Trial of May. Dorrell, Or A Collection of Defenses against Allegations not
yet suffered to receive convenient answer.

Tending To clear him from the Imputation of teaching Summers and others to
counterfeit possession of Devils.

That The mist of pretended counterfetting being dispelled, the glory of Christ
his royal power in casting out Devils (at the prayer and fasting of his
people) may evidently appear.

John 7.11. Does our Law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he
has done?

Proverb. 14.15. The foolish will believe every thing, but the Prudent will
consider his steps.

1599.

To the right honorable and righteous Judge, Sir John Poppham Knight, Lord
chief Justice of England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel: Increase of wisdom and sincerity, to carry himself, as hither to,
so more and more faithfully in matters of God and the Queen, etc.
THE Iniquity of these times considered, Act. 25.^ etc.
I think it happy (right honorable upright and worthy Judge) that there is
such an one as your Ho^is, to who^ answer may be made of all ye things whereof
M. Dorr. is accused by the Prelates: chiefly because you have the knowledge of
all Customs and Laws which are in this Nation. Wherefore I beseech you to
hear me pauently. The cause which I am to recommend to your Lo. favorable and
just consideration is of great importance, and yet will not be suffered to
receive just defense from him whom it most concerns. Wherefore as I am to open
my mouth for the dumme in the cause of a child of destruction, so, Prove. 31.^
let your judgment be as a Robe and a Crown that the blessing of him that is
ready to perish may come upon you. Job. 29.^ 14. Pro. 26.^
And let it not be objected against me, That he which medleth with the strife
that belongs not unto him, is as one that takes a dog by the ears. For the
maintenance of this cause tends as well to the Glory of Christ, as to the
credit of M Dorrell: Mat. 11.^
and therefore wisdom is to be justified of all her Children. Indeed I grant
there be many no less willing and more able (for wisdom and learning) to
manage this matter then I am. But I know none that has used more means to be
truly and thoroughly informed in this cause (whereof at the first I was indeed
very doubtful) the^ I have don: and therefore I think my self bound in
conscience, being persuaded my self to persuade others, Luc. 22.^
and to justify wisdom (as I may) in this case. Which I cannot do more
conveniently then by presenting to your L. patient and judicial reading these
Collection^ which I have withal sincerity (God is my witness) gathered
together out of printed books, written reports of sundry faithful and
discret brethren present at the pleading on Whitsoneue, and out of certain
Apologeticall answers of M. Dorr^^ himself and other. (...). 2.10.
I beseech your Lo. as you have received the love of the truth to read them
over. They be but short, and therefore quickly read: and they be so pithy
that they will inform your Lo. more soundly then all the hearing you have had.
Which hearing notwithstanding, there be many weighty reasons that should move
your Lo to enter into a better consideration of a cause so generally hearkened
after, and concerning as highly the glory of Christ our Savior as it does
merely the credit of a faithful Minister.

Dorrell commits the wounded creditt of his holy Ministry. That her
Majesty's most excellent spirit may rejoice in the Lord who adds to so long
and happy Government such a notable sign of his heavenly favor, ^at. 12.28
as either the glorious manifestation of his mighty power over the enemy of
mankind in this part of his Church whereunto he has vouchsafed to make her
grace a Nursing Mother, or such Prelates as (herein) are not like them of ye
Romish Synagogue who by false miracles draw foolish people to their vain
superstition. ^ct. 25.26.
In perfourming which duty, your Lo. cannot take a better course then that
which Festus took who examined Paul the second time, that he might write a
certain truth to Caesar to whom Paul had appealed. Where it may please your
Lo. to observe, that Festus did not hear again the plaintifes, but only Paul
the defenda^t whom he had heard before at large. (...). ver: 15 ^ 16.
For when the High Priests and Elders of the Jews desired judgment upon
their only information, Festus answered, That it is not the manner of the
Romans (for favor) to punish any, before that he, which is accused, have the
accusers before him, and have place to defend himself concerning the crime.
But in this case may it please your Lo. likewise to consider. That the Prelates
(whom you have heard again and again) do press judgment upon their heaped
informacions, and yet concerning them, M. Dorr. has not had convenient place
to defend himself. And therefore there is great reason, that before you
certify her Majesty: your Lo. should satisfy your own conscience by reading
these his collected defenses: whereby the principal allegations (if not all of
any force) urged on Whitsoneue, are severally and (I am persuaded) fully and
truly answered.

To come somewhat nearer your self I pray you (good my Lord) remember your
diligence in hearing, Job. 29.^
and sincerity in determining causes in other Courts (namely in the
Starr-chamber) where the ears of many hear you judge uprightly and freely
without respect of persons (yea honorable persons dissenting from you) and they
bless you, and so remembering your self, examine your own heart why you should
not manifest the like diligence and sincerity in this cause. What? Is it in
respect of the Lordly Bishops? O! Be it far from you that you should be like
such of whom it is said: John. 12.4
Nevertheless even among the chief Rulers many believed in him but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess him. Nay rather this is conceived of your Ho
that howsoever Pashur the Priest (appointed Governor in the house of the
Lord) did smite Jeremy, Ier. 30.1, ^ and 26, 8, 10, 16.
put him in the Stocks, and (with other Priests) would hastily bring his
innocent blood upon themselves, yet your Lo. will with the Princes of Judah,
consider better of Ieremyes cause. If then not respect of persons, is it for
that this cause is proceeded in ex officio, and not ^udicially as a cause
between party and party? Indeed it is to officiously proceeded in, but the
truth is, The cause is between party and party: I say not between a faithful
servant of Jesus and a perjured Boy, but between Michaell and the old Serpent,
Christ Jesus and the envious man. For Jesus pleads (by M. Dorrell) that his
great name, which ought to be glorious among all Christians is highly
dishonored, by calling into question his mighty power in casting out Devils at
the prayer and fasting of his holy people. On the contrary part Satan, who
long since moved the Pharisees (even against their own consciences) to charge
Christ with casting out of Devils by the power of Beelzebub, does eftsoons (by
his instruments) traduce such dispossession pretending it to be but very
counterfaiting. If then a loyal Judge will diligently hear whatsoever can be
said in behalf of her Majesty in a cause wherein she is pretended to be a
party, much more religiously will your Lo. (being a Christian Judge) hear
whatsoever can be said in the behalf of Jesus, in a cause wherein he is
pretended to be a party. And whether the name of Jesus be more glorified
(indeed) by undoubted dispossession, or pretended counterfaiting, your
faithful heart ca^ quickly judge. If by undoubted dispossession, then as good
policy as that, whereby M. Moore is not called into any question about the
dispossession of 7. in Lancashire, might direct Christian Magistrates to bend
their authority rather to manifest the Glory of Christ, then (altogether) to
obscure the same by pretended counterfaiting.

What soever other do, hear you (8 worthy Judge) what the Spirit speaks
evidently and plentifully (concerning this very ^ving that sposses* (in these
^es) is no ^acle. ^. 23. ^. 24.
cause) from the 22. verse. to the 38. of the 12. chap. of Matthew where you may
first generally observe; that Satan never set himself so earnestly against any
miracle wrought by Jesus as against this of dispossession. For perceiving the
people hereby occasioned to take Jesus for the Son of David, he moved the
Pharisees to traduce the same as before is said* and contrariwise Jesus
conceiving how highly this miracle concerned the glory of his Name, did never
take his own part more earnestly then in justifying the same. From whence we
may learn* that Christ his people should show forth the virtue of him, by
whose name they are called Christians in mainteyning his cause so much the more
resolusly, as Satan by his instruments shall oppose himself maliciously. But
so it is in this cause: For Satan perceiving thousands of the best professors
(among whom not a few be honorable, worshipful, and learned) occasioned by the
dispossession of Summers and 9. other to glorify the name of Jesus, yea so,
that Nottingham (heretofore not so forward) became (for a time) very zealous
(as I hear) in hearing the word: Satan (I say) perceiving such a consequent
of dispossession, moved sundry adversaries to traduce the same as Papists who
deny any such power to be in our Churrh, Atheists who scorn whatsoever tends
to prove that there is a God or a Devil, But especially certain Prelates, who
(being grosser in their conceit then the Pharisees) by discrediting 12.
sufficient Commissioners, 6. worshipful Gentlemen, and 6. learned Preachers,
by suppressing 17. sufficient depositions, by withhoulding M. Dorr. from
answering at large for himself, make it (forsooth) a matter of counterfaiting.
And yet I must needs say that the L. B. of London (as I have heard) was
fumbling about some proof* That M Dorrell did cast out Devils by witchraft or
coniuration But (belike) he remembers, that so he might overthrow his first
pretended counterfaiting. These things well weighed, it follows that all
Christians ought to take this cause to heart: and to further the manifestation
of truth, no less zealously the^ the Prelates would obscure it indirectly. If
all Christians, then especially it behooves your L. so to do, having authority
even in that case. But the rather because all the godly (whose desire to be
satisfied is not to be despised) attribute most to your L. faithfulness, yea the
Prelates seem to lay the burden on your H. For Mistress Dorrell and Mistr
Moore suing to the L. Bishop of Cant. that their husbands might have (at
least) the liberty of prison, were referred to your Lo. as to him, that gave
the sentence of close imprisonment, till further punishment were decreed: and
it is likely if further punishment be determined, your Lo. shall be put to
pronounce the same.

Secondly in Christ his apologeticall discourse your Lo. justifies
dispossession with unanswerable arguments in the Mat. 1^
25.26.27. verses, and then he reproves the traducing thereof. Concerning the
former I refer your Lo. to these Collections. The reproof Christ prosecuteth
by noting the offenders, and by censuring the sin. He notes (as with a
black cole) the offenders, in the 33.34 35. verses, where he thus argneth, An
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Therefore no merveill though
envious Pharisees traduce the Spirit or Finger of God. To apply: Lordly
Bishopes in the judgment of most, if not of all learned Preachers of the
Gospel in England, France, Scotland* and the low Countries (except
Soul-killing non-residents, and ambitious aspirers to to the Prelacy) are
plants which (in respect of their ecclesiastical dignity) the heavenly Father
has not planted in his Church by the hand of his Son: Mat. 28.18 19. Ephesians.
4.8.1^ 12.13. 1. Cor. 12.^
who only (having all power committed to him) appoints what callinges
ecclesiastical he thinks best for the building of his Church. If this
judgment be found, then better proceedings then these against M Dorrell cannot
be ordinarily expected from them, especially against such as desire the Church
to be reformed of the Romish Hierarchy and Ceremonies enforced. As for your
Lo. better fruits are expected from the same, as from a tree planted in the
Courts of the Lord, and that by his own right hand.

The sin is censured by discovering either the corruption, or thereof. The
former is performed by proving wherein, and showing against whom the offense is
committed. Christ proves wherein, after this manner in the 28. and 29. verses.
Only the Kingdom (that is the souveraigne power) of God can cast the strong
and envious man out of his possess^o^: therefore in traducing dispossession, ye
traduce ye kingdom of God. This argument applies it self. I therefore only
admonish you to think of it seriously: and the rather, Because Atheists abound
in these days and witchcraft is called into question. Which error is confirmed
by denying dispossession* and both these errors confirm Atheists mightily* For
thus will they gather if 11. possessed (at sundry times and in sundry places)
were all counterfeits, why should we think there is any possess^on at all? If
neither possession, nor witchcraft, (contrary to that has been so long
generally and confidently affirmed) why should we think that there are
Devils? If no Devils, no God.

against whom the sin is committed namely against himself and the holy
Ghost. Against himself in respect of the matter to wit the very slandering of
dispossession, arguing to this purpose in the 30. verse. My Royal authority is
so great, that whosoever is not with me is against me: much more ye, who
traduce so glorious an effect of my Kingly power. This argument ought to move
all faithful Christians to take part with Christ, whosoever be on the
contrary: much more your Lo carefully to inform your self in this case,
(...). ^.13.13
least (unawares) you confederat with them, with whom you should not consent.
For answerably to this reason of Christ) it is elsewhere written: Whosoever
will be a friend of the world, (...). 4.4.
makes himself the enemy of God. A notable example whereof we have in Pilat,
who being loath to displease the high Priest, became guilty of innocent blood
for all the washing of his hands.

Blasphemy against the holy Ghost. As if he should thus speak unto the
Pharisees, (...). 4.25.26 ^or. 10.5 (...) 4.21.25 ^br. 9.10
I know your thoughts and immaginations exalted against the acknowledging of me
to be Christ, and hateful against reformation which cannot be avoided. In
envy whereof ye maliciously (even against your own consciences) traduce the
Spirit, the Finger or power of God so evident in this miracle, and therefore ye
blaspheme the holy Ghost. That the Prelates (which now set them selves
against dispossession) be guilty of this vnpardonnable sin, I will not say.
But (without doubt) their hatred of reformation carries them (as I am
persuaded) sometimes to far, and their crooked courses about Summers, with their
deep silence touching the ^ dispossessed in Lancashier occasioneth me verily
to think yt in their hearts they acknowledge undoubted dispossession. As for
your Lo I beseech the same (as you tender the comfort of your own soul) to pray
with David saying, O cleanse me from my secret faults, (...). 19.12.13
and keep me from the presumptuous sin of wilful rejecting (as libels) the
informations of truth touching the royal power of Christ in casting out
Devils, so shall I be free from this great offense.

Lastly Christ discovers the danger of this sin, For in the 3^.36.37.
verses he concludes to this effect, Men are either justified or ^ondemned^y
their words, therefore account is to be given at the last day of every idle
word, much more of the vnpardonnable sin of blasphemy against the holy
Ghost. Which argument may move your H^ to say (that which God hearkneth for)
what have I done, Ier. 8.6^
in countenancing such proceedings against M. Dorrell; and what have I done in
taking occasion to condemn him, because he said Summers is now possessed.
Wherein if he be deceaved, It is but an error in opinion, impling rather his
simplicity then otherwise, and yet he pretends some ground, to wit proof of
repossession, and pleads that if Summers can do his Fears (so called and as
is pretended) so strangely as is deposed, he must needs be repossessed: If not,
then objected cou^terfeiting is but deluding Gods people, abusing authority,
and eclipsing Christ his glory which should rather be cleared. If that your
heart smite you, Dan. 4.^^
let (O Christian Judge) my counsel be acceptable to you, Break of this sin
and heal this error by taking that course which (out of the premises briefly
collected) I thus conclude.

If 1. (as Festus, so) your Lo. should thoroughly inform your self more
Certainly to certify our Caesar to whom M. Dorrell appealeth. 2. If your Lo.
ought to be nolesse diligent and sincere in this case of dispossession wherein
Christ is a party, then in a cause wherein her Majesty is a party. 3 If all
Christians (specially your Lo.) should endeavor the manifestatio^ of undoubted
dispossession no less zealously then many would obscure it indirectly. 4 If it
be the fruit of a good tree, planted in the Court of the Lord to advance the
glory of Christ in this Cause. 5. If traducing dispossession be an impeachement
to the Kingdom of God, and confirmation of Papists and Atheistes. 6. If he
that is not with Christ by justifying dispossession is pronounced to be openly
against Christ. 7. If malicious traducing of dispossessio^ be blasphemy against
the holy Ghost, and we are to fear all steps leading in the same And 8. If
every idle word spoken to the prejudice of dispossession shall be punished at
the day of judgment. Then I require you in the name of Jesus (our King and
Savior) patiently and iudicially to read these Collections, and (abhorring
his example, act. 24.2^
who to get favor of the Jews left Paul bound) to be an honorable mean that
M. Dorrell may have time and place convenient, to prove and plead for
himself, and then if he cannot justify his cause, let him be made a public
example of severity against such ungodly counterfeiting. But if he can manifest
undoubted dispossession, let the name of Jesus be magnified in his Church to
the conversion or confusion of Papists and Atheistes.

To the Reader.
BEcause sundry supposed these Collections might be offensive to the Lord chief
Justice of England and the Prelates: the Author (though after diligent pains
therein taken) would not publish them. They therefore coming to my hands by
occasion, I thought it a great injury to suppress them, and so the godly to
be deprived of that benefit which no doubt may come by them. Not that I would
be more careless in offending then the Author, but that I presume the right
Honorable L. chief Justice will take no offense to be admonished and rightly
informed in a matter so highly touching not only the good name of one man, but
even the credit of the Gospel, and the glory of Christ him self: and wherein
his L. has had and is to have an especial stroke, but as yet by the injurious
dealing of some of the Prelates (especially the L. B. of Land.) has not fully
nor sufficiently heard the same. Hoping the rather of his L. patience herein,
for that his H. (since the last hearing of the matter at Lambeth on Whitson eve
last) namely in his circuit in Suff. did hear evidently proved unto him, that
a Maid there was handled and tormented very grievously, in many things as
Summers and the rest were. Whether it may be called Possession or Obsession, or
any other proper name, I for my part will not strive, (neither is it material)
but will leave it to be decided by the learned. Only this may suffice, that
they were fearful and strange vexations of the Devil in Gods displeasure
against us, which could not possibly be done by any humane ways or means
whatsoever: which is the very maine point in controversy. For the further and
more manifest clearing whereof, and for the satisfying of all such as are
indifferently carried in this cause, I have thought good to add to the end of
this Treatise, a brief Narration of those accidents which befell the said Maid
in Suffo. Wherein neither M. Dorr. nor any of his friends ^ad dealing, and
therefore the more material for their clearing in their cause.

Presuming therefore on the lawful favor of that Honorable and worthy Judge, I
am withal the rather imboldned to publish these Collections. First, because
(being my self an eare-witnes at Lambeth on Whitson eve last, when the
^llegations in this Treatise mentioned were objected against M. Dorrell, and
coming thither with an indifferent mind to be satisfied in the truth (yea
rather I protest mistrusting M^ Dorr. then otherwise) I heard and saw to my
great grief, that he co^ld not be permit^ed (although very humbly and earnestly
he entreated the same) to make his particular defenses to the said allegations
as they were laid to his charge: but was still fro time to time ^ut off by the
L. B. of London especially, in the very material and maine points which
^ended to his clearing yea also in th^se which the L. chief Justice (very
honorably) seemed desirous to be satisfied in. Who would now and then give him
leave to speak yet could not hear him to any purpose, being still interrupted
by the L. B. of Land who fed him with these words, Stay, hear another
matter, you shall be heard at large anon. etc. and yet not then neither suffered
him to make his apology, save only to an objection or 2. Which was to so good
purpose, and tended so directly to his clearing in the waightiest matters
against him, that I doubt not if he had been permitted to proceed in the rest,
he would have satisfied or at least given cause of suspense unto the H. and
Worcester. there assembled. But being in the chief ma^ter and that which touched the
quick, the L. B. of Cant. or Land. interrupted him saying, My LL. I think i^
not fit he should be suffered thus to go on. For what cause, I doubt not but
those of discretion both did and can judge well enough.

Another reason and that (not the least) mooving me to publish this Treatise,
is because I hear that the L. of Land. is writing a book against Mr Dorell.
Now I doubt not these Collections will in some measure (though briefly) answer
all the objections of any moment which he shall publish. Only we doubt that he
will, as he did at the said last hearing, curt all the Depositions of such
persons as by reexamining may seem in some things to make against M^ Dorell,
(which yet in some things being laid together do make much for him) leaving
out altogether that which by the same Deponents might serve to clear him any
way. Which thing if he do again, it will prove but a trick of his In his
book of ^cottizing and Gene^^ting etc.
wonted dealing, and will do him small pleasure or credit in the end. And I
doubt not M^ Dorell will (if he may be permitted) sufficiently defend him self
at large, if occasion require. In the mean time this small discourse may serve
I trust, in some steed, since he being a Prisoner, can not do^ what he would, or
in reason he should. September. 30. 1599.

Allegations Against Mr DORRELL, Made at Lambeth the 26. of May. 1599. With
such DEFENSES as are made in his behalf.
HE challenges to him self a singular

1. Mr Dorrell his profession is, that howsoever Starkey in Lancashire, and to
Mr Aldridge of Nottingham, by thousands that have heard him in Pulpit
disclaim such a gift, by 16. Ministers in Leycester shiere that urged him to
go to the 7. in Mr Starkeys house* by other Preachers, and by Darlings friends
that could not entreat him to join with them in fasting, etc.

2. But admit vainglory (whereof yet God is only Judge) it may reprove the
person, but not overthrowe the cause.

Mr Dorrell taught 4. to counterfeite, viz: Katherine Wright of Ridg way lane
in the County of Darby, Tho. Darling of Burton in the County of Stafford, Mary
Couper, and William Summers of Nottingham. For the signs of possession and
dispossessio^ were alike in all. Therefore these 4. and 7. in La^cashire were
counterfectes, and taught by Mr Dorrell.

Master Brown. M. Porter. M. Evington. M Brinsley
4. grave, godly, and learned Divines offered to confirm as compurgators
according to the law) Mr Dorrell solemly protests, that he is most free from
teaching any to counterfeit either possession or dispossession. Dorrell
grants and retorteth thus: If those 7. had the same signs of possession and
dispossession; if they were cured by the same means, to wit, by fasting and
prayer, and if they did not counterfeit, then is it likely that Mr Dorr. did not
teach the other 4. to counterfeit. But the 2. former are granted to have been
at least in show. And M. Dorrell presumes no counterfeiting can be imagined
in them. Because then the L. B. of London, who has labored (night and day) to
prove the other 4. to be counterfeits, sent his pursivant for some to be
examined, and addressed Harsenett his examiner, and Pigott his secretary to
Chesterfeild in Darbyshire there to examine Katherine Wright her possession,
which was 12. years ago, would not have lost so great a pray, having had a
large discourse thereof, but would have made some show of proof or at least
demanded some answer from M. Dorr. touching the same, and charged M. Moore
therewith (against whom he wanted matter) or (in so long time of imprisonment)
examined them partners in that dispossession) about the same. But (belike) the
L. B. of London understanding 2. of the 7. were but 10. years old, and
therefore could not possibly counterfeit so strange things; knowing Jane
Ashton (an other of the 7) is repossessed, and by Popish Priests made a
spectacle to Papists; reading M^ Starkey (the gentleman in whose house the 7.
were) his confident lettre to the L. B. of Chester, who by the direction (as he
said) of one in great place, (belike the L.B. of London) required true
certificate; and hearing (it may be) the report of sundry of credit in
Lancashire, thought that case to be clear, and therefore hurtful to the rest
of his proceedings Summers: and may be proved (if commission were granted) by
the rest. Therefore M. same sin, which were impiety to admit. Since sundry by
him dispossessed had the like signs as our supposed Counterfeites had, Mar.
1.24.26. and 9.18.20.26. Lu. 4.35.

7 Indeed May. Dorr. grants that the

Catharin Wright deposes counterfeiting.

First her supposed feats were either impossibilies, viz. 1. In her fits she
was so often cast into the fire and water, that she was chained to a post. 2.
She was cast into sundry wels, yet being sought and found was without hurt. 3.
otherwise (as by cutting her throat) she would have destroyed her self. 4.
Tra^ces supernatural. 5. Strength. 6. Knowledge. 7. Swelling so as her body
and neck were swollen twice as big as they were wont to be. 8. A thing (as if
quick) felt stirring up and down in her body: and drink brought in her thirst
(in most strange sort) sprouted out of the cup up to the roof of the parlor.
Catherine Wright dispossessed by Prayer, was repossessed and so continued from
the 18. to the 30. year of her age, or thereabout. In all which time it is
marvel that none could perceave her counterfeiting before Harsenet came, nor
she be weary thereof: since thereby she is deprived of Marriage, and other
co^forts of this life. Ed. Beersfoord examined upon oath would have set down
some of the strange things he saw, but Harsenet cast away the paper, saying,
If you will have a miracle you shall answer it before impossibilities, says
true. What is this to M. Dorrell, who had never seen her before she was
brought to Maunsfield, (where M. Dorr. dwelt) by one Ma. Beckingham (Parson of
Bilstrop) his appointment, of whom help was expected, after it had been sought
for of one Arthur a Co^iurer: who, after he had raised a Devil (in a likeness
not remembered,) was instantly apprehended by the L. Darcies means.

Katherine Wright has deposed that at

1. May. Dorrell denies that, or any other Kather. Wright in conscience,
sorrowfully confessed her perjury, and was in most miserable taking through
trouble of mind because of the same. Of her recovery I do not hear.

Dorrell lay on Katherine Wrights belly, and was so found by one Beckingham a
Minister, who plucked him of by the heels, and thrust him out of the Chamber.
Which lying M: Dorrell has deposed to have been, in imitation of Elias and
Paul.

Kathar. Wright, and though M. Dorrell answered that he did not well remember
the reason of a matter of no moment done 12. or 13. years ago, yet the L.B.
would needs have present answer one or other, M. Dorr. thus urged did
answer, that it might be in some childish imitation of the Prophet and the
Apostle, because (at that time) he was young in age, and Divinity. But when he
had better thought of the matter, he remembered him self, returned withal
convenient speed he could, and upon his oath absolutely denying such Edward
Loade^ (who by him self tried in vain) to keep her down in her fit; That
Beckingham was not present when that lying was; and that many women (and
amongst the rest M. Dorr. own wife) were then present in the room, which was
no Chamber. All which M. Dorr. can prove sufficiently.

3. Harsenet was earnest with Kath. Wright

Thomas Darling confesses that he coun^erfeited.

1. That Confession was enforced by Har^enets Burgunnian was (to whom he was
carried for his further terrifying when he was newly hanged in the streat) and
that he should be burnt with a hot iron in the forehead: and by cunning
devices; as fair promises, and counterfeiting sundry letters from Master
Dorrell to persuade him to confess. As the boy avouched by word and writing as
soon as he got out of the L. B. of Londons house: and stood to it, though
afterward the L.B. kept him (being about 14. years old) in the counter in
South warke 7. weeks together, and in bail til the day he rose and walked. 3.
Alice Goodridge Darling never did nor would confess, but ever denied that Mr
Dorrell did teach him: his being in prison, and so long under bail at London,
and his often examination notwithstanding. 5. If he Burton, until the day
before he was dispossessed: when M. Dorr. only advised the childs friends to
fast and pray, but was not present him self. 6. Darling was not Summers, no
nor once called to accuse Dorr. to his face (as Somm. did) or to acknowledge
Counterfeitinge, though the said L. B. had long kept him under bail and bound
him to appear for that purpose, and was also present there accordingly in the
face of the Court. Belike the L.B. knew full well by former and often experience,
that the boy would deny Mai-Dorrels teaching of him and all counterfeiting. It
may be also he feared least the boy would have discovered the foresaid
dealing with him, as also told that So^mers was appointed his keeper, and that
Harsenet added to his confession that which he never spoke, whereof he before
had accused Harsenet: offering either to swear him self, or to rest with
Harsenets oath, but he could not be heard.

Mary Cooper confesses Counterfeiting.

viz. Supernatural 1. strength and 2. knowledge. For among other things she
told 2. or 3. days before it happened of her husbands return, who had long
before ru^ne from her, and had been but few days before at Linne, which is
from Nottingham (at least) an hundredth miles. 3. She was without feeling in
her fittes. For her little finger was be^ded inward with all the force of a man
whereat she then stirred not, though presently after it swelled much and (many
days after) she had great pain. 4. When her fitts ended immediately began her
brother Summers fitts, and when his ended hers began presently in the
twinkling of an eye, notwithstanding they were in several rooms.

Mary Couper deposes that she thinking

1. Here is nothing to prove that Mr Her belly suddenly swelled as if she
had been half gone with child, and so continued with little or no increase
about a quarter of a year. 4. This swelling would be suddenly gone, and after
a while be there again. 5. Upon and during this swelling she felt something
(as it were quick) stir within her, which from the beginning she said was
nothing like the stirring she felt when before she was with child. 6. At
last she seemed to travel 2. or. 3. days, and midwife after midwife was sent
for, and many neighbour-women, whereof some were of good worship who will
testify the rare accidents. 7. In the beginning her belly was of the bigness
aforesaid and soft, the next day very bigg and hard as if she had been with
child indeed, and at the point of deliverance. 8. Sometimes again very big and
soft, sometimes very gaunt, and less then any woman's ordinarily is. 9. A
moving (as of some quick thing (yet no substance) was seen and felt about her
stomach: above her breasts, and in her arm or shoulder. 10 She had the
pains of a woman in travail, and in danger of death, so as the bell was told
for her. 11. There were all the signs and forerunners of a child: yea that
issued from her which never came from woman, but when a child was borne 12.
Besides the things in common with a woman, she had lumps of flesh came from
her: which carried to the Physician, he said, If they came from nature she could
not live. 13. Yet while these things were in doing, and presently after, she
rose out of her bed and went up and down the house, and for all this
travaill kept neytheir bed nor house. 14. In her breast was sometimes water,
sometimes milk. 15. And after such travaill M. Dorr. and others have seen her
belly somewhat bigger the^ ordinary, and within half a quarter of an hour so
great, as if she had been ready to

William Summers deposes Counterfeiting and that Dorrell taught him, which
though of it self it be of small validity, yet since 3. other affirm the
like, it is to some purpose.

big again as naturally it is, and (once) by swelling he brake a new leather
girdle.

6. In this swelling his entralles shot up and down like a weavers shittle.
7. Three or 4. men could scarsly lift him. 8. His foming white and thick
roaped down his breast sometime an hour together, though often wiped away. 9.
In his fits his temples and pulses did not beat. 10. He lay for an hour and a
half as dead, cold as Ice, face and hands black, and without breath
perceived. 11. His tongue vsully retorted into his throat so as no part of it
was to be seen in his mouth. 12. He spoke distinctly in a continued speech
for a quarter of an hour his mouth being shutt close. 13. His tongue drawn
into his throat and his mouth wide open he said, Ego sum Deus, ego sum Rex.
14. He neither took any sustenance nor disburthened nature for 3. days. 15,
Pinnes were thrust deep into sundry parts of his body. Sometimes up to the
head, yet he felt not, neither did blood issue. 16* Often cast, sometimes hand,
sometimes face in the fire: where he lay a while, yet not burned. 17. Three men
did strive with him about an hour till they sweat and were breathless, yet he
did not pant nor draw wind, perceived: yea sometimes 4.5.6. or mo were scarce
able to hold him though they had him at great advantage, as lying flatt upon
the ground, or upon a bed, or tied fast to a chair. 18. He said Dal. Freeman
and Higgetts wife were stripping and searching. Dal: has a mark upon such a
shoulder, and the other in her mouth though unknown. Again they (to wit
Justice Perkins, etc:) have her (to wit Milisent Horseley) and are examining
her, and she says she does all by prayer, now they strippe her and search her,
and after, now she is brought to town. Again they (to wit a constable,
etc.) are there now: She (to wit Milicent Horsleyes sister) sits lapping
her sore toe, o sore toe! she cannot go for her sore to, now they hale her
forth, look how they pull her out, they call for ropes and a horse. Look
where she commes running through the meadows, now see she is come to town.
Again now M. Dorrell (then at Ashby) has consented to come, and the next day,
now he is come to town. All these things were as he said, at the same instant,
though far from him. Again to a traveling stranger, O murderer what do thou
here? Who acknowledged flying the land for killing a man about 20. years
before. An other stranger he told where he had gone out of the way, that such
a thing befell him in such a place, and of a secret of his body; the man
acknowledged all. Again 7. weeks before the Assizes in a trance, I must go
to S. John's (a house of correction where he was afterward had by
commandment of the Mayor and Aldermen of Nottingham, against the will of his
parents) and being there M. Dorrell must not come at me, (which proved true)
and at the Assizes I must be before the Judges, and they must see. It came so
to pass indeed, for by commandemente of Judge Anderson being before him,
they saw a trifling and deluding fit, the boy being brought to say he
counterfeited. Lastly he expounded the Creed an hour together divine-like,
save that he intermixed an error or two, as of Christ his Souls descent into
Hell, etc. 19. There were felt under the coverlet (where he lay) 4. or 5. (as
kitlings, or whelps etc.) stirring, and sometimes round as a boull, which
vanished or gave place like air or wind in a bladder, when some would have
held them; the hand removed the boull filled. The coverlett sudainly cast up,
they were gone: thrown down, there again: the boys hands and feet being
held. And this continued 10. days and nights, in which time he appeached 8.
women (of whom they before named were some) and 2. men to be witches, one after
an other: at the most two together, and as soon as he named one to have a
catt he was never quiet, but was often tossed and thrown upon his bed strangly
and grevously crying out upon the party or parties to fetch and bring them,
often saying: their Cats were in bed with him, continuing so till they were had
before the Magistrate, and brought unto the boy. Near whom as they came (but
one after an other) while they were in the house (though in another room) or
offered to go from him, he was grievously and extraordinanrily handled: and yet
while the suspected person tarried by him, he lay as if he had been a sleep.
Besides which observation, there was such trial made, that such as were about
him knew as well when any of the^ were near, as if they had been told. After
those ten persons had been with the Magistrate and him, he cried upon them no
more but was quiet. 20 There was in the room where he lay a strange rapping as
upon wainscott with a finger, Summers hands and feet being held immovable.
21. He had a swelling in some places as big as an egg, in some places bigger,
in some less, running swiftly between the flesh and the skin, from leg to
leg, from arm to arm, from finger to finger, on the back of his hand,
forehead, eare-roots, and tongue, yea thereby his eyes were thrust out
extraordinarily big and black. When it made any stay in leg or arm, it made
the leg or arm as heavy and inflexible as iron. Which swelling may seem to be
by the special providence of God to stop the mouths of Atheistes swarming in
these days. For sundry troubled with the sclaunder of counterfeiting secretly
and earnest-prayed to God (the knower of hearts) that they might see some thing
that might satisfy them. They went to Summers, and by this sign (by Gods
providence rather presented unto them then other signs) were satisfied.

Summers offered to counterfeit this swelling

1. In deed he putt his tongue into his the fact. And that not serving the L.
B. of Lo^dons turn, the L. B. said it was the Cholique. But perceiving that
healing so stra^g a Cholique by fasting, etc. makes for Mr Dorr: Cou^terfeiting
in all things seems to be resolved upon as the best policy and Thyreus de
Daemoniacis, ca. 32 tells of some possessed that had the like Dorr. is) chased
the swelling (as they speak) with the sign of the Cross from head to foot,
and from foot to head. Satan thereby feeding them in their superstitious
estimation 5. By fasting and prayer it was so driven quite away, that it
returned not, till Somm. was repossest, which was 12. weeks after. All these
things considered, this (with the rest) came from Satan.

Sundry of Dorrells witnesses have corrected their oaths.

viz. First laying before them the confession of Summers himself and of other:
So dealt they with May. Beersford. But that not prevayling, then were they
threatened with aunswering before the L. B. of London at their peril. One was
commanded to appear the first day of the term following, and another (namely
Henry Butler) was commanded to prison in the sight of others, Ad terrorem. 2.
They do not deny the truth of Summers Rich. Me denies not all swelling of
Summers tongue, and eyes, but lesseneth the bigness. 3. They go not back from
other particulars which

Some do depose, that indevouring to try

Somm. pretended cou^terfeiting: If they did, it were to no purpose except they
swear that within that time, many such trials were made, and yet that were to
no great purpose for the former Dorrels forbidding Somm. for the pretended
danger, it is both false, (for Summers did never sweat in any of his fittes)
and absurd, for Summers lay in his clothes with a light coverlett only upon
him. But he that often counterfeiteth laughing, must sometimes strain him
self.

Thomas Garland deposes that Summers was sometimes of an ordinary strength.



2. It is not said that he had always supernatural

Summers was cast with his shoulder toward

1. This may be at one time, and yet he Thomas Garland before the L. B. of
London) that his bare hand lay in the fire. At another time he was thrown so
as his face did bear down hot coals; lying thus Mary Cowper snatched at him;
caught his lynnen cap; but left his bare face and head in the fire, and yet
neither face burned, nor hear singed.

Summers had black lead in his mouth,

1. Black lead cannot cause foming, especially weeks before: at what time he
was no

Summers deposes that Dorrell taught him to counterfeit.

Ergo no teaching. 2. Summers is but one witness, therefore not sufficient,
especially against a Minister, 1. Timot. 5.19. Elizabeth. cap. 12. Summers is
an unlawful witness, being manifestly guilty of perjury (having by oath both
denied and affirmed counterfeiting) as also of blasphemy: (if he were a
Summers cou^terfeited (to speak as the L. B. of London would have it) a month
or 6* weeks, before M. Dorr. ever saw him.

Summers deposes that long before Dorrell came to Nottingham, they met at
Ashby de la Zouche, where Dorrell then dwelled, and (upon agreement) they met
at Ashby park 4. years together, every time Summers coming 4. miles, to wit
from Ma. Gray (with whom he then dwelled) his house at Gray Langley in
Leichestershire: Jn which Park and time Dorrell taught and Summers learned to
counterfeit, and after by Dorrels direction, Summers showed him self at
Nottingham. Also before Summers went to dwell with one Ma. Brackenbery, (where
he began to cou^terfeit) Dorr. taught him, but Summers having not well learned
his feats, gave over till Dorrell had taught him better. Lastly, Dorr. coming
to Nottingham (5o No. 97.) acted before Summers the signs of possession and
dispossession, giving him direction (and that two days together) immediately
before the supposed dispossession.

1. Either there needs not so much teaching, Summers said, that the So^m. body
got by often going into the water, came to him at Nottingham, and bad him
conceal it, and so they first agreed upon counterfeiting* To an other, that
they came first acquainted when M. Dorrell dealt with Katherine Wright, which
is above 13. years ago, when Summers was scarce 9. years old. And touching
the manner of their first meeting at Ashby deposed: One time So^mers tells the
L. B. of London that he came to M. Dorrell and two strangers talking in the
street, and demanded whereof they were talking: M. Dorrell answered of one
Katharine Wright sometimes possessed, the strangers departed, they went into the
fields etc. Another time he tells the L. B. that M. Dorr. first met him in an
alehouse among other boys; had speech with him apart, and so they first agreed
upon counterfeiting. Summers then about 10. years old (went from M. Gray to M.
Brackenbury in Warwickshire: And it is not 7. years since Dorrel came from
Mansfield to Ashby. For most part of which time, Summers being gone from M.
Brackenbury, and never returning to M. Gray, dwelt in Nottingham and was
servant (for 4. years before his dispossessio^) with Tho. 4. If May. Dorrell
acted signs of possession and dispossession two mornings together, without
doubt some may depose the same with Summers, considering Somm. was never
without company night or day. 5. M. Dorr. can prove that those whole mornings
he was elsewhere far from Summers.

Though the boys testimony alone be not

1. Circumstances be but half a proof especially since Somm. deposition so
advisedly and preciselie set down touching the time and place of teaching is
utterly thus conclude. M. Dorrell bought out Summers his years of
apprentiship, and Summers resorted to M. Dorrels chamber where they had private
talk. Therefore it is likely M. Dorrell taught Summers to counterfeit. Indeed
if redemption and talk had been before dispossession, these presumptions had been somewhat probable, it being granted that all Summers his supposed feats
could be possibly counterfeited. But further answer here after. 7. These
circumstances are out countenanced 3. Cha^ by conjecture against ^ proceedings
(...) M. Dor^
of London sits not as Judge indifferently disposed to manifest the glory of
God or pretended counterfeiting, but sets himself as an adversary to convince
M. Dorrell per fas aut nefas. 2. That the L. Bishop of London did draw Somm. to
accuse M. Dorrell. 3. That the high Commisioners on whitson even, agreed in
policy (by conference or self conceiving) rather to blame M. Dorrell, then to
shame the L. B. Where note, that the second charge presumes the first, the
third presumes both, and all presume the weakness and nullity of the
Circumstances against M. Dorrell. Circu^st^ces to p^ve the charge
The outcountenancing Circumstances are these concerning the first charge. 1.
Though M. Dorrell has many adversaries at Nottingham (some affecting witchery,
some Popery,) who would gladly prosecute this cause (so enterteyned) with might
and maine. Yet the L. B. of London would needs be at charges in sending down
his Commissioners. 2. Harsenet (his chaplain) was by his appointment (as
keeper and examiner of Darling, so) a principal Co^missioner, whose
partiallity in executing his commission, may be presumed by his impudency
before the high Co^missionerson whitsoneve. Both (touched hereafter) presume
concurrence with his master. 3. When deponentes would speak to the justifying
of M. Dorr: Harsenett threatened them, not with the high Commission so much, as
with the L. B. of London. 4. The L. B* of London not abiding any thing that
makes for M. Dorrell (according to that of Christ He that evil does, hates
the light.) Hides and hinders all evidences, checketh or threatens all
witnesses for M. Dorr: Namely M. Ireton (a famous learned minister) M. Gray,
and Bambridge worshipful gentlemen. 5. By his sole warrant the L. B. of London
took from M. Dorrel certain directions in law concerning this cause only,
which M. Dorr. (being denied council to plead for him) was constreined to
procure. 6. Often did the L. B. of Land. examine (as Darling the boy of Burton)
so M. Dorrell (at onetime with an other) upon 180. interrogatories or
thereabout. 7. The register would have granted M. Dorr. wife copies of his
answers, etc. but only the L. B. of London would not. 8. On Whitson eve the L.
B. of Land. had a book of depositions, and pleaded as earnestly as Doct.
Cru^pton the appointed advocate, to whom standing at his elbow the L. B. of
London was suggester and director. All these things well weighed it is likely
that the L. B. of London sits not as Judge, etc. Concerning the 2d.
Circumstances prove t^^ 2. charg^
charge 1. The L. B. of London agreed with a Barber about Summers his service
and freedom. 2. The L. B. of London took So^mers into his house, clothed and
used him to his liking. 3. Before this, So^mers never charged M. Dorr. with
teaching: though long, and often before he had pretended counterfeiting. 4.
Summers (made for the purpose) was appointed Darlings keeper when he was close
prisoner in the L. B. house, and then dealt with Darling to do as he had don.
5. So^mers robbing of Harsenett was smothered. 6. Though Darling was (by
indirect means) drawn to say he had counterfeited, yet because he would not
say also that Dorrell taught him, he^ was used otherwise then Summers, as is
before showed. 7. After the L. B. of Land. had served his turn, Summers was
suddenly made away out of his house and the Barbers service too, when he had
given him money for ^he Remaynder of his yeates. But whither it is not known.
Save that in Whitson week the L. B. of London sent his Mother word that he
should go to Sea. Least (belike) So^mers should either be seen in his fitts,
and so the opinion that he is still possessed be justified, or some should
offer money (as a noble personage did) to see his feats, which he either
refusing to do or not performing according to that has been deposed, all the
pack of knavery will be opened. These things well weighed, it is likely that
the L. B. of London did draw So^mers to accuse M. Dorr. Concerning the 3d.
^ircum^^^nces to love the charge.
charge. 1. The L. B. of Land. has given out, that since he has taken May.
Dorrels matter in hand, he will have the credit of it. 2. Most of the
afternoon (on Whitsoneve) was spent in pleading and pretended proving against
May. Dorrell. 3. M. Dorr. beginning to speak at large to all matters objected
against him, was by the L. B. of Cant. forbidden, and for this reason, least M.
Dorrel should persuade his favorites there present. 4. M. Dorrell desired a
condition to examine witnesses for his part, or that depositions already
taken, and by him then presented, might be heard. But the L. B. of Cant. denied
both. 5. M. Dorrell did charge Harsenet and his fellow Commissioners with
threatening of witnesses, taking money, etc. Harsenet openly answered that M.
Dor. durst as well eat a toades head as name particulars, M. Dorrell did name
particulars; whereupon was some silence. But excuse was readily coined, and as
easily taken. 6. M. Dorrell perceiving the L. Bisho. their course, appealed to
the L. chief Justice of England; earnestly desiring his Lordsh. to vouchsafe
hearing some few particulars as possible for Summers to counterfeit, as to fly.
Audience was granted. Among the rest he told, that So^mers spoke his mouth
gaping and tongue retorted. He described the running swelling, and showed how
he was dead an hour, etc. The Judge acknowledged them very wonderful. It was
answered, That the retorting was by means of a string, and that the boy could
counterfeit swelling, which the Judge desiring to see, Summers rolled his
tongue in his mouth. To the third nothing was said. 7. Yet for all this that
just Judge (who in his own Court admits no coppies of depositions without
an oath that they are true copies, much less bound up in books, and suffers
the accused to plead and prove as well as the accuser, (yea in a former hearing
told Mr Dorrell that he was to prove) took now occasion to signify great
disliking of May. Dorrell, because he said he thought Summers to be yet
possessed. The like occasion or less, took Doctor Caesar to signify semblant
mislike (though upon reading M. Dorr. Apology and the story of the 7. in
Lancashire) he had pronounced M. Dorrels cause to be Gods cause. 8.
Notwithstanding so great proof pretended of so heinous a matter objected: As
of abusing 1. the name of Jesus: 2. the exercises of preaching, prayer and
fasting, and hundreds of Gods people, by so many cousenages and counterfeitings
as he was charged with: yet May. Dorrell (the pretended offender) has no more
punishment, then M. Moore for only justifying his cause. Amongst the rest
perpetual imprisonment was threatened. For the L. B. of London had said he
should not out of prison while he were B. of London. These things well
weighed, it is likely that the Co^missionars being wise men and able to
discern colors, had such regard (in policy) of the L. B. of Londons
authority, that they hearkened to whatsoever tended to M. Dorr. blame, and
neglected the contrary: least (otherwise) the L. B. of London so indirectly and
egerly following, yet altogether failing in so great a matter, should reap no
little shame. Though these general answers be sufficient, yet more to
satisfy all men, M. Dorrell answers thus particularly.

Dorrell said upon the bare receipt of a

The letter (indeed) was subscribed only by M. Dorrels wifes sister, Answer.
but written in the name of many of Nottingham, and containing some signs of
possession. The messinger (conversant with So^mers) made the case more plain:
whereupon M. Dorr. (though he had then never seen So^mers, yet) crediting Gods
word which records like signs, answered that if Summers was handled as is
reported, no doubt he was possessed.

Dorrell was told at his first coming to Nottingham, that Summers did
counterfett: he notwithstanding gave out the contrary.

Answer.
It is true that the next day after he came to Nottingham and had seen Summers
fitts, M. Dorrell said to some suspecting counterfetting, that it could not be
possibly. This may presume hundreths to have taught Summers, and others, to
counterfeit: as well as M. Dorrell.

Dorrell did interpret the sins which Summers acted in a dumb show, saying
he had seen others possessed do the like.

Answer.
M. Dorrell never saw the like before, neither was he the interpreter. Indeed
no one man especially, but many confusedly did interpret the dumb show. So that
(once) in open Court, the L. B. of London charged Mistress Gray therewith. But
admit that M. Dorrell did interpret, it presumes forwardnes to speak, not
teaching to counterfeit, and the rather since by no art the like can be
counterfeited.

Dorrell said of certain speeches uttered by Summers in his pretended fitts,
that they were not his but the Devils.

Answer.
It is true, M. Dorrels ground is Mar. 1.23.24.34. But suppose it was not the
Di^ell: this presumes error of judgment, ^ot imposture by teaching.

Dorrell affirmed that Summers felt not in

The former part is true, the latter false: Answer.
^t admit, yet teaching cannot be presu^ed, but that M. Dorrell would not have
^^mmers to much payned, since sufficient all had been before made.

Dorrell said that Summers was possessed not

It is false: but admit that where so. Answer.
Yet ^s proves not teaching.

Dorrell said in his preaching over night

^t is true: M. Dorrells ground is Joell 2. Answer.
and 1. Cor. 7.5. Yet neither this proves teaching.

Dorr. preaching at the feigned dispossessi^

^t is true, M. Dorr. reason was: Answer.
Of many ^mbled, some acknowledging Summers to be tormented, yet doubted of
possession others were of M. Dorrells mind: To satisfy all, M. Dorr. chose
for his text, Mark^ 9.14. etc. delivered the doctrine of possession, and
applied accordingly. This doet^ not presume teaching, but M. Dorr. stron^
persuasion, that Summers was possessed, an^ not by natural disease, or otherwise
to^mented.

Dorrell then preaching, sometimes pa^sed, and made some stay: that the signs
(...) possession and dispossession might be seen.

Answer.
It is false, for perceiving the word a^ work of God to meet together, he
d^ will the people so to behold the work the especially they hearken unto the
word God. But admit: this presumes not teac^ing, but that the stra^genes of
Gods wor^ compelled both preacher, and people pause for a while.

Dorrell then said* they should see great things, and before they were acted,
she^ the signs of dispossession.

Answer.
M. Dorrell coming to the 26. v^ of that text, only said, that if the Lo^
would be entreated to cast out the D^ these strange things should be seen:
sequel presumes the efficacy of fa^ and prayer, and not that M. Dorr. spea^
^hereof aforehand (yet not prophesying) was guilty of teaching.

Dorrell said, that So^mers was bewitched

Except bewitching be disproved, Answer.
this Circumstance presumes not teaching: but rather that Summers did not
coun^erfett.

When Summers was in prison, Dorrell

Summers Father in law can easily disprove that. Besides M. Dorr: Answer.
was at Ashby that day, when Summers was both imprisoned and bailed: But
admit, this being after dispossessio^, presumes nothing less the^ teaching.
Only it shows M. Dorrells mind, that Summers should not have to much wrong
being accused to be a witch, and that of malice, because (in his fitts) he had
named one Doll Freeman (kinswoma^ to an Alderman of Nottingham) to be a witch.

Dorrell bought out Summers years of apprentiship.

M. Dorrell indeed was suerty, Answer.
(and paid 13 s. 4 d.) for Summers Father in law, who agreed (6 weeks after
the dispossession) with Summers master (being a fiddler) for his years. Toward
payment whereof M. Mayor of Nottingham collected, etc. For the deed and cause
was openly known, and approved. This presumes not teaching more in M. Dorrell
then in the Mayor, but that M. Dorr. had a godly care that Summers should not
any longer profane the Sabbath, but serve the Lord JESUS in whose name he was
delivered.

Summers came often to Dorrells chamber, and had private talk.

Answer.
About 8. weeks after the dispossession, there was once or twice such talk.
The cause was, Summers Father and other perceiving some misdemeanour, desired
M. Dorrell to talk with him hoping that Summers would regard M. Dorrell then
preacher of Nottingham, and the rather because of his deliverance. This
presumes teaching no more by M. Dorr: then by others, who had oftener private
talk with him, who by crossing (as is said) had chased the swelling, had
charged the spirit in the name of Jesus to go out, affirmed Summers to be
possessed, and interpreted the dumb show: Indeed if it had been deposed either
that this talk had been before dispossessio^ it had been some thing, or that M.
Dorrell was heard commending of Summers for his acting or counterfeting, it had been more then a presumption.

Dorrell sent Summers to see Darlings fits

Indeed Summers avouched as much to Darlings face in the hearing of many in the
L. B. of Londons house. Answer.
But Darling asking him, whether the bridge into Burton were long or short, or
whether his uncles house were of wood or stone, and 3. in what end of the town
builded? Somm. answered, 1. that the bridge was short. 2. That Darli. uncles
house was a sorry one of wood: and 3. standing at such an end of the town.
Look (said Darling) what a notable liar he is. For the Bridge has so many
Arches, and is a quarter of a mile long: my Uncles house built of stone, is one
of the fairest, and stands in the midst of the town. Besides, So^mers was
all the time of Darlings possession with his Master Potter at Nottingham, 20.
miles from Burton. 4. Let this be proved, so as Dorrell having commission can
not disproove it, and he will yield.

Objections in behalf of M. Dorr. more fully to show the vanity of
allegations, and invalidity of proceedings against him.


Answer.
Tumblers by discontinuance cannot act their tricks as before.

Summers avouched before the high Commisioners (on Whitson-eve) that he could
do them again as straungely as ever: whereupon room was made. But the L. B.
of London was unwilling that more trial should be made, then he thought
convenient. For if Summers had gone on, he would either have shamed all, by
cou^terfeiting the rest, as he did the running swelling, by rolling his
tongue. Or if he had acted all the fearful things, that are deposed, the
L.B. of Land. him self would think that Summers said true, when he confessed;
That the Devil persuading him to say that he counterfeited, promised to help
him to do the same.

as tumblers and iuglers can show their sleightes, and other connterfeites
(before them) Wie^^ de praest^ daemo^t. 4.26.
have showed their Conveyances: So as the reason of counterfeiting by art may
be perceived.

Summers has showed by what devises he has counterfeited. Answer.


His devises, namely the said rolling of Summers has told devices, but
Darling, for

If not only those 4. but the 7. also in Lancashire were counterfeites, which
yet is but suggested, for fear of shame keeps the L.B. of London from
enterprizing convenient proof hereof: It is very likely that (as tumblers and
iuglers, so) some of so many, in so long time, have taught some other to do
their feats, or some of them; If none, it is likely, that their feats be not
to be taught or learned.

Wierus (de praestig. li. 4. cap. 26.27.28.) reports, that the end of
certain counterfeites and their instructors were discovered, as soon as their
counterfeitings.

Answer.
Darling confessed to May. Harsenett, that he cou^terfeited, thereby to bring
credit to the Gospel or Ministry.

Darling (scarce 13. years old) did counterfeit to that end, it is likely
that other of the cou^terfeits (being elder) had the same end; since M. Dorrell
(a Minister) is said to Harsenett, who abused the boys confession (as is
said) Darling and his friends might think, that though it be credit to the
Gospel to dispossess; yet small credit, that where the Gospel is professed, so
many should be possessed, especially a Darling was a little Prophet, For he
was possessed 17. weeks before Fasting and prayer, or M. Dorr. (a mere
stranger dwelling in an other Country) was thought of, or his vexacion (known
to be by witchcrafte) was perceived to be possession. 6.

Howsoever the L. B. of London has Domine fac totum among the high
Commissioners, yet since other Commissioners must needs join with him in many
things, for warranting the same, May. Dorr. humbly craveth favor; that having
sufficient causes and reasons, he may (without prejudice to the high commission
it self, which he honors as a most lawful authority) challenge the equity
and lawfulnes of the L. B. of London, and some of the Commissioners (his
partakers) their proceedings in this cause. For though this pretended
cou^terfeiting Dorr. (whom he acknowledged to be an honest man) from the
execution of his Ministry to the impoverishing of him, his wife, and 5. poor
children, and to the discouraging of all those, who by his ministry (affected
because of Somm. his dispossession) began to taste of the Gospel in Nottingham,
where a settled Preacher had not been since her Majesty's reign. And that only
because he holds fasting and prayer be means left by Christ in his Church
to cast Devils out of the possessed: yet so, that therein he refers his
opinion to the censure of his learned and godly brethren. Notwithstanding (I
say) the clear manifestation of possession and dispossession (against which no
exception has been Canterbury Province, he was sent for, and presently
committed to the Gate House for the supposed heresy, where he has lain a
year and certain months, and still lies without any judicial and lawful
trial, (notwithstanding sufficient bail was often and humbly offered) yea so
hardly used, that (by no entreatie) he can obtain liberty to go abroad with
his keeper, (as other prisoners do) no not to go to Church upon the Sabbath
day. In which proceedings Dorrell supposes small regard to be had first of 28.
H. 8. cap. 9. where an Archb: is restrained from drawing a cause of haeresy to
his own hearing, from any B. or ordinary within his province, except the said
B. or ordinary consent or do not his duty in punishment of the same. Much
less may M. Dorrell his cause be drawn out of another Province from an
Archb. and that after punishment inflicted, except high Commissioners of Cant.
may execute a transcendent authority. Secondly as of this ground of law, Nemo
bis pro eodem delicto puniendus est, so of 1. Eliza. cap. 2. where it is
provided that a Minister depraving the book of common prayer, etc. shall not
be punished both by the B. and Judge. Much less (thinks M. Dor.) is supposed
(not convicted) heresy to be punished twice in Ecclesiastical Courts.
Thirdly, of 1. Eliz. ca. 1. where it is expreslie provided, That nothing is to
be judged heresy, which has not been so judged by authority 1. of the
Canonical Scripturs. 2. of any of the 4. first general Councills, or of the
Parliament, etc. But affirming fasting and prayer to be means, etc. has not
been so adjudged. Ergo. Fourthly, of magna Charta, the violaters whereof are
solemly accursed An^. 12. H. 3. where ( cap. 29.) The Prince thus protests,
No Freeman may be taken or imprisoned, etc. we will not go upon him, etc. but
by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the law of this land. To none will we
deny or deferr Justice or right. If not the Prince, much less may
Commisioners violate this Charter. And of West. 1. cap. 15. where it is said;
If any with hold prisoners replevisable after they offered sufficient surety,
he shall pay a grievous amerciament unto the King. But bail is not denied M.
Dorr. by any law, for any thing yet laid to his charge. Ergo.

^tion
For all this suspending, and imprisoning M. Dorr. for his supposed haeresie,
yet when Summers was drawn to accuse M. Dorrel of teaching him to counterfett,
the L. Bb. followed that sent with a full cry with examination upon examination
(M. Dorrell himself being examined at several times, upon (about) 180.
articles) with commission upon commission; M. Dorrell often desired to join in
commission, to have copies of depositions, and to have a new commission to
examine witnesses on his parre, but was denied all: witnesses (grave Preachers,
and worthy Gentlemen) speaking for M. Dorrel were reproved, and depositions
material to his justification (taken by other Commissioners) were twice
snatched from him in open Court, some would not be received at all, yea some
were blotted out being recorded by the Register. Nay these hunters for matter
against M. Dorr. could so hardly abide any thing that sounded toward the
signification of his innocence, that a poor parish-Clerke was fetched up from
Nottingham, only because he did sing the 94. Psalm before that the Nottingham
Commissioners (forsooth) satt in Commission. Which proceedings M. Dorrell
hops all indifferent men will deem, as very indirect, so of small validity.
For these considerations: First, M. Dorr. was committed for one thing, and
prosecuted for another. Secondly, the judging of counterfeiting belongs (as
M. Dorr. supposes) to the Starr chamber, or some other of her Majesty's
Courts, and not to the high Commission. Thirdly, in that law (whereby the high
Commission reigns) it is a rule, Delegatus non potest delegare. And
fourthlie, In the Stare chamber (where most criminal causes be heard and
determined) the party accused (of what fault soever) has leave to plead and
prove for him self, and to take out copies of depositions for him or against
him.

Darling by Harsenett, Kather. Wright by Harsenett, Pigott, and Gregory. Indeed
the Mayor of Chesterfielde (for countenance sake) was one with them, who
(simpleman) was content to set his hand to what they had don, though he was
not at the doing him self. Mary Cowper by those 3. and other of Nottingham for
the purpose, as hereafter, etc. And William Somm. by the same. And it is more
strange, that so many of all sorts, wise, simple, godly, profane, learned,
unlearned, who viewed those 4. many times in their fitts (since they were long
vexed, one 10. weeks, another 17. weeks, a third half a year, and the 4th.
above 12. years) could not perceive counterfeiting, and these find it out so
quickly, and yet none of them ever saw any of the possessed in their fitts, nay
the Nottingham men could not be drawn to come to that sight fearing (belike)
in their hearts that, which with their mouths they said to have been
counterfett. Were all other eye witnesses fools and could not, or partial and
would not discover? Doubtless if these Commissioners had gone into Lancashire
they had found the 7. possessed there, to have been counterfets too.

These were enjoined by authority to bend their wits to find counterfeiting;
Answer.
and there is no cause why these should be partial.

Yes, two causes, First partial affection. Reply.
For Harsenet and Pigott (servants of trust to the L.B. of London set against
M. Dorr. as is showed) were to make good their Masters word, that since he had
taken M. Dorrells matter in hand, he would have the credit of it. And the men
of Nottingham must justify their accusation of Summers, and wreck their malice
upon M. Dorrell, since they had power in their hands by their commission.
Secondly Popery: for (not long since) Harsenet held about 12. gross errors of
Popery never yet soundly recanted. For which Cambridge spewed him out, and now
lately denied him the grace of Doctorship. M. Morrey of Nottingham is generally
reputed to be a Papist, and either for his own or his wyves popery has been
before the high Commission at York: and M. Gregory has not received the
Communion for 11. years together. No merveile though the secret friends of
Rome do what they can that the true Church of Christ may not have credit by
casting out Devils, which that Synagogue glories in as proper to it self. So
that some Papists not denying the possession of the 7. in Lanc. do say, That if
it were plain that they were dispossessed by the fasting and prayer of M.
Dorrell and M. Moore, etc. they will forsake the Church of Rome: wherein they
show more sincerity (though less policy) then the L. B. of London and his
Commissioners. Again others ( John Therold ^squir high ^herife of Nottingh.
Sir John Biron Kni. John Stanhope, Rob Markha^, Rich. Parkins esquiers. Peter
Clerk mayor of Nottingham, Arch. Walton, Miles Leig. offic. Ioh. Ireto^, Io.
Brown, Rob. Evington, and Tho Bolto^ Preachers.
mo in number, and of greater creditt) had been before enjoined by authority to
sift out the truth touching Summers: who after diligent examination, and seeing
him in such a fit, That M. Walton (an Archdeacon, and then an arch-adversarie)
was constrained to say, This is the finger of God; returned, That Summers was
no Cou^terfeit, as had then ben given out. If these, or the like me^ for
credit, learning, judgment, and godliness, had been employed in examining the
truth concerning the other 3. pretended counterfetts, no doubt, they would
also (in them) have acknowledged the finger of God. So that, if the L.B. of
London might challenge a right honorable personage for threatening Summers,
whereas it was only said (and that after hearing) take heed least these
tricks ^ring thee to the author of them; much more may M. Dorrell challenge
the L. B. of London his Commissioners (being M. Dorrels enemies) for threatening
to whip, ^ang, and burn, for committing, and in^oyning to appear at London
(when drawing means could not prevail) such as would not swear as they
desired, or more ^hen they well liked. And for interlyning ^n the absence and
without consent of the ^eponent, and all this (not to urge taking ^f money of
witnesses, as of M. Beersford and others) before hearing, as is showed before
and can not be too often noted.

Sundry times was M. Dorr. convented Heretic, Devil, and threatened to ^e the
Devils martyr, etc. Only because ^e denied Summers to have counterfeited. ^t
the second and third co^vention he was ^alled Most impudent varlett, Ass,
Patch, etc. Also when at the same time ^entle audience was given to Papists,
Arians, Atheists, and blasphemers, neither then nor at any time after would
they permit him to speak any thing to the purpose, i^ his own defense: save
somewhat in the las^ day of hearing, for their promise sake, an^ least otherwise
their dealing should appear too gross in the eyes of the L. chie^ Justice of
England, who was desirous t^ hear him speak. Yet somewhat being s^roundly and
substantially spoken then t^ the matter, that the L. B. of Cant. his color
went and came so, that he could n^ endure: he silenced M. Dorr. for this
reason, least he should persuade his favorit^ present. In which last convention
(when unto most is attributed) these things are (...) be observed. First,
though promise w^ made by the L. Bishops to honorable pe^sonages, that M.
Dorrell should be hea^ iudicially, at, or before the end of East term, yet he
was not convented til Wh^soneve, and that so suddenly, that M. Do^ and M. Moore
had no more warning, the* Make you ready and away to be at La^beth before the
Bishops, Judges, and Commisioners have dyned. The L. Bishops ^devour (belike)
was, That few or none (...) of their own creatures, should be witn^ses of
their indirect proceedinges. T^ sundry sufficient witnesses for M. Dorr.
expecting the promised hearing, might be gone into the country, as they were
indeed when they saw nothing done at the end of the Term. Secondly, Three
large books containing not only depositions, but reasons (or pleadings) also
against M. Dorrell written by Ledsam and other the L. Bish. of Land. his
servantes, were brought: one for their Advocate, and (least he should ^aile in
pleading) an other for the L. B. of Cant. his secretary, and the 3d for the
L.B. ^f London him self. Thus L. Bishops may ^e (by their high commission)
parties, or leaders, and Judges too. Thirdly, The L. ^b. fitted their turn
with an Advocate for their purpose, namely Doctor Crompton, a ^an as I have
heard, so suspected for Po^erie in Oxforde that Cardinal Allens ^aunderous
invectiue against the Execution of Justice in England, was sought for and found
in his study, and thereupon for ^ time he was committed, and after that he ^as
once (or twice) denied his Doctorship though Sir Christop. Hatton then
Chau^^ellor of England and of Oxon. wrote in ^s behalf) because the
University still ^spected him. Now, he (no doubt) did take as earnestly as
he could against M. Dorr. (for such me^ cannot abide that protestant Ministers
should cast out Devils whereas M. Dorrell was both denied co^sell and not
permitted to plead for him sel^ Fourthly, They not only read Summers confession
artificially penned far beyond h^ reach) but produced him also viua voce t^
accuse M. Dorrell: which course they di^ not take with Katharine Wright, Man
Cowper, and Thomas Darling, Thoug^ they had time enough to have sent a
pu^suivant for the two former, and bound the^ to appear as they did Darling,
whom y^ they did not call for (though he were the^ present) to accuse M. Dorrell
to his face* The reason was, Somm. was made for the^ purpose, whereas Katharine
Wright a^ Mary Cowper would have appeared ((...) not possessed, yet) straungely
affected, a^ Darling would have justified M. Dorr. a^ charged Harsenet with bad
dealing, as (...) was beginning to do when his pretend confession was read,
but that his Vn^ (who was bound for him) did stay (...) speech. Fifthly, when
M. Dorr. urged sun^ impossibilities, as the running swelling, ^ they answered
that the boy by count^feiting, could do them as stra^gely as ev^ Then Summers
rolled his tongue, etc. (...) when better demonstration was desired, they had
their shift. For (quoth the L. B. of London) it is to no purpose since M.
Dorrell holds Summers to be repossessed. Sixthly and lastly. They spent all,
or most of the afternoon, in reading, conferring, and cavelling upon pieces of
depositions (read out of the said books) against M. Dorrel. Whereas it had
been convenient to have read the depositions at large, considering M. Dorr.
had no copies of them, that it might appear whether the witnesses (which are
drawn to speak somewhat in in show against M. Dorrell) have not spoken more
in substance for him: as Thomas Garland did: as also M. Gray and his wife, M.
George Small, Thomas Porter, and M. Ireton, M. Brown, and M. Evington, 3.
learned and godly Preachers: who spoke materially in the behalf of M. Dorrell,
if it would have pleased the L.B. of London to have produced their depositions
at large and uncorrupted. The L. B. of London still promised, That when all was
said that could be, M. Dorrell should have time enough to answer at large to
every particular, as he often desired. But when it came to the point he was cut
of from speaking: So that he said nothing to any of the Circumstances
concerning confederacy with Summers, or of teaching the other 3. and yet was
condemned for teaching all 4. to counterfeit. Neither would they read any
word of any of the 17. depositions that were taken by commission from York: a
copy whereof he eftsoons presented unto the^. Notwithstanding also they had
twice before (in open Court) taken the like from him. Which proceedings M.
Dorrell judges to be against these rules of Gods word, ^. Tim. 5.8.19.
Rebuke not an elder hut admonish him as a father, Receave no accusation
against an elder but under. 2. or 3. witnesses. And the Judges shall make
dilligent inquisition, Deuteronomy. 19.18
and if the accuser be found false, etc. As I hear I judge, Ioh. 5.30. and
7.51. Mat. 26.62. Act. 25.16.
and my judgment is just; and against the practice of the Jews, yea of the
Priests, who urged Christ to answer for him self; Of the Romans, Of other her
Majesty's Courts of Justice, where both parties be not only permitted to
plead and prove for them selves, but publication also of Depositions is
granted certain days before hearing, at what time both parties are heard at
large, there being great care had of the credit of the copies of the
Depositio^s. Yea against the practice of the Assizes, where murderers and
fellons may speak for the^ selves and except against the Jury or witnesses
what they ca^. So that M. Dorr. complayneth that in a matter of so great
importance wherein Christ for his names sake, and his people for their
information sake, have great interest, he is yet condemned without form or
judgment.

The Ecclesiastical Commissioners may proceed summarie and de plano, Answer.
and sine forma iudicii, That is summarily, and without form of judgment.

It is true, but add Non sic iudex litem abbreviare debet, Reply.
quin probationes necessariae and legittimae defensiones (ne veritas omittetur)
admittantur, that is: The Judge ought not otherwise to shorten the contention,
but so (least truth be omitted) that necessary proofs and lawful defenses may
be admitted. Again Si occasion clausularum memoratarum aliquid constiterit in
alterius preiudicium constitutum, id viribus caret; In ca eam quae de resc:
that is, If by occasion of the mentioned clauses (to wit su^marie, etc.) there
shall be any thing ordered or decreed to the prejudice of an other, such an
order or decree is of no validity. Sec: If the high Commisioners exercise
such a transcendent authority, that they proceed when they will so without
form of judgment, that necessary proofs and lawful defense will not be
admitted. Their proceedings are to be accounted rather tyrannical then
lawful, for then none can be innocent whom they will accuse. 3. The very
clauses ( summarie etc.) do show that such a course i^ ^o be taken, when they
want time, but in trying this case they have had time enough, so that they have
sent commission after commission, and taken examination upon examinacion, and
therefore their not admitting M. Dorrell his necessary proofs and lawful
defenses does argue that (being secretly persuaded) in their consciences that
there was no counterfetting, they would have truth omitted. Otherwise if they
were assured of cou^terfetting, they cannot but know, but that the more
liberty, M. Dorrel has to plead and prove, the more to his shame will his
imposture appear.

as grievously as M. Dorrel, for teaching (as they say (eleven to counterfeit,
depriving both of their Ministry and committing both to close imprisonment,
until further punishment were determined. And that's not yet perpetual
imprisonment, though this also has been often threatened. But not one of so
many supposed counterfers is toward any punishment, no not Summers who is
guilty of blasphemy, if he did cou^terfeit, but rather he has been made much
of, since he accused M. Dorrell. As for the Popish exorcists in Lancashire
(which play their pageant with Jane Ashton) and those in Nottingham who chaced
(as they affirm) the Devil in Summers with the sign of the Cross. None of
these are once called into question. In which proceedings M. Dorrell observes.
1. First matter of Justifying him self, as thus: Close imprisonment (a strange
punishment after a cause publikly and largely debated on the plaintifs side)
argues a fear, that Master Dorrell would justify himself to so many as
would (if permitted) resort to him, which presumption is so much the more
pregnant, because Master Moore was likewise committed to close imprisonment
only for holding a good opinion of M. Dorr. dealing in dispossession, and
because the Archb. said, If they were abroad they would infect the common
wealth. Which fear they conceive not of Popish Priests, whose opinions be more
dangerous then that of M. Moore: neither need they to conceive fear of M.
Dorrell, if he had been manifestly detected, for then every one would be ashamed
of him. Again, if M. Dorr. were manifestly convicted, of teaching eleaven to
counterfeit, without doubt, some shameful and public punishment would be sone
inflicted for an example to other, without taking so long time for
determination, and not only perpetual imprisontment would be threatened,
least thereby they should seem Murderers of the persons, and smootherers of
the cause. Moreover, If the Commissioners did not secretly think
counterfeiting to be but a pretended matter, some of the^ would have urged that
(as heretofore Mistres Pinder, and Mistres Brigges their daughters were
compelled to confess such counterfeiting at Paul's cross, so) some of so many
cou^terfeitts discovered at one time, should be punished for example, least by
the forbearing of so many, the number of such cou^terfets should daily
increase. Sec: M. Dorr. observes partiality and unequal dealing, somewhat like
that of delivering Barrabas, and crucifying Jesus: but herein worse, for then
it was the peoples deed, but now to the grief of all the godly (in city and
country) that know both man and matter. Yea flatly against these words of God.
pro. ^
He that instifieth the wicked add he that condemns the just even they both
are abomination to the Lord. For Somm. his wickedness is notorious and (to say
nothing of M. Dorrell) M. Moore having had experience of Gods power, and
Satan's malice in these 7. in Lancashire, knowing the godliness and honesty of M.
Dorr: and the perjury of Summers, acquainted with the testimony of many
faithful eye witnesses, seeing (himself) Summers in a most strange fit before
the Commissioners at Not: and hearing frivolous Allegacions and Circumstances
against M. Dorrell not suffered to receive answer, can not (in honesty) but
continue, not only a good opinion, but a good report also, of M. Dorrell his
dealing about the dispossession of Summers, and the other three: according to
that of Peter and John: Act. ^
We can not but speak the things we have seen and heard. Nay it is contrary
to a W^ 1. c^
Statute which provideth that an exigent shall not go out against the accessory
until the principal be attainted by outlawry or otherwise, and contrary to
the course of justice in Germany, ^erus ^raest. ^mon, ^4. ca. ^7.
where not only a Priest was punished for teaching to counterfeit possession,
but the party likewise so taught yea a beggar also, for such counterfeiting
were tormented in a wheel 2. hours, and then hanged.

^wer.
Thomas Darling (one of the cou^terfeiters) was laid in the cou^ter in
Southwark 7. weeks and otherwise punished. But if none of the cou^terfeiters
had been punished, yet it follows not that the Bb. had any grudge against M.
Dorr. and M. Moore that might be probably supposed, to be the root of their
partiality.

^eply.
If Darl. were punished for cou^terfeiting, then the verdit of 12. men and
sentence of Judge Anderson (whereby a witch was condemned for torme^ting
Darling by her familiar) are called into question to the prejudice of her Mats
Court, and contrary to the statu. of 27. Ed. 3. ca. 1.2. But indeed Darl. was
not imprisoned for cou^terfeiting, but for not confessing cou^terfeiting, and
denying it after such confession was drawn from him. As may appear by that is
aforeshewed; by the not punishing of So^m. and by not calling Darl. (at the
last day of hearing) to answer the disclaiming his confession, but presently
after they released him and his uncle of his band. 3 The L. Bb. rigorous
dealing with M. Dorr. and M. Moore does of necessity argue either zeal
against the horrible sin of cou^terfeiting possession, or grudg against the
persons. The former it is not, for the^ (without dout) they would not only
diligently seek out the sin, but punish it also severely wheresoever they find
it, at least, in some of so many cou^terfeits discovered about the same time.
But so they do not; Therefore it follows, there is some grudg against M. Dor.
and M. Moore though the cause be not readily perceyved. 4. But indeed sundry
causes may be perceived of all not willingly blind. 1. The hatred which the L.
Bb. ( Cant. and London) have against those that desire reform. of the church
(among who^ they account M. Dor. and M. Moore) whom they persecute more egerly
then Papists, as if they were more ielous of their own miter the^ of the Queens
crown. Which their Articles in visitatio^s, and other their proceedings do more
then manifest. Yea they so loath such professors, that they cannot brook fasting
and prayer, as they use it, without some taste of the leaven of the Pharisees.
2. They would gladly have this matter for a complement of that sclau^derous and
schismatic book of Scottizing Genevating Discipline, that (through M.
Dorrell sides) they might goare all reformed Churches about us, and all
desirers of reformation amongst us. In this sort, These Disciplinarians not
prevayling by the conspiracy of Hacket, nor by the libelling of Martin, nor
threatening with Vdall, (yet fearing to attempt the rebellion of Scotland and
Geneva for their reformation) would obtain credit by working miracles in
casting out Devils. To which purpose the L. B. of London and his Advocat, have
confidentdently and openly (but most falsely) spoken. Lastly, they must needs
justify the L. B. of Londons words; who (as is said) vaunted that since he had
taken M. Dorr. cause in hand, he would have the credit of it.

But all the premises well considered, M. Dorr. appealeth to God, the church,
and the Queen to judge: whether he be justly punished for teaching to
cou^terfeit possession etc. or the L. Bb. of Cant. and Land. (overrulers of
this case) have not herein showed themselves the adversaries of Jesus. Since to
the glory of his Name at the fasting and prayer of his people, unclean Spirits
have been cast out by the finger of God.

To the Christian and indifferent Reader.
THE Report before promised (for some causes not sent with this treatise to the
press) was omitted so long, as that (in mean while) the book against M.
Dorrell begotten (as for some reasons it may seem) by one, to wit th'authour of
Scottizing Genevating discipline, is come forth in deed; but fathered (as a
bastard) upon another, viz. S. H. Whereof I thought good to take knowledge, and
to refer some few things to thy Christian consideration.

First concerning the Publishing thereof, It is to be observed, that as copies
of Depositions were denied before hearing, and M. Dorrell not suffered to answer
(as he should) at hearing, So he is traduced in print after hearing, though he
be yet in sure hold, and therefore without convenient means to reply in such
sort, as this case requires. Is not this to bind a man, and then to fight
with him? Has not the publisher of M. Dorrels apology some reason to call
such courses exorbitant?

Secondly, concerning the Matter: It is to be considered, That howsoever the
Discovery of M. Dorrels practices in teaching sundry to counterfeit
possession, be only pretended; yet D. Barlowes opinion That in these days
there is no possession must needs be here and there maintained, and yet not
directly. J call it D. Barlowes opinion, Because in process of disputation the
last Commenceme^t in Cambridge, he defended the same; yea so, that he would
have no possession (but obsession) in Christ's time. Notwithstanding that
worthy University would not suffer him at first to profess so gross an error,
but (inserting this word Ordinary) compelled him to set up his question to this
effect, In these days there is no Ordinary possession, etc. Now to what
purpose is Possession so simply denied? Marry, to cut May. Dorrels comb. For,
if there be no Possession at all, then Summers was not possessed, and then M.
Dorrels supposed crown of glory may prove but a withered garland. Nay verily.
If this were so, yet they gain nothing thereby, neither is M. Dorrels cause
the worse. For what if there be Obsessio^? and so if Summers were thus affected
and tormented indeed, as he appeared in show, is M. Dorrell then to be
condemned as an impostor? Yea further, admit Summers to have counterfaited: why
should M. Dorrell deceived by him, be punished? Was that good man, of reverend
memory (M. Fox) deceived by Anne Brigges and Rachel Pindar, called into
question for the same? He was not.

But how is this absolut denial of possession proved? First, forsooth, by an
Induction not urged as a reason, but insinuated like a fallacy, thus to be
collected: Will. Summers, Tho. Darling, Kath. Wright, the seven in Lancashire,
etc. Martha Brossier (whose matter is discoursed by Abraham Hartwell and
published in the very nick with S. H. his Discovery) were cou^terfeits:
Therefore (as it is concluded p. 77.) a Magistrate said to Mengus, Of 50.
exorcistes 49. are counterfeits. To whom Mengus answered: If I were not
present, you would so judge of me. O worthy Induction from a most sufficient
enumeration of undoubted particulars. But mark (good Reader) how like a
squint-eyed man S. H. in his parting blow looks one way, and strikes another.
For in the title he pretends to discover Master Dorrells bad practicing but
with 4: and yet, in sundry places of the discovery, he labors to prove the
7. in Lancashire to be also counterfeits, yea, though he confess pa. 4. that,
touching the^ examinations have not been taken. If the L.B. of London had tried
at first, how his Chaplain could (by very wit) without farther examinations
have made the other 4. Counterfeits in the opinion of all that would believe
him, his Lp. might have saved great charges, and pains bestowed in hunting
after their supposed counterfeiting. Here is yet another note upon this
Induction not to be forgotten, viz. That S.H. presuming (belike) to be borne
out, does call into question the sentences of death given by her Maiecties
Justices of Oier and Determiner upon the Witches, that bewitched the 7. in
Lancashire, and the boy of Burton, to the public and perpetual prejudice of
those her Majesty's Courts of Assizes.

Secondly, Absolute denial of possession is faced out by a ridiculous and
slight (not answering, but) evading from arguments framed by S.H. him self from
the word for possession, etc. the refutation whereof I refer to some treatise
that may be hereafter: also from the volu^tary confessions of witches
themselves; who, at their death have confessed, That they sent Devils into
parties possessed. Indeed, if witches by denial would excuse themselves, Such
denial for sundry reasons might be thought insufficient. But seeing many
witches, in sundry Kingdoms and ages, have, by their voluntary confessions,
justified evidences and sentences given against them, and when? Even at their
death when they see no hope to save them selves by persisting in denial, what
reason is there, why they may not be thought guilty of sending evil spirits
into the possessed, whereof they were convicted? S. H. avouches none, but
suggesteth (page 39.) that learned men have sufficiently confuted this already.
But S. H. are you ashamed of your learned men, or of their reasons, that you
neither quote the one nor set down the other? Must J help at a pinch? If memory
fail me not (as it may be it did S. H. In his Discovery of witchcraft
) M. Scot imputes such confessions to a strong imagination arising from
Melancholy the predominant humor of old women and such like. O superstitious
Catholic Mela^choly, that no less stranglie the^ strongly deludeth so many
young, as well as old, men, as well as women, and that at their executions! Tell
me S. H. what you think bona fide: was it Melancholy that caused Hartley (who
bewitched the 7. in Lancashire) stiffly to deny, both at the bar and gallows,
his divelish witchcraft: and yet when he saw that breaking an halter would not
deliver him from ha^ging (as the Devil had promised) then penitently to
confess, that all wherewith M. Starky (in whose house the 7. possessed were)
had charged him, was very true? Yet admit the reason. But know withal, that
your learned men intend theroby to dispoue not only possession, but all
witchcraft whatsoever, otherwise then by poisoning. Are you S. H. of that
opinion too? Why should I doubt it? For do not you hold (page 36.) That
Witches cannot send Devils into men and women? and, Is it not as easy for
witches to sent Devils Into, as Unto men? Here Doctors doubt. But D. Barlowes
reason at Cambridge strikes all dead. For (says he) one substance cannot enter
into another. Here is a dead blow indeed. For, Jf neither air (which is a
substance) nor meat can enter into our bodies, what will become of us? Jf
either enter, why cannot the Devil, since he is a spirit? But admit that it is
an harder matter to send the Devil Into, then Unto a man: I mean so Unto, as
to torment him, yet (me thinks) S. H. does hold the denial of one, as well
as of the other. For, by the authority of the same authors, who deny
witchcraft in sending Devils both Unto and Jnto men, Lib. 1.6.
he likewise indefinitly concludes that his discourse against the co^fessions
of Witches Again, Is it not likely, That D. Barl^ and Abrah. Hartwell belong
to the L. B. of Can. S.H. to the L. ^ of Land.
birds of a fether will fly together? Further, D. Barlowes reason at
Cambridge Why in these days there is no possession, was this: Christ came to
dissolve the works of darkness, and upon the Cross he triumphed over powers and
principalities: Ergo, There is now no possession. He may conclude as well, Ergo,
There is now no witchcraft: yea no murder, no pride, no Jdolatry, etc.
Moreover, There is reason why it is expedient for S. H. indefinitly and
implicatiuely to make witchraft doubtful. For, If there be no witchcraft at
all, then may he conclude, All M. Dorrels possessions (which are said to be by
witchcraft) must needs be counterfeitings. Who would loose such an argument?
But consider (good Reader) whether such a conclusion tend not to the
confirmation of Atheists. If so: may we not fear, that Witches and Atheists
may hope for more favor with the^, then M. Dor. The rather, if we consider 2.
actions of S.H. his L. and master on friday 8. days at the Session in Land.
First, how unwilling he was to find Concerning Anne Ke^ke, spoken of in the
end.
Witchcraft if his L. could have overruled that court: for notwithstanding he
heard sufficient witnesses testifying grievous things, and saw a yo^g girl
falling into a most terrible fit yet he smiled (at no laughing matter, as some
of the Bench told his L.) saying, That he saw nothing that might not be
counterfeited, and told, how many Counterfeits he had lately discovered.
Whereupon Judge Anderson, and other of the Bench thought it necessary for the
satisfying of the Jury to urge the Scriptures for proof that there is
witchcrafte, and (of their own knowledge) to tell of sundry bewitched, yea
possessed out of whom Devils spoke: and of a child bewitched to death whose
eyes were fast closed, yet when the Witch came in presence they opened, and (as
it were) stared upon the Witch. Second: How earnest his L. was to free an
Atheist then and there arraigned for blasphemy against God. For
notwithstanding his L. acknowledged that the Atheist had been before the high
Commission for such blasphemy, yet he pleaded that the secular power had
nothing to do with him until the spiritual jurisdiction had pronounced him
obstinate in his blasphemy. Upon whose words the Atheist took hold and
heart, openly and impudently to say, My Lord, if any here can prove there is
a God, I will believe it. Would the L. B. have done such a part if May. Dorrell
had been then and there arraigned for teaching to cou^terfeit possession? To
draw toward an end. Whereas S. H. his Discovery consists partly of matter
of Opinion, viz. a close fight against possession, at least in these days: and
of matter of Fact, viz. a bearing down of May. Dorrell with a tumultuous riot
of words as a Teacher of sundry to counterfeit possession: This (I hope) I may
presume to say touching the former, that if S. H. will take in hand directly
and syllogistically to conclude his negative opinion from the Scriptures, son
(no doubt) of M. Dorrels friends (so often by him provoked) will return (to use
his own words page 324) matter sufficient to show his skill in. As for the
matter of Fact, this I dare boldly say: That if M. Dorrell do not refute all
imputations and arguments material, which are not sufficiently answered in this
Collection (provided he may have liberty) all his friends will abandon him:
yea the Narrator, Publisher of his apology, and this Collector, if they be
alive and make conscience of their ways. I say, If they be alive, because if
they be all one (as some may suppose, and I have heard presumptions given so to
think) then they, in one, be departed this life.

Jn mean while, I desire thee (good Reader) to consider one thing with me,
that is, whether it may not be concluded, That a^ Raking of riches does
manifest the unsatisfied poverty of a covetous mind; so the Raking of matter,
even from papists, and that to no good purpose: The examining of M. Dorrell
(at several times) upon 8. or 9. skore interrogatories; and the deposing of
52. witnesses (as S. H. reckons page 13.) does not manifest an unsatisfied
mind, and (by consequence) the poverty of S.H. his cause. Which point, that
is, of the Prelates their not being satisfied (in their secret persuasion)
touching M. Dorrel his guiltines, may the rather be conceaved, For that, within
these few days, notwithstanding Ma. Dorrell, and Ma. Moore were both deposed
from the Ministry, and committed to close prison, there to remain until
order were taken for their further punishment, (as S. H. reports pa. 9.) yet
for all that, they have offered (by M. Barker the Register, who went of purpose
to M. Dorrell in the Gatehouse) liberty upon these conditions, That they
should not justify their cause, nor meddle any more with prayer, and fasting
for parties possessed.

Which good motion of granting liberty (J say not upon such conditions) to
Preachers, of whose Ministry the Church may have good use, in these times,
when Priests and Papists multiply and practice so fast, I could wish the
Reverende Prelates would follow, and do that of love toward Christ his Church
and Gospel, Act. 16.3^ 39.23.18.
which the Governors of Philippi did for fear of the Romans, to wit, They
delivered Paul out of prison with credit, whom they had punished more severely
then casting out a Devil had deserved. But how soever it shall please God to
move the hearts of our Reverend Prelates, Let me entreat thee (Christian
Reader) to suspende thy judgment in M. Dorrels till M. Dorrell, or some of his
friends have made further answer then here is, or can be made: and then to
judge as thou shall see cause. And so I pass to the promised Report,
accompanied with another of like argument.

A REPORT, Containing a brief Narration of certain devilish and wicked
witcheries, practiced by Oliffe Barthram alias Doll Barthram of Stradbrook in
the County of Suffolk, upon Ioane Jorden the Servant of Simon Fox of the same
Town: For which, she was arraigned before the right Ho* the L chief Justice of
England condemned and executed at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk the 12. of Iulye.
1599.
ABout midsomer last, the said Doll Barthram, falling out with the said Ioane
Jorden for refusing to give her of her masters goods, practiced and devised,
to afflict the said Joane by witcheries: as, through Gods permission by the
means of Satan it came to pass; which in brief was thus.

First the said Doll Barthra^ sent 3. Toads to trouble her in her bed, not
suffering her to rest. The first, being thrown out into the midst of the
chamber, returned, and sat croaking on her beds side: which being thrown out of
the window; another within few days after came and vexed her again; which
was taken and burnt. After that within a while came the 3d. which Ioane was
counseled to burn her self; and going down stayres to do so, she was
violently thrown to the stayers foot, there lying (a while) for dead. And when
this Toade began to burn, (which Simon Fox had put into the fire,) a flame
arose at the stayers foot where the toade lay when Ioane fell, and grew so
great, that it seemed to them to endanger the house, yet no hurt was don.

After this, On Satterday the 9. of June, in the sense of Ioh. Th^ston, Anthony
Adam ger^ Will. Go bold ch^ Constabl^ of Hoxa^ M. Ran^vicar. Io^ Sheerem^
Symo^ Po^ and d^ others.
many of good accoumpt and credit, A Spirit (which had been there the night
before, and said then, being asked, that his name was Gyles, and that he came
down the chimney in the likeness of a cat) came now again about eleven a clock
at night; first scraping on the walls, then knocking, after that shufling in the
rushes: and then (as his usual manner was) he clapped the maid on the cheeks
about half a skore times as to awake her; and, (as often times else he did) he
kissed her 3. or 4. times and slauered on her: and, (lying on her breast) he
pressed her so sore that she could not speak; at other times he held her
hands that she could not stir, and restrained her voice that she could not
answer.

The Shape which they saw the Spirit then to have, was a thick dark
substance about a foot high; like to a sugar lofe, white on the top. And
(being charged) he did shoot up in all their sightes as high again as he
showed himself before.

As this spirit had a shape, so had he also an audible voice: by which he spoke
and uttered many things. This voice was not the maids, neither from her, nor
yet of any other save of the spirit it self. For; (besides that the maid
denied it,) she and the spirit were heard speak both at once; also, her lips
were seen not to move, when the spirit spoke; and, some standing nearer to
the one then to the other, did sensibly discern and distinguish both their
voices. Neither was this the voice of any counterfeit confederate; for, (to put
this out of doubt) the house was searched, the parties in the maids presence
(except Io. Sheereman, M. Randall, and Sy. Fox) were strangers, the rooms
under and adjoining to her, were full of people, and the house was besett with
diverse who came to see and hear these strange accidents, which indeed they did;
for the voice was easily heard to them all.

This Spirit being demanded diverse questions, returned answers; saying, (among
diverse other things,) Joane, Ioane, I come for thy life; J will have it, I am
a Boy, a Boy; my name is Gyles; an old woman that dwells in the street gave
me that name, to wit, Doll Barthram; She sent me; I have served her 10.
years, yea 20. years; She is now in prison, (as indeed she was); Nan
Barthram sent me now; I will kill Ioane tomorrow night; J will tear her in
pieces; She has given her life and soul to me (which Ioane in part
acknowledging, viz. that she had given him her life, he laughed Ho, Ho, Ho.)
To this when John Sheereman defying him) replied, that he should not have her
life, he said, I will have thine then; I come to thee, J come; and with that,
offered toward him, to the great astonishment and fear of him and the rest
present. And yet thus for that time he vanished away.

But, not long after, he returned again; in manner as at the first (except
scraping the walls.) When, upon occasion of talk touching one Cavers wife, in
the presence of many, he said: Tom, (which was another of the Spirits of the
said Doll,) and J, at Doll Barthrams commandment, did hang her. But first I
led her into a ditch up to the chyn and could not drown her, and therefore I
brought her out again. Then Tom brought a rope and put it under her chaps, and
I pulled her up and hung her. Which seems to have been so, because of the
strangnes of it. For, the rope werewithall Cauers wife was hanged, was but put
under her chaps, not about her neck: and the noose was so big, that three
men's heds might have slipped through it at once.

Moreover, this Spirit then declared, That he, (at Doll Barthams commandment)
had killed a child, in the womb of the mother, by nipping out the brains; and
that he entered into another party and killed him, by tearing his heart in
pieces. Both which seem to be true also: for, the woman was delivered of a
dead child, and the man did dye in a very strange manner; and both at the same
time that the Spirit declared. Then, after many speeches used by the spirit,
as, that he would kill Ione, and tear John Sheereman in pieces; that he was
their God; and that he would not be content with the life of Ioane only, but
would have also the lives of Fox, his wife, children, and cattle, and that by
the commandment of Doll Bartharm, he went away for that night.

But Satan and the Witch, nothing contented with that which as yet had been don,
^eturned again in more grievous sort then before. For, in the presence of Of
who^ 4. were Sir Nicolas B^cons men, sent of pu^pose to bring true report.
many credible persons, there was seen a lump to arise in her body as big as a
man's fist; which ascended vpwardes in her body till it came to her throat, and
there settled as big as a man's arm. With this the maid was somewhat unruly,
and therefore was bound in a chair with a long to well, very fast. But she (or
rather the Devil in her) strugled and strained so sore, that it brake in
pieces. Being again bound in the chair, six strong men leaned with their
whole strength thereon, each also setting one foot on the round of the chair
to keep it down. But she, (though so bound) notwithstanding all their
strength, removed the chair round about the house, a yard at a time, they
hanging thereon.

After this fit ended, the maid was had to bed: And about eleaven a clock the
Spirit came; not after his usual ^aner, but with a great stroke on the bordes,
like the fall of a great stone. Wherewith, the people awoke, and the maid
cried, Help, Help: and then, a thick shadow was seen to go up to the
maids bed. Shortly after which, the maid was taken out, and thrown so
violently against the wall, as if it would have driven out the side of the
chamber. Then search being made for the maid, she was found lying underneath
the standing bed: From whence, it was as much as four men could do to pluck
her. Neither was this great throw, and heavy weight, the only strange things
in this her fit: For, her eyes were sunck into her head an inch. Her head and
body were bent backwards, almost to her hips. She lay as it were dead. Her
teeth were so fast closed, that a man could not open them, though with all his
strength he assayed it with his dagger and a key. And, (that which strange is,)
a stiff dry Rush being put into her nostrels, so far, as it might touch her
brains in the judgment of them that were present, yet she moved nothing
thereat; neither at the violent bending of her fingers; nor yet at a great
quantity of Aqua-vitae, which was powered into her mouth.

In which case she having lain half an hour, at last she opened one of her
eyes gazing there with very strangly; then the other, crying, o Barthram, thou
have killed me. Then, being laid in her bed, she so striued to get out, that
all there present (which were not a few for such a purpose,) could scarce hold
her therein. And this is the sum of that which happened to this maid bewitched.

Another Report of like Argument.
IN Castle Alley near Broken wharfe in London, there dwelt a witch called Anne
Kerke; who for her notorious mischievous witcheries hereafter in brief
described, was arraigned in London the 30. of November 1599. before the right
honorable the Lord Anderson and other of her Majesty's Justices, and then
condemned, and executed at Tyburne the 4. of December following.

To let pass the Evidence, that of long time she had been suspected for a
witch; I will set down the sum of the other evidences given in against her.

First, this witch falling out with a woman in the street, said she would be
meet with her, or hers. Whereupon the woman going home and sitting by the fire
with her child in her lap, it gave a great skreeke, and was suddenly changed;
and after that continually pined away till it dyed.

After whose death, her other child going up Bredstreet Hill, met with this
witch; who asked her how her sister did. But before she could make answer, she
was stricken down in a very strange manner; her mouth being drawn aside like
a purse, her teeth gnashing together, her mouth foming, and her eyes staring
the rest of her body being strangely disfigured. When the witch was gone, she
recovered out of this trau^ce; howbeit she was still oftimes cast into the
like. This, the maid her self deposed: who being willed by the Lord
Anderson, to To try like if ^ee coun^feited
show how she was tormented; she said she could not show it, but when the fit
was on her.

Another time, this Witch taking displeasure with a woman for not bidding her
to her childs Christening, tormented the child twice or thrice a day in
strange manner, until the Father with others went to mother ^welling (...) the
^nkside.
Gillams; who told them, that the child was forespoken, and that the witch
had been (as indeed she was) twice with the mother of the child before they came
home; and that, for the childs recovery they should cut of a piece of the
witches coat with a pair of sheeres, and burn it together with the child's
under cloth: which they did, and the child accordingly was healed.

Again, at another time, this witch fell out with an Inkeeper; and in
revengement, bewitched his only child so strangely, as that by no means of
Physik which he could get, it could be recovered; but still it was from time to
time tormented, till it dyed. But before the death, the Father (finding no
help by Physic) went to a cuning man (as they call them;) who told him, that
the causer of his childs torments was one that was conversant in his house:
and (after promise made of not revealing the party) he showed him in a glass
this witch, Anne Kerke. After this, this man the Father of the child, met this
witch coming out of his neighbors door, and making stay till she was gone,
told his neighbor that she was a witch, and that she had bewitched his child
to death. Whereupon he going home, fell sick and dyed.

Besides all these, among other mischiefs don by Satan's instrument in the
house of one M. Nayler dwelling in Thames street near Broken wharf, she
tormented his son George in such grievous manner that he dyed. So also did she
torment his daughter Anne till she dyed: who was oftimes vexed with a frenzines:
and with an evil spirit, to which this maid in her Fathers hearing did often
talk. And being demanded who was the causer of these her torments, the spirit
which was within her said, that one would come after who should For yet the did
n^ suspect Anne^
discover the causer, and the truth of all; as afterward it came to pass by
Ione Nayler, another of the said M. Naylers daughters.

For so it was, That money being given to poor at the burial of the said Anne
Nayler; This witch was vexed that she had none, being a parishioner; and
therefore practiced against the said Ioane Nayler also. Who the next night
after her sisters burial, was tormented with an evil spirit, which spoke in
her oftimes in the hearing of her Parents; saying, Give me thy liver, thy
lights, thy heart, thy soul, etc; then thou shall be released, then I will
depart from thee: also; Go, take thy lace and hang thy self: Go into the next
room and hang thy self in the jack rope, and so thou shall be released. She
was oftimes grievously tormented and in a trance, during which her mouth was
turned to the one side, her ioyncts so shrunk up that the soles of her feet
did beat together, her shoulder bones did strike one against another, so, as
that they were heard to rattle, to the terror of them present. And (according
to the words of the spirit in her sister Anne) she often said, that mother Kerke
had bewitched her. And when the maid (according as some had willed her to do)
did reach forth her hands to scratch this mother Kerke, they were so fast
closed tha^ none could open the^. Whereupon, her Father suspected this Anne
Kerke of witchcraft, and procured a warrant from Sir Richard Marti^ to fetch
her before him, he being the^ in the house of the said M. Nayl. and in the
presence of the maid. But so soon as the witch came to the door, she fell into
her former trau^ce, her hands being again so closed as they could not be
opened, Sir Rich* Martin himself assaying it. Into the like trance the maid
did also fall being in the houses of Sir John Heart, and Sir Steph. Slaney (or
Some) so soon as the witch (being by the^ sent for,) was entered into their
doors: And the like also did she fall into, being in the fields, at the same
instant when the witch was bayled forth of prison: as also being in the
Sessions house, when the jury were departing to consider of the matter. But
that of Sir R. Martin is not here to be omitted: who having heard that a
witches hair could not be cut; sent for the said An. Kerke, and commanded a
Seriant to pull from her head 10. or 12. of her hairs, and try if he could cut
them. The Seriant did so; and offering to cut the^ with a pair of Barbers
Sissers, they turned round in his hand: and the edges were so battered, turned,
and quite spoiled, as that they would not cut any thing. Then the Seriant took
the hair, and did put it into the fire to burn it; but the fire flew from it,
and the hair in the midst thereof unburned.

Who is wise that he may observe these things? The righteous shall see and
rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth.

Psalm. 107* 43.42.
