THis Play, called THE WITS, as it was Acted without offense, may be Printed,
not otherwise.

19. January 1635. HENRY HERBERT.

THE VVITTS.

A Comedy, PRESENTED AT THE Private House in Black Friars, by his Majesty's
Servants.

The Author WILLIAM D'AVENANT, Servant to Her Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD MEIGHEN, next to the Middle Temple in Fleetstreet.
1636.

TO THE CHIEFLY Beloved of all that are Ingenious, and Noble, ENDYMION PORTER,
of his Majesty's Bedchamber.
SIR,
THough you covet not acknowledgements, receive what belongs to you by a double
title: your goodness has preserved life in the Author; then rescued his work
from a cruel Faction; which nothing but the forces of your reason, and your
reputation could subdue. If it become your pleasure now, as when it had the
advantage of presentation on the Stage, I shall be taught, to boast some merit
in my self; but with this inference; you still (as in that doubtful day of
my trial) endeavor to make show of so much justice, as may countenance the
love you bear to

Your most oblieg'd, and thankful humble Servant, WILLIAM DAVENANT.

TO THE READER OF Mr. WILLIAM D'AVENANT'S Play.
IT has been said of old, that Plays are Feasts,
Poets the Cooks, and the Spectators Guests,
The Actors Waiters: From this Similie,
Some have derived an unsafe liberty
To use their Judgments as their Tastes, which choose
Without control, this Dish, and that refuse:
But Wit allows not this large Privilege,
Either you must confess, or feel it is edge;
Nor shall you make a current inference
If you trans-fer your reason to your sense:
Things are distinct, and must the same appear
To every piercing Eye, or well-tuned Ear.
Though sweets with yours, sharps best with my taste meet,
Both must agree this meat's or sharp or sweet:
But if I sent a stench or a perfume,
Whilst you smell naught at all, I may presume
You have that sense imperfect: So you may
Affect a sad, merry, or humerous Play,
If, though the kind distaste or please, the Good
And Bad, be by your Judgment understood;
But if, as in this Play, where with delight
I feast my Epicurean appetite
With rellishes so curious, as dispense
The utmost pleasure to the ravished sense,
You should profess that you can nothing meet
That hits your taste, either with sharp or sweet,
But cry out, it is insipid; your bold Tongue
May do it is Master, not the Author wrong;
For Men of better Pallat will by it
Take the just elevation of your Wit.
T. CAREVV.

THE PROLOGVE.
Bless me you kinder Stars! How are we thronged?
Alas! whom, has our long sick-Poet wronged,
That he should meet together in one day
A Session and a Faction at his Play?
To Judge, and to Condemn: For It cannot be
Amongst so many here, all should agree.
Then it is to such vast expectation raised,
As it were to be wondered at, not praised:
And this, good faith Sir Poet (if I Have read
Customs, or Men) strikes you, and your Muse dead!
Conceave now too, how much, how often each Ear
Has surfeited in this our Hemispheare,
With various, pure, eternal Wit; and then
My fine young Comic Sir, you are killed again.
But 'bove the mischief of these fears, a sort
Of cruel Spies (we hear) intend a sport
Among themselves; our mirth must not at all
Tickle, or stir their Lungs, but shake their Gall.
So this joined with the rest, makes me agin
To say, You and your Lady Muse within
Will have but a sad doom; and your trim Brow
Which longed for Wreathes, you must wear naked now;
'Lesse some resolve out of a courteous pride,
To like and praise what others shall deride:
So they have their humor too; and we in spite
Of our dull Brains, will think each side in the right.
Such is your pleasant judgments upon Plays,
Like Par'lells that run straight, though several ways.
The Persons of the Comedy.
Pallatine the Elder, Richly Landed, and a Wit. Pallatine the Younger, A Wit
too, but lives on his exhibition in Town. Sir Morglay Thwack, A humorous rich
old Knight. Sir Tirant Thrift, Guardian to the Lady Ample. Meager, A Soldier
newly come from Holland Pert, His Comrade. Engine, Steward to Sir Tirant
Thrift. The Lady Ample, An Inheretrix, and Ward to Sir Tirant Thrift. Lucy,
Mistress to the Younger Pallatine. Ginet, Woman to the Lady Ample. Snore, A
Constable. Mistress Snore, His wife. Mistress Queasie, Her Neighbor.
Watchmen, etc.
The Scene LONDON.

THE WITS.
ACT. 1. SCEN. 1.
Enter Young Pallatine, Meager, Pert. Young Pallatine. WElcome o'shore Meager!
Give me thy hand!
It Is a true one, and will no more forsake
A Bond, or Bill, then a good Sword; a hand
That will shift for the Body, till the Laws
Provide for both.
Meag. Old Wine, and new Clothes Sir,
Make you wanton! Do You not see Pert, my Comrade?

Yo: Pallat. Ambiguous Pert! have thou danced to the Drum too?
Could a Taff^ta scarf, a long Estridge whing,
A stiff Iron Doublet, and a Brazeele Pole
Tempt thee from Cambrick sheets, fine active Thighs,
From Caudles where the precious Amber swims?

Pert. Faith, we have been to kill, we know not whom,
Nor why: Led on to break a Commandment,
With the consent of Custom and the Laws.

Meag. Mine was a certain inclination Sir
To do mischief, where good men of the Jury,
And a dull Congregation of gray Beards
Might urge no tedious Statute against my life!

Yo: Pallat. Nothing but Honor could seduce thee, Pert!
Honor! which is the hope of the Youthful,
And the old Soldiers wealth, a jealousy
To the Noble, and mist'ry to the wise.

Pert. It was Sir, no Geographicall fancy
(Cause in our Maps, I liked this Region here
More than that Country lying there) made me
Partial which to fight for.

Yo: Pallat. True, sage Pert.
What is it to thee whether one Don Diego
A Prince, or Hans van Holme, Fritter seller
Of Bombell, do Conquer that Parapet,
Redout, or Town, which thou nere saw before?

Pert. Not a brass Thimble to me! but Honor! --


Yo: Pallat. Why right! else wherefore should thou bleed for him,
Whose Money, Wine, nor Wench, thou nere have used?
Or why destroy some poor Root-eating Soldier,
That never gave thee the ly, denied to pledge
Thy Cockatrices health, nere spit upon
Thy Dog, jear'd thy Spur-leather, or returned
Thy Tooth-pick ragged, which he borrowed whole?

Pert. Never to my knowledge!


Meag. Comrade! it is time --

Yo: Pallat. What, to unship your Trunkes at Billings gate?
Fierce Meager! why such haste? do not I know,
That a Mouse yoked to a Pescod, may draw
With the frail Cordage of one hair, your Goods
About the World?

Pert. Why we have Linen Sir!


Yo. Pallat. As much Sir as will fill a Tinder Box,
Or make a Frog a shirt. I like not friends,
This quiet, 'mo jest posture of your Shoulders!
Why stir you not, as you were practicing
To Fence, or do you hide your Cattle, least
The Skipper make you pay their passage over?

Pert. Know Pallatine! Truth is a naked Lady,
She will show all! Meager, and I have not --

Yo: Pall. The Treasure of Saint Marks I believe Sir,
Though you are as rich as cast Servingmen,
Or Bawdes led thrice into Captivity!

Pert. Thou have a heart of the right stamp; I find
It is not comely in thine eyes, to see
Us Sons of war walk by the pleasant Vines
Of Gascoiny, as we believed the Grapes
Forbidden Fruit: sneake through a Tavern with
Remorse, as we had read the Alcharon,
And made it our best Faith.

Meag. And abstain flesh,
As if our English Beef were all reserved
For Sacrifice.

Pert Whilst Colon keeps more noise
Than Mariners at Plays, or Apple-wives
That wrangle for a Sive!

Meag. Contribute, come!


Yo: Pallat. Stand there close on you lives! here in this house
Lives a rich old Hen, whose young Egg. (though not
Of her own laying) I have in the Embers!
She may prove a Morsel for a discreet Mouth,
If the kind Fates have but the leisure to
Betray the old one.

Pert. Pallatine.
No plots upon generation; we two
Have fasted so long, that we cannot think
Of begetting any thing, unless
Like Cannibals, we might eat our own Issue.

Yo: Pallat. I say close; shrink in your Morions! go!


Meager. Why hidden thus? a Soldier may appear.


Yo: Pallat. Yes in a Sutlers Hut on the Pay-day:
But do you know the silence of this house,
The gravity and awe? here dwells a Lady,
That has not seen a street, since good King Harry
Called her to a Masque: she is more devout
Then a Weaver of Banbury, that hopes
T'intice Heaven (by singing) to make him Lord
Of twenty Loomes. I never saw her yet:
And to arrive at my preferment first,
In your sweet company will (I take it)
Add but little to my hopes. Retire! go!

They step aside, whilst he calls between the Hangings Pert. We shall obey, but
do not tempt us now
With sweet meats for the nether Pallat! do not --

Yo: Pallat. What Lucy! Luce! now is the old Beldame
Misleading her to a Cushion; where she
Must pray, and sigh, and fast, until her knees
Grow smaller then her Knockles. Lucy! Luce.
No hope! she is undone! shele number over
As many Orisons, as if she had
A Bushel of Beads to her Rosary!
Lucy! my April love! my Mistress speak! --

Enter Lucy. Lucy. Pallatine, for Heavens sake keep in your voice!
My cruel Aunt will hear, and I am lost.

Yo: Pallat. What can she hear, when her old ears are ^^uff'd
With as much warm wax, as will seal nine Leases?
What a pox does she listening upon earth?
Is It not time for her t'affect privacie?
To creep into a close dark Vault, there gossip.
With worms, and such small tame creatures, as Heaven
Provided to accompany old People?

Lucy. Still bettered unto worse! but that my heart
Consents not to disfigure thee, thou would be torn
To pieces numberless as sand, or as
The doubts of guilt, or love, in Cowards are!

Yo: Pal. How now Luce! from what strange coast this storm! hah!


Lucy. Thou do out-drinke the youth of Norway at
Their Marriage feasts, out-sweare a puny Gamster
When his first misfortune rages out quarrel,
One that rides post, and is stopped by a Cart:
Thy walking hours are later in the night,
Then those which Drawers, Traitors, or Constables
Th^mselves do keep; for Watchmen know thee better
Then their Lantern! and here is your Surgeons Bill,
Your kind thrift (I thank you) has sent it me
To pay, as if the poor exhibition
My Aunt allows for Aprons, would maintain
You in Seareclothes. -- Gives him a paper.

Meger. Can the Daughters of Brabant
Talk thus when Younker-gheek leads'em to a Stove?

Pert. I say ( Meager) there is a small parcel
Of Man, that rebels more then all the rest
Of his body, and I shall need (if I
Stay here) no Elixer of Beef to exalt
Nature, though I were leaner then a groat!

Yo: Pallat. This Surgeon's a Rogue (Luce) a fellow Luce
That has no more care of a Gentleman's
Credit, then of the Lint, he has twice used!

Lucy. Well Sir, but what is that Instrument he names?


Yo: Pall He writes down here for a tool of Injection
Luce, a small water Engine which I bought
For my Tailors Child to squirt at Prentises!

Luce. I Sir, he sins more against wit then Heaven,
That knows not how t'excuse what he has done!
I shall be old at twenty Pallatine,
My grief to see thy manners, and thy mind
Has wrought so much upon my heart!

Yo: Pallat. I Would as live keep our Marriage Supper
In a Churchyard, and beget our Children
In a Coffin, as hear thee prophecy;
Luce, thou art drunk Luce; far gone in Almond Milk,
Kiss me! --

Pert. Now I dissolve like an Eringo?


Meager. He Is ploughing of the Indies, good Gold appear!


Yo: Pallat. I am a new man Luce; thou shall find me
In a Geneva-band, that was reduced
From an old Alder-mans Cuffe; no more hair left
Then will shakle a flea; this debash'd Whineyard,
I will reclaim to comely Bow and Arrows,
And shoot with Haberdashers at Finsbury,
And be thought the Grandchild of Adam-Bell!
And more (my Luce) hang at my velvet Girdle,
A Book wrapped in a green Dimity Bag,
And squire thy untooth'd Aunt to an exercise.

Lucy. Nothing but strict Laws, and age will tame you.


Yo: Pallat. What money have thou Luce?


Lucy. I there is your business.


Yo: Pallat. It is the business of the world: Injuries grow.
To get it, Justice sits for the same end;
Men are not wise without it; for it makes
Wisdom known; and to be a Fool, and poor,
Is next t'old Aches and bad Fame; it is worse
Than to have six new Creditors, they each
Twelve Children, and not bread enough to make
The Landlord a Tossed, when he calls for Ale
And Rent. Think on that, and rob thy Aunts Trunks
Ere she has time to make an Inventory.

Pert. A cunning Pioner! he works to th'bottome.


Lucy. Have thou no taste of Heaven? were thou begot
In a Prison, and bred up in a Galley?

Yo: Pallat. Luce! I speak like one that has seen the Book
Of Fate: I Am loath (for thy sake) to mount a Coach
With two wheels; whilst the Damzels of the Shop
Cry out, A goodly strait chin'd Gentleman!
He dies, for robbing an Atturnies Cloak-bag
Of Copper-seales, foul Night-caps, together
With his wives Bracelet of Mill-Testers!

Lucy. There Sir! -- Flings him a Purse.
It Is gold! my Pendants, Carckanets, and Rings,
My Christning Caudle-cup, and Spoones
Are dissolved into that Lump. Nay, take all!
And with it as much anger as would make
Thy Mother write thee illegitemate!
See me no more! I will not stay to bless
My gift; lest I should teach my patience suffer
Till I convert it into Sin. Exit.

Yo: Pallat. Temptations will not thrive. This Bagadge sleeps
Cross legged, and the Devil has no more power
Over that charm, than dead Men over their lewd Heirs.
I must marry her, and spend my revenue
In Cradles, Pins, and Soap! That Is the end of all
That escape a deep River, and a tall Bough.

Meag. Pallatine! How much?


Pert. Honorable Pall!


Yo: Pallat. Gentlemen, you must accept without gaging
Your corporal Oaths, to repay in three days!

Pert. Not we (Pall) in three Iubilies, fear not!


Yo: Pallat. Nor shall you charge me with loud vehemence
(Thrice before company) to wait you in
My chamber such a night; for then, a certain
Drover of the South comes to pay you money!

Meag. On our new Faithes!


Pert. On our Allegiance Pall!


Yo: Pall. Go then! -- shift, and brush your skins well, do you hear!
Meet me at the new Play; fair, and perfumed!
There are strange words hang on the lips of Rumor!

Pert. Language of joy dear Pall!


Yo: Pallat. This day is come
To Town, the Minion of the womb (my Lads)
My elder Brother, and he moves like some
Assyrian Prince; his Chariots measure Leagues
Witty, as youthful Poets in their wine!
Bold as a Centaure at a Feast, and kind
As Virgins that were nere beguild with love!
I seek him now, meet and triumph!
Meager, King Pall! -- Exeunt Omnes.
Pert.

Enter Sir Morglay Thwack, Eld. Pallatine, new and richly clothed, buttoning
themselves. Eld. Pallat. Sir Morglay! come! the hours have wings, and you
Are grown too old, t'overtake them: The Town
Looks (me thinks) as it would invite the Country
To a Feast.

Thwack. At which Sergeants and their Yeomen
Must be no Waiters (Pallatine) lest some
Of The Guests pretend business: how do like me?

Eld. Pallat. As one, old women shall no more avoid,
Then they can warm Furs or Muskadell!

Thwack, Pallatine! to have a volatile Ache,
That removes oftener then the Tartars Camp;
To have a stich that sucks a man awry,
Till he show crooked as a Chestnut Bough,
Or stand in the deformed Guard of a Fencer;
To have these hid in Flesh, that has lived sinful
Fifty long years; yet husband, so much strength
As could convay me hither, fourscore Miles
On a disigne of Wit, and glory may
Be Registered for a strange Northern Act.

Eld. Pallat. I cannot boast those Noble Malladies
As yet; but Time (dear Knight) as I have heard,
May make man's knowledge bold upon himself.
We travel in the grand cause! These smooth Rags,
These Jewels too, that seem to smile e're they
Betray, are certain silly snares, in which
Your Lady-wits, and their wise Compeers-Male
May chance be caught!

Enter Young Pallatine. Yo: Pallat. Your welcome (Noble Brother)
Must be hereafter spoke, for I have lost
With glad haste to find you, much of my Breath! --

Eld. Pallat. Your joy becomes you it has Courtship in it!


Yo: Pallat. Sir Morglay Thwack! I did expect to see
The Archer Cimbeline, or old King Lud
Advance his Fauchion here again, e're you
Amongst so much smoke, diseases, Law, and noise!

Thwack. What your Town gets by me, let'um lay up
For their Orphans, and Record in their Annals!
I come to borrow where I Will never lend,
And buy what I Will never pay for.

Yo: Pallat. Not your Debts?


Thwack. No Sir, though to a poor Brownists widow!
Though she sigh all night, and have the next morning
Nothing to drink, but her own Tears.

Eld. Pallat. Nor shall thou lend money to a sick friend,
Though the sad worm ly morgag'd in his bed
For the hire of his Sheets.

Yo: Pallat. These are Resolves,
That give me newer wonder than your Clothes;
Why in such shining Trim, like Men that come
From rifled Tents, laden with victory?

Eld. Pal. Yes Brother, or like eager heirs new dipped
In Ink, that sealed the day before in haste,
Lest Parchment should grow dear. Know Youth we come
To be the business of all Eyes, to take
The wall of our St. George on his Feast day!

Thwack. Yes, and then imbarke at Dover, and do
The like to St. Dennis: All this (young Sir)
Without charge too; I mean, to us; we bring
A humerous odd Philosophy to Town
That says, pay nothing!

Yo: Pal. Why, where have I lived?


Eld. Pal. Brother be calm, and edify! But first
Receive a Principle, never hereafter
(From this warm breathing, till your last cold sigh)
Will I disburse for you again; Never!

Yo: Pal. Brother mine, if that be your Argument,
I deny the Mayor!

Thwack. Resist Principles?


El. Pal. Good faith, though you should send me more Epistles
Than young Factors in their first voyage write
Unto their short hair'd Friends; than absent Lovers
Pen near their Marriage week, t'excuse the slow
Arrival of the License, and the Ring,
Not one clipped penny should depart my reach.

Yo: Pal. This Doctrine will not pass, how shall I live?


Eld. Pall. As we intend to do, by our good wits!


Yo: Pall. How, Brother, how?


Eld: Pall. Truth is a pleasant knowledge;
Yet you shall have her cheap, Sir Morglay here,
(My kind Disciple) and my self, have leas'd
Out all our Rents and Lands for pious uses!

Yo: Pall. What, Co-founders! give Legacies ere death!
Pallatine the pious, and St Morglay!
Your names will sound but ill ith Kallender.
How long must this fierce raging zeal continue?

Eld: Pall. Till we subsist here no more by our wit,
Then we will renounce the Town, and patiently
Vouchsafe to reassume our Mother Earth,
Lead on our Ploughs into their rugged walks
Again, grope our young Heifers in the flank,
And swagger in the wool, we shall borrow
From our own flocks.

Thwack. But ere we go, we may
From the vast treasure purchased by our wit,
Leave here some Monument to speak our Fame.
I have a strong mind to reedifie
The decays of Fleet-Ditch, from whence I hear
The roaring Vestals late are fled, through heat
Of persecution.

Yo: Pal. What a small star have I,
That never yet could light me to this way!
Live by our wits?

El: Pall. So live, that Usurers,
Shall call their Moneys in, remove their Bank
TO Ordinaries, Spring-garden, and Hide-parke,
Whilst their glad Sons are left seven for their chance,
At Hazard, Hundred, and all made at Sent;
Three motly Cocks o'th right Derby strain,
Together with a Foale of Beggibrigge!

Thwa. Sir, I will match my Lord Majors horse, make Iockeys
Of his Hench-boyes, and run 'em through Cheap Side.

Eld. Pallat. What beauties Girls of feature govern now
In The town? it is long since we did traffic here,
In midnight whispers, when the Dialect
Of Loves loose Wit, is frighted into signs,
And secret laughter stifled into smiles:
When nothing's loud but the old Nurses Cough!
Who keeps the Game up, hah! who misled now?

Thwack. Not Sir, that if we woo, we will be at charge
For Looks; or if we marry, make a Ioynture,
Entaile Land on women? entaile a Back,
And so much else of Man, as Nature did
Provide for the first wife.

Eld. Pallat. I could keep thee,
Thy future Pride, thy Surfets, and thy Lust,
(I mean, in such a garb as may become
A Christian Gentleman) with the sole Tithe
Of Tribute, I shall now receive from Ladies.

Thwack. Your Brother, and my self have sealed to Covenants!
The Female Youth o'th town are his; but all
From forty to fourscore, mine own: A widow
(You Will say) is a wise, solemn, wary Creature;
Though she has lived to the cunning of dispatch,
Closed up nine Husbands eyes, and have the wealth
Of all their Testaments, in one Month Sir,
I will waste her to her first Wedding-smock,
Her single Ring, Bodkin, and Velvet-Muffe.

Yo: Pallat. Your Rents exposed at home, for Pious uses
Must expiate your behavior here; Tell me,
Is that the subtle plot you have on Heaven?

Thwack The worm of your worships conscience would appear
As big as a Conger, but a good eye
May chance to find it slender as a Grigge!

Yo: Pallat. Amazement knows no ease, but in demands,
Pray tell me Gentlemen, to all this vaste
Disignment (which so strikes my Ear) deduct
You naught from your revenue, naught that may
Like Fuel, feed the flame of your expense?

Eld. Pall. Brother, not so much as will find a Jew
Bacon to his Eggs: These gay tempting Weeds,
These Eastern stones of cunning foil, bespoke
Against our arrival here, together with
A certain stock of Crowns in eithers purse,
Is all the charge that from our proper own,
Begins or furthers the magnifique plot,
And of these Crowns, not one must be usurped
By you.

Thwack. No relief, but Wit and good Counsel!


Eld. Pallat. The stock my Father left you, if your care
Had purposed so discreet a course might well
Have set you up in the Trade, but we spend light!
Our Coach is yet unwheel'd, Sir Morglay, come,
Lets suit those Friesland horse with our own strain!

Yo: Pallat. Why Gentlemen, will the disigne keep horses?


Thwack. May be Sir they shall live by their Wits too!


Yo: Pall. Their Masters are bad Tutors else; well, how
You Will work the Ladies, and weak Gentry here
By your fine gilded Pills, a Faith that is
Not old may guess without distrust. But Sirs,
The City (take it on my experiment)
Will not be gulled!

Thwack. Not gulled? they dare not be
So impudent! I say they shall be gulled,
And trust, and break, and pawn their Charter too!

Yo: Pallat. Is it lawful (Brother) for me to laugh
That have no money?

Eld. Pallat. Yes Sir, at your self!


Yo: Pallat. Two that have tasted Natures kindness Arts,
And men, have shined in moving Camps; have seen
Courts in their solemn business, and vain pride;
Conversed so long in the town here, that you know
Each Sign, and Pibble in the streets; for you
(After a long retirement) to lease forth
Your wealthy pleasant Lands, to feed John Crump,
The Cripple, Widow Needy, and Abraham
Sloth, the Beads-man of More-dale? Then (forsooth)
Persuade your selves to live here by your Wits.

Thwack Where we nere cheated in our Youth, we resolve
To cousen in our Age.

Eld. Pallat. Brother, I came
To be your wise example in the Arts
That lead to thriving glory, and supreme life;
Not through the humble ways wherein dull Lords
Of Lands, and Sheep do walk; Men that depend
On the fantastic winds on fleeting Clouds,
On seasons more uncertain than themselves,
When they would hope or fear; But you are warm
In another silk, and make your tame ease
Virtue, call it content, and quietness!

Thwack Write Letters to your Brother! do! and be
Forsworn, in every long Parenthesis,
For twenty pound sent you in Butchers silver!

Eld. Pall. Rebukes are precious! cast them not away!


Yo: Pall. Neither of these Philosophers were borne
To above five Senses; why then should they
Have hope, to do things greater, and more new
In The world, than I? This Devil Plenty thrusts
Strange boldness upon Men! well, you may laugh
With so much violence, till it consume
Your breath! Though sullein want, the Enemy
Of Wit, have sunk her low; if pregnant Wine
Can raise her up, this day she shall be mine. Exit.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 1.
Enter the Lady Ample, Engine, Ginet. Ampl. My Guardian horsed? this evening
say thou Engine?


Engine. It Is an hour (Madam) since he smelt the Town?


Ampl. Saw thou his slender empty leg in th'Stirrop?
His Ivory Box on his smooth Ebon staff
New civitted, and tied to's gouty wrist?
With his warped face close buttoned in his Hood,
That Men may take him for a Monk disguised,
And fled post from a Pursevant!

Engine. (Madam) beware I pray, lest The Age and cunning
He is Master of, prepare you a Revenge,
And such as your fine wit shall nere entreat
Your patience to digest. To morrow night
The Extremest Minute of your Wardship is
Expired, and we Magicians of the house
Believe this hasty Journey he has taken
Is to provide a Husband for your sheets!

Ampl. And such a one, as judgment and nine Eyes
Must needs dislike, that is composition may
Grow up to his own thrifty wish.

Eng. Madam.
Your Arrow was well aimed; I call him Master,
But I am Servant unto Truth, and You.

Ampl. He choose a Husband, fit to guide, and sway
My Beauties wealthy Dowry, and my heart?
I Will make Election to delight my self:
What composition strictest Laws will give;
His Guardianship may take from the rich Bank
My Father left, and not devour my Land.

Ginet. Your Ladyship has lived six years beneath
His roof, therefore may guess the color
Of his heart, and what his brains do weigh.
But Engine (Madam) is your humble Creature.

Ampl. I have bounty, Engine!
And thou shall largely taste it, when the next
Fair Sun is set, for then my Wardship ends -- Knocking within.
That speaks command, or have open the door.
Enter Lucy. Lucy! weeping my wench? melting thine Eyes,
As they had trespassed against light, and thou
Would give them darkness for a punishment.

Lucy. Undone (Madam) without all hope, but what
Your pity will vouchsafe to minister!

Ampl. Have thou been struck by infamy? or come
A Mourner from the Funeral of Love?

Lucy. I am the Mourner, and the Mourned; dead to
My self; but left not rich enough to buy a Grave:
My cruel Aunt has banished me her Roof,
Exposed me to the night, the winds, and what
The raging Elements on wandrers lay,
Left naked, as first Infancy or Truth.

Ginet. I could nere endure that old moist eyed Lady!
Me thought she prayed too often.

Amp. A mere receipt
To make her long winded, which our devout
Physicians now prescribe to defer death.
But Lucy, can she urge no cause for this
Strange wrath, that you would willingly conceal!

Lucy. Suspicions of my Chastity; which heaven
Must needs resist as false; though she accused
Me even in dream, where thoughts commit by chance,
Not Apetite.

Amp. What ground had her suspect?


Lucy. Young Pallatine (that wooed my heart until
He gathered Fondness where he planted Love)
Was fallen into such want, as eager blood,
And Youth could not endure, and keep the Laws
Inviolate. I to prevent my fear,
Sold all my Jewels, and my trifling wealth
Bestowed them on him; and she thinks a more
Unholy consequence attends the gift.

Ampl. This Luce, is such Apostacy in Wit,
As Nature must degrade her self in woman to
Forgive? shall Love put thee to charge? could thou
Permit thy Lover to become thy Pensioner?

Engine. Her sense will now be tickled till it ache!


Ampl. Thy feature and thy wit, are wealth enough
To keep thee high in all those vanities
That wild ambition, or expensive pride
Perform in youth; but thou invertst their use
Thy Lover like the foolish Adamant,
The steel; thou fiercely do allure, and draw,
To spend thy virtue, not to get by it.

Lucy. This Doctrine (Madam) is but new to me.


Ampl. How have I lived think thou? even by my Wits!
My Guardians contribution gave us Gowns;
But cut from th'curtaines of a Cariers bed:
Jewels we wore, but such as Potters wives
Bake in the Furnace for their daughters wrists!
My woman's Smock's so course, as they were spun
O'th tackling of a Ship.

Ginet. A Coat of Male
Quilted with Wyre, was soft sarsnet to 'um.

Ampl. Our diet, scarce so much as is prescribed
To mortify; Two Eggs of Emmets poach'd
A single Bird no bigger than a Be,
Made up a Feast.

Ginet. He had starved me, but that
The Green-sicknesse took away my stomach!

Ampl. Thy disease ( Ginet) made thee in love with Mortar,
And tho'eatst him up two foot of an old wall!

Engine. A privilege my Master only gave
Unto her teeth, none else o'th house durst do it.

Ampl. When ( Lucy) I perceived this straightened life,
Nature (my Steward) I did call t'acompt,
And took from her Exchequer so much Wit
As h^s maintained me since. I led my fine
Trim bearded Males in a small subtle string
Of my soft hair; made 'um to offer up,
And bow, and laughed at the Idolatry.

Ginet. A jewel for a kiss, and that half ravished.


Lucy. I feel^ I am inclined t'indeavour in
A Calling (Madam) Ild be glad to live!

Ample. Know ( Luce) this is no Hospital for Fools!
My Bed is yours, but on condition Luce,
That you redeem the Credit of your Sex;
That you begin to tempt, and when the snare
Has caught the Foul, you plume him till you get
More feathers then you lost to Pallatine.

Lucy. I shall not waste my hours in winding Silk,
Or shealing Pescods with your Ladyship!

Ampl. Frosts on my heart! what? give unto a Suitor!
Know? I would feign behold, that silly Monarch,
(Bearded Man!) that durst woo me with half
So impudent a hope!

Eng. Madam, you are
Not far from the possession of your wish,
There is no language heard, no business now
In town, but what proclaims th'arrivall here
(This morn) of the elder Pallatine, Brother
To him you named, and with him such an old
Imperial buskin Knight as th'Isle nere saw.

Amp. What Is their design?


Eng. They will immure themselves
With Diamonds, with all refulgent Stones,
That merit price: ask 'em who pays? why Ladies!
They Will feast with rich Provincial vvines, who pays?
Ladies. They Will shine in various habit, like
Eternal Bridegromes of the day, ask 'em
Who pays? Ladies. Lie with those Ladies too,
And pay'em but with Issue-Male, that shall
Inherit nothing but their wit, and do
The like to Ladies, when they grow to age.

Luce. My ears received a taste of them before.


Ampl. Engine, how shall we see them? bless me, Engine,
With thy kind voice.

Eng. Though Miracles are ceased,
This (Madam's) in the power of Thought, and Time.

Ampl. I would kiss ^hee Engine, but for an odd
Nice humor in my lips; they blister at
Inferior breath! This Ring, and all my hopes
Are thine; dear Engine now project, and live!

Ginet. I Would loose my Wedding to behold these Dagonets!


Ample. My Guardean's out of Town! let us triumph
Like Caesar's, till to morrow night! thou know
I Am then no more o'th Family! I would
Like a departing Lamp) before I leave
You in the dark, spread in a glorious blaze!

Engine. Madam, command the Keys, the house, and me.


Ampl. Spoke like the bold Cophetua's Son!
Let us contrive within to tempt 'um hither:
Follow my Luce, restore thy self to Fame! -- Ex. Eng. Amp. Gin. Young
Pallatine beckens Lucy from between the Hangings, as she is going.

Yo: Pall. Luce! Luce!


Lucy. Death on my Eyes! how came you hither?


Yo: Pallat. I Am Luce, a kind of peremptory Fly,
Shift houses still to follow the Sunbeams!
I must needs play in the flames of thy beauty!

Lucy. You Have used me with a Christian care, have you not?


Yo: Pallat. Come I know all! I'have been at thy Aunts house*
And there committed more disorder than
A storm in a Ship, or a Canon Bullet
Shot through a Kitchen among shelves of Pewter.

Lucy. This madness is not true I hope!


Yo: Pal. Yes Faith.
Witness a shower of Malmsey Lees, dropped from
Thy Aunts own Vrinall, on this new Morion! --

Lucy. Why you have seen her then?


Yo: Pallat. Yes, and she looks like the old Slut of Babylon
Thou have read of. I told her she must dye.
And her beloved Velvet-Hood be fold
To some Dutch Brewer of Ratcliffe, to make
His You Frowe slippers.

Lucy. Speak low! I am deprived
By thy rash wine of all atonement now,
Unto her after Legacies or Love!

Yo: Pallat. My Luce! be magnified! I am all plot!
All Stratagem! My Brother is in town;
My Lady Ample's Fame has caught him Girl:
I Am told he means an instant visit hither.

Lucy. What happiness from this?


Yo: Pallat. As he departs
From hence, I'have laid two Instruments, Meager
And Pert, that shall encounter his long ears:
With tales less true than those of Troy, they shall
Endanger him maugre his active wits,
And mount thee little Luce, that thou may reach
To dandle Fate, to sooth them till they give
Us leave to make, or alter destinies!

Lucy. You are too loud! whisper your plots within. Exeunt


Enter Engine, Elder Pallatine, Thwack. Engine. You call, and govern Gentlemen,
as if
Your business were above your haste, but know
You where you are?

Eld. Pallat. Sir Tirant Thrift dwells here!
The Lady Ample is his Ward; she is
Within, and we must see her; No excuses!
She is not old enough to be locked up
To sey new Perukes, or purge for Rhume.

Thwack. Tell her, that a young devout Knight, made gray
By a charm (to avoid temptation in others)
Would speak with her.

Engine. I shall deliver you both,
These Tigers hunt their pray with a strange Nosthrill!
Come unsent for so aptly to our wish? -- Exit.

Eld: Pallat. But this Sir Morglay will not do, In troth
You break our Covenants.

Thwack. Why hear me plead!


Eld: Pallat. From forty to fourscore, the written Law
Runs so; this Lady's in her Nonage yet,
And you to press into my company
Where visitations are decreed mine own,
Argues a heat that my rebukes must cool.

Thwa. What should I do? would have me keep my chamber
And mend Dark Lanthornes; invent steel Matocks,
Or weigh Gunpowder, sollitude leads me
To nothing less than Treason; I shall conspire
To dig, and blow up all rather than sit still.

Eld: Pallat. Follow your Task! you see how early I
Have found this young Inheretrix, go seek
The aged out; Bones, unto Bones! Like Cards
Ill packed, shuffle your selves together till
You each dislike the game!

Thwack. It Is the cause I
Come for; a withered Midwife, or a Nurse
Who draws her lips together, like an eye
That gives the cautionary wink, are those
I would find here; so they be rich, and fat! --

Enter Ginet. Ginet. My Lady understands your haste, and she
Her self, consults now in affairs of haste,
But yet will hastily approach, to see
You Gentlemen, and then in haste return! exit.

Eld Pall. What Is this the Superscription of a Packet?


Thwack. Now does my blood wamble! you! Sucket eater!


offers to follow her, Pallatine stays him. Eld. Pall. These Covenants
(Knight) will never be observed,
I Will sue the forfeiture, leave you so poor
Till for preferment you become an E^n^uch,
And sing a Trebble; in a Chauntry, Knight.

Enter Ample, Lucy, Ginet, Elder Pallatine, and Thwak. address to kiss them,
and are thrust back. Ample. Stay Gentlemen! good souls! they have seen (
Lucy)
The Country Turtles bill, and think our lips
In The Town, and Court, are worn for the same use.

Lucy. Pray how do the Ladies there? poor Villagers
They churne still, keep their Dayrles, and lay up
For Imbroidered Mantles, against the Heirs birth!

Ample. Who is begot in the Christmas Holydaies.


Eld. Pall. Yes surely, when the Spirit of Mince-Pie
Reigns in the blood.

Ampl What? penny Gleek I hope's
In fashion yet, and the treacherous foot
Not wanting on the Table frame to jogge
The Husband, lest he lose the Noble that
Should pay the Grocers Man, for Spice and Fruit!

Lucy. The good old Buttler shares too, with his Lady
In the Box, bating for Candles that were burnt
After the Clock struck Ten.

Thwack. He does indeed,
Poor Country Madams they are in Subjection still,
The beasts their husbands make 'em sit on three
Legged stools, like homely Daughters of an Hospital,
To knit sockes for their cloven feet.

Eld. Pallat. And when these Tirant! Husbands too, grow old
(A^ they have still th'impudence to live long)
Good Ladies they are feign to waste the sweet
And pleasant seasons of the day, in boiling
^ellies for them, and rolling little Pills
Of Cambrick Lint to stuff their hollow teeth.

Lucy. And then the Evenings (warrant ye) they spend
With mother Spectacle the Curats wife,
Who does inveigh against curling and did Cheeks,
Heaves her devout impatient nose at oil
Of Iessamin, and thinks powder of Paris more
Profane then th'ashes of a Romish Martyr.

Ample. And in the days of joy, and triumph Sir,
Which come as Seldom to them as new gowns
Then humble wretches, they do friske and dance
In narrow Parlers, to a single Fidle,
That squekes forth tunes, like a departing Pigge.

Lucy. Whilst the mad Hinds, shake from their feet more dirt
Then did the Cedar-Rootes, that danced to Orpheus.

Ample. Do they not power their wine too, from an Ewre,
Or small guilt Cruce, like Orange-water kept
To sprinkle hollyday Beards?

Lucy. And when a Stranger comes, send seven miles post
By Moone-shine, for another pint?

Eld. Pallat. All these indeed are heavy truths, but what
Do you (th'exemplar Madams of the Town?)
Play away your youth, as our hasty Gamesters
Their light Gold, not with desire to lose it,
But in a fond mistake that it will fit
No other use?

Thwack. And then reserve your age
As superstitious Sinners ill got wealth
Perhaps for'th Church, perhaps for Hospitals.

Eld. Pallat. If rich you come to Court, there learn to be
At charge to teach your Paraqueeto's French,
And then allow them their Interpreters,
Least the Sage Foul should lose their wisdom on
Such Pages of the presence, and the Guard
As have not past the Seas.

Thwack. But if you are poor,
Like wanton Monkies, chained from Fruit,
You feed upon the itch of your own Tails.

Lucy. Rose-Vineger to wash that Ruffians mouth!


Ampl. They come to live here by their Wits, let them use'em!


Lucy. They have so few, and those they spend so fast,
They will leave none remaining to maintain them.

Eld. Pallat. You shall maintain us; a community
The subtle have decreed of late: You shall
Endow us with your Bodies, and your Goods;
Yet use no manacles called dull Matrimony
To obliege affection against wise Nature,
Where it is lost (perhaps) through a disparity
Of years, or justly through distaste of crimes.

Ampl. Most excellent Resolves!


Eld. Pallat. But if you will needs marry,
Expect not a single (...) for a Ioynture;
Not so much Land as will allow a Grasshopper
A Salad!

Thwac. I would no more doubt to enjoy
You two in all variety of wishes,
(Were not for certain Covenants that I lately
Signed to in my drink) then I would fear Usury
In a small Poet, or a cast Corporal.

Ampl. You would not!


Thwack. But look to your old Widows!
There my title's good; see they be rich too;
Lest I shall leave their Twins upon the Parish,
To whom the Deputy o'th Ward will deny
Blew Coats at Easter, Loaves at Funerals,
Cause they were Sons of an old Country Wit!

Ampl. Why all for Widows Sir, can nothing that
Is young affect your moldy apetite?

Thw. No in sooth, Damsels at your years are wont
To talk too much over their Marmaled,
They cannot fare well, but all the Town must hear't!
Their love's so full of praises, and so loud,
A man may with less noise, lie with a Drum!

Ampl. Think you so Sir?


Thw. Give me an old widow that commits Sin
With the gravity of a corrupt Judge,
Accepts of Benefits in the dark, and can
Conceal them from the light. -- Ample takes Elder Pall: apart.

Ampl. Pray Sir allow me but your ear aside!
Though this rude Clime in the Clough, presume
In his desires more than his strength can justify,
You should have nobler kindness than to think
All Ladies relish of an apetite,
Bad as the worst your evil chance has found.

Eld. Pallat. All are alike to me: at least, I Will make
Them so, with thin persuasions, and a short
Expense of time.

Ample. Then I have cast away
My sight; my eyes have looked themselves into
A strong disease, but they shall bleed for it.

Eld. Pall. Troth Lady mine, I find small remedy!


Ample. Why came you hither Sir, she that shall sigh
Her easy spirits into wind for you,
Must not have hope the kindness of your breath
Will ere recover her.

Lucy. What do I hear? Hymen defend?
But three good corners to your little heart,
And two already broyling on Loves Altar?
Does this become her Ginet, speak?

Ginet. As age, and half a smock would become me.


Thwack. Thou Have caught her Pallatine; insinuate Rogue? --


Lucy. Love him, you must recant, or the small God
And I shall quarrel, when we meet in the Clouds.

Thwack. S'light, see how she stands, speak to her.


Eld. Pall. Peace Knight! it is apt cunning that we go;
Disdain is like to water poured on Ice,
Quenches the flame a while to raise it higher.

Lucy. Engine show them their way. -- Enter Engine.


Engine. It lies here Gentlemen! --


Eld. Pal. There needs small su^mons, we are gone! but do you hear,
We will receive no Letters, we, though sent
By The incorporiall spy your Dwarffe, or Audry
Of the Chamber, that would deliver them
With as much caution, as they were Atachments
Upon money newly paid.

Thwack. Nor no message
From the old Widow your Mother (if you
Have one) no, though she send for me when she
Is giving up her testy Ghost; and lies
Half drowned in Rhume, those floods of Rhume, in which
Her Maids do daily dive to seek the Teeth
She cough'd out last. -- Exeunt Engine, Eld. Pall. Thwack.

Lucy. Less! good old Gentleman!
We shall see him shortly in as many Nightcaps,
As would make sick Mahomet a Turband
For the Winter.

Amp. Are they gone Luce?


Lucy. Not like the hours, for they will return again
Ere long* O you carried your false love rarely!

Amp How impudent these Country fellows are?


Lucy. He thinks you are caught; he has you between's teeth,
And intends you for the very next bit
He means to swallow.

Amp. Luce, I have a thousand thoughts
More than a Kerchiefe can keep in: Quick Girl!
Let us consult, and thou shall find what silly Snipes
These witty Gentlemen shall prove, and in
Their own confession too, or I Will cry Flownders else,
And walk with my Petti-coat tucked up like
A long maid of Almaineny. Exeunt.

Enter Yo: Pallatine, Meager, Pert, the two last being new clothed. Yo: Pall.
Don Meager, and Don Pert, you neither found
These imbroaderd skins in your mothers womb:
Surely Natures Wardrobe is not thus laced!

Pert. We flourish Pall, by th'Charter of thy smiles,
A little magnified, with show, and thought
Of our new plot.

Meag. The chambers bravely hung!


Pert. To thy own wish, a Bed and Canopy
Prepared all from our numbered pence; if it
Should fail, Meager, and I, must creep into
Our quondam rags, a transmigration Pall,
Which our Divinity can ill endure.

Meag. If I have more left t'maintaine a large stomach,
And a long Bladder, than one comely Shilling,
Together with a single ounce of Hope;
I am the Son of a Carman.

Yo: Pall. Do you suspect my prophecies,
That am your Mint, your grand Exchequer?

Pert. Pall, no suspicions Pall, but we that imbarque
Our whole stock in one vessel, would be glad
To have all Pirates o'shore, and the winds
In a calm humor!

Meag. How fares th'intelligence?


Yo: Pall. I left 'um at the Lady Ample's house
This street they needs must pass, if they reach home.

Pert. O I would feign project against the old Knight,
Can we not share him too?

Yo: Pall. This wheel must move
Alone, Sir Morglay Thwack's too rugged yet,
He Would interrupt the course, a little more
O'th File, will smooth him fit to be screwed up;

Pert. Shrink off Pall, I hear 'em!


Enter Thwack, Elder Pallatine. Eld: Pall. Thou Have not the art of patient
leisure to
Attend the aptitude of things; would thou
Run on like a rude Bull, on every object that
Does heat the blood? this cunning abstinence
Will make her passions grow more violent.

Thwack. But Pallatine, I do not find I have
The cruelty, or grace, to let a Lady
Starve for a warm morsel. -- Pert and Meager take the Elder Pallatine aside.

Yo: Pallat. Now my fine Pert!


Pert. Sir, we have business for your Ear; it may
Concern you much, therefore it is fit it be
Particular.

Eld: Pall. From whom!


Meager. A young Lady Sir.
It is a secret will exact much care
And wisdom in the delivery; you should
Dismiss that Gentleman!

Eld: Pallat. A young Lady! good!
All the best Stars in the Firmament are mine!
Our Coach attends us Knight in the botome of
The hither street, you must go home alone.

Thwack. I Will sooner kill a Sergeant, choose my Jury
In the City, and be hanged for a Tavern Bush!

Eld: Pall. Will It ruin all our destinies has built?


Thw. Come, what are those sly silkworms there that creep
So close into their wool, as they would spin
For none but their dear selves. I heard 'em name a Lady!

Eld: Pall. You heard them say then, she was young, and what
Our Covenants are, remember!

Thw. Young, how young?
She left her Wormeseed, and her Coral whistle
But a Month since: do they mean so?

Eld. Pall. Morglay, our Covenants is all I ask!


Thw. May be she has a mind to me, for there is
A reverend humor in the blood, which thou
Nere knewst; perhaps she would have Boys begot
Should be delivered with long Beards, till thou
Arive at my full growth, thou wilt yield the world
Naught above Dwarf, or Page.

Elder Pallat. Our Covenants still, I cry!


Thwack. Faith, I Will stride my Mule too morrow, and away
To The homely Village in the North!

Eld: Pall. Why so?


Thwack. Alas, these silly Covenants (you know)
I sealed too in my drink, and certain fears
Lurk in a remote comer of my head,
That say the game will all be yours.

Eld: Pallat. But what success can thou expect, since we have
Not yet enjoyed the City a full day?

Thwack. I say, let me have Woman; be she young,
Or old, Grandam or Babe, I must have Woman!

Eld: Pall. Carry but thy patience like a Gentleman,
And let me singly manage this adventure,
It will too morrow cancel our old deeds,
And leave thee to subscribe to what thy free
Pleasure shall direct.

Thw. We Will equally enjoy
Virgin, Wife, and Widow, the younger Kerchiefe with
The aged Hood.

Eld: Pall. What I have said, if I had leisure now
I Would ratify with oaths of thy own choosing.

Thwac. Go! propagate! fill the shops with thy notch'd
Issue, that when our Money's spent, we may
Be trusted, break, and couz'n in our own Tribe.

Eld: Pall. Leave me to fortune!


Thw. Do You here Pallatine.
Perhaps this young Lady has a Mother! --

Eld: Pall. No more, good night! -- Exit Thwack.
I have obay'd you Gentlemen, no Ears
Are near us, but our own, what is your affair!

Meag. We Will lead you to the Ladies Mansion Sir,
It Is hard by.

Eld: Pall. Hard by!


Pert. So near, that if your Lungs be good,
You may spit thither: that is the house!

Eld: Pall. These appear Gentlemen,
And of some rank! I will in! Exeunt Eld. Pall. Meager. Pert.

Yo: Pall. So, so! the hook has caught him by the Gils;
And it is fastened to a line will hold
You Sir, though your wits were stronger than your purse!
Sir Morglay Thwack's gone home; his lodging I
Have learned, and there are certain Gins prepared,
In which his wary feet may chance to be
Ensnared; though he could wear his Eyes upon his Toes!
I must follow the game close! He is entered,
And ere this amazed, at the strange complexion
Of the house, but, 'twas the best our friendship
And our treasure could procure. Exit.

Eld: Pallatine, Meager, Pert, with Lights. Eld. Pall. Gentlemen (if you
please) lead me no further!
I have so little faith to believe this,
The Mansion of a Lady, that I think
It Is rather the decays of hell; a sad
Retirement for the Fiend, to sleep in when
He Is sick with drinking Sulphur.

Pert. Sir you shall see this upper room is hung!


Eld. Pall. With Cobwebs Sir, and those so large, they may
Catch and ensnare Dragons instead of Flies.
Where sit a melancholy race of old
Norman Spyders, that came in with'Conqueror.

Meag. This chamber will refresh your Eyes, when you
Have cause to enter it. -- Leads him to look in 'tween the hangings.

Eld: Pallat. A Bed, and Canopy!
There Is show of entertainment there indeed;
There Lovers may have place to celebrate
Their warm wishes, and not take cold: but Gentlemen,
How comes the rest of this blind house so naked,
So ruinous, and deformed?

Pert. Pray Sir sit down:
If you have seen ought strange, or fit for wonder,
It but declares the hasty shifts, to which
The poor distressed Lady is exposed,
In pursuit of your love. She has good fame,
Great dignity and wealth; and would be loath
To cheapen these by making-her dull family
Bold witnesses of her desires with you:
Therefore, t'avoyd suspicion, to this place,
Sh'ath sent part of her neglected Wardrobe.

Meag. And will ere Time grows older by an hour,
Guild all this homely furniture at charge
Of her own Eyes; her beams can do it Sir!

Eld: Pallat. My manners will not suffer me to doubt!


Pert. We hope so too: besides though every one
That has a heart of's own, may think his pleasure;
We should be loath, your thoughts should throw mistakes
On us; that are the humble Ministers
Of your kind stars: for sure, though we look not
Like men that make Plantation on some Isle
That Is uninhabited; yet you believe
We would teach Sexes mingle, to increase Men!

Meag. Squires of the Placket, we know you think us.


Eld: Pall. Excuse my courage Gentlemen! good faith
I am not bold enough to think you so.

Pert. Nor will you yet be wooed to such mistake?


Eld: Pall. Not all the Art, nor Flattery you have
Can render you to my belief worse than
My self: Panders, and Bawds, good Gentlemen
I shall be angry, if you persuade me to
So vile a thought!

Pert. Sir you have cause!
And in good faith* if you should think us such,
We would make bold to cut that slender throat.

Eld Pall. How Sir?


Pert. That very throat, through which the lusty Grape,
And sav'ry Morsel in the Gamesters dish,
Steal down so leasurely, with Kingly gust!

Meag Sir it should open wide, as th'widest Oyster
In The Venecian Lake!

Eld. Pall. Gentlemen, it should!
It is a throat I can so little hide
In such a cause, that I would whet your Razor for it
On my own shoe.

Pert. Enough! you shall know all!
This Lady has a Noble Mind; but it is
So much o'remastred by her blood, we fear
Nothing but death, or you can be her remedy!

Eld: Pallat. And she is young?


Meag. O! as the April Bud!


Eld. Pall. 'Twere pity faith, she should be cast away!


Pert. You have a soft, and blessed heart! and to
Prevent so sad a period of her sweet breath;
Our selves, this house, the habit of this room,
The Bed within, and your fair person we
Have all assembled in a trice.

Eld: Pall. Sure Gentlemen,
In my opinion more could not be done,
Were she Inheretrix of all the East!

Pert. But Sir the excellence of your pure fame,
Has given us boldness to make suit, that if
You can reclaim her apetite with chaste
And wholesome homilies; such Counsel as
Befits your known morality, you will
Be pleased to save her life, and not undo her honor?

Meag. We hope you will afford her Medicine by
Your meek and holy Lectures, rather than
From any manly exercise, for such
In troth Sir you appear to our weak sight!

Eld. Pall. Brothers, and friends a style more distant now
Cannot be given: though you were in compass
Thick, as the Aspes, I must embrace you both --
You Have hit the very Center, unto which
The toils and comforts of my studies tend!

Pert. Alas we drew our Arrow but by aim!


Eld: Pall. Why Gentlemen I have converted more
Than ever Gold or Aretine misled:
I Have Disciples of all degrees in Nature
From your little Punque in Purple, to your
Tall Canvas Girl, from your Satin Slipper
To your Iron Pattin, and your Norway Shoe!

Pert. And can you mollify the Mother Sir,
In a strong fit.

Eld: Pall. Sure Gentlemen I can.
If books penned with a clean and wholesome spirit,
Have any might to edify; would they
Were here.

Meag. What Sir?


Eld. Pall. A small Library,
Which I am wont to make companion to
My idle hours: where some (I take it) are
A little consonant unto this Theme.

Pert. Have they not names?


Eld. Pall. A Pill to purge phlybotomy! a Balsamum
For the spiritual back! a lozeng against lust;
With diverse others Sir, which though not penned
By dull Platonic Greeks, or Memphian Priests,
Yet have the blessed mark of separation
Of Authors silenced, for wearing short hair.

Pert. But Sir, if this chaste means cannot restore
Her to her health and quiet peace; I hope
You will vouchsafe your Lodging in yon Bed,
And take a little pains -- Points to the Bed within.

Eld: Pallat. Faith Gentlemen, I was
Not bred on Scythian Rocks; Tigers and Wolves
I Have heard of, but nere sucked their milk, and sure
Much would be done to save a Ladies longing!

Meag. It Is late Sir. pray uncase! -- They help to uncloath him.


Pert. Your Boot, believed, it is my exercise! --


Eld: Pall. Well; it is your turn to labor now, and mine
Anon, for your dear sakes Gentlemen, I profess --

Pert. My friend shall wait upon you to your sheets,
Whilst I go and conduct the Lady hither:
Whom if your holy doctrine cannot well
Reclaim, pray hazard not her life; you have
A body Sir!

Eld. Pall. O! think me not cruel! Ex. Mea. Eld: Pal.


Enter Yo: Pallatine. Pert. Pall! come in Pall!


Yo: Pall. Is he in Bed?


Pert. Not yet,
But stripping in more haste, than an old snake
That hop^s for a new skin!

Yo: Pall. If we could laugh
In our Coffin Pert, this would be a jest
Long after death: he is so eager in
His witty hopes, that he suspects nothing.

Pert. O all he swallows Sir is melting Conserve,
And soft Indian Plum! Meager, what news? Enter Meager.

Meag. Laid! gently laid! he is all Virgin sure,
From the crown of's head, to his very Navell!

Yo: Pall. Where are his Breeches? speak! his Hatband too!
It Is of grand price, the stones are Rosiall, and
Of the white Rock!

Meag. I hung'em purposely
Aside, they are all within my reach: shall I in?

Yo: Pall. Soft! softly my false fiend! remember Rogue;
You tread on Glasses, Eggs, and gowty Toes! --

Meager takes out his Hat and Breeches, the Pockets and Hatband rifled, they
throw 'em in again. Meag. Hold Pall! The Exchequer is thine own! we will
Divide, when thou art gracious and well pleased!

Yo: Pal. All Gold! the Stals of Lombard Street powered into a purse.


Pert. These dear Pall, are thy Brothers goodly herds!


Yo: Pall. Yes, and his proud Flocks; but you see what they
Come to? a little room contains them all
At last; so, so, convay them in again!
Because he is my Elder Brother!
My Mothers Mayden-head, and a Country Wit,
He shall not be exposde to bare thighs, and a
Bald Crown! what noise is that? -- knocking within, Pert looks at door.

Pert. Death! there is old Snore
The Constable! his wife, a Regiment of Halberds.
And Mistress Queasie too, the Landlady
That ownes this house.

Meag. Belike they have heard, our friend
The Bawd, fled hence last night; and now they come
To ceaze on Mooveables for rent!

Young. Pall. The Bed within, and th'Hangings that we hyr'd,
To furnish our design, are all condemned,
My brother too; they will use him with as thin
Remorse, as an old Gamester would an Aldermans Heir!

Pert. No matter, our adventure's paid! follow
Pall! and I Will lead you a back way, where you
Shall climb ore tiles, like Cats when they make love.

Young. Pall. Now I shall laugh at those, that heap up wealth
By lazy method, and slow rules of Thrift;
I Am grown the Child of Wit, and can advance
My self, by being Votary to chance, Exeunt.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 1.
Enter Snore, Mistress Snore, Queasie, and Watchmen. Mist. Snore. Days of my
breath, I have not seen the like!
What would you have my husband do? it is past
One by Boe, and the Bell-Man has gone twice!

Queasie. Good Master Snore, you are the Constable,
You may do it (as they say) be it right or wrong!
It Is four years rent, come Childermas Eve next!

Snore. You see Neighbor Queasie the Doors are open;
Here Is no goods, no Bawd left; I Would see the Bawd!

Mist. Snore. I or the Whores; my husband's the Kings officer,
And still takes care I warrant ye of Bawdes,
And Whores! Show him but a Whore at this time
OF night (Good man) you bring a bed in faith!

Queasie. I pray Mistress Snore let him search the Parish,
They are not gone far, I must have my rent;
I hope there are Whores, and Bawdes in the Parish!

Mist. Snore. Search now? it is too late; a woman had
As good marry a Cowlestaffe as a Constable;
If he must nothing but search and search, follow
His Whores, and Bawds all day, and never comfort
His Wife at night: I prithee Lamb let us to Bed!

Snore. It must be late; for Gossip Nock the Nayleman
Had chatechys'd his Maids, and sung three Catches,
And a Song, ere we set forth!

Queasie. Good Mistress Snore, forbear your husband but
To night; and let the search go on!

Mist. Snore. I will nor forbear; you might have let your house
To honest women, not to Bawds! fie upon you!

Queasie. Fie upon me! it is well known I Am the mother
Of Children! Scirvie Fleake! it is not for naught
You boil Eggs in your Gruell, and your man Sampson
Owes my Son in law, the Surgeon, Ten groats
For Turpentine; which you have promised to pay
Out of his Christmasse Box.

Mist. Snore. I defy thee.
Remember thy first calling, thou setst up
With a Peck of Damsens, and a new Sive;
When thou broakst at Dowgate corner, 'cause the Boys
Flung down thy ware!

Snore. Keep the peace Wife! keep the peace!


Mist. Snore. I will not peace; she took my silver Thimble
To pawn, when I was a Maid; I paid her
A penny a month use!

Queasie. A Maid? yes sure;
By that token, goody Tongue the Midwife,
Had a dozen Napkins of your Mothers best
Diaper, to keep silence; when she said
She left you at Saint Peter's Fair, where you
Longed for Pigge!

Snore. Neighbor Queasie, this was not
In my time: what my Wife has done, since I
Was Constable, and the Kings Officer,
I Will answer: therefore (I say) keep the peace!
And when we have searched the two back rooms, I Will to bed!
Peace Wife! not a word! Exeunt.

Enter Eld. Pallatine clothing himself in haste. Eld. Pall. It Is time to get on
wings, and fly!
Here Is a noise of Thunder, Wolves, Women, Drums,
All that is confused, and frights the ear! I heard
Them cry out Bawds! the sweet young Lady is
Surprised sure, by the nice slave her husband;
Or some old frosty Matron of near kin;
And the good Gentlemen sh' employed to me
Are tortured, and called Bawds! If I am taken,
I Will swear, I purposed her conversion. --

Enter Snore, Mist. Snore, Queasie, and Watchmen. Snore. Here Is a Room hung,
and a fair Bed within,
I take it, there is the he Bawd too.

Queasie. Ceaze on the lewd thing!
I pray Master Snore, ceaze on the Goods too!

Mist. Snore. Who would not be a Bawd? they have proper men
To their husbands; and she maintains him
Like any parish Deputy.

Eld. Pall. What are you?


Snore. I am the Constable,

Eld. Pall. Good, the Constable?
I begin to stroke my long ears, and find
I am an Ass! such a dull Ass, as deserves
Thistles for provander, and sawdust too
Instead of Grains! O I am finely gulled.

Mist. Snore. Truly as proper a Bawd, as a woman
Would desire to use?

Eld. Pall. Master Constable,
Though these your Squires o'th Blade and Bill seem to
Be courteous Gentlemen, and well taught, yet
I would know, why they embrace me?

Snor. You owe my neighbor ( Mist. Queasie) four years rent.


Queasie. Yes and for three Bed Teekes and a Brass Pot;
Which your Wife promised me to pay this Term,
For now (she said) sh'expects her country Customers.

Eld. Pall. My Wife! have I been led to the Altar too;
By some doughty Deacon, taken woman by
The pretty thumb, and given her a Ring
With my dear self, for better, and for worse,
And all in a forgotten dream? But for whom
Do you take me?

Snore. For the he Bawd.


Eld. Pall. Good faith, you may as soon,
Take me for a VVhale, which is something rare
You know, of this side the Bridge.

Mist Snore. It Is indeed!
Yet our Paul was in the belly of one,
In my Lord Majors Show; and husband you remember,
He beckned you out of the Fishes mouth,
And you gave him a Pepin, for the poor soul
Had like to have choked, for very thirst.

Eld. Pall. I saw it, and cried out
O'th City, 'cause they would not be at charge
To let the Fish swim in a deeper Sea!

Mist. Snore. Indeed; why I was but a tiny Girl then;
I pray how long have you been a Bawd here?

Eld. Pall. Again! how the Devil,
Am I changed, since my own Glass rendered me
A Gentleman: well, master Constable,
Though every Stall's your Worships wooden Throane,
Here you are humble, and of foot; therefore,
I will put on my Hatt; pray reach it me! -- misses his Diamond Hatband.
Death! my hatband! a row of Diamonds
Worth a thousand Marks! Nay, it is time then
To doubt, and tremble to. My Gold! my Gold! -- searches his Pockets.
And precious stones!

Mist. Snore. Do you suspect my Husband?
He has no need of your stones, I praise heaven!

Eld. Pallat. A plague upon your courteous midnight Leaders!
Good silly Saints, they are dividing now,
And ministering (no doubt) unto the poor!
This will decline the reputation of
My Wit; till I be thought to have a less head
Then a Justice of Peace! if Morglay hear't,
He Will think me dull, as a Dutch Mariner!
No medicine now from thought? Good! it is designed!

Snor. Come along! it is late.


Eld. Pall. Whither must I go?


Queasie. To the Compter sir, unless my rent be paid!


Snore. And for being a Bawd!


Eld. Pallat. Confined in Wanscot Walls too,
Like a licorish Rat, for nibling
Unlawfully upon forbidden Cheese!
This to the other sauce, is Alloes and Mirrh!
But Master Constable do you behold this Ring?
It is worth all the Bells in your Church steeple,
Though your Sexton, and Sidemen hung there too,
To better the Peale.

Snor. Well, what is your request?


Eld. Pall. Mary, that you will let me go to fetch
The Bawd, the very Bawd, that owes this rent;
Who being brought, you shall restore my Ring:
And believe me to be an arrant Gentleman,
Such as in's Scutchion gives Horns, Hounds, and Hawks,
Hunting Nags, with tall E^ters in Blew Coats,
Sance Number!

Quea. Pray let him go Master Snore;
We Will stay and keep the goods!

Mist. Snor. Yes, let him Husband.
For I would feign see a very be Bawd!

Snor. Come Neighbors, light him out! Exeunt.

Enter Yo: Pallatine, Ample, Pert, Luce, Ginet, Engine, with lights. Ampl. A
Forest full of Palms, thy Lover ( Luce)
Merits in Girlands for his victory.
I Am wild with joy! why there was wit enough
In this design to bring a Ship of fools
To shore again, and make them all good Pilots!

Yo: Pall. Madam, this Gentleman deserves to share
In your kind praise, he was a merry Agent
In the whole plot, and would exalt himself
To your Ladyships service: If you please
For my humblesake, unto your Lip too! -- Pert salutes her.

Ampl. Sir you are friend to Pallatine,
And that entitles you unto much worth.

Pert. The title will be bettered (Madam) when
I am become a Servant to your beauty.

Lucy. Why your confederate Pert, is courtly too;
He will out-tongue a Favorite of France!
But did thou leave thy Brother surfeiting
On lewd hopes?

Yo: Pall. He belives all woman kind
Dressed, and ordained for th'mercy of his Tooth!

Ampl. And now lies stretched in his smooth slipperie sheets!


Yo: Pall, O like, a wanton Snake on Camamile!
And rifled to so sad remains of wealth,
That if his resolution still disdain
Suppliment from his Lands, and he resolve
To live here by his Wits; he will ere long
Betroth himself to Raddish women for
Their roots; pledge Children in their sucking Bottles,
And in dark winter Mornings, rob small School-boyes
Of their Honey, and their Bread.

Pert. Faith, Meager and I, used him with as much
Remorse, as our occasions could allow:
Las, he must think we shreds of time
Have our occasions too!

Yo: Pall. What (Madam) need he care?
For let him but prove kind unto his ^uls,
Bring them their Heifers when their Crests are high;
Stroke his fair Ewes, and pimpe a little for
His Rams; they strait will multiply; and then
The next great Fair, prepares him fit again,
For'th Cities view, and our surprise.

Amp. Why this young Gentleman has relish in it*
Yet when you understand the dark, and deep
Contrivements which my self, Engine, and Luce,
Have laid for this great witty Villager,
To whom you bow as foremost of your blood*
You will degrade your selves from all prerogatives,
Above our Sex, and all those pretty Marks
Of Manhood (your trim beards) sindge often with Tapers,
As a just Sacrifice to our Supremacy!

Luce. If Sir Tirant Thrift, your Phlegmatic Guerdian
Leave but this Mansion ours till the next Sun,
We Will make your haughty brother tremble at
The name of Woman, and blush behind a Fan
Like a yawning Bride, that has foul Teeth!

Engine. Madame, it is time you were a Bed; for sure besides
The earnest invitation which I left,
Writ in his Chamber, these afflictions will
Disturb his rest, and bring him early hither
To recover his sick hopes. -- Enter Meager.

Yo. Pall. Meager! What news? Madam, the homage of
Your Lip again; A Man of War believed;
One that has fasted in the face of's foe;
Seen Spinola entrenched; sometimes has spread
His butter at the States charge; sometimes too,
Fedd on a Sallad that has grown upon
The Enemies own Land; but pardon me,
Without or Oil, or Vinegar!

Ample. Sir, Men in choler may do any thing.


Meager. Your Ladyship will excuse his new plenty;
It has made him pleasant.

Yo. Pall. Meager! what news? how do our Spies prosper?


Meager. Sir rare discoveries! I Have traced your Brother;
You shall hear more anon!

Ginet* Your Ladyship forgets how carely your
Designs will waken you?

Engine. Madam, I Would feign be
Bold too, to hasten you unto your rest!

Amp. It Is late (indeed) the silence of the Night
And sleep be with you Gentlemen! Exeunt. Ample, Ginet: Engine

Yo. Pall. Madam, good night: but our heads never were
Ordained to so much trivial leisure as
To sleep: you may as soon entreat
A Sexton sleep in's Bellfry when the Plague reigns;
An aged Sinner in a Tempest, or
A jealous States man when his Prince is dying!

Luce. Pray dismiss your friends, I would speak with you.
Eig* Pall. Men of the puissant Pike, follow the lights. -- Exeunt Meager, Pert.

Luce. Pall, you are as good natured to me Pall,
As the wife of a silenced Minister,
Is to a Monarchy, or to lewd Gallants,
That have lost a Nose!

Yo. Pall. And why so Dame Luce!


Luce. So many yellow Images at once
Assembled in your fist, and Jewels too
Of goodly price, all this free booty got,
In lawful war, and I no tribute Pall?

Yo. Pall. What need it Luce? a Virgin may live cheap:
They Are maintained with as small charge as a Wren
With Magots, in a Gheesemongers shop?

Luce. Well Pall, and yet you know all my extremes?
How for a little Taffata to line
A Mask, I Am feign to mollify my Mercer
With a soft whisper, and a timorous blush;
To sigh unto my Millener for Gloves;
That they may trust, and not complain unto my Aunt;
Who is as jealous of me as their wives, and all
Through your demeanor Pall; whose kindness I
Perceive, will raise me to such dignity,
That I must teach Children in a dark Cellar,
Or work Coifes in a Garret for cracked Groates,
And broken meat!

Yo. Pall. Luce, I will give thee Luce, to buy

Luce. What Pall.


Yo. Pall. An ounce of Arsnick to mix in thy Aunts Caudels,
This Aunt, I must see cold, and grinning, Luce,
Sealed t'her last wink, as if she closed her eyes
T'avoyd the sight of Feathers, Co^^hes, and short Cloakes!

Luce. How many Angels of your Family
Are there in heaven? but few I fear, and how,
You Will be the first, that shall entitle them
To such high calling, is to me a doubt!

Yo. Pallat. Why is there never a P^^ there ( Luce) but for
Your coughing Aunt, and you?

Luce. Had thou eyes like flaming Beacons, crook'd homes,
A tail three yards long, and thy feet Cloven,
Thou could not be more a Fiend, then thou art now;
But to advance thy sins with being hard,
And costive unto me!

Yo. Pall. You lie Luce! you lie! -- Flings her a Purse.
There Is Gold! the Fairles are thy Mintmen Girl,
Of this thou shall have store enough, to make
The hungry Academicks mention thee,
In Evening Lectures, with aplause, and prayer:
A Foundresse thou shall be.

Luce. Of Hospitals;
For your decayed self, Meager, and Pert,
Those wealthy Usurers, your poor friends.

Yo: Pall. A Nunn'ry Luce, where all the female issue
Of our decayed Nobility shall live
Thy Pensioners: it will preserve them from
Such want, as makes them quarter Arms with th'City,
And match with saucy Haberdashers Sons,
Whose Fathers lived in Allies, and dark Lanes!

Luce. Good night Pall! your gold I Will lay up, though but
T'incounter the next Surgeons Bill; yet know
Our Wits are ploughing too, and in a ground
That yields as fair a grain as this!

Yo: Pall. Farewell, and let me hear thy Aunt is stuck
With more Bay leaves and Rose-mary, than a
Westphalia Gammon. Exeunt.

Enter Elder Pallatine, and Thwack, dressing himself. Eld. Pall. Quick,
dispatch Knight! thou art as tedious in
Thy dressing, as a Court Bribe; two ships might
Be rigged for the Straits, in less space than thou
Carienst that same old Hulke, can it be thought
That one so filled with hope and wise designs
Could be subdued with sleep, what dull, and drowsy?
Keep earlier hours than a roost Hen in Winter?

Thwack. Pallatine, the design grow all Dream, Magic,
And Alchymie to me: I gave it lost!
Clove to my soft Pillow, like a warm Justice,
And slept there with less noise than a dead Lawyer
In a Monument.

Eld: Pall. This is the house; dispatch, that I may knock.


Thwack. S'light stay, thou think I Have the dexterity
Of a Spaniell, that with a yawne, a scratch
On his left ear, and stretching his hind legs,
Is ready for all day: O for the Biscayne sleeve,
And Bulloigne hose, I wore when I was shrieve,
In Eighty Eight!

Eld. Pall. Faith thou art comely Knight!
And I already see the Town Girls melt,
And thaw before thee.

Thwack. We must be content!
Thou know all men are bound to were their limbs
In The same skin that Nature bestows upon them;
Be it rough or be it smooth; for my part,
If she to whom you lead me now like not
The grain of mine, I will not flea my self,
T'humor the touch of her Ladi-ships fingers!

Eld: Pall. Well I had thought to have carried it with Youth,
But when I came to greet her beauties with
The Eyes of Love and wonder, she despised me,
Rebuked those haughty Squires, her Servants that
Convay'd me thither in mistake, and cried,
She meant the more Authentic Gentleman,
The reverend Mounsier, she!

Thwack. The reverend Mounsier?
Why does she take me for a French Deane?

Eld. Pal. Her Confessor at least, her secrets are
Thine own; but by what Charms attained;
Let him determine that has read Agrippa.

Thw. Charms? yes Sir, if this be a Charm -- or this -- leaps and frisks.
Or here again to advance th'activity
Of a poor old back!

Eld. Pall. No Ape, Sir Morglay,
After a years obedience to the Whip,
Is better quallify'd!

Thw. Limber, and sound Sir!
Besides, I sing, little Musgrove; and then
For, the Chivie Chase, no Lark comes near me!
If she be t'ane with these, why at her peril be it!

Eld: Pall. Come Sir, dispatch! I Will knock, for here is the house*


Thwack. Stay, stay! this Lane (sure) has no great renown!
The house too, if the Moon reveal't aright,
May for it is small Magnificence be left
(For ought we know) out of the City Map!

Eld. Pall. Therein consists the Miracle, and when
The doors shall open, and thou behold, how lean
And ragged every room appears, till thou
Have reached the Sphaere, where she (Illustrious) moves,
Thy wonder will be more perplexed; for know
This Mansion is not hers, but a concealed
Retirement, which her wisdom safely chose
To hide her loose love.

Thwack. Give me a Bagadg that has brains! but Pallatine,
Did not I at first persuade thee, those two
Trim Gentlemen, her Squires, might happily
Mistake the person unto whom the message was
Disposed; and that my self was he?

Eld: Pall. Thou did! and thou have got (Knight) by this hand
I think, the Mogul's Niece; she cannot be
Of less descent; the height and strangeness of
Her port, denote her foreign, and of great blood!

Thwack. What should the Mogul's Niece do here?


Eld. Pall. Alas thy Ears are buried in a Wool-sack;
Thou hear'st no News! it is all the voice in Court,
That she is sent hither in disguise, to learn
To play on the Gitarh, and make Almond Butter!
But whether this great Lady that I bring
Thee too, be she; is yet not quite confirmed!

Thwack. Thou talk o'th high, and strange comportment that
Thou found'st her in!

Eld: Pall. Right Sir! she sat on a rich Persian Quilt,
Thridding a Carckanet, of pure, round Pearl,
Bigger than Pigeons Eggs!

Thwack. Those I will sell!


Eld: Pall. Her Maids with little Rods of Rose-marie,
And stalks of Lavander, were brushing Ermines skins;

Thw. Furs for the Winter! I Will line my Breeches with them!


Eld. Pall. Her young smooth Pages lay, round at her feet;
Clothed like the Sophies Sons; and all at Dice;
The Caster six Wedges a Cubit long
Cries one; another comes a Tun of Pistolets;
And then is covered with an Argosie,
Laden with Indico, and Cutchy nill!

Thwack. This must be the great Mogul's Niece!


Eld. Pal. As for her Grooms, they all were planted on
Their knees, carowsing their great Ladies health
In perfumed Wines, and then straight quallify'd
Their wild, voluptuous heats with cool Cerbet,
The Turks own Iulip?

Thw. Knock, Pallatine!
Quick Rogue! I cannot hold; little thought I
The Thwack's of the North, should inoculate
With the Mogul's of the South! -- Pallatine knocks.

Enter Snore. Eld. Pall. Speak softly Master Constable, I Have brought
The very he Bawd!

Snor. Blessing on your heart Sir!
My Watch are above at Trea Trip, for a
Black Pudding, and a pound of Suffolk Cheese;
They Will ha'done straight: Pray fetch him to me,
I Will call them down, and lead him to a by-roome!

Thw. Pallatine, what is he?


Eld. Pall. The Ladies steward sir,
A sage Philosopher, and a grave Pandar!
One that has writ bawdy Sonnets in Hebrew,
And those so well, that if the Rabbis were
Alive, it is thought he would corrupt their Wives.
Follow me Knight! --

Thw. Pallatine,
Half the large Treasure that I get is yours!

Eld: Pal. Good faith (my friend) when you are once possessed
Of all, it is as your Conscience will vouchsafe.

Thwack. Do thou suspect? I Will stay here till thou fetch
A Bible, and a Cushion, and swear kneeling!

Eld: Pal. My Faith shall rather cousen me; walk in
With this Philosopher -- No words! for he is
A Pythagorian and Professes silence!
My Ring Master Constable -- Snore gives him his Ring, then Exit with Thwack.
Here yet my Reputation's safe! should he
Have heard of my mischance, and not accompanied
With this defeat upon himself, his Mirth
And Tyranny had been 'bove humane Sufferance!
Now for the Lady Ample, she (I guess)
Looks on me with strong fervent Eyes; she is rich;
And could I work her into profit, 'twould
Procure my Wit, immortal memory;
But to be gulled? and by such Trifles too;
Dull, humble Gentlemen that nere drunk Wine,
But on some Coronation day, when each
Conduit pisses Cl^ret at the Town charge!
Well, though it is worse than Steel or Marble to
Digest; yet I have learn^d, one stop in a
Careire, taint^ not a Rider with disgrace;
But may procure him breath to win the race. Exit.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 1.
Enter Yo: Pallatine, Engine, Meager, Pert, Pallatine richly clothed. Engine.
Your Brother's in the house; the Letter which
I sent to tempt him hither wrought above
The reach of our desires; My Lady Sir,
He does believe is sick to death; and all,
In languishment for his dear love.

Yo: Pall. Pert, and Meager, though you have both good faces,
They must not be seen here; there is below,
A Brother o'mine; whom (I take it) you
Have used not overtenderlie.

Meag. S'light he must needs remember us!


Pert. We Will sooner stay t'out-face a Basiliske!
Whither shall we go?

Yo: Pall. To Snore the Constable: Morglay is still
A Prisoner in his house; take order for's
Release, as I projected, but (do you hear)
He must not free him till I come.

Pert. Pall, will the dull Ruler of the night (Pall)
Obey thy Edict!

Yo: Pall: His wife will, and she is his Constable!
Name me but to her, and she does homage!

Meag. Enough, we will attend thee there!


Engine. This way Gentlemen. Exeunt Engine, Pert, Meager.


Enter Elder Pallatine. Eld: Pal. What Is this, an apparition, a Ghost
imbroider'd?
Sure he has got the Devil for his Tailor.

Yo. Pall. Good morrow Brother, Morrow!


Eld. Pall. You are in glory sir, I like this flourishing!
The Lilly too, looks handsome for a Month;
But you (I hope) will last out the whole year!

Yo. Pall. What flourishing? O Sir, belike you mean
My Clothes; they are Rags, course homely Rags, beleev't;
Yet they will serve for'th Winter sir, when I
Ride post in Sussex ways! --

Eld. Pall. This gayetie denotes
Some solitary treasure in the Pocket,
And so you may become a lender too;
You know, I Am far from home!

Yo. Pall. I Will lend nothing, but good Counsel, and Wit?


Eld. Pall. Why, sure, you have no Factors sir, in Delph,
Lyghorne, Aleppo, or'th Venetian Isles,
That by their Traffic can advance you thus;
Nor do you trade in the City by retaile
In our small Wares: All that you get by Law,
Is but a doleful Execution
After Arrest; and for your power in Court;
I know your stockings being on, you are
Admitted in the Presence.

Yo. Pall. What does this infer Brother?
Men of design are chary of their Minutes,
Be quick, and subtle!

Eld. Pall. The Inf'rence is
You prosper by my documents; and what
You have achieved must be, by your good Wits!

Yo. Pall. If you had had a Sybill to your Nourse,
You could not (Sir) have aimed nearer the truth.
I saw your Ears and Baggs, were shut to all
Intents of bounty; therefore was enforced
Into this way; and 'twas at first somewhat
Against my Conscience too!

Eld. Pall. If not to vex
The zealous spirit in you, I would know why?

Yo: Pal. Good faith I Have searched Records, and cannot find
That Magna Charta does allow a Subject
To live by his Wits; there is no Statute for it!

Eld. Pall. Your Common Lawyer was no Antiquary!


Yo. Pal. And then (credit me Sir) the Canons of
The Church authorize no such thing.

Eld: Pall. You have met with a dull Civillian too!


Yo: Pall. Yet Brother, these impediments cannot
Choke up my way; I must still on!

Eld: Pall. And you believe the Stories of young heirs
Enforced to sign at Midnight to appease
The Sword Man's wrath, may be outdone by you!

Yo: Pall. I were unkind else, to my own good parts!


Eld: Pal. And that your Wit has power to tempt from the
Severe, grave Bench, the Aldermen themselves,
To rifle where you please, for Skarfes, Feathers,
And for Race Nags!

Yo: Pal. It is believed Sir, in a trice!


Eld: Pal. And that your wit can lead our reverend Matrons,
And tefty Widows of fourscore, to scale
(And in their smocks) for frail commodities
To elevate your Punke?

Yo: Pal. All this Sir, is so easy,
My Faith would swallow't, though t'had a sore throat!

Eld: Pal. Give me thy hand! This day I Will cut off the entaile
Of all my Lands, and dis-inherit thee!

Yo: Pall. Will you Sir? I thank ye!


Eld: Pal. But mark me Brother; for there is Justice in it,
Admits of no reproof; what should you do
With Land, that have a Portion in your brain,
Above all Legacies or heritage?

Yo: Pal. I conceive you!


Eld: Pal. O to live here, in the fair Metropolis
Of our great Isle, a free Inheritor
Of every modest, or voluptuous wish,
Thy young desires can breath; and not oblieg'd
To The Plough-mans toils, or lazy Reapers swet;
To make the world thy Farm, and every Man
Less witty than thy self, Tennant for life;
These are the glories that proclaim a true
Phylosophie, and Soul, in him that climbes
To reach them with neglect of Fame and Life!

Yo: Pal. He carries it bravely! As he had felt
Nothing that fits his own remorse; but know,
Sir Eagle, th'higher that you fly, the less
You will appear to us, dim sighted Foul,
That flutter here below. Brother, farewell!
They say, the Lady of this house, groans for
Your love, the tame sick fool is rich; let not
Your pride beguile your profit! Exit.

Eld: Pall. I suspect him! Not all the skill I have
In Reason, or in Nature can pronounce
Him free, from the defeat upon my Gold,
And Jewels! 'twas like a Brother! but for
His two Confederates; though I should meet
Them in a Mist, darker than Night, or Southern Fens
Produce, my Eyes would be so courteous sure,
To let me know them!

Enter Ample, carried in as sick in a Couch, Luce, Engine, Ginet. Engine. Room!
More air! if heavenly Ministers
Have leisure to consider or assist
The best of Ladies, let them show it now! --

Luce. How do you Madam? Oh, I shall lose
The chief example of internal love
Of gentle grace, and feature, that the world
Did ever show, to dignifie our Sex!

Eng. Work on! I must stand Sentinel beneath! Exit.


Eld: Pal. Is her disease grown up to such extremity?
Then it is time, I seem to suffer too;
Or else my hopes will prove sicker than she!

Luce. More cruel than the Panthar on his prey!
Why speak you not? no comfort from your Lips;
You Sir that are the cause of this sad hour!

Gin. He stands as if his Legs had taken root;
A very Mandrake!

Eld: Pall. How comes it (Lady) all these Beauties that
But yesterday did seem to teach
The Spring to flourish and rejoice, so soon
Are withered from our sight.

Amp. It is in vain, t'inquire the reason of
That grief, whose remedy is past; had you
But felt so much remorse, or softness in
Your heart, as would have made you nobly just,
And pitiful; the Mourners of this day
Had wanted then, their Dead to weep upon!

Eld. Pall. Am I the cause? forbid it gentle heaven!
The Virgins of our Land, when this is told,
Will raze the Monumentall building, where
My buried flesh shall dwell, and throw my dust
Before the sportive winds, till I am blown
About in parcels less then Eie-sight can
Discern!

Luce. She listens to you sir?


Eld. Pal. If I am guilty of neglect;
Give me a taste of duty, name how far
I shall submit to love! the mind has no
Disease above recovery, if we
Have courage to remove despair!

Ample. O sir, the pride and scorns, with which you first
Did entertain my passions, and regard,
Have worn my easy heart away; my breast
Is emptier than mine Eyes; that have distilled
Their Balls to Funeral Dew! It is too late!

Luce. Ginet, my fears have in them too much Prophecy,
I told thee she would nere recover!

Ginet. For my poor part, I wish no easier Bed
At night, then the cold grave where she must lie!

Amp. Luce, Luce! entreat the Gentleman to sit!


Luce. Sit near her sir! You hear her voice grows weak!


Ample. That you may see your scorns could not persuade
My love, to thoughts of danger or revenge;
The faint remainder of my breath, I Will waste
In Legacies, and Sir to you, you shall
Have all, the Laws will suffer me to give!

Eld. Pall. Who, I? sweet Saint, take heed of your last deeds!
Your bounty carries cunning Murder in it;
I shall be killed with kindness, and depart
Weeping, like a fond Infant, whom the Nurse
Would sooth, too early to his bed!

Luce. Nay Sir, no remedy, you must have all:
Though you procured her death; the world shall not
Report; she died beholding to you!

Ginet. Go to her Sir, she'ld speak with you again!


Ample. Sir, if mine Eyes, in all their health and glory,
Had not the power to warm you into Love,
Where are my hopes, now they are dim, and have
Almost forgot the benefit of light!

Eld. Pal. Not love! Lady! Queen of my heart! what oaths
Or execrations can persuade your faith
From such a cruel jealousy!

Ampl. I Would have some testimony Sir; if but
T'assure the world, my love, and bounty at
My death, were both conferred on one, that showed
So much requital, as declares he was
Of Gentle humane race!

Eld. Pall. What shall I do?
Prescribe me dangers now, horrid as those
Which Midnight fires beget, in Cities overgrowne;
Or Winter storms produce at Sea, and try
How far my love will make me venture to
Augment th'esteeme of yours!

Ampl. That trial of your love which I request
Implies no danger Sir; it is not in me
T'urge any thing, but what your own desires
Would choose!

Eld: Pall. Name it! like eager Mastiffs, chained
From the encounter of their game, my hot
Fierce appetite diminishes my strength!

Ampl. It Is only this: for fear some other should
Enjoy you when I Am cold, in my last sleep;
I would entreat you to sit hear, grow sick,
Languish, and dye with me!

Eld: Pall. How! dye with you! Takes Luce aside.
'Twere fit, you hastened her to write down all
She can bestow, and in some form of Law:
I fear, she is mad! her senses are so lost,
She Will never find them to her use again!

Luce. I pray Sir why?


Eld. Pall. Did you not hear what a fantastic suit
She makes, that I would sit and dye with her?

Luce. Does this request seem strange? you will do little
For a Lady, that deny to bring her
Onward her last journey; or is it your thrift?
Alas you know, souls travel without charge!

Eld: Pall. Her little skull is tainted too!


Ampl. Is he not willing Luce?


Eld. Pall. My best dear Lady, I am willing to
Resign my self to any thing but death!
Do not suspect my kindness now; In troth
I Have business upon Earth will hold me here
At least a score or two of years; but when
That Is done; I am content to follow you!

Amp. If this persuasion cannot reach at your
Consent; yet let me witness so much love
In you, as may enforce you languish, and
Decay, for my departure from your sight.

Luce. Can you do less than languish for her death?
Sit down here, and begin! true sorrow Sir,
If you have any in your breast will quickly
Bring you low enough!

Eld. Pall. Alas good Ladies! do you think my languishment
And grief is to begin upon me now?
Heaven knows how I have pined, and groaned, since first
Your letter gave me knowledge of the cause!

Luce. It is not seen Sir in your face!


Eld. Pall. My face! I grant you; I bate inwardly!
I Am scorched, and dried, with sighing to a Mummie:
My Heart, and Liver are not big enough
To choke a Daw! A Lamb laid on the Altar for
A sacrifice has much more entrails in it!

Luce. Yet still, your sorrow alters not your face?


Eld. Pall. Why no, I say! No man, that ever was
Of Natures making has a face molded
With less help for hypocrisy than mine!

Ginet. Great pity Sir!


Eld. Pall. Though I endured the Diet and the Flux;
Lay seven days buried up to the Lips like a
Deceased sad Indian in warm sand; whilst his
Afflicted Female wipes his salt foame off
With her own hair, feeds him with Buds of Guacum
For his salad; and Pulpe of Salsa for
His Bread; I say, all this endured, would not
Concern my face! Nothing can decline that!

Amp. Yet you are used Sir, to bate inwardly!


Eld. Pall. More than heirs unlanded, or unjoynter'd Wives.


Enter Engine. Engine. What shall we do? Sir Tirant Thrift's come home!


Eld. Pall. Sir Tirant Thrift!


Luce. My Ladies Guardian Sir!


Amp. He meets the expected hour, just to my wish!


Luce. What, has he brought a husband for my Lady?


Engine. There is a certain one legged Gentleman,
Whose better half of limbs is wood; for whom
Kind Nature did provide no hands, to prevent
Stealing; and to augment his gracefulness,
He Is crooked as a Witches Bin!

Luce. Is he so much wood?


Engine. So much, that if my Lady were in health,
And married to him, as her Guardian did
Propose, we should have an excellent generation
Of Bed-staves.

Luce. When does he come?


Engine. To night if his slow Litter will consent;
For they convay him tenderly, lest his
Sharp bones should grate together: Sir Pallatine,
I wish you could escape my Masters sight!

Eld. Pall. Is he coming hither?


Engine. He Is at the door! My Ladies sickness was
No sooner told him, but he straight projects
To proffer her a Will of his own making!
He means Sir to be heir of all: if he
Should see you here, he would suspect my loyalty,
And doubt you for some cunning Instrument,
That means to interrupt his covetous hopes!

Eld. Pall. Then I Will be gone.


Engine. No Sir, he needs must meet you in
Your passage down! besides, it is not fit
For you, and your great hopes, with my dependancie
On both, to have you absent when my Lady dies;
I know you must have all: Sir I could wish
That we might hide you here! --
Draw out the Chest within, that is big enough
To hold you: it were dangerous to have
My Ladies Guardian to find you Sir! -- They draw in a Chest.

Eld. Pall. How! laid up like a brushed Gown, under lock
And key! By this good light, not I!

Luce. O Sir, if but to save the honor of
Your Mistress fame, what will he think to see
So comely, and so straight a Gentleman
Converse here with a Lady in her Chamber!
And in a time that makes for hi^ suspicion too,
When he is from home!

Eld. Pall. I hate enclosure, I;
It is the humor of a distressed Rat!

Ginet. It is retirement Sir, and you will come forth
Again, so sage!

Ampl. Sir Pallatine! --


Luce. Your Lady calls Sir, to her, and be kind!


Amp. Will you permit the last of all my hours
Should be defiled with Infamy, proclaimed
By lewder Tongues, to be unchaste even at
My death? what will my Guardian guess to find
You here?

Eld. Pal. No more, I Will in! but think on it gentle Lady!
First to bate in wardly, and then to have
My outward person shut thus and enclosed
From day light, and your company; I say
But think, if it be not worse than death! -- He enters the Chest.

Amp. Lock him up Luce, safe as thy Mayden-head! --


Enter Sir Tirant Thrift. Thrift. Engine, where is my charge Engine, my dear
charge?


Engine. Sick as I told you Sir, and lost to all
The hope, that earthly medicine can procure!
Her Physicians have taken their last fees,
And then went hence shaking their empty heads,
As they had left less brain than hope!

Thrift. Alas poor Charge! come, let me see her Engine!


Luc. At distance Sir, I pray, for I have heard
Your breath is somewhat sour, with overfasting Sir,
On Holy Day Eeves!

Thrift. Ha! what is she Engine?


Engine. A pure, good soul, one that your Ward desired
For love and kindreds sake, to have near her at
Her death; she will outwatch a long Rush Candle,
And reads to her all night the Posie of
Spiritual Flowers!

Thrift. Does she not gape for Legacies?


Engine. Fie no! there is a Cornelian Ring, perhaps
She aims at, cost Ten Groats; or a wrought Smock,
My Lady made now against her wedding Sir;
Trifles which Maids desire to weep upon
With Fun'rall Tales, after a Midnight Possit.

Thrift. Thou saydst below, she has made me her heir.


Engine. Of all, even to her Slippers and her Pins!


Amp. Luce, me thought Luce, I heard my Guardeans voice!


Engine. It seems her senses are grown warm again;
Your presence will recover her!

Thrift. Will it recover her, then I Will be gone!


Engine. No Sir, she will straight grow cold again! On! on!
She looks that you would speak to her.

Thrift. Alas poor Charge! I little thought to see
This doleful day.

Amp. We all are mortal Sir!


Thrift. I Have taken care, and labor, to provide
A Husband for thee; he is in's Litter now,
Hastening to Town; a fine young Gentleman!
Only a little rumpled in the womb,
With falls his Mother took, after his making.

Amp. Death is my husband now! but yet I thank
You for your tender pains, and wish you would
Continue it in quiet governing my Legacies,
When I am past the power to see it Sir;
You shall enjoy all!

Thrift. This will occasion more Church building;
And raising of new Hospitals; there were
Enough before; but Charge you will have it so.

Amp. I Will make Sir one request; which I have hope,
You Will grant in thankfulness to all my bounty!

Thrift. O dear Charge! any thing! Your Cousen here
Shall witness the consent and Act,

Amp. Because I would not have my vanities
Remain, as fond examples to persuade
An imitation in those Ladies that
Succeed my youthful Pride in the Town: my Plumes,
Fantastic Flowers, and Chains: my haughty Rich
Embroideries: my gaudy Gowns, and wanton Jewels,
I have locked within a Chest!

Luce. There Sir, there the Chest stands.


Ampl. And I desire it may be buried with me!


Thrift. Engine, take care Engine, to see it done!


Ampl. Now Sir, I beseech you leave me: for 'twill
But make my death more sorrowful, thus to
Continue my converse with one, I so
Much love, and must forsake at last.

Thrift. Alack, alack! bury her to night Engine!


Engine. Not Sir, unless she dies. Her Ancestors
Have sojourned long here in St. Bartholmewes,
And there is a Vault in the Parish Church, kept only
For her Family; she must be buried there.

Thrift. I Engine, I, and let me see; the Church
Thou know, joins to my house, a good prevention
From a large walk; 'twill save the charge of Torch-light.

Engine. What Fun'rall Ghests? the neighbors Sir, will look
To be invited!

Thrift. No more than will suffice
To carry down the Corpse; and thou know Engine,
She is no great weight.

Engine. And what to entertain them Sir?


Thrift. A little Rose-marie, which thou may steal
From the Temple Garden; and as many Comfits
As might serve to Christen a Watchmans Bastard:
Twill be enough!

Engine. This will not do! Your Citizen
Is a most fierce devourer Sir of Plums!
Six will destroy as many as can make
A Banquet for an Army!

Thrift. I Will have no more, Engine.
I Will have no more! nor (do you hear) no Burnt wine;
I do not like this drinking healths to 'th memory
O'th dead; it is profane.

Engine. You are obay'd!
But Sir, let me advise you now to trust
The care, and benefit of all your fate
Presents you in this house, to my discretion;
And get you instantly to horse again.

Thrift. Why Engine, speak?


Engine. In brief, you know, that all
The Writings which concern your Wards estate,
Lie at her Lawyers, fifteen Miles from hence!
Your credit, he not knowing (Sir) she is sick,
Will easily tempt them to your own Possession:
Which, once enjoyed, you are free from all litigious suits
His envy might incense her Kindred to!

Thrift. Enough Engine, I am gone!


Engine. If you should meet the crooked Lover in
His Litter Sir (as it is in your own rode)
You may persuade him move like a Crab, backward;
For here is no mixture, but with worms.

Thrift. It Is well thought on Engine! farewell Engine!
Be faithful, and be rich! --

Engine. My breeding and
Good manners Sir, teach me to attend your bounty!

Thrift. But Engine, I could wish, she would be sure
To dye too night!

Engine. Alas good Soul! I Will undertake
She shall do any thing to please you Sir! Exit Thrift.

Ampl. Engine, thou have wrought above the power
Of Accident, or Art!

Engine. If you consider't with a just
And lib'rall brain: first, to prevent
Th'accesse, and tedious visits of the Fiend
His lovesick Monster; and then rid him hence,
Upon a journey to preserve this house
Empty, and free to celebrate the rest
Of our designs!

Luce. This Engine, is thy Holly-day! -- Luce knocks at the Chest.
What hoa! Sir Pallatine, are you within?

Eld: Pall. Is Sir Tirant Thrift gone? open Lady! open!


Luce. The Cazement Sir I will, a little to
Increase your witships allowance of air! -- opens a wicket at the end of the
Chest.
But th'troth, for liberty of limbs, you may
As soon expect it in a Gally Sir,
After six Murders and a Rape!

Eld. Pall. How, Lady of the Lawne!


Luce. Sir Lancelot,
You may believed, if your discreet faith please;
This Tenement is cheap; here you shall dwell,
Keep home, and be no wanderer!

Eld. Pal. The Pox take me if I like this! sure when
The Advice of th'Ancients is but asked, they will say
I am now worse, than in the state of a Bawd!

Engine. Do You know this Lady Sir?


Eld: Pall. The Lady Ample!
Her vayle's off too! and in the lusty garb
Of health, and merriment! Now shall I grow
As modest as a snayle that in's affliction
Shrinks up himself, and's horns into his shell,
Ashamed still to be seen.

Ampl. Could thou believe,
Thou bearded Babe! thou dull ingenderer!
Male rather in the back, than in the brain,
That I could sicken for thy love? for th'cold
Society of a thin Northern Wit! -- Eld: Pallatine sings.

Eld. Pal. Then Troyains wail with great remorse,
The Greeks are locked in the wooden horse! Enter Yo: Pallatine.

Luce. Pall, come in Pall! it is done! the spacious Man
Of Land, is now contented with his own length.

Ample. Your Brother's come to see you Sir!


Eld. Pa. Brother! Mad Girls these I could thou believed sirrah!
I am Coffined up like a Salmon Pie,
New sent from Den'shire for a token! Come,
Break up the Chest!

Yo. Pall. Stay Brother! whose Chest is it?


El. Pall. Thou Wilt ask more questions then a Constable
In's sleep! prithee dispatch!

Yo. Pall. Brother, I can,
But mark the Malice and the envy of
(...) Nature: I am no sooner exalted
To rich Possessions, and a glorious mien;
But straight you tempt me to a forfeiture
Of all; to commit Felony; break open Chests!

Eld Pall. O for Dame Patience! the Fools Mistress!


Yo. Pall. Brother, you have prayed well, heaven send her you!
You must forsake your own fair fertile soil,
To live here by your Wits!

Luce. And dream Sir of
Enjoying goodly Ladies six yards high!
With Satin Trains behind them ten yards long!

Amp. Clothed all in Purple, and imbroadred with
Embossements wrought in Imag'ry, the works
O'th ancient Poets drawn into similitude,
And cunning shape!

Gin. And this attained Sir by your Wits!


Yo: Pall. Nothing could please your haughty Pallat but
The Muskatelli, and Frantiniak Grape!
Your Turin and your Tuscan Veale, with Red
Legged Partridge of the Genoa hills!

Engine. With your broad Liver o'th Venecian Goose;
Fatned by a Jew; and your aged Carpe,
Bred in the Geneva Lake!

Ampl. Luce. Ginet. All this maintained Sir by your Wits!


Engine. And then you talked Sir of your Snailes t'ane from
The dewy Marble Quarries of Carrara,
And sows'd in Luca Oil; with Cream of Zwitzerland,
And Genoa pas^^.

Yo: Pall. Your Angelots of Brie!
Your M^rsolini, and Parmasan of Lodi!
Your Malamucka Mellons, and Cicilian Dates!
And then to close your proud voluptuous Maw,
Marmalad made, by the cleanely Nuns of Lisbone!

Ample. Luce. Ginet. And still thus feasted by your wits!


Eld. Pall. Deafned with tyranny! is there no end!


Ample. Yes Sir, an end of you; you shall be now
Convay'd into a closse dark Vault; there keep
My silent Grandsire company; and all
The Music of your groans, engrosse to your own ears!

Eld: Pall. How! buried, and alive?


Yo. Pall. Brother! your hand! --
Farewell! I Am for the North! the fame of this
Your voluntary death, will there be thought
Pure courtesy to me; I mean to take
Possession sir, and patiently converse
With all those Hindes, those Herds, and Flocks,
That you disdained in fullness of your Wit!

Luce. Help Pall to carry him! he takes it heavily! --


Eld. Pall. I Will not endur't! fire! murder! fire! treason!
Murder! treason! fire! --

Amp. Alas you are not heard!
The house contains none but our selves! Ex. carrying out the Chest.

Enter Thwack, Pert, Meager. Pert. We bring you sir, commends from Pallatine!


Thwack. I had as'live, y' had brought it from the Devil!
Together with his horns boyld to a Ielly,
For a Cordial against lust!

Meag. We mean the younger Pallatine; one Sir,
That loves your person, and laments this chance,
Which his false brother has exposde you to!

Pert. And as we told you sir, by his command,
We have compounded with the Constable;
In whose dark house, you are now a Prisoner!
But sir, take it on my Faith; you must disburse!
For Gold is a restorative, as well
To liberty as health!

Thwack. And you believe
(It seems) that your small-tinie Officer
Will take his Unction in the Palm as lovingly,
As your exalted Grandee, that awes all
With hideous voice, and face!

Pert. Even so the Moderns render it!


Thwack. But Gentlemen, you ask a hundred pounds;
It Is all I Have left!

Pert. Sir do but think what a
Prodigious blemish it will be, both to
Your ingenuitie, and fame, to be
Betrayed by one, that is believed, no wittier than
Your self, and lie imprisoned for a Bawd!

Thwack. Sir name it not! You kill me through the ear!
I Would rather Sir, y'ould take my Mother from
Her grave, and put her to do Penance in*
Her winding sheet: there is the Sum! --

Meag. I Will in Sir, and discharge you! Exit Meager.


Thw. These carnal Mulcts and Tributes are designed
Only to such vain people as have Land;
Are you, and your friend Landed Sir?

Pert. Such land as we can share Sir in the Map!


Thw. Lo'you there now! These live by their Wits!
Why should not I take the next Key I meet,
And open this great head; to try, if there
Be any brains left, but sour Curds, and Plum-broth!
Cozened in my Youth! cozened in my Age!
Sir, do you judge, if I have cause to curse
This false, inhumane Town! when I was young,
I was arrested for a stale commodity
Of Nut-crackers, long Gigs, and Casting Tops:
Now I am old, imprisoned for a Bawd!

Pert. These are sad Tales!


Thw. I will write down to the Country, to dehort
The Gentry from coming hither, Letters
Of strange dire News; You shall disperse them Sir!

Pert. Most faithfully!


Thw. That there are Lents, six years long proclaimed by th'State!
That our French and Deal Wines are poisoned so
With Brimstone by the Hollander, that they
Will only serve for Medicine to recover
Children of the Itch; and there is not left
Sack enough, to mull for a Parsons cold!

Pert. This needs must terrify!


Thw. That our Theaters are razed down; and where
They stood, hoarse Midnight Lectures preached by Wives
Of Comb-makers, and Mid-wives of Tower-Wharfe!

Pert. 'Twill take impregnablie!


Thw. And that a new Plantation Sir (mark me)
Is made in the Coven Garden, from the Sutlerie
O'th German Camps, and the Suburbs of Paris,
Where such a salt disease regnes as will make
Sassafras dearer than Unicorns Horn!

Pert. This cannot choose but fright the Gentry hence;
And more impoverish the Town, than a
Subversion of their Fair of Bartholmew,
The absence of the Terms, and Court!

Thw. You shall (if my projections thrive) in less
(Sir) than a year; stable your horses in
The New Exchange, and graze them in the Old! --

Enter Yo: Pallatine, Meager, Queasie, Snore, Mist: Snore. Pert. Iog off!
there is Pall, treating for your liberty!


Yo: Pall. The Canopy, the Hangings, and the Bed,
Are worth more than your Rent! come, you are overpaid!
Besides, the Gentleman's betrayed! he is no Bawd!

Snor. Truly, a very civil Gentleman!
Alas, he has only roared, and sworn, and cursed
Since he was t'ane: no bawdry I Will assure ye!

Mist: Snor. Gossip Queasie! what a good'yer would ye have?


Quea. I am content, if you and I were friends!


Yo: Pall. Come, come agree! it is I that ever bleed,
And suffer in your wars!

Mist. Snor. Sweet Master Pallatine, here me but speak!
Have I not often said, Why neighbor Queasie,
Come to my house; besides, your Daughter Mall,
You know, last Pompeon time, dined with me thrice!
When my child's best yellow stockings were missing;
And a new Pewter Porenger marked with P. L.

Snor. I for Elizabeth Snore!


Mist: Snor. The Pewterer that marked it was my Uncle!


Quea. Why, did my Daughter steal your goods?


Mist. Snor. You hear me say nothing! but there is
As bad as this (I warrant ye) learned at
The Back-house! I Will have an Oven o'mine own shortly!

Yo: Pall. Come, no more words! there is to reconcile you
In Burnt wine, and Cake! Go, get you all in!
I Am full of business, and strange Mystery!

Exeunt Snore, Mist: Snore, Queasie. Meag. A hundred Pall! 'twas all his store;
it lies
Here my brave Boy, warm, and secure in Pouch!

Pert. We Will share't anon. -- What need your blush Sir Morglay,
Like a Maid newly undone in a dark
Entry? There are disasters sure, as bad
As yours Recorded in the City Annals!

Thw. Your Brother is a Gentleman of a
Most even, and blessed composition, Sir;
His very blood is made of Holy Water,
Less salt, than Almond-milke!

Yo: Pall. My silly reprehension's were dispis'd;
Y'would be his Disciple, and follow him,
In a new Path, unknown to his own feet.
Yet I Have walked in it since; and prosper'd as
You see, without or Land, or Tenement.

Thw. It Is possible to live b'our Wits! that is
As evident as light, no humane learning
Shall advise me from that Faith!

Yo: Pall. Sir Knight, what will you give worthy my brain,
And me; if after a concealment of
Your present shame, I can advise you, how,
T'achieve such store of wealth, and treasure, as
Shall keep you here, th'exemplar glory of
The Town, a long whole year, without relief
Or charge, from your own Rents. This (I take it)
Was the whole Pride, at which, some few days since,
Your fancy aimed!

Thw. This was Sir in the hours
Of haughtiness and hope! but now --

Yo: Pal. I Will do it: whilst my poor Brother too; low, and
Declined, shall see, and envy it.

Thwack. Live in full port; observed, and wondered at?
Wine, ever flowing in large Saxon Romekins
About my board; with your soft sarsnet smock
At night; and foreign Music to entranse?

Yo: Pall. All this, and more than thy invention can
Invite thee too.

Thw. I Will make thee heir of my
Estate! take my right hand, and your two friends
For witnesses!

Yo: Pall. Enough! hear me with haste!
The Lady Ample's dead! -- Nay there are things
Have chanced since your concealment far more fit
For wonder Sir, than this: Out of a silly piety,
T'avoyd a thirst of Gold, and gaudy Pride
In The world; sh'ath buried with her in a Chest,
Her Jewels, and her Clothes; besides, as I Am
Enform'd by Luce (my wise Intelligence)
Five thousand pounds in Gold; a Legacy,
Left by her Aunt more than her Guardian knew!

Thwac. Well, what of this?


Yo: Pall. Your self, and I, joined Sir in a most firm
And loyal League, may rob this Chest!

Thwack. Marry, and will!


Yo: Pall. Then when your promise is but ratified,
Take all the treasure for your own expense!

Thw. Come let us go; My fingers burn till they
Are telling it! The night will grow upon's!
Only you and I, I Will not trust new Faces:
Dismiss these Gentlemen!

Yo: Pall. At the next street Sir!


Thw. This is at least a girne of Fortune, if
Not a fair smile. I Am still for my old Problem;
Since the living rob me, I Will rob the dead!

Yo: Pall. On my delicious Pert! Now is the time
To make our Purses swell, and Spirits climb! Exeunt omnes.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 1.
Enter Yo: Pallatine, Ample, Luce, Engine, with a Torch. Yo. Pall. Engine, draw
out the Chest, and open the Wicket!
Let us not hinder him the air, since it is
Become his food!

Eld, Pall. Who Is there? what are you? speak!


Amp. A brace of mourning Virgins Sir; that had
You died in Love, and in your Wits, would now
Have brought Roses, and Lillies, Buds of the Brier,
And Summer Pinks to strew upon your Hearse!

Eld. Pall. Then you resolve me dead!


Luce. 'Twere good that you would so resolve your self!


Yo: Pall. She counsels you to wise and severe thoughts;
Why, you are no more mortified, then Men
That are about to dance the Morris!

Eld. Pall. Ladies, and Brother too (whom I begin
To worship now, for tenderness of heart)
Can you believe, I am so leaden, stupid,
And so very a Fish, to think you dare
Thus murder me in bravery of Mirth,
You have gone far: part of my suff'rance I
Confess a justice to me!

Amp. O, do you so!
Has your heart, and brain met upon that point;
And rendered you silly to your own thoughts!

Eld. Pall. Somewhat mistaken in the projection of
My journey hither! Three hours in a Chest
Among the dead; will profit more than three
Years in a Study; Amongst Fathers, Schoolmen,
And Philosophers!

Yo. Pal. And you are persuaded now, that there is relative
To The maintaining of a poor younger Brother,
Something beside his Wits?

Eld: Pall. It Is so conceived!


Ample. And that we Ladies of the Town, or Court,
Have not such waxen hearts, that every beam
From a hott Lovers Eye, can melt them through
Our Breasts?

Eld. Pall. Faith, it is imagined too!


Luce. That though the unruly Apetites of some
Perverted few, of our frail Sex, have made
Them yield their honors to unlawful love;
Yet there is no such want of you Male-sinners
As should constrain them hyre you to it with Gold?

Eld. Pall. You Have taught me a new Music, I am all
Consent, and concordance!

Engine. And that, the nimble packing hand, the swift
Disordred shuf^lle, or the slurr; or his
More base employment, that with youth, and an
Eternal back, engenders for his bread;
Do all belong to Men, that may be said
To live sir, by their Sins, not by their Wits!

Eld. Pall. Sir, whom I love not, nor desire to love,
I am of your mind too!

Yo, Pall. Madame, a fair conversion, it is now fit
I sue unto you, for his liberty!

Ample. Alas he has so profited in this
Retirement, that I fear he will not willingly
Come out!

Eld. Pall. O Lady, doubt it not! Open the Chest!


Amp. A little patience Sir! Enter Ginet.


Ginet. Madam, we are undone, your Guardian is
At door, knocking as if he meant to wake
All his dead Neighbors in the Church!

Ample. So soon returned! it is not midnight yet!


Engine. I know the bayt that tempts him back with such
Strange have; and have according to your will
Provided (Madam) to betray his hopes!

Ample. Excellent Engine!


Engine. This Key convayes you through the Chancell to
The house Gall'ry! My way lies here; I Will let
Him in, and try how our design will relish! -- Exit Engine.

Ample. Come sir, it is decreed in our wise Counsel,
You must be laid some distance from this place!

Eld. Pall. Pray save your labor (Madam) I Will come forth!


Amp. No sir, not yet!


Eld. Pal. Brother, a cast of your voice!


Yo. Pall. She has the Key Brother! it is but an hours
Dark contemplation more!

Eld. Pall. Madam, here me speak.


Ampl. Nay, no beginning of orations now;
This is a time of great dispatch, and have;
We have more plots then a General in a siedge! -- Ex. carrying out the Chest.

Enter Thrift, Engine. Engine. None of the Writings Sir, and yet perplex
Your self, with so much speed in a return!

Thrift. The Lawyer was from home, but Engine, I
Had hope to have prevented by my have,
Though not her Fun'rall, yet the Fun'rall of
The Chest; Ah dear Engine, tell me but why
So much pure innocent Treasure, should be
Thus thrown into a dark forgetfulness!

Engine. I thought, I had encountered his intents!
All Sir, that Law, allowed her bounty to
Bestow, is yours; but for the Chest; trust me,
It Is buried sir; the Key is here sir, of no use!

Thrift. Hah, Engine! Give it me! --


Engine. And Sir, to vex your meditation more,
Though not with Manners, yet with truth; know there
Is hidden in that Chest, a plenteous heap
Of Gold; together with a Rope of most
Inestimable Pearl, left by her late
Dead Aunt by will, and kept from your discovery!

Thrift. Is this true, Engine?


Engine. That precise Chit Luce, her cousen Puritan
Was at th'interring often; concealed it till
The Fun'rall forms were past; and then forsooth,
She boasted that it was a pious Means,
To avoid covetous desires in the world*

Thrift. These Fun'rall tales ( Engine) are sad indeed;
Able to melt an Eye, though harder than
That heart, which did consent to so much cruelty
Upon the harmless Treasure!

Eng. I mourn within Sir too!


Thrift. Give me the Key, that leads me from my house,
Unto the Chauncell door!

Engine. It Is very late Sir, whither will you go?


Thrift. Never too late too pray; My heart is heavy!


Engine. Where shall I wait you Sir?


Thrift. At my low Gall'ry door, I may chance stay long.


Engine. This takes me more than all the kindness Fortune
Ever showed me: a desent transmutation.
I am no more your Steward, but your Spy! Exeunt.

Enter Yo: Pallatine, Pert, Meager, Snore, and Watchmen. Yo: Pall. There,
there is more Money for your Watch; me thinks
They Have not drunk Wine enough; they do not chirpe!

Snor. Your Wine mates them, they understand it not.
But they have very good capacity in Ale;
Ale Sir, will heat 'um more than your Biefe Brewis!

Yo: Pall. Well, let them have Ale then.


Snor. O Sir, 'twill make 'um sing like the Silk-knitters
Of Cock-lane!

Yo: Pall. Meager, go you to Sir Tirant Thrifts house,
Luce, and the Lady are alone, they will
Have cause to use your diligence, make haste!

Meag. Your dog, tied to a Bottle, shall not outrun me! Exit.


Yo: Pall. Pert, stay you here with Master Constable;
And when occasion calls, see that you draw
Your lusty Bill-men forth; bravley advanced
Under the Colors of Queen Ample, and
My self, her General!

Pert. If Ale can fortify, fear not! where is Sir Morglay?


Yo: Pall. I Am now, to meet him in the Churchyard; the old Blade
Sculks there like a tame filcher, as he had
Nere stolen 'bove Eggs from Market women;
Robbed an Orchard, or a Cheese loft!

Snor. We Will wait your worship in this corner.


Yo: Pall. No stirring, till I either come, or send.


Snor. Pray Sir let us not stay long, it is a cold night;
And I have nothing on my Bed at home,
But a thin Coverlet, and my wives Sey Petti-coat:
She Will nere sleep (poor soul) till I come home
To keep here warm!

Yo: Pall. You shall be sent for strait!
Be merry my dull Sons o'th Night, and Chirpe! Exit.

Snor. Come, neighbor Runlet! sighing pays no Rent,
Though the Land-Lady be in love! Sing out --
They sing a Catch in four Parts. With Lantern on Stall; at Trea Trip we
play,
For Ale, Cheese, and Pudding, till it be day:
And for our Breakfast (after long sitting)
We steal a Street Pig, o'th Constables gitting.

Enter Engine. Engine. Sir, draw down your Watch into the Church,
And let 'um lie hid close by the Vestrie door!

Pert. Is he there already?


Engine. Fat Carriers Sir, make not more haste to bed,
Nor lean Philosophers to rise; I Have so
Prepared things, that he will find himself mistaken!

Pert. Close by the Vestry door!


Eng. Right sir,
I Will to my Lady, and expect the event of your surprise!

Pert. Follow Master Constable, one, and one:
All in a File! -- Exeunt.

Enter Thrift, with a Candle. Thrift. I cannot find where they have laid her
Coffin!
But there is the Chest; I Will draw it out, that I
May have more room, to search, and rifle it! --
The weight seems easy to me, though my strength
Be old; how long, thou bright all powerful mineral,
Might thou lie hid, ere the dull dead, that are
Entombed about thee here, could reach the Sense,
To turn wise Thieves, and steal thee from oblivion! -- opens it, and finds a
Halter.
How! a Halter! what Fiend affronts me with
This Emblem! Is this the Rope of Orient Pearl? --

Enter Pert, Snore, Watchmen. Pert. Now I have told you Master Constable,
The entire plot; mark but, how like that Chest,
Is to the other, where the Elder Pallatine
Lies a Perdu; Engine contrived them both!

Thrift. Hah! what are these, the Constable and Watch?


Pert. Ceaze on him for no less than sacrilege!


Thrift. Why neighbors, Gentlemen!


Pert. Away with him.


Snor. We shall know now, who stole the Wanscot Cover
From the Font, and the Vicar's Surplisse!

Pert. Alas grave Sir, become a forfeiture
To The King, for Sacrilege!

Thrif. Hear me but speak!


Snor. No, not in a cause against the King!


Pert. Lead to's own house! he shall be Prisoner there,
And locked up safe enough.

Thrift. Undone for ever! -- Exeunt.


Enter Yo: Pallat: Thwack, with an Iron Crow, and dark Lanthorn. Thw. Why this
was such a firke of Piety,
I nere heard of: Bury her Gold with her?
It Is strange her old shoes were not interred too;
For fear the days of Edgar should return,
When they coined Leather.

Yo. Pal. Come Sir, lay down your Instrument!


Thw. Why so?


Yo: Pal. I Am so taken with thy free jolly Nature,
I cannot for my heart proceed to more
Defeat upon thy liberty: all that
I told thee were rank lies!

Thw. How! no treasure trovar!


Yo: Pal. Not so much as will pay for that small Candle light
We waste to find it out!

Thwack. I thank you Sir! -- Flings down the Crow of Iron.


Yo. Pal. You shall have cause, when you hear more; to this
Dark region Sir, solemn, and silent, as
Your thoughts must be, ere they are mortified.
Have I now brought you, to perceive what an
Immense large Ass (under your favor Knight)
You are to be seduced, to such vain stratagems
By that more profound Foppe, your friend, my Brother!

Thw. How had I been served, if I'ad brought my scales
Hither, to weigh this Gold? but on! your brother!
Whose name (let me tell you first) sounds far worse
To me then does a Sergeant to a young
Indebted Lover, that is arrested in his Coach,
And with his Mistress by him!

Yo: Pall. You are believed: but will you now confirm
Me to your grace and love, if I shall make it
Appear, that in a kind revenge of what
You suffered Sir, I Have made this false, and great
Seducer of Mankind, to suffer more.

Thw. The Legend, Talmud, nor the Alcharon,
Have not such doubtful tales as these; but make it
Appear, I would have evidence!

Yo: Pal. Then take it on my Religion Sir, he was
Laid up in durance for a Bawd before
He betrayed you to the same preferment!

Thw. Shall this be justified, when my disgrace
Comes to be known; will thou then witness it?

Yo: Pal. With a deep oath! And Sir, to tempt more of
Your favors on poor me, that ever mourned
For all your sufferings; know you shall now
See him enclosed in a blind Chest; where he
Lies bathed Sir, in a greater swet than ere
Cornelius took in his own Tub!

Thw. Here amongst Sepulchers, and mallencholy bones:
Let me but see it; and I will dye for joy,
To make thee instantly my heir!

Yo. Pal. You shall; and yet ere the Sun rise, find him
Enthralled too in a new distress!

Thw. Do want money? bring me to Parchment and
A Scriv'ner, I Will seal out two pound of Wax. -- Yo. Pall: knocks at the Chest.

Yo: Pal. You Sir, my neer'st Ally, are you asleep?


Eld: Pal. O Brother, art thou come! quick, let me forth.


Yo: Pal. Here is a certain friend of yours presents
His loving visit Sir! -- Opens the Wicket.

Eld. Pall. Sir Morglay Thwack?
I had rather have seen my sister naked!

Thwack. What, like a bashful Badger do you draw
Your head into your hole again? Come sir,
Out with that sage Noddle, that has contrived
So cunningly for me, and your dear self!

Eld. Pall. Here, take my Eielids Knight, and sow'em up,
I dare not see thy face!

Thwack. But what think you
Of a new Journey from the North, to live
Here by your Wits; or midnight visits sir,
To the Mogols Niece!

Eld. Pall. I have offended Knight!
Whip me with wire, headed with Rowels of
Sharp Ripon Spurs! I Will endure any thing
Rather than thee!

Thwack. We have (I thank your bounteous brain)
Been entertained with various consorts sir,
Of whispring Lutes, to sooth us into slumbers,
Spirits of Clare to bathe our Temples in,
And then the wholesome womb of woman too,
That never teemed, all this for nothing sir!

Yo: Pall. Come, I Will let him forth!


Thwack. Rogue! if thou love me!
Nay, let him be confined thus, one short month!
I Will send him down to Country Faires for a
New motion made, b'a Germane Ingener!

Yo: Pall. Alas, he is my Brother.


Thwack. Or for a solitary Ape,
Lead captive thus by the Hollander, because
He came aloft for Spain, and would not for the States!

Yo: Pall. Sir Morglay leave your Lantern here, and stay
My coming at yon door; I Will let him out!
But for the new distress, I promised on
His person, take it on my manhood sir,
He feels it strait!

Thwack. Finely ensnared again, and instantly!


Yo: Pall. Have a good faith, and go! Exit Thwack.


Eld. Pall. Dear Brother, will thou give me liberty!


Yo: Pall. Upon condition sir, you kiss these Hilts,
Swear not to follow me, but here remain
Until the Lady Ample shall consent,
To The freedom I bestow! -- He kisses the Hilts.

Eld. Pall. It Is done! a vow inviolate! He opens the Chest and lets him out.


Yo. Pall. Now silence Brother! not one curse, nor thanks --

Exit Yo* Pall. Eld. Pall. Fate, and a good Starr speed me! though I have
Long since amazed my self e'ne to a Marble,
Yet I have courage left, to ask, what this
Might mean? Was ever Two legged Man thus used! --

Enter Pert, Snore, and Watchmen. Pert. Pall, and his friend are gone, I must
not stay
His sight; but after you have ceaz'd upon him
Lead him a Prisoner to the Lady too. -- Exit Pert.

Sno. Warrant ye, though he were Gog, or Heldebrand! -- they lay hold on him.


Eld. Pal: How now? What mean you Sirs?


Snore. Yield to the Constable.


Eld. Pal. It Is yielded sir, that you are Constable!
But where have I offended!

Snore. Here Sir, you have committed Sacrilege,
And robbed an Aldermans Tomb, of himself,
And his Two Sons kneeling in Brass!

Eld. Pal. How, Flea Monuments of their Brazen skins?


Snore. Look, a Dark Lantern, and an Iron Crow!
Fine evidence for a Jury! --

Eld. Pall. I like this plott! The Lady Ample and
My Brother, have most rare, triumphant Wits;
Now by this hand, I am most eagerly
In love with both; I find I have deserved all;
And am resolved t'hugge them, and their designs;
Though they afflict me more, and more! Whither must I go?

Snore. Away with him! Saucie fellow! examine
The Kings Constable* -- Exeunt.

Enter Young Pallatine, Thwack, Ample, Luce, Meager. Meager. I am become your
Guardians Iaylor, Lady;
He Is safe locked in the Parlor, and there howles
Like a Dog that sees a Witch flying!

Thwack. I long to hear how my wise Tutor thrives
In The new defeat!

Amp. It Is well you are converted!
Beleev't that Gentleman deserves your thanks.

Thwack. Lady seal my conversion on you Lipp;
It Is the first leading Kiss, that I intend
For after chastetie! -- kisses her.

Yo. Pal. Luce, see you make the proposition good
Which I shall give my Brother from this Lady,
Or I Will so swaddle your small Bones.

Luce. Sweet Pall, thou shall. Madam, you will please to stand
To what I lately mentioned to your own desire?

Amp. To every particle, and more. -- Enter Pert.


Pert. Your Brother's come; this room must be his prison.


Yo: Pall. 'Way Luce, away: stand in the Closet Madam,
That you may hear us both, and reach my call.

Thw. I Will stay, and see him.


Yo: Pall. No Knight; you are decreed Sir Tirants Judge:
Go that way Sir, and force him to compound.

Thwack. I Will fine him soundly,
Till's Purse shrink like a Bladder in the fire* -- Ex. Amp. Luc. Thw. Meag.
Pert.

Enter Snore, Elder Pallatine. Snor. Here Sir, this is your Iayle, too good for
such
A great Offender.

Eld: Pall. Sacrilege! very well.
Now all the Pulpit Cushions, all the Hearse Clothes,
And winding sheets, that have been stolen about
The Town this year, will be laid to my charge!

Yo: Pall. Pray leave us Master Constable, and look
Unto your other Bondsman in the Parler. -- Exit Snore.

Eld: Pal. This is the wittiest offspring that our name
Ere had: I love him beyond hope, or lust,
My Father was no Poet sure, I wonder
How he got him?

Yo. Pal. I know you curse me now.


Eld. Pal. Brother, in troth you lie, and who ere believes it.


Yo: Pal. Indeed you do: Conjurers in a Circle,
That have raised up a wrong spirit, curse not
So much, nor yet so inwardly.

Eld: Pal. I Have a great mind to kiss thee.


Yo: Pal. You have not sure?


Eld: Pal. I shall do it, and eat up thy lips so far,
Till thou have nothing left to cover thy teeth.

Yo: Pal. And can you think all the afflictions you
Endured, were merited; first, for misleading
Morglay, your old friend; then, neglect of me,
And haughty over-vallewing your self?

Eld: Pal. Brother, I murmur not; the Traps that you
Have laid, were so ingenious, I could wish
To fall in them again.

Yo: Pal. The Lady Ample Sir,
There is the great contriver that has weaved
These knots so intricate and safe: Alas, I
Was but her lowly Instrument.

Eld: Pall. Ah that Lady! were I a King, she should
Sit with me under my best Canopie,
A silver Scepter in her hand; with which,
I Would give her leave to break my head for every fault
I did commit.

Yo: Pall. But say, I bring this Lady Sir, unto
Your lawful sheets; make her your bosom wife:
Besides, the plenty of her heritage,
How would it sound, that you had conquered her
Who has so often conquered you?

Eld. Pall. Dear Brother, no new plots.


Yo. Pall. Six thousand pounds Sir is your yearly Rent;
A fair temptation to a discreet Lady:
Luce, has filled both mine Ears with hope; besides,
I heard her say, she nere should meet a man,
That she could more subdue with Wit, and Government.

Eld: Pall. That I Will venture.


Yo: Pal. Well, my first bounty is your freedom Sir;
For'th Constable obayes no Law, but mine.
And now, Madam! Appear! -- Enter Ample, Luce.

Amp. You Are welcome amongst the living Sir?


Eld, Pal. Lady, no words; if you have but so much Mercy
As could secure one that your Eyes affect.

Amp. Why, you are grown arrogant again: do you think
They are so weak, to affect you?

Eld. Pal. I have a heart so kind unto my self,
To wish they could; O we should live.

Amp. Not by our Wits.


Eld: Pal. No, no! but with such soft content; still in
Conspiracy, how to betray our selves
To new delights, keep harmony, with no
More noise, than what the upper motions make;
And this so constant too, Turtles themselves,
Seeing our faith, shall slight their own, and pine
With jealousy.

Amp. Luce, the youth talks sense now, no Medicine for
The brain, like to captivity in a dark Chest.

Yo: Pall. O Madam, you are cruel!


Amp. Well my sad Convertite: joy yet at this:
I Have often made a vow, to marry on
That very day my Wardship is expired:
And two hours since, that liberty begun.

Luce. Nay, hear her out! your wishes are so saucy Sir.


Amp. And know, my glory is dispatch. My Ancestors
Were of the fiery French, and taught me love,
Hot eagerness, and haste!

Eld: Pall. Let me be rude
A while; lie with your judgment, and beget
Sages on that! My dearest, chiefest Lady! --

Amp. Your braine's yet foul, and will recoyle again.


Eld* Pall. No more: I Will swallow down my Tongue!


Amp. If Sir, your nature be so excellent,
As your kind Brother has confirmed to Luce.
And me; follow, and I Will present you straight
With certain writings you shall seal to, hood-winck'd,
And purely ignorant of what they are?
This is the swiftest, and the easiest test,
That I can make of your bold love; do this,
Perhaps, I may vouchsafe to marry you*
The writings are within.

Eld: Pall. Lead me to trial, come!


Amp. But Sir, if I should marry you; it is
In confidence, I have the better Wit;
And can subdue you still to quietness,
Meek sufferings, and patient awe.

Eld: Pall. You rap me still anew.


Yo: Pall. In Luce, our hopes grow strong, and Giantly! Exeunt.


Enter Thrift, Snore, Mist: Snore, Queasie, Ginet. Ginet. To him Mistrisse
Snore; it is he has kept
Your Husband from his Bed so long, to watch
Him for a Church Robbery!

Mist: Snor. Ah, thou Judas! I thought what thou'ldst come to!
Remember the Warrant thou sent'st for me
Into Duck-lane, 'cause I called thy Maid Trot!
When I was feign t'invite thy Clerk to a
Fee Pie, sent me b'a Temple Cook, my Sisters Sweetheart!

Quea. Nay, and remember who was brought to bed
Under thy Coach house wall; when thou deuid'st
A wad of straw, and would not join thy halfe-penny
To send for Milk, for the poor Chrisome!

Snor. Now you may sweeten me with Sugar-loaves
At New-yeares-tide, as I have you Sir. --

Enter Thwack, Pert, Meager, Engine. Thw. We Will teach you to rob Churches!
S'light, hereafter
We of the Pious shall be afraid to go
To a long Exercise, for fear our Pockets should
Be picked! Come Sir, you see already how
The neighbors throng to find you; will you consent?
It Is but a thousand pounds a piece to these
Two Gentlemen; and five hundred more to Engine.
Your crime is then concealed, and your self free.

Meag. No, he may choose, he will trust to the kind hearted Law.


Pert. Let him, and to Dame Justice too, who though
Her Ladyship be blind, will grope hard Sir,
To find your Money Bags.

Engine. Sir you are rich* besides, you know what you
Have got by your Wards death; I fear you will
Be begged at Court, unless you come off thus.

Thrift. There is my Closet Key, do what you please.


Engine. Gentlemen, I Will lead you to it, follow me.


Thw. Do You use to find such sums as these beneath
An Oak, after a long March; I think sure,
The wars are not so plentiful.

Pert. We think so too.


Thw. You Had better traile a Bodkin, Gentlemen,
Under the Lady Ample, than a Pike
Under a German General.

Per. We Will in for th'Mony Sir, and talk anon. Ex. Eng. Per. Meag.


Enter Eld: Pallatine, Yo: Pallatine, Ample, Luce. Yo: Pall. Sir Tirant Thrift,
here is your Ward come from
The dead, t'indite you for a Robbery
Upon her Ghost.

Thrift. Hah! Is she alive too?


Luce. Yes, and her Wardship out, before you have profer'd her
A Husband Sir; so the best benefit
Of all your Guardianship is lost.

Ampl. In seven long years you could not Sir provide
A man deformed enough, to offer me
For your own ends.

Thrift. Cozened of wealth, of fame! Dog Engine! Ex. Thrift.


Thw. We must have you enclosed again: you are very
Forward with the Lady.

Eld: Pall. I will be Sir,
Until she groan! this Priest stays some what long.

Thw. How Is this? troth I shall forgive thee then heartily.

Amp. I Have t'ane him in the behalf of health; to chide
And jeere, for recreation sake, 'twill keep
Me Sir, in breath, now I am past growing.

Eld: Pall. Hark Knight! here is relish for your ears. I chose
None of your dull Country Madams, that spend
Their time in studying Receipts, to make
March-Pane, and preserve Plums; that talk
Of painful Child-births, Servants wages, and
Their husbands good Complexion, and his Leg!

Thw. New wonders yet!


El: Pall. What was that (Mistress) which I sealed to, hood-winked?
A simple trial of my confidence and love.

Amp. Your Brother has it, it is a gift to him
Of one fair Manor, amongst those many that you
Have in Possession Sir; and in this Bond,
You Are witness to three thousand pounds I give to Luce!

Luce. Yes Sir, for Pall and I must marry too.


Yo: Pall. I were an Ev'nuch else, and the world should know it.


Eld: Pall. Thou could not have betrayed me to a bounty
I more love. Brother! Give thee joy! -- Thw. takes Yo: Pall. aside.

Thw. You are the cause of all these Miracles:
Therefore I desire you to be my heir;
By this good day you must: for I Have t'ane order,
Though I love your Wit, you shall not live by it.

Yo: Pall. My kind thanks Sir, the poor Man's gratitude.


Mist: Snor. 'Give you joy sweet Master Pallatine, and
Your Brother too.

Quea. And send you more such wives,
Every year as many as shall please heaven.

Snor. It Is day. I Will not to bed Sir now; my watch
Shall be drunk, at your worships wedding.

Yo: Pall. They shall, and there is Gold enough to keep
Them so, until thy reign be out. --

Enter Pert, Meager, Engine, with Money Bags. Pert. Laden with composition
Pall. --


Meag. It Is for your sake we groan under these burdens. --


Yo: Pall. The Offall of Sir Tirants Trunks! Brother,
Pray know these Gentlemen, they owe you more
Money than they mean to pay now.

Eld: Pal. I remember 'um: But no words my Cavalliers,
And you are safe. Where shall we dine to day?

Yo: Pal. At Lucy's Aunts; we will make her costive Beldamship
Come off; when she beholds a goodly jointure,
And our fair hopes.

Eld: Pall. First, to the Church. Lady,
I Will make your skittish person sure. Some of
Your pleasant Arts upon me, may become
A wise Example, and a Moral too;
Such as their haughty fancy well befits,
That undertake to live here by their Wits. Exeunt omnes.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
THe office of an Epilogue, is now
To smooth and* stroke the wrinckles from each brow;
To guide severer judgments (if we could
Be wise enough) until they thought all good,
Which they perhaps dislike; And sure, this were
An over-boldnesse, raised from too much Fear.
You have a Freedom, which we hope you will use,
TO advance our youthful Poet, and his Muse
With a kind Doom; And he will tread boldly then
In's best new Comic Socks, this Stage again.

