A PROTESTATION Made and Published by John Davenporte upon occasion of a
pamphlett Entitled A JUST COMPLAINT AGAINST AN VNIVST DOER published by a
nameles person.

Pro. 26.17. He that passes by, and medleth with Strife belonging not to him,
is like one that takes a dog by the ear.

Mat. 10.16.17. Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmles as Doves, but beware of
Men.

flying angel blowing a horn and carrying a quill pen

Pranted at ROTTERDAM, by Isaac from Waesbergbe, upon the Steygher, in the
Fame. MDCxxxv.

THe third day of this present month of Ian: 1635. New Style, at noone, the
fornamed book was delivered into my hands, by a Reverent Brother, which when I
had received, and read the title page, and considered the drift of the
Publisher, I was amassed to see my name prefixed and passages, which concerned
me, Published, without my knowledge, and usshered with such harsh and unsavory
language, and Scriptures so wrested and missapplyed: nor could I have rest in
my Spirit, till I had resolved upon this Protestation, which I now publish for
the declaration, both of mine innocence in this matter, and of my hearty
dislike of this course.

First, therefore, I do solemniley and sadly protest these three following
particulars.

1. That I know not, nor can yet learn, who is the Publisher thereof.

2 That he had not my approbation, or consent to this Publishing of it.

3. That I do account the injury done herein so great, that I know not how
the Publisher of it shall be able to make satisfaction, other wise, then by
revoking his books, burning the whole impression, or printing another, that may
pass as publicly, as this is like to do, in acknowledgement of his fault.

Secondly, what motive set this Publisher upon this work I know not nor, can I
magine, unles I knew the man. If the arrow against the Separation Stick still
in his side, A Book be made by Mr. Paget
and cause him thus to kick, and fling, let him know that recrimination is no
APOLOGY, A Book be made by Mr. Paget
and books are better answered by arguments, then reproaches, and it is more
wisdom to heal a man's self, then to wound another, to cleanse himself, then
to besmeare another. If some other, not engaged in that quarrail, be the doer
of it, I wish him to consider seriously, whether some byrespect, or secret
distemper have not biassed his spirit a wrong way, or imbittered it too much.

Thirdly: seeing the Publisher consealeth his name, saying, Published by one
that etc. I pray him to inform him self of three things.

Tim. 1.13.14.16.

As for my self; had I been Silent in this case; every man would have concluded
me guilty: yea, it is already reported that I am the author of it, and so,
besides the injury done to my self (being represented to the public view as a
co^tentious person, which I naturally abhor, and by Grace much more) the
injury also would have fallen upon so many persons, as, upon this occasion,
should have been scandalized by evil surmises unjustly received against me,
which is Slander in heart.

one be not, in this act, one, that sows discord among Brethren, which is
one of the six things the Lord hates and of the seven that are an
abomination to him. Pro. 6.16.17 18.19. For, if this was not the end, or
intent of the publisher (as I will hope, it was not) yet, if God do not,
beyond expectation, mercifully prevent it, it may be the end or event of the
work. But the Lord rebuke Satan! The beginning of Strife is as the opening of
Waters, says Solomon pro. 17.14. If any man should go about to open the
sluses, how soon might these NETHERLANDS be drowned, before they could be
stopped again? And, who knows not that a little Child may fire an house,
which a thousand men cannot quench?

one, be not this act, a Buisy body? 2. These. 3.11. one, that Busieth himself
in other men's matters. 1. pet. 4.15. For, if the publisher be not a member of
that Church; what calling has he to interpose himself thus publicly in
matters, which properly and only concern that Church? If he be a member of
that Church; what warrant has any particular member to publish those
greivances to the world, which are by them selves referred to their
Consistory, before matters have been there discussed, and determined, or, at
least, before the issue, and conclusion, which there shall be put to the
question, has been sufficiently demanded and expected? who ever he be; who
called him to intrude himself into matters that appertame to me, so far as to
publish a private wrighting, with my name to it, without my kno^wledg, and
against my mind?

I leave the publisher to satisfy him self in these particulers, which
whilst he endeavoreth to do, I will labor to satisfye all men concerning mine
innocence in the first part of the book, leaving the second part of the book
to the members of that Church, whom it concerns.

First, I confess, that, about six months since, having been often provoked
by injurious reports, about my letter to the Classis, and about my Tenet
against promiscuous Baptizing all that are brought (especially in such a place
as Amsterdam) and about my desisting, and about passages between Mr. Paget,
and me, and having been much solicited by particular friends, to give my
answers to such objectio^s, as were daily brought to me, and, being informed
that the Duch in that city, and some of the members of that Church, and many
of our nation, in other parts of these Contries, were by misreports prejudiced
against me, and, seeing that I purposed shortly to leave these Contries: upon
such necessity, and much importunity, I was constrained to set down those
particulars in wrighting, that some friend might be able to speak in the cause
of the dumb, and to clear the truth in my absence.

Secondly. I profess, that no man has the original Copy, but my self, and
that, for aught I know, I never gave it to more then two to peruse, and whether
they both transcribed Copies out of it, or no, I know not, but they both
returned mine to me again, which, I have in my keeping, at this instant, and
my intent, in communicating it to those two, was only to enable them to give
private satisfaction to those that should require it of them, and so to enable
those to satisfye others, in a private way, as may appear, in that I applied
my self, in that wrighting, only to such things as were then objected,
concealing other things which I might have added for my further clearing, unless
more public provocation should make it necessary to publish all together.
Which I have hither to forborne, expecting when God would sweetly order, and
dispose the spirits of pastor and people, in that Church, to unity and concord
between them selves, in some conclusions, and ways of advancing their
mutual good and comfort agreeable to the Gospel, and rule, which Christ has
left for his Churches to walk by, which I have hoped hither to that God would,
in time, effect, and do still hope and pray forit: The grant where of would be
to me, matter of unfeigned joy and thanksgiving (not with standing all the
Injuryes which I have Suffered in that place) whersoever it should please God
to pich my tent afterward.

Thirdly, From hence it will follow, that I am al to-gether innocent in this
Matter, which, as I knew not of it, till it was brought to me in print, so I
utterly dislike, both for the vnseasonablenes of the work, and for the
unreasonable, and uncharitable bitterness of the Publisher.

Lastly, my request therefore is,

1. to M. Paget that he will rest satisfied with my ingenuous profession, and
acquitt me (as he aught) of any suspicion of guilt, in this particular.

Secondly. To the publisher, that, seeing he omitted to clear my innocence in
his first publication of this Phamphlett, he will now do me so much right as to
affixe this sheet of paper, in stead of a postscript, to his book, or
disperse it among all persons, to whose hands his book shall come, or is come.
But he will most gratifieme, if he make one good fire of both together

Thirdly. To all men, to whose hands the other book shall come, that they will
spedily send this after it, or stiche this with it: assuring themselfes, that,
if I could have foreseen this injury, I would have prevented it. For, how
soever I have written nothing in that declaration, but the truth (which I am
also ready to confirm, as occasion shall require) yet, I affect not to make
that public which may be ended privaty, much less to be the first in a
contention, whether public or private.

Now the very God of peace, who also is Love, unite our hearts to himself, and
one to and other in that Love, which is out of a Pure heart, and a good
Conscience, and faith unfeigned: and in able us to keep the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of peace, even for his sake, who is the prince of peace,
and in whom We, who sometimes were afarr off, are made night by the blood of
Christ, who is our peace!

AMEN.

