DELIA and ROSAMOND augmented.

CLEOPATRA

By Samuel Daniel.

AEtas prima canat veneres postrema tumultus.

1594.

Printed at London for Simon Waterson; and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yarde at the sign of the Crown.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY MARY, Countess of Pembrooke.
WOnder of these, glory of other times,
O thou whom Envy even is forced t'admyre:
Great Patroness of these my humble Rymes,
Which thou from out thy greatness do inspire:
Since only thou have deigned to raise them higher,
Vouchsafe now to accept them as thine own,
Begotten by thy hand, and my desire,
Wherein my Zeal, and thy great might is shown.
And seeing this unto the world is known,
O leave not, still to grace thy work in me:
Let not the quickening seed be ouer-throwne,
Of that which may be borne to honor thee.
Whereof, the travail I may challenge mine,
But yet the glory, (Madam) must be thine.
Gentle Reader correct these faults escaped in the printing.
SOnnet 18. line 3. for error, read terror.
G. 1. page 2. for Condemning, read Conducting.
In L. page 16. Mark the Speaker, and read thus,
The justice of the heavens revenging thus,
Does only satisfy it self, not us.
In the last Chorus, for care, read cure.
TO DELIA.
SONNET. I.
Unto the boundles Ocean of thy beauty,
Runs this poor river, charged with streams of zeal,
Returning thee the trybute of my duty,
Which here my love, my youth, my plaints reveal.
Here I unclasp the book of my charged soul,
Where I have cast th'accounts of all my care:
Here have I summed my sighs; here I enrole
How they were spent for thee; look what they are.
Look on the dear expenses of my youth,
And see how just I reckon with thine eyes:
Examine well thy beauty with my truth,
And cross my cares ere greater sums arise.
Read it (sweet maid,) though it be done but slightly,
Who can show all his love, does love but lightly.
SONNET. II.
GO wayling verse, the Infants of my love,
Minerua-lyke, brought forth without a mother:
Present the Image of the cares I prove,
Witness your Fathers grief exceedes all other.
Sigh out a story of her cruel deeds,
With inter-rupted accents of despair:
A monument that whosoever reeds,
May justly praise, and blame my louelesse Fair.
Say her disdain has dried up my blood,
And starued you, in succors still denying:
Press to her eyes, importune me some good,
Waken her sleeping pity with your crying,
Knock at her hard heart, beg till you have moved her,
And tell th'vnkind, how decrely I have loved her.
SONNET. III.
IF so it hap, this offspring of my care,
These fatal Antheames, sad and mournful songs:
Come to their view, who like afflicted are;
Ah let them sigh their own, and moan my wrongs.
But untouched hatts, with unaffected eye,
Approach not to behold so great distress:
Cleer-sighted you, soon note what is awry,
Whilst blinded ones mine errors never guess.
You blinded souls whom youth and errors lead,
You outcast Eaglets, dazeled with your sun:
Ah you, and none but you my sorrows read,
You best can judge the wrongs that she has done.
That she has done, the motive of my pain,
Who whilst I loue^, does kill me with disdain.
SONNET. IIII.
THese plaintiue verse, the Posts of my desire,
Which haste for succor to her slow regard:
Bear not report of any slender fire,
Forging a grief to win a fames reward.
Nor are my passions lymnd for outward hew,
For that no colors can depaint my sorrows:
DELIA her self, and all the world may view
Best in my face, where cares has tilled deep furrows.
No Bays I seek to deck my mourning brow,
O cleer-eyde Rector of the holy Hill:
My humble accents bear the Olive bough,
Of intercession to a Tyrants will.
These lines I use, t'vnburthen mine own heart;
My love affects no fame, nor steemes of Art.
SONNET. V.
WHilst youth and error led my wandering mind,
And set my thoughts in heedles ways to range:
All unawares, a Goddess chaste I find,
(Diana-like) to work my sudden change.
For her no sooner had mine eye bewraid,
But with disdain to see me in that place:
With fairest hand, the sweet vnkindest maid,
Casts water-cold disdain upon my face.
Which turned my sport into a Hearts despair,
Which still is chased, while I have any breath,
By mine own thoughts; set on me by my fair:
My thoughts (like hounds) pursue me to my death.
Those that I fostred of mine own accord,
Are made by her to murder thus their Lord.
SONNET. VI.
Fair is my love, and cruel as sh'is fair;
Her brow shades frowns, although her eyes are sunny;
Her smyles are lightning, though her pride despair;
And her disdaines are gall, her favors hunny.
A modest maid, decked with a blush of honor,
Whose feet do tread green paths of youth and love,
The wonder of all eyes that look upon her:
Sacred on earth, designed a Saint above.
Chastity and Beauty, which were deadly foes,
Live reconciled friends within her brow:
And had she pity to conioyne with those,
Then who had heard the plaints I utter now.
O had she not been fair, and thus unkind,
My Muse had slept, and none had known my mind.
SONNET. UII.
O Had she not been fair and thus unkind,
Then had no finger pointed at my lightness:
The world had never known what I do find,
And clouds obscure had shaded still her brightness.
Then had no Censors eye these lines suruaide,
Nor grauer brows have judged my Muse so vain;
No sun my blush and error had bewraid,
Nor yet the world had heard of such disdain.
Then had I walked with bold erected face,
No downe-cast look had signified my miss:
But my degraded hopes, with such disgrace
Did force me groan out griefs, and utter this.
For being full, should I not then have spoken,
My sense oppressed, had faild, and heart had broken.
SONNET. VIII.
THou poor heart sacrifiz'd unto the fairest,
Have sent the incens of thy sighs to heaven:
And still against her frowns fresh vows repayrest,
And made thy passions with her beauty even.
And you mine eyes, the agents of my heart,
Told the dumb message of my hidden grief:
And often with careful turns, with silent Art,
Did treat the cruel Fair to yield relief.
And you my verse, the Advocates of love,
Have followed hard the process of my case:
And urged that title which does plainly prove,
My faith should win, if justice might have place.
Yet though I see, that naught we do can move her,
It Is not disdain must make me cease to love her.
SONNET. IX.
IF this be love, to draw a weary breath,
Paint on floods, till the shore cry to the air:
With downward looks, still reading on the earth;
The sad memorials of my loves despair.
If this be love, to war against my soul,
Lie down to wail, rise up to sigh and grieve,
The neuer-resting stone of care to roll,
Still to complain my griefs, whilst none relieve.
If this be love, to cloathe me with dark thoughts,
Haunting untrodden paths to wail apart;
My pleasures horror, Music tragic notes,
Tears in mine eyes, and sorrow at my heart.
If this be love, to live a living death,
O then love I, and draw this weary breath.
SONNET. X.
O Then love I, and draw this weary breath,
For her the cruel Fair, within whose brow,
I written find the sentence of my death,
In unkind letters; wrought she cares not how.
O thou that rul'st the confines of the night,
Laughter-louing goddess, worldly plesures Queen,
Intencrat that heart that sets so light,
The truest love that ever yet was seen.
And cause her leave to triumph in this wise,
Upon the prostrate spoil of that poor heart:
That serves a Trophey to her conquering eyes,
And must their glory to the world impart.
Once let her know, sh' has done enough to prove me,
And let her pity if she cannot love me.
SONNET. XI.
Tears, vows and prayers, win the hardest heart;
Tears, vows and prayers, have I spent in vain;
Tears cannot soften Flint, nor vows conuart,
Prayers prevail not with a quaint disdain.
I lose my tears, where I have lost my love,
I vow my faith, where faith is not regarded,
I pray in vain, a merciles to move:
So rare a faith ought better be rewarded;
Yet though I cannot win her will with tears,
Though my souls I doll scorneth all my vows;
Though all my prayers be to so deaf ears,
No savor though the cruel fair allows,
Yet will I weep, vow, pray to cruel she:
Flint, frost, disdain, wears, melts, and yields we see.
SONNET. XII.
MY spotless love hoouers with purest wings,
About the temple of the proudest frame:
Where blaze those lights fairest of earthly things, which clear our clowded
world with brightest flame.
M'ambitious thoughts confined in her face,
Affect no honor but what she can give,
My hopes do rest in limits of her grace,
I weigh no comfort unless she relieve.
For she that can my heart imparadize,
Holds in her fairest hand what dearest is,
My fortunes wheele's the circle of her eyes,
Whose rolling grace deigne once a turn of blis.
All my lives sweet consists in her alone,
So much I love the most unloving one.
SONNET. XIII.
BEhold what hap Pigmalion had to frame,
And carue his propper grief upon a stone,
My heavy fortune is much like the same,
I work on Flint, and that is the cause I moan.
For hapless lo even with mine own desires,
I figured on the Table of mine heart,
The fairest form, that all the world admires,
And so did perrish by my proper art.
And still I toil, to change the Marble breast
Of her, whose sweetest grace I do adore,
Yet cannot find her breathe unto my rest,
Hard is her heart, and woe is me therefore.
O happy he that joyed his stone and art,
Unhappy I to love a stony heart.
SONNET. XIIII.
THose snary locks, are those same nets (my Dear,)
Wherewith my liberty thou did surprise;
Love was the flame that fired me so near,
The Dart transpearsing, were those Crystal eyes.
Strong is the net, and fervent is the flame;
Deep is the wound my sighs do well report:
Yet do I love, adore, and praise the same,
That holds, that burns, that wounds me in this sort.
And list not seek to break, to quench, to heal,
The bond, the flame, the wound that festreth so,
By knife, by liquor, or by salve to deal:
So much I please to perrish in my woe.
Yet least long travails be above my strength,
Good DELIA lose, quench, heal me now at length.
SONNET. XV.
IF that a loyal heart and faith unfeigned,
If a sweet languish with a chaste desire,
If hunger-staruen thoughts so long retained,
Fed but with smoke, and cherisht but with fire.
And if a brow with cares characters painted,
Bewraies my love, with broken words half spoken,
To her that sits in my thoughts Temple sainted,
And lays to view my Vultur-gnawne heart open.
If I have done due homage to her eyes,
And had my sighs still tending on her name;
If on her love my life and honor lies,
And she (th'vnkindest maid) still scorns the same,
Let this suffice, that all the world may see,
The fault is hers, though mine the hurt must be.
SONNET. XUI.
HAppy in sleep, waking content to languish,
Embracing clouds by night, in day time mourn,
My joys but shadows, touch of truth my anguish,
Griefs ever springing, comforts never borne.
And still expecting when she will relent,
Grown hoarce with crying mercy, mercy give;
So many vows, and prayers having spent,
That weary of my self, I loathe to live.
And yet the Hydra of my cares renewes,
Still newborn sorrows of her fresh disdain:
And still my hope the Summer winds purfues,
Finding no end nor period of my pain.
This is my state, my griefs do touch so nearly,
And thus I live because I love her dearly.
SONNET. XVII.
WHy should I sing in verse, why should I frame,
These sad neglected notes for her dear sake?
Why should I offer up unto her name,
The sweetest sacrifice my youth can make?
Why should I strive to make her live for ever,
That never deignes to give me joy to live?
Why should m'afflicted Muse so much endeavor,
Such honor unto cruelty to give?
If her defects have purchased her this fame,
What should her virtues do, her smiles, her love?
If this her worst, how should her best inflame?
What passions would her milder favors move?
Favors (I think) would sense quite overcome,
And that makes happy Lovers ever dombe.
SONNET. XVIII.
SInce the first look that led me to this error,
To this thoughts-maze, to my confusion tending:
Still have I lived in grief, in hope, in error,
The circle of my sorrows never ending.
Yet cannot leave her love that holds me hateful,
Her eyes exact it, thou^gh-her heart disdaines me;
See what reward he has that serves the ungrateful,
So true and loyal love no favor gains me.
Still must I whet my young desires abated,
Upon the Flint of such a heart rebelling;
And all in vain, her pride is so innated,
She yeeldes no place at all for pitryes dwelling.
Often have I told her that my soul did love her,
(And that with tears,) yet all this will not move her.
SONNET. XIX.
REstore thy tresses to the golden Ore,
Yield Cithereas son those Arkes of love;
Bequeath the heavens the stars that I adore,
And to the Orient do thy Pearls remove.
Yield thy hands pride unto the Iuory white,
TO Arabian odors give thy breathing sweet:
Restore thy blush unto Aurora bright,
To Thetis give the honor of thy feet.
Let Venus have thy graces, her resigned,
And thy sweet voice give back unto the Spheres:
But yet restore thy fierce and cruel mind,
To Hyrcan Tigers, and to ruthles Bears.
Yield to the Marble thy hard heart again;
So shall thou cease to plague, and I to pain.
SONNET. XX.
IF Beauty thus be clowded with a frown,
That pity shines no comfort to my blis,
And vapors of disdain so ouer-growne,
That my lives light thus wholly darkened is.
Why should I more molest the world with cries?
The air with sighs, the earth below with tears?
Since I live hateful to tho^se ruthlesse eyes,
Vexing with untuned moan her dainty ears.
If I have loved her deerer then my breath,
My breath that calls the heavens to witness it:
And still must hold her dear till after death.
And if that all this cannot move a whit,
Yet let her say, that she has done me wrong,
To use me thus, and know I loved so long.
SONNET. XXI.
COme Death the anchor-hold of all my thoughts,
My last resort whereto my soul appeals,
For all too-long on earth my fancy dotes,
Whilst age upon my wasted body steals.
That heart being made the prospectiue of horror,
That honored has the cruelst fair that lives,
The cruelst fair, that sees I languish for her,
Yet never mercy to my merrite gives.
This is her Laurel and her triumphs prize,
To tread me down with foot of her disgrace:
Whilst I did build my fortune in her eyes,
And laid my lives rest on so fair a face;
Which rest I lost, my love, my life and all,
So high attempts to low disgraces fall.
SONNET. XXII.
THese sorrowing sighs, the smoakes of mine annoy,
These tears, which heat of sacred flame distills,
Are those due tributes that my faith does pay
Unto the Tyrant, whose unkindness kills.
I sacrifize my youth, and blooming years,
At her proud feet, and she respects not it:
My flower vntimely's withred with my tears,
And Winter woes, for spring of youth unfit.
She thinks a look may recompense my care,
And so with looks, prolongs my long-lookt ease,
As short that bliss, so is the comfort rare,
Yet must that bliss my hungry thoughts appease.
Thus she returns my hopes so fruitless ever,
Once let her love indeed, or eye me never.
SONNET. XXIII.
FAlse Hope prolongs my ever certain grief,
Traitor to me, and faithful to my Love:
A thousand times it promised me relief,
Yet never any true effect I prove.
Often when I find in her no truth at all,
I bannish her, and blame her treachery;
Yet soon again I must her back recall,
As one that dies without her company.
Thus often as I chase my hope from me,
Straightway she hastes her unto DELIAS eyes,
Fed with some pleasing look there shall she be,
And so sent back, and thus my fortune lies.
Looks feed my Hope, Hope fosters me in vain,
Hopes are unsure, when certain is my pain.
SONNET. XXIIII.
Look in my griefs, and blame me not to mourn,
From care to care that leads a life so bad;
The Orphan of Fortune, borne to be her scorn,
Whose clowded brow does make my days so sad.
Long are their nights whose cares do never sleep,
Loathsome their days, whom no sun ever ioyd,
Her fairest eyes do penetrate so deep,
That thus I live both day and night annoyd.
But since the sweetest root does yield thus much,
Her praise from my complaint I may not part:
I love the effect for that the cause is such,
I Will praise her face, and blame her flinty heart.
Whilst that we make the world admire at us,
Her for disdain, and me for loving thus.
SONNET. XXU.
Reign in my thoughts fair hand, sweet eye, rare voice,
Posses me whole, my hearts trium virate:
Yet heavy heart to make so hard a choice,
Of such as spoil thy poor afflicted state.
For whilst they strive which shall be Lord of all,
All my poor life by them is trodden down:
They all erect their Trophies on my fall,
And yield me naught that gives the^ their renown,
When back I look, I sigh my freedom past,
And wail the state wherein I present stand;
And see my fortune ever like to last,
Finding me rained with such a heavy hand;
What can I do but yield? and yield I do,
And serve all three, and yet they spoil me too.
SONNET. XXVI. Alluding to the Sparrow pursued by a Hawk, that flew into the
bosom of Zenocrates.
WHilst by her eyes pursued, my poor heart flew it,
Into the sacred bosom of my dearest:
She there in that sweet sanctuary slew it,
Where it presumed his safety to be nearest.
My privilege of faith could not protect it,
That was with blood and three years witness signed:
In all which time she never could suspect it,
For well she saw my love, and how I pined.
And yet no comfort would her brow reveal me,
No lightning look, which falling hopes erecteth;
What boots to laws of succor to appeal me?
Ladies and Tyrants, never laws respects.
Then there I die, where hoped I to have liuen;
And by that hand, which better might have given.
SONNET. XXVII.
STill in the trace of my tormented thought,
My ceaselesse cars must mattch on to my death:
Thy least regard too dearly have I bought,
Who to my comfort never deign'st a breath.
Why should thou stop thine cares now to my cries,
Whose eyes were open, ready to oppress me?
Why shutt'st thou not the cause whence al did rise,
Or hear me now, and seek how to redress me?
Injurious DELIA, yet He love thee still,
Whilst that I breathe in sorrow of my smart:
I Will tell the world that I deserved but ill,
And blame my self for to excuse thy heart.
Then judge who sins the greater of us twain,
I in my love, or thou in thy disdain.
SONNET. XXVIII.
Often do I marvel, whether DELIAS eyes,
Are eyes, or else two radiant stars that shine:
For how could Nature ever thus devise,
Of earth on earth a substance so divine.
Stars sure they are, whose motions rule desires,
And calm and tempest follow their aspects:
Their sweet appearing still such power inspires,
That makes the world admire so strange effects.
Yet whether fixed or wandering stars are they,
Whose influence rule the Orb of my poor heart?
Fixed sure they are, but wandering make me stray,
In endless errors, whence I cannot part.
Stars then, not eyes, move you with milder view,
Your sweet aspect on him that honors you.
SONNET. XXIX.
THE star of my mishap imposd this pain,
To spend the April of my years in wayling,
That ever found my fortune in the wayne,
With still fresh cares my present woes assayling.
Yet her I blame not, though for her it is done,
But my desires wings so high aspyring,
Which now are melted by that glorious Sun,
That makes in fall from off my hie desiring.
And in my fall, I cry for help with speed.
No pitying eye looks back upon my mourning,
No succor find I now when most I need,
The Ocean of my tears must drown me burning.
Whilst my distress shall christen her a new,
And give the Cruel Fair this title due.
SONNET. XXX.
AND yet I cannot reprehend the flight,
Or blame the attempt presuming so to sore,
The mounting venture for a high delight,
Did make the honor of the fall the more.
For who gets wealth that puts not from the shore?
Danger has honor, great designs their fame,
Glory does follow courage goes before.
And though the event often aunswers not the same,
Suffice that high attempts have never shame.
The Meane-obseruer, (whom base Safety keeps,)
Lives without honor, dies without a name,
And in eternal darkness ever sleeps.
And therefore DELIA, it is to me no blot,
To have attempted, though attained thee not.
SONNET. XXXI.
Raising my hopes on hills of high desire,
Thinking to scale the heaven of her heart,
My slender means presumed too high a part;
Her thunder of disdain forced me retire,
And threw me down to pain in all this fire,
Where lo I languish in so heavy smart,
Because the attempt was far above my art:
Her pride brook'd not poor souls should come so nie her.
Yet I protest my high aspyring will,
Was not to dispossess her of her right:
Her sovereignty should have remained still,
I only sought the bliss to have her sight.
Her sight contented thus to see me spill,
Framed my desires fit for her eyes to kill.
SONNET. XXXII.
O Why does DELIA credit so her glass,
Gazing her beauty deigned her by the skies;
And does not rather look on him (alas) whose state best shows ye force of
murdering eyes
The broken tops of lofty trees declare,
The fury of a mercy-wanting storm:
And of what force your wounding grances are,
Upon my self you best may find the form.
Then leave your glass, and gaze your self on me,
That Mirror shows what power is in your face:
To view your form too much, may danger be,
Narcissus changed t'a flower in such a case.
And you are changed, but not t'a Hiacint;
I fear your eye has turned your heart to flint.
SONNET. XXXIII.
I Once may see when years shall wreck my wrong,
When golden hayres shall change to silver wier:
And those bright rays that kindle all this fire,
Shall fail in force, their working not so strong.
Then beauty, (now the burden of my song,)
Whose glorious blaze the world does so admire,
Must yield up all to tyrant Times desire;
The^ fade those flowers that decked her pride so long.
When, if she grieve to gaze her in the glass,
Which then presents her winter-withered hew,
Go you my verse, go tell her what she was;
For what she was she best shall find in you.
Your fiery heat lets not her glory pass,
But (Phenix-like) shall make her live anew.
SONNET. XXXIIII.
Look Delia how we steeme the half blown Rose,
The image of thy blush, and Summers honor:
Whilst in her tender green she does enclose,
The pure sweet beauty Time bestows upon her.
No sooner spreades her glory in the air,
But straight her ful-blowne pride is in declining;
She then is scorned that late adorned the fair:
So clouds thy beauty after fairest shining.
No April can revive thy withred flowers,
Whose blooming grace adornes thy glory now:
Swift speedy Time, feathred with flying hours,
Dissolues the beauty of the fairest brow.
O let not then such riches waste in vain,
But love whilst that thou may be loved again.
SONNET. XXXV.
BUT love whilst that thou may be loved again.
Now whilst thy May has filled thy lap with flowers,
Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain;
Now use thy Summer smiles, ere Winter lowers.
And whilst thou spread'st unto the rising sun,
The fairest flower that ever saw the light,
Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done,
And ( Delia,) think thy morning must have night.
And that thy brightness sets at length to West,
When thou will close up that which now you showest,
And think the same becomes thy fading best,
Which then shall hide it most, and cover lowest.
Men do not wey the stalk for that it was,
When once they find her flower her glory pass.
SONNET. XXXVI.
WHen men shall find thy flower, thy glory pass,
And thou with careful brow sitting alone:
Received have this message from thy glass,
That tells the truth, and says that all is gone;
Fresh shall thou see in me the wounds thou made,
Though spent thy flame, in me the heat remaining,
I that have loved thee thus before thou fadest,
My faith shall wax, when thou art in thy waining.
The world shall find this miracle in me,
That fire can burn when all the matter's spent:
Then what my faith has been thy self shall see,
And that thou wast unkind, thou may repent.
Thou may repent that thou have scorned my tears,
When winter snowes upon thy golden hairs.
SONNET. XXXVII.
WHen VVinter snowes upon thy golden hairs,
And frost of age has nipt thy flowers near,
When dark shall seem thy day that never cleeres,
And all lies withred that was held so dear.
Then take this picture which I here present thee,
Limned with a Pensill not all unworthy:
Here see the gifts that God and nature lent thee,
Hear read thy self, and what I suffered for thee.
This may remain thy lasting monument,
Which happily posterity may cherrish,
These colors with thy fading are not spent,
These may remain when thou and I shall perrish.
If they remain, then thou shall live thereby.
They will remain, and so thou can not die.
SONNET. XXXVIII.
THou can not die whilst any zeal abound
In feeling hearts, that can conceive these lines;
Though thou a Laura have no Petrarch found,
In base attire, yet clearly Beauty shines.
And I (though borne within a colder clime,)
Do feel mine inward heat as great, (I know it,)
He never had more faith, although more rhyme,
I love as well, though he could better show it.
But I may add one feather to thy fame,
To help her flight throughout the fairest I Will.
And if my pen could more enlarge thy name,
Then should thou live in an immortal style.
For though that Laura better limned be,
Suffice, thou shall be loved as well as she.
SONNET. XXXIX.
O Be not grieved that these my papers should
Bewray unto the world how fair thou art:
Or that my wits have showed the best they could.
(The chastest flame that ever warmed heart.)
Think not (sweet DELIA,) this shall be thy shame,
My Muse should sound thy praise with mournful warble,
How many live, the glory of whose name,
Shall rest in Ise, when thine is grau'd in Marble.
Thou may in after ages live esteemed,
Unburied in these lines reserved in pureness;
These shall intombe those eyes, that have redeemed
Me from the vulgar, thee from all obscurenes.
Although my careful accents never moved thee,
Yet count it no disgrace that I have loved thee.
SONNET. XL.
DELIA, these eyes that so admireth thine,
Have seen those walls the which ambition reared,
To check the world, how they intombd have lain.
Within themselves; and on them ploughes have eared.
Yet found I that no barbarous hand attaind.
The spoil of same deserved by virtuous men:
Whose glorious actions luckily had gaind,
The Eternal Annals of a happy pen.
Why the^ though DELIA fade, let that not move her,
Though time do spoil her of the fairest veil
That ever yet mortality did cover;
Which must instarre the needle and the Rail.
That grace, that virtue, all that served t'in-woman,
Does thee unto eternity assommon.
SONNET. XLI.
Fair and lovely maid, look from the shore,
See thy Leander striving in these waves:
Poor soul quite spent, whose force can do no more,
Now send forth hopes, for now calm pity saues.
And wast him to thee with those lovely eyes,
A happy conuoy to a holy Land:
Now show thy power, and where thy virtue lies,
To save thine own, stretch out the fairest hand.
Stretch out the fairest hand, a pledge of peace;
That hand that darts so right and never misses:
I shall forget old wrongs, my griefs shall cease;
And that which gave me wounds, I Will give it kisses.
O then let The Ocean of my care find shore,
That thou be pleased, and I may sigh no more.
SONNET. XLII.
Read in my face a volume of dispayres,
The wailing Iliads of my tragic woe;
Drawn with my blood, and printed with my cares,
Wrought by her hand that I have honored so.
Who whilst I burn, she sings at my souls wrack,
Looking aloft from Turret of her pride:
There my souls Tyrant joys her, in the sack
Of her own seat, whereof I made her guide.
There do these smoakes that from affliction rise,
Serve as an incense to a cruel Dame;
A sacrifice thrice-gratefull to her eyes,
Because their power serve to exact the same.
Thus ruins she (to satisfy her will,)
The Temple, where her name was honored still.
SONNET. XLIII.
MY DELIA has the waters of mine eyes,
The ready handmaids on her grace attending:
That never fall to ebb, but ever rise,
For to their flow she never grants an ending.
The Ocean never did attend more duly
Upon his sovereigns course, the nights pale Queen,
Nor paid the impost of his waves more truly,
Then mine unto her Deity have been.
Yet naught the rock of that hard heart can move,
Where beat these tears with zeal, and fury drives,
And yet I rather languish in her love,
Then I would joy the fairest she that lives.
I doubt to find such pleasure in my gayning,
As now I taste, in compass of complaining.
SONNET. XLIIII.
How long shall I in mine affliction mourn?
A burden to my self, distressed in mind,
When shall my interdicted hopes return,
From out despair wherein they live confined.
When shall her troubled brow, charged with disdain,
Reveal the treasure which her smyles impart:
When shall my faith the happiness attain,
To break the Ise that has congeald her heart.
Unto herself, herself my love does sommon,
(If love in her has any power to move,)
And let her tell me as she is a woman,
Whether my faith has not deserved her love.
I know she cannot but must needs confess it,
Yet deignes not with one simple sign to express it.
SONNET. XLV.
Beauty (sweet Love,) is like the morning dew,
Whose short refresh upon the tender green:
Cheeres for a time but till the Sun does show,
And straight it is gone as it had never been.
Soon does it sade that makes the fairest flourish,
Short is the glory of the blushing Rose:
The hew which thou so carefully do nourish,
Yet which at length thou must be forced to lose.
When thou surcharged with burden of thy years,
Shall bend thy wrinkles homeward to the earth,
When time has made a pasport for thy seares,
Dated in age the Kalends of our death.
But ah no more, this has been often told,
And women grieve to think they must be old.
SONNET. XLVI.
I Must not grieve my Love, whose eyes would reed
Lines of delight, whereon her youth might smyle;
Flowers have a time before they come to seed,
And she is young, and now must sport the while.
Ah sport (sweet Maid) in season of these years,
And learn togather flowers before they wither:
And where the sweetest blossoms first appears,
Let love and youth conduct thy pleasures thither.
Lighten forth smyles to clear the clowded air,
And calm the tempest which my sighs do raise,
Pity and smiles do best become the fair,
Pity and smiles shall yield thee lasting praise.
I hope to say, when all my griefs are gone,
Happy the heart that sighed for such a one.
SONNET. XLVII. At the Authors going into Italy.
O Whether (poor forsaken) will thou go,
To go from sorrow, and thine own distress,
When every place presents like face of woe,
And no remove can make thy sorrows less?
Yet go (forsaken,) leave these woods, these playnes,
Leave her and all, and all for her that leaves
Thee and thy love forlorn, and both disdaines;
And of both, wrongful deemes, and ill conceaues.
Seek out some place, and see if any place
Can give the least release unto thy grief:
Convey thee from the thought of thy disgrace,
Steal from thy self, and be thy cares own thief.
But yet what comfort shall I hereby gain?
Bearing the wonnd, I needs must feel the pain.
SONNET. XLVIII. This Sonnet was made at the Authors being in Italy.
Drawn with th'attractiue virtue of her eyes,
My touched heart turns it to that happy cost:
My joyful North, where all my fortune lies,
The level of my hopes desired most.
There where my DAELIA, fairer then the Sun,
Decked with her youth whereon ye world does smile,
Joys in that honor which her eyes have won,
The Eternal wonder of our happy I Will.
Flourish fair ALBION, glory of the North,
Neptunes best darling, held between his arms:
Divided from the world as better worth,
Kept for himself, defended from all harms.
Still let disarmed peace deck her and thee:
And Muse-foe Mars, abroad far fostred be.
SONNET. XLIX.
CAre-charmer Sleep, son of the sable Night,
Brother to death, in silent darkness borne:
Relieve my languish, and restore the light,
With dark forgetting of my cares return.
And let the day be time enough to mourn,
The shipwreck of my ill aduentred youth:
Let waking eyes suffice to wail their scorn,
Without the torment of the nights untruth.
Cease dreams, th'imaginary of our day desires,
To model forth the passions of the morrow,
Never let rising Sun approve you liars,
To add more grief to agrauate my sorrow.
Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain,
And never wake to seele the days disdain.
SONNET. L.
LET others sing of Knights and Palladines,
In aged accents, and untimely words,
Paint shadows in imaginary lines,
Which well the reach of their high wits records;
But I must sing of thee, and those fair eyes.
Autentique shall my verse in time to come,
When yet th'vnborne shall say, Lo where she lies,
Whose beauty made him speak that else was dombe.
These are the Arkes the Trophies I erect,
That fortify thy name against old age:
And these thy sacred virtues must protect,
Against the dark and Times consuming rage.
Though th'error of my youth they shall discover,
Suffice, they show I lived, and was thy lover.
SONNET. LI.
AS to the Roman that would free his Land,
His error was his honor and renown:
And more the fame of his mistaking hand,
Then if he had the Tyrant ouer-throwne.
So DELIA has mine error made me known.
And my deceived attempt, deserved more fame,
Then if I had the victory mine own:
And thy hard heart had yielded up the same.
And so likewise, renowned is thy blame,
Thy cruelty, thy glory; o strange case,
That errors should be graced that merrite shame,
And sin of frowns bring honor to the face.
Yet happy DELIA that thou wast unkind,
But happier yet, if thou would change thy mind.
SONNET. LII.
LIke as the Lute, that joys or else dislikes,
As is his art that plays upon the same,
So sounds my Muse, according as she strikes
On my heart strings, high tuned unto her fame.
Her touch does cause the warble of the sound,
Which here I yield in lamentable wise,
A wailing deskant on the sweetest ground,
Whose due reports give honor to her eyes.
Else harshe my style, untunable my Muse,
Hoarce sounds the voice that praises not her name,
If any pleasing relish here I use,
Then judge the world her beauty gives the same.
O^ happy ground that makes the music such,
And blessed hand that gives so sweet a touch,
SONNET. LIII.
NOne other fame mine vnambitious Muse,
Affected ever, but t'eternize thee:
All other honors do my hopes refuse,
Which meaner prized and momentarie be.
For God forbid I should my papers blot,
With mercynarie lines, with servile pen:
Praising virtues in them that have them not,
Basely attending on the hopes of men.
No no, my verse respects nor Thames nor Theaters,
Nor seeks it to be known unto the great,
But Auon poor in fame, and poor in waters,
Shall have my song where DELIA has her seat.
Auon shall be my Thames, and she my song,
I Will sound her name the River all along.
SONNET. LIIII.
Unhappy pen, and ill accepted papers,
That intimate in vain my chaste desires:
My chaste desires, (the euer-burning Tapers,)
Inkindled by her eyes celestial fires.
Celestial fires, and vnrespecting powers,
That deigne not view, the glory of your might:
In humble lines the work of careful hours,
The sacrifice I offer to her sight.
But since she scorns her own, this rests for me,
I Will moan my self, and hide the wrong I have,
And so content me that her frowns should be
To m'infant style the cradle and the grave.
What though my self no honor get thereby,
Each byrd sings to her self, and so will I.
SONNET. LU.
LO here the impost of a faith vnfayning,
That love has paid, and her disdain extorted:
Behold the message of my just complaining,
That shows ye world how much my grief imported.
These tributarie plaints fraught with desire,
I send those eyes, the cabinets of love;
The Paradise whereto my hopes aspire,
From out this hell, which mine afflictions prove.
Wherein I thus do live, cast down from mirth,
Pensive alone, none but despair about me,
My joys abortiue, perrisht at their birth,
My cares long lived, and will not die without me.
This is my state, and DELIAS heart is such;
I say no more, I fear I said too much.
FINIS.
An Ode.
NOW each creature joys the other, passing happy days and hours,
One byrd reports unto an other, in the fall of silver showers,
Whilst the earth (our common mother,) has her bosom decked with flowers.
Whilst the greatest Torche of heaven, with bright rays warmes FLORAS lap,
Making nights and days both even, cheering plants with fresher sap:
My field of flowers quite bereauen, wants refresh of better hap.
ECHO, daughter of the Air, (babbling guest of Rocks and Hills,)
Knows the name of my fierce Fatre, And sounds the accents of my ills.
Each thing pitties my despair, whilst that she her Lover kills.
Whilst that she (O cruel Maid,) does me and my love despise,
My lives flourish is decayed, that depended on her eyes:
But her will must be obeyed, and well he ends for love who dies.
FINIS.
THE Complaynt of ROSAMOND.

THE COMPLAINT OF ROSAMOND.
OVT from the horror of Insernall deepes,
My poor afflicted ghost comes here to plain it,
Attended with my shame that never sleeps,
The spot wher-with my kind and youth did stain it.
My body found a grave where to contain it.
A sheet could hide my face, but not my sin,
For Fame finds never tomb t'inclose it in.
And which is worse, my soul is now denied,
Her transport to the sweet Elisian rest,
The joyful bliss for ghostes repurified,
The euer-springing Gardens of the blessed,
Caron denies me wastage with the rest.
And says, my soul can never pass the River,
Till Lovers sighs on earth shall it deliver.
So shall I never pass; for how should I
Procure this sacrifice amongst the living?
Time has long since worn out the memory,
Both of my life, and lives unjust depriving,
Sorrow for me is dead for aye reviving.
ROSAMOND has little left her but her name,
And that disgraced, for time has wronged the same.
No Muse suggests the pity of my case,
Each pen does ouer-passe my just complaint,
Whilst others are preferred, though far more base;
Shores wife is graced, and passes for a Saint;
Her Legend iustifies her foul attaint.
Her wel-told tale did such compassion find,
That she is passed, and I am left behind.
Which seen with grief, my miserable ghost,
(VVhilome invested in so fair a veil,
Which whilst it lived, was honored of the most,
And being dead, gives matter to bewail.)
Comes to solicit thee, (since others fail,)
To take this task, and in thy woeful song
To form my case, and register my wrong.
Although I know thy just lamenting Muse,
Toyld in th'affliction of thine own distress,
In others cares has little time to use,
And therefore may esteem of mine the less:
Yet as thy hopes attend happy redress,
Thy joys depending on a woman's grace,
So move thy mind a woeful woman's case.
DELIA may hap to deigne to read our story,
And offer up her sigh among the rest,
Whose merrite would suffice for both our glory,
Whereby thou might be graced, and I be blessed;
That indulgence would profit me the best.
Such power she has by whom thy youth is led,
To joy the living, and to bless the dead.
So I (through beauty) made the wofull'st wight,
By beauty might have comfort after death:
That dying fairest, by the fairest might
Find life above on earth, and rest beneath.
She that can bless us with one happy breath.
Give comfort to thy Muse to do her best,
That thereby thou may joy, and I might rest.
Thus said: forthwith moved with a tender care,
And pity, (which my self could never find,)
What she desired, my Muse deigned to declare,
And therefore, willed her boldly tell her mind.
And I (more willing,) took this charge assignd,
Because her griefs were worthy to be known,
And telling hers might hap forget mine own.
Then write (quoth she) the tuine of my youth,
Report the downe-fall of my slippry state,
Of all my life reveal the simple truth,
To teach to others what I learnt too late.
Exemplify my frailty, tell how Fate
Keeps in eternal dark our fortunes hidden,
And ere they come, to know them it is forbidden.
For whilst the sunshine of my fortune lasted,
I joyed the happiest warmth, the sweetest heat
That ever yet imperious beauty tasted,
I had what glory ever flesh could get:
But this fair morning had a shameful set.
Disgrace darkt honor, sin did clowd my brow,
As note the sequel, and I Will tell thee how.
The blood I staind, was good and of the best,
My birth had honor, and my beauty fame:
Nature and Fortune joined to make me blessed,
Had I had grace to have known to use the same.
My education showed from whence I came,
And all concurd to make me happy furst,
That so great hap might make me more accursed.
Happy lived I, whilst Parents eye did guide,
The indiscretion of my feeble ways,
And Country home kept me from being eyde,
Where best unknown I spent my sweetest days;
Till that my friends mine honor sought to raise,
To higher place, which greater credit yields,
Deeming such beauty was unfit for seeldes.
From Country then to Court I was preferred,
From calm to storms, from shore into the deepes:
There where I perrish'd, where my youth first erred,
There where I lost the flower which honor keeps;
There where the worser thriues, the better weeps;
Ah me (poor wench,) on this unhappy shelfe,
I grounded me, and cast away my self.
For thither com'd, when years had armed my youth,
With rarest proof of beauty ever seen:
When my reviving eye had learnt the truth,
That it had power to make the winter green,
And flower affections whereas none had been;
Soon could I teach my brow to tyranuize,
And make the world do homage to mine eyes.
For age I saw, (though years with cold conceit,
Congeald their thoughts against a warm desire,)
Yet sigh their want, and look at such a bait.
I saw how youth was wax before the fire.
I saw by stealth, I framed my look a lyre.
Yet well perceived, how Fortune made me then
The envy of my sex, and wonder unto men.
Look how a Comet at the first appearing.
Draws all men's eyes with wonder to behold it;
Or as the faddest tale at sudden hearing,
Makes silent lishring unto him that told it,
So did my speech when Rubies did unfold it.
So did the blazing of my blush appear,
T'amaze the world, that holds such sights so deer.
Ah beauty Syred, fair enchaunting good,
Sweet silent rethorique of persuading eyes:
Dombe eloquence, whose power does move the blood,
More then the words, or wisdom of the wise;
Still harmony, whose diapason lies
Within a brow, the key which passions move,
To ravish sense, and play a world in love.
What might I then not do whose power was such?
What cannot women do that know their power?
What women knows it not (I fear too much)
How bliss or bale lies in their laugh or lowre?
Whilst they enjoy their happy blooming flower,
Whilst nature decks her with her proper fair
Which cheeres the world, joys each sight, sweetens the air.
Such one was I, my beauty was mine own,
No borrowed blush which banck-rot beauties seek:
That newfound shame, a sin to us unknown,
Th'adulterate beauty of a falsed cheek:
Vilde stain to honor, and to women eeke,
Seeing that time our fading must detect,
Thus with defect to cover our defect.
Impiety of times, chastitles abator,
Falsehood, wherein thy self thy self deniest:
Treason, to counterfeit the seal of Nature,
The stamp of heaven, impressed by the hiest.
Disgrace unto the world, to whom thou lie.
Idol unto thy self, shame to the wise,
And all that honor thee idolatrise.
Far was that sin from us whose age was pure,
When simple beauty was accounted best,
The time when women had no other lure
But modesty, pure cheeks, a virtuous breast.
This was the pomp wher-with my youth was blessed.
These were the weapons which mine honor wun
In all the conflicts which mine eyes begun.
Which were not small, I wrought on no mean object,
A Crown was at my feet, Scepters obeyde me,
Who^ Fortune made my King, Love made my subject,
Who did command the land, most humbly praid me,
HENRY the second, that so highly weighed me,
Found well (by proof) the privilege of Beauty,
That it had power to counter-maund all duty.
For after all his victories in FRANCE,
Tryumphing in the honor of his deeds:
Vnmatch'd by sword, was vanquished by a glaunce,
And hotter wars within his bosom breeds.
Wars, whom whole Legions of desires feeds.
Against all which, my chastity opposes
The field of honor, virtue never loses.
No armor might be found that could defend,
Transpearcing rays of Crystal poynted eyes:
No stratagem, no reason could amend,
No not his age; (yet old men should be wise.)
But shows deceive, outward appearance lies.
Let none for seeming so, think Saints of others,
For all are men, and all have sucked their mothers.
Who would have thought a Monarch would have ever
Obeyed his hand-mayde of so mean estate;
Vultur ambition feeding on his liver,
Age having worn his pleasures out of date,
But hap comes never, or it comes too late.
For such a dainty which his youth found not,
Unto his feeble age did chance a-lot.
Ah Fortune, never absolutely good,
For that some cross still counter-checks our luck;
As here behold th'incompatible blood,
Of age and youth was that whereon we stuck:
Whose lothing, we from natures breasts do suck,
As opposite to what our blood requires.
For equal age, does equal like desires.
But mighty men, in highest honor sitting,
Naught but applause and pleasure can behold:
Soothed in their liking, careless what is fitting,
May not be suffered once to think the'are old:
Not trusting what they see, but what is told.
Miserable fortune to forget so far,
The state of flesh, and what our frailties are.
Yet must I needs excuse so great defect,
For drinking of the Lethe of mine eyes,
H'is forced forget himself, and all respect
Of majesty, whereon his state relies:
And now of loves, and pleasures must devise.
For thus revived again, he serves and su'th,
And seeks all means to undermine my youth.
Which never by assault he could recover,
So well encamped in strength of chaste desires:
My cleane-arm'd thoughts repelled an unchaste lover.
The Crown that could command what it requires,
I lesser prized then chastities attires.
Th'vnstained veil, which innocents adorns,
Th'vngathred Rose, defended with the thorns.
And safe mine honor stood, till that in truth,
One of my sex, of place, and nature bad,
Was set in ambush to entrap my youth.
One in the habit of like frailty clad.
One who the liu'ry of like weakness had.
A seeming Matron, yet a sinful Monster,
As by her words the chaster sort may conster.
She set upon me with the smoothest speech
That Court and age could cunningly devise:
The One autentique, made her fit to teach,
The other learnt her how to subtelise.
Both were enough to circumuent the wise.
A document that well may teach the sage,
That there is no trust in youth, nor hope in age.
Daughter (said she,) behold thy happy chance,
That have the lot cast down into thy lap,
Whereby thou may thy honor great advance,
Whilst thou (unhappy) wilt not see thy hap:
Such fond respect thy youth does so inwrap,
To Oppose thy self against thine own good fortune,
That points thee out, and seems thee to importune.
Do thou not see, how that thy King (thy Jove,)
Lightens forth glory on thy dark estate:
And showers down gold and treasure from above,
Whilst thou do shut thy lap against thy fate?
Fie fondling fie, thou will repent too late
The error of thy youth; that can not see
What is the fortune that does follow thee.
Thou must not think thy flower can always flourish,
And that they beauty will be still admired:
But that those rays which all these flames do nourish,
Canceld with Time, will have their date expired,
And men will scorn what now is so desired.
Our frailties doom is written in the flowers,
Which flourish now, and fade ere many hours.
Read in my face the ruins of my youth,
The wrack of years upon my aged brow,
I have been fair, (I must confess the truth,)
And stood upon as nyce respects as thou;
I lost my time, and I repent it now.
But were I to begin my youth again,
I would redeem the time I spent in vain.
But thou have years, and privilege to use them,
Thy privilege does bear Beauties great seal;
Besides, the law of nature does excuse them,
To whom thy youth may have a just appeal.
Esteem not Fame more then thou do thy weal.
Fame, (whereof ye world seems to make such choice,)
Is but an Echo, and an idle voice.
Then why should this respect of honor bound us,
In the imaginary lifts of reputation?
Titles which cold severity has found us,
Breath of the vulgar, foe to recreation:
Melancholies opinion, Customs relation;
Pleasures plague, beauties scourge, hell to the fair,
To leave the sweet, for Castles in the air.
Pleasure is felt, opinion but conceau'd,
Honor, a thing without us, not our own:
Whereof we see how many are bereaved,
Which should have reaped the glory they had sown.
And many have it, yet unworthy, known.
So breathes his blast this many-headed beast,
Whereof the wisest have esteemed least.
The subtle Citty-women, better learned,
Esteem them chaste enough that best seem so:
Who though they sport, it shall not be discerned,
Their face bewraies not what their bodies do;
It Is wary walking that does safeliest go.
With show of virtue, as the cunning knows,
Babes are beguild with sweets, and men with shows.
Then use thy tallent, youth shall be thy warrant,
And let not honor from thy sports detract:
Thou must not fondly think thy self transparent,
That those who see thy face can judge thy fact,
Let her have shame that cannot closely act.
And seem the chaste, which is the chiefest art,
For what we seem each see, none knows our heart.
The mighty, who can with such sins dispense,
In steed of shame do honors great bestow:
A worthy author does redeem the offense,
And makes the scarelet sin as white as snow.
The Majesty that does descend so low,
Is not defilde, but pure remains therein,
And being sacred, sanctifies the sin.
What, do thou stand on this, that he is old?
Thy beauty has the more to work upon.
Thy pleasures want shall be supply d with gold,
Cold age dotes most when heat of youth is gone:
Enticing words prevail with such a one.
Alluring shows most deep impression strikes,
For age is prone to credit what it likes.
Here interupt, she leaves me in a doubt,
When lo began the combat in my blood,
Seeing my youth inuirond round about,
The ground uncertain where my reasons stood;
Small my defense to make my party good,
Against such powers which were so surely laid,
To ouer-throw a poor unskillful Maid.
Treason was in my bones, my self conspiring,
To sell my self to lust, my soul to sin:
Pure-blushing shame was even in retiring,
Leaving the sacred hold it glori'd in.
Honor lay prostrate for my flesh to win,
When cleaner thoughts my weakness began up bray,
Against my self, and shame did force me say;
Ah ROSAMOND, what does thy flesh prepare?
Destruction to thy days, death to thy fame;
Will thou betray that honor held with care,
T'entombe with black reproach a spotted name,
Leaving thy blush, the colors of thy shame.
Opening thy feet to sin, thy soul to lust,
Graceless to lay thy glory in the dust.
Nay, first let the earth gape wide to swallow thee,
And shut thee up in bosom with her dead,
Ere Serpent tempt thee taste for bidden Tree,
Or feel the warmth of an unlawful bed;
Suffering thy self by lust to be misled;
So to disgrace thy self and grieve thine heirs,
That Cliffords race should scorn thee one of theirs.
Never wish longer to enjoy the air,
Then that thou breathe the breath of chastity:
Longer then thou preseru'st thy soul as fair
As is thy face, free from impuritie.
Thy face, that makes th'admir'd in every eye,
Where Natures care such rarities inroule,
Which used amiss, may serve to damn thy soul.
But what? he is my King, and may constrain me,
Whether I yield or not, I live defamed.
The world will think authority did gain me,
I shall be judged his Love, and so be shamed.
We see the fair condemned, that never gamed.
And if I yield, it is honorable shame,
If not, I live disgraced, yet thought the same.
What way is left thee then (unhappy maid,)
Whereby thy spotless foot, may wander out
This dreadful danger, which thou see is laid,
Wherein thy shame does compass thee about?
Thy simple years cannot resolve this doubt.
Thy youth can never guide thy foot so even,
But (in despite) some scandale will be given.
Thus stood I balanced equally precize,
Till my frail flesh did weigh me down to sin;
Till world and pleasure made me partialize,
And glittering pomp my vanity did win.
When to excuse my fault my lusts begin.
And impious thoughts alleged this wanton clause,
That though I sinned, my sin had honest cause.
So well the golden balls cast down before me,
Could entertain my course, hinder my way:
Whereat my retchlesse youth stooping to store me,
Lost me the gole, the glory, and the day.
Pleasure had set my wel-schoold thoughts to play,
And bade me use the virtue of mine eyes,
For sweetly it fits the fair to wantonise.
Thus wrought to sin, soon was I traind from Court,
T'a solitary Grange, there to attend
The time the King should thither make resort,
Where he loves long-desired work should end.
Thither he daily messages does send,
With costly Jewels (Orators of love,)
Which (ah too well men know) do women move.
The day before the night of my defeature,
He greets me with a Casket ritchly wrought;
So rare, that art did seem to strive with nature,
TO express the cunning work-mans curious thought;
The mystery whereof I prying sought.
And found engraven on the lidde above,
Amymone, how she with Neptune strove.
Amymone, old Danans fairest Daughter,
As she was fetching water all alone
At Lerna: whereas Neptune came and caught her,
From whom she strived and strugled to be gone,
Beating the air with cries and pittious moan.
But all in vain, with him sh' is forced to go,
It Is shame that men should use poor maidens so.
There might I see described how she lay,
At those proud feet, not satis-fied with prayer:
VVayling her heavy hap, cursing the day,
In act so pittious to express dispatre.
And by how much more grieved, so much more fair.
Her tears upon her cheeks (poor careful gerle,)
Did seem against the sun crystal and pearl.
Whose pure clear streams, (which lo so fair appears,)
Wrought hotter flames, (o miracle of love,)
That kindles fire in water, heat in tears,
And makes neglected beauty mightier prove,
Teaching afflicted eyes affects to move;
To show that nothing ill becomes the fair,
But cruelty, which yields unto no prayer.
This having viewd, and therewith something moved,
Figured I find within the other squares,
Trans-formed IO, JOVE'S dearly loved,
In her affliction how she strangely fares.
Strangely distressed, (o beauty, borne to cares.)
Turned to a Heiffer, kept with jealous eyes,
Always in danger of her hateful spies.
These presidents presented to my view,
Wherein the presage of my fall was shown,
Might have fore-warned me well what would ensue,
And others harms have made me shun mine own.
But fate is not prevented, though fore-knowne.
For that must hap, decreed by heavenly powers,
Who work our fall, yet make the fault still ours.
Witness the world, wherein is nothing rifer,
Then miseries unkind before they come:
Who can the characters of chance discipher,
Written in clouds of our concealed dome?
Which though perhaps have been reueald to some,
Yet that so doubtful, (as success did prove them,)
That men must know they have ye heavens above the^.
I saw the sin wherein my foot was entering,
I saw how that dishonor did attend it,
I saw the shame whereon my flesh was ventring,
Yet had I not the power for to defend it.
So weak is sense when error has condemned it.
We see what is good, and thereto we consent,
But yet we choose the worst, and soon repent.
And now I come to tell the worst of ilnes,
Now draws the date of mine affliction near.
Now when the dark had wrapped up all in stilnes,
And dreadful black had dispossessed the clear,
Com'd was the Night, (mother of sleep and fear;)
Who with her Sable-mantle friendly couers,
The sweet-stolne sports, of joyful meeting Lovers.
When lo, I ioyd my Lover, not my Love,
And felt the hand of lust most undesired:
Enforced th'vnprooued bitter sweet to prove,
Which yields no mutual pleasure when it is hired.
Love's not constrained, nor yet of due required.
Judge they who are unfortunately wed,
What it is to come unto a loathed bed.
But soon his age received his short contenting,
And sleep sealed up his languishing desires:
When he turns to his rest, I to repenting,
Into my self my waking thought retires:
My nakedness had proved my senses liars.
Now opned were mine eyes to look therein,
For first we taste the fruit then see our sin.
Now did I find my self vnparadis'd,
From those pure fields of my so clean beginning:
Now I perceived how ill I was advised,
My flesh began loathe the new-felt touch of sinning.
Shame leaves us by degrees, not at first winning.
For nature checks a new offense with lothing.
But use of sin does make it seem as nothing.
And use of sin did work in me a boldness,
And love in him, incorporates such zeal,
That iealosie increased with ages coldness,
Fearing to loose the joy of all his weal.
Or doubting time his stealth might else reveal,
H' is driven to devise somesubtile way,
How he might safeliest keep so rich a pray.
A stately Palace he forthwith did build,
Whose intricate in numerable ways,
With such confused errors so beguild
Th'vnguided entrers with uncertain straies,
And doubtful turnings kept them in delays,
With bootlesse labor leading them about,
Able to find no way, nor in, nor out.
Within the closed bosom of which frame,
That served a Center to that goodly round:
Were lodgings, with a Garden to the same,
With sweetest flowers that eu'r adorned the ground.
And all the pleasures that delight has found,
T'entertaine the sense of wanton eyes,
Fuel of love, from whence lusts flames arise.
Here I enclosed from all the world a sunder,
The Minotaure of shame kept for disgrace,
The Monster of Fortune, and the worlds wonder,
Lived cloystred in so desolate a case:
None but the King might come into the place.
With certain Maids that did attend my need,
And he himself came guided by a thread.
O Jealousy, daughter of Enuy'and Love,
Most way-ward issue of a gentle Syer;
Fostred with fears, thy Fathers joys t'improue,
Myrth-marring Monster, borne a subtle liar;
Hateful unto thy self, flying thine own desire:
Feeding upon suspect that does renew thee,
Happy were Lovers if they never knew thee.
Thou have a thousand gates thou enterest by,
Condemning trembling passions to our heart;
Hundred eyed Argus, euer-waking Spy,
Pale Hagge, infernal Fury, pleasures smart,
Envious Obseruer, prying in every part;
Suspicious, fearful, gazing still about thee,
O would to God that love could be without thee.
Thou did deprive (through false suggesting fear,)
Him of content, and me of liberty:
The only good that women hold so dear,
And turnst my freedom to captivity,
First made a Frisoner, ere an enemy.
Enioynd the ransom of my bodies shame,
Which though I paid, could not redeem the same.
What greater torment ever could have been,
Then to enforce the fair to live retired?
For what is beauty if it be not seen?
Or what is it to be seen, unless admired?
And though admired, unless in love desired?
Never were cheeks of Roses, locks of Amber,
Ordained to live imprisoned in a Chamber.
Nature created beauty for the view,
(Like as the fire for heat, the Sun for light:)
The fair do hold this privilege as due
By ancient Charter, to live most in sight,
And she that is debarred it, has not right.
In vain our friends (in this) use their dehorting,
For beauty will be where is most resorting.
Witness the fairest streets that Thames does visit,
The wondrous concourse of the glittering Fair:
For what rare women decked with beauty is it,
That thither couets not to make repair?
The solitary Country may not stay her.
Here is the center of all beauties best,
Excepting DELIA, left t'adorne the West.
Here does the curious with judicial eyes,
Contemplate beauty gloriously attired:
And herein all our chiefest glory lies,
To live where we are praised and most desired.
O how we joy to see our selves admired,
Whilst niggardly our favors we discover,
We love to be beloved, yet scorn the Lover.
Yet would to God my foot had never moved
From Country safety, from the fields of rest:
To know the danger to be highly loved,
And live in pomp to brave among the best,
Happy for me, better had I been blessed;
If I unluckily had never straide,
But lived at home a happy Country Maid.
Whose unaffected innocence thinks
No guilefull fraud, as does the Courtly liver:
She Is decked with truth, the River where she drinks
Does serve her for her glass, her counsel giver:
She loves sincerely, and is loved ever.
Her days are peace, and so she ends her breath,
(True life that knows not what is to diecil death.)
So should I never have been registered,
In the black book of the unfortunate:
Nor had my name enrold with Maids misled,
Which bought their pleasures at so hie a rate.
Nor had I taught (through my unhappy sat,)
This lesson, (which my self learnt with expense,)
How most it hurts that most delights the sense.
Shame follows sin, disgrace is duly given,
Impiety will out, never so closely done:
No walls can hide us from the eye of heaven,
For shame must end what wickedness begun;
Forth breaks reproach when we least think thereon.
And this is ever propper unto Courts,
That nothing can be done, but Fame reports.
Fame does explore what lies most secret hidden,
Entering the closet of the Palace dweller:
Abroad revealing what is most forbidden,
Of truth and falsehood both an equal teller.
It Is not a guard can serve for to expel her.
The sword of justice cannot cut her wings,
Nor stop her mouth from vtt'ring secret things.
And this our stealth she could not long conceal,
From her whom such a forfeit most concerned:
The wronged Queen, who could so closely deal,
That she the whole of all our practice learned,
And watched a time when least it was discerned,
In absence of the King, to wreake her wrong,
With such revenge as she desired long.
The Laberinth she entered by that thread,
That served a conduct to my absent Lord,
Left there by chance, reserved for such a deed,
Where she surpised me whom she so abhord.
Enraged with madness, scarce she speaks a word,
But flies with eager fury to my face,
Offering me most unwomanly disgrace.
Look how a Tygresse that has lost her whelpe,
Runns fiercely raging through the woods astray:
And seeing her self deprived of hope or help,
Furiously assaults what is in her way,
To satis-fie her wrath, (not for a pray;)
So fell she on me in outrageous wise,
As could disdain and jealousy devise.
And after all her vile reproaches used,
She forced me take the poison she had brought,
To end the lyse that had her so abused,
And free her fears, and case her jealous thought.
No cruelty her wrath would leave unwrought,
No spightfull act that to revenge is common;
(For no beast fiercer then a jealous woman.)
Here take (says she) thou impudent unclean,
Base graceles strumpet, take this next your heart;
Your loue-sick heart, that ouer-charg'd has been
With pleasures surfeite, must be purged with art.
This potion has a power, that will conuart
To naught those humors that oppress you so.
And (Gerle,) I Will see you take it ere I go.
What stand you now amazed, retire you back?
Tremble you (minion?) come dispatch with speed.
There is no help, your Champion now you lack,
And all these tears you shed will nothing steed;
Those dainty fingers needs must do the deed.
Take it, or I will drench you else by force,
And trifle not, least that I use you worse.
Having this bloody doom from hellish breath,
My woeful eyes on every side I cast:
Rigor about me, in my hand my death,
Presenting me the horror of my last;
All hope of pity and of comfort past.
No means, no power, no forces to contend,
My trembling hands must give my self my end.
Those hands that beauties Ministers had been,
They must give death that me adorned of late,
That mouth that newly gave consent to sin,
Must now receive destruction in thereat.
That body which my lust did violate,
Must sacrifize it self to appease the wrong.
(So short is pleasure, glory lasts not long.)
And she no sooner saw I had it taken,
But forth she rushes, (proud with victory,)
And leaves m'alone, of all the world forsaken,
Except of Death, which she had left with me.
(Death and my self alone together be.)
To whom she did her full revenge refer.
Ah poor weak conquest both for him and her.
Then straight my Conscience summons up my sin,
T'appeare before me, in a hideous face;
Now does the terror of my soul begin,
When every corner of that hateful place
Dectates mine error, and reueales disgrace;
Whilst I remain oppressed in every part,
Death in my body, horror at my heart.
Down on my bed my loathsome self I cast,
The bed that likewise gives in evidence
Against my soul, and tells I was unchaste,
Tells I was wanton, tells I followed sense.
And therefore cast, by guilt of mine offense,
Must here the right of heaven needs satis-fie.
And where I wanton lay, must wretched die.
Here I began to wail my hard mishap,
My sudden, strange unlooked for misery.
Accusing them that did my youth entrap,
To give me such a fall of infamy.
And poor distressed ROSAMOND, (said I,)
Is this thy glory got, to die forlorn
In Dezarts, where no ear can hear thee morn?
Nor any eye of pity to behold
The woeful end of thy sad tragedy;
But that thy wrongs unseen, thy tale untold,
Must here in secret silence buried lie.
And with thee, thine excuse together die.
Thy sin revealed, but thy repentance hid,
Thy shame alive, but dead what thy death did.
Yet breathe out to these walls the breath of moan,
Tell the air thy plaints, since men thou can not tell.
And though thou perrish desolate alone,
Tell yet thy self, what thy self knows too well:
Utter thy grief where with thy soul does swell.
And let thy heart, pity thy hearts remorse,
And be thy self the mourner and the Corse.
Condole thee here, clad all in black despair,
With silence only, and a dying bed;
Thou that of late, so flourishing, so fair,
Did glorious live, admired and honored:
And now from friends, from succor hither led,
Art made a spoil to lust, to wrath, to death,
And in disgrace, forced here to yield thy breath.
Did Nature (o for this) deliberate,
To show in thee the glory of her best;
Framing thine eye the star of thy ill fate,
And made thy face the foe to spoil the rest?
O Beauty, thou an enemy professed,
To chastity and us that love thee most,
Without thee how we are loathed, and with thee lost?
O you that proud with liberty and beauty,
(And o may well be proud that you be so,)
Glitter in Court, loved and observed of duty;
O that I might to you but ere I go
Speak what I feel, to warn you by my woe,
To keep your feet in pure clean paths of shame,
That no enticing may divert the same.
See'ng how against your tender weakness still,
The strength of wit, of gold, and all is bent;
And all the assaults that ever might or skill,
Can give against a chaste and clean intent:
Ah let not greatness work you to consent.
The spot is foul, though by a Monarch made,
Kings cannot privilege a sin forbade.
Lock up therefore the treasure of your love,
Under the surest keys of fear and shame:
And let no powers have power chaste thoughts to move
To make a lawless entry on your fame.
Open to those the comfort of your flame,
Whose equal love shall martch with equal pace,
In those pure ways that lead to no disgrace.
For see how many discontented beds,
Our own aspyring, or our Parents pride
Have caused, whilst that ambition vainly weds
Wealth and not love, honor and naught beside:
Whilst married but to titles, we abide
As wedded widows, wanting what we have,
When shadows cannot give us what we crave.
Or whilst we spend the freshest of our time,
The sweet of youth in plotting in the air;
Alas how often we fall, hoping to clime.
Or wither as unprofitably fair,
Whilst those decays which are without repair,
Make us neglected, scorned and reprou'd.
(And o what are we, if we be not loved?)
Fasten therefore upon occasions fit,
Least this, or that, or like disgrace as mine,
Do ouer-take your youth to ruin it,
And cloud with infamy your beauties shine:
Seeing how many seek to undermine
The treasury that is vnpossest of any:
And hard it is kept that is desired of many.
And fly, (o fly,) these Bed-brokers unclean,
(The Monsters of our sex,) that make a pray
Of their own kind, by an unkindly mean;
And even (like Vipers,) eating out a way
Through th womb of their own shame, accursed they
Live by the death of Fame, the gain of sin,
The filth of lust, uncleanness wallowes in.
O is it not enough that we, (poor we,)
Have weakness, beauty gold, and men our foes,
But we must have some of our selves to be
Traitors unto our selves, to join with those?
Such as our feeble forces do disclose,
And still betray our cause, our shame, our youth,
To lust, to folly, and to men's untruth?
Hatesull confounders both of blood and laws,
Vilde Orators of shame, that plead delight:
Ungracious Agents in a wicked cause,
Factors for darkness, messengers of night,
Serpents of guile, devils, that do inuit
The wanton taste of that forbidden tree, whose fruit once plucked, will show
how foul we be.
You in the habit of a grave aspect,
(In credit by the trust of years,) can shoe
The cunning ways of lust, and can direct
The fair and wily wantons how to go:
Having (your loathsome selves) your youth spent so.
And in uncleanness, ever have been fed,
By the revenue of a wanton bed.
By you, have been the innocent betrayed,
The blushing fearful boldned unto sin,
The wife made subtle, subtle made the maid,
The husband scorned, dishonored the kin:
Parents disgraced, children infamous been.
Confused our race, and falsi-fied our blood,
Whilst fathers sons, possess wrong Fathers good.
This, and much more, I would have vttred then,
A testament to be recorded still,
Signd with my blood, subscribed with Conscience pen,
To warn the fair and beautiful from ill.
And o I wish (by the example of my will,)
I had not left this sin unto the fair,
But did intestat to have had no heir.
But now, the poison spread through all my veins,
Began dispossess my living senses quite:
And naught respecting Death, (the last of pains,)
Placed his pale colors, (th'ensigne of his might,)
Upon his new-got spoil before his right;
Thence chased my soul, setting my day erenoone,
When I least thought my joys could end so soon.
And as conuaid t'vntimely suneralles,
My scarce cold corse not suffered longer stay,
Behold, the King (by chance) returning, falls
T'incounter with the same upon the way,
As he repaird to see his dearest joy.
Not thinking such a meeting could have been,
To see his Love, and seeing been vnscene.
Judge those who^ chance depriues of sweetest treasure,
What it is to lose a thing we hold so dear:
The best delight, wherein our soul takes pleasure,
The sweet of life, that penetrates so near.
What passions feels that heart, enforced to bear
The deep impression of so strange a sight?
Tongue, pen, nor art can never show aright.
Amazed he stands, nor voice nor body steares,
Words had no passage, tears no issue found,
For sorrow shut up words, wrath kept in tears,
Confused affects each other do confound:
Oppressed with grief, his passions had no bound.
Striving to tell his woes, words would not come;
For light cares speak, when mighty griefs are dombe.
At length, extreamitie breaks out a way.
Through Wc th'imprisoned voice with tears attended,
VVailes out a sound that sorrows do bewray,
With arms a-crosse, and eyes to heaven bended,
Vaporing out sighs that to the skies ascended.
Sighs, (the poor ease calamity affoords,)
Which serve for speech when sorrow wants words.
O heavens (quoth he,) why do mine eyes behold
The hateful rays of this unhappy sun?
Why have I light to see my sins controld,
With blood of mine own shame thus vildly done?
How can my sight endure to look thereon?
Why does not black eternal darkness hide,
That from mine eyes, my heart cannot abide?
What saw my life, wherein my soul might joy,
What had my days, whom troubles still afflicted,
But only this, to counterpoize annoy?
This joy, this hope, which Death has interdicted;
This sweet, whose loss has all distress inflicted.
This, that did season all my sour of life,
Vexed still at home with broils, abroad in strise.
Vexed still at home with broils, abroad in strife,
Dissension in my blood, iarres in my bed:
Distrust at board, suspecting still my life,
Spending the night in horror, days in dread;
(Such life has Tyrants, and this life I led.)
These miseries go masked in glittering shows,
Which wise men see, the vulgar little knows.
Thus as these passions do him ouer-whelme,
He draws him near my body to behold it.
And as the Vine married unto the Elm
With strict embraces, so does he infold it.
And as he in his careful arms does hold it,
Viewing the face that even death commends,
On senseless lips, millions of kisses spends.
Pitiful mouth (says he) that living gave
The sweetest comfort that my soul could wish:
O be it lawful now, that dead thou hauest,
This sorrowing farewell of a dying kiss.
And you fair eyes, containers of my bliss,
Motives of love, borne to be matched never,
Entombed in your sweet circles sleep for ever.
Ah how me thinks I see Death dallying seeks,
To entertain it self in Loves sweet place;
Decayed Roses of discolloured checkes,
Do yet retain dear notes of former grace:
And ugly Death sits fair within her face;
Sweet remnants resting of vermillion Red,
That Death it self doubts whether she be dead.
VVonder of beauty, oh receive these plaints,
These Obsequies, the last that I shall make thee:
For lo, my soul that now already faints,
(That loved thee living, dead will not forsake thee,)
Hastens her speedy course to ouer-take thee.
I Will meet my death, and free my self thereby,
For (ah) what can he do that cannot die?
Yet ere I die, thus much my soul does vow,
Revenge shall sweeten death with ease of mind:
And I will cause posterity shall know,
How fair thou were above all women kind.
And after-ages Monuments shall find,
Showing thy beauties title, not thy name,
Rose of the world that sweetened so the same.
This said, though more desirous yet to say,
(For sorrow is unwilling to give over,)
He does repress what grief would else bewray,
Least he too much his passions should discover.
And yet respect scarce bridles such a Lover.
So far transported that he knew not whither,
For Love and Majesty dwell ill together.
Then were my funerals not long deferred,
But done with all the rites pomp could devise,
At Godstow, where my body was interred,
And ritchly tomb'd in honorable wise,
Where yet as now scarce any note descties
Unto these times, the memory of me,
Marble and Brass so (...) be.
For those walls which the credulous devout,
And apt-belieuing ignorant did found:
With willing zeal, that never called in doubt,
That time their works should ever so confound,
Lie like confused heaps as underground.
And what their ignorance esteemed so holy,
The wiser ages do account as folly.
And were it not thy favorable lines,
Re-edified the wrack of my decays,
And that thy accents willingly assigns,
Some farthar date, and give me longer days,
Few in this age had known my beauties praise.
But thus renewd, my fame redeemes some time,
Till other ages shall neglect thy time.
Then when confusion in her course shall bring,
Sad desolation on the times to come:
When mirth-lesse Thames shall have no Swan to sing,
All Music silent, and the Muses dombe.
And yet even then it must be known to some,
That once they florisht, though not cherisht so,
And Thames had Swannes as well as ever Po.
But here an end, I may no longer stay thee,
I must return to attend at Stigian flood:
Yet ere I go, this one word more I pray thee,
Tell DELIA, now her sigh may do me good,
And will her note the frailty of our blood.
And if I pass unto those happy banks,
The^ she must have her praise, thy pen her thanks.
So vanquished she, and left me to return,
To prosecute the tenor of my woes:
Eternal matter for my Muse to Mourn,
But (ah) the world has heard too much of those,
My youth such errors must no more disclose.
I Will hide the rest, and grieve for what has been,
Who made me known, must make me live unseen.
FINIS.
THE Tragedy of Cleopatra.

AEtas prima canat veneres postrema tumultus.

1594.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady Marie, Countess of PEMBROOKE.
LO here the work the which she did impose,
Who only does predominate my Muse:
The star of wonder, which my labors chose
To guide their way in all the course I use.
She, whose clear brightness does alone infuse
Strength to my thoughts, and makes me what I am,
Called up my spirits from out their low repose,
To sing of state, and tragic notes to frame.
I, who (contented with an humble song.)
Made music to my self that pleased me best,
And only told of DELIA, and her wrong,
And praised her eyes, and plained mine own unrest:
(A text from whence my Muse had not degrest.)
Madam, had not thy well graced Anthony,
(Who all alone having remained long,)
Required his Cleopatras company.
Who if she here do so appear in act,
That for his Queen and Love he scarce will know her,
Finding how much she of her self has lackt,
And mist that glory wherein I should show her,
In majesty debased, in courage lower;
Yet lightning thou by thy sweet favoring eyes,
My dark defects which from her sp'rit detract,
He yet may guess it is she; which will suffice.
And I hereafter, in another kind,
More fitting to the nature of my vain,
May (peradventure) better please thy mind,
And higher notes in sweeter music strain:
Seeing that thou so graciously do daine.
To countenance my song and cherish me.
I must so work posterity may find
How much I did contend to honor thee.
Now when so many pens (like Spears) are charged,
To chase away this tyrant of the North:
Gross Barbarism, whose power grown far enlarged,
Was lately by thy valiant Brothers worth,
First found, encountered, and provoked forth:
Whose onset made the rest audacious,
Whereby they likewise have so well discharged,
Upon that hidious Beast incroching thus.
And now must I with that poor strength I have,
Resist so foul a foe in what I may:
And arm against oblivion and the grave,
That else in darkness carries all away,
And makes of all our honors but a pray.
So that if by my pen procure I shall
But to defend me, and my name to save,
Then though I die, I cannot yet die all;
But still the better part of me will live,
Decked and adorned with thy sacred name,
Although thy self do far more glory give
Unto thy self, then I can by the same.
Who do with thine own hand a Bulwark frame
Against these Monsters, (enemies of honor,)
Which euer-more shall so defend thy Fame,
That Time nor they, shall never pray upon her.
Those Hymns that thou do consecrate to heaven,
Which Isreal's Singer to his God did frame:
Unto thy voice eternity has given,
And makes thee dear to him from whence they came.
In them must rest thy ever reverent name,
So long as Syons GOD remains honored;
And till confusion has all zeal be-reauen,
And murdered Faith, and Temples ruined.
By this, (Great Lady,) thou must then be known,
When Wilton lies low loudl'd with the ground:
And this is that which thou may call thine own,
Which sacriligious time cannot confound;
Here thou suruiu'st thy self, here thou are found
Of late succeeding ages, fresh in fame:
This Monument cannot be ouer-throwne,
Where, in eternal Brass remains thy Name.
O that the Ocean did not bound our style
Within these strict and narrow limmits so:
But that the melody of our sweet I Will,
Might now be heard to Tyber, Arne, and Po.
That they might know how far Thames does out-go
The music of Declyned Italy:
And listening to our songs another while,
Might learn of thee, their notes to purify.
O why may not some after-comming hand,
Unlock these limits, open our confines:
And break a sunder this imprisoning band,
T'inlarge our spirits, and publish our dissignes;
Planting our Roses on the Apenines?
And teach to Rhene, to Loyre, and Rhodanus,
Our accents, and the wonders of our Land,
That they might all admire and honor us.
Whereby great SYDNEY and our SPENCER might,
With those Po-singers being equalled,
Enchaunt the world with such a sweet delight,
That their eternal songs (for ever read,)
May show what great ELIZAS reign has bred.
What music in the kingdom of her peace.
Has now been made to her, and by her might,
Whereby her glorious fame shall never cease.
But if that Fortune does deny us this,
Then Neptune, lock up with thy Ocean key,
This treasure to our selves, and let them miss
Of so sweet riches: as unworthy they
To taste the great delights that we enjoy.
And let our harmony so pleasing grown,
Content our selves, whose error ever is,
Strange notes to like, and disesteeme our own.
But, whither do my vows transport me now,
Without the compass of my course inioynd?
Alas, what honor can a voice so low
As this of mine, expect hereby to find?
But, (Madam,) this does animate my mind,
That favored by the Worthyes of our Land,
My lines are liked; the which may make me grow,
In time to take a greater task in hand.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the death of Antonius, Cleopatra (living still in the Monument she had
caused to be built,) could not by any means be drawn forth, although Octauius
Caesar very earnestly labored it: and sent Proculeius to use all diligence to
bring her unto him: For that he though it would be a great ornament to his
Tryumphes, to get her alive to Rome. But never would she put herself into
the hands of Proculeius, although on a time he found the means, (by a window
that was at the top of the Monument,) to come down unto her: where he
persuaded her (all he might) to yield herself to Caesar's mercy. Which she,
(to be ridd of him,) cunningly seemed to grant unto. After that, Octauius in
person went to visit her, to whom she excused her offense, laying all the
fault upon the greatness, and fear she had of Antonius, and withal, seemed
very tractable, and willing to be disposed of by him.

Whereupon, Octauius (thinking himself sure) resolved presently to send her
away to Rome. Whereof, Dolabella a favorite of Caesar's, (and one that was grown
into some good liking of her,) having certified her, she makes her humble
peticion to Caesar, that he would suffer her to sacrifize to the ghost of
Antonius: which being granted her, she was brought unto his Sepulcher, where
after her rites performed, she returned to the Monument, and there dined, with
great magnificence. And in dinner time, came there one in the habit of a
Countriman, with a basket of figgs unto her, who (unsuspected) was suffered to
carry them in. And in that basket (among the figs) were conuaid the Aspicks
wherewith she did herself to death. Dinner being ended, she dispatched
Letters to Caesar, contayuing great lamentations: with an earnest supplication,
that she might be entombed with Antonius. Whereupon, Caesar knowing what she
intended, sent presently with all speed, messengers to have prevented her
death, which notwithstanding, before they came was dispatched.

Cesario her son, which she had by Julius Caesar, (conuaied before unto
India, out of the danger of the wars,) was about the same time of her death,
murdered at Rhodes: trained thither by the falsehood of his Tutor, corrupted by
Caesar. And so hereby, came the race of the Ptolomies to be wholly extinct, and
the flourishing rich Kingdom of Egypt utterly ouer-throwne and subdued.

The Scaene supposed Alexandria.
THE ACTORS.
CLEOPATRA. OCTAVIUS CAESAR. PROCVLEIVS. DOLABELLA. TITIVS, Scruaunt to
DOLABELLA. ARIVS. -- two Philosophers. PHILOSTRATVS. SELEVCVS. Secretary to
CLEOPATRA. RODON. Tutor to CAESARIO. NVNTIVS. The CHORUS. all Egiptians.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
CLEOPATRA.
YET do I live, and yet does breath possess
This hateful prison of a loathsome soul:
Can no calamity, nor no distress
Break heart and all, and end a life so soul?
Can Cleopatra live, and with these eyes
Behold the dearest of her life bereft her?
Ah, can she entertain the least surmise
Of any hope, that has but horror left her?
Why should I linger longer griefs to try?
These eyes that saw what honor earth could give me,
Do now behold the worst of misery:
The greatest wrack whereto Fortune could drive me
He on whose shoulders all my rest relyde,
On whom the burden of my ambition lay:
The Atlas and the Champion of my pride,
That did the world of my whole fortune sway;
Lies fallen, confounded, dead in shame and dolors,
Following th'vnlucky party of my love.
The Ensign of mine eyes, the unhappy colors,
That him to mischief, me to ruin drove.
And now the model made of misery,
Scorn to the world, borne but for Fortunes foil,
My lufts have framed a Tomb for me to lie,
Even in the ashes of my Countries spoil.
Ah, who would think that I were she who late,
Clad with the glory of the worlds chief riches,
Admired of all the earth, and wondered at,
Glittring in pomp that heart and eye bewitches:
Should thus distressed, cast down from of that height
Leuell'd with low disgraced calamity,
Under the weight of such affliction sigh,
Reduced unto the extremest misery.
Am I the woman, whose inuentiue pride,
(A dorn'd like Isis,) scornd mortality?
Is It I that left my sense so without guide,
That flattery would not let him know it was I?
Ah, now I see, they scarce tell truth, that praise us,
Crowns are beguild, prosperity betraies us.
What is become of all that stately train,
Those troops that wont attend prosperity?
See what is left, what number does remain,
A tomb, two maids, and miserable I.
And I t'adorne their tryumphes, am reserved
A captive kept to beautify their spoils:
Whom Caesar labors, so to have preserved,
And seeks to entertain my life with wiles.
No Caesar no, it is not thou can do it.
Promise, flatter, threaten extreamitie,
Employ thy wits, and all thy force unto it,
I have both hands, and will, and I can die.
Though thou of Country, kingdom, and my Crown,
Though thou of all my glory do bereave me,
Though thou have all my Egypt as thine own,
Yet have thou left me that which will deceive thee.
That courage with my blood and birth innated,
Admired of all the earth, as thou art now:
Cannot by threats be vulgarly abated,
To be thy slave, that ruled as good as thou.
Consider Caesar that I am a Queen,
And scorn the baseness of a servile thought:
The world and thou, do know what I have been,
And never think I can be so low brought,
The Rome should see my scepter-bearing hands,
Behind me bound, and glory in my tears.
That I should pass, whereas Octauia stands
To view my misery, that purchased hers.
No, I disdain that head that wore a Crown,
Should stoop to take up that which others give:
I must not be, unless I be mine own.
It Is sweet to die when we are forced to live.
Nor had I troubled now the world thus long,
And been indebted for this little breath,
But that I fear, Caesar would offer wrong
To my distressed seed after my death.
It Is that which does my dearest blood control.
It Is that (alas) detaines me from my Tomb,
Whilst Nature brings to contradict my soul,
The argument of mine unhappy womb.
O lucklesse issue of a woeful Mother,
The ungodly pledges of a wanton bed;
You Kings designed, must now be slaves to other,
Or else not be (I fear) when I am dead.
It is for you I temporise with Caesar,
And live this while for to procure your safety.
For you I feign content, and soothe his pleasure,
Calamity herein has made me crasty.
But it is not long, I Will see what may be done,
And come what will, this stands, I must die free.
I Will be my self, my thoughts do rest thereon,
Blood, children, nature, all must pardon me.
My soul yields honor up the victory,
And I must be a Queen, forget a mother:
Yet mother would I be, were I not I,
And Queen would I not now be, were I other.
But what know I, if th'heauens have decreed,
And that the sins of Egypt have deserved,
The Ptolomeyes should fail, and none succeed,
And that my weakness was thereto reserved.
That I should bring confusion to my state,
And fill the measure of iniquity:
Licentiousnes in me should end her date,
Begun in ill-dispensed liberty.
If so it be, and that my heedles ways,
Have this so great a dissolation raised,
Yet let a glorious end conclude my days,
Though life were bad, my death may yet be praised,
That I may write in letters of my blood,
A fit memorial for the times to come:
To be example to such Princes good
That please themselves, and care not what become.
And Anthony, because the world does know,
That my misfortune has procured thine,
And my improuidence brought thee follow,
To lose thy glory, and to ruin mine:
By grapling in the Ocean of our pride,
To sink each others greatness both together,
Both equal shipwreck of our states to abide,
And like destruction to procure to either:
If I should now (our common fault) survive,
Then all the world must hate me if I do it,
Since both our errors did occasion give,
And both our faults have brought us both unto it.
I being first enamored with thy greatness,
Thou with my vanity bewitched wholly:
And both betrayed with the outward pleasant sweetness,
The one ambition spoyld, the other folly.
For which, thou have already duly paid,
The statute of thy errors dearest forfeit:
Whereby thy gotten credit was decayed,
Procured thee by thy wanton deadly surfeit.
And next is my turn, now to sacrifize
To Death, and thee, the life that does reprove me,
Our like distress I feel does sympathize,
And even affliction makes me truly love thee.
Which Anthony, (I must confess my fault,)
I never did sincerely until now;
Now I protest I do, now am I taught,
In death to love, in life that knew not how.
For whilst my glory in that greatness stood,
And that I saw my state, and knew my beauty,
Saw how the world admired me, how they wood,
I then thought all men, must love me of duty,
And I love none: for my lascivious Court,
(Fertile in euer-fresh and new-choyce pleasure,)
Affoorded me so bountiful disport,
That I to think on love had never leisure.
My vagabond desires no limits found,
For lust is endless, pleasure has no bound.
Thou, coming from the strictnes of thy City,
The wanton pomp of Courts yet never learned:
Inured to wairs, in woman's wiles vnwittie,
Whilst others fayn'd, thou fell'st to love in earnest.
Not knowing women like them best that houer,
And make least reckning of a doting Lover.
And yet thou earn'st but in my beauties waine,
When new-appearing wrinkles of declining,
Wrought with the hand of years, seemed to detain
My graces light, as now but dimly shining.
Even in the confines of mine age, when I
Failing of what I was, and was but thus:
When such as we, do deem in iealosie
That men love for themselves, and not for us.
Then, and but thus, thou did love most sincerely,
(O Anthony,) that best deseru'dst it better
This Antumne of my beauty bought so dearly,
For which (in more then death) I stand thy debtor.
Which I will pay thee with most faithful zeal,
And that ere long, no Caesar shall detain me;
My death, my love and courage shall reveal,
The which is all the world has left t'vnstaine me.
And to the end I may deceive best, Caesar,
Who does so eagerly my life importune,
I must prevail me of this little leisure,
Seeming to suit my mind unto my fortune.
Whereby I may the better me provide,
Of what my death and honor best shall fit:
A seeming base content, must wary hide
My last disseigne, till I accomplish it.
That hereby yet the world shall see that I,
Although unwise to live, had wit to die.
Exit.
CHORUS.
BEhold what Furtes still
Torment their tortured breast.
Who by their doing ill,
Have wrought the worlds unrest.
Which when being most distressed,
Yet more to vex their sp'rit,
The hidious face of sin,
(In forms they most detest)
Stands ever in their sight.
Their Conscience still within,
Theternall larum is,
That euer-barking dog that calls upon their miss.
No means at all to hide
Man from himself can find:
No way to start aside
Out from the hell of mind.
But in himself confined,
He still sees sin before:
And winged-footed pain,
That swiftly comes behind,
The which is ever more,
The sure and certaie gain
Impiety does get,
And wanton loose respect, that does it self forget.
And CLEOPATRA now,
Well sees the dangerous way
She took, and cared not bow,
Which led her to decay.
And likewise makes us pay
For her disordred lust,
The interest of our blood:
Or live a servile pray,
Under a band unjust,
As others shall think good.
This has her riot won.
And thus she has her state, her self and us vndunne.
Now every mouth can tell,
What close was muttered:
How that she did not well,
To take the course she did.
For now is nothing hid,
Of what fear did restrain.
No secret closely done,
But now is uttered:
The text is made most plain
That flattry glos'd upon,
The bed of sin revealed,
And all the luxury that shame would have concealed.
The scene is broken down,
And all vncou'red lies,
The purple Actors known
Scarce men, whom men despise.
The complots of the wise,
Prove imperfections smoke:
And all what wonder gave
To pleasure-gazing eyes,
Lies scattered, dashed, all broke.
Thus much beguiled have
Poor vnconsider at wights,
These momentary pleasures, fugitive delights.
ACTVS SECVNDVS.
CAESAR. PROCVLEIVS.
KIngdoms I see we win, we conquer Climates,
Yet cannot vanquish hearts, nor force obedience,
Affections kept in close-concealed limits,
Stand far without the reach of sword or violence.
Who forced do pay us duty, pay not love:
Free is the heart, the temple of the mind,
The Sanctuary sacred from above,
Where nature keeps the keys that loose and bind.
No mortal hand force open can that door,
So close shut up, and locked to all mankind:
I see men's bodies only ours, no more,
The rest, another right, that rules the mind.
Behold, my forces vanquished have this Land,
Subdu'de that strong Competitor of mine:
All Egypt yields to my all-conquering hand,
And all their treasure and themselves resign.
Only this Queen, that has lost all this all,
To whom is nothing left except a mind:
Cannot into a thought of yielding fall,
To be disposed as chance has her assigned.
But Proculei, what hope does she now give,
Will she be brought to condescend to live?
Proc. My Lord, what time being sent from you to try,
To win her forth alive, (if that I might)
From out the Monument, where woefully
She lives enclosed in most afflicted plight;
No way I found, no means how to surprise her,
But through a Grate at th'entry of the place,
Standing to treat, I labored to advise her,
To come to Caesar, and to sue for grace.
She said, she craved not life, but leave to die,
Yet for her children, prayed they might inherit,
That Caesar would vouchsafe (in clemency,)
To pity them, though she deserved no merit.
So leaving her for then; and since of late,
With Gallus sent to try another time,
The whilst he entertaines her at the grate,
I found the means up to the Tomb to climb.
Where in discending in the closest wise,
And silent manner as I could contriue:
Her woman me descri'd, and out she cries,
Poor Cleopatra, thou art taken alive.
With that the Queen raught from her side her knift,
And even in act to slab her martred breast,
I stepped with speed, and held, and saved her life,
And forth her trembling hand the blade did wrest.
Ah Cleopatra, why should'is thou (said I,)
Both injury thy self and Caesar so?
Bar him the honor of his victory,
Who ever deals most mildly with his foe?
Live and rely on him, whose mercy will
To thy submission always ready be.
With that (as all amazed) she held her still,
Twixt majesty confused and misery.
Her proud grieved eyes, held sorrow and disdain,
State and distress warring within her soul:
Dying ambition dispossessed her reign,
So base affliction seemed to control.
Like as a burning Lamp, whose liquor spent
With intermitted flames, when dead you deem it,
Sendes forth a dying flash, as discontent,
That so the matter fails that should redeem it.
So she (in spite) to see her low-brought state,
(When all her hopes were now consumed to naught,)
Scorns yet to make an abject league with Fate,
Or once descend into a servile thought.
The Imperious tongue unused to beseech,
Authority confounds with prayers, so
Words of command conioyn'd wish humble speech,
Showed she would live, yet scorned to pray her foe.
Ah, what has Caesar here to do, said she,
In confines of the dead in darkness living?
Will he not grant our Sepulchers be free,
But violate the privilege of dying?
What, must he stretch forth his ambitious hand
Into the right of Death, and force us here?
Has misery no covert where to stand
Free from the storm of pride, is it safe no where?
Cannot my land, my gold, my Crown suffice,
And all what I held dear, to him made common,
But that he must in this sort tirannize,
The Afflicted body of an woeful woman?
Tell him, my frailty, and the Gods have given,
Sufficient glory, if he could content him:
And let him now with his desires make even,
And leave me to this horror, to lamenting.
Now he has taken all away from me,
What must he take me from my self by force?
Ah, let him yet (in mercy) leave me free
The kingdom of this poor distressed corse.
No other crown I seek, no other good.
Yet wish that Caesar would vouchsafe this grace,
To favor the poor offspring of my blood.
Confused issue, yet of Roman race.
If blood and name be linkes of love in Princes,
Not spurs of hate; my poor Caesario may
Find favor notwithstanding mine offenses,
And Caesar's blood, may Caesar's raging stay.
But if that with the torrent of my fall,
All must be rapt with furious violence,
And no respect, nor no regard at all,
Can ought with nature or with blood dispense:
Then be it so, if needs it must be so.
There stays and shrinkes in horror of her state.
When I began to mitigate her woe,
And thy great mercies unto her relate;
Wishing her not despair, but rather come
And sue for grace, and shake off all vain fears:
No doubt she should obtain as gentle doom
As she desired, both for herself and hers.
And so with much a-doe, (well pacifide
Seeming to be,) she showed content to live,
Saying she was resolved thy doom to abide,
And to accept what favor thou would give.
And heere-withall, craved also that she might
Perform her last rites to her lost beloved.
To sacrifize to him that wrought her plight:
And that she might not be by force removed.
I granting from thy part this her request,
Left her for then, seeming in better rest.

Caes. But do thou think she will remain so still?

Pro. I think, and do assure my self she will.

Caes. Ah, private men found not the hearts of Princes,
Whose actions often bear contrary pretenses.

Pro. Why, it is her safety for to yield to thee.

Caes. But it is more honor for her to die free.

Pro. She may thereby procure her childrens good.

Caes. Princes respect their honor more then blood.

Pro. Can Princes power dispense with nature than?

Caes. To be a Prince, is more then be a man.

Pro. There Is none but have in time persuaded been.

Caes. And so might she too, were she not a Queen.

Pro. Diverse respects will force her be reclam'd.

Caes. Princes (like Lions) never will be tamed.
A private man may yield, and care not how,
But greater hearts will break before they bow.
And sure I think sh'will never condescend,
To live to grace our spoils with her disgrace:
But yet let still a wary watch attend,
To guard her person, and to watch the place.
And look that none with her come to confer:
Shortly my self will go to visit her.

CHORUS.
OPINION, how do thou molest
Th affected mind of restles man?
Who following thee, never can,
Nor ever shall attain to rest.
For getting what thou say is best,
Yet lo, that best he finds far wide
Of what thou promisedst before:
For in the same he looked for more,
Which proves but small when once it is tried.
Then something else thou find'st beside,
To draw him still from thought to thought:
When in the end all proves but naught.
Farther from rest he finds him than,
Then at the first when he began.
O malcontent seducing guest,
Contriuer of our greatest woes:
Which borne of wind, and fed with shows,
Do nurse thy self in thine unrest.
Judging vngotten things the best,
Or what thou in conceit design'st.
And all things in the world do deem,
Not as they are, but as they seem:
Which shows, their state thou ill defin'st:
And live to come, in present pin'st.
For what thou have, thou still do lack:
O mindel tormentor, bodies wrack,
Vain promiser of that sweet rest,
Which never any yet possessed.
If we unto ambition tend,
Then do thou draw our weakness on,
With vain imagination
Of that which never has an end.
Or if that lust we apprehend,
How does that pleasant plague infest?
O what strange forms of luxury,
Thou straight do cast t'intice us by?
And tell us that is ever best,
Which we have never yet possessed.
And that more pleasure rests beside,
In something that we have not tried.
And when the same likewise is had,
Then all is one, and all is bad.
This Anthony can say is true,
And Cleopatra knows it is so,
By the experience of their woe.
She can say, she never knew
But that just found pleasures new,
And was never satis-fide:
He can say by proof of toil,
Ambition is a Vulture vile,
That feeds upon the heart of pride:
And finds no rest when all is tried.
For worlds cannot confine the one,
The Other, listes and bounds has none.
And both subvert the mind, the state,
Procure destruction, envy, hate.
And now when all this is proved vain,
Yet Opinion leaves not here,
But sticks to Cleopatra near.
Persuading now, how she shall gain
Honor by death, and fame attain.
And what a shame it were to live,
Her kingdom lost, her Lover dead:
And so with this persuasion led,
Despair does such a courage give,
That naught else can her mind relieve.
Nor yet divert her from that thought:
To this conclusion all is brought.
This is that rest this vain world lends,
To end in death that all thing ends.
ACTVS TERTIVS.
PHILOSTRATVS. ARIVS.
HOW deeply Arius am I bound to thee,
That sau'dst from death this wretched life of mine:
Obtaining Caesar's gentle grace for me,
When I of all helps else dispayr'd but thine?
Although I see in such a woeful state,
Life is not that which should be much desired:
Since all out glories come to end their date,
Our Countries honor and our own expired.
Now that the hand of wrath has ouer-gone us,
Living (as'twere) in the arms of our dead mother,
With blood under our feet ruin upon us,
And in a Land most wretched of all other,
When yet we reckon life our dearest good.
And so we live, we care not how we live:
So deep we seele impressed in our blood,
That touch which nature with our breath did give.
And yet what blasts of words has learning found,
To blow against the fear of death and dying?
What comforts vnsicke Eloquence can sound,
And yet all fayles us in the point of trying.
For whilst we reason with the breath of safety,
Without the compass of destruction living:
What precepts show we then, what courage lofty
In taxing others fears in counsel giving?
When all this air of sweet-contriued words,
Proves but weak armor to defend the heart.
For when this life, pale fear and terror boords,
Where are our precepts then, where is our art?
O who is he that from himself can turn,
That bears about the body of a man?
Who does not toil and labor to adiorne
The day of death, by any means he can?
All this I speak to the end my self t'excuse,
For my base begging of a servile breath,
Wherein I grant my self much to abuse,
So shamefully to seek t'auoyd my death.
Arius. Philostratus, that self same care to live,
Possesses all alike, and grieve not then
Nature does us no more then others give:
Though we speak more then men, we are but men.
And yet (in truth) these miseries to see,
Wherein we stand in most extreme distress:
Might to our selves sufficient motives be
To loathe this life, and weigh our death the less.
For never any age has better taught,
What feeble footing pride and greatness has.
How 'improuident prosperity is caught,
And clean confounded in the day of wrath.
See how dismayed Confusion keeps those streets,
That naught but mirth and Music late resounded,
How nothing with our eye but horror meets,
Our state, our wealth, our pride and all confounded.
Yet what weak sight did not discern from far
This black-arysing tempest, all confounding?
Who did not see we should be what we are,
When pride and riot grew to such abounding.
When dissolute impiety possessed,
Th'vnrespectiue minds of such a people:
When insolent Security found rest
In wanton thoughts, with lust and ease made feeble.
Then when unwary peace with fat-fed pleasure,
New-fresh invented ryots still detected,
Purchac'd with all the Ptolomies rich treasure,
Our laws, our Gods, our mysteries neglected.
Who saw not how this confluence of vice,
This innondation of disorders, must
At length of force pay back the bloody price
Of sad destruction, (a reward for lust.)
O thou and I have heard, and read, and known
Of like proud states, as woefully incombred,
And framed by them, examples for our own:
Which now among examples must be numbered.
For this decree a law from high is given,
An ancient Canon, of eternal date,
In Consistory of the stars of heaven,
Entered the book of vnauoyded Fate;
That no state can in height of happiness,
In th'exaltation of their glory stand:
But thither once ariu'd, declyning less,
Ruin themselves, or fall by others hand.
Thus does the euer-changing course of things,
Run a perpetual circle, ever turning:
And that same day that highest glory brings,
Brings us unto the point of back-returning.
For senceles sensuality, does ever
Accompany felicity and greatness.
A fatal witch, whose charms do leave us never,
Till we leave all in sorrow for our sweetness;
When yet our selves must be the cause we fall,
Although the same be first decreed on hie:
Our errors still must bear the blame of all,
This must it be, earth ask not heaven why.
Yet mighty men with wary jealous hand,
Strive to cut off all obstacles of fear:
All whatsoever seems but to withstand
Their least conceit of quiet, held so dear;
And so entrench themselves with blood, with crimes,
With all injustice as their fears dispose:
Yet for all this we see, how oftentimes
The means they work to keep, are means to lose.
And sure I cannot see, how this can stand
With great Augustus safety and his honor,
To cut off all succession from our land,
For her offense that pulled the wars upon her.

Phi. Why must her issue pay the price of that?

Ari. The price is life that they are rated at.

Phi. Caesario to, issued of Caesar's blood?

Ari. Plurality of Caesar's are not good.

Phi. Alas what hurt procures his feeble arm?

Ari. Not for it does, but that it may do harm.

Phi. Then when it offers hurt, repress the same,

Ari. It Is best to quench a spark before it flame.

Phi. It Is in humane, an innocent to kill.

Ari. Such innocents, sildome remain so still.
And sure his death may best procure our peace,
Competitors the subject dearly buies:
And so that our affliction may surcease,
Let geat men be the peoples sacrifice.
But see where Caesar comes himself, to try
And work the mind of our distressed Queen,
To apprehend some falsed hope: whereby
She might be drawn to have her fortune seen.
But yet I think, Rome will not see that face
(That quel her cha^pions,) blush in base disgrace.

SCENA. SECVNDA.
CAESAR, CLEOPATRA, SELEVCVS, DOLABELLA.
Caes. WHat Cleopatrae, do thou doubt so much
Of Caesar's mercy, that thou hid'st thy face?
Or do thou think, thy' offenses can be such,
That they surmount the measure of our grace?

Cleo. O Caesar, not for that I fly thy fight
My soul this sad retire of sorrow chose:
But that my' oppressed thoughts ab horring light,
Like best in darkness, my disgrace t'inclose.
And here to these close limmits of despair,
This solitary horror where I bide:
Caesar, I thought no Roman should repair,
More after him, who here oppressed did.
Yet now, here at thy conquering feet I lie,
Poor captive soul, that never thought to bow:
Whose happy foot of rule and majesty,
Stood late on yt same ground thou stand now.

Caes. Rise Queen, none but thy self is cause of all.
And yet, would all were but thine own alone:
That others ruin had not with thy fall
Brought Rome her sorrows, to my tryumphs moan.
For breaking off the league of love and blood.
Thou make my winning joy a gain unpleasing:
Since the eye of grief must look into our good,
Through the horror of our own bloodshedding.
And all, we must attribute unto thee.

Cleo. To me? Caesar what should a woman do
Oppressed with greatness? What was it for me
To contradict my Lord, being bent thereto?
I was by love, by fear, by weakness, made
An instrument to such disseignes as these.
For when the Lord of all the Orient bade,
Who but obeyed? who was not glad to please?
And how could I withdraw my succouring hand,
From him that had my heart, or what was mine?
Th'intrest of my faith in straightest band,
My love to his most firmly did combine.

Caes. Love? alas no, it was th'innated hatred
That thou and thine have ever borne our people:
That made thee seek al means to have us scattred,
To disvnite our strength, and makers feeble.
And therefore did that breast nurse our dissension,
With hope t'exalt thy self, t'augment thy state:
To pray upon the wrack of our contention,
And (with the rest our foes,) to joy thereat.

Cleo. O Caesar, see how easy it is t'accuse
Whom fortune has made faulty by their fall,
The wretched conquered may not refuse
The titles of reproach he is charged withal.
The conquering cause has right, wherein you art,
The vanquished, still is judged the worser part.
Which part is mine, because I lost my part.
No lesser then the portion of a Crown.
Enough for me, alas what needed art
To gain by others, but to keep mine own?
But here let weaker powers note what it is,
To neighbor great Competitors too near,
If we take part, we often do perrish thus,
If neutrall bide, both parties we must fear.
Alas, what shall the forced partakers do,
When following none, yet must they perrish to?
But CAESAR. since thy right and cause is such,
Be not a heavy weight upon calamity:
Depresse not the afflicted overmuch,
The chiefest glory is the Victors lenity.
Th'inheritaunce of mercy from him take,
Of whom thou have thy fortune and thy name:
Great Caesar me a Queen at first did make,
And let not Caesar now confound the same.
Read here these lines which still I keep with me,
The witness of his love and favors ever:
And God forbid this should be said of thee,
That Caesar wronged the favored of Caesar.
For look what I have been to Anthony,
Think thou the same I might have been to thee.
And here I do present thee with the note,
Of all the treasure, all the Jewels rare
That Egypt has in many ages got;
And look what Cleopatra has, is there.

Seleu. Nay there is not all set down within that roll,
I know some things she has reserved a part.

Cle. What vile vng greateful wretch, dare thou co^troule
Thy Queen and sovereign? caitiue as thou art.

Caes. Hold, hold, a poor revenge can work so feeble

Cle. Ah Caesar, what a great indignity hands.
Is this, that here my vassale subject stands,
TO accuse me to my Lord of treachery?
If I reserved some certain women's toys,
Alas it was not for my self (God knows,)
Poor miserable soul, that little joys
In trifling ornaments, in outward shows.
But what I kept, I kept to make my way
Unto thy Liuia, and Octauias grace.
That thereby in compassion moved, they
Might mediat thy favor in my case.

Caes. Well Cleopatra, fear not, thou shall find
What favor thou desir'st, or can expect:
For Caesar never yet was found but kind
To such as yield, and can themselves subject.
And therefore give thou comfort to thy mind;
Relieve thy soul thus ouer-charg'd with care,
How well I will entreat thee thou shall find,
So soon as some affairs dispatched are.
Til when farewell. Cl. Thanks thrise-renowned Caesar,
Poor Cleopatra rests thine own for ever.

Dol. No marvel Caesar though our greatest spirits,
Have to the power of such a charming beauty,
Been brought to yield the honor of their merits:
Forgetting all respect of other duty.
Then whilst the glory of her youth remained
The wondering object to each wanton eye:
Before her full of sweet (with sorrow wain'd,)
Came to the period of this misery.
If still, even in the midst of death and horror,
Such beauty shines, through clouds of age and sorrow,
If even those sweet decays seem to plead for her,
Which from affliction, moving graces borrow;
If in calamity she could thus move,
What could she do adorned with youth and love?
What could she do then, when as spreading wide
The pomp of beauty, in her glory dight?
When armed with wonder, she could use beside,
The engines of her love, Hope and Delight?
Beauty daughter of Marvel, o see how
Thou can disgracing sorrows sweetly grace?
What power thou show in a distressed brow,
That make affliction fair, give tears their grace.
What can vntressed locks, can torn rent hair,
A weeping eye, a wailing face be fair?
I see then, artlesse feature can content,
And that true beauty needs no ornament.

Caes. What in a passion Dolabella? what? take heed:
Let others fresh examples be thy warning;
What mischiefs these, so idle humors breed,
Whilst error keeps us from a true discerning.
Indeed, I saw she labored to impart
Her sweetest graces in her saddest cheer:
Presuming on the face that knew the art
To move with what aspect so eu'r it were.
But all in vain, she takes her aim amiss,
The ground and mark, her leuel much deceiues;
Time now has altered all, for neither is
She as she was, nor we as she conceiues.
And therefore now, twere best she left such badnes,
Folly in youth is sin, in age, it is madness.
And for my part, I seek but t'entertaine
In her some feeding hope to draw her forth;
The greatest Trophey that my travails gain,
Is to bring home a prizall of such worth.
And now, since that she seems so well content
To be disposed by us, without more stay
She with her children shall to Rome be sent,
Whilst I by Syria thither take my way.

CHORUS.
O Fearful frowning NEMESIS,
Daughter of JUSTICE, most severe,
That art the worlds great Arbitresse,
And Queen of causes reigning here.
Whose swift-sure hand is ever near
Eternill justice, righting wrong:
Who never yet-deserrest long
The proudes decay, the weakes redress.
But through thy power every where,
Do raze the great, and raise the less.
The less made great, do ruin to,
To show the earth what heaven can do.
Thou from dark-clos'd eternity,
From thy black clowdy hidden seat,
The worlds disorders do discry:
Which when they swell so proudly great,
Reuersing the order nature set,
Thou give thy all-confounding doom,
Which none can know before it come.
The inevitable destiny,
Which neither wit nor strength can let,
Fast chayn'd unto necessity,
In mortal things does order so,
Th'alternate course of weal or woe.
O low the powers of heaven do play
With travailed mortality:
And does their weakness still betray,
In their best prosperity.
When being listed up so hie,
They look beyond themselves so sarre,
That to themselves they take no care:
Whilst swift confusion down does lay,
Their late proud mounting vanity:
Bringing their glory to decay.
And with the ruin of their fall,
Extinguish people, state and all.
But is it justice that all we
The Innocent poor multitude,
For great men's faults should punishs be,
And to destruction thus pursude.
O why should th'heauens us include,
Within the compass of their sall,
Who of themselves procured all?
Or do the Gods (in close) decree,
Occasion take how to extrude
Man from the earth with cruelty?
Ah no, the Gods are ever just,
Our faults excuse their rigor must.
This is the period Fate set down,
To Egipts fat prosperity:
Which now unto her greatest grown,
Must perrish thus, by course must die.
And some must be the causers why
This revolution must be wrought:
As borne to bring their state to naught.
To change the people and the crown,
And purge the worlds iniquity:
Which vice so far has ouer-growne.
As we, so they that treat us thus,
Must one day perrish like to us.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
SELEVCVS. RODON.
Sell. Never friend Rodon in a better hour,
Could I have met thee then eu'en now I do
Having affliction in the greatest power
Upon my soul, and none to tell it to.
For it is some ease our sorrows to reveal,
If they to whom we shall impart our woes
Seem but to feel a part of what we feel,
And meet us with a sigh but at a cloze.

Rod. And never (friend Seleucus) found'st thou one,
That better could bear such a part with thee:
Who by his own, knows others cares to moan,
And can in like accord of grief agree.
And therefore tell th'oppression of thy heart,
Tell to an ear prepared and tuned to care:
And I will likewise unto thee impart
As sad a tale as what thou shall declare.
So shall we both our mournful plaints combine,
I Will wail thy state, and thou shall pity mine.

Sell. Well then, thou know how I have lived in grace
With Cleopatra, and esteemed in Court
As one of Counsel, and of chiefest place,
And ever held my credit in that sort.
Till now in this confusion of our state,
When thinking to have used a mean to climb,
And fled the wretched, slowne unto the great,
(Follow'ing the fortune of the present time,)
Am come to be cast down and ruined cleene.
And in the course of mine own plot undone.
For having all the secrets of the Queen
Revealed to Caesar, to have savor won:
My treachery is quited with disgrace,
My falsehood loathed, and not without great reason
Though good for him, yet Princes in this case
Do hate ye Traitor, though they love the treason.
For how could he imagine I would be
Faithful to him, being false unto mine own?
And false to such a bountious Queen as she,
That had me raised, and made mine honor known.
He saw it was not for zeal to him I bare,
But for base fear, or mine own state to settle.
Weakness is false, and faith in Cowards rare,
Fear finds out shyfts, timiditie is subtle.
And therefore scornd of him, scornd of mine own.
Hateful to all that look into my state:
Despised Seleucus now is only grown
The mark of infamy, that is pointed at.

Rod. It Is much thou say, and o too much to feel,
And I do grieve and do lament thy fall:
But yet all this which thou do here reveal,
Co^par'd with mine, will make thine seem but small.
Although my fault be in the selfsame kind,
Yet in degree far greater, far more hateful;
Mine sprung of myschiefe, thine from feeble mind,
I staind with blood, thou only but'vngratefull.
For unto me did Cleopatra give
The best and dearest treasure of her blood.
Lovely Casario, whom she would should live
Free from the dangers wherein Egypt stood.
And unto me with him this charge she gave,
Here Rodon, take, convey from out this Coast,
This precious Gem, the chiefest that I have,
The jewel of my soul I value most.
Guide him to INDIA, lead him far from hence,
Safeguard him where secure he may remain,
Till better fortune call him back from thence,
And Egipts peace be reconciled again.
For this is he that may our hopes bring back,
(The rising Sun of our declyning state:)
These be the hands that may restore our wrack,
And raise the broken ruins made of late.
He may give limmits to the boundles pride
Of fierce Octauius, and abate his might:
Great Julius offspring, he may come to guide
The Empire of the world, as his by right.
O how he seems the model of his Sire?
O how I gaze my Caesar in his face?
Such was his gate, so did his looks aspyre;
Such was his threatening brow, such was his grace.
High shouldred, and his forehead even as hie.
And o, (if he had not been borne so late,)
He might have ruled the worlds great Monarchy,
And now have been the Champion of our state.
Then unto him, o my dear Son, (she says,)
Son of my youth, fly hence, o fly, be gone:
Reserve thy self, ordained for better days,
For much thou have to ground thy hopes upon.
Leave me (thy woeful Mother) to endure,
The fury of this tempest here alone:
Who cares not for herself, so thou be sure,
Thou may revenge, when others can but moan.
Rodon will see thee safe, Rodon will guide
Thee and thy ways, thou shall not need to fear.
Rodon (my faithful servant) will provide
What shall be best for thee, take thou no care.
And o good Rodon, look well to his youth,
The ways are long, and dangers every where.
I urge it not that I do doubt thy truth,
Mothers will cast the worst, and always fear.
The absent danger greater still appears,
Less fears he, who is near the thing he fears.
And o, I know not what presaging thought
My sp'rit suggests of luckles bad event:
But yet it may be it is but love does dote,
Or idle shadows which my fears present.
But yet the memory of mine own fate,
Makes me fear his. And yet why should I fear?
His fortune may recover better state,
And he may come in pomp to govern here.
But yet I doubt the Genius of our Race
By some malignant spirit comes ouer-throwne:
Our blood must be extinct, in my disgrace,
Egypt must have no more Kings of their own.
Then let him stay, and let us fall together,
Since it is fore-decreed that we must fall.
Yet who knows what may come? let him go thither,
What Merchaunt in one Vessel venters all?
Let us divide our stars. Go, go my Son,
Let not the fate of Egypt find thee here:
Try if so be thy destiny can shun
The common wrack of us, by being there.
But who is he found ever yet defense
Against the heavens, or hyd him any where?
Then what need I to send thee so far hence
To seek thy death that may as well die here?
And here die with thy mother, die in rest,
Not trauayling to what will come to thee.
Why should we leave our blood unto the East,
When Egypt may a Tom be sufficient be?
O my divided soul, what shall I do?
VVhereon shall now my resolution rest?
What were I best resolve to yield unto
When both are bad, how shall I know the best?
Stay; I may hap so work with Caesar now,
That he may yield him to restore thy right.
Go; Caesar never will consent that thou
So near in blood, shall be so great in might.
Then take him Roden, go my son farewell.
But stay; there is something else that I would say:
Yet nothing now, but o God speed thee well,
Least saying more, that more may make thee stay.
Yet let me speak: It may be it is the last
That ever I shall speak to thee my Son.
Do Mothers use to part in such post-hast?
What, must I end when I have scarce begun?
Ah no (dear heart,) it is no such slender twine
VVhere-with the knot is tide twixt thee and me.
That blood within thy veins came out of mine,
Parting from thee, I part from part of me:
And therefore I must speak. Yet what? O son.
Here more she would, when more she could not say.
Sorrow rebounding back whence it begun,
Filled up the passage, and quite stopped the way:
When sweet Caesario with a princely sp'rite,
(Though comfortless himself) did comfort give;
With mildest words, persuading her to bear it.
And as for him, she should not need to grieve.
And I (with protestations of my part,)
Swore by that faith, (which sworn I did deceive)
That I would use all care, all wit and art
To see him safe; And so we took our leave.
Scarce had we trauail'd to our iourneyes end,
When Caesar having knowledge of our way,
His Agents after us with speed does send
To labor me, Caesario to betray.
VVho-with rewards, and promises so large.
Assaild me then, that I grew soon content;
And back to Rhodes did reconuay my charge,
Pretending that Octauius for him sent,
To make him King of Egypt presently.
And thither come, seeing himself betrayed,
And in the hands of death through treachery,
VVayling his state, thus to himself he said.
Lo here brought back by subtle train to death,
Betrayde by Tutors faith, or Traitors rather:
My fault my blood, and mine offense my birth,
For being son of such a mighty Father.
From INDIA, (whither sent by Mothers care,
To be reserved from Egypts common wrack,)
To Rhodes, (so long the arms of Tyrants are,)
I am by Caesar's subtle reach brought back.
Here to be made the oblation for his fears, (him:
Who doubts the poor revenge these hands may do
Respecting neither blood, nor youth, nor years,
Or how small safety can my death be to him.
And is this all the good of being borne great?
Then wretched greatness, proud rich misery,
Pompous distress, glittering calamity.
Is it for this the ambitious Fathers sweat,
To purchase blood and death for them and theirs?
Is this the issue that their glories get,
To leave a sure destruction to their heirs?
O how far better had it been for me,
From low descent, derived of humble birth,
To'haue eat the sweet-sowre bread of poverty,
And drunk of Nilus stream in Nilus earth:
Under the cou'ring of some quiet Cottage,
Free from the wrath of heaven, secure in mind,
Untouched when sad events of Princes dotage,
Confounds what ever mighty it does find.
And not to have stood in their way, whose condition,
Is to have all made dear, and all thing plain,
Between them and the mark of their ambition,
That nothing let the full sight of their reign.
Where nothing stands, that stands not in submission;
Where greatness must all in it self contain.
Kings will be alone, Competitors must down,
Near death he stands, that stands too near a Crown.
Such is my case, for Caesar will have all:
My blood must seal the assurance of his state:
Yet ah weak state that blood assure him shall,
Whose wrongful shedding, Gods and men do hate.
Injustice never scapes unpunished still,
Though men revenge not, yet the heavens will.
And thou Augustus that with bloody hand,
Curt'st off succession from another race,
May find the heavens thy vows so to withstand.
That others may deprive thine in like case.
When rhou may see thy proud contentious bed
Yielding thee none of thine that may inherit:
Subvert thy blood, place others in their sted,
To pay this thy injustice her due merit.
If it be true, (as who can that deny
Which sacred Priests of Memphis do fore-say,)
Some of the offspring yet of Anthony,
Shall all the rule of this whole Empire sway.
And then Augustus, what is it thou gainest
By poor Antillus blood, or this of mine?
Nothing but this thy victory thou stainest,
And pull'st the wrath of heaven on thee and thine.
In vain does man contend against the stars,
For what he seeks to make, his wisdom marrs.
Yet in the mean-time we whom Fates reserve,
The bloody sacrifices of ambition,
We feel the smart what ever they deserve,
And we endure the present times condition.
The justice of the heavens revenging thus,
Does only sacrifice it self, not us.
Yet it is a pleasing comfort that does ease
Affliction in so great extreamitie.
To think their like destruction shall appease
Our ghostes, who did procure our misery.
But dead we are, uncertain what shall be,
And living, we are sure to feel the wrong:
Our certain ruin we our selves do see.
They joy the while, and we know not how long.
But yet Caesario, thou must die content,
For men will moan, and God revenge the innocent.
Thus he co^plain'd, and thus thou hear'st my shame.

Sell. But how has Caesar now rewarded thee?

Rod. As he has thee. And I expect the same
As fell to Theodor to fall to me:
For he (one of my coat) having betrayed
The young Antillus, son of Anthony,
And at his death from of his neck conuayd
A jewel: which be'ing asked, he did deny:
Caesar occasion took to hang him straight.
Such instruments with Princes live not long.
Although they need us, (actors of deceit,)
Yet still our sight seems to upbraid their wrong;
And therefore we must needs this danger run,
And in the net of our own guile be caught:
We must not live to bray what we have done,
For what is done, must not appear their fault.
But here comes Cleopatra, woeful Queen,
And our shame will not that we should be seen.
Exeunt.
CLEOPATRA.
WHat, has my face yet power to win a Lover?
Can this torn remnant serve to grace me so,
That it can Caesar's secret plots discover
What he intends with me and mine to do?
Why then poor Beauty thou have done thy last,
And best good service thou could do unto me.
For now the time of death revealed thou have,
Which in my life did serve but to undo me.
Here Dolabella far forsooth in love,
Writes, how that Caesar means forthwith, to send
Both me and mine, the air of Rome to prove:
There his Tryumphant Chariot to attend.
I thank the man, both for his love and letter;
The One comes fit to warn me thus before,
But for the other, I must die his debtor,
For Cleopatra now can love no more.
But having leave, I must go take my leave
And last farewell of my dead Anthony:
Whose dearly honored Tom be must here receive
This sacrifice, the last before I dye.
O sacred euer-memorable Stone,
That have without my tears, within my flame,
Receive th'oblation of the wofull'st moan
That ever yet from sad affliction came.
And you dear relics of my Lord and Love,
(The sweetest parcells of the faithfull'st liver,)
O let no impious hand dare to remove
You out from hence, but rest you here for ever.
Let Egypt now give peace unto you dead,
That living, gave you trouble and turmoyle:
Sleep quiet in this euer-lasting bed,
In foreign land preferred before your soil.
And o, if that the spirits of men remain
After their bodies, and do never die,
Then hear thy Ghost thy captive Spouse complain,
And be attentive to her misery.
But if that laborsome mortality,
Found this sweet error, only to confine
The curious search of idle vanity,
That would the deapth of darkness undermine:
Or rather, to give rest unto the thought
Of wretched man, with th'after-comming joy
Of those conceived fields whereon we dote,
To pacify the present worlds anoy.
If it be so, why speak I then to the air?
But it is not so, my Anthony does hear:
His everliving ghost attends my prayer,
And I do know his houering sp'rite is near.
And I will speak, and pray, and mourn to thee,
O pure immortal love that daign'st to hear:
I feel thou aunswer'st my credulity
With touch of comfort, finding none elsewhere.
Thou know these hands entombed thee here of late,
Free and vnforst, which now must servile be,
Reserved for bands to grace proud Caesar's state,
Who seeks in me to triumph over thee.
O if in life we could not seuerd be,
Shall Death divide our bodies now a sunder?
Must thine in Egypt, mine in Italy,
Be kept the Monuments of Fortunes wonder?
If any powers be there where as thou art,
(Since our own Country Gods betray our case,)
O work they may their gracious help impart,
To save thy woeful wife from such disgrace.
Do not permit she should in triumph show
The blush of her reproach, joined with thy shame:
But (rather) let that hateful Tyrant know,
That thou and I had power t'auoyde the same.
But what do I spend breath and idle wind,
In vain invoking a conceived aid?
Why do I not my self occasion find
To break the bounds wherein my self am stayed?
Words are for them that can complain and live,
Whose melting hearts composed of baser frame,
Can to their sorrows time and leisure give,
But Cleopatra may not do the same.
No Anthony, thy love requires more.
A lingering death, with thee deserves no merit,
I must my self force open wide a door
To let out life, and so vnhouse my spirit.
These hands must break the prison of my soul
To come to thee, there to enjoy like state,
As does the long-pent solitary Foul,
That has escapt her cage, and found her mate.
This Sacrifice to sacrifize my life,
Is that true incense that does best beseem:
These rites may serve a life-desiring wife,
Who doing them, to have done enough does deem.
My heart blood should the purple flowers have been,
Which here upon thy Tomb to thee are offered,
No smoke but dying breath should here been seen,
And this it had been to, had I been suffered.
But what have I save these bare hands to do it?
And these weak fingers are not yron-poynted:
They cannot pierce the flesh be'ing put unto it,
And I of all means else am disapoynted.
But yet I must a way and means seek, how
To come unto thee, what so ere I do.
O Death, art thou so hard to come by now,
That we must pray, entreat, and seek thee too?
But I will find thee where so ere thou lie,
For who can stay a mind resolved to die?
And now I go to work the effect in deed,
I Will never send more words or sighs to thee:
I Will bring my soul my self, and that with speed,
My self will bring my soul to Anthony.
Come go my Maids, my fortunes sole attenders,
That minister to misery and sorrow:
Your Mistres you unto your freedom renders,
And quits you from all charge yet ere to morrow.
And now by this, I think the man I sent,
Is near returned that brings me my dispatch.
God grant his cunning sort to good event,
And that his skill may well beguile my watch.
So shall I shun disgrace, leave to be sorry,
Fly to my love, escape my foe, free my soul;
So shall I act the last act of my glory,
Dye like a Queen, and rest without control.
Exit.
CHORUS.
MIsterious Egypt, wonder breeder, strict religions strange obseruer,
State-ordrer Zeal, the best rule-keeper, fostring still in temprate feruor:
O how came thou to lose so wholly all religion, law and order?
And thus become the most unholy of all Lands that Nylus border?
How could confused Disorder enter where stern Law sat so severely?
How durst weak lust and riot venture the eye of Justice looking nearly?
Could not those means that made thee great, Be still the means to keep thy
state?
Ah no, the course of things requires change and alteration ever:
That same continuance man desires, th unconstant world yields never.
We in our counsels must be blinded, and not see what does import us:
And oftentimes the thing least minded, is the thing that most must hurt us.
Yet they that have the stearne in guiding, it is their fault that should prevent
it,
For often they seeing their Country slyding, take their ease, as though
contented.
We imitate the greater powers,
The Princes manners fashion ours.
The Example of their light regarding, vulgar loosenes much incences:
Vice uncontrolled, grows wide enlarging,
Kings small faults, be great offenses.
And this has set the window open unto license, lust and riot:
This way Confusion first found broken, whereby entered our disquiet.
Those laws that Zoroaster founded, and the Ptolomies observed,
Hereby first came to be confounded, which our state so long preserved.
The wanton luxury of Court,
Did form the people of like sort.
For all (respecting private pleasure,) universally consenting
To abuse their time, their treasure, in their own delights contenting:
And future dangers naught respecting, whereby, (O how easy matter
Made this so general neglecting,
Confused weakness to diseater?)
Caesar found the effect true tried, in his easy entrance making:
Who at the sight of arms, discryed all our people, all forsaking.
For riot (worse then war,) so sore
Had wasted all our strength before.
And thus is Egypt servile rendered, to the insolent destroyer:
And all their sumptuous treasure tendered, all her wealth that did betray her.
Which poison (O if heavens be rightful,) may so far infect their senses,
That Egipts pleasures so delightful, may breed them the like offenses.
And Romans learn our way of weakness, be instructed in our vices:
That our spoils may spoil your greatness, overcome with our devises.
Fill full your hands, and carry home Enough from us to ruin Rome.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
DOLABELLA, TITIVS.
Dol. COme tell me Titius every circumstaunce
How Cleopatra did receive my news:
Tell every look, each gesture, countenance,
That she did in my Letters reading use.

Tit. I shall my Lord so far as I could note,
Or my conceit observe in any wise.
It was the time when as she having got
Leave to her Dearest dead to sacrifize;
And now was issuing out the Monument,
With Odors, Incense, Garlands in her hand,
When I approcht (as one from Caesar sent,)
And did her close thy message t'vnderstand.
She turns her back, and with her takes me in,
Reads in thy lines thy strange unlooked for tale:
And reads, and smyles, and stays, and does begin
Again to read, then blushed, and then was pale.
And having ended with a sigh, refoldes
Thy Letter up: and with a fixed eye,
(Which steadfast her imagination holds)
She mused a while, standing confusedly.
At length. Ah friend, (says she,) tell thy good Lord,
How dear I hold his pitying of my case:
That out of his sweet nature can afford,
A miserable woman so much grace.
Tell him how much my heavy soul does grieve
Merciless Caesar should so deal with me:
Pray him that he would all the counsel give,
That might divert him from such cruelty.
As for my love, say Anthony has all,
Say that my heart is gone into the grave
With him, in whom it rests and ever shall:
I have it not my self, nor cannot have.
Yet tell him, he shall more command of me
Then any, whosoever living, can.
He that so friendly shows himself to be
A right kind Roman, and a Gentleman.
Although his Nation (fatal unto me,)
Have had mine age a spoil, my youth a pray,
Yet his affection must accepted be,
That favors one distressed in such decay.
Ah, he was worthy then to have been loved,
Of Cleopatra whiles her glory lasted;
Before she had declyning fortune proved,
Or scene her honor wrackt, her flower blasted.
Now there is nothing left her but disgrace,
Nothing but her affliction that can move:
Tell Dolabella, one that is in her case,
(Poor soul,) needs rather pity now then love.
But shortly shall thy Lord hear more of me.
And ending so her speech, no longer stayed,
But hasted to the Tomb of Anthony.
And this was all she did, and all she said.

Dol. Ah sweet distressed Lady. What hard heart
Could choose but pity thee, and love thee too?
Thy worthiness, the state wherein thou art
Requires both, and both I vow to do.
Although ambition lets not Caesar see
The wrong he does thy Majesty and sweetness,
Which makes him now exact so much of thee,
To add unto his pride, to grace his greatness.
He knows thou can no hurt procure us now,
Since all thy strength is ceaz'd into our hands:
Nor fears he that, but rather labors how
He might show Rome so great a Queen in bands.
That our great Ladies (envying thee so much
That stained the^ all, and hell'd them in such wonder,)
Might joy to see thee, and thy fortune such,
Thereby extolling him that brought thee under.
But I will seek to stay it what I may;
I am but one, yet one that Caesar loves,
And o if now I could do more then pray,
Then should you know how far affection moves.
But what my power and prayer may prevail,
I Will join them both, to hinder thy disgrace:
And even this present day I will not fail
To do my best with Caesar in this case.

Tit. And Sir, even now her self has Letters sent,
I met her messenger as I came hither,
With a dispatch as he to Caesar went,
But knows not what imports her sending thither.
Yet this he told, how Cleopatra late
Was come from sacrifice. How ritchly clad
Was served to dinner in most sumptuous state,
With all the brauest ornaments she had.
How having dyn'd, she writes, and sends away
Him straight to Caesar, and commanded than
All should depart the Tomb, and none to stay
But her two maids, and one poor Countryman.

Dol. Why then I know, she sends to have audience now,
And means t'experience what her state can do:
To see if Majesty will make him bow
To what affliction could not move him to.
And o, if now she could but bring a view
Of that fresh beauty she in youth possessed,
(The argument wherewith she ouer-threw
The wit of Julius Caesar, and the rest,)
Then happily Augustus might relent,
Whilst powrefull Love, (far stronger the^ ambition)
Might work in him, a mind to be content
To grant her asking, in the best condition.
But being as she is, yet does she merit
To be respected, for what she has been:
The wonder of her kind, of rarest spirit,
A glorious Lady, and a mighty Queen.
And now, but by a little weakness falling
To do that which perhaps sh'was forced to do:
Alas, an error past, is past recalling,
Take away weakness, and take women too.
But now I go to be thy Advocate,
Sweet Cleopatra, now I Will use mine art.
Thy presence will me greatly animate,
Thy face will teach my tongue, thy love my heart.

SCENA SECVNDA.
NVNTIVS.
AM I ordaind the careful Messenger,
And sad newes-bringer of the strangest death,
Which self hand did upon it self infer,
To free a captive soul from servile breath?
Must I the lamentable wonder show,
Which all the world must grieve and marvel at?
The rarest form of death in earth below,
That ever pity, glory, wonder gat.
Chor. What news bring'st you, can Egypt yet yield more
Of sorrow then it has? what can it add
To th'already ouer-flowing store
Of sad affliction, matter yet more sad?
Have we not seen the worst of our calamity?
Is there behind yet something of distress
Unseen, unknown? Tell if that greater misery
There be, that we wail not that which is less.
Tell us what so it be, and tell at first,
For sorrow ever longs to hear her worst.

Nun. Well then, the strangest thing relate I will,
That ever eye of mortal man has seen.
I (as you know) even from my youth, have still
Attended on the person of the Queen.
And ever in all fortunes good or ill,
With her as one of chiefest trust have been.
And now in these so great extreamities,
That ever could to Majesty befall,
I did my best in what I could devise,
And left her not, till now she left us all.

Chor. What is she gone. Has Caesar forced her so?

Nun. Yea, she is gone, and has deceived him to.

Chor. What, fled to INDIA, to go find her son?

Nun. No, not to INDIA, but to find her son.

Chor. Why the^ there is hope she may her state recover.

Nun. Her state? nay rather honor, and her Lover.

Chor. Her Lover? him she cannot have again.

Nun. Well, him she has, w him she does remain.

Cho. Why the^ she is dead. Is It so? why speak not thou?

Nun. You guess aright, and I will tell you how.
When she perceived al hope was clean berest her,
That Caesar meant to send her straight away,
And saw no means of reconcilement left her,
Work what she could, she could not work to stay.
She calls me to her, and she thus began.
O thou whose trust has ever been the same
And one in all my fortunes, faithful man,
Alone content to attend disgrace and shame.
Thou, whom the fearful ruin of my fall,
Never deterrd to leave calamity:
As did those other smooth state-pleasers all,
Who followed but my fortune, and not me.
It Is thou must do a service for thy Queen,
Wherein thy faith and skill must do their best:
Thy honest care and duty shall be seen
Performing this, more then in all the rest.
For all what thou have done, may die with thee,
Although it is pity that such faith should die.
But this shall euer-more remembered be,
A rare example to posterity.
And look how long as Cleopatra shall
In after ages live in memory,
So long shall thy clear fame endure withal,
And therefore thou must not my suit deny;
Nor contradict my will. For what I will
I am resolved: and this it is thou must do me:
Go find me out with all thy art and skill
To Aspicqs, and convey them close unto me.
I have a work to do with them in hand,
Enquire not what, for thou shall soon see what,
If the heavens do not my disseignes withstand,
But do thy charge, and let me shyft with that.
Being thus coniur'd, by her t'whom I'had vowed
My true perpetual service, forth I went,
Devising how my close attempt to shrowde,
So that there might no art my art prevent.
And so disguised in habit as you see,
Having fou^nd out the thing for which I went,
I soon returned again, and brought with me
The Aspicqs, in a basket closely pent.
Which I had filled with figs, and leaves upon.
And coming to the Guarde that kept the door,
What have thou there? said they, and looked thereon.
Seeing the figgs, they deemed of nothing more,
But said, they were the fairest they had seen.
Taste some, said I, for they are good and pleasant.
No, no, said they, go bear them to thy Queen.
Thinking me some poor man yt brought a Present.
Well, in I went, where brighter then the Sun,
Glittering in all her pompous rich array,
Great Cleopatra sat; as if she'had won
Caesar and all the world beside this day.
Even as she was when on thy cristall streams,
O CYDNOS she did show what earth could show.
When Asia all amazed in wonder, deemes
VENUS from heaven was come on earth below.
Even as she went at first to meet her Love,
So goes she now at last again to find him.
But that first, did her greatness only prove.
This last her love, that could not live behind him.
Yet as she sat, the doubt of my good speed,
Detracts much from the sweetness of her look:
Cheere-marrer Care, did then such passions breed,
That made her eye bewray the care she took.
But she no sooner sees me in the place,
But straight her sorrow-clowded brow she cleeres,
Lightning a smile from out a stormy face,
Which all her tempest-beaten senses cheeres.
Look how a strayed perplexed trauailer,
When chased by thieues, and even at point of taking,
Discrying suddenly some town not far,
Or some unlooked for aid to him-ward making;
Cheeres up his tired spirits, thrusts forth his strength
To meet that good, that comes in so good hour:
Such was her joy, perceiving now at length,
Her honor was t'escape so proud a power.
Forth from her seat she hastes to meet the present,
And as one ouer-ioyd, she caught it straight.
And with a smyling cheer in action pleasant,
Looking among the figs, finds the deceit.
And seeing there the ugly venomous beast,
Nothing dismayde, she stays and viewes it well.
At length, the extremest of her passion ceast,
When she began with words her joy to tell.
O rarest Beast (says she) that Afric breeds,
How dearly welcome art thou unto me?
The fairest creature that fair Nylus feeds
Me thinks I see, in now beholding thee.
What though the euer-erring world does deem
That angered Nature framed thee but in spite:
Little they know what they so light esteem,
That never learned the wonder of thy might.
Better then Death, Deaths office thou dischargest,
That with one gentle touch can free our breath:
And in a pleasing sleep our soul inlargest,
Making our selves not privy to our death.
If Nature erred, o then how happy error,
Thinking to make thee worst, she made thee best:
Since thou best freest us from our lives worst terror,
In sweetly bringing souls to quiet rest.
When that inexorable Monster Death
That follows Fortune, flies the poor distressed,
Tortures our bodies ere he takes our breath,
And loades with pains th'already weak oppressed.
How often have I begged, prayed, entreated him
To take my life, and yet could never get him?
And when he comes, he comes so ugly grim,
That who is he (if he could choose) would let him?
Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chief,
That open can with such an easy key
The door of life, come gentle cunning thief,
That from our selves so steal'st our selves away.
Well did our Priests discern something divine
Shadowed in thee, and therefore first they did
Offerings and worshyps due to thee assign,
In whom they found such mysteries were hid.
Comparing thy sweet motion to the Sun,
That mou'st without the instruments that move:
And never waxing old, but always one,
Do sure thy strange divinity approve.
And therefore to, the rather unto thee
In zeal I make the offering of my blood,
Calamity confirming now in me
A sure belief that piety makes good.
Which happy men neglect, or hold ambiguous,
And only the afflicted are religious.
And here I sacrifize these arms to Death,
That Lust late dedicated to Delights:
Offling up for my last, this last of breath,
The complement of my loves dearest rites.
With that she bares her arm, and offer makes
To touch her death, yet at the touch with-drawes,
And seeming more to speak, occasion takes,
Willing to die, and willing to to pause.
Look how a Mother at her sons departing
For some far voyage, bent to get him fame,
Does intertaine him with an idle parling.
And still does speak, and still speaks but the same;
Now bids farewell, and now recalls him back,
Tells what was told, and bids again farewell,
And yet again recalls; for still does lack
Something that love would feign and cannot tell.
Pleased he should go, yet cannot let him go.
So she, although she knew there was no way
But this, yet this she could not handle so
But she must show that life desired delay.
Feign would she entertain the time as now,
And now would feign yt Death would seize upon her.
Whilst I might see presented in her brow,
The doubtful combat tryde twixt Life and Honor.
Life bringing Legions of fresh hopes with her,
Armed with the proose of Time, which yields we say
Comfort and Help, to such as do refer
All unto him, and can admit delay.
But Honor scorning Life, lo forth leads he
Bright Immortality in shyning armor:
Through the rays of whose clear glory, she
Might see Life's baseness, how much it might harm her.
Besides, she saw whole Armies of Reproaches,
And base Disgraces, Furies fearful sad,
Marching with Life, and Shame that still incroches
Upon her face, in bloody colors clad.
Which representments seeing worse then death
She deemed to yield to Life, and therefore chose
To render all to Honor, heart and breath;
And that with speed, least that her inward foes
False flesh and blood, joining with life and hope,
Should mutiny againsther resolution.
And to the end she would not give them scope,
She presently proceeds to the execution.
And sharply blaming of her rebel powers,
False flesh, (says she,) and what do thou conspire
With Caesar to, as thou were none of ours,
To work my shame, and hinder my desire?
Will thou retain in closure of thy veins,
That enemy Base life, to let my good?
No, know there is a greater power constraines
Then can be countercheckt with fearful blood.
For to the mind that is great, nothing seems great.
And seeing death to be the last of woes,
And life lasting disgrace, which I shall get,
What do I lose, that have but life to lose?
This having said, strengthened in her own heart,
And union of her self senses in one
Charging together, she performs that part
That has so great a part of glory won.
And so receives the deadly poysning touch.
That touch that tryde the gold of her love pure,
And has confirmed her honor to be such,
As must a wonder to all worlds endure.
Now not an yielding shrink or touch of fear.
Consented to bewray least sense of pain:
But still in one same sweet vnaltred cheer,
Her honor did her dying thoughts retain.
Well, now this work is done (says she,) here ends
This act of life, that part of Fates assigned me:
What glory or disgrace here this world lends,
Both have I had, and both I leave behind me.
And now o Earth, the Theater where I
Have acted this, witness I dye vnforst.
Witness my soul parts free to Anthony,
And now proud Tyrant Caesar do thy worst.
This said, she stays, and makes a sudden pause,
As twere to feel whither the poison wrought:
Or rather else the working might be cause
That made her stay, as likewise may be thought.
For in that instant I might well perceive,
The drowsy humor in her falling brow:
And how each power, each part oppressed did leave
Their former office, and did senseless grow.
Look how a new-pluckt branch against the Sun,
Declynes his fading leaves in feeble sort,
So her disioyned ioyntures as undone.
Let fall her weak dissolved limbs support.
Yet lo that face the wonder of her life,
Retains in death, a grace that graceth death,
Couller so lively, cheer so lovely rife,
That none would think such beauty could want breath.
And in that cheer, the impression of a smile
Did seem to show she scorned Death and Caesar,
As glorying that she could them both beguile,
And telling death how much her death did please her.
VVonder it was to see how soon she went,
She went with such a will, and did so haste it,
That sure I think she did her pain prevent,
Foregoing pain, or staying not to taste it.
And senseless, in her sinking down she wryes
The Diadem which on her head she wore,
Which Charmion (poor weak feeble maid) espyes,
And hastes to right it as it was before.
For Eras now was dead, and Charmion too
Even at the point, for both would imitate
Their Mistres glory, striving like to do.
But Charmion would in this exceed her mate,
For she would have this honor to be last,
That should adorn that head that must be seen
To wear a Crown in death, that life held fast,
That all the world might know she did a Queen.
And as she stood setting if fitly on,
Lo in rush Caesar's Messengers in haste,
Thinking to have prevented what was done,
But yet they came too late, for all was past.
For there they found stretched on a bed of gold,
Dead Cleopatra, and that proudly dead,
In all the rich attire procure she could,
And dying Charmion trymming of her head.
And Eras at her feet, dead in like case.
Charmion, is this well done? said one of them.
Yea, well said she, and her that from the race
Of so great Kings discends, does best become.
And with that word, yields too her faithful breath,
To pass the assurance of her love with death.

Chor. But how knew Caesar of her close intent?

Nun. By Letters which before to him she sent.
For when she had procured this means to die,
She writes, and earnestly intreates, she might
Be buried in one Tomb with Anthony.
Whereby then Caesar gess'd all went not right.
And forthwith sends, yet ere the message came
She was dispatched, he crossed in his intent,
Her providence had ordered so the same
That she was sure none should her plot prevent.

CHORUS.
THen thus we have beheld
The Accomplishment of woes,
The full of rutne, and
The worst of worst of ills.
And seen all hope expeld,
That ever sweet repose
Shall re-possess: the Land
That Desolations fills,
And where Ambition spills
With uncontrolled hand,
All the issue of all those,
That so long rule have hell'd:
To make us no more us,
But clean confound us thus.
And can O Nylus thou,
Father of floods endure,
That yellow Tyber should
With sandy streams rule thee?
Will thou be pleased to bow
To him those feet so pure,
Whose unknown head we hold
A power divine to be?
Thou that did ever see
Thy free banks vncontroul'd
Live under thine own care:
Ah will thou bear it now?
And now wilt yield thy streams
A pray to other Reames?
Draw back thy waters floe
To thy concealed head:
Rocks strangle up thy waves,
Stop Cataractes thy fall.
And turn thy courses so,
That sandy Dezarts dead,
(The world of dust that craves
To swallow thee up all,)
May drink so much as shall
Revive from vastie graves
A living green, which spredd
Far florshing, may gro
On that wide face of Death.
Where nothing now draws breath.
Fatten somepeople there,
Even as thou us have done,
With plenties wanton store,
And feeble luxury:
And them as us prepare
Fit for the day of moan
Respected not before.
Leave leuell'd Egypt dry,
A barraine pray to lie,
Wasted for euer-more.
Of plenties yielding none
To recompense the care
Of Victors greedy lust,
And bring forth naught but dust.
And so O leave to be,
Since thou art what thou art:
Let not our race possess
The Inheritance of shame,
The sea of sin, that we
Have left them for their part:
The yoke of whose distress
Must still vpbraid our blame,
Telling from whom it came.
Our weight of wantonness,
Lies heavy on their heart,
Who neuer-more shall see
The glory of that worth
They left who brought us forth.
O thou all seeing light,
High President of heaven,
You Magistrates the stars
Of that eternal court
Of Providence and Right,
Are these the bounds y'haue given
Th'vntr anspassable bars,
That limit pride so short,
Is greatness of this sort,
That greatness greatness marres,
And wracks it self, self driven
On Rocks of her own might?
Does Order order so
Disorders ouer-thro?
FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts, and Edward Allde, for Simon VVaterson.

1594.


