AN APOLOGETICALL REPLY To a book Called AN ANSWER to the unjust complaint of
VV. B.

Also an ANSWER to Mr. I. D. TOUCHING His report of some passages.

His allegation of Scriptures against the baptising of some kind of infants.

His protestation about the publishing of his wrightings.

BY JOHN DAVENPORTE BD.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just: but his
neighbor comes, and searches him.

Hieron: ad Nepot. Cave ne aut lingnam, aut aures prurientes habeas: ne aut
ipse alijs detrahas, aut alios detrabentes audias. Nemo invito auditori
libenter refert. Discat detractor, dum te videt non libenter audire non facile
detrahere.

Horat: Epist. 16. ad Quint. Mordear opprobrijs falfis? mutemque colores?
Falsus honor juvat, et mendax infamia terret.
Quem? nisi mendosum, et mendacem?
AT ROTTERDAM, Printed by Isaac van Waesberghe upon the Steygher at the Fame.
Anno 1636.

The Preface to the Reader.
CHristian Reader. 2. Cor. 1.12.
Though the testimony of a good conscience, is of it self a sufficient cause
of rejoicing in all the tribulations of this pilgrimage, Act. 23.1. 1. Pet.
3.16. Act. 24.16.
and of confidence in our Apologies against false accusers, in which respect
Blessed Paul, according to the wisdom given unto him, did herein exercise
himself, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men: yet, next to a good conscience, every man is bound to provide for his good
name, it being, Eccles. 7.1
in Salomons judgment, better then precious ointment, which serves to cheer a
man's own spirits, and to make him amiable to others, and as any man is of more
public use, so it is both more diffused, and more apt to be tainted by the
show of any infirmity: according to that holy proverb. Eccles. 10.1.
Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor; so does a litly folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor.
But the regard of our good name must be excercised upon higher, then
selfe-respects, else it is but vain glory, which flowing from pride falls
into unwarranted contention. Gods name must be more dear unto us then our
own, and our care must be, not so much to shun our own, as his dishonor, our
esteem whereof ought, in some proportion, to answer to his dignity and
eminency. We see that among men the same reproach which is but a slander of
private persons, is scandalum magnatum, when it reflecteth dishonor upon
peers of a realm, and it is crimen lasae Majestatis, when it ascends to the
sovereign majesty. For which cause it is not to be wondered that God has
shown himself so jealous of the honor of his own name, not only upon the
sons of Aaron and Eli, and those wicked Priests in Israel, Mal. 2.5.8.9.
but also upon Aaron and Eli themselves, and upon Moses, and David, in whom,
though he pardoned their sin, yet he passed not by this consequent of it, the
dishonor of his name, without a temporal judgment. Iosu. 7.9. Psa. 8.1. Psalm.
111.9. Mich: 5.4
For his name is a great, excelent, holy, and reverent name, it is a name which
has Majesty in it, and is as far above all names, as his Majesty is above all
creatures.

Gods honor being principally intended, the good of men is not to be
neglected, that they within the Church be not ashamed, or offended, nor they
without, hindered, or hardened. Luther on Genesis 9. Genesis 9.22
For such is the malignant genius of the Serpents seed, that they delight in
observing the slipps and falls of Gods servants, as swine do to nuzzle in
filth and excrements, which evil inclination was so strong in Cham and Canaan
that it brake the bonds of nature, and therefore it is the less to be wondered
at, if Sanballat and Tobiah, Nehem. 6.13.
to hinder the work of the Lord in the hands of his servants, did seek matter
of an evil report, that they might reproach them. And, as it would not
satisfye Hamans malice to lay hands upon Mordecai alone, Hest. 3.6.
but he saught to destroy all the Jews: so these are accustomed, for the
miscarriage of any one, to misjudge the generation of Gods children. Which
David much feared, and earnestly deprecated, Psalm. 69 5.6.
saying. Let not them that wait on thee O Lord God of Hoasts, be ashamed for
my sake. Let not those that seek thee, be confounded, for my sake, O God of
Israel. And the laying of a stumbling block, Romans 14.13.
or an occasion of falling, in the way of weak Christians, by giving them
offense, is of no less dangerous consequence to him by whom the offense comes
(for whom it had been better that he had been cast into the sea with a millstone
about his neck) then it is to him who is scandalized, Mat. 18.6.
who is wounded, and made weak, 1. Cor. ^.13.
and in danger of being destroyed thereby, which caused holy Paul to resolve
rather to eat no flesh, whilst the world stands, then thereby to cause his
brother to offend. And the same thing which makes the hearts of the righteous
sad, Ezeck. 13.22.
usually strengthens the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from
his evil way. Thus it falls out in scandalous reproaches raised against
those that fear God by the worst of men, but much more when Israelites thrust
their swords into their fellows sides, Exodus 21.22.27.
especially when those who are as women with child are spurned, hurt, and
endangered, by reproaches, to miscarry, of some spiritual children, of whom
they travayle in birth, Gal. 4.19
till Christ may be formed in them.

These considerations may serve to be an Apology to others for this my Reply,
and for an admonition to my self, and direction about my wholl carriage in it.

They, who have read the Answer, whereunto this Reply is made, will testifye,
on my behalf, that the honor of God, and the good of the Church, both for
maintenance of truths opposed, and for vindicating mine own name, and the
names of others, far more worthy then I, from calumny, did necessitate the
publishing of this Apology. It had been more to the Answerers comfort, if he
could have as truly pleaded the same necessity, as he readily pretended it.
But, 1. how easily might he have prevented it, in the cause: either by not
making an unjust opposition, or by yielding to such aequall means of
accommodation as were propounded, or by propounding other ways sufficient to
salve the sore, or by referring the matter to the Church as properly belonging
to their cognition, or by fairly seeking the advice of the Classis (seeing he
would bring it thither) without praepossessing the Dutch preachers with
causeless praejudices, and jealousies against men whom they knew not. 2. Seeing
due care was not taken to prevent the kindling of the fire: yet, how easily
might it have been quenched, when the smother of it began to break forth
apparently! at least, the fuel might have been subtracted, and it suffered to
have gone out, and to have dyed of it self, but, in stead, thereof, oil is
cast upon it to make it flame out, and the force and violence of it, is, by his
book (as by bellows, or a strong wind) driven upon the faces of those, who
have done, and suffered much that they might extinguish it. Alas! what benefit
could redound to the Church by such personal vindications published to the
world, seeing a sufficient answer given in wrighting to their written complaints
would have satisfied their desire, and ended all difference among them? And,
what though these private wrightings were printed? yet, what necessity was
there of printing any answer to them? seeing the Answerer had many ways to have
suppressed them at the press (being made privy to the printing of them, by the
printer himself, which I was not) and seeing I protested, in print, against
the first part, which concerned me, and the Complainants professed their
dislike of publishing the other part of it? How tender I was of the Answerers
reputation my Protestation shows, in part, and my labor to have the book
suppressed more fully manifests. For I procured that all the copies unsold
might be bought up, so that (I am told) about four hundred and fifty, of the
five hundred, were stopped. How he has requited me let his book speak.

And howsoever he pretends that the printing of that pamphlet compelled him
to print, in his own defense, yet it is evident, 1. that he declared his
purpose of printing about these matters before any wrighting was made by me, in
mine own defense, or by them, in way of complaint of their greivances. 2. that
his theatning to print an answer to their complaints, which then were only
written, and left in the Consistory privately, and the report of one, who said
that he had seen some of the sheets which the Answerer had prepared to print,
were the causes moving W. B. to print that wrighting. 3. that himself declared
in a letter, which the friend, to whom he sent it, showed me, that he purposed
to print an answer to that short wrighting which was left by me, when as
nothing had been printed by W.B. Which proves that the printed pamphlet was
not the cause of his book, but that he took occasion thereby to publish that
which he had before purposed. 4. When he acquainted the ministers of the
Classis with his purpose of printing an answer to that pamphlet, they disuaded
him: yet he again importuned them to consent to it, threatening to get it
printed in England, if they opposed it here. To conclude. He so wearyed them
with importunityes, as if his life had layne in the doing of it, that they left
him to himself (after they had advised him to leave out some passages which
they disliked in his copy) but still professed that, as they did not hinder
him, so they would not counsel him to do it. This some of those learned and
prudent men have affirmed to some of the members of that Church, whereby the
Reader may see with how strong a bent of spirit he was carried hereunto, but
upon what argument, or motives, I leave it to his own consideration in the
sight of God.

Yet, if he would print, needlessly: ah, that he had not done it so
reproachfully, sarcastically, bitterly! Not that I have cause to be troubled
thereat, in respect of my self, who have, in some measure, learned to be
content (if God will have it so) to be as a lamp despised in the thought of
him that is at ease, Job. 12.5. Heb. 10.35.
and to be made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflications, and by
becoming a companion of them that were so used, but for the truths sake, for
the Churches sake, for his own sake, whom I do unfeinedly reverence, and love
in the Lord, though I am by him compelled to this unpleasing contest. I
confess, that when I read his book, and considered how to answer it, upon a
serious pondering of passages, I thought upon Herod's short letter to Cassius
((...)) and if I had so written to him, Philostr. in vit. Herod.
though I should have censured my self, as not dealing according to the
respect which I bear to his gravity, and long standing in the Church, and
ministerial abilities etc. Yet he could not answer as Paul did a like (though
more unjust) challenge, that he wrote the words of truth and sobernes. Act.
26.25.
For how untruely (though, I hope, but by ignorance, or forgetfullnes, or
misapprehension, or inadvertency) passages are reported, I am compelled to
declare in the several answers. How unsoberly let the Reader judge, without
my raking into that finck, which makes the wholl book the more unsavory and
useless. This also (remembering my praecedent admonition) I would cover, for
the better moderating other men's censures, by imputing it to some aptnes in his
natural spirit to causeless jealousies, or to the infirmity of his age, or to
his melancholy temper, or to the instigation of others, or to the violence of
temptation, or to a misguided Zeal, as our love causes us to impute
unbeseeming carriages of our friends in violent fevers etc. to the disease,
not to the man.

As for me; what reproaches soever I sustain, I hope the spirit of
understanding and counsel, and the fear of the Lord will so guide me, that I
shall not, by returning rebuke for rebuke, 2. Pet. 3.9 Romans 12.21. Aug. ad
Catech:
give just cause of suspicion that I am overcome of evil. But such a necessity
is now laid upon me, that I may say, with Augustine, Cogimur non tacere, cum
potius expediat flere quam aliquid dicere. I am constrained to wright, though
(in some respects) it were more expedient to weep then to say any thing. My
desire is to make a modest defense of the truth, and of mine own innocence,
without injuring or irritating any body. Wherein I purpose to propound to my
self excelent patterns, whom I wish the Answerer also had imitated, such as
Basil and Nazianzen, Greg: Naz: Monod: in Laud: Basil.
whose spirits were so sweetly composed in a difference between them, that
notwithstanding it, they gave due respect each to other, Basil calling
Nazianzen. Vas electionis, puteum profundum, os Christi, An elect vessel, a
deep well, the mouth of Christ, and Nazianzen winding up his invention to the
highest streine in Basils praise, as appears in an oration made by him for
that purpose, though he noate an unkindnes received from him, which he could
not well digest. In like manner Augustine differed from Cyprian about
rebaptization, yet he does not reproach him, but excuses his error rather,
Aug. lib. 2. de bapt. contr. Donat: Cap. 7
saying, nondum erat diligenter ista baptismi question pertractata. That
question about baptism had not been diligently discussed unto that time, and
honors his name with excelent titles. Beatus Cyprianus, vigilantissimus
Episcopus, gloriosissimus Martyr. Blessed Cyprian, a most vigilant Bishop, a
most glorious Martyr. And, comparing Cyprian, and Stephanus, Idem lib. de unico
Bap. contr. Petil. cap. 14.
and Donatus together, in their different carriage about that question, he did
not reproach Cyprian as schysmatically affected, but shevved that both Cyprian
and Stephanus and those that adhaered to them preserved unity each with other,
Idem contr Donat. lib. 5. Cap. 11.
and did not, as Donatus, separate from the Church for that cause; and for
himself, he professed (howsoever he held as he did touching the Baptism of
John) se non acturum pugnaciter etc. that he would not quarrrell those that
held otherwise. In latter times Beza shevved the same spirit toward
Bullinger and Gualter; Praef. in lib. de presbyt: et excom. contr. Erast:
for though they seemed to incline more to Erastus his opinion then he could
vvish, yet he speaks honorably of them, calling them, after their deaths,
non tantum Tigurinae, sed Christianae totius Ecclesiae lumina, lights not only
of the Tigurine, but also of the wholl Christian Church, and elsewhere they
are styled by him, optimi illi beatissimae memoriae fratres, summa tum pietate,
tum eruditione praediti, his excelent brethren of very blessed memory, men of
singular piety and learning, and he takes occasion to excuse their difference
from him in that point, not to brand them with any black noate for it. Thus in
those men the spirit of love vvraught, as it had done before them in the
Apostles of Christ: For, howsoever Paul justly reproved Peter, as the case
required, Gal. 2.
yet Peter did not lie at the catch (as we say) to recriminate him, but took
occasion, from some passage in Paul's epistles, to make an honorable mention of
him saying. 2. Pet. 3.15.
Account that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation, as our beloved
brother Paul, according to the wisdom given unto him, has written unto you
etc. such a carriage of differences amongst Christians, specially Ministers of
the Gospel, would much conduce to the advancement of the truth, and stopping
of the mouths of adversaries, which are apt to be opened upon two
advantages. 1. The differences in judgment amongst professors. 2. The
bitterness of spirit which they discover in those differences. To prevent (as
much as in me lies) any hurt that may come from these two praejudices, I
thinck it requisite that I add a word or two, upon occasion of this advantage,
which some bitter passages in the Answer do seem to give all sorts of
adversaryes to blaspheme the truth.

1. All sorts of people are apt to object against the truth, that the
professors of it do not agree amongst themselves. This the ancient
Philosophers objected against the Christians in the first 300 years after
Christ, whose mouths the worthy lights in those times stopped, with the
different sects among the Philosophers themselves. In like manner I may tell
the Papalls of the 26 Schysmes in the Romish Church, others of the troubles in
Franckford raised in Queen Maryes days, about bringing in the English liturgy
into that place, (for the effecting whereof they spared not to endanger the
life of that famous Godly man Mr. Knocks who opposed it.) others, of Troubles
about excommunications in Amsterdam extant to the view of all men, and all men
of differences about their several ways and projects.

2. Bellarmine, to prove that our Religion does not produce holiness in men's
lives, instanceth in the violence of Luthers spirit, which appeared in much
bitterness even against those who agreed with him in opposition to popery,
because they differed from him in some particular tenets. That this is but a
fallible sign, may appear, not only in this, that shows of holiness may be
where holiness in truth is not, as in that gravity, constancy, and humility
which was observeable in that enemy of Gods grace Pelagius, Aug. Epist. 120.
Mat. 7.15.
according to our Saviors praediction, concerning Wolves in sheep clothing;
but also in this, that distempered passions have been found in eminent servants
of God, as in the difference betvveene Paul and Barnabas, the only wise God,
for his own glory many vvayes, by some infirmityes stayning the glory of all
flesh. How hot was the contention betvveene Cyprian and Stephanus! what
violent and troublesome dissension was there betvveene Theophilus and
Chrisostom! also betvveene Cyrill of Alexandria and Theodoret, boath Bishops,
Catholics, boath learned, boath godly, boath excelent pillars of the Church,
and yet he that reads both their vvrightings would thinck that boath were
dangerous enimyes of the Church. The invectives of Ierom and Ruffinus one
against another are extant, and Augustines Epistles, wherein he bevvayled the
same. How many unkindnesses passed betvveene Chrisostom and Epiphanius! Did
not the one refuse to pray with the other? Did not the one challenge the other
for manyfold breaches of Canons? Did not the one profess that he hoped he
should never dye a Bishop? and the other that he should never come alive into
his country, boath which things fell out according to their uncharitable
vvishes, Epiphanius dying by the way as he was returning home, and Chrisostom
being cast out of his Bishopric, and dying in banishment? And these things
came to pass, 1. partly, by the instigatio^ of others. Thus Epiphanius was
stirred up against Chrisostom by Theophilus. So that their contentions arose
from a versatilous wit accompanied with a malicious and vindictive spirit in
Theophilus, and imprudence accompanied with too much credulity in Epiphanius.
2. partly, by some stiffnes and inflexibility of spirit in some of them,
accompanied with much hardness to be reconciled when once offended, to those
with whom they were displeased, from which blemish Chrisostom was not
altogether free, and that caused him somevvhat the more trouble. 3. partly by
mistakes, as in the difference betvveene Theodoret and Cyrill, and in the
division betvveene the Christians of the East, and those of the West, the one
suspecting the other of haeresy, upon a mistake, For the Romans believed three
persons in the Trinity but would not believe three hypostases, and thence the
Oriental Christians thought them Sabellians, who held that there is but one
person in the Godhead called by three names. The Eastern Christians believed
three hypostases in the Godhead, but would not admit three persons, whence
they of Rome thought them to be Arrians, who believed that there are three
distinct substances in the Godhead. Athanasius, perceiving that they differed
not in judgment, brought them to accord, by shevving them that they meant one
thing, though their expressions were different, so that there was a
difference arising from ill suspicion which was grounded upon misunderstanding
one another. Lastly, from an ill guided Zeal, whereby (beside the former)
Luther and those that adhaered to him were carried too far in opposition
against Zwinglius, about the Sacrament, which afterward Luther saw, and
confessed to Melancthon, a little before his death, that his wrightings, in that
controversy had been too bitter, and professed his inclination to publish some
thing for the qualifying of them, but that be feared the scandal that might
grow upon such his retractation, as is to be seen in the Admonition of the
Divines of the County Palatine concerning the book called liber concordiae.
Thus a groundless jealousy sharpened Luthers spirit in that controversy, and a
groundless jealousy hindered him from retracting what he had written. Had the
same jealousy hindered Augustine, the wholl Christian world had been loosers
thereby, wanting that help by his book of Retractations, which now they have.
Which unproffitable jealousy, whereby men will make good what they have said or
done, least they should seem to have erred, Ambrose piously cast off, and
confessed that his wrightings had need of a second review, et qnantumlibet
quisque profecerit, Ambr: offic: lib. 1. Cap. 1.
nemo est qui doceri non indigeat, dum vivit. How much soever any man has
profited, every man has need to be taught whilst he lives.

These things being premised, for prevention of scandal, which may be taken at
the Answer, whereunto the ensuing Reply is made, I will breifely conclude,
after I have added one or two words for prevention of unaequall censures upon
the Reply it self, with respect to the matter, and to the manner of my
proceeding in it.

1. For the matter. I must entreat the wise hearted Reader to vouchsafe a
benign and favorable construction of things that may seem liable to some
misconstruction, and to consider that in all the passages of this discourse, I
have a particular respect to the question between us, avoiding by-matters. As,
for instance, when I speak of the summity of the power of particular Churches,
in re propria, in such things as are properly their own, and do instance in
the choice of their ministers, it may be, some captious politician will thinck
that I abridge the power of the civil Magistrate, which is far from my
purpose (though I speak as I do, limiting my self to the question between
the Church and the Classis only, which was the (...)) For I acknowledge, not
only that submission and obedience is due, by the fifth commandment, both to
the highest Governors in every common wealth, according to the several laws
and customs thereof, as to Emperors, Kings, Consuls Princes, Dukes, States,
and to other officers and ministers under them, as Senators, Counsailours,
Justices, Majors, Sheriffs, Balives, Constables, etc. (these, and the like,
being in respect of their several kinds, 1. Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.1
that (...), every ordinance of man, yet in respect of their common nature and
power, (...), are ordered or ordained of God) and that for conscience sake, in
all their civil laws and constitutions, but also in matters ecclesiastical
and spiritual, it belongs to the chief governor or governors to be
nursing fathers of the Church, as well as of the Commonwealth, Isa. 49.23.
to be Custodes et vindices utriusque tabulae, and that they may, and aught to
establish, by their authority, the true Religion, and pure worship of God, and
to forbid and punish, not only civil persons for civil crimes: but even
Churchmen also, and boath sorts for crimes against Religion, as Blasphemy,
Haeresy, Idolatry, Sacrilege, Schysme, etc. and to take order (as occasion may
require) that the Churches make choice of fit officers, and that Church
officers do their duty in every kind, according to all Gods ordinances and
institutions, and that the wholl worship of God, and all the parts of it, be
administered in the congregations decently, 1. Cor. 14.40.
without uncomelines, and orderly, without confusion, of which care they have
excelent praecedents set before them for patterns in the Scripture, such as
David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah. Nor are the matters of the Lord, 2. Chron.
19.11.
and the Kings matters of so different a nature, that the care of the things of
God does not appertain to the King, but only to the high Priest, but they
are distinguished in the manner of their performing them, the Magistrates
discharging their part, civilly, and politically, and the Church officers
executing theires ecclesiastically, and spiritually, that so piety and policy,
the Church and Common wealth, religion and righteousness may dwell together, may
kiss each other, and may flourish together, in the due subjection of all sorts
of subjects to Princes and Magistrates, and of both princes and people to the
scepter and government of Jesus Christ, James 4.12.
that one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.

2. For the manner. 1. I have endeavored to carry my self inoffensively, in
this wholl treatise, without wronging or provoking any, and for that purpose
have concealed the name of the Answerer, wishing that it may not be remembered,
upon this occasion, to blemish any of his well deservings, in any other service
to God, or to his Church. 2. I have labored so to temper my style that the
truth may be manifested by his own actions sincerely related, rather then by
my verbal censures. 1. His own words I have truly repeated and answered, and
when I have been compelled to contradict those things whereunto I could not
consent, I have labored to show reason more then passion therein. If any
thinck it might have been done more smoothly, and plausibly, let him know there
is a difference to be made between personal vindications, and doctrinall
ventilations, there being not the same degrees of provocation to passion in the
latter as in the former: and that some of the personal aspersions, whereunto I
am enforced to make reply, are such as whereunto a simple cold negation,
without some vehemence, would seem incongruous, as Ierom speaks of the
suspicion of haeresy or schysme, wherein, he says, it becomes no man to be
patient. To conclude; let the Christian reader, if he meet with any such
passages, suspend his censure, till he have been put upon the clearing of his
innocence to the world, in answer to a printed book made in so provoking a
manner, by such a man, upon such an occasion, himself being excercised with
the same trials and difficulties wherewith I am excercised, in these tossings
to and fro, yet with much quiet in my spirit, thorough inward supportments,
wherein I may say, to the praise of Gods grace, in my measure. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, 2. Cor. 1.5
so our consolation also abounds by Christ.

Lastly. If any man shall thinck that my Reply is too large, let him consider,
1. that the particular matters of fact, wherein mine innocence was necessarily
to be defended are many. 2. that I could not declare and maintain the truth
which I hold in points of doctrine, and which is in word or actions opposed by
the Answerer, in a breifer discourse. 3. that a necessity was laid upon me to
wright somewhat on the behalf of other Reverend ministers, some whereof are at
rest, as Mr. Parker, Dr. Ames, Mr. Forbes, some are absent, as Mr. Hooker, Mr.
Weld, Mr. Peter. 4. that he so interweaveth his discontents against the Elders,
and the complaints of the members with the passages which concern me, that, in
many things, I could not clear my self without saying some thing also in
their just defense, which I have done sparingly, and but when it was made
necessary by his joining us together. 5. that he has so frequently mentioned
my name, almost in every passage, that I could not make a satisfying Reply, on
mine own behalf, without examining almost the wholl book, which I was
constrained to do also more particularly (and according to the order of his
Sections) then else I would, least it should be thought that I had been unable
to answer what I had praetermitted. Wherein what I have written the Reader
sees, but he knows not what I could have added, and therefore is to be
entreated to suspend his censure concerning what I have said till he may
understand the reasons whereby I am able to justifye such particulars, 6. that,
for the help of the Reader in comparing the Reply with the Answer I have
inserted his own words every where. 7. that I thought it unaequall to cause
the Reader to lay out his money, and spend his precious hours upon a fruitless
discourse of our personal concernments only: and therefore have added many
things, upon this occasion, for his intellectual advantage, whereby the Reply
is made much larger then else it should have been. The benefit whereof, will, I
hope, with Gods blessing, recompense his expense of money or time upon it. Which
I beseech the Father of lights and of spirits to grant for the advancement of
his truth in the hearts of many! Amen.

The faults escaped correct thus.
1. Words or points to be altered. p: stands for page, l: for line, r. for read.

P: 6. l: 7. r. all together. p: 25. l: 25. r: operantis. p. 32. l: 6. r. Emden
for Ments. p: 46. l: 2. r. answers. p: 48. l: 27. r: holesom. l: 37. r: up.
p: 54. l. 14. r: injury. p: 55. l. 27. r: consequence. p: 56. l: 3. r: open. p:
58. l. 27. r: specially. p: 61. l. 2. r: of for to. p. 62. l. 1. and. p. 70. l:
7. r: 20. for 21. p. 79. l: 23. r: that the Doct: p: 81. l: 26. r: held. p. 88.
l: 11. r: in ter Veer, where he. p. 89. l: 4. r: with arrogating. p. 118. l:
29. r: to the. p: 148. l: 5. r: yet. p: 174. l: 2. r: counsel. p: 177. l: 27.
r: was, for w, as. p: 191. l: 33. r: against it, for against, it. p: 223. l:
12. r: impute. p: 242. l. 2. r: the, for, th. p: 245. l: 7. r: was, for wae. p:
265 l: 23. r. injustice. p: 266. l: 20. r: devised, p. 268. l: 7, and 8. r:
further. p: 288. l: 31. r: these, p: 295. l: 4. r: either, for, neither.

2. Words or points to be added. a: stands for, add. p: 9. l: 20. a: about,
after satisfaction. p. 59. l. 8. a. secondly, before, Is. p. 61. l. 16. a. not,
after, and. p. 82. l. 1 a. he, after, fit. p. 106. l. 19. a, the, before,
Jesuits. p. 113. l. 15. r. months absence. p. 163. l. 36. a. of marriages,
after condition. p. 165. l. 14. a.?, after, day. p. 183 l. 17. r. ministers. p.
202. l. 1. a. that, after, not. p. 213. l. 14. r. constitution. p. 229. l. 3.
a. is, after, it.

3. Words to be blotted out. d: stands for dele. p. 9. l. 15. d. h, in where.
p. 56 l. 13. d. First. p. 66. in the margin. d. s. in epist. p. 82. l. 31. d.
s, in places. p. 86. l. 31. d. s. in Maties. p. 106. l. 19. d. the, before,
Machiavells. p. 138. l. 10. d. be,

Other faults which do not so much hinder the Readers understanding I leave to
his own observation. As, when t, is put, for, c, s, for c, ei, for, i, for, e,
u, for, n, p, for b. s, for f. m, for n. n, for, m. y, for, i. etc.

A Table added by a Friend, wherein the Reader (for his better understanding)
is to take notice, that the first figure shows the page, the latter shows
the line in the page.
Action.
CHristian actions of a twofold nature. 277. 26
Ames.
Dr. Ames defended, 77. 12 Commended. 79. 12 What works he was author of. 80.
1 His fitness for Pastoral office. 81. 12 His remoove from Franeker to
Rotterdam justified. 83. 1
Dr. Ames not for promiscuous baptising. 160. 14 Dr. Ames opinion of Synods.
224. 36 Dr. Ames judgment about the power by which the Church ought to be
governed. 242. 20
Answer.
Three things required to a right answer of complaints. 1 Two things required
to a true answer. 1
Answerer.
Answerer defective in his answer in the requisites thereto. 2. 31 Answerers
subtle devises to prejudice the Reader. 7. 20 Answerers fallacy in putting
that for a cause which is no cause. 9. 25 Answerers judgment and practice
agree not. 12. 20 Answerer found faulty from his relation of a father. 20. 6
from the place. 20. 35 from the time. 22. 10
Answerer found guilty of depriving the Church of those whom they desired,
notwithstanding all his answers for the clearing of himself. 55. 1 Answerer
diverteth the Reader. 51. 5. and 64. 19. and 68. 18. and 209. 30. Answerer
prooved guilty of sin in opposing the persons whom the Church desired. 65. 8
It has been the Answerers course to injury the Church. 77. 7 Answerer not
willing to accommodate the Replyer about promiscuous baptising. 126. 1. and 130
22. Answerer obtruded a false translation of the five Dutch Ministers writing
upon the Reader. 129. 12. Answerer contradicts himself and the Classis about
the insufficiency of the Elders, about baptising. 169. 12 Answerer hinders the
agreement of the Elders, concerning the Replyers preaching, notwithstanding all
his pretended answers. 218. 12 Answerers needless jealousies kept Mr. Weld
out from preaching when the Elders desired him. 221. 27 Answerer
notwithstanding his answers, found guilty of subjecting the Church under an
undue power of the Classis. 232. 22. Answerer joyneth with the enemies in an
old cavil, what the due power is by which the Church should be governed. 253.
15. Answerer injurious to Christ and to the truth, while he thinks to leave
the complaynants under suspicion of adhearing to some sect. 236. 22 Answerer
found guilty of giving unto the Classis power to keep out such men as the
Church desired. 243. 31 Answerer found guilty of giving unto the Classis power
of making laws. 257. 7. Answerer found guilty of bringing matters violently
unto the Classis. 264. 9 Answerer found guilty of subjecting the Church under
the Classis without consent, ^68. 1 Answerers answers about his pulpiting
against the Replyer examined. 278. 19 Answerer arms his opposites against
himself and all Non-Conformists. 282. 23 Answerer describes not the persons
right whose infants are brought to baptism. 314. 2
Attersol.
Mr. Attersol not for promiscuous baptising. 161. 27
Balmford.
Mr. Balmford defended. 93. 34
Baptising.
Examples against promiscuous Baptising. 32. 1 Arguments for promiscuous
Baptising answered. 118. 31 Scriptures for promiscuous Baptising answered. 121.
31 The question concerning promiscuous Baptising stated. 132. 5 Things premised
about promiscuous Baptising. 132. 22 Four grounds against promiscuous
Baptising. 133. 25 The opinion of learned Writers concerning promiscuous
Baptising. 134. 1 The ends and uses of baptism against promiscuous Baptising.
140. 21. Promiscuous Baptising offensive. 143. 19. Promiscuous Baptising amoung
the Reformed a building of things destroyed. 145. 21 Promiscuous Baptising
against Godly custom. 153. 9 Promiscuous Baptising not maintained by them that
seem to favor it. 156. 23 Pretenses for promiscuous Baptising answered. 163.
8 Promiscuous Baptising not an order of the Dutch Churches, but a disorder
crept in. 175. 15 Confessions and Cannons of the Dutch Churches against
promiscuous Baptising. 175. 22 Custom about baptising such, as that it may
justly be called promiscuous Baptising. 300. 34
Baptism.
Baptism is an ordinance belonging to the Church. 312. 1
Basil.
Basil for peace sake remooves his dwelling. 16. 31
Beza.
Beza not for promiscuous baptising. 158. 19 Beza his opinion of Synods. 228.
11 Beza his carriage when Erastus his book was published after the authors
death. 323. 27
Brownists.
Nearness to or distance from the Brownists, but a false rule to try truth or
error by. 10. 2 Brownists errors. 280. 35
Burden.
What a Burden is. 52. 36 The Burden of the Complaynants being deprived of
those whom they desired, grievous by the concurrence of many respects. 53. 6
Certainty.
Human Certainty stands with a contingency of future events. 28. 10.
Choosing.
Power of Choosing Ministers in the whole church. 36. 24 the terms explicated.
36. 30 the position laid down as the Affrican Synod and Professors of Leyden
hold it. 37. 8 Proof of the position reduced to 3 heads. 37. 23 Argument from
the Scriptures. 37. 25. Argument from consent of times. 40 6. Argument from the
evidence of reason. 43. 10
Power of Choosing, the Church cannot give from her. 46. 12
Choice.
In Choice of Ministers there is (in cases) a necessary use of the combination
of Churches. 230. 33.
Church.
In what sense Church is taken. 36. 33. Church is deprived of her power two
ways. 47. 35 Power to govern granted to the Church by witnesses in all ages.
237. 21 The order of the Church of Franckford for the power of the Church. 243.
13 What authority the Church has about laws. 258. 10
Classis.
What the Classis requires of Ministers which are to be ordained. 68. 36 Two
things blame worthy in the Classis. 9. 12 The Classis repaired unto about the
Replyers settling without his consent and approbation. 185. 34. The proceeding
of the Classis after the Replyer had refused his call. 193. 1 The Classis
assume in some particulars more power then the the Prelates. 223. 25 What power
is due to Classis over particular Churches by virtue of combination. 227. 19
The object of Classical combinations of Churches. 228. 7 Classis power
borrowed and derived from particular Churches. 229. 3. Classis power not a
prerogative of jurisdiction, but of estimation. 229. 27 Classis power not to
deprive particular Churches of their power, but to strengthen them in the
exercise thereof. 230. 10 Wherein the Classis power is undue and usurped. 231.
26 The undue power of the Classis in making laws. 252. 26 Concerning resting
in the determinations of the Classis. 271. 14 Classis require more power then
the Apostles, when they required the Replyer to baptize those which were not
members of the Church. 287. 10 The Church of Antioch warranteth not the
Classis. 290. 32
Collection.
Concerning a Collection, which the Answerer calls a reco^pense of the Replyers
labors. 284. 2
Combination.
What kind of Combinatio^ is lawful among Churches. 226. 11 The reasons of the
lawfullnesse of Combinations. 227. 3 Combinations of Churches in some cases
expedient and necessary. 230. 30 The Answerers Comforts are the Replyers also.
34. 26
Complaynants.
Complaynants complaints no evil weeds. 17. 31 Complaynants vindicated, and
the Answerer refuted. 18. 6 Complaynants defended about their not advising with
the Replyer. 29. 1 Complaynants cleared of oppositio^ unto the worthy servants
of God. 67. 24 Complaynants vindicated from slander in 8 particulars, where in
charged by the Answerer. 88. 28. Complaynants assertions found true,
notwithstanding the answers of the Answerer. 209. 9 and 213. 26.
Complaint.
What a Complaint is. 3. 24 Complaints not unjust in themselves. 3. 28 Four
things required unto an unjust Complaint. 3. 29 Complaints of weak ones not to
be slighted. 5. 23 Complaints of the Complayna^ts unjustly called unjust. 4.
10
Conference.
Conference between the Answerer and the Replyer defectively reported. 117. 3
Confession.
Threefold Confession with the observations upon it in the protestation
reviewed. 18. 17
Contention.
Contention twofold good and bad. 17. 36
Crispe.
Ia. Crispe vindicated from preaching, wherewith the Ansvverer charge him.
285. 17
Customs.
Of Customs, the evillnesse of them, and unlawfullnesse of building any
practice upon them. 30. 32 Good Customs should not lightly be broken. 151. 25
Good Customs of a diverse nature. 152. 1
Denomination.
Denomination may follow the better part, not the greater. 21. 24
Difference.
Differences in opinion must in cases be borne with. 58. 11 In cases of
Difference there is necessary use of combination of Churches. 231. 16
Elders.
Vsefullnesse and honnour of Elders. 207. 31 Elders cleared from the charge of
the Answerer about depriving the Church of her right. 49. 15. Elders cleared
from partiality. 210. 34.
Error.
Error arises from the perverseness of passions. 63. 11 Error in men one
cause of harsh censuring of others. 63. 29
Examples.
Examples in disquisition of truth not to be rested on. 32. 8
Excommunication.
In Excommunication there may be good use of the combination of Churches. 231.
8.
Father.
What a Fathers duty is toward his children. 20. 7
Fenner.
Mr. Fenners judgment about the power by which the Church should be governed.
238. 25 against the Answerer. 239. 29

Fleeing.
Fleeing justified by examples. 104. 2. Fleeing and not fearing them that can
kill, and not fainting, may stand together. 104. 23 Fleeing is sometimes a
confessing to the truth. 105. 14 Fleeing or a voluntary banishment, is in some
cases worse then some imprisonment. 105. 13
Forbes.
Mr. Forbes defended. 85. 32 commended. 87. 30

General.
General good to be preferred. 12. 32.
Hooker.
Mr. Hooker defended. 68. 25 Mr. Hooker not the cause of disturbance, but the
Answerer. 116. 19. Mr. Hooker cleared from Scisme. 246. 1.
Jacob.
Mr. Jacobs judgment about Classis and Synods, for substance the same with Beza
and Calvin. 236. 4.
Intentions.
It is lawful to judge of men's Intentions. 234. 1
Law.
Three things required to the making of a Law. 256. 14 Laws and orders differ.
257. 30
Learned.
Learned men's judgments not sufficient to justify any thing, or condemn it,
unless their grounds be found sufficient. 171 35
Magistrates.
Magistrates may not take away the power of the whole Church from her, in
choosing Officers, but may only rectify her choice. 51. 17 Magistrates
possessed with a false informatio^ about the cause of the Replyers coming
over. 183. 30 Magistrates give but a conditional consent to the Replyers
settling. 185. 9
Ministers.
The lattine copy of the writing of the 5 Dutch Ministers together with the
translation. 126
Objections.
Objections against the peoples choosing their own Ministers answered. 45. 6
Occasion.
To be an Occasion only of an evil is not blame worthy. 199. 27
Offense.
To give an Offense is sinful. 143 11.
Opposition.
Opposition among the persons whom the Church desired (objected by the
Answerer) examined, and the persons vindicated. 57. 12
Order.
Order about having one that can speak Dutch, may be attributed more to the
Answerer then the Magistrate. 91. 5 Of the Order agreed upon in the Consistory,
and the insufficiency of it for accommodation. 177. 13. The enlarging of the
Order as much as just nothing. 190. 1^ An Order agreed upon to be made by the
Elders, hindered by the Answerer. ^16. 13
Pamphlet.
What a Pamphlet is. 8. 8
Parents.
Parents sin a sufficient ground in some cases to keep their children from
baptism. 167. 5
Parker.
Mr. Parker defended. 74. 7 praised for his great worth. 74 19. What works he
was author of. 74. 22
Mr. Parkers judgment about the power by which the Church should be governed.
240. 21 Against the Answerer. 242. 6

Passions.
Passions are then strongest when reason is weakest. 6. 10
Pastor.
Pastors proper work to feed a flock already gathered. 291. 37 To compel
Pastors to perform a ministerial act to them who are not members, is to
confound the Apostolical and Pastoral office. 280. 22 What governing belongs
to Pastors. 298. 10 It is lawful for Pastors in some cases to flee. 103. 2
Patronages.
Patronages whence they came in, and the evil which followed upon them. 41. 15
Potts.
Mr. Potts grieved with promiscuous baptising. 125. 23
Praising.
Self Praising not always unlawful nor vain. 25. 24 An evil end ofttimes
in praising, 9. 2.
Preservation.
Self Preservation must not be with calumniation. 12. 32
Prove.
To Prove belongs to the Answerer, for diverse reasons. 32. 30
Protestation.
Protestation with the Answerers observations upon it reviewed. 317.
Provocation.
Threefold Provocatio^ added unjustly. 325. 1
Quaere.
Threefold Quaere in the Protestation, with the Answerers observations
reviewed. 322. 4
Reformation.
As Reformation increased the right of the people more pleaded for. 41. 36
Reply.
A Reply upon the 4 answerers which the Answerer calls his comforts. 34. 26
Replyer.
Replyers writings unjustly called complaints. 10. 32 Replyer unjustly charged
for nourishing contention. 15. 8 Replyer vindicated about a writing left by him
for which the Answerer blames him. 23. 28. and 99. 2. Justified in the matter
of the writing. 201
4 things in the Replyers defense about his writing considerable. 23. 29.
Replyer freed from a 4fold charge laid upon him about his industry in keeping
the Church together. 25. 13 Replyers writing sent to the Classis vindicated
from the imputation of the Answerer. 33. 18 Replyer defended about faults in
his writing. 72. 16 Replyer vindicated from the cavil of the Answerer about
the word Always. 96. 15. Replyer justified about his coming over to Amsterdam.
101. 6 About an authentic testimony which he is charged to have wanted. 102.
20 About the resignatio^ of his Pastoral charge. 106. 8 Concerning his knowing
of differences. 112. 8 Concerning his intention of coming over but for 3 or 4
months, and seeking of the place. 112 24
Replyer justified about writing diverse conferences, which he had with the
Answerer. 124, 1 Why the Replyer rested not in the judgment of the 5 Dutch
Ministers about promiscuous Baptising. 174. 4 Replyer vindicated about his
falsely supposed consenting to the writing of the 5 Dutch Ministers. And from
an accusation of withdrawing his consent. 187. 21
Replyer cleared concerning his pretended preaching in a private house. 197. 1.
and 275. 20 Cleared from fault in desisting from it. 277. 22
Replyer cleared about his journeying out of town before the Sacrament. 200.
24 Replyer justified in his three writings. 202. 26 Replyer freed from the
Answerers quarelling at these words he did not desire me. 204. 27 Replyers
opinion concerning the Classis the same with Dr. Ames. 224. 36 Replyer cleared
from Scisme. 248. 32. Replyers judgment concerning the trueness of Churches,
expressed in Dr. Ames words. 281 19. Replyers opinion against promiscuous
baptising, not built upon grounds of separation. 280. 20 Of the right by which
the Replyer did communicate in the Lords Supper. 288. 20 Replyer refuteth not
himself, when he professes readiness to baptize their infa^ts who have
membership elsewhere. 292. 34
Request.
Threefold Request in the Protestation, with the observations of the Answerer,
reviewed, 324. 25
Scisme.
Scisme, what it is, and how taken. 26. 9. Five things about Scisme. 26. 22
Scripture.
Scripture ought to be the rule to try all things by. 13. 20 All things
agreeing with Scripture are old, though they may appear new. 13. 33 Texts of
Scripture answered by the Answerer, reviewed by the Replyer. 286. to 316 Acts
20.28. reviewed. 288 9 Col. 4.17. reviewed. 296. 19 1. Peter 5.2. reviewed.
297. 16 To. 14.5.23. reviewed. 299. 5 Act. 11.21.26 reviewed 304. 32 Genesis
17.10. reviewed. 306. 8 Romans 4.11. reviewed. 306. 32 Acts 2.39. reviewed. 310.
11 1. Cor. 5.12. reviewed. 311. 37

Secession.
Secession from a Church twofold. 26. 27
Shepherds.
Shepherds combination a good embleame of the combination of Ministers. 297.
29 The reason of Shepherds combination. 297. 30
Speech.
Speech must have two propertyes. 2. 8
Suretyes.
Sureties not from the beginning. 164. 14. Sureties ca^ give no right to
Baptism. 164. 35
Synods.
Abuse of Synods have caused some reverend men to speak against them. 225. 9
Synods necessary for certain causes. 228. 11 Power of Synods see Classis.
Voetius.
The judgment of Voetius about the power of the Church. 242. 36.
Waldenses.
Waldenses separate, and bring the right of ^hoosing their Ministers to the
Church. 41. 31
Yea.
The saying Yea, not sufficient to testify faith, notwithstanding the places of
Scripture brought to prove it. 302. 1 Negative argument from Scripture
disabled by the Answerer in his arguing for the sufficiency of Yea. 305. 19
FIN.
AN APOLOGETICALL REPLY To a book called An answer to unjust Complaints etc.
THE TITLE PAGE EXAMINED.
AN ansvver] Every man shall kiss his lips that answers right words, says
Solomon. Prove. 24.26. 3 Things required in a right answer.


He that will answer complaints made against him, with right words, must be
mindful especially of three things.

2 Cor: 1.12.
from a good conscience bearing witness of his integrity, let him make his
answer to men, as if he were making it to our Lord Jesus Christ, before Angels
and men, in that great day, Luke 12.2 Prove. 15.23. Genesis 30.3.2.
when covered things shall he revealed and hidden things shall be made known.
Thus, shall a man have joy by the answer of his mouth, and shall be able to
say, as Jacob did to Laban, my righteousness shall answer for me in time to come.

True, by a double conformity, both of the speech with the mind, that he speak
as he thinks, and of the mind with the thing, that he think as the thing is.
Also it must be satisfying, that, is sufficient clearly to take away the
strength of all the allegations produced by the Plaintiff to prove him guilty:
else it is not worthy to be called an answer to complaints.

Coll. 4.6.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how
ye ought to answer every one. Where it is enjoined, that our speech be well
filled and well seasoned. It is well filled, when it expresses the sanctifying
graces of the Spirit, as the fruits of the earth are then full ripe when they
have attained to the perfection of their kind. The best rise of a right answer
is from a gracious heart, which is the^ declared to be a good treasure, when it
sends forth good things, and to be full of goodness, when good speeches flow
from the abundance within, and to be filled with the Spirit, when the words
express the delightful, Gal. 5.22.
and amiable sweetness of those fruicts of the Spirit, love, joy, peace, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meeknes, temperance, and such like: Cant:
4.16.
which are very pleasing to Christ, (whom, for that cause, the Church inviteth
to come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruicts) and very delightful to
good men; as the savor of that ointment, which Mary poured on the head of
Christ, was to those that were in the house. Thus an answer is well filled. And
it is well seasoned, when it expresses godly wisdom, and christian prudence,
or discretion, which inableth a man to observe a due proportion to the causes,
persons, times, places and whatsoever circumstances are considerable. As, that
harsh speeches be forborne, where a soft answer should be given, that a friend
be not wounded as an enemy, nor he reviled as an abject, who should be honored
as a brother, and that the answer, which should serve to mend the garment, does
not make the rent worse.

How much these three requisites are to he wished for in this pretended answer,
the wise hearted reader, I doubt not, sees, with sorrow, and will more
clearly, when he shall have compared this Reply, and it together, in all
passages. In the mean time; however, in a large acceptance of the word (as
Antwoorde, in dutch, is Ander woorden) this may be called an answer: Yet, in
strict and accurate consideration of it, I cannot acknowledge this to be an
answer, but must say, that it will appear; Facile patior injuriam, si est
vacua a contumelia Pac: Habet quendam aculeum contumelia, quem prudentes, ac
viri boni diff^cile pa ti possunt. Cic:
either to be less then an answer to the written complaints of ^he members,
and to my wrighting (if by answer he mean the disproving of particulars in
them) for he does not truly and punctually relate matters, but subtly evade
the discovery of them: or else it is more then an answer to the printed
pamphlet, if, by answer, he mean the revenge, or the requital of one ill
turn with another. for, if the publishing of those complaints, in print, was
an injury (as I freely professed it to be, in my protestation) yet he should
not have answered it with contumely, and that against those, who are innocent
of that fact, as all are, against whom he wrighteth (exept. W. B.) so that
instead of an answer to clear his innocence, the Reader shall find him
endeavoring to repel a less injury, by doing a greater injury; as Diogenes
would tread down Platoes pride, alio fastu. But amongst Christians these
things ought not so to be: much less toward fellow servants and brethen,
least of all from the Pastor toward his flock. Jesus Christ our Lord did not
thus, nor his Disciples, nor those ancient beleivers, who, for his sake, were
killed all the day long. my desire and purpose, in this Reply, 1. Pet. 2.23.
is to follow his example, who being reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered, threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously.

To the unjust complaint.] A complaint is unjust in 4 cases.
A complaint is a sorrowful declaration of the thing that greiveth a man. Thus
to do is not (in it self simply considered) unjust, it being founded in a
principle of natural aequity, allowed and warranted by all laws Divine and
human. So then, to complain of injuries is not unjust: unless it be, laid
many grievous complaints against Paul, Act. 25.7 2.
which they could not prove. or, goes about as a talebearer revealing secrets,
Pro. 20.19 2. Cor. 12 20:
whether it be done in way of whispering or of backbiting. or, Doeg the Edomite
came and told Saul and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech;
1. Sam. 22 9.
to incense Saul against Ahimelech and David, as if they conspired against the
King. Jn which respect David truly said of him: thou love evil more the^
good, Psalm. 52.3
and lying rather then to speak righteousness. or, Scelus tu illud vocas Tubero.
Cur isto nomine ista causa ad huc caruit? Alji enim errorem appellant, alij
timorem, qui durius; spem, cupiditatem, odium, pertinatia^, qui gravissime;
temeritatem. Scelus praeter te, ad huc nemo Cic.
as, when every infirmity is made a scandal, and every offense a crime, and
every petite error a wickedness; as Tully charge Tubero in the case of
Ligarius.

Now it would be inquired, in which of these four respects the Answerer
affirms the complaint (as it was delivered by the members in wrighting to the
Consistory) to be unjust? If he say, in the first; then he must show the
insufficiency of their proofs, which the indifferent reader will see that he
has not done, if he shall compare the Reply and answer together.

If he say, the complaint is unjust in the second respect; it must be showed
that the cognizance of a Church-greivance, referred to them by the members,
does not belong to the Consistory, which, I suppose, he will not undertake. If
he say the complaint is unjust, in the 3. respect; their own protestation, in
the conclusion of the greivances, will answer for them, that their end in
taking that course, was, that some lawful course might be taken by the Elders,
for the redress of those greivances, and, in case that should be neglected, to
free them selves from the guilt of those evils, when they should have done
their uttermost endeavors for the redress of the same. If he say; the
complaint is unjust in the fourth respect, as too much aggravating the offense;
the Answerer himself clears the^ thereof, in the preface of his book, where
he justifyeth the harshest expressio^s used by the Complainants, and the very
title of the printed pa^phlet, which many mislike: saying, If the complaints be
just, then is the title just, being framed according to the contents and
spec^all subject of the book etc. It remains therefore, that he find some
other respect, in which the complaints may be said to be unjust; else it will
be concluded that the are just, notwithstanding any thing said by him to the
contrary, in that pretended answer, and that him self has dealt unjustly in
calling them unjust complaints.

Of W. B. and of such others as have subscribed theeunto] Here it would be
inquired what copy of the complaints the Answerer means? If he mean the
written copy: why does he me^tio^ only W.B. name, co^cealing the rest, seeing
they all subscribed it as well as he? If he mean the printed copy (which I
call the pamphlet;) why are the other subscribers joined with him, seeing they
knew not of it before it was published, and freely expressed their dislike of
it afterward? If the publishing of it only be the injury, where of he
complains; why are the subscribers blamed, who knew not of it nor approved
it? If the subscription to the written copy be the offense; what did W. B. more
then the rest that he is named alone? This Riddle needs an Oedipus. Is it,
because though he be foremost in standing; yet he is the least in understanding,
and by the printer of the Brownists noated to be a Simplician, as the Answerer
scoffingly and injuriously declares, in his praeface? If so; no man will
praise his fortitude; howsoever they may his policy, who chalengeth so weak an
Antagonist to the field. Or is it, that the Reader may apprehend that to be
some weak jury which has such a foreman; that so he may slight the complaint
the more, for W.B. sake? If so; the Reader is abused. For, neither was the
complaint subscribed by him alone, but by the rest, (many whereof the Answerer
knows to be no Simplicians) nor were the rest induced to complain, or
subscribe the complaint exhibited in Consistory, by his example or persuasion.
Secondly, suppose they had been weaker men then they are: it is not safe for
any man, upon such a praejudice, to slight their complaints, seeing the Lord
does otherwise, who says, For the oppression of the poor: Psalm. 12.5.
for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him
in safety from him that puffs at him. In which last word [puffeth at him] is
expressed both the pride and policy of those that oppress the poor and needy.
And commonly circumventing wits, and scornful spirits go together; Prove.
29.8. Ephesians. 6.9 Prove. 24.23. (...) Lucian. de Sect.
so Solomon joyneth them, in a Proverb, saying, Scornful men bring a city
into a snare. And as there is not respect of persons with God, so, for men, it
is not good to have respect of persons in judgment. which even the Areopagites
discerned by the glimmering twilight of nature, and therefore gave judgment in
the night, that they might not observe the persons of the speakers, but attend
to the things spoken by them. And the Christian reader, I hope, will be ashamed
that the best of the heathen should go beyond him, in such a point of Justice.

Also an answer to Mr. J. D.] As he did answer them, so he has answered me
also, that is, boath alike untruely, unfitly, insufficiently: yet, with this
difference, that upon me alone he has spent more bitterness and gall, then upon
them altogether; which the understanding Reader will easily apprehend to be an
argument of his guilt and weakness to manadge his cause, in those passages that
concern me. For commonly, when reason and judgment is unable to help, then
the passions grow tumultuous, and rise up disorderly, at least, to make a
noise, with impotent clamours, as bores and pesants sometimes confusedly
assemble, and, with hideous shoutings, thinck to affright the enemy, or to give
others occasion to thinck they have the victory. But here I have a few
questions to propounde.

1. Quaere. Why this Answerer mentions my name, in the title page of his
book? Is it, because I am mentioned in the printed pamphlet? But, he knows,
I protested against that, in print, in favor of him, though he has ill
requited me.

2. Quaere, Why he wrighteth it so at length, both there, and throughout his
whole book? Js it to ingratiate himself with any, by opposing me?

3. Quaere, concerning the matter of his answer: 1. whether any report of
passages made by me, in that wrighting, be proved untrue by him? 2. Whether the
Scriptures alleged by me be faithfully handled by him, or do not serve fully
to the purpose, for which I produced them? and whether all of them be alleged
by me against the baptism of some infants, as he pretends? and why he
answerth not other passages, in that letter to the Classis, but only insisteth
upon 2. or 3. texts of Scripture, in the pretended purpose whereof he abuses
his Reader? and what end he had in pretending to answer, in such a manner, my
protestation, which was made in his favor?

4. Quaere. Why he compels me thus to contest with him, in print, seeing, he
knows, I have declined all contention with him, by wrighting, or word?

5. Quaere. Why he brings others upon the stage also, both Reverend ministers
(dead and far absent) and the Elders of his own Church, when he pretends
only to answer W. B. and I. D? If he say, the Complainants mentioned their
names; who knows not, how easily and fairly he might have declined any
speech about them, at least, Sect. 5. p. 28. Sect. 6. p. 32. Sect. 28. p: 76.
77.
tending to their reproach, notwithstanding that? Yea, de facto, he has
declined the same, in the cases of other men. Why might not alike answer have
served, concerning those also?

6. Quaere, Why, seeing he would answer me, without cause, in print, did he not
answer my threefold wrighting, by it self, or refer me to the answer of the
complaints, or the Complainants to the answer of my wrighting, in cases
parallel and coincident, but so implicateth and involveth the one in the other,
that he compels me to reply upon almost his whole book? His answer to these
I expect, in his reply.

The Praeface examined.
IN examining the Praeface, I may not omit to acquaint the Reader with two
subtle insinuations, whereby (if he be not forewarned of them) he may easily
and at unawares be causelessly praejudiced. Two subtle devises.


a fallacy of the composition. For, pretending to answer two wrightings (the
one made by me, the other made and subscribed by diverse well affected members
of his Church) he so confounds them with a book published by W. B. (which in
my printed protestation I called an injurious pamphlet) as if those wrightings,
and this printed book, were one and the same. For, having spoken of that
pamphlet (in respect of the title, publishers and post script) he tells the
Reader that the first part of that pamphlet was made by Mr. D. and the 2. part
subscribed by others. Who, reading these passages, would not conclude us to be
authors of the pamphlet? For which cause, let the judicious Reader be
entreated to understand, that a difference must be made betwixt that pamphlet
and those wrightings. For the printed book (wherein also those wrightings are
contained) I called a pamphlet; not in respect of those 2. wrightings
(considered as written for private use) but in ^espect, of the joint printing
and publishing of them, in form of a book, with such a title and postscript,
and, in this respect only, (...) and (...) quia implet omnia loca
it is properly called a pamphlet: because, by this mean, that, which was
before private (and intended so to be) at least comparatively, became now, as
it were, to fill all places, and to be made common. Whence it is evident that
the same thing may be called a pamphlet, when it is printed, which yet is no
pamphlet being only written. So then, if he undertake to answer the pamphlet,
let him deal with the authors of it: my self have protested against it, in
print, and all the Subscribers (except W. B.) disclaim it. But if he will
answer the wrightings; let him deal fairly with us, and not join us with the
authors of the pamphlet, nor abuse the Reader by telling him of a first and
second part of the pamphlet, but profess to deal with the wrighting, which he
shall find me ready to defend, so far as concerns my part.

The second is a common practice of subtle Orators, whose custom is to raise
some sinister suspicion of ill purposes or intendments, in the opposite party,
that so, whatsoever they shall say may be, either slighted, or suspected. For
this purpose, he labors to persuade the Reader, that, partly affection to
the Brownists, partly disaffection to Classes and Synods and the government of
these Churches, and partly private discontents have been the strong motives,
whereupon these wrightings were made, whether by them, or me. The untruth of
which suggestions will the more appear, if we single out some persons whom, by
name, he thus reproacheth.

And first (not to speak of the printed pamphlet, nor of any that had a hand
in it (which both they and I disclaim) I will clear my own purpose, in that
threefold wrighting, whereof he speaks. As for my renoune and fame for
learning and gifts in preaching, which he intimates. These titles, as I
assume not, Quomodo luctantes Antagonistas altius attollunt, quo vehementius
illidant. Cypr. epist. 2. lib. 2.
so, I suspect, he ascribes them with no other mind then wrestlers have
toward their Antagonists, whom they lift as high as they can, that they may
give them the greater fall afterward.

First whereas he says; that threefold wrighting, was partly against the
classis, and partly, against him, the reader may see another politic devise of
his to, join the Classis with him self, for his own advantage; as if my
wrighting were intended against them, where as I have all ways professed my
reverent esteem of the^, as also I did in those three wrightings mentioned by
him, which were not at all intended, nor framed against the^, as he
misinformeth the Reader; only I do justly bewail two things. 1. their
credulity, that they have suffered them selves to be abused so much, by
misinformations, and that, from thence, they have been plunged, more then where
to be wished, into the guilt of partiality, by to much adhaering to one party,
with to apparent neglect of the other, though, in this case, the more
considerable. 2. Their injurious depriving the Church of their right in the
free choice and enjoyment of men, whom they unanimously desired for their
Pastors, without giving them due satisfaction the aequity of their so doing.
Which a man may say having respect to some particular persons, with out
condemning all, and in reference to a particular miscariage, without condemning
all use of Classes and Synods.

Secondy. Whereas he says, that, Fallacia non causae. ut causae.
being discontented that my calling amongst them did not succeed, I had an hand
in wrighting against them for not desiring me, he uses another fallacy, which
is, when that is put for a cause which is no cause. For, though I had cause to
be discontented that my calling did not succeed, and that by his fault, yet
that disconte^t did not cause me to wright (as appears in that I did forbear
wrighting 6 months after he had hindered my settling there) but the clearing of
mine innocency was the cause of my wrighting, whereunto I was compelled by his
repoaches. Sect. 5. Ans. 3. and 21. and Sect. 40. Ans. 3.


Thirdly, Whereas he says, that coming nearer to the Brownists in this
question about Baptism, then to us, it is therefore the less marvayle etc. I
answer. 1. Himself, in diverse places of his book, freeth me from any such
affection to the Brownists, as might cause me to wright against him, in favor
of them. Therefore herein he contradicts himself. 2. Nearenes to, or
distance from the Brownists is but a false rule whereby to try truth or
error. If the Brownists be nearer to the truth, in this matter, then this
Answerer why should not I come nearer to them then to him? Is it not safe to
come nearer to the Brownists in holding a truth, then to the Libertines, in a
danberous error? Will he say, the Brownists hold no truth? or, that we may
not lawfully hold the truth with them, that it may appear we differ from
them? or, that no man can wright in defense of any truth which they hold,
without siding against him? 3. It would be known whom he means by [us] when
he says, nearer to the Brownists then to us? 1. If he mean the Elders of his
Church; his own words will contradict himself. For of them he says; these
three have diverse times professed themselves to be of the same opinion with
Mr. D. touching the Baptism of infants. Sect. 23. Ans. 5.1. p. 63.
If he mean the subscribers, which, with the Elders, are the best part of his
Church; their complaint against him, for this difference, shows how far they
differ from him herein. 3. If he mean the Classis; the wrighting of the five
Dutch Preachers, which, he says, was by all the Ministers of the Classis,
Sect. 19.
with one consent, afterward approved and confirmed, will witness against him.
For there they thus express themselves. We do greatly approve of his good
Zeal and care of having some precedent private examination of the parents and
suretyes of these Children in the Christian religion. Sect. 12.
And a little after. We do so judge that this fore said examination be
ordained, so far as may stand with the aedification of the English Church.
Thus far they agree wholly with me; how soever in the words following (being
abused by causeles jealousies and suspicions suggested by the Answerer,) they
concluded, according to his mind.

Fourthly when he says, that; I had an hand in wrighting complaints against
him. I answer, 1. If he mean my two first wrightings to the Classis: they were
a breife narration (by way of account) of passages between us, that the
Classis might rightly understand those passages, about which they had been
misinformed. 2. If he calls that my third wrighting shown to one or two of
the members, about the time of my departure from Amsterdam, a complaint, he
miscalleth it. For it was only a just and necessary defense of my innocence
against misreports.

The same imputation of Brownisme he lays upon those members of his own
Church, which subcribed the complaints; but how unjustly the Reader may easily
apprehend. Sect. 31. p. 87.
For those of them (who were such before) have, in their joining with his
Church, left their separation, as he says, and diverse of them, he knows,
were never of them, nor do hold with them, in the point of Separation as it is
urged and practiced by them; Therefore, I hope, the wise-hearted Reader will
not suffer himself to be prejudiced against them, or me, or what we shall
wright, or have written, by such vain pretenses, whereof they are able and
ready to aquitt themselves in print, as may appear, in due time,

Whereas, upon occasion of the title of the pamphlet generally disliked by the
complainants, he says, As is the one, so is the other. If the complaints be
just, the^ is the title just, if the title be a vile title, the^ is the book
also vile; I answer. 1. He continues still to jumble the pamphlet and the
complaints together, that the Reader may be deceived, in thinking boath to be
one, which is a fallacy, as we have formerly shown. 2. it will not follow,
that, if the complaints be just, the title of the pamphlet is just. For the
very pamphlet (considered as it has been expressed) is an unjust thing, when
the complaints might justly be exhibited, as they were.

Besides, they, that condemn the title of the pamphlet, do condemn the whole
title page, which they condemn for the misapplication of Scriptures to this
case, and too much harshnes of language. Because they hope, and so do I, that
these actions, whereof they complain, do proceed, but from error of
judgment, or from some curable distemper of affections, in the Answerer. And
then the complaint will be just, though the title be found unjust: else the
whole title page of the pamphlet will be more justified, by many, then we wish
it should, considering his eminency in the Church.

Whereas he says, I find no just ground that these opposites bring for their
complaints, nor any due proof of their many reproves. Jf it please the Reader
to examine. Sect: 4.5.6. and Sect. 23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31. with those
intercurrent Sections, concerning me, (by comparing the answer and reply with
their complaints) it will appear that he has not so much cause of comforting
him self against their allegations, as, from my heart, I wish he may have.
That which he adds concerning the single uncompounded policy, whereof Mr.
Jacob speaks, shall be examined in its due place here after, when he strikes
at the same man again, upon as little occasion given him, whom yet he might
have spared being dead, and so not able to answer for himself. At least; he
might have freed him from suspicion of Brownisme, whose defense of the
Ministers and Churches of England, against Mr. Fr: Johnson, is extant in print,
concerning whom more hereafter.

In the mean time, I must profess, that I do not find, in examining the
complaints of the members, or in their private speeches, that they are opposite
to the Answerer, further then himself opposes their enjoyment of that liberty
and power, which himself (in express words) acknowledges to be due to the
Church. From which his practice so far differs, that it seems to sweigh
his Judgment, in some particulars, a contrary way* wherefore let the Answerer
agree with himself and reconcile his own judgment and practice, and, for
ought I know, the opposition between him and these members will cease. It had
been a work, both more comfortable to himself, and proffitable to the Church,
for him to have done right to the Church, rather then to have justified an
injury, and to have stopped the course of contentions, rather then to have
opened the sluices thereof, by publishing this book, and persisting so stiffly
in an unwarrantable way.

Nature and Religion, I confess, teach and warrant self preservation, but
neither of them warrant a man, under pretense of answering for himself, to
calumniate others, and, under pretense of a defensive war against enimyes, to
invade and spoil confoederates and friends. Nature teaches particulars to
lose them selves in promoving the general good, as the fire to descend and the
water to ascend, rather then there should be a Vacuum, And Religion teaches
Christians, 1. Cor. 6.6*7.8
rather to suffer wrong, then, either to do wrong, or, by too contentious
righting a man's self, to expose our Profession to reproach. Both Nature and
Religion ratify this Maxim. Salus populi suprema lex esto. The good of many
must be preferred before our private benefit or content, How defective the
Answerer has been herein is too manifest. But I leave that and spare him.

Only, For a conclusion, to prevent another prejudice, I do earnestly entreat
the Christian reader to beware how he suffer himself to be carried away with
any man's confidence, though he profess a readiness to suffer reproach for his
opinions, knowing, that it is not the suffering, but the cause that makes the
martyr. Never theles; far be it from me to approve any that reproach men with
their errors, when they seek the truth, in love of it, seeing we all know but
in part, and we are ignorant of more then we know, by far: but let every man,
according to the rule, try all things and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
not framing to him self a way of Religion, according to the fancyes of men,
how grave and learned soever they seem to be, but expecting a rule for the
ordering of our whole behavior in the house of God, from the Scripture, 1.
Tim. 3 15.
which is given by inspiration of God, and is proffitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, being
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. From which rule who soever stragle,
Ier. 18.^^.
they are truly and fitly said to stumble in their way from the ancient ways,
and what soever Ecclesiastical Constitutions or customs, received in the
Church, have not warrant from the Ancient of days, in this word, Dan. 7.9. 1.
John. 2*7.
which is the old Commandment which we had from the beginning, they are but
new forms though they have a show of antiquity, by their long continued use:
in which sense, Iosu. 24.2
the Idolatry of the Pagans is said to have been of old time. On the other
side; what soever form of Churches and Church government is warranted by this
rule, though it may seem new to men, because they never knew it before, yet it
is not new, in it self; as it was no new-fanglednes in Nehemiah to celebrate
the Feast of Tabernacles, Nehem. 8.17.
though it had been out of use from the days of Joshua unto that time. These
things we may safely publish, in life and death. But if any man shall advise
men otherwise, though, upon his death bed, let it be rejected as unsafe
counsel. I will conclude the examination of the praeface, with the prayer of
the blessed Apostle of the Gentiles. Romans 15.5 6.
Now the God of patience and consolation grant us to be like minded one toward
another according to Jesus Christ: that we may with one mind and one mouth
glorifye God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! Amen.

The answer to the first and second Section examined.
HAving examined the title, and the praeface; we now come to examine the
particulars of the complaint, so far as it has pleased this Answerer to
interest me therein, by making use of my name, which he does, not covertly, but
wrighting it at large, nor sparingly, but almost in every page, and that, not
only when the complainants naming me in their wrighting constrained him so to
do, but also needlessly, and without provocation: as if his desire were deeply
to imprint an evil praejudice in the mind of the Reader against me. And
particularly, in the second section, page 6. Answ.
he begins with me thus.

But had these complainants well considered their own ways, and the way of
truth, they would then have left the complaint upon themselves and upon the
proceedings of Mr. I. D. 1. Principijs o men inesse solet. Principio quae sunt
inchota malo, vix est ut bono peragantur exitu. Leo apud Graticaus 1. q. 1.
Ans. Reply. Contentiousnes charged upon me unjustly.


Beginnings are ominous. Things ill begun seldom end well. It is much to be
suspected that he inte^deth to quarail, who so needlessly falls upon me, in
the first onset, being not any way occasioned to mention me, by any thing which
the complainants have expressed, or intimated, in this section: and yet he
takes occasion, in this one section, to make mention of me seven times, and to
wright my name at its full length, every time. His own heart knows what his
purpose was in so doing. But let us consider what he charge upon me, that, if
it be just; I may confess, and give glory to God: If it be unjust; I may
declare my innocence.

As for Mr. D. he is guilty of nourishing contention in our Church.

Nourishing contention in the Church is the thing laid to my charge. An heinous
offense, if the accusation be true, but, in him, a grievous slander, thus to
reproach me in print, if it be false. I cannot but admire how he fell upon this
accusation, to charge me with an evil so contrary to my disposition, and the
practice of my whole life, especially, since my public employment in the
Ministry. I was about seventeene years a preacher in London, and lived there
almost ten years in a pastoral charge. There I had much converse with
Ministers of differing judgments, and with people (almost of all conditions and
degrees) of different affections, and ways, being employed, both in public
occasions and private cases: Let this Answerer speak plainly (I challenge him
before all men) whether he has ever heard, by any credible report, that I have
been, I say not, detected, but so much as rationally suspected of
contentiousnes, in mine own country? And is it probable, that change of air,
should work such a change in my disposition, Coelum, non animum mutat qui
trans mare currit.
in so short a space, that, he, who was wont to be peaceable with all, and a
peacemaker amongst many, should, in Holland, where he is but a stranger, and
passant, become a nourisher of contention? But what have I done in Holland,
that has given occasion of this imputation? At my first coming, this
Answerer, with the Elders, entreated me to help them in their extremity. I did
it willingly, preaching twice every Lord's Day, till he was able, and, after
that, continued to assist him once a day, whilst he desired it. Jn that time,
which was above 5 mouths, I applied my self to him with all love and respect,
frequently visiting him, (without once receiving the same courtesy from him)
and fashioning my outward comportment and behavior so, that no difference
might appear between us, even when I had just cause of complaining. I began
no question with him, that might occasion dispute, though I had as good reason
to examine his judgment as he mine: when he pressed to know my judgment in any
thing, I dealt ingenously with him, and, if we differed, I examined his grounds
impartially, as one that sought the truth, not contention; Yea sometimes I
expressed my judgment obscurely, if I suspected a difference, to avoid
offending him. He first brought the matter to the Elders, not I, and then to
some of the Dutch preachers, without me, and then to the Classis, against my
mind. Had he told me plainly, that the means of accommodation propounded by me
would not succed, and that nothing would satisfy, but comformity to that
unwarrantable custom, I had desisted sooner: as I did, when it appeared so to
be. After I desisted from pulick work; I was silent, till he began to contend
against me in public, after he had procured the cessation of my public
labor, and I had sat still, in private, above four months, doing what good I
might without offense, and ceased from that also, so soon as his discontent
publicly appeared against it. When I ceased from the public work; I preached
a sermon for peace, Romans 14.9
out of those words. Let us follow after the things which make for peace, and
things where with we may edify one another. But may not I justly say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 120.7.
I am for peace, but, when I speak, they are for war? For, besides the
wresting of one passage in my sermon (which I had expressed, though he had had
no kinsman) how he answered me in the afternoon I am ashamed to wright, but
too many, who then heard him, know. When thus I was unkindly used in public,
and saw that my private dwelling there was a matter of offense to him; for
peace sake, I removed my dwelling to another part of the country. Thus Basil,
Greg. Naz. Monod. in laud Basilij.
in a like case, when Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria (a man, otherwise, of noat
for his pietey and constant confession of the faith against the Arrians, under
the Emperor Valens, yet) not being able to bear the esteem which Basil had
with the people, was drawn, by a spirit of Envy, into an opposition against
that holy man, and labored, by word and deed, to hinder his settling there, and
the Nazareans and Aschetae, taking it very ill that Basil should be thus
slighted, purposed, in discontent, to break off from the Church. What did
Basil in this case? For peace sake, he went aside, with Greg: Nazianzen into
Pontus, thincking it better to provide for his own peace, in a solitary
condition, then to contend with Eusebius, de ambitione. Yet afterward the same
Eusebius gave way to the settling of Basil, in that place, having use of his
help in some disputes, and they conversed together lovingly. And the reason is
rendered by Nazianzen who wrighteth of Eusebius (an ancient man of somewhat an
ill nature) that As iron is softened by the fire, so was Eusebius by age. (...).
I wish the same testimony may be given of the Answerer, for the time to come,
for his own good, and the Churches. In the mean space, I proceed to examine
what reason or pretense the Answerer does bring for this accusation.

Whilst those roots of bitterness, Ans: p. 7.
and evil weeds of unjust complaints are watered by him: whiles he himself,
by his wrighting, which was first secretly spread abroad among our people, does
make the like, yea and many the very same complaints that these men have.

guilty of nourishing contention in the Church, he aleadgeth a wrighting left
by me, at my departure, and, afterward, spread, as he says, amongst the
people: to prove that thereby I nourished contention, he says that the roots
of bitterness and evil weeds of their unjust complaints are watered thereby:
And to prove this, he affirms that many and the very same complaints are in
my wrighting which these men have.

In answer to this challenge, I am to declare two things. 1. that their
complaints are no evil weeds. 2. that the wrighting, which was secretly
spread abroad, as he says, is not blame worthy.

First, There is no herb in the garden, but there is some weed in the field
like it, and the similitude is such between them, 1. 1. That their complaints
are on evil weeds. Jude 3.
both in shape and color sometimes, as men may easily mistake the one for the
other, through inadvertency, or neglect of examining their different
properties. So it falls out in this case. There is a good contention, an
herb whose roots should be watered. It is a contending for the faith, a
striving against sin. There is a bad contention, a weed which must be pulled
up by the roots. Heb. 12.4. A two fold contention.
It flows from pride, and rayseth factions in the Church, and seditions in
the Common wealth, of such are the instances produced by the Answerer against
the complainants, upon supposall that their complaints are unjust, which if we
shall deny, and evince the contrary, his calling them roots of bitterness and
evil weeds, and his comparing them to the Rebellious Israelites rising up
against Moses and Aron, The 1. Section examined.
to those sons, by the Mo^hers side, that were angry with the Church, and to
those of Jerusalem, that stoned the Prophets, and to those contentious
Corinthians that were factiously addicted to Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, and
went to law amongst heathen, and to those Iudaizing Galathians, who troubled
the Church (as he contumeliously rhethoricateth in the first Section) will
prove a notorious slander, and the more grievous, if it shall be found to be a
calling of good evil, and because it extends to the injury of so many. I
appeal to the Answerer. Do these complainants murmur against God Exodus 16.8.
through coffeehouse with Gods allowance Exodus 17.6.7.
? or with Gods appoyntments Exodus 17.2.
? or with Gods judgments upon others Numb. 14.41.
? or through distrust in difficult cases Numb. 14.1.10.
? or, do they not complain of man, who does deprive them of that spiritual
food which God allows them, and sets up human customs, and self-will
against Gods appoyntments in his Church? whereby they want the help of those
whom they desired to go before them, and lead them through the wilderness (not
backward into Aegipt, but forward) toward the heavenly Canaan. Is there no
difference between an humble presenting of complaints by these members of the
Church to the Eldership, that matters may be privately examined before 2 or 3
(when secret speech with the party alone has proved fruitles) and a proud
casting off the ordinance of God, through discontent, as those rebels in
Israel did? between heretics, Idolatours and such kind of Seducers, that,
under the name of the Church (whose sons they profess themselves to be)
fight against the Church, and these, who, being a part of Christ's flock, desire
faithful shepeards that they may be kept from straggling? between those, who
killed the Prophets and stoned those that were sent unto them, and these, who
account their feet beautiful, who bring the glad tidings of peace, and strive
(as for life) to enjoy the Prophets, whom they conceive God has sent unto
them? And, howsoever contention, which is a fruit of the flesh, will be found
in any persons, and Churches, under heaven, whilst that corrupt principle of
flesh (which is, in some degree, in the best men) remains unpurged out,
which, not only fights against the spirit, in our selves, but also inclines
us to fight against others, though spiritual, and that upon carnal and
worldly respects; yet, I demand, do these complainants, so contend for the
enjoyment of those men, whom they mention, as those Corinthians did about Paul,
Apollos, and Cephas? Do they look upon these men so, as to have the truth of
God in respect of their persons, and to receive the word for their authority
sake, as they did? Did these terminate their desire in any one of these men,
excluding all others, as they did in some one of those? All that these men
desire, is to have a faithful Pastor known to themselves, and approved of,
and desired by them, and of their own Nation, if it may be, and, as much as
may be, without drawing men from the service of other English Congregations in
these Countries, so long as some fit and free men may be had, either
immediately from England, or else resident in these parts. Hereupon they desired
Mr. Parker: Jf they may not be so happy as to enjoy him; Mr. Forbes. If not
him; Dr. Ames: if not him; Mr. Peter: If not him; Mr. Hooker; If not him; itur
ad me. If none of these, yet some faithful one, whom, with joint consent, they
shall choose. Yet, if sufficient reason be not given them, why they are deprived
of all, or any of these; they find themselves aggreived, and complain to the
Consistory of their own Church. And, is this such a Piaculum, a crime, as this
Answerer intimates it to be? And is there no difference between the Christian
Corinthians going to Law amongst the Heathen (neglecting such means of
composing differences as might be had in the Church) and these men seeking help
from the Church for redress of the Church-greivances? That they had cause to
complain, will appear in the reply to the Answerer, in the following
Sections, and that, upon such cause, in case of obstinacy, on his part, they
had power to have proceeded further then they did, in that complaint, who
knows not? The strange liberty that the Answerer takes in misapplying the
Scriptures alleged by him, upon this occasion, should be a matter of sorrow
to the godly Reader, and of humiliation to himself.

2. The Answerer is the cause of contention, which is aggravated. 1. By his
relation. Father. 2. Sam. 18.5. Paululum supplicijpro magnodelicto satis est
patri.
That sweet name of Father, which the Answerer assumeth to himself (and it is
due to him in respect of his office) should have caused an yearning of bowels
in him toward his Children, that cried for milk, when the Nurses, whom they
desired, were thrust out of doors. At least, when they cried for bread, he
should not have given them a stone, and beat them instead of feeding them.
Suppose the Children were froward; A little fatherly indulgence, in granting
their desire (it not being for their hurt, but for their good) should have been
used to still and quiett them. David would have rebellious Absalon gently
entreated for his sake. But these did not conspire against their Father, as
Absalon did: only, because their father was not the Lord, but Steward of the
house, they complained that he denied the household that allowance of provision,
which their heavenly Father afforded his family. But it may be, they did that
too contentiously; It will not be found so, upon trial, no, not in this act of
exhibiting their greivances in their own Consistory, if all the earnest
intreatyes, large offers for the poor, and other means used by them, for the
obtaining of their desire, the necessity of the place, the inconvenience which
already they felt in the so long want of one, the qualities of the men, of whom
he deprived them, the insufficiency of the pretenses; whereupon he did so, and
their despair of being accomodated, to their content, be aequally and
judiciously considered. And, if the contention of Children be indeed grievous
to his fatherly spirit, how easily might he have prevented it, by obeying that
Apostolical Canon, Coll. 3.21.
Fathers provoke not your Children, least they be discouraged?

2. By the place.
The place, where he lives, and his relation to that Church should have warned
him, standing upon his watch tower, and espying so many enimyes invironing them
on every side, to have interposed seasonably and strenuously for the prevention
of intestine dissentions, and for the making up of breaches within, and not, by
such a course, to have occasioned a division among the members, through their
falling into several parties. And yet, even they, who seem herein to adhaere
to him, do it not, out of approbation of his carriage in this particular, nor
out of opposition against me, whom themselves profess to desire, but out of
personal enmity against some of the Complainants, who appeared most to labor
for my settling there, and therefore willingly they laid hold of this
opportunity, and served themselves of it, for the more plausible and
undiscernable venting of their disaffection to them, by opposition against
them, under a pretense of standing for the Answerer.

Here he quarelleth the Complainants 1. For stiling themselves burdened and
oppressed, which is, as if a Father should beat his children till they cry,
and then beat them again for crying. How unjust this passage is, will appear
in the examination of the ensuing Sections. 2. For calling themselves members
of the English Church. How unreasonable this reproof is, may easily be
perceived. For, what though the words were understood, as meaning the body of
the Church (which yet is not necessary) and that the greatest part of the
congregation were otherwise minded, which yet is not so? will it thence follow,
that their words are notoriously false? I trow not. For the denomination may
follow the better part, though it be not the greater, as a man has his
denomination from his reasonable soul, though the unreasonable body be the
greater part, and a corn field is denominated, not from the chafe which is
the greater, but from the corn, which is the better, though the lesser part. I
will not stand to enquire of the Answerer what necessity there is that Elem, in
Psalm. 58.1. should signifye a faction in the Church, seeing the word (which
signifies binding in a sheafe or bundle) may noate a combination in the Common
wealth, as well as a faction in the Church, and the context seems to carry it
to the former, rather then to the latter sense? Nor will I return upon him his
descant on Ionath Elem rechokim, in the title of psalm. 56. My desire and
purpose was to continue (as I went on, 4, or 5 months) in a patient silent
bearing of my personal greivances, Ephesians: 4.2.3.
forbearing him in love, and endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace. For which purpose I may say, in some measure, with the
Psalmist. I as a deaf man, Psalm. 38.13.14.
heard not, and I was as a dumb man that opens not his mouth. And so had
remained to this day, if I had not been, by unkind importunity compelled to
these Apologies, first in private, and now, in public.

3. By the time.
Thirdly, His descant upon the time of their wrighting may easily be answered.
1 by concession. 2 by retortion?

First, By concession; that the year 1634. was a time of much affliction of
the Churches in Dutchland, and therefore might seem seaonable for the warning
of the Churches in Holland to take some course for a timely prevention of like
judgments upon themselves, by a due reformation of things amiss. 2. That, on
the day of the month, when they presented their complaints, his maid died.

But they say. 1 they knew not if it, 2 neither did he keep private (as
mourners use to do) but came to the Consistory, 3 neither did they apprehend
the death of that maid to be so great a cause of sorrow to him, as is here
intimated, for reasons which are not worth the printing. 4 that, if it had been
so; they co^ceive, that private greifes should not hinder the redress of
public greivances, and that, by the sense (...) own sorrow that day, for the
loss of one maid servant, he might have been more affected with compassion
toward them who had many days mourned for the loss of more then one Pastor,
whom God had, by his providence, brought among them, and almost cast upon them.

Secondly, The same observation may be retorted upon himself, both for the
year, and the month. 1. The year, wherein his book was printed, was the
year 1635. A time, when, not only the Churches of Dutchland were in great
affliction, but also the Churches in the Low Countries were in great danger
(the Prince of Orange being then in Brabant, and the Armies in some distress,
by want of victual) a time, wherein, by special order from the States
General, all Churches were called upon to meet one day in a week, in public,
to hear the word preached, and to pray for the good success of the Prince,
and of the Armies. And we are commanded, as in all prayer, so particularly,
when we pray for those in authority, 1. Tim. 2.8
to lift up pure hands without wrath, etc. 2 The month, wherein it was
published, was June, or July, a time when I was very weak, having been, not
long before, very near unto death, at which time he labored importunately
with the Classis for their consent to the printing of this book. But from that
death, and from dangerous relapses afterward into weakness and distemper the
Lord in mercy recovered me, even when man cruelly added sorrow to my
affliction. But I will aggravate that no further.

How well he performs his purpose of not doing the least wrong to those,
against whom he wrighteth, will appear to the indifferent Reader, in the
examination of the following Sections, in which, if he had dealt accordingly, I
might have been happily freed from this unpleasing task, whereby I am now
unwillingly detayned from more profitable employments, being compelled
hereunto, by necessity, for the justifying of the truth: wherein I do humbly
beseech the God of truth (who also is Love) to assist me with the spirit of
truth and of love, that I may be enabled in every passage to declare the
truth in love! To conclude: I leave it to the Read to judge, whether so to
contend be worthy of such a censure, as this Answerer lays upon it, or of any
blame at all, for the matter of it, and the thing done, unles, in the manner of
it, any unwarrantable distemper of affections or passions have appeared in the
complainants, which, if it be found, I will not justifye, neither will they, I
hope, justify it in them selves. So much be noated for the vindication of
their complaints.

Secondly, Now, being called, See more concerning that wrighting in Sect. 22. 4
Things in defense of my wrighting. 1.
I must clear the wrighting left by me from his unjust intimations against it.
For which purpose I will declare four things.

First, that the wrighting (qua tale) is not to be blamed. Suppose I had
complained; Is it unjust to wright down a man's complaints? Then, down with
all courts of Justice, where suits and causes are so transacted. And my case
was such, as I could not be righted against many injurious reports, purposing
to leave this country, otherwise then by wrighting. Again, a man wrighteth
with more deliberation, and a more full recollection of his thoughts, then he
speaks, and so with more strength, as the scattered beams of the Sun heat
more intensly and vehemently, being united in a burning glass. And, lastly, I
would have added that a man wrighteth with more composednes of mind, and a
better temper of spirit, then he usually speaks, and so with more solid
judgment, the passions being somewhat quieted and allayed (as the water is
clear and transparent, after the mudd is settled in the bottom) but that the
distempered passions appearing in the Answerer, and that in print, are a real
confutation thereof.

Secondly, Neither was the secret spreading of the wrighting a fault, but
rather an Argument of my tender care of his reputation, that I desired that
matters between us should not be divulged, but only declared where it was
necessary, for their satisfaction, who had been praejudiced against me, by
untrue reports of passages. Or, if the delivery of a wrighting to a friend or
two, in mine own defense, was to be blamed; what shall be said to him, 1. Who
provoked me thereunto, both by private suggestions, and by public injuryes? 2
Who him self did the same thing, without being provoked thereunto by me. For
he wrote a large letter to one Mr. B. at N. in England dated September. 26. (in
which month also he had revived contention in public, after I had satt down
quietly almost 5 months) and with this he sent enclosed a copy of the
wrighting of the 5 Ministers, which I never did, because I took it to be a
private wrighting, not to be communicated, without their consent.

Thirdly, Neither was that wrighting a complaint, (if actions be denominated
from their ends) but rather an Apology, or true defense of my innocence
(against untrue reports about my letter to the Classis, and about the question
concerning promiscuous baptizing of all that are presented, by whom soever, and
about passages between the Answerer and me) being frequently importuned by
some friends to give them mine answers to such objections, that they might be
enabled to satisfy others that were praejudiced unjustly against me. So that,
in my intent, it was an Apology: if, by accident, it became a complaint; who is
to be blamed; He that complains? or he that gave the cause? let the Reader
judge.

Fourthly. Here is an old fallacy, No^ causae, ut causae.
when my wrighting is pretended to be the cause of their complaints, which was
not. For they complained of many of the greivances mentioned in that wrighting,
not only, before my wrighting was seen, but before I saw Amsterdam. And,
though they make some complaints which agree with some passages in my
wrighting, yet they make many more also, which are not in my wrighting. Who
watered those roots? So much shall suffice for the vindicating of my self
from the imputation of contentiousnes, and of my wrighting, from the censure of
watering evil weeds of unjust complaints.

He says of our Church: had he not exercised much patience and industry, it
would certainly have fallen from me etc. But as he does vainly praise him
self, etc.

Here is a 4 fold charge laid upon me, with bitterness enough. Reply. 4. Things
unjustly charged upon me.
1. Vain selfe-praysing: 2. Wronging him, and the Church. 3. Folly and vain
Credulity, 4. Diminishing of the grace and power of God. And for what? Because
I said, If I had not exercised much patience and industry, the Church would
certainly have fallen from him. I will speak something to every one of these
severally.

To the first. It is no vain selfe-praysing to say so. The first charge
replied upon. 1.
For it attaineth its end, (finem operis, and oporantis) For it shows, both
how free I was from nourishing contention in that Church (for the preservation
of whose peace, I both did, and suffered so much) which was the end of the
speech: and it tended to Gods glory, and to the honor of the Gospel, that I
should declare my actions to be comely and to be according to that virtue,
Phil. 4.8.
praise, and good report which we are commanded to thinck of, which was the end
of the speaker. 2. Nor is all selfe-praysing unlawful, if it arise not from
selfe-seeking. As when the report is true, and uttered in way of testimony to
the truth, the case requiring it. All which requisits do concur in this
speech. 2. The second charge replied upon


To the second. It is no wrong to the Answerer, nor to the Church that I say so.

First, Not to the Answerer. For the report is, neither untrue, nor needlessly
made, but, upon constraint, to declare so much for the clearing of mine own
innocence. Nor does he, nor can he disprove any thing spoken by me, in that
particular.

Secondly not to the Church. For: neither do I speak of the body of it,
indefinitly, without exception (but of the better and most considerable part of
it) nor does my speech argue them (of whom it is spoken) to be of a
Schysmaticall disposition. For the clearing whereof (because the word Schysme
is so frequently used, Schysme d^^b e
and misapplyed by the Answerer) we will briefly consider the ordinary uses of
the word Schysme, in the Church, which signifies, 1. Io. 2.19
whereby the Unity of it is broken. 1. Cor. 11.18.
but the peace is broken: Jn which of these senses does the Answerer use the
word in this place? If in the latter; they are Schysmatickes (according to the
judgment of the Apostle) who cause division and offenses. 1. Cor. 11.14. 6.
Things about schysme. 1. Every sesession is not unjust. 2. Nor a breach of
Unity. Chameron de Eccles. de Schysm. page 395. 3. Nor concluded to be a
schysme. Cartwr: Reply.
And so he will find it laid at his own door. If in the former; it is a wrong
done to me, if he intimate (as he seems to do) that I accuse them of a
Schysmaticall disposition, in that sense, when I say that they would have
fallen from him. For 1. every secession from a Church is not unjust, as the
Reformed Churches plead for the justification of their forsaking the Romish
Antichristian Synagogue, which they truly affirm to be no Schysme, nor
themselves Schysmatickes, for so doing, though the unity be broken.

Secondly, Every secession from a true Church, is not a breach of unity: for
there is a negative secession as well as a positive one. And the former may be
lawful, in some cases, wherein the latter is not warrantable.

Thirdly, the case may be such, in a positive secession, as it may be
disputable, whether it be to be called a Schysme, or not. Mr. Cartwright
declares, out of Theodoret, how the Catholics which maintained the faith, of
the Nicene Council, through affection to their teachers (of whom they were
unjustly deprived) severed themselves into several companies: and, there upon
demands, will the Answerer say that these meetings were Schysmaticall? And then
answers, If he do; he speaks otherwise then Theodoret. 4. Nor argues men
to be of a Schysmaticall disposition. Socrat. lib. 6. Cap: 16. Soz: lib: 8. Ca:
22.23 24.25.26 27.


Fourthly, Every positive secession (or Schysme) is not to be imputed to the
Schysmaticall disposition of those, who withdraw themselves, but sometimes to
the injurious, dealing of others. For instance. Under Arcadius the Emperor, a
great Schysme was raised in Constantinople, whereof Socrates speaks somewhat,
but Sozomen much more. Who was the author of that Schysme? Were those Orthodox
Christians (Bishops, Presbyters, and people) who, being incensed by the
indignity of the thing, and not being able to bear the ill usage of so learned
and pious a man, as Chrisostom, then unjustly banished, assembled a part, and
forsook the rest of the Church, were, I say, these blamed as men of a
Schysmaticall disposition? No. the blame of it was laid upon Theophilus Bishop
of Alexandria, who, out of Envy, practiced against Chrisostom, and prevayled so
far, that, that holy man was cast out of his Bishopric, Theod: lib: 3. cap: 5.
and dyed in banishment. And in the case mentioned out of Mr. Cartwr. (if he
mean that which Theodoret noateth. Lib. 3. Cap. 5) both Theodoret and Eusebius
blame not the Catholics, but Liberius for that, who, though he desired to make
up the breach, yet, thorough his imprudence, made it worse, by too partially
favoring the party of Eustathius, with neglect of Meletius. These things I
noate, not to encourage such dissentions (the sad eve^t, both of the former,
which lasted 35 years, and of the latter, which continued 85 years, will, (I
hope) sufficiently forwarne the godly wise thereof) but to warn others (viz
Pastors and Classes) to take heed, least they, the one, by needles opposition
against those, whom the people reverence and desire for their ministers, and
the other, by partial adhaering to the one party more then is meet, and
aequall) make themselves the authors of disturbance, and dissension in the
Church, whereof they seem to complain: always remembering that of Solomon.
Surely oppression makes a wise man mad. Eccle. 7* 7.


Fifthly, Suppose the members (whom J mean) had only, 5. Its lawful to seek
the ordinances
in a fair way, sought their dimission, seeing no hope of the redress of
their greivances, and so joined themselves (without casting off communion with
that, as no true Church) to some other Church, where they might be satisfied in
their lawful desires; would such a joining with some other true Church in that
City, or a peaceable removing of themselves, and their families to some other
place, where they might be, with more satisfaction and content, still
professing and holding communion with that as a true Church, would such an
action have been judged Schysmaticall? This was that which I meant, and some
spoke. And, is this to accuse the Church of a Schysmaticall disposition? Let
the Reader judge.

3. The third charge replied upon.
To the Third. It is not folly, nor vain credulity, much less against modesty
or conscience, that I said, certainly they would have fallen from him. For it
is but an humane certainty, that I meant, which may stand with the contingency
of future events. Had J professed to have said that prophetically, without a
prophets warrant; it had been against modesty, or conscience, but when I
profess to speak it but after the usual manner of all men, who account a
thing, that is most probable, as certain, I am no more to be blamed then Ioab
was, if he had said to David (in a fit manner) certainly (in stead of, as the
Lord lives) If thou go not forth, 2. Sam: 19 7. Sect: 22.
there will not one tarry with thee this night: nor so much as the Answerer
himself is to be blamed for using the same word, in a case less probable,
when he says. It is certainly a want of modesty and prudence in me etc. which
I shall noate more particularly, in its due place. But I think any learned
man will conclude this challenge to be a mere cavil.

4. The 4. charge replied upon.
To the fourth. I did not diminish the grace and power of God, in that speech:
for what I said may stand with a due acknowledgement of God, 1, to be the
supreme and principal efficient, to whom the instrument is not contrary, but
subordinate and subservient (as he that says, the knife cutteth, does not
derogate from the power of the hand, which uses and guides the knife) 2, to
be a voluntary and free agent, Si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens?
who could have effected his own pleasure, in this particular, without any
instrument, or without me. And therefore his discourse of Gods often
frustrating humane purposes, is nothing to the purpose. But, if such bold
accusations may pass, upon any man's naked affirmation, without proof,
innocence it self shall be judged and condemned as guilty.

Ans. 14. and 15.
Before I leave this Section, I must examine one passage more, (in which I find
my name twice used) wherein he tells the nine first, and twelve latter
complainants, that Godly wisdom, and good conscience required of them all, that
they should have my counsel touching such weighty matters etc.

I am sorry that the Answerer thus discovers his spirit, their headlong and
headstrong rashness was extraordinary great. If it should be said, that, they
did consult with me, and I did approve of their wrighting; then, says he, will
it appear that he has been an extraordinary author of contention. Is not
this the spreading of a nett and setting of grinnes? Psalm. 140 4. Esa. 29.20
21. Hosea. 9.8.
Is it not the watching for iniquity, and the laying a snare for men? Is it not
that, which the prophet Hosea noateth, saying, The prophet is a snare of a
fowler, in all his ways? Now, although I can sufficiently clear my self; yet
I thinck it not expedient to gratifye the Answerer so far, in this way, but
will rather answer him (as our Savior Christ did the Pharisees, when they put
questions to entrap him) by some other questions. How easily might the vanity
of this passage, and the faultines of his dilemma be discovered, by showing him
that the disjunction is not full, and that the parts there of do not touch me
at all? For. 1. what necessity was there that they should consult with me? Why
not with him, or with any other? Again: if they had consulted with me; what
necessity was there that I should express my judgment? Might I not profess
that I would not answer to such questions, nor intermedle in such matters?
Again, if I did express my judgment, whether in dislike of their way, or
with such cautions as the case required; were they bound to rest in mine
opinion, as it was required of me to rest in the judgment of the five
Ministers? Had they not liberty to examine my advise, and, upon the reasons,
which satysfyed them, to choose the way which they took? Lastly, If I did
approve of their declaring to the Consistory, in wrighting, what were the
greivances, which caused these differences and oppositions (supposing that a
sober and wise answer thereunto would facilitate the ending of those
contentions: if either the complainants should be convinced that their
praejudices against the Answerer were not well grounded, or the Answerer,
reflecting upon his own faylings, should, in humility and faythfullnes, give
satisfaction by amendment, in the future) would this prove me to be an
extraordinary, or any author of contention? or, rather, will not it evince
that I have been studious of his and the Churches peace? This nett was ill
made, and therefore it has caught nothing: we shall see, if he will mend it
against the next time.

The answer to the third Section examined.
P. 15. ans. 2. 3.
THat which particularly concerns me, in this Section, is to be found, page 15.

When some of these Complainants have, upon occasion, objected unto me, that
nothing but customs and examples of men were urged against Mr. D. I signified
unto them, at diverse times, that if Mr. D. would set down any reasons from
the Scripture for the maintenance of his opinion, I would (God willing)
endeavor, etc.



1. See Sect. 11.
First For customs,] J must confess, that whatsoever show was made of Arguments
from Scripture missaplyed, or other pretended reasons (as of less useful
soldiers, and weapons in lighter skirmishes) yet customs and consequences were
the Triarij, and maine strength of the battle, in case of hazard: these were
insisted upon by every one (almost) that pleaded for this disorder, as the
principal plea they seemed to have. Now, howsoever I am, and shall be always
ready to give all due respect unto those good customs of Churches, which are
taken up, 1 Cor: 11.16.
upon good warrant, and received and long continued amongst Gods people; yet I
am of opinion, that is not lawful to do even good things only upon this
ground, because it is the custom. For our faith should not stand in the
wisdom of men. 1 Cor: 2.5
But to do a thing that is not warranted by Scripture, nor good reason, Eusebius:
lib. 1. de praep. Evang. Cap. 2. and lib. 6. Cap. 8. Ier: 44.17 2 King: 10.19.
Ioh. 4.20. Ier. 10.3. Levit: 18.30. Act. 21.21. 1 Samuel 2.13.16. Mat: 5.19 Romans
3.8. Pr. 19.16. Consuetudo impedire non debet, quo minus veritas praevaleat.
Nam consuetudo sine veritate vetus^as erroris est. Cyp. Epist. ad Pompej.
only in conformity to a custom (though it be a custom of some Churches) can by
no rule be justified. For evidence whereof (not to insist upon those unnatural
actions mentioned by Eusebius, for all which they might plead maniere van
'tland, the custom of the place, as incestious marriages with their own
mothers, in Persia, killing their dearest children upon religious respects, in
Scythia, murdering their parents and kinsfolks, amongst the Massagetae,
slaying their ancient men, amongst the Tiburens, Hircanes, and the Caspians,
many men marrying one woman of old, in Britanny, and many women marrying one
husband in Parthia) let us consider the Church of God. For burning incense to
the Q: of heaven, the Israelites pleaded ancient custom. But was that
sufficient? could custom justifye their offering sacrifice at Dan and Bethel?
or did custom warrant the Samaritans worshipping God in mount Gerazim? Customs
not warranted by the written word, what are they, but vain customs, abominable
customs and to be taught against, and reproved, though they be the Priests
customs, Howsoever, I confess, there is not the same degree of evil in all
evil customs: yet, as the least commandment must not be broken, so the least
evil must not be done, for any good that may come; seeing the Holy Ghost
speaks peremptorily saying. He that keeps the commandment keeps his own
soul but he that despises his way shall die. I will conclude this breife
discourse of customs, in the words of Cyprian* Custom should not hinder the
prevayling of truth* for custom without truth, is but the ancientnes of error.

Secondly, For examples,] 1. many examples could not be urged against me, in
this case; For (not to speak of other Churches) this custom is not in some
churches of these countries, they in Zealand do not so promiscuously
administer baptism, as it is of me required, nor the Churches of strangers in
London, or elsewhere; nor has any wrighter of noate, in print, pleaded for it,
but against it diverse: and renowned Scultetus freely and openly witnessed
against it at Ments, and refused to conform to it, as I am credibly informed.

Secondly, Suppose they could produce more examples and consent of wrighters,
in defense of it, then they can; (though in matter of Suffrages, where matters
pass by number, not by weight, this plea would hold, yet) in the disquisition
of truth, not the names of men, but the weight of argument will carry the
cause. Soz: lib. 1. Cap. 23.
Sozomen reports, that when all the rest of the Nicene Council had concluded
that no Bishop etc. should, after that time, enjoy the wives which they had
formerly married, Paphnutius alone spoke against that decree, and showing
marriage to be honorable, and accompaning with a man's own wife to be true
Chastity, brought all the rest to be of his mind. And Theodoret witnesses,
Theod: Eccles: hyst. lib. 2. Cap. 16.
that, when Constantius had objected to Liberius, that he alone withstood the
condemnation of Athanasius, saying to him, What a part of the world art thou,
who alone sidest with a wicked man, and do dissolve the peace of the wholl
world? Liberius answered him. The word of faith is not diminished by my
solitarines, for even heretofore also only 3 were found which resisted the
edict. To conclude. might not Arianisme of old, Papisme of latter times, yea
Turcisme, at this day, weigh down truth it self, if examples should be looked
upon, and the rule be neglected,

set down any reasons from Scripture for maintenance of my opinion.

See Sect. 11. and 12.
1 It shall appear, in due time and place, that it is not my singular opinion,
and that it is sufficiently warranted by Scripture, with Gods assistance. 2 Yet
the Answerers demand is unaequall, and against the rule of all Courts, as well
as Schools. For it belongs to him, Affirmanti incumbit probatio. Vlpian.
not to me to prove: 1 Because he, affirms it to be lawful so promiscuously
to administer baptism; therefore he must prove it to be so. 2 He preaches
that my tenet is erroneous: Therefore he must prove it to be so. Let him show
the text, the truth, from which it erreth, as Appollos mightily convinced the
Jews by the Scriptures, 3. He practices it: therefore he must produce the
rule which warranteth that practice, that it may appear, he has done it in
faith. 4, Lastly, he presses it upon me to do it, and that as a condition,
without which my calling is void, and tells the people, that, with a good
conscience he keeps me out, and has much peace in what he has done to me,
and others, for this cause. Does it not much concern him to prove this to be
a duty, by some praecept, or rule, in the Scripture, seeing I profess that I
see no warrant for it? Else will not every one question the goodness of his
conscience, and the truth of his peace in this particular?

If they thinck Mr. D. wrighting which he gave to the Classis with the reasons
of his opinion, might serve to convince me, and therefore infer that I am
obstinate, they are far deceived, for, neither is there any such convincing
power in any of his Allegations, as, I hope will be manifested by others.

First, The wrighting which I sent to the Classis was not intended for dispute
about the point in question,

Secondly, what convincing power was wanting in those intimations, rather then
allegations, which I gave in wrighting to the Classis, some other had need to
manifest: for the Answerer has not done it, who, of 20 sheets of paper,
spends 18 upon personal invectives (as being a subject more suiting with his
Genius) and not 2 sheets upon matters doctrinall, to satisfye men's consciences,
about the soundnes of his judgment, and his upright carriage in this buisnes.
And that little which he says, how little it is to his purpose, will, I hope,
appear, in its place.

Thirdly, The trouble which he has already brought upon his friends, and
others, in the Classis, needlessly, might seem enough, that he should not put
them upon more work, to answer my wrighting, which I intended only for their
private use. But, if any one will undertake it, I doubt not, with Gods
assistance, to be able to reply, and, in the mean space, I pray the reader,
that, if any such treatise be published, he will be so aequall to me as to
suspend his censure, till my reply may come forth, and I will assure him he
shall have no cause to repent of that aequanimity, in the end.

Fourthly, If my allegations to the Classis may not serve to convince him of
injurious dealing; let him show their insufficiency for that purpose: else he
cannot so easily rubb off the guilt of obstinacy, as he imagines. And, if, in
private discourse with him, I answered all his allegations and praetences in
defense of promiscuous baptizing all that are brought, so as his replies were
silenced in that point, let him take heed that he have not contracted the guilt
of a double obstinacy.

In the ensuing passages, wherein my name is not mentioned, the Reader will, I
suppose, easily apprehend that the Answerers purpose was, not only to defend
himself, but also to reach some blows to some body else. If I am the man he
aymeth at (as who can thinck otherwise) I must crave leave to speak foolishly
in mine own praise, being compelled thereunto, that I may fitly reply upon his
4 answers to their testification, which he calls his comforts.

First, His strong inclination to this calling from 12 years old, though I can
thorough Gods mercy, say the same thing, for the substance of it, and from the
same age, and though such propensions, being observed in Athanasius (he being
about the same age) by his Schoolmaster, were strangely answererd by the
events, in that famous light; yet neither the Answerer nor I have cause to
glory much in that, as a sign of Gods inward calling, unles after passages of
our lives concur to strengthen that: and, if they do; yet much is not to be
ascribed to those childish impressions which many have felt in their childhood,
whom afterward God has disposed of in some other services, whereunto they
have been better fitted, and many have not felt, at that age, who have far
exceeded either of us, in fruitful labors, and profitable services for the
good of the Church,

Secondly* what he says afterward, Ans. 2. page 16. Reply.
of his not seeking the place of a Pastor till he was lawfully called. I thanck
God, I can say also, and it may be, with some advantage* for in the place,
whence I came to these parts, I was by the Church freely chosen their Pastor,
without my seeking it. And how far I was from intruding my self for a Pastor
into this place, or running before I was sent, my slow proceeding in the
buisines, and desire of entering, upon such terms and agreements, as might
stand with the peace of my conscience, and assurance of Gods calling me
thereunto, do, in my silence, proclaim in the ears, and sight of all men.
And had I been so hasty, in thrusting my self into the place, as he
pretends, I should, and could have made him more work to keep me out, the^
I have done. Neither could they, who too much cleaved to him, have justified
what they did, much less have proceeded further, in this case, if I would have
interposed, in mine own right, as I might have done. But I preferred peace,
before other outward advantages, and do not repent of it: though he will have
no cause to glory in the issue.

Thirdly, Ans. 3. page 17. Reply.
what he speaks afterward of Gods blessing upon his labors in his calling,
and of the ample testimony which formerly has been given to him in other
places, I have considered, and could say some thing to it, and do wish, from
my heart, that he may obtain a more plentiful testimony thereof from this
people also. As for me, by the grace of God I am that I am, and, I may say, his
grace has not been altogether, in vain in me. His own name have the praise
of his own work in me, and by me: For I am nothing. I leave it to others to
say; whether eve^ from hence, I have not some matter of comfort, in the midst
of my troubles, and of joy when the chief Shepherd shall appear.

Fourthly, Whereas he says, Ans. 4. p. 17. Reply.
that whatsoever troubles have befallen him, in his calling, he did never
voluntarily forsake the work of his Ministry; cannot I say the same? My
labors for him, and, in other places of these countries, show that I have not
forsaken the work: neither did I resign up the place I had, voluntarily,
otherwise then as merchants cast their goods into the sea, in a storm: neither
was it an imaginary fear of trouble, that caused me to do it, but the trouble
was upon me, and, with good advise, and the consent of the congregation, I did
what I did, as shall be shown more fully, Sect. 8.9.
in its place: His misapplication of that phrase of looking back, when he had
put his hand to the plough, being intented for a secret gird against the
innocent, is a mere abuse of Scripture, and so a taking of Gods name in vain,
which, J hope, and pray, that God will give him a heart to see and repent of.

Whereas he adds his resolution, for the future, to take up his cross, etc.
whether he or I have most practiced this rule, in these afflicting passages and
events, let the story related by us boath show, and our own consciences
testifye, in the fight of God; yea let our several conditions, considered with
the causes of these troubles (which he might have avoided and prevented, but I
could not) demonstrate, in the sight of all men.

The fourth Section examined.
BEfore I proceed to a particular examination of this Section, I will lay down
some grounds for declaring the peoples right, in choosing their own officers,
especially Pastors. Which I will breifely express in this position.

The power of choosing their minister is in the wholl Church.
The power of freely choosing worthy Pastors, and refusing unworthy ones, is, by
Gods ordinance, in the wholl Church.

For the more full declaring thereof, I must explicate the terms, and show
what I mean, 1 by the wholl Church. 2 by the power of freely choosing.

First, The word Church, I take, not in a figurative sense, either,
Metonomycally, for a Church representative, or Synechdochically, for some part
of the Church, but, properly, for the wholl body of the Church, standing of
people to be taught, and governed, and of teachers, and governors.

Secondly, By the power of freely choosing, I mean, that no power can limit
and determine them, either, in way of restraint, to hinder their enjoyment of
one that is fit for them, when they have, by consent, chosen him, or, in way
of compulsion, to constrain them to wave such a choice, being made by them,
for the putting of some other upon them, whom they do not desire, or affect.

In boath: Cipry. lib. 1 Epist. 68.
I intend no other thing then the Affrican Synod intended, in Cyprian, when
they said. Plebs maxim habet potestatem, vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel
indignos recusandi: quod and ipsum videmus de divina authoritate descendere,
etc. The wholl Church principally has power, either to choose worthy
ministers, or to refuse those that are unworthy: which very thing we see to
descend upon them by Gods ordinance. To which purpose also the Professors of
Leyden, distinguishing between Election and Ordination, Synops. pur. Theol
Disput. 24 Sect. 32. 33.
conclude, that jus pastores eligendi est penes Ecclesiam, ac proinde plebi
commune cum presbyteris. Ius eos ordinandi, solis presbyteris est proprium,
etc. The right of choosing their pastors is in the Church, and therefore common
to the people with the Elders. The right of ordayning them is proper to the
Elders.

Now, that this Assertion may be vindicated from the reproach and suspicion of
Novelty or Singularity, Proved 3. ways. 1. Text of Scripture. 1. Act. 1.5. v.
23.
I will reduce the proofs of it to three heads. 1 Texts of Scripture. 2
Consent of times. 3 Evidence of Reason.

The first text is in Act: 1 where, at a meeting of about 120 persons, the
choice of one to succeed in the place of Judas being propounded by Peter, the
multitude pitched upon two men, Joseph surnamed lustus, and Matthias, whom they
esteemed meetest for that work, v. 24.25.
in reference to the description which Peter had before given of the man, that
might be judged fit for that ministry: having considered and concluded of two
men, whom they knew, and judged to be such as best answered that description,
they commended them to God in prayer, and, because Apostles must be immediately
called of God, they gave forth lotts, which fell upon Matthias, whom thereupon
they numbered with the eleven Apostles. v. 26.


Here are three Actors, the Apostles calling upon the people to choose, and
directing them therein, according to the mind of Christ; the people freely
nominating those whom they judged fittest, according to that direction, and
leaving that to the Lord which was peculiar and proper to him, in such an
extraordinary case, to declare immediately which of those two, whom they had
nominated, it pleased him to set apart to the Apostleship. Hence I argue, that.

The Apostles did not choose Joseph and Matthias alone, but the wholl Church
chose them, by consent.

Therefore the choice of the Minister belongs, not to some few, how learned
soever, but to the wholl Church.

Ans.
But, though the choice by God immediately signified in the use of lots is
extraordinary, yet the suffrage of the people is ordinary. Which seeing God
would not suffer to be neglected, in such an extraordinary case, much less
will he dispense with the rejecting of it ordinarily.

2. Act. 6.1.
The second Text is Acts 6 where the multitude (the number of Disciples being,
by this time, increased and multiplied) are called together about the choice of
a Deacon. In this buisenes the Apostles only directed them, Verse. 3.
according to the mind of Christ, what manner of one they should choose, leaving
them to their liberty of choosing him, whom they judged to be fittest for that
service, Verse. 6.
whom having chosen, they presented him to the Apostles, and they, without
gayn-saying, having prayed, laid their hands upon them. Hence I argue, in the
words of the Affrican Synod, in Cyprian, thus.

Cypr. Epi. 68.
If the Apostles would not choose, even Deacons, without the consent of the
people, much less would they obtrude Pastors upon them, without their consent.
For there are more and greater causes that require the Churches consent, in the
choice of Pastors, then of Deacons.

The third Text is Act. 14, where it is said of Paul, 3. Act. 14.23. (...)
and Barnabas, that, when they had, by the suffrage of the people, chosen
Elders in every Church etc. In which place some translatours, (in stead of
chosen by consent) read ordained, 1. contrary to the use of the same word, in
another Scripture, where themselves translate the same word, in the passive
particle chosen of the Churches. 2. contrary to the consent of expositours upon
that place, 2. Cor. 8.19. (...).
as Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Musculus, Brentius, Arias Montanus, Erasmus, etc.
3. contrary to the civil custom, whence that word and practice was brought
into the Church: it being taken from the custom of the Athenians, in choice of
their Magistrates, which they performed two ways. 1. By lots, whence they were
called (...) 2. By holding up of hands, whence they were called (...) 4.
contrary to the nature of the thing: Voet. desp. cause. pap. lib. 2. Sect. 2.
cap. 12. 1. Tim. 4.14. Cap. 5.22
for, there election is spoken of, which was done with (...) the holding up of
hands, not ordination, which was afterward done with (...) laying on of hands,
as if election and ordination were one and the same thing, whereas there is as
much difference between them, as is between the Election and Coronation of a
King, or the choice and installment of a Magistrate in his office. This being
granted, that the people chose their Elders by consent, hence I argue.

In the time of the Apostles, the power of choosing was in the people, without
whose consent and preceding choice, the Apostles obtruded none upon them, by
their own Authority, Therefore it ought to be so now.

This Argument when the authors of the admonition propounded; D. Whitgift
excepted against it, saying, that, howsoever, in the Apostles time, this use
was of having the consent of the Church in the choice of their Pastor, Cartw.
Reply. par. p. 32.
yet now it were pernicious and hurtful. To whom Mr. Cartwright replyeth
breifely, and fitly. See how unaduisedly you condemn the Churches of Geneva,
of all France, and certain of the German Churches which keep this order, Idem
ibid. p. 33.34.35.36.
who also in the same place fully answers the Archbishops five pretended
differences between those times and these, whereunto, for brevityes sake, I
refer the Reader.

So much for the texts of Scripture.

2. Consent of times.
The second proof of the peoples right to choose their Pastor, is from the
consent of times.

Cypr. li. 1. Ep. 4. and 68. Theod: lib: 1. cap. 9. Eusebius: de vit. Constable. lib.
3.
as appears in an Epistle written by them to the Church of Alexandria, which
determination, for the peoples free choice of their Pastor, Constantine the
Emperor approved in an Epistle which he wrote ad Antiochenos.

Secondly, After Constantines time, the same liberty continued in the Churches,
till the time of Charles the Great and Lodovicus his son, about the year
840, as Azorius the Jesuit confesses. Azo. part 2. li. 3. cap. 28. and lib. 6.
cap. 14.
Some thinck that the Council of Laodicea gave some check to this power of the
people in the year 338, or thereabouts, where, they say, it was decreed that
the election should not be permitted to the people, but Calvin expounds that
Canon as meaning that they should make no election, Calv. on Act. 16.
without having some ministers, or men of judgment to direct them in election,
and to gather their voices, and to provide that nothing be done tumultuously,
even as Paul and Barnabas where chief in the election of the Churches. Which
may very well stand with the liberty of the people in elections. But those that
wright the Centuryes suspect this Canon, and doubt that it is a bastard,
considering the practice of the Church. And well it may be suspected. For the
Council of Constantinople, under Theodosius, Hist. tri^art. lib. 9. cap. 14.
Council. Carth. 4. ^an. 1.22.
toward the end of the third Century, in an Epistle to Damasus and Ambrose,
declare that both Nectarius and Flavian were chosen by decree and appointment
of the people. Also, about the year 420, in the Council of Carthage, the
consent of the people is required, to the choice of their Pastor. Also the
Council of Basil, in Cardinal Cusanus, De concord. Cath. lib. 2 cap. 18. and
34.
concludes to the same purpose. Rectores ecclesiae per consensum, jure divino
et humano, constitui debent. The Governors of the Church aught, by Gods law
and man's, to be chosen by the consent of the Church. And, about the end of the
sixth Century, Gregory surnamed the Great was chose^ Bishop of Rome by the vote
of the people. Yea, above a thousand years were expired, before Pope Nicholas
the second had prevayld to settle a decree that the power of choosing the Pope
should be taken from the Emperor and the people (who were boath deprived of
their right at once) and be only in the Cardinals, contrary to Gods word, the
example of the Apostles, the Canons of the Fathers, and the use of the
Primitive Church, says Banosius truly. When election was taken from the
people, after the eleventh Century: Banos. de pol. civit: Dei and Hier. Rom:
cap. 7.
the fourth Toletan Council says, Let founders of Churches offer to the
Bishop those who are to be ordained. Hence, it seems, patronages came in, and
with them unlawful seeking of Church livings by friends, gifts, service to
patrons, marriages, flattery, base and unwarrantable contracts, which,
whosoever reads the Counsels and Centuriatours, shall find condemned to the
pit of hell, from whence they came, and to be judged as Apostasy, Symony, worse
then haeresy, like the sin of Gehazi and Judas, that alms may not be given
out of what is gotten that way: Pope Leo the fourth calls it a detestable
wickedness: the Canon says, Cause. 2 q. 3.
they are not to be accounted among the Bishops. Here I might show how many
ways Satan wraught in those times, against this ordinance of Christ, and the
greatness of their sin* who, in these days, obtrude themselves, or are
obtruded by others, upon Churches, without their consent, or approbation. Of
whom the Lord may say, I have not sent these prophets: yet they run. Ier: 23.31
And therefore may justly execute upon them that threatening. Therefore they
shall not proffit thi^ ^^ple at all. v: 32.


When things were brought to this sad condition, in those dark times of
popery, the Churches being thus robbed, and spoiled of their right, God raised
up the Waldenses about the year 1161, who, discovering the hypocrisy and
tyranny and idolatry of the popish Prelates, separated from them and chose
Pastors to themselves, and as the light and reformation increased, in after
times, the right of the people was more pleaded, by learned men in all
countries, as in Germany by Zwinglius etc. in England, by M. Bucer and P.
Martyr, in France, by sundry worthy lights, in Geneva, by Viret and Calvin, in
the Palatinat, by Ursinus, and others: in these countries, among others, by
famous Iunius, whose words I translate thus. Iun: Ecclesiastus. 3.1
It is manifest that the most simple and approved way of choosing, and calling a
minister, by the testimony of holy Scriptures, is that, which the Apostles of
old held in the Churches, and the ancient Church, imitating them, observed. The
wholl Church did choose, that is, the body constituted of the presbytery and
common people or multitude with aequal and common suffrages. This is the just
manner of Election. This (says he) the old Church did observe sometime, until
(as, through men's corruption, it comes to pass) things began to grow worse,
and to fall backward, etc. and a little after he says. Afterward popery so
far prevayled to usurp and tyra^nise over the Church, that now there was no
speech of the people (viz in the election of ministers) whom Christ has
purchased with his blood, that they might be his Church. Hence came, says he,
that barbarous ignorance, that heap of all sins, that sinck of deceit, and
selling the souls of men. In the conclusion, he answers some objections; At
nescit populus, dixerit quispiam. But some will say, the people is ignorant of
their duty and right therein? Let them be taught, and they will understand it.
But they know not how to use this their right? They will never know it, if they
never use it. But they are factious often, and are divided into parts? Let them
be reduced to peace, by holesom counsel, and let them be ruled by authority of
the word, and endeavors of good men, that, their minds being united and
composed, they may do that which by right belongs to them to do.

At last, the reformed Churches did, in their public confessions, plead the
peoples right in this particular, and in their Canons. A particular instance of
the Synod, at Middleborough in the year 1581, shall conclude this discourse of
times, where it is thus concluded. Electio sit penes Ecclesiam, and fiat per
suffragium, in Templo public, let the choice be in the Church, and be made by
voices publicly in the Church. We will gather up this discourse of the consent
of times into an Argument, thus.

The choice of Ministers, by the free consent of the people, 3. Arg.
has been constantly practiced by all Churches, in the best times since the
Apostles days. Therefore it should be so now. In Cyprians time it was observed
per provincias universas, as he says, in all provinces. Azorius affirms the
same thing and shows that it was observed in Africa, Graecia, Spain,
France, and ubique, says he, and every where, 3 Evidence of Reason.
and so continued to the time of Charles the great, and afterward.

Thirdly. The evidence of Reason.



The Antecedent is clear out of Matthew. 16:19. where the Church spoken of is
the company of beleivers, Mat. 16.19.
whose person Peter sustained, at that time, as appears by his answer, which
was concerning the faith common to the wholl Church, not concerning any
buisenes proper to Ministers. And, under the Keys, all the means of
aedification are granted unto the Church to be dispensed by such, as, being
chosen by the Church, Eccles. pol: lib: 3. cap. 2.3.
should receive power from the Church thereunto, as Mr. Parker has abundantly
proved, and by many witnesses.

The Argument is undeniable. For it is in them to choose the person, whom they
will entrust with such weighty matters, to whom the things themselves do
primarily belong. Nor is it a sufficient foundation of that phrase, that they
are given to the Church for her proffit and benefit, unless the Church be able
to provide that they be handled by those, by whose ministry she may be most
proffited and benefited.



The Antecedent is clear in John. 10.

The Argument is without just exception. If not; let somewhat material be
objected against it. Will they say? The people is rude, and cannot judge; Thus
the Pharisees said of old: Ioh: 7.49.
but did our Savior Christ judge of them so? John. 7.17
I trow not. And, if it were so, it is not necessary to the election of the
Pastor, that all amongst the people should be able to judge, without the helps
of those that are more skillfull, much less that they should do it perfectly:
but they must have so much knowledge as to shun false teachers. Will they say,
the people are forbidden to hear false teachers, but not allowed to depose
the^, and substitute others? Let such know, Bellar. enerv. tom: 2. cap. 2.
that when they are forbidden to hear them, they are commanded not to be
subject to their Ministry, and so in effect warranted to depose them, as Dr.
Ames answers Bellarmine.



1. Cor. 3.9. Chapter 4 1. 1. Pet. 5.3.
The Antecede^t is clear. For all the works of Pastors are Ministerial, viz,
whether they declare Christ's will to the Church; they command the Church in his
name and words, not in their own, or whether they execute the will of the
Church upon particular members; they do it, not in their own, but in Christ's
and the Churches name.

The Argument is good: for such a Ministry agrees very well with this power of
the people in choosing their Pastor.



The Antecedent is undeniable. For therefore it is called the pillar, 1. Tim.
3.5
and ground of truth. for else it were but the harbor, not the mansion of
truth.

The Argument is as clear. For they who have power to preserve truth, have
power also to preserve, in their own right, those functions which are
necessary for the preserving of it: which they cannot do, unless they have
power of choosing their own Ministers.



The Antecedent is clear, in these texts and such like Acts. 2.28. 1. Pet.
5.1.2.

The Argument is founded upon an axiom of the law, proceeding from good reason.
Quod omnium interest ab omnibus approbari debet. That which concerns all,
ought to be approved of all. Which course we see observed in civil matters, as
in the choice of worthy men to stand for several Countyes in Parliament. Also
the choice of officers in Corporations is done by common vote, the major part
of voices carrying the election.

Bishop Bilson, well weighing the importance of these reasons, Perp. govern:
cap. 15. p. 339.
yielded to the aequity of them, saying. Well may the peoples interest stand
upon the grounds of reason, and nature, and be derived from the rules of
aequity, and christian society, that each Church and people stand free, by Gods
law, to admit, maintain, or obey no man as their Pastor, without their
liking-vnlesse, P. 360
by law, custom, or consent they have restrained themselves. And a little after
he says, that the people had as much right to choose their Pastor, as the
Clergy, that had more skill to judge, and he tells papalls, P. 359.
having related the cursing and fighting of the Bishop of Rome, till excluding
boath prince and people, he had reduced the election wholly to the Clergy,
that, by their leave, Assert. p. 212.
it was not so from the beginning* whence the Assertour for true and christian
policy argues thus.

Whatsoever is derived from christian aequity and society: what soever was from
the beginning and was left by the Apostles to the Church, the same aught still
to remain, and must be kept inviolable in the Church.

But the peoples interest to choose their Pastor is right, is lawful, is free,
by the law of God, stands upon the grounds of reason and nature, is derived
from Christian aequity and society, was from the beginning, etc.

To his exception [unlesse by some law custom or consent the people have
restrained themselves etc. or by their default, or abuse, the Canons,
Councills, superior powers, or public laws have abridged, altered, or
abrogated the same] he answers, that our Savior reproved the abuse of the
law in the Scribes and Pharisees, but took not away the least title of it. We
grant, in like manner, that Custom, consent, Councills, superiors, laws may
reprove, restrain and reform the disordered unrulines, and contentions of the
people, in, and about their election, and that they may alter, abridge, or
enlarge the manner of elections: but that any superior powers may take this
right into their own hands (as he says) from the people, or that the people,
by any law, custom, or consent etc. may transfer their right, freedom, and
interest given and deduced unto them by these rules and grounds, I do not yet
perceive any good ground or reason for the same. For, has the wisdom of God
and his providence made us free men? and can we, without contempt of his grace,
become bondmen? And, albeit in some cases that may be well said, quod volenti
non fit injuria, and that, quilibet potest recedere a suo jure; yet the cases
must be such, as wherein a man is not tied to mainetaine his liberty with so
strong a bond, as the bond of reason and nature, of the rules of Christian
aequity, and of the freedom of the law of God. It is free for a man not to eat
or drinck this, or that, but not to eat or drinck at all, and so to starve
himself, it is not free: and in this case, volenti fit injuria. Husbands,
parents, and masters have, by the very instinct of nature, and aequity of
Christ's law, freedom to provide for those that depend upon them, and so must
carefully use this their freedom, and may not wholly put from themselves the
care of their provision, education etc. nor give their consent to the making
of any law, or to the bringing in of any custom, whereby their freedom should
be restrained, or annihilated, in this point. Thus far he.

Now, to prevent all mistakes, it will be convenient to answer a question or
two, that may be propounded, upon this occasion.



Dr. Ames ^n 2. Manduct.
by acceptance and submission, may make it good. As in wedlock, the after
consent of parents or parties does often make that a lawful state of marriage,
which before, and without that, was none: and in government, acceptance and
submission does make him a King, which before was an Usurper: though, in their
order, these actions be rather consequents, then causes of that calling. So it
is between minister and people.



In such cases, Ans. Mr. Cartwr. 1. Reply. p. 35.
the ministers and Elders of other Churches round about should advertise first,
and afterward, as occasion should serve, sharply and severely charge them,
that they neglect not this care of electing a fit one, and that they forbear
such election of one unfitt, or, if it be made, that they confirm it not, by
suffering him to exercise any ministry. And, if, either the Churches round
about do fail of this duty, or the Church which is admonished, rest not in
their admonition, then to bring it to the next Synod, and, if it rest not
therein, then the Prince or Magistrate, which must see that notbing, in the
Churches, be disorderly and wickedly done, aught to drive that Church from that
election, to another which is convenient. Thus Mr. Cartwright. So that, in his
judgment, other Churches have no power of hindering a faulty election, but by
admonition, which power every Christian has in another, for his good. Nor can
the Magistrate forbid the choice, which the Church has made or would make,
unless the man, upon whom they pitch, be so unfitt, either for doctrine or
manners, that the making of such a choice will be wickedly and disorderly done.

Having thus declared what we hold, de jure populi, concerning the Churches
right, in the choice of their Ministers. Now we come to enquire, de facto,
whether their complaint be just, concerning the injury, wherewith they charge
the Answerer, in this particular, taking the rise of ensuing passages from
those words wherein he mentions my name, after a provoking manner, in this
Section.

I leave it to their consciences to consider, Ans. page 19.3:
whether now also they would not have kept silence, if they could have brought
in Mr. D. even according to this corrupt order used by us, as they complain of
it.

To prove that the Answerer does not behave himself as becomes a Pastor in
government, their first evidence is, he depriveth the Church of that liberty
and power, which Christ has given it, in the free choice of their Pastor. Now
a Church is as well deprived of their liberty in choosing, when the men, ^^ply.
whom they desire, are, without sufficient cause shown to the Church, kept
out, as when men are, without their approbation, obtruded upon them. They
complain of both these injuries: of the first, in this and the following
Section: of the second, in the sixth Section. That in this Section they
complain of the first of these injuries, appears by the instances which they
produce, for proof of it, in the fifth Section. So then their complaint, in
this, and the next Section, is, that, they are deprived of the liberty and
power of the free choice of their Pastor, which Christ has given them, in that
they are deprived of worthy men, whom they have generally desired, but have
been hindered, that, either they could not choose them, or, having chosen, could
not enjoy them, and this has been done against them, without sufficient cause
alleged against the men, whom they have desired. And the person, whom they
particularly charge with this unjury, is the Answerer. Let us now consider how
he does defend himself. And this he endeavors to do diverse ways.

Page 18. Ans. 1.
First, by putting the blame from himself, upon the Classis, and not upon their
persons so much as upon the very government established in these Churches. 1.
Reply.
1. Here it must be remembered that the Complainants produce the holy records of
the ancient charter of privileges which of old was granted unto particular
Churches, in this case, Page 19. Ans. 4
which also the Answerer himself confesses so clearly to warrant their
claim, and to justifye this plea, that he has, as he says, both publicly
taught, in the exposition of those 2 places. Acts. 6.3. and 14.23, and does
still acknowledge, that the free consent of the people is required to the
lawful calling of a Minister. and afterward he says, Page 22. Ans. 8.
that to deprive the Church of that liberty and power etc. must be an heinous
crime, and no less then Sacrilege. This crime, how great soever it is, the
Reader will find that he charge upon the Classis, how justly, let him see:
nor will he be able to clear himself of slandring the very government and
order of discipline established in these Churches, unless he can show, out of
the National Synods, that it was established, for an order in these Countries,
that the Classes should have power to deprive the Churches, of the Ministers
whom they desire, or have chosen, without showing sufficient cause for the
Churches satisfaction: which is the greivance complained of by these sub^^ibers.

2. If it be not true of them; the more heinous the accusation is, the more
grievous the slander is, and so much the more grievous in him, who is many
ways obliged to them, and whose testimony against them, will be more easily
received, and firmly believed, because he is acquainted fully with all their
ways, being one of them, and ordinarily in counsel with them.

3. But, if it be true, that the Classis has such a practice, Cyp. Epist. l.
1. Epi. 8. Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegum, est, quicquid humano furore
instituitur, ut dispositio divina violetur. Ans. 2. Reply.
and that the government has established such an order (which he will never be
able to prove) yet that will not free him from guilt, seeing, by his own
confession, such a Custom or Canon is contrary to Christ his ordinance, which I
will express in Cyprians words. It is adulterous, it is wicked, it is
Sacrilegious what soever by human fury is instituted, to the violation of a
Divine ordinance. His second answer, or evasion rather, follows.

Secondly, By involving the Elders with him in the same guilt and blame, and
retorting an accusation of partiality, in that they lay the fault upon him
only. But who sees not the insufficiency of this defense, that, either
considers the reply to the former answer, or knows his power in the
Consistory? But what before was said by me, in defense of the Classis, may be a
sufficient Apology also for the Elders and Deacons.

Thirdly, By questioning the reason of their not complaining, after this
manner, hitherto. But who sees not, Ans. 3. Reply.
that this is a mere evasion? For, what though they exhibited not a bill of
greivances, til now? It may be, they waited, in hope of reformation, or, it may
be, these last passages have ripened the sore, and filled up the measure, and
caused it to run over. What consequent is there in these Arguments? They
complained not thus before: therefore they were not injured. The sore did not
run before: therefore it was not an ulcer. This measure did not run over
before: therefore it was empty. Nor is there more weight in his conclusion of
that 3 answer, when he appealeth to their consciences, whether now also they
would not have kept silence, if they could have brought in Mr. D. even
according to this corrupt order used by us, as they complain of it: 1. Let the
Reader judge, whether any others are mentioned in the complaint either, Elders,
Classis, or government, but only the Answerer. Why then does he speak in the
plural number, saying this corrupt order used by us? 2. Is there not a
manifest contradiction, in this part of the answer? For, if they could have
brought in Mr. D. by their free choice (which himself acknowledges to be the
ordinance of Christ) how could they then have brought him in, according to this
corrupt order, whereof they complain? so that, why should they not keep
silence, if the cause of complaint had been removed, as, in this case, it had
been?

that the free consent of the people is required unto the lawful calling of a
Minister, and that by virtue of those texts, Act. 6.3. and 14.23.



They, who, without just and sufficient warrant, hinder that the Church cannot
enjoy these Ministers whom they, with one consent, desire, do deprive the
Church of that liberty and power which Christ has given it, in the free choice
of their Pastor.

But the person complained of by these 22 subscribers does, without, just and
sufficient cause, hinder the Church from enjoying those whom they, with one
consent, desired.

Therefore the person complained of does deprive the Church of that liberty and
power which Christ has given it, in the free choice of their Pastor.

The Proposition himself grants to be true, as has been noated.

The assumption they prove in the following Section by instances, as we shall
see, in due time. The Answerer has said nothing hitherto that may serve to
weaken the truth of it. In the words following also, he rather evadeth it then
makes a direct answer. And his evasions are, by way of diversion. For.

1. He diverteth his Reader from the particular subject of the complaint, Page
19. Ans. 4. Reply.
telling him of the order of these Churches about this matter; whereas, for
ought I have heard from themselves at any time, or now have read in their
wrightings, that good correspondency with the Christian Magistrate, and
foreknowledge, or advise of the Classis, which the Synods of these Churches
describe, as the order to be observed in the calling of Ministers, are not
contrary to that liberty and power in the free choice of their Pastor, which
they claim, and the Answerer acknowledges to be due to the Church, by virtue
of Christ's ordinance. But, I suppose, it will be granted, on all sides, that
the Synods do not acknowledge any power to be due to the Magistrates, or
Classis, to deprive the Church of any power which Christ has give^ it, which
is the greivance they now complained of, and wherein the Answerer is accused,
not for observing the order of the Synods, but for doing contrary to the intent
of the Synods, in their orders,

2. He diverteth his reader, from the question in hand, Page 20. Ans. 5. Reply.
by propounding another question to be examined, which he pretends that some
object out of Acts 6.3. viz. whether the people ought not to go before in
seeking out officers for themselves? That this is a mere diversion, will
appear to the indifferent Reader, if he examine their wrighting, in which he
shall not find any word tending that way; but rather they complain that the
Elders are too much neglected by the Answerer, as will appear in its place, So
that the 20. p. is a laborious proving of that which is not in question.

3. The pretended absurdityes, in his sixth answer, Page 21. Ans. 6. Reply.
Page 21. Ans. 7. Reply
are to the same purpose with his fifth Answer, and serve only to countenance a
girde at some neighbor Minister: Cui-bono, he best knows.

His seventh answer is no more to the purpose then the fifth, and sixth. For,
what if these Complainants should not agree one with another touching the due
order of Elections, and touching the ground thereof, from those places, Acts 6.
and 14? which (if he has diverse times taught them (as he says) the necessity
of the free consent of the people, unto the lawful calling of a Minister, out
of those texts) may be questionable. Yet: will it thence follow, that therefore
they may be deprived of men, whom they have chosen, or desire to choose,
without just, and sufficient cause? J suppose, not.

Page 22. Ans. 8. Reply.
His eighth and last answer is already examined, and replied upon, and declared
to be contradictory to himself, in my reply to the third answer, concerning
their supposed silence, if they could have brought me in, according to this
order: thither I referr the Reader. So much shall serve for the fourth Section.

The answer to the fifth Section examined.
IN this Section, they prove the justnes of their former complaint by instances
of men desired by the Church, but by him rejected, and opposed, whereunto he
answers.

This complaint is confirmed and aggravated by Mr. D. etc.

the burdened members, and well might I say, that they are over burdened with
the loss of so many men so much desired by the Church. The Answerer himself
says, If the complaints be just, then is the title just, being framed
according to the contents and special subject of the book. And, a little
after. If this Church be deprived of that liberty and power which Christ has
given it etc. then is there cause to complain of the miserable slavery and
bondage of this Church. These be his own words. What have the complainants or
I said more then this? That is a burden which causes wearines to him that
bears it. Wearines arises from the disproportion between the faculty and
the object, hence is pain in the subject, and thence are complaints, which are
more grievous, as the burden is more painful. And, as corporal burdens are
made intolerable to the body, by addition of weight, so are inward burdens to
the mind, by accession of aggravating considerations. And, in this case, the
concurrence of many respects makes the burden, they complain of, exceeding
grievous: as, their love to God, to the Church, to our Nation, to their opposed
brethen, and to themselves.

First, Their love to God stirs up indignation in them, when they see his
servants injuryed, and, according to the height of their esteem of the men, is
the deepenes of their sense of their injuryes. Their injury they express to be
his rejecting and opposing them: their own esteem of the men they declare, in
stiling them, the most worthy servants of God. Such superlative and exuperant
titles the persons, to whom they are applied, dare not assume to themselves,
acknowledging themselves to be unproffitable servants, and not worthy of that
high honor to be called the servants of such a God: Yet the persons, who thus
describe them, show a great esteem of them. To see such disgracefully used,
not by Ammonites, as David's servants were, 2. Sam. 10.2.4.5.
thorough causeles jealousyes, but by Israelites, and to be smitten by their
fellow servants, to the hinderance of the Lords work, and the furtherance of
Satan's projects, is very grievous.

Secondly, Their love to the Church stirs up Zeal in them to promove the
good thereof, by all possible endeavors, both for their brethren and
companions sake, Psalm. 122.
and because of the house of the Lord our God. Whence their grief is
increased, if in deavours prove successes: especially, when they are denied
those men, whom God seems to cast upon them, and the Church unanimously
desires, to the hinderance, of the Churches peace and aedification, and when
that is done, not against some one, but against many, nor once only, but often.

Thirdly. Their love to their Nation and Country stirs up aemulation, and
causes much grief and coffeehouse in them at any thing that may reflect
reproach or disgrace upon the same, as Contentions amongst them (which by these
actions are made unavoydable,) will do, especially in such a place, as
Amsterdam, where so many nations, living in Concord amongst themselves, and
with others, are observers, and admirers at the unnaturalnes of some of ours to
their own countrymen.

Fourthly. Their love to their rejected and opposed brethren stirs up
compassion in them. For, who can look upon a silly sheep scratched in a hedge
of thorns, whither it fled for shelter, without pity? And, if Jobs complaint
is able to affect any tender spirit, when he says. To him ehat is afflicted,
pity should be showed from his brethren, Job. 6.14.15.
but my brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook (which is then emptyest,
when the season is hottest, and the wearied travayler is in greatest thirst,)
much more will this stir up Sympathy, in a merciful heart, to see brethren,
not only, like waters that fail, but as a violent stream, that threatens to
overflow and drown those, that should be refreshed, to reject and oppose
those, that should be received and cherished.

Fifthly, Their love to them selves, and to those that depend upon them,
stirs up great desire in them, to enjoy those means which they have found
blessed to them: to some of them for their effectual calling to the obedience
of Faith; to others of them, for their buylding up and strengthening in their
most holy Faith. Hence, their grief is increased. When they see themselves
deprived of that, which they have found so good and proffitable. As for his
girding Epithites, in the next words, against my person, and their expression,
I pass it by, pitying his distemper. Whereas he says, that, in the reproof
of these Complainants Mr. D. may, in part, read his own, it concerns me the
more strictly and particularly to examine the following passages, that I may
see how justly he reproves me, being prepared, in some good measure, I hope,
to bear patiently, and receive thanckfully, a just reproof, and to hold forth
the truth and mine own innocence against unjust reproaches, not respecting any
man's person, in discharge of my bounden duty. We will therefore exactly
observe his method, and examine his pretended answer. 1 To general assertions,
2 To the particular instances severally considered, and apart.

1. His pretended answer to that which is objected concerning these instances
jointly considered, and in general.

The thing objected, or complained of, is, that the Church is, by the Answerer,
deprived of her due liberty, and power, in the free choice of a Pastor, whilst
men desired by the Church generally, are, by him, rejected and opposed, without
sufficient cause. This we prove (say they) by his rejecting and opposing the
most worthy servants of God, (who came out of England for the same cause he
did) whom the Church, with one consent, desired, as Mr. H. and Mr. D. of later
times, as also Mr. Pa: Dr. A. Mr. F. Mr. P. etc.

Now let us see what he answers, That all left not their Country for the same
cause. 2. That the Church did not desire every one of those. 3. That he may
lawfully oppose some of these, when each of themselves were opposite one to
another. 4. That, in the same eminent persons, there may be diverse eminent
offenses and errors, which may be just cause of opposing them, and refusing
them, as unfitt Ministers for some particular Congregations. 5. That his
opposing of the Election of some of these persons is not a depriving the Church
of her power. 6. That diverse of these Complainants have opposed the calling of
sundry worthy servants of God. 7. That those which were refused, were not put
back by his authority, but, either by the Magistrates, Classis, or Consistory,
or by their own voluntary desistance.

In like manner, my reply

First, In general, 1. Generally.
It is to be noated, that all his answers tend to the disparagment of the
persons whom the Complainants do so highly reverence. To let pass the
inhumanity of reproaching the absent; and the dead, and the impiety of his
encouraging the enimyes of God to blaspheme, who may easily thinck that they
have just cause to revile and speak evil of these men, when they shall see
that this Answerer spares them not, and that in print. And (that I may retort
his own words, but more fitly,) What wonder, if they follow, when they are so
lead forth, and by such a grave leader?) May it please the reader to consider
the imprudence of this course. Socra. 7.2.
Socrates reports of Atticus, Bishop of Constantinople, that he was a pious
and prudent man, and how wonderfully (says he) did he promove the good of the
Church, by his prudent administration! would you know, wherein? He reconciled
those that were at variance, (about the injury done to Chrysostom) to the rest
of the Church. How was that effected? By a course quite contrary to that, which
this Answerer takes. Not, by disparadging Chrysostom, as unfitt for the
Congregation, but by causing the name of Chrysostom to be mentioned, in
public, with other Bishops, Idem cap. 25.
(I suppose in thancksgiving) which plot Proclus, one of his successors,
followed and perfected, to the full taking away of that Schysme. Idem ibid Cap.
44.
For he persuaded the Emperor to translate the body of Chrysostom, that had
been buried else where, to Constantinople, and to be buried, with much honor
and pomp; which being done gave such content to his friends, that, their
discontent being healed thereby, they returned to the Communion of the Church.
So true is that proverb. Pro. 24.3.
Through wisdom is an house (and a Church also) builded, and by understanding
it is established. But of contrary causes what can be expected but contrary
effects? 2. Particularly.


Secondly, more particularly, and to the several particulars I reply thus.

1. To the first.] That we all came out of England for one cause the Answerer
acknowledges, when the says, we all agree in the dislike of some coruptions,
against which we have testified. For 1. For that cause we could not enjoy our
public Ministry in England. 2. Being denied that, we thought it our duty to
be of what public use we might, for the service of the Church, in any other
Country, where God should oppn a door unto us, and rather to our Countrymen
then others. What other particular reason any might have besides, it might
concur, as a concausa, with others, but that still remains the cause, which
was one, and the same to us all.

2. To the second.] It is very true and may easily be proved. 1. that when an
overture has been made for any of these men, whilst there was hope, none
opposed their Election, but so many, as were put upon it, expressed their
desire of them 2. After the difference between this Answerer and any of those
men, in in some opinion, was known, I appeal to the Church, whether they
desired not, rather that the Answerer would compose such differences between
him and them, by freindly accommodation, or pass it by altogether, that they
might enjoy these men, then press things so extremely, to the depriving the
Church of them? I am confident, that the greatest and best part of the Church
would answer, Yea: And I thinck the greatest and best part may well be called
the Church, and such a declaration of their affection may be judged a
sufficient proof of their desire.

3. To the third.] It is to be observed, that he does not deny, that he
opposed some of these men, only he knows no reason, why it should be wondered
at.

First, For my part, I thinck no man will wonder at it, if by reading his
answer (as he calls it) he have but some such insight into his disposition,
as Pythagoras is said to have into the stature and strength of Hercules his
body, by the measure of his foot.

Secondly, Suppose those men are, in some few opinions, opposite each to other.
Will that justify his opposing and rejecting them? Let him draw his argument
into form of a Syllogism, and it will prove a mere Sophisme, and to labor of
an aequivocation, in the word opposite and oppose, which, in the Antecedent,
noateth difference in judgment only (which may stand with personal concord)
in the consequent, it signifies personal opposition, and so there be 4 terms
in it.

Thirdly, His wholl argument is grounded upon a false supposition. For he
supposes, that opposition against the person must necessarily, or may
warrantably follow all difference in judgment. The contrary whereof is most
true. Synodal Dordrecht. Rem: Sent: suae declarat. P. 5.
When the Arminians odiously exaggerated, and objected against the
Contra-Remonstrants their different opinions, about the object of
Praedestination, Dr. Twisse learnedly, and judiciously wipeth of this
aspersion, and therein answers the ground of this Argument, by showing the
personal agreement and love between those men that so differed, and
instanceth in Calvin, Beza, Iunius and Piscator, Vindiciae gratiae Digr. 1.
Sect. 4.
each of which had his several tenet, differing from the other, and Piscator
seemed to differ from them all, and yet his high esteem of them all is
manifest, 1, of Iunius, in his Scholia upon the old testament, 2, of Beza, in
his Scholia upon the New testament, 3, of Calvin, in his aphorisms gathered
out of Calvin's institutions. 2. in the sweet harmony and consent of the
Co^tra-Remonstrants, in opposing the errors of the Remonstrants and Pelagians,
which appeared in the determination of the Synod at Dort. The same thing is
verifyed in those men mentioned in this Section.

Fourthly, The premises being considered, it is to be wondered at, that he
opposes these men and rejects them, upon this pretense, Seeing. 1. these men,
in unfeigned brotherly love, tender the esteem one of another, and would
account it their happiness that they might live in one Church together,
notwithstanding these pretended differences between them, 2, and all godly men
order themselves by that Apostolical Canon, in such cases, Phil. 3.15.16.
If in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
Nevertheles, where to we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing. 3. And it is the more to be wondered at, seeing the
men, whom he is said to reject and oppose, are known to be of sound judgment,
godly, peaceble, free from haeresy, and Schysme, and therefore not to be
rejected and opposed, for such points, wherein men may differ, without
violation of love and peace, or danger of corrupting others. 4. And this adds
to the cause of wonder, that these men (espicially the 2. that are first
mentioned, and have been most opposed,) have offered to carry the matter so, if
he would join with them therein, as none should take notice of any difference
between them. Lastly, this exceedingly increases the wonder; because, unless
men will yield so much favor each to other, in some Difference of opinions, as
the Church, and some of those Ministers, have desired of the Answerer, a
dissolving, not only of Churches, but of human Societyes also, must
necessarily follow, and not only, not 2. Ministers, but, not 2. men should live
together, which were to put off even humanity it self.

Fifthly, Are these men opposites each to other? The good Lord discover to him,
in mercy, the evil of that principle in his own spirit, from whence these
discoveryes of other men's differences flowed! For. 1, Who called him to publish
to the world such men's private differences, there being neither need, nor good
use of it, in this place? was not this in part prophesyed of, to be in the last
days and perilous times, that men should be (...)? Is not this plainly
against aequity and charity, 2. Tim. 3.4.
boath at once? To what end does this passage tend, but to cause strife and
contention between so many of these as are alive (and the Apostle James James
3.14.15.
tells us from whence this wisdom descends) and to blemish both the living
and the dead, by leaving them under the censure, or suspicion of Error. For it
is a received Canon concerning contrary positions. They may be boath false, but
they cannot boath be true. 3. What event, or issue of such unseasonable
discoveries can be expected, but scandal? Hence Atheists, Libertines, profane
persons cast off all care of Religion, yea hence all Haereticks and Sectaries
are hardened against the Orthodox, because they agree not among themselves. What
rule is here by transgressed I need not tell the Answerer.

Sixthly, was it an underhand course, for which I was to be complained of, for
want of sincere and plain dealing, that I wrote down, only for the help of
mine own memory, the talk that passed between him and me, about that
question? Was this done by me like a deceitful Notary? And does it argue me to
be far from honest and ingenuous dealing, as he affirms? What shall be
thought of him then, who does not noate, for his own secret use, but print to
the view of all men, not conferences about questions between him and them, but
personal differences between them, not only without their consent or
knowledge, but also injuriously and untruely, not being compelled thereunto,
but needlessly, and without provocation?

Seventhly, What if those men, upon search into particulars, 1 The pretended
difference between Mr. Hok. and me examined.
shall not be found so opposite each to other, as he pretends? Let the Reader
judiciously and indifferently weigh what is replied for the clearing hereof. 1.
He says Mr. H. and I are opposite in 3 points, 1, the admission of Brownists
to be members of his Churh, whilst they persist in their separation from the
Church of England, 2. Touching private men's preaching 3. Touching repentance
going before faith.

2. The pretended opposition between Mr. Peter's and me examined.
Another praetended opposition is between Mr. Pet. and me, and this is grounded
upon our different practice, or rather, upon my not doing the same thing, which
he did, in that particular to resorting to the Brownists.

1. To what use the declaring of this serves, I know not, unles it be to cast
some aspersion upon him, and, thorough his sides, to wound sundry of these
Complainants, whom he charge in the same manner. How often Mr. Pet. has
resorted to those meetings, I know not, nor, upon what inducements. Only, I
suppose, he thought it not simply unlawful for him to hear with them, upon
some occasion, if it might be done, without offense, neither would he (J am
persuaded) have done it, with offense to any, if he had been convinced thereof,
These things the Answerer should have informed himself of, before he had
exposed a brother, in print, to public censure for this matter. 2. If he
saught the reformation, and not the disgrace of his brother, he should have
labored privately to convince Mr. Pet. by word or wrighting, and have
published it thus to the world. 3. If he would publish it, in such a disorderly
and unwarrantable manner, yet he should have declared the justnes of his
reproof, by showing what rule of the word was transgressed by Mr. Pet. in so
doing; else he will be found guilty of adding to the word, and of making eleven
Commandments. And for the Complainants, at whom he girdeth, I say the same
thing, and do add, that the best way for his own account, and their comfort
had been for him to have joined with them, in desiring the assistance of some
faithful Minister, whom God should point out, by the earnest and joint desire
of the Congregation, that so they might not have justly pleaded for themselves,
that they have been constrained to seek abroad, through want of comfortable
supply at home.

Another pretended opposition is between Mr. Forbes and Mr. H. touching the
authority of Synods and Classes. The pretended opposition between Mr. F. and
Mr. H. examined.
1. Had he shown, in what point the opposition did consist, I should have
answered, and showed, that neither did Mr. H. condemn all use of Synods and
Classes, nor Mr. F. acknowledge all that authority to be due to them, which
some men, for advantage sake, ascribe to them, or others, out of an inordinate
(...) are ready sometimes to assume to themselves. 2. But, be it so (though no
such thing appears in the 21 questions, or otherwise, that J know) that they
were herein opposite each to other Did Mr. F. reject or oppose Mr. H. for any
such difference? Did he not earnestly desire, and chearefully embrace his
fellowship in the work with him? Did they not live together, for the space of
about 2. years, so like brethren, that an indifferent observer might say of
them, (...) in vita Naz. 2. Cor. 12 18. 2. Sam. 10 11.
as it was said of great Basil, and Nazianzen, there seemed to be one Soul in
two bodies, or as, Paul says of himself and Titus, Walked we not in the same
spirit? Walked we not in the same stepps? If they had been absent one from
another, with what joy, with what congratulations, yea with what embracements
did they meet, and intertayne each the other! How did they unite their forces
(as Ioab and Abishai) not only against the common adversaries, but each for
others personal vindication, and defense, mutually! All that I will say to the
Answerer, for a conclusion of this instance, Luke 10.37.
shall be, in the words of our Savior, (...).

4. The pretended opposition between Dr. Ames. and Mr. Forbes examined.
Another pretended opposition, is between Dr. Ames and Mr. F. in three things.
1. touching the authority of the Magistrate in causes Ecclesiastical, 2.
touching Adoption going before Justification 3. touching the active obedience
of Christ in the point of Justification. In the first of these, he joyneth Mr.
Parker with Dr. A. in opposition to Mr. F. but he should have showed whether
Mr. F. denied all authority of the Magistrate in those cases, or only some, and
what that authority is, which he denied them, that the Reader might have seen
the question rightly stated, and then we should have been able to make a more
punctual answer, thereunto, then now we can. 2. What ever difference of
judgment was between D. A. and Mr. F. in the 2. other points, it is evident to
those who knew them, that there was much unfeigned love between them,
accompanied with a Reverend and high esteem each of the other mutually
expressed, upon all fitting occasions. And so much shall serve for answer to
his third pretended answer; the Vanity where of (that I may use his own words)
will appear to the intelligent Reader by what has been replied. I proceed now
to the fourth pretended answer.

To the fourth, eminent errors and offenses which may be in eminent persons,
just cause of opposing and refusing them etc.

Be it so: but, First, Let it be proved that it is so in these persons:

Secondly, Let these things be proved by Scripture, For all men are apt, 1, to
err, and to be in love with their errors, 2, to be harsh and unadvised in
their judgment of others.

First, Men are apt to err, and to be in love with their errors. Chameron of
popish praejudices, Cap. 1.
The cause of which mischeife is the perversenes of their passions, which
oftentimes so overheate and distemper the heart, that, out of it, as it were,
exhaling thick and black vapors, upon the understanding, they, either disturb
our judgments, or altogether dull our apprehensions. In which respect, an heart
chafed with passion, leaves us in a worse case, then peircing smokes do the
eyes which bereave us of our bodily sight: For they, seeing nothing, can not be
deluded by lying apparitions, but by these, though the light of the
understanding be dimmed, yea extinguished, yet there remains a presumptuous
conceit of our own clear sight, and real comprehension of the truth: whence
it is, that man, compassed about with thick darkness, confidently imagines
that he walks in the sunshine, and he is strongly conceited, that he has
then fast hold of the truth, when he huggeth an absurd ridiculous fable.

Secondly, from the same cause it is, that men are harsh, and rash in their
censures of others, who dissent from those tenets, for the defense whereof they
are engaged. And, as men, that look thorough a colored glass, thinck that
all the things they see, thorough it, are of the same color with the glass,
so they, judging of men's opinions, by the error of their own distempered
fancyes, cry out, Errors, Errors many times causelessly. 1 Cor. 1.23
Thus the Panymes, puffed up with a conceit of their own wisdom, accounted
the doctrines of the christian Religion, foolishnes. And, as their passions
increase, so their censures will grow more harsh and bitter: So that lesser
errors shall be accounted haeresies, and small infirmityes, eminent offenses,
and trueths themselves shall be miscalled dangerours errors. Hiron. ad Ripar.
and contra. Vigilant.
Hence it was that Ierom held Vigilantius for an haeretick; because he held it
unlawful to pray for the dead, and to worship the dead bones and relicques of
the Saints, and praeferred Marriage before Virginity.

Thirdly. To prevent a scandal against these men, and their Tenets, let the
Reader know, that the suspicion of falsity is a calumny ordinary to truth, yet
truth is not to be disliked for such imputations, under which it is often hid,
as admirable beauty, under a mask, or as a solid sparckling diamond, under
some discolourment. But, as a rich Diamond suspected of bastardy should be
brought to the touchstone and admitted to a trial; so let truth, being
suspected, be examined, and not condemned, upon mere surmises.

his refusing to give his voice for the calling of some of these persons, is
not a depriving the Church of her power. etc.



Secondly that which he acknowledges himself to have done, leaves him under
the guilt of that sin which they charge upon him. For, 1, his opposing and
rejecting of these men, whom the Church desired, was unjust, seeing they held no
opinions, which, by warrant of the Scripture, make them incapable of being
called to his Church. 2. His manner of proceeding was disorderly, in carrying
the matter to the Classis, before he had declared to the Church the aequity of
his refusing these men, by the Scriptures. 3. Is a mere pretense that things
were unjustly carried, and swayed against him, in the Church, or Consistory, a
sufficient ground of an appeal to the Classis, as to an higher lawful
judicatory; that so he may sway them, according to his own will, without a
rule, or to other men's customs, without a word? If this be not to deprive the
Church of their liberty and power, in the free choice of their Pastor, let the
Reader judge. The wholl shall be resolved into a Syllogism.

He that, without just and sufficient cause, opposed and hindered the calling
of these persons instanced, whom the Church desired, sinned, in so doing.

But the Answerer, without just and sufficient cause, opposed and hindered the
calling of those persons, whom the Church desired.

Therefore in so opposing, he sinned.

Which proposition will he deny? The first? He cannot. P. 22: Ans. 8.
Himself has acknowledged it to be a sin, yea an heinous crime, and no
less then Sacrilege.

Will he deny the second proposition, or the Assumption? He cannot. For, did
not the Church desire these men? It has been proved, in Reply to his second
answer, in this Section. If he say; not all of them: let him name which of them
they did not desire, which I believe he cannot do. But if he could; it will
not help him. For, if it be true of 2, or of any one, he is guilty of sin by
refusing them, in the case propounded. Will he deny, that he opposed, and
hindered the calling of them? Himself acknowledges it, in the 3 and 4 answer
of this Section, and more at large and expressly in the 6 answer, in the reply
whereunto the Reader shall find also that it was done, without just and
sufficient cause. But that he may be more fully convinced of sin herein, thus
I argue. He that does an injury, sins. But the Answerer, in thus opposing
these men, does an injury. Therefore the Answerer, in so doing, sins,

The Major, or first proposition is clear of it self, Injuria est violatio
juris 1. Ioh. 3.4.
for every injury is a transgession of the Law.

The Assumption, or second proposition, is, that the Answerer, in thus opposing
these men, does an injury. This I will prove by showing that, so to do is
against, both the Law of nature, and the positive Law.

First, It is against the law of Nature, which consists of practical
principles, which men know they ought to do, or to avoid, by the light of
nature. Amongst which this is one. Whatsoever you would, Mat. 7.12 Luke 6.31
that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. Now, I demand, would the
Answerer be upbrayded with errors, and traduced as erroneous, before
strangers, before a public Congregation, before a Classis of Reverend
Ministers, yea, before the wholl world, in print, and that, by a brother famous
for learning and ministerial abilityes, and that without proof? Would he
thinck himself aequally dealt withal, if another should oppose and reject
him, as unfit for a place, whereunto he is called by the Church, without
sufficient cause? If not; let him reflect upon his own actions, and consider,
whether he be not guilty of an injury, Lact: in Epist. C. 3.
which an heathen man, such as Alexander Severus would not willingly be guylty
of.

Secondly, the positive Law, or the law of God revealed in Scriptures is
violated by it, many ways. For it is a threefold injury, viz, against the men,
against the Church, and against the Classis. 1. It is an injury to the men,
whom he rejected, whom he traduced to the Church, and to the Classis, and now
in print, as unfit for that place, whereby he is guilty of detraction and
slander: which injury will appear to be the greater, if we consider, 1, the
qualityes and condition of the men, whose names are mentioned, 2. his manner of
doing it, viz: not rashly, but upon deliberation, not sparingly, but with
odious intimations of eminent offenses, and errors, not secretly, but in
public, and in print, not truly, but untruely and slanderously. 3. the
dangerous consequences, and events of it. For 1. the men thus reproached are
exposed to the censure of all men. 2. their enimyes have some pretense,
whereupon to justify their unjust opposing them, and so are hardened in sin.
3. a blow and wound is given to the authority of their Ministry, in the hearts
of so many as ascribe any thing to his testimony against such men, which may
endanger the souls of many.

2. It is an injury to the Church: yea a threefold ^njury. For, 1, It is a
deluding of them, by pretending that he had just cause of opposing and
rejecting those men, when he had not. 2. It is a defrauding of them of that
power and liberty, which Christ has given them (as himself confesses) in the
free choice of their Pastor, under pretense of seeking the advice of the
Classis: himself calls this sin Sacrilege. 3. It is a slander of them to
say that matters are unjustly swayed against him in the Church, or Consistory,
when they desire only such men as these are, against whom himself has
alleged no objection of weight sufficient to keep them out.

Thirdly, It is an injury to the Classis: yea a threefold injury also. 1. It is
a disturbing them and distracting them from better employments, to attend
needles quarells. 2. It is a misinforming them, both concerning these
Ministers, and his Church and Consistory, whereby, through too much credulity,
they are unjustly praejudiced against the innocent. 3. It is a misingaging
them, by solicitations, and pretenses, to be parties with him, in an injury.
But the wrong to himself is the greatest of all, which I pray God, by his
spirit, to convince him of! without which he will go on still to boast of a
false peace.

To the sixth; 6. Ans.
That diverse of these Complainants have showed them selves opposite and averse
to the calling of sundry worthy servants of God. etc.

The Answerer should have showed. Church of her power as well as he: yet that
will not excuse, much less justify him. If nay; (as he knows they did not
so) then he depriveth the Church of her power, and not they.

7. Ans. P. 25. Reply.
To the seventh. that those, which were refused, were not put back by his
authority, etc.]

The question is not, whether they were put back by his authority, or not? (for
no such authority is due to him, and if he do it, it is not by any lawful
authority, but by usurpation, and tyranny) but whether he have not so far
prevayled, though by other men's authority, whom he has irritated, by false
accusations, intimations, or intreatyes, as that these men have been thus put
back? If not: he should have denied it, that the accusation might have appeard
to be false. If yea: the complaint is just, and he is the cause of their being
deprived of their liberty and power, in the free choice of their Pastor, by
whose authoty soever it was done. As Iezabell was guilty of depriving Naboth of
his life, though it was done by the authority of Achab. So that this answer is
like the former, a mere diversion of the Reader from the true question. And
thus we have finished our reply to his pretended answer to that which is
objected concerning these instances jointly considered, and in general. we
proceed to the next.

2. His pretended answers to the particular instances severally considered, and
a part.

P. 25. A defense of M. Hooker.
First he begins with Mr. H. concerning whom he noateth 3 things. 1. The
making known of his opinions to the Classis, by his own hand wrighting. 2.
The judgment of the Classis, both concerning Mr. H. and concerning this
Answerers dealing in the buisenes. 3. The reason of his wrighting these things.
We will examine what he says, in every one of these.

To the first, concerning the making known of Mr. H. opinions to the Classis
from his own hand wrighting. Here I must take leave to enquire 2 or 3 things
of the Answerer, after I have declared the course that is taken in the Classis
with those that are to be admitted into any Church that stands under them,
which is this. What the Classis requires of ministers to be admitted by them.
For trying the fitnes of Ministers for any pastoral charge, in any Church
combined with others, under a Classis, the Classis, under which it is,
requires of them, that are to be admitted, Subscription to the Catechism, and
to the Belgicke confession of faith, and to the determination of the Synod of
Dort, and to every point of doctrine in them, with a promise to teach and
defend that doctrine, and that they will, neither publicly nor privately,
directly, nor indirectly, either speak or wright any thing against the same,
and that they will reject, oppugn, resist and drive from the Church, as much
as in them lies, all errors that fight against the same, and, by name, those
that are condemned, in the same Synod. And, if it happen that they fall into
any doubt or opinion contrary to the former doctrine, they promise, that they
will not propose, defend, preach, or wright the same, privately, nor secretly,
before they have declared the same to the Consistory, Classis, or Synod, and
subjected it to examination, being ready willingly to submit them selves to
their judgment, under the paenalty of being suspended from their ministry, if
they do otherwise. And, if the Consistory or Synod, upon great cause of
suspicion, for conservation of the purity of doctrine, and concord, shall exact
of them a declaration of their opinion concerning any point of the Confession,
Catechism, or Synodicall explication, they do promise, under the same
paenalty, to be ready thereunto, reserving to themselves the right of
appealing, if they thinck themselves injuryed. And they promise, by all means,
to defend the Canons of the National Synod, at Dort. Anno 1619. and never to
speak, consult, or communicate with any person, whether ecclesiastical or
civil, privately, without the knowledge and permission of the Classis,
concerning any project of moderation or accommodation with the Remonstrants, in
fraudem praedictorum Synodalium canonum, and decretorum, under the paenalty
which the Classis shall inflict upon them, according to the exigency of the
thing, if they do otherwise, even to suspension and abdication. To which
censure the subscribers do willingly submit them selves.

This being the manner of proceeding in the Classis, with a Minister that is to
be admitted, it would be enquired of the Answerer.

1. Quaere. Why dealt he with Mr. H. and with me, and some others, by way of
private questioning, seeing the Classis will make sufficient trial of their
judgment before their admittance?

2. Quaere. Why he put those 21 questions to Mr. H. and some of them to me,
seeing the Synods have not determined that those questions should be put to
them, nor are they proposed by any Classis to any Ministers, for trial of them?

3. Quaere. Why did the Answerer make known Mr, H. judgment to the Classis?
seeing, in the conclusion of that wrighting, he expresses himself thus.
Because J do apprehend your opinion and affection to be so far settled, that
you conceive there cannot be a peaceable concurre^ce, in such distance of
judment, I am resolved contendly to sit down, and suddenly, as I see my
opportunity, to depart etc. Was not here a voluntary desistance? To what end
was this wrighting carried to the Classis, after he voluntarily desisted? Was
it not to shelter and hide himself under the Classis, that it might be
thought, they deprived the Church of Mr. H. not he? was it not to expose Mr. H.
to the more reproach and censure, when the Classis and Synod had judged against
him?

2. To the second. The judgment of the Classis 1. concerning Mr. Hook: 2.
concerning the answerer.]

Here again, concerning this judgment of the Classis, it would be enquired:

1. Quaere. Whether all the Ministers of the Classis, consented hereunto, or
not?

2. Quaere. Whether they, that so judged, declared their sentence to be
according to the Scriptures? If yea; what Scriptures they produced to warrant
their censure? If not; By what rule they will justify such proceeding?

3. Quaere. Whether the Church referred this matter, to the Classis, and craved
their judgment therein?

4. Quaere. Whether the Classis did hear Mr. H. declaring the reasons of his
judgment, and seek to rectifye his judgment, if they thought he had erred, by
Scripture, before they proceeded to sentence against him,

If, upon inquiry, it shall appear, that the matter was not referred to their
judgment by the Church, and that only some few of the Ministers, or all, or
most of them, without showing the aequity of their sentence by the Scriptures,
thus judged, and without hearing what Mr. H. could say in defense of his
assertions, and then gave it under their hands, to subject the Church to their
determination, and the Answerer procured this to be done, and afterward
pressed it upon the Church, to keep out Mr. H. let the Reader judge whether
this be not a manifest depriving of the Church of that liberty and power which
Christ has given it, as himself acknowledges, in the free choice of their
Pastor? Nor can I thinck that the Classis, or deputyes of the Synod would
justify the Answerers dealing, in this buisenes, and condemn Mr. H. so far,
if they had been rightly informed of the naked truth, without such intimations
suggested by the Answerer against him, as might serve to stir up unjust
jealousyes and surmises against that worthy man. For may not any thing he held
stand with the doctrine contained in the Catechism, Confession, and Synodicall
explication thereof? And does the Synod require any more of him, that is to be
admitted to any Church in these countries? I am confident, that this case would
bear a review, and that a National Synod would not justify the deputyes for
that provincial Synod, nor the deputyes justify that Classis, nor the Classis
approve of the Answerers dealing in this buisenes, if it were more thoroughly
examined.

His apology for wrighting this, being compelled by the Complainants, in his
own defense, which else he says, he would not have done.

Be it, that all the pamphlets were bought up, save a few that were dispersed,
before the receipt of my letter, and so the publishing of them was stopped. And
therefore I may fitly reply in his own words a little qualifyed, had the
Answerer been so considerate and wise in this as he has been in some other
things, he would rather have rested in the judgment of the Classis against the
printing of his book, and burnt it, or utterly suppressed it, then to compel
me, in mine own and other men's defense, to wright these things concerning him,
or them, which otherwise I would never have done, though the injuryes we have
suffered are great, and the wrong done to the Church is far greater, if they
had no more to complain of, then that they were deprived of that faithful
servant of God, Mr. H. whom he, not only then deprived them of, but also
pursues him with reproaches, in print, unto the ends of the earth.

So much for Mr. H. at least, till another occasion be given.

Ans. 2. A breife defense of my self which is more fully done in ans. to the
7. Sect. and those that follow.
2. In the next place, he deals with me, and thincketh to free himself from
any blame concerning me, out of mine own words, in the postscript after my
letter to the Classis, concerning which he noateth three things. 1. Some faults
in that wrighting. 2. that my desisting is by me imputed to the Classis, as the
cause thereof. 3. that the Complainants are to be blamed for laying this
complaint upon him] To all which I will reply, breifely, referring the larger
discourse of my matters to the seventh Section, and those which follow.

first, concerning faulty and injurious relation of matters to be further
examined hereafter.] Let the Reader but cast his eyes hereafter, upon Sect. 19,
where this matter should be examined, and he shall find nothing said by the
Answerer to evince, that, in that postscript are any faults, or injurious
relations of matters, though J can easily show sundry faults, and injurious
relations of matters made by him, to be further examined, both in that, and
other Sections.

2. To the second, that my desisting is to be imputed to the Classis, P. 147. 3.
as the cause thereof.] Here I may justly retort the Answerers observation
concerning my public censure of the pamphlet, upon himself, in reference to
the Classis, with some additions more justly, and say almost in his own words.
Observe the just reward of the inordinate affection, which the ministers of the
Classis have showed in contending against the Church, and against those
Ministers whom the Church has desired, to gratifye the Answerer. By the
Answerer himself complaints are called for to be directed against them, that
himself may escape. Nor is it once (as it was in my case concerning W. B.)
that he has done thus, but often in this book, Nor is it done against men
unknown (as in my case) but he names them, and urges it, and that in print
(as well as I did) and though, by the Answerer himself, sentence is not
pronounced against them, yet the evidence, which he brings; is so clear, and
so insisted upon, and urged by him, rhat some will thinck right is not done to
the Answerer, if sentence pass not against the Classis.

3. To the third, that they unjustly lay this complaint upon him.] Why so?
Because, they say Mr. P. is the only cause. If that be the fault; let the
expression be altered, and, in stead of the only cause, what if they say, the
principal cause? will that please him? No: Mr. D. contradicts them, in
confessing the Classis to be so strong a cause thereof: But this is no
contradiction to that saying, that he is the principal cause. For, the
concurring of diverse causes to the producing of one effect, does not destroy,
but suppose a due subordination of causes; so that the effect may be ascribed
to either properly, yet to the principal efficient primarily, and secondarily
to the Instrument. As if one man cut another with a knife; it is truly said
the knife cut him, or the man cut him: to the knife it is ascribed, but as to
an instrument, to the man, as to the principal Agent. To apply this. I demand,
who carried the matter to the Classis, and would accept no ways, which I
propounded for private accommodation? The Answerer. Who held it in the Classis,
when they were willing to have it ended in the Consistory, suspecting the
Elders would carry the matter for me, and that the keeping of me out might not
be imputed to himself? The Answerer. who intimated to some of them the danger
of giving me liberty, in that point, when some of them inclined thereunto,
telling them, it would encourage the Brownists, and it would make the contrary
practice of their Church censured, and that it would make their Church to be
accounted as a sinck, or common shore, to receive what the English Church
refuses, that he might irritate and incense them against me, in this point?
Did not the Answerer? Causa causae est causa causati.
I conclude. If he was the cause moving them to it, the complaint may justly be
laid upon him that he was the principal cause of it.

A defense of Mr. Parker.
3. In the third place, he deals with Mr. Parker] And now we are come to the
Triarij, in the three following instances, the first whereof is this worthy
man, a man of much eminency, above many famous lights in his time.

Jn this passage I will noate 3 things. 1. some doubtful expressions which
should be cleared. 2. some questions to be answered. 3. the exception, that
this was 20. years since, by the Answerer propounded.

But, before I prosecute these particulars, I have some thing to say concerning
this worthy man. And, I confess, when I did read this passage, I did much
wonder, both in respect of the man himself and of the Answerer.

For this man] his works do, in part, show his worth, concerning which a
judicious censurer, though differing from him in judgment about the Hierarthy,
testified, that they are as full of learning as an egg is full of meat. His
works which I have seen are. 1. a treatise against the Cross 2. De descensu
Christi ad inferos. 3. De Politia Ecclesiastica. One would have thought that
Holland should have esteemed the opportunity of settling such an one amongst
them an unvaluable bessing. And yet, did the ministers of the Classis make some
difficulty about admitting him? And did the Magistrates signify, that they
should cease from the pursuit of this buisenes? I will hope, it was ignorantly
done, the man being unknown to them, or they were abused by sinister
informations. But if they had rightly known him, and yet so concluded, my
conclusion concerning them shall be, that they are worthy to want such a man,
who so undervalued him.

For the Answerer.] Is it possible, that he should hinder his settling there who
sojourned at his house, who was a member of his Church, and an Elder (as am
informed) about 2 years? what could they object against him, which the
Answerer could not have answered? Did they suspect him of inclining to
Brownisme? His book of Ecclesiastical Policy clears him, and a letter
written by himself, but published by some other, in a pamphlet called the
profane Schysme etc. clears him of that imputation. Did they suspect his
dissaffection to Classes? The same book shows how far he likes and
disliketh their way, which though it was not then printed, the Answerer
understood his judgment fully. Or, was there any thing else in the wind? The
searcher of all hearts knows, and will manifest, in due time. In the mean
space, here is a sad complaint, that the Church was deprived of him, whom they
admired, when they heard him preach (which was but a little before his
departure) and with one consent desired to enjoy as their Pastor, and
colleague with the Answerer. And the ancient inhabitants say, that, with a sad
heart, he left the city; but in a short space, after his removeall thence, to
a Leager, whither he was called to be their preacher, it pleased God to remove
him from this unthanckfull world, and from all sorrows and troubles, to
perfect joy, and peace. He died about 3 months after he went from Amsterdam,
at Doesburge in the County of Z^lphen, whither he was called to preach to a
Regiment of English. The Church triumphant received him, In the year 1613, as
I am informed.
who^ a few, out of needles jealousyes, hindered from being entertained by this
small hand-full, a very little parcel of the Church militant, to their
unspeakeable loss, and hindrance. But I hasten to the three things to be
noated in the answer.

1. Certain doubtful terms in this answer should be cleared, and their
meaning shown. As. 1. There was some difference about the manner of his call.]
But he says not, what was the manner of his call, about which the difference
was, nor what, nor between whom, the difference about it was. 2. I propounded
the matter unto the Dutch Ministers, who made some difficulty about it.] but be
shows not, about what they made difficultye, nor what difficulty they made,
nor whether they made difficultyes, as particular men, in a prudentiall way,
for advise, or jointly concurring, in a way of Classical power, binding the
Church to rest in their determination, concerning Mr. Parkers unfitnes for
that place. 3. When Mr. Halius, and Mr. Plancius etc. were deputed etc. I
labored to clear the difficultyes objected by them] but he concealeth what
course he took for the clearing of those difficulties, and whether Mr. Parker
himself was consulted with for the removeall of them. 4. Some while after, a
dutch Minister and an Elder coming to Mr. T. signified from the Burgomasters of
this city etc.] But he hides it, whether the Burgomasters sent these men, and
the reason why they came to Mr. T. and not to all the Elders in Consistory, and
why the Elders were not then sent for before the Burgomasters, as in other
cases they are, to know their pleasure. Besides other evidence, I have a copy
of the letter, which our Eldership sent unto Mr. Parker.] but will that letter
manifest that the Answerer did what lay in his power to further the calling of
Mr. Parker? or what else will it evidence? 6. And there be some ancient
Ministers of the Classis, yet living, whose testimony might give further light
thereto.] To what? what need these dark expressions, if things were carried
fairly and openly? especially, seeing the Answerer it not went to be shye of
telling any thing, nor of wresting an interpretation of words or actions, which
was never meant, nor thought, if it may make for his advantage, as this book
abundantly witnesses.

2. Some questions also should be answered.

1. Quaere. Why it was not considered of, how Mr. Parkers settling, in that
place might be effected, before he was, in a manner, engaged to another place?

2. Quaere. Who incited the Dutch preachers, and, after them, the Magistrates,
to insist upon those difficultyes, to the depriving of the Church of such a man?

3. Quaere. Whether the Church was satisfied with that, which the Answerer told
them was done, in this buisenes? or, whether diverse of them, did not entreat
him, to try once more? And what his answer was?

a raking into a buisenes that fell out 20 years past, and if their dealings
for 20 years together etc.

Reply. P. 28.
1. If this were a fault in the Complainants to rake into matters 20 years past
concerning him, yet he is unfit to reprove it, who, in the very next page,
raketh into a buisenes concerning Mr. F. about 30 years past, Anno 1605.
for which he was banished out of Scotland, whereof we shall speak in its
place. 2. If it were so with him, about 2 years since, in my case, and 2
years before that, in Mr. H. and 2 years before that, in Mr. Pet. and I know
not how long before that, in Dr. A. and 20 years since, Anno 1610.
in Mr. Par. and 24 years since, in Mr. F. his case, it seems to have been
his constant course thus to injury the Church. 3. Personal and private evils
past long since, and reformed, may not be raked into warrantably, when public
greivances, still continued, may be raked into provided that they be not made
more public then necessity requires, and the aim be right, to seek
reformation, not to cast reproach upon men's persons.

A defense of Dr. Ames. Job. 41.8:
of whom I may say, if he were alive, as the Lord speaks concerning the
Leviathan. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, and do no more. We
shall have fit occasion, in the ensuing passages, to say more for the
vindicatio^ of his deserved honor against the disparadgments by the Answerer
unworthily cast upon him, whose name is as a precious ointment, in all the
Churches of the Saints, and shall be to future ages, which will abhor these
indignityes cast upon him.

What is said concerning him may be brought to 6 heads. that his calling, was
never put to voices. 2. that the Answerer signified to one that asked him
occasionally, that he thought him not fit, nor could give his consent. 3, that
he denied the authority of Synods and Classes. 4. that he acknowledges he has
written diverse learned and worthy treatises. 5. that he was fitter for a
Professor in Schools. 6. that his leaving of Franeker was disliked by all
learned men, approved by none

To the first. 1. The Answerers memory has not been so faithful a record, in
passages between him and me, I thinck him not fit for us, and I cannot give my
consent, whereby the voting of it might easily be hindered, though the Church
had generally desired him.

2. That experience which I have of the ill setting down of the acts of the
Consistory in mine own case (which I shall discover in its place) causes me
the less to regard their records of propositions, of agreements, in that
meeting, and to account them insufficient evidences for proof of the doing, or
not doing any thing in question.

to one asking him occasionally; he signified that he thought him not fit for
them, neither could give his consent for him.] Be it so, he confesses that he
signified so much to one, (whether that one asked this question secretly,
opposed, and rejected Dr. Ames also. Neither does the not putting of it to
voices prove that they did not generally desire him, seeing his peremptory
answer to that one might cause them to despair of enjoying their desire, if
they had proceeded further in it. It is some favor to have a quick dispatch. I
wish, from my heart, he had said so to me, and I should have prevented all this
trouble, by a voluntary desistance, long before. And so much I said to him, but
he said, he would not answer me alone, that the blame should lie upon him only,
and he would see what could be done with the Classis, in favor of me, as I
understood him, but time has taught me my mistake. Pardon this digression. But
why was not Dr. Ames fit?

he denied the authority of Synods and Classes. 1. What Dr. Ames held touching
the authority of Synods and Classes, great, nor any confusion or disturbance of
Churches. 2. whereas he prete^deth that his intertaining of Dr. Ames, in
respect of this his opinion, would have been an occasion of Contention or
Scandal; that the vanity of his suggestion may appear, let the Reader know,
that Dr. Ames was minister of the English Church, at the Hague, where,
whatsoever he held touching this question, it occasioned no contention, nor
scandal, neither to English, nor Dutch. Afterward, he was Professor at
Franeker, where he continued twelve years: who ever heard of any contention or
scandal, occasioned by his opinion, given to any there, all the time of his
abode with them? The contrary whereof appeared by the great unwillingnes of the
Curateurs of that Academy to leave him, which the Answerer acknowledges, Page
18.
when it may serve (as he thincketh) to reflect blame upon the worthy Doctor.
After this, he was called to Rotterdam, where God finished his course, to give
him the Crown of righteousness. What contention, or scandal did his opinion,
or practice, according to it, occasion there? But as in this so in many other
passages in his book the Answerer has often miscarryed by an unwarrantable
striving to praepossesse his credulous Reader with unjust praejudices against
those, whom he praesenteth to common view as his opposites. I wish he may see
his error therein, and amend it, for the future, and that, in the mean time,
the judicious Reader may not be deluded thereby. 3. If the Answerer has (as he
says) earnestly contested with Dr. Ames, ever since he was acquainted with
him, and yet still he persisted in the same, it shows that Dr. Ames did not
apprehend that strength and weight to be in his arguments, and allegations, as
himself fancyed. And all men know that the Dr. was sufficiently able to
discover the strength, or weakness of an Argument.

To the fourth. he acknowledges him to have written diverse learned and worthy
treatises.] 1. While the Answerer seems ingenuous, in giving his adversary
his due, he is politic,

First, so much he must necessarily acknowledge, that he may decline the
censure of all learned men, in case he should do otherwise. For eve^ his
professed adversaries will do so much. And though all men should be so
possessed with a spirit of envy that they would hide and blemish his worth; yet
his works will praise him to posterity, which we will distribute under their
several heads, thus. Besides the book mentioned by the author, and his
Demonstratio logica; his Polemicall treatises, which, are extant, are, 1. that
sinewous work, Bellarminus enervatus, where the volumes of that daring Jesuit,
and Cardinal are so concisely answered, as if Homers Iliads were in a
nutshell, and that exact piece in the Arminian controversies, his Coronis,
besides those other disputes, viz, his Antisynodalia, contra^ Grevinchovium,
his 1 and 2 Manuduction, his Reply, and Triplication. 2. His systematicall
treatises, his Catechism (which I find mentioned, but have not seen it) that
worthy work worthily called Medulla Theologiae, the Marrow of Divinity, and
that practical institution (wherein he exceeds not only Pontificians and
Lutherans handling that argument, but also his own guide in that work, who
died before he could finish it, famous Mr. Perkins) his Cases of conscience. 3.
His exegeticall treatises, viz his Analysis upon the wholl book of the Psalms
(which he lived not to perfect, to his mind) his noates upon the 1. and 2.
Epistles of Peter, and upon the catecheticall heads.

Secondly, so much he may safely acknowledge, without prejudice to himself for
opposing his calling. Any ingenous Protestant will acknowledge so much of many
popish wrighters in their comtemplative, and moral discourses, both divine and
humane. The Answerer will acknowledge so much of Mr. Ainsworth, against whom he
has shown himself more opposite then against this Dr.

2. If Dr. A, have occasioned many to rejoice justly, and thanck God for his
labors, because they have been of much good use, in the Church of God, I wish
from my heart that the Answerer, instead of sharpening his style, to cast
reproach upon the memory of so worthy and learned a wrighter, had imitated his
example, in publishing proffitable things, that others might praise God for the
fruits of his labors, and not such wrangling stuff, and unproffitable
invectives, which serve only to greive the hearts of Gods people, and, for my
part, I would not have troubled my self to read, much less to answer, if I
had not been thereunto compelled,

Secondly. Was Dr. A. his judgment about the authority of Synods and Classis
such an offense, Non eadem sentire bonos de rebus ijsdem, Incolumi licuit
semper amicitia.
as all these worthy and learned treatises (for which so many praise God) could
not expiate? Suppose they had differed in their opinions; could no
accommodation have been thought of? Amongst good men it has been easy to join
them together, in one Church, notwithstanding greater differences. But what if
Dr. Ames his judgment be sound in this matter? As it will, upon trial, be
found to be. Will it not then be easy to determine, whose cause is most
justifyable, whose case is most eligible? whether his, who persiseth in the
truth, or his who resists it (though, I hope, not maliciously) in this
particular?

To the fifth. Not to speak of other things etc. he was generally held more
fit to be a Professor of Divinity in Schools, etc.] I must crave leave to
demand, 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.12.
there are diversityes of gifts, and answereably diversityes of
administrations, but, as one spirit is the author of those gifts, so one Lord
is the author of those administrations, even our Lord Jesus, who has given
Doctorall as well as Pastoral gifts, for the service of his Church, not only
to that primitive Church, but also to the end of the world. 3. Nor is there
such opposition between Churches and Academyes, that a man, who is generally
held fit for the one, may not be judged fit for the other. They, who hold him
fit for a Professor, did, in holding so, account him orthodox, and sound in
his judgment. And holding him so sound in his judgment, that he is fit to be
Professor in an Academy, in these Countries, they must necessarily conclude,
that, for the soundnes of his judgment, he is fit much more to be a Pastor in
any Church, in this Country, and so condemn the Answerer of injudiciousnes, in
saying he thinks him not fit, and of selfe-willednes, in saying that he can
not give his consent for him, and of injury to the Church, in depriving them of
such a man, who is generally held fit to be a Professor of Divinity in the
Schools, both for learning and sound judgment. 4. How fit was for the service
of any Chvrch, whether in a Pastoral or Doctorall way, let his works testify,
which declare him to have been a man well fitted to aedifye the Church, by
words of knowledge, which is the Doctorall way (witness those worthy disputes,
and Systems published by him) and by words of wisdom also, which is the
Pastoral way, (witness his expositon of the Psalms, and of boath the Epistles
of Peter, and his book of conscience, wherein he does that in divinity, which
Socrates is said to have done in Philosophy, viz, to bring it from heaven into
men's houses, by reducing all into practice, which also he does in his uses or
applications of Doctrine, in his expositions of Scripture, and in his
practical resolutions of cases, in that book. All which, being considered,
will evince this suggestion of unfitnes, to be a vain pretense, that I say no
worse. 2. How ever, whilst he continued fixed in his Academicall employment,
thorough continual scholastic exercises and disuse of public preaching, he
had been formerly less dexterous therein, yet two things showed him to be
called unto the service of the Church, in that work. 1. the strong inclination
of his own spirit thereunto, even when his whole time was taken up in the
other task. For he has often been heard to profess, that he would willingly
travail many miles to preach a sermon; being (as it seems) like a nurse, who
is in pain of the fullnes of her breasts, for want of some to suck them. 2. He
no sooner was resolved to join himself to a Church, where he might employ
that talent, for the best advantage, but it appeared, to the admiration of
those that knew him, than God was with him, to fit his spirit, and increase his
gifts, for that service. A trial whereof is yet fresh in the memoryes of those
in Amsterdam, who heard his excelent and proffitable sermons upon Psalm. 65.4.
and Psalm. 133. the last fruits of his labor in that places Likewise in
Rotterdam are many witnesses of his worthy and fruitful sermons upon the 17.
of John. Their sorrow for their Churches loss, in his translation thence,
continued to this day, shows what experience they had of his fitnes for that
work.

That all learned men (for ought the Answerer could hear) in these Countries,
disliked his leaving his Profession in Franeker, none approved him therein.]

and be mistaken in such questions (as the Answerer affirms) especially, when
they understand not the reasons of those actions and intentions which they
censure, in which cases it is more true, then in that wherein he affirmed it,
that they may justly be corrected by others.

2. But, that it may appear, they erred, who disliked it, and, that all may be
satisfied, concerning Dr. Ames his removeall from Franeker to Rotterdam, I will
breifely relate the story of it, from the testimony of one, who was an eye and
eare-witnes, and, upon knowledge, wrote to me the words following.

1. At his first coming to Franeker, he found things in such a frame in, the
University, that he thought of departing thence before he was settled.

2. Upon the reformation made by the wise and religious care of some few
interested in the government of that Academy, he had some more hope of content,
and he continued suffering so much, the first year, that, had he not had a
greater strength then his own to support him, he had not been able to have
borne it, and he lived there, his wholl time, in continual opposition, and
suffering. So that, in that 12 years, he endured more, I thinck, then Mr. P.
has in his life.

3. For the place; though it may, and does agree with some bodies, yet it did
not agree with him, the air being very sharp in winter, which so wraught upon
him every year, that, toward the end of winter, he was ever so troubled with
stoppings and shortness of breath, that he could scarsely go a flight shot,
without resting; and would always say. If I can hold out this winter, If I can
hold out this winter, etc. I thinck, he had done well, for his own health, if
he had come away some years before.

4. For his coming from Franeker. 1. he did it not without great counsel and
deliberation, Indeed, contrary to the desire of some of the States of
Friesland, which truly desired the good of the Academy, yet could not, being
the weaker party, defend him in his righteous cause, wherein he was left alone,
which made him the more confident, that God did call him thence, all his
company, which were of the best party, being plucked away from thence
wonderfully, which went very near him, as, the Professor of Hebrew, whose
name was Amama, a worthy man, in his place, a right honest man, whom the Lord
took away being young, and of a very healthful constitution: shortly after,
the Logic Professor, a young likely man, and one of that party, died also.
Then another, which was Professor of Divinity, a worthy and an holy man, as
any they have in that Country, who, seeing how all things went, and having a
call to Lewerden, which is the head town of that County, left his
Professourship and took that pastoral charge. There were one or two more,
who, seeing how things went, ran with the stream, and left him alone to
strive against it, wherein finding his labor in vain, and no hope of
redress, this made his being there uncomfortable, and him more ready to look
out to Rotterdam being offered, where he thought he might do much good, both
by his Ministry, unto which his own heart did much incline him, and his
Academicall employments, by which he thought he might do as much good at
Rotterdam, as at Franeker, most good he did there being private: other
encouragements also he had for his change, as 1. the proffitable ministry which
he hoped there to enjoy, the want of which did not a little trouble him. 2. the
covenant and government of that Church, which he did approve of, and hoped to
be a means to establish. 3. the society of good people, which he promised to
himself there, more then he could possibly obtain in Franeker, there being
not one of our Nation, and few of the other to be found.

5. And, for motives. 1. his own inclination, upon the foresaid grounds. 2.
the Church of Rotterdam its call, again, and again renewed, with Mr. Pet.
great desire, a long time manifested, and the desire of some of the
Burgomasters. 3. his friends, whom he acquainted with the buisenes, they
persuaded to it, as being a thing that might redound much to his health, and
comfort, telling him that many would come to Rotterdam to be helped in their
studies by him, that would not come to Friesland, and whereas one brought some
reasons against it, he soon answered and satisfied him. By which narration, it
seems that the learned men, who disliked it, concealed their judgments from
him, if there were any such. And the Answerer himself cannot well be excused,
if he disliked it, that he hid his dislike that time, and now publishes it,
after his death, to the world. To wind up all in a few words. 1. Jf things
continued in so ill a state at Franeker, and there was no hope of reformation.
2. Jf the climate did so ill agree with his body. 3. If his own heart, upon
the motives formerly mentioned, was strongly inclined for Rotterdam. 4. If all
his friends, upon good grounds, advised him to it, and those that spoke with
him, being of a different opinion, were satisfied with his reasons. 5. If the
Church and Commonwealth should have the same fruit of his Academicall
exercises at Rotterdam, which they had at Franeker, and with advantage of a
place more convenient for Students, and of his ministerial employments
super-added to the former; I pray the Reader to judge, whether Dr. Ames his
removeall from Franeker, deserve a disliking censure from learned men. Thus
having endeavored to scatter the mist, which else might have hindered the
shining forth of this eminent light, we leave him in the blessed enjoyment of
that inaccessible light, whereunto he was translated by death above two years
since. He died in Rotterdam, a little before I came into these countries, and
was buried, on the 14 day of November 1633. New style. We now proceed to the
third worthy, Mr. Forbes, and to examine what he says concerning him.

Two reasons are pretended by the Answerer against Mr, Forbes, Ans. 5 A defense
of Mr. Forbes.
for the justifying of his refusing him to be his Colleague. 1. His differing
from him in judgment about the Declinatour, or appeal etc. 2. His refusal of
referring that difference to an hearing of Ministers. And thence he proceeds,
in the third place, to show the issue of this difference, and Mr. F. refusal
to referr it, which was, that, not only he, but all the Elders, with one
consent, refused to proceed in the calling of him.

Page 13.
whereas he blames the Complainants for unseasonable admonition, in that they
complain now of matters done above 20 years agone, about Mr. Parker and Mr.
Forbes. Was it unseasonable in them, and is it not so in him? Nor will it
help, that he say, they compel him to it, seeing in the very next instance
(viz speaking of Mr. Peter's) he says. I thinck it needles to give a reason
here, why I gave not my voice for him. Why might not this answer as well have
served in the former instances? 2. His policy is to be noated, in this passage,
in his urging that appeal as a mean to keep out Mr. Forbes, well knowing
that Mr. Forbes would not now pass from that, for procuring a Ministry in
Amsterdam, for the which he had formerly taken his life in his hand, and, at
that instant, endured banishment. 3. His disparadging of Mr. Forbes his
judgment, when he says, he saught to maintain his appeal, insinuating
thereby an endeavor, without ability.

to show Mr. F. the unlawfullnes of that appeal. The wholl council of
Scotland (consisting of wise and honorable persons) with others, as well
versed in the laws and constitutions, both Ecclesiastical, and civil of
Scotland, as the Answerer, did their endeavor to make Mr. F. and his
associats to understand the unlawfullnes of it, and yet they could not see it,
but the Answerer will presently show it them.

To the third.] That both he and the Elders, with one consent, refused to
proceed in the calling of Mr. F. upon his refusal to give them satisfaction.]
A refusal supposes a petition, the Answerer should have shown who was the
petitioner. 1 was it Mr. Forbes? This seems to be intimated. But they that
knew M. Forbes, knew him to be a man of no such mean spirit, as to petition,
or seek to be the Answerers Colleague. 2. were the members of the Church the
petitioners, or motioners for his call? and was their request frustrated, upon
this ground? Then their complaint seems to be just, in that they were
deprived of him, for such a cause. For what is a difference about things done
in Scotland (and which are proper and peculiar to the cognition of that State)
to the Church in Amsterdam? what Canon of any National Synod? what order of
any Classis? what Custom of any Church in Holland is violated, by Mr. Forbes
his opinion concerning the Declinatour? Which injury, both to them and him, is
the greater, seeing, notwithstanding that, he was intertayned, and settled in an
English Church, and (which is more to this purpose) with the English Merchants,
amongst whom he lived, paynfully discharging the office of a Pastor, above 20
years, to the singular content of the Company, and not without his Maties of
Great Britain etc. King James, of famous memory, his approbation, as, to the
praise of his Royal clemency, appeared in a message sent by him to the
Company. For him God provided mercyfully. But the Church in Amsterdam, was, by
this mean, deprived of a man of eminent worth, in the enjoyment of the fruits
of whose learning, judgment, wisdom, amiable spirit, and other exellent
properties, and indowments, all places, where he has lived, thought themselves
happy, accounting him a man richly furnished with all indowments, which are
requisite, not only for a minister to any Church, but also for a public
instrument, upon great occasions, in the common affairs of many Churches, to
stand before princes. What esteem he had in Scotland, appeared by their
employing of him in public services, and those of great importance. How he was
accepted in Swede^, whither he travayled, after his banishment, was manifest,
besides other instances, in the great favor showed him, and honorable proffer
made to him, by that Mirror of Princes, the last King of Sweden, a little
before his death. How the Company of Merchants, who enjoyed him so many years,
affected him, is evident in the annual exhibition which they have conferred
upon his widow, as a testimony of their high esteem of him, their deceased
Pastor, whom it pleased God to call hence, where in ter Veer he finished his
course, and was freed from all the troubles of his pilgrimage, to enjoy that
crown of righteousness which is laid up for those that have faught a good
fight, he died on the 5 day of August, old style, and was buried, on the 9 day
Anno 1634.

In the sixth place, he deals with Mr. Peter's, or rather declineth the answer
of their complaint, in that particular. Had he done so in all the rest, he had
eased me of all this labor and trouble, and might have seemed to others more
free from blame then he is, or now can rationally be judged to be.

The answer to the sixth Section examined.
This Section might have passed without being examined by me, P. 33.
had not the Answerer, in the close of it, brought me in as one fighting
against him, in like manner as the Complainants, which is, according to an
English proverb, to slander him with a matter of truth. But, because, he
says, the answer before given to the Complainants, may also serve for answer
to me, I am compelled to examine the wholl Section, to find out the answer
given to me, in theyres. His wholl answer tends to charge them with slander,
in 8 particulars, to which I will answer severally and briefly.

To the first.] That they charge him with pressing others upon the
Congregation. In answer I do not claim any more to my self, then one voice.

Nor do they charge him to arrogate 2 voices. But who knows not, that some
one voice may drown many voices?

he abuses his interest in the Magistrates, and Classis, he answers,

they involve the Magistrates in the same guilt with him. 1. Their own words
show that their complaint is against him, not the Magistrate, and so the
imputation of slander may be retorted upon himself. This will be more fully
cleared in the reply to the 6. answer, where the difference between the
Magistrates requiring of this, and his pressing of it, will appear. 2. Nor is
it so rare a case, as is pretended, that men's interest in good Magistrates may
be abused. Was not the Emperor Constantius abused by the Arrians, under their
show of gravity, to side with them against the Orthodox, though the greater
number, by far, in the Synod at Ariminum.

That they extend this complaint to the Classis also. What offense is there in
this? he adds, as if they were generally so blind and corrupt as to suffer
themselves to be abused by me. Sozom. 8.14. Socrat. 6.9
Did not Theophilus of Alexandria, by his policy, prevayle with Epiphanius, a
man of much integrity, to take his part against Chrysostom, whereby he
prevayled to procure his banishment out of Constantinople, to the great grief
of the godly, which also caused much calamity in the Church and civil State?

their reproach serves to the clearing of him, and that, those that are
unpartiall, and wise in heart, may conceive hereby, that he has obtained this
interest in them, not by abusing and corrupting them, but by walking uprightly
before them.

Magistrates, or Ministers of the Classis, by abusing and corrupting them, but,
that he abuses the interest which he has gotten in them, to the injury of the
Church. 2. Nor is an interest in wise and godly men, an infallible sign of
upright walking. Indeed interest in God is a sign of uprightnes, as in Noah,
Abraham, Job, Moses, Samuel, David etc. Because the Lord searches the heart,
and knows our thoughts afar off: but it is not so in men's acceptance, who,
judging by the outward appearance, are often deceived and may be deluded by
false pretenses. Was not David a wise King? And yet Ziba abused his interest in
him, and, by misinforming him, caused him to do an injury to Mephiboseth. The
Church, to whom John the Divine wrote, was not destitute of wise men, and of
men able to judge: yet Diotrephes so far abused his interest in them, as the
Apostle describes, 3. John. 9.10.
saying. I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes that loves to have the
pre-eminence amongst them, received us not, wherefore, if I come, I will
remember his deeds, which he does, prating against us with malicious words,
and not content therewith, neither does he himself receive the brethren, and
forbids them that would, and casts them out of the Church. Boath those had
an interest: the one in the Magistrate, the other in the Church, which they
abused. But I produce these examples, not to compare the Answerer with them,
but only to show, that an interest may be gotten with wise and good men,
without upright walking, and therefore this is no necessary consequence.

To the sixth and seventh,] where he shows what order the Magistrates set
down, about having one that can speak Dutch.

The story which here he relates, clears three points.

1. That it is no slander, when they say, that none of our Nation, that come
immediately from England, though never so fit and able, shall be admitted, but
they must be forced to take one that can speak Dutch. Himself in relating the
story, confesses this to be no slander, but a truth.

2. That it is no slander, when they complain of him as guilty of this injury.
For, besides what he has done toward the procuring of this, it is evident,
that he was so far from pleading, or stirring up the Elders to join with him,
in petition for the altering of this order, as that he pleads for it, though,
they say, it is to the unspeakeakle injury and grief of the Church.

3. That it is no slander, that they complain of the Answerer for this, and
not of the Magistrate, seeing he urges it more vehemently then they seem to
do. For they propound it as a matter only, in some respects, convenient, that
the English preacher speak Dutch, but he presses it as necessary. The former
appears three ways. 1. in that caution which they give [If it were possible]
wherein I suppose, they mean, with the consent and approbation of the Church:
for otherwise, if they would obtrude one upom them, they need not put in that
proviso. 2. In the reasons, which they give for that their desire, which do
imply only an expediency, viz, that he may debate matters with the Classis, and
treat with the Magistrate, on the Churches behalf, as occasion shall require,
which a man may do, by learning the language after he is settled, though he
have no Dutch before. 3. Jn their indulgence to me, which the Answerer
acknowledges, in sayng, that they were content to dispense with my want of the
Dutch language, which shows that they accounted it but an expediency, with
which they would dispense, in a case of necessity. The latter (viz, P. 31.6.
that the Answerer presses it as a matter necessary) appears in his own
words, when he says, that a minister called to this place which can not speak
Dutch, is, in great measure, no better then a Dumb Minister, in respect of one
special work of his calling, which is to give advise etc. In the Classis. If,
to sit in the Dutch Classis etc. Be one special work of the English Ministers
calling, then indeed his ability to speak Dutch, is a necessary requisite,
without which he is but a dumb minister. But how will this be proved? For 1.
Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus and in the rest of his Epistles,
speaks nothing of this property or duty, nor is it any where else in
Scripture revealed to be necessary, how then is it a special work of his
calling? 2. The Magistrates do not press this sitting in the Dutch Classis,
upon the English preachers in other towns in Holland. How comes it to be so
special a work of a Ministers calling in Amsterdam? 3. This is not urged as a
special work of a ministers calling to the French and walloon Churches in
that City; How comes it to be so to the English? 4. The Answerer did not
account it a special work of his calling to sit in the Dutch Classis, a good
while after his coming to Amsterdam, when he labored to set up an English
Classis; though afterward he opposed the same thing, when it took effect by
Mr. Forbes his labor. How comes it now to be a special work of his calling,
which then was not? 5. The Answerer has been heard to say, that he comes
sometimes from the Classis greived and troubled in his mind, because, when
weighty matters are debated, he cannot sufficiently express his mind in Dutch.
And well may it greive him to supply the place of a Pastor there, if he find
him self unable to perform one special work of his calling. To wind up all.
Seeing the Answerer makes that an especial work of the Ministers calling to
his Church in Amsterdam, which God does not make so, in any place of
Scripture, nor the Magistrates do make so, neither there, to other Nations,
nor, in other Cities, to other English Churches, and seeing, by that pretense,
they are deprived of many worthy men, which they might have enjoyed (had not
this been so insisted upon by him) and seeing the Answerer does urge it more
strictly, then the Magistrates (they propounding it, but as a matter of
convenience, but he pressing it, as a matter of necessity) have not the members
just cause to complain of this as a greivance? Nor will this free him from
blame, that he is but one, and claymeth but one voice, seeing he hinders, that
what agrees not with his mind, can not be ended in the Church, but is carried
to the Classis, where he can strengthen himself, by help of those whom he
gayneth to his party, by raising causeles suspicions of some factions, or
Shysmaticall intentions in his people, or in the Consistory, which they receive
from him, and report to the Magistrates, who, at their entreaty, interpose to
prevent some imagined distractions, which may fall in the English Church:
whereas, if they had rightly been informed of the wholl truth, they would have
seen the request of the Church to be reasonable, and just, and the opposition
made against it to be injurious, and blameworthy.

the Lords fighting against his course hitherto by the great unfitnes of those
etc. who have preached hitherto by his nomination or consent in sending for, he
answers 2 things; 1. That they are guilty of rash judgment, and of taking
Gods name in vain, or reproaching the Lord, and laying iniquity upon the Lord,
and of making him a partaker with them, for maintenance of their sin. 2. For
the men to whose sending for he has given consent; that they are not unfit,
but learned and worthy men: one of them he names, the other 2 he concealeth.
This passage shall be briefly examined, and replied upon.

To the first,] just reward of Mr. B. inordinate affection to me, that I
censure the printing of that pamphlet to be an injury. That which I did in the
simplicity, and uprightnes of my heart, not knowing that Mr. B. was the
publisher, in way of witness bearing to the truth, and in favor of him, he
wresteth and perverteth to contrary ends. This dealing of his, in that
particular, may make me wary of uttering my thoughts, in a like case, when
another lies to watch and catch all advantages against me and them. Therefore
what I account amiss in this expression, on their part, I will conceal, and
also pass by the distemper of his spirit, which, upon this occasion, venteth
it self. The comparing of the reply to the former Section and this, will give
some light, whereby the Reader may discern, 1. whether that which they have
disliked, and complained of, be not a just greivance, 2. whether, in that case,
such an expression deserve so heavy a censure. Here he instanceth in three
persons sent for by him, and names but one of them, viz Mr. Balmford, whom he
mentions in the first place. In the passages concerning him I noate three
things.

1. Upon a third and fourth review, A defense of Mr. Balmford,
I wondered why so little was said by the Answerer in the just acknowledgment of
Mr, B. sufficiency, especially seeing the next, whose name he concealeth, is
honored by him with the praise of special gifts of learning, piety, and
utterance, and the third, whose name he also suppresseth, is styled a man of
special noate for his learning, and labors in the Church of God. But, when I
consider the men, (him, upon knowledge, and them by guess, and report of
others) I seem to apprehend the cause of it, which was, not that Mr. Balmford
was inferior to either of those men, in the desert of such attributio^s but
that, if he had freely done him right, in so public a declaration thereof, it
might have reflected more honor upon him then he can be content should be
devolved upon one, whose judgment did at all differ from his, and agree with
his opposites, as, he accounts them, in the point controverted between us.

2. Yet, when it may serve for a staff, wherewith to beat the Complainants,
he adds thus much. His great unfitnes is their great slander, that avouch
it, unles they could prove it.] Neither himself nor they will be ever able to
prove Mr. B. unfit for that Church, but both he and they might have blessed
God, with much thanckfullnes, for such a mercy, if they had enjoyed him. And
certainly it will be found worthy to be called a great slander, if any shall
impute great unfitnes to him. The place where he has diverse years executed
his pastoral function, constantly, painfully, proffitably and with good
acceptance, is incomparably before Amsterdam, both in the eminency of the
Auditors, and in their ability to judge of his sufficiency: the deserved
approbation of him, and affection to him so frequently expressed, on all
fitting occasions, by all sorts of hearers, both resorting thither, and
residing there, are in stead of letters of recommondation, to stop the mouths
of any that shall mussitate or whisper any such disparadging intimations, and
to convince them of great slander. But now the question will be, at whose door
the slander must be laid? For the Complainants refuse to father it, and do
retort the accusation of a great slander upon the Answerer himself, and
profess the great unfitnes, which they meant, was intended by them concerning
others, partly, in respect of the language, and they name several men against
whom they except in that respect, whom they could not well understand, through
some defect of the English tongue, or their manner of pronouncing it* partly;
in respect of years, or experience for such a work, whereof some other
instances are alleged by them. But of boath these insufficiencyes they acquit
Mr. Balmford, and blame the Answerer that he has so needlessly brought him, by
name, upon the stage, whilst he coneealeth the names of the other two, and
wholly hides others, whom they can name. Also, they say, some were desired by
him, whom they could not thinck fit for them, in respect of their relations,
and engagements to other Churches, which would suffer much by the loss of
them, though, in other respects, they accounted them fit.

3. To that which he adds, concerning the fighting of some of these
Complainants against his calling, they answer and profess, that the fighting,
which he means, was not, out of disesteeme of, or disaffection to Mr.
Balmford, but for the defense and maintenance of their right, in which case,
they would have opposed any other. For, seeing how unjustly they were deprived
of Mr. Hooker, whom they generally desired, and having heard, that some of the
Dutch Ministers had said, that, if they had known so much before, concerning
him, as they had then heard matters should not have been carried against him as
they were: whereupon they conceyved hopes that they might yet enjoy Mr. Hooker.
Hence came their opposition to Mr. B. calling, whom they thought the Answerer
more forward to bring in, that he might deprive them of the other. But, since
that time, finding their expectation and hope frustrate, they have wished that
Mr. B. had been settled amongst them.

Concerning the other two, seeing the Answerer concealeth their names, I will
be silent, and am sorry that he concludes that passage with persisting in his
former fault of missappiying (and so abusing) the Scripture, which he
alleges for his own purpose.

Thus long I have been excercised in a most unpleasing work of raking in a
kennel of reproaches to find out my answer, which he directed me to seek in
theyres. And, in searching, I find no such answer to them, as I looked for,
viz, a disproofe of this second proof of the justnes of their complaint,
concerning his depriving the Church of the free choice of their Pastor. For
what free choice have they, when they may not have one of their own Nation,
immediately from England, but one that can speak Dutch: and that one must be
so and so principled, and framed to the bent of the Answerers spirit, as has
been declared, in the former Section? why is this required more of the English
then of other Nations? Why does the Answerer press this as a thing necessary,
when the Magistrates only propound it as a thing convenient? Who sees not,
that, till he showed his dislike, both the Magistrates and Classis have
approved of these very men, whom afterward, upon his suggestions against them,
they have refused? How then can it be accounted a slander, that they complain
of him, for this cause? If he have no better answer for me, J shall remain
unanswered, as they are, notwithstanding any thing pretended by him to the
contrary.

Page 32. Ans.
He charge me with overlashing more then they, and mine assertion with more
untrueth then theyres, because J used the word Always. their assertion has
been examined, and, found true, and I doubt not, upon examination, mine will be
found true also, and that, in both, he will be found guilty of slander. For. 1.
in my wrighting, these words following will be found added to the former, and
has hitherto opposed diverse worthy men, that have come immediately from
England, which addition serves to restrain the word always, to those that
came immediately from England; as if I should say, Always, when men have come
immediately from England (which was the case of Mr. H. Mr. P. and my self) he
has opposed them, and showed himself desirous of one that had lived some time
in this country, rather. So that I make the opposition of those that have come
immediately from England, a real proof of his desire of having one that lived
in these countries; which desire when it works so strongly, as that those
that come immediately from England are more narrowly sifted, and more violently
opposed, then others, who, having lived in these parts, consent with them in
judgment; this I call urging. So that, suppose, this have not been publicly
urged by him always, from the first day of his being called to that Church:
yet if always, whenever men have come immediately from England, and have
been much desired by the Church (for such I mean) he has found one pretense
or other to oppose their calling, when he has not been so strict with others,
my assertion appears to be true.



The seventh Section examined, whereunto this title is praefixed, The story of
some proceedings about the calling of Mr. D.
THe Answerer, purposing to expose me to all the reproach he can, in the 16
following Sections; to draw the eyes of passengers (as it were) and to fix the
mind of the Reader upon the ensuing discourse, he praefixeth a title written in
a larger character then the rest, and my name in capital letters. To what
special purpose* his own heart knows, and God, who is greater then his
heart, knows much betrer. As for me: The good will of the Lord be done! If he
deliver me up to be buffeted by the frowardnes of a Masterly fpirit, and that,
when I do well, his grace, I hope, will enable me to submit to my Fathers good
pleasure, in the smitings of my fellow servant; because Christ my Lord has
also suffered for me, leaving me an example. And, it may be, in thc answer of
these particulars, whereby he thought to blemish me, my innocence and his
injury shall more fully appear to all men (by the overruling hand of the only
wise God) then any other way it could have done. This the Lord has done in
Joseph's case, and others, but specially, in the crucifying of our Lord, whose
superscription in great letters upon the cross, proclaimed to all the world,
both his glory, and their shame. As for the Answerer, I wish his age may be
crowned with the honor of righteousness, upon his unfeinged repentance of these
injuries, the guilt whereof he has been plunged into, I hope, by the violence
of temptation, and not by a settled, and habitual evil bent of his spirit, out
of which my prayer is unfeignedly, that God would recover him speedily. And so
I proceed to examine his answer, in this Section, and the conclusion of the
former, against which I have diverse exceptions.

1. Except.] That he says, the things here declared have been occasion of the
strife raised up in this place,] This I except against, as it is indefinitely
expressed. For it may be universally understood, as if those things had
occasioned all the strife, and in that sense it is untrue. For there has been
great strife raised up amongst them, about the rejecting of other men (whom I
praefer above my self) before my name was mentioned amongst them, which is not
yet ended, as appears in the complaints. 2. I affirm, that, whosoever has
been the occasion; his unjust opposition against the men, whom the Church has
justly desired, has been the cause of the strife in this place.

2. Except.] That he says. Whilst I was buisy in wrighting, etc. another
complaint is written against me, and secretly dispersed amongst our people.] My
exception against this expression is double. 1. That he calls it my
complaint, which title I do not give it, nor is it proper, it being rather an
account, then a complaint, being intended for their satisfaction, who desired
to know the truth of passages, not for redress of injuries, which I suffer,
without expectation of help from any man. 2. that he blames the secret
dispersing of it: whereas he should rather acknowledge my tender care of his
reputation, who would not have it divulged, though for mine own clearing,
further then it was necessary, for the rectifying of their understanding and
judgment, who had been praejudiced against me, by his misinformations* And, if
this were a fault in me, yet he has cause to lay his hand upon his mouth, who
not only compelled me to do it, but himself sent a larger wrighting, without
any provocation from me, to a partial friend of his, Mr. B. at Newburgh in
England, which was, no doubt, by him secretly dispersed, where it pleased him.

3. Except.] That he says. I have dealt very injuriously with him, not only in
reporting many things, but in sundry inferences, etc.] this is a trick of
policy, to praepossesse his credulous Reader with a forestalled opinion, and
praejudice against what I wright, but the wise-hearted will compare the Reply
with the answer in every Section impartially, and so judge righteous judgment.

4. Except.] That he says, most of my complaints are, for substance, the very
same that these Complainants have framed, as if the same pen had written both;]
As if he would intimate that I am the author of those complaints; whereas I am
persuaded, that, in his own heart, he does acquit me thereof, both in
observation of some passages in that wrighting, which any man may conceive not
to be penned by me, and, upon his strict examination of some of the
Subscribers, and of those. 3. whom he exempteth from the number of Subscribers
(having, as he says, acknowledged their fault therein) by whom, if he could
have understood that I had been guilty, the Reader should have found it, I
believe, either in great letters, or in some remarkable marginall noate,
expressed and aggravated to the uttermust: yet he so framed his answer to
theyres, as if the whole book were an answer to me only, whereas my wrighting
was in some of their hands, a good space of time, before theyres was framed:
whence all, that can probably be inferred, is, that they recieved some
information about things that concerned my self, from thence, or from my own
words. And whatsoever more is inferred from thence is to be returned back to
his own needless jealousy, from whence it came.

5. Except.] That he says, Each of my threefold wrighting is stained with
untrueth, and matter of reproach.] but when he comes to show it (that his
Reader may be convinced hereof) he flies off from two of the wrightings, at
the first onset, which, for the present, he leaves to the consideration of the
Classis. Yet, that he may not seem to be wholly out of heart, he says, He
will so answer the third wrighting, as that he shall take them in by the way,
etc. For me; he may freely take his choice, whether he will answer all, or
none, and whether, in every particular, or in gross: but he had dealt more
fairly, if he had forborne to pass his sentence, it being his work to give
evidence, not sentence: but, it seems he durst not rest upon the aequanimity
of the Reader, who is now made his judge, but would condemn it, least else it
might have passed altogether uncondemned.

And seeing he undertaketh to answer the third wrighting, in every particular,
we shall (with Gods assistance) examine his answer, and the narration which he
makes of particulars touching my calling hither, with the issue thereof,
which, if it be faithfully done, may give much light to help the Readers in
judging righteously: else it will, like an ignis fatuus, misleade them from the
truth.

SECT. 8. Concerning my sending for out of England.
that such as procured my coming out of England, did not, according to good
order, communicate the matter with those, whom it specially concerned, who in
all such weighty and public affairs of the Church, should by their counsel
and direction have gone before others therein. The same thing, in his letter
sent to Nuburgh, he expresses thus, that, I, being sent for privately by a
particular person, without his knowledge, and without advise and consent of
their Eldership, came over before I was called.



2. If there had been any further purpose or agreement to come over by a
private solicitation, without public order, yet in so doing, no good order
was transgressed. Because it was agreed upon in the Consistory, that it should
be free for every member of the Congregation to procure any able minister to
come thither for the trial of his gifts: the reason of which agreement (as I
can show under the Elders hands) was, that the Church should not be engaged
unto any man, if his gifts should not be approved by the Congregation. So that
the manner of my coming over was according to the order agreed upon amongst
themselves.

3. I could add, if I thought it worth insisting upon, that my coming over
was, not without his knowledge, nor without the desire of the Eldership, though
not signified by any public Act, nor was it requisite in this case, the
premises being considered.

The Answer to the nineth Section examined, concerning my resigning of my
pastoral charge in London.
THree things are in this Section propounded by the Answerer, or pretended
rather. 1. my not bringing with me an authentic testimony of my lawful
dimission. My resignation of my place. 3. His answer to my arguing from his
preaching against that my resignation to prove that he never desired me, for
his Colleague. Which particulars are now to be examined, and answered severally
and breifely.

Momus himself. One of the Ministers of the Classis, having read it, said it
was testimonium laudatissimum. The Answerer intimates that an ample testimony
has been formerly given to him in other places. Page 17.3*


How ample his testimony was, I know not: but that mine was honorable, and
sufficient, appears by what has been said.

2. For the second.] seeing J am challenged thus in public, about the
resignation of my pastoral charge in London, and called to the bar of common
censure, to answer to that which my accuser objecteth against me, both here,
and in other places of the book, concerning this matter, I pray the Reader
aequally to consider my defense, wherein. 1. I will speak something, in thesi,
generally, concerning the lawfullnes of that which he seems to condemn. 2. I
will add something, in hypothesi, for the justifying of what I have done in
this particular.

In Thesi.] I am to show that it is not unlawful for a Pastor, in case of
extreme and apparent personal danger, by flight, to provide for his personal
safety. That this is lawful, appears.

1. By the precept given by Christ to the Disciples, and in them to all
beleivers, and particularly to the Ministers of the Gospel. When they
persecute you in this City, flee into another. Mat, 10.23.
Unless he will say, that rule is but temporary, and of force only during the
first Century, which was the error of Tertullian, Haec scripsit Tertullianus
contra totam Ecclesiam. Hieron: d^ virisillustr.
and wherein the wholl Church held contrary to him. The Arguments, which
Tertullian produces for justifying of his Error, I examined thoroughly,
before I took that course, and found them (if I may say with reverence to so
ancient a light in the Church) of no weight. This liberty of flight granted by
that precept, I have not read many that have denied, of later time, only an
Anabaptist, one Mr. Helwis, who is fully answered, in print, Helw: of the
mystery of iniquity. Mr. Rob: of Rel. Com. P. 23 Mat. 10.5 P. Martyr in Epist:
ad amicum de de fuga. Mat: 28.19. Aug: in Epist: ad Honorat. Epist: 180.
Also the same precept was argued by some others, to be but temporary, from the
temporarines of that other precept. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, etc.
Which indeed was shortly after abrogated. But between those two precepts Peter
Martyr judiciously noateth this difference: viz, that appeared to be temporary,
in that it was abrogated by Christ, who after his resurrection, expressly
^^mmanded the contrary, saying, Go teach all nations; But this precept,
concerning flight in persecution, is perpetual, because Christ never reversed
it, by any word in Scripture* And, upon this and other satisfying grounds,
Augustine is clear concerning the lawfullnes hereof, in the case of Ministers,
as will appear to him that shall read an Epistle of his written to that purpose.

2. By examples of the servants of God who have done thus. We may not expect
examples of any Pastors in Scripture, who did thus. For, till the ascension of
Christ, that gift was not given to the Church. And after, for the space of 300
years, the persecutions were, for the most part, not personal, but general;
not against the person of the Pastor only (in which case alone it is lawful to
flee) but against the wholl Church, in which case, it was necessary, Act. 7.25.
Exodus: 2.12.14. and 3.4.18.
that they should stay. But of cases parallel hereunto we have instances, of
not a few. As of Moses, who being persuaded, that God, by his hand, would
deliver the Israelites, yet, for fear, fled out of Aegipt, where, the Lord did
not reprove him for so doing, but reveal himself more fully to him, then
formerly. 1 Kings 17.3.18-10.19.3.5. etc. Acts 9.23.24. 2 Cor: 11.30.
Great Eliah, by the Lords appointment, hid himself from Iezabells pursuit,
who had threatened him, and was not there in condemned by the Lord, but
encouraged, and assisted. The blessed Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul, to avoid
the lying in wait of the Jews, was let down by night, through the wall of
Damascus, by a rope, in a basket, for which he was so far from being condemned
of his own conscience enlightened by Gods holy Spirit of truth, that he
rejoiced in it afterward, and took the same course of flying from Iconium to
Listra, Ast: 14.1 5.6.
to avoid violence. The time would fail me to speak of Jacob, David, Jeremy,
Baruch, of those whom Obadiah hid by 50 in a cave, and of those worthyes, under
Antiochus, Heb: 11.^ 37.38.39
of whom the world was not worthy, who did wander up and down in sheepeskinnes
and goateskinnes, in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves of the
earth, and this they are said to have done by faith. Yea, our blessed Savior
did also sundry times, as our head, sanctifye flight to all his members, who
are partakers of the fellowship of his afflictions, and of this, amongst the
rest. Mat: 10.28. v. 23. with 28.
Nor is this that unlawful fear of them that can kill the body, as appears
in this, that in the same chapter, where the Apostles are forbidden to fear,
they are allowed to fly. And if these might stand together in the Apostles, why
not in others? Nor is this the unlawful faynting in affliction, 2 Cor: 4.16.
with. 2 Cor: 11.30.
spoken of by Paul. For even the same Apostle, in the same Epistle, where he
speaks of his not faynting, speaks of his flying: to show that these are
not contrary. Nor is this like the flying of Jonah, or that whereunto Jeremy
was tempted. For they that do thus, do not do it, that they may not preach,
but that they may preach the Gospel, of which liberty they foresee that they
should utterly be deprived, if they should fall in to their hands, who would
not afford them the favor, which Paul had at Rome, to dwell in his own hired
house, Act: 28.16.30.31
and to receive all that came in unto him, preaching the Kingdom of God etc. no
man forbidding him. Neither is it done by them as by those, who are acted by
the spirit of that base fear, which is opposed to the spirit of power and of a
sound mind. 2 Timothy: 1.7*
For even the spirit of power or courage or fortitude, works diversely in the
servants of God, upon several occasions. When God calls men to confess the
truth, by doing it, it incourageth them thereunto, whatsoever difficulties or
impediments lie in the way, when he calls them to witness to it, by suffering,
it strengthens them thereunto; But how? to suffer that trial, not wherewith
men would ensnare them, but wherewith it pleases the Divine providence to
exercise them. Men would imprison them, but God strongly inclines their
spirits, rather to choose a voluntary banishment, for a short space of time,
which is a sorer trial then some imprisonment. And, in such a case, flight it
self is a real confession, and profession that the truths of the Gospel are
of no small value to them, who thus fly. For who had not rather tarry in his
own country, then leave his country, acquaintance, and all the commodities
which, with them, he might have enjoyed, and travayle amongst strangers, whose
language, dispositions, and customs he knows not, where he is exposed to many
inconveniences, by the change of air and diet, and to be reviled in his own
land, and suspected amongst strangers, and to be ill entreated, oppressed,
rejected, and in print traduced, by those who should have comforted, and
countenanced him, and to be brow-beaten by his inferiors, fhily looked upon by
some aequalls, treacherously circumvented by others, obnoxious to the injuryes
of all. In a word, to be a footestoole for others to tread upon, that they may
raise themselves, by doing some service, though it be by railing against, or
slandering those whom they frown upon, Psalm: 129.3. Secedamus (inquit am^ cis)
nubecula est, quae cito evanescit. Socrat: hyst: 3.12.18.
from whom they expect preferment. As Erasmus said of Luther. poor Luther made
many rich men: because they got preferment, in those days, by wrighting
against him. Is this to forsake the Lords plough? or is it not, for the
testimony of Christ, to be content that the ploughers plough long furrows upon
our backs? Did Athanasius forsake the Lords plough, when, to decline Iulians
plot against him, he fled from Alexandria? This was not to forsake the calling
of God, but to follow it. The like I may say of Peter Martyrs relinquishing his
station in Luca, when he saw he could not with safety hold it, it was not a
deserting of his flock, but a preserving himself for his flock, whom if he had
not left for a time, they, and the whole Church had lost for ever. I will not
now speak of Policarpus, and Cyprian, and others in former times, nor of those
who fled in Q: Maryes days, and were preserved in Franckfurt, and other places
for after times.

In Hypothesi.] For the justifying of mine own act, in this particular (being
injuriously compelled hereunto, in so public a way, by the inconsiderate
importunity of an angry brother who seems very regardlesse how far he
exposes me to censure, or danger) I will breifely relate, both the causes of
it, and the manner of my carriage in it. That the true cause may be known,
false causes pretended by others, must be removed. For, this way, I have been
much wronged, whilst many, out of ignorance, or malice, or both, either
willingly not knowing, or maliciously concealing the truth, have taken an
unwarrantable liberty to spread abroad slanders, with as much confidence, as if
they had been trained up in the Machiavells and Jesuits principles, Calumniare
audacter: aliquid haerebit.
from their childhood. And some were so bold herein, that they feared not to
cast the poison of their reproaches, and to shoot the arrows of their
slanders at me, thorough the ears of their superiors, persons of noble
quality, whose place and authority should have awed them, and made them affrayd
to be found liars unto them, though they had no regard of God, nor of their
conscience, nor of their account in the day of Christ. The time may come when I
shall, 3. Ioh. 10
in print, remember their deeds which they do, and their prating against us
with malicious words, if they take not up in time, but proceed and persist in
these injurious dealings. In the mean space, and always, my soul stay thy
self upon the righteous God, Psalm. 37.6
the God of truth. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgments as the noone day. Say unto the Lord my God. Thou have known my
reproach, Psalm. 69.19. and. 6.7
and my shame, and my dishonor, my adversaries are all before thee. Let not
them that wait on thee, o Lord God of hoasts be ashamed for my sake: Let not
those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, o God of Israel! Because for
thy sake I have borne reproach etc. yet, that I may not be altogether wanting
to my self, nor injurious to the Reader, in suffering him to be guilty of the
sin of evil surmises, or of slander in heart, for want of information, I do
seriously and sincerely protest, that (so far as I know mine own heart) I did
not with draw my self. 1. out of any disloyal affection or unduetifull
thought toward his Matie of great Brittayne, my dread Sovereign, for whom my
hearty prayer shall be, day and night, that his soul may be bound in the
bundle of life with the Lord his God, and that the souls of his enimyes may be
slung out, as out of the middle of a sling. And that the Lord will cloth his
enemies with shame, but upon himself let his crown flowrish. 2. nor out of
any Schysmaticall propension to forsake the Church assembles of England, Heb.
10.29.
as if I thought there were no true Churches of Christ in the land, as the
manner of some is. 3. nor out of idleness, or wearines of the Lords plough, nor.
4. out of love of ease, that I might pamper the flesh. 5. nor out of any
unrighteous aim to defraud any one by any means. 6. nor as one ashamed of the
Gospel, to avoid witness bearing to the truth. 7. nor for any trouble I was
in, or feared by the civil Magistrate, before whom I was never questioned, in
all my life, except for the good and pious buisenes about redeeming
impropriations, wherein our righteous dealing was publicly cleared even by his
Maties Attorney general, who prosecuted against us.

But the truth is, that having about 17 years excercised a public ministry in
London (about 9 or 10 years whereof I was in a Pastoral charge in
Colmanstreet) Jn the latter part of that time I was much perplexed with doubts
about the lawfullnes of that co^formity, which I had formerly used, without
scruple, in respect of some defects, and corruptions, and unwarrantable human
impositions, whereunto I found my self thereby subjected. It is not requisite
in this place to relate, upon what occasion or ground I became thus altered in
my judgment; but thus much I will express. It was not from a dislike of some
one Ceremony only, but of many things amiss, and those, not trifles, or things
indifferent, but matters of great importance, and which I can not submit to,
nor do, with satisfaction to my conscience in the sight of God, though one
thing occasioned the discovery of that dislike, which was not wraught at once,
but by degrees, nor suddenly, but slowly, nor upon slight, but weighty
considerations, nor without much labor, day and night. From that time, I
saught how to free my self from former intanglements, in such a manner, as
might be most for the peace and proffit of the Church, being very fearful
(out of the peaceablenes of my spirit) of causing any public disturbance. Yet
I ceased not to use those means, for the satisfaction of my doubts, which I
thought most convenient for me, and know to be as sufficient, as any I could
use. Whilst these things were in agitation; the alteration of my judgment
(which I had kept secret from common observation) was discovered by a letter,
which one intercepted and opened, who soon acquainted his intimates with it,
by whom it was whispered into the ears of many: the same man, I suspected,
would soon make it known to my Diocesan, that then was, at his return from
Scotland, where he had waited upon his Matie. These things when I understood, I
purposed, the week after his return, to retire for a week or two, in to the
Country, that I might discern what was intended against me, by the manner of
their inquiry after me. Upon this course I was hurried, rather then settled, by
an unexpected accident, which was this. Upon the monday after his return, I
rode a few miles from London to an ancient Reverend Divine, a Dr. in Divinity
and my particular friend (upon a former agreement between us) to conferr with
him about my doubts. But when it was known that I went out of town, and not
whither, some gave out that I was fled, which others too easily receyved and
too confidently reported, and spread it abroad, yet I returned, as I purposed
at my riding forth, that night, to a place within 2 or 3 miles of London, and
stayed there the next day, where I was not a little troubled at the clamor,
which, I heard, was made by many, about my supposed flight, fearing that it
would much irritate and incense authority against me, and accordingly was, even
that week, advertised of a storm gathered in a thick cloud, and ready to fall
upon me. Whereupon I retired a small distance from London, for a few weeks, to
see what issue the Lord would put to these overtures. In which time, 3 requests
were, on my behalf, and at my entreaty, propounded to the Bishop of that
diocese, that then was, by his answer whereunto I perceived that extremity was
intended against me. Yet I did not resign, till the Bishop had caused the
Churchwardens to be examined concerning me, by the Register of the High
Commission, whereby it appeared that he purposed to deal with me speedily, in
that Court, if, by resigning, I prevented it not. Nevertheles, I did not yet
resign up my place, till I had called the Church together in a general
Vestry, and propounded the matter to them, acquainting them with my case,
praying them to advise freely what was best to be done, for their good and
mine. The Church, I confess, might have required me to stay with them, by
virtue of that rule, Coll. 4.17
Say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it. and, if they had so done, I purposed to yield,
whatever had become of me. Yea, 1 Cor: 3.22. and v. 5
I confess the Churches right to be such in their Pastors, that if, whilst I
withdrew my self, for a short time, they had sent for me to return to the
exercise of my intermitted function (promising to stick to me, so far as
lawfully they might, in all dangers that might befall me) I hold my felfe bound
to have returned thereunto: as Luther, upon the letters of the Church of
Wittenburg, Melch: Adam: vit: Luth.
returned to the execution of his function, from which he had, for a time,
desisted, and hidd himself, by the advice and command of the D. of Saxony.

As I acknowledge the Church to have this right in their pastor, so I told
them, that if they should find that any hurt would redound to them by my
resignation, which by my holding the place would be prevented, I would hold it,
whatever should befall me.

They seriously advising upon the proposition made by me, and knowing that the
liberty and power of choosing their Pastor was in themselves (which also
secured me from fear that a wolf should be obtruded upon them, after my
departure, without which assurance I would not have resigned it) and it being
thought by some to be better for the Church, that I should quietly resign,
then, by holding the place, to expose them to some inconveniences (which I
forbear to mention at this time) they freely consented to my resignation. Jn
testimony whereof the Churchwardens (in the name and service of the rest)
joined with me in all that was done about it. Thus I was freely dismissed by
the same power that called me to that ministry. The reasons, which inclined me
to preserve my liberty, were these. 1. the severity of the Canons against
those, who, having formerly subscribed, and conformed, do alter their
judgment and practice. 2. the Bishops own threatenings uttered to me, in
particular, formerly, that, in this case, I must expect, that they would be
more severe against me, then some others; because my example (he said) would
do more hurt. 3. J was satifyed, in my conscience, upon good grounds, that I
might do more service to the Church, by preserving the liberty of my person,
then by lying (and for ought I know, dying) in prison, and it may be, in close
prison. And in this resolution I was strengthened, as by good advise, so by
inward testimonies, that, in this course, I should more please God (all things
being considered) then in the other, being (as it seemed to me) guided
thereunto by the eye of God, whose providence fore showed me, both the danger,
and the way of escape, and by the mouth of God, whose word warranted me so to
do, and by the hand of God (as I have already shown) who strongly inclined my
spirit, upon the forementioned grounds, thereunto. So that I could not satisfye
my self, in these respects, that, if I should do otherwise, I could be free
from the guilt of tempting God. Thus I have ingenuously, and plainly reported
the truth. Wherein, if the Godly and judicious Reader shall find any thing
done by me, through humane infirmity, that agrees not with the rule, my humble
request is, that he will, in brotherly love, help me, with his light, that I
may be convinced thereof by the Scripture, and he shall find me ready to
receive a freindly and just rebuke, with due meekenes, and thanckfullnes. But,
if otherwise, he shall see cause to justifye my way (which, I thinck, if he
judge righteously, he will) let him suffer me to stand right in his good
opinion, and condemn himself, in the sight of God, if he have misjudged me.
As for the Answerer: Either let him convince me of sin in the premises, or
bear the just blame of an unjust reproof, or reproach rather, which is so
much the greater injury, as, by being printed, it is made more notorious and
scandalous.

After the buisenes of my resignation was in this manner transacted, I expected
peace, but behold new troubles. For another pursivant was sent out for me, who
gave out great threatenings. And this inclined me to accept of the motion from
these Countries, wherein, I thought, I might be safe in my person, and
proffitable, in the fruit of Gods blessing upon my labors to that Church, for
a time, and that, upon my absence, the displeasure conceived against me would
be mitigated, and my return, after a convenient time, would be made more safe.

3. For justifying of my inference, from his preaching against my resignation,
to prove that he never desired me for his Colleague, I need not use many words.
For if, before I came, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam?
he showed his aversenes, and after J came, he really hindered my settling there,
his actions speak it sufficiently so that my words, in this case are needles.

Sect. 10. examined, concerning my knowledge of their differences before my
coming over.
THat Roman Emperor, whom stories report to have spent so much time in
catching flies, might have been better employed in such thoughts as Ahasuerosh
had, when he could not sleep. The text says, Heb. 6.1,
He commanded them to bring the book of records, and they were read before
him. In like manner, the Answerer might well have spared this needles, useles
labor for enlarging this Section, and, in ste^d thereof, have condemned
himself for his unthanckfullnes, who, not only, has not recompensed the
kindness that has been done him, but has rewarded evil for good. And, that it
may more appear to all men, even in the Sections where my confidence in him
and kindness should be mentioned, there he labored most to injure me with
casting intimations to raise suspicions in men's minds causelessly. To be breife.
To what end are all these words?

Are they to prove that I had seen in wrighting a copy of the differences
between the Answerer and Mr. Hooker? J grant it, but withal I affirm three
things. 1. That it was long before I left London, and, when I was far from any
thoughts of coming into these parts, and leaving mine own land, and so had no
cause to fix my mind upon thoughts of those matters. 2. That my coming over
was but for 3 or 4 months. He that brought me over, those that wrote for me,
the friends I left behind, all know, and can witness it. The Answerer himself
knows, I told him so, when I first visited him. 3. That in Mr. H. answer to
the question, there does not appear light sufficient to inform any man what
that is, which in the Dutch custom about Baptism, he disliked. And, when he
propounded the question to me, about this matter, I did not understand, in what
particular, the difference between the Answerer and Mr. H. lay.

Or, secondly, Would he intimate that I saught the place, or went about to
intrude my self, for continuance? 1. Himself knows, that, when he, with one
of the Elders, presented to me a call from the Consistory, I did not suddenly
accept it (which I would have done, if I had so desired the place, as he
insinuates) but took time to consider of it, being not satisfied about the
lawfullnes of the conditions propounded to me. 2, Himself has reported that I
might have had the place, but I refused it: which is true, being understood in
that sense, wherein it is said of those worthyes, Heb. 11.35.
that they would not be delivered, viz, not upon unwarrantable, and ill
conditions. But this is sufficient to clear me of that imputation of
inordinately desiring that place.

Or, thirdly, Would he have his credulous Reader to suspect my truth, when I
say that I came over but for 3 or 4 months? Else, what mean those 4
praesumptions, which he insinuates to suggest the contrary? To which I will
answer breifely.

To the first, For a man of plausible gifts, eminent, and of fame, and wanting
present employment, to present himself where a place is vacant where much
contention has been etc. I answer. 1. For the titles which he gives me, I
account them, as they fall from his pen, but an honorable reproach. 2. For the
matter of it: Honorifica contumelia. Hieron ad Pammach: and Ocean.
The extreme necessity of the place, he being so weak and unfit to preach,
together with the importunity of those that solicited me, was the cause moving
me (who then was out of employment, and in continual danger) to come over to
that place, choosing rather to cast my self upon Gods providence, in perils of
the sea, and in a strange land, where I might be of some use to the Church, for
a time, then to live privately, but neither safely nor proffitably, in my own
land, in hope that 3 or 4 month would quiet, and pacifye their spirits, that
were most exasperated and incensed against me, without any just cause; that so
my return to my own land might be with safety and comfort. What if this might
give them occasion of seeking, and calling me? will it thence follow, that I
saught the place before I was called? or that I did intrude, or thrust my self
in for a Pastor? Page 16*
or that I run before I was sent, as he slandereth me before? No marvel, if
diverse learned and godly Ministers, being their neighbors in this country,
have been loath to show themselves in this place etc. least they should seem
to offer themselves unto this calling. For they knew the Answerers disposition
and spirit, and the contentions which have thereby been in this place, which if
I had known, so as now I do, no persuasions should have drawn me thither.
And it is very likely, that I had stayed at Rotterdam till the Eldership had
sent for me, as Mr. H. did, if the necessity of the place had not hurryed me
sooner, to prevent the shutting up of the Church doors, which (as I have been
told, and the event showed) would come to pass the next Lords day, if my
coming prevented it not. Yet two of the Elders, with some other members of the
Congregation, met me at Harlem, and accompanied me to Amsterdam, and took care
for my accommodation with a convenient intertaynment: and, the joy, that was
generally expressed soon after my being there was known, showed a great
desire in the members that they might enjoy me, And the Answerer himself, at
that time, acknowledged Gods good providence in my being there, at that time,
and jointly with the Elders, who were then present, when I first visited him,
entreated my help the Lords day following, and so long as my time would
permit, and their need should require.

To the second praesumption, that they that sent for me, and I. C. that fetched
me over, did not seek me but for 3 or 4 months; J answer. 1. Suppose their
desire was to enjoy me longer; will it thence follow, that I yielded for longer
time? 2. By what has been formerly said it appears sufficiently that I
agreed with him for no longer time, which himself is able and ready to
testifye. if it be required.

To the third praesumption; that the friend which by an open and unsealed
letter, which I brought unto him from London, entreated him to receive me for a
fellow helper, did not desire that for 3 or 4 months only.

Answer. I thinck, never did Laban search so narrowly Jacobs stuff to find his
Idols, as this Answerer does to find an untrueth in my assertion. To what end
is this brought in? If he thinck, or would persuade others, that I procured
that friends letter that I might obtain the place, he is much deceived. For
neither stands it with my judgment to seek a place (much less by such private
recommendations) nor need I the letters of any private friend, having a more
public testimony. And how little I minded that letter, may appear in this,
that I know not that it was unsealed, and, if indeed it was unsealed, I know
not at all what was written in it. It is likely, that, knowing the author of
it to be my approved friend, and one that has deserved well of the Answerer, I
supposed, he would commend me to him affectionately, to be lovingly
intertayned, and used by him in a strange Country, and so took no further heed
to it. But, what if that friend did entreat him to receive me for a
fellowhelper? Will it follow thence, that I saught it? who sees not the vanity
of these pretenses?

To the fourth praesumption. That it was not likely, that, after 3 or 4 months
preaching amongst them, I could easily be dismissed, and their labor and care
of seeking and calling another must be interruped, if not wholly broken off.

Answer. 1. Grant all this to be true: will it thence follow that I saught it?
2. Grant, that at the end of 3 or 4 months, I had accepted of a call to that
place (which it is probable, I should have done, if it had been offered upon
safe conditions, rather then to live without public employment) will it thence
follow, that I inordinately desired, or basely, or unworthily saught it, or
unwarrantably, or without a calling intruded my self? 3. what hindrance could
my mere preaching there be to their seeking, or calling another, if I should
refuse it? Let the indifferent Judge.

To what he says in the two following answers, about the necessity of my
knowing the state of the Dutch Churches, whet her I stayed here or not. I
Answer, that even for that Reason, my coming over was needful. For no man's
word or letters could make that so well known to me, as mine own observation,
and experience has done. But the suppositio^, whereupon he groundeth that
opinion, I do not approve. For, in some cases, a good conscience suffers a man
to be neutrall, viz, in those things which he is not bound to know or practice,
and wherein he has wanted occasion, or means of full informatio^. And what
hurt can that man be supposed to do, by private conference, who suspendeth his
judgment, and determines neither way? Are not these passages mere roapes of
sand?

Lastly. Whereas he seems to doubt, in the beginning of this Section, whether
I came not over with a discordant mind; I profess, in simplicity of my heart,
that I came over with a reverent esteem of him, and with confidence that I
should reap more fruits of his brotherly love then I have received, and was
far from any purpose of raising contention, which I naturally abhor, or
suspicion, that I should have met with such contentions, as I have been
troubled with, which if I had foreseen, J should never have come to Amsterdam.
Yet I do not repine at, but contentedly submit to that good hand of Divine
providence, which brought me hither, and is pleased this way to try me, and
do with a childelike submission and reverence (in my measure) kiss the rod in
my Fathers hand, even when I lament the unkindnes of my Elder brother, which
yet I would not have published, if he would have suffered me to be silent.

The Answer to the eleventh Section examined. Of the private conference had
with me after my coming over.
IN this Section three things are to be considered. 1. his gird at Mr. Hook: 2.
His partial and defective report of a conference between us. 3. his pretended
answer to some passages in my third wrighting. These we will examine severally
and breifely.

For the first. 1. the great disturbance, which here he seems to impute to
Mr. Hook: is to be charged upon himself, and his own violent and unjust
opposition against Mr. Hook: and the Church, and not at all to Mr. Hook: unles
by accident, as Paul might be said to be an occasion of the disturbance at
Ephesus, Ast. 19.22.
the cause whereof was Demetrius and his companions. 2. It would be known how
I seemed to accord with him, and to dislike Mr. Hook: opinions, in general? If
he mean, by my my silence, I confess, I heard him speak some things, at
which I was silent, being not called to speak. For himself said, that, in
some of their differences, he would not inquire after my opinion, being
persuaded that I was therein clear, And, in conclusion, pitched upon two
questions. 1. Concerning the power and authority of C^^sses, whereunto what I
answered he knows. 2. Concerning promiscuous administration of Baptism,
according to the custom of the Dutch Church in Amsterstam, wherein what I held
and do hold shall appear.

For the second. By comparing this report with my noates of our conferences
(which I wrote upon my return to my lodging whilst matters were fresh in
memory) I find it to be partial and defective.

First, partial, in declaring the state of the question, which was not as he
intimates, but thus. After an hystoricall narration made by him of a
difference between the Classis and Mr. Hook; about a custom, which the
Ministers of the Dutch Church in Amsterdam have, of baptizing all that are
brought by whomsoever, he asked me what I thought of it. I desired (for my
satisfaction) to know wh^t their custom was, being then, in part, ignorant
thereof. He told me, that they baptized all, refusing none. I replied, that I
would baptize all their infants, who were members of his Church, refusing none.
He said, that is not sufficient. I, desiring to carry matters with all possible
peaceablenes, told him that I would not refuse to baptize others also, which
were no members of his Church, if I were satisfied concerning the Parents, and
instanced in such as might occasionally be there from England, and were
sufficiently known to me. But yet the case might be such, in some others, as I
should not adventure to do it. He answered. But here they except none, but
baptize all that are brought, though the parents be not known, or the infant
be presented, in the f^thers absence, by persons unknown. I told him, that, I
hoped, such cases were seldom, especially in the English Church. He said, it
must be expected to fall out often. I told him, I should desire to be satisfied
concerning the parents, before the child were presented. He said. They would
often bring them, in sermon time, without giving any notice before, and, in
such a case, to refuse any, would give offense, if the child should be
unbaptized. I replied, that offense may be prevented, seeing those, whom I dare
not admit, may repair to the Dutch Church, where none are refused. He added,
that it would give offense to the Classis, if our Church should not do as they
did, in this. I answered, the difference between the small English Church, and
the vast Dutch Church in the same town being considered, that might easily be
answered.

By all which it appears that the thing which I refused (and whereupon our
difference arose) was the promiscuous administration of baptism to all that
are presented, by whomsoever; and not that J made the parents submission to my
private examination a necessary condition of baptism, but only I propounded it
as a prudent mean for avoiding that promiscuous baptizing which he required.
Thus the Reader may see the report to be partial.

Secondly, it is defective, not mentioning diverse passages of discourse
between us, which I will but point at. As about an order in the Classis, which
he said was for this, concerning which, what I demanded and, what he answered,
I will, for this time, conceal, as also what he spoke about this custom being
always observed in that Church, as also about passages that, he said, had been
between the Classis, and Mr. Forbes about Mr. Hooker, in reference to this
question. He omitteth also our discourse about the case of an unbaptized Turk
presenting his child to baptism, with no other profession then that which is
required in their Church. And how he thought it to be more for a man's
satisfaction, to baptize all, upon the injunction of the Classis, then to
refuse any, upon his own judgment. Other passages also I could name, but
these may suffice, to show that his memory has not retained particulars so
well as my noates, at least, that this report is defective. But let us consider
his Arguments.

The arguments for promiscuous baptizing. 1 From Reasons.
He mentions 2 sorts of arguments, which he used in that conference to
convince me. The first consisted of reasons, the second of Scriptures alleged
against my opinion.

First, the reasons were two. 1. the scandal of the Brownists. 2. the offense
of the Church. In both which he should have set down my answers also, which
seeing he neglected, I will now set down truly, according the to substance of
my answer, and yet breifely.

1. The scandal of the Brownists
To the first. I answer. 4 things. in this point is such (as the Answerer
knows) that there is no fear of their insulting, or being hardened thereby.
4. the French Churches and some other Dutch Churches, viz, in Zealand. and
England etc. are not so large in this practice as they in Amsterdam.

To the second. I answer. 1. That the ways propounded by me for accommodation,
2. The offense of the Church

Ans. Means: propounded for accommodation. A Copy of a wrighting showing.


were sufficient (as I conceive) to prevent any offense of the Church. These
ways I will now relate in the words wherein I wrote them to a friend to enable
him to acquaint the Dutch preachers with the truth in this matter. This
wrighting was dated and delivered by me, for the use aforesaid, the 10 of Ian:
newstile, 1634. Wherein I spoke of my self in the third person, for good
reason, at that time.

Sir, because you are willing to take pains for the accommodation of this
difference, you shall, in few words, understand. 1. the true state of the
question. 2. the reasons of his answer. 3. the way of accommodation, which will
best satisfye him, which I leave with you in wrighting, for the help of your
memory.

First, the question is, 1. The state of the question.
whether he will baptize all children who are presented to the Church, though
the parents be no members? His answer was, and is, that this cannot be answered
otherwise then according to cases. He may not say, that he will baptize none:
and he dare not say, that he will baptize all, but this he says. There are
cases where in he will baptize such as are not members of this Church, and yet
the cases may be such, as, in them, he shall refuse to administer it to others.

Secondly the reasons of his answer, 2. Reasons of my answer.
besides others (which to him seem weighty) in reference to this particular
place, are two. 1. the promiscuous mixture of all languages, and sects, amongst
which also are many Libertines, which are of no Church, and, for aught is
known, many parents, who themselves never were baptized, will, in policy,
present their children thereunto, 2. the custom of this place, which has been
to refuse none, though presented in the sermon time (without notice given
before) by a nurse, or any one, neither of the parents appearing in it, or
being known, or enquired after, nor any sufficient assurance given for the
education of the children, in that faith, which is there professed, and that
confession of faith being expressed and demanded by the minister, in a
language, which they that present the child, some times understand not, and in
this act boath the ministers must join,

3. Three means of accommod^tion.
Thirdly, for accommodation; He desires that, at least, these three things may
be agreed upon.

First, That this Sacrament be administered by the ministers severally not
jointly (as the Lords supper is) either only by him that preaches, or only by
him that preaches not, at that time, in their several courses, respectively:
whereby, the discovery of any difference, in particular cases, between them
may be prevented, and mutual concord between themselves may be preserved,
boath being left free to walk according to their light, in such particulars,
wherein their opinions may differ.

Ob. Ans.
"But this is not according to the order of the Dutch Church?

Nor will they expect, that we should have no particular order different from
them; seeing they are constrained to take up some customs, by occasion of their
multitudes, which are not so necessary, or requisite to be used in lesser
Congregations, such as this is.

Secondly, That the party, who shall present the child, resort to the Minister
(into whose course it falls to baptize*) a day or two before, to the end that
he may inform himself concerning the parents etc. By which course, all
public disturbance in the face of the Congregation, will be prevented.





Thirdly, That they, who ^e allowed by the Minister to present the child, shall
be able to speak, or, at least, to understand the English tongue, that the
Congregation be not deluded by a seeming profession of faith uttered by the
Minister, and answered by the party, in such form of words as is dictated to
him by some that stand by* but himself understands not.

By this relation the Reader may see how easily the imagined inconveniences
might have been prevented, if the Answerer had been willing thereunto.

Secondly, It is not true, that all the Church generally would tak^ offenc^ (as
he says) to see a double practice. For, at that time, all the Church generally
desired that some course might be agreed upon, for accommodation in this
matter, and, to this day, they dislike the Answerers stiffnes and aversnes
thereunto. And what double practice could they see, in the way which I
propounded for accommodation? Whereby how easily might all offense have been
prevented! But he would not. No, though some of the Dutch preachers wished it
might have been so, and all, I am persuaded, would have been contented
therewith.



Whereunto I answer. That will not follow.

Secondly. The Scriptures alleged* he says, were two, from whence he showed,
that when so great multitudes were at once baptized by John Baptist. Mat. 3.
Mark. 1. and by the Apostles Acts. 2. there could not be a strict private
examination of every particular person etc.

Ans. To these Scripture instances I will answer severally, as I then did.

First ^o the instance of John's Baptising. 1. The text says. They were
baptized of John in Jordan confessing their sins. Whence it is manifest that
John was satisfied concerning their fitnes to be baptized, before he admitted
them. And that is all that I require. 2. How will it appear that so many were
baptized of him at once? I rather am of opinion, that those places do contain
the story of the wholl time of John's Ministry, so far as concerns his
baptism, in which time multitudes might be baptized by him, and yet he
sufficiently informed concerning their fitnes to partake of it.

2. To Act. 2.
Secondly, To the instance of 3000 souls baptized by Peter in on^ ^^ay, I
answered, that I desire no better satisfaction concerning men, in this case,
then Peter had concerning those 3000. souls. For. 1. Their very joining to the
Church, by public profession, in those times of persecution, was a better
sign of faith and repentance, then some public confession in words is now, in
time of peace. For, then it was a reproach, now it is an honor to profess
Christianity. 2. The text says. They were pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37.
and faid unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what
shall we do? Thereupon Peter preached unto them the doctrine of faith, and
repentance, and new obedience, and after this, observed what fruit the word
brought forth, and accordingly dispensed the Sacrament. For the text faith.
Verse. 41.
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized. Where the particle
[(...), they] is diacriticall, and restrictive, and serves, both to
distinguish between them, and others, that did not so receive the word, and to
limit the dispensation of baptism by the Apostles, at that time, to those only.

Whereas he says. By conference of other Scriptures, their confession of
their sins, and profession of faith were rather to be conceived some solemn
and public testification of t^eyre consent unto the doctrine that was preached
unto them etc.

I answer. 1. he should have set down those other Scriptures, which, being
conferred with these, decl^re so much, that we might have understood his
meaning. 2. I demand, whether that solemn and public testification of their
consent unto the doctrine preached, did not give sufficient ground to John
Baptist and Peter of persuasion that they had repented and did believe. If so;
I desire no more. If not; how are the one sort said to confess their sins
so, as to declare their repentance? For, so it must be understood, as
appears. 1. In that John's baptism is called the baptism of repentance, for
remission of sins. 2. In his discourse with the publicans and soldiers that
came to him to be baptized. 3. In that the Pharisees, and Lawyers are said to
reject the counsel of God, against themselves, being not baptized of him.
Again. Else why are those of the other sort, whom Peter baptized said to
receive the word gladly, and to believe etc. Was there, in all this, no more
then such a testification of consent unto the doctrine preached, as is made in
the Dutch Church, in saying Yae, or nodding the head, when, it may be, they
understand not one word that is spoken? Or had Peter and John no other
knowledge of the persons, whom they baptized, then they have, who administer it
promiscuously to all that are brought, by whomsoever, refusing none?

Now, seeing the Answerer used no other Arguments, in conference, then these,
the wise hearted Reader, I thinck, will not wonder that by such private
conferences he prevayled nothing with me, in this point.

As for the third particular observeable in this Section, viz, his pretended
answers to some passages in my third wrighting.

First, About the report of my refusing to dispute or conferr about this point,
when he desired it, seeing he denies that he so reported, and confesses the
contrary, I am satisfied.

Secondly, About his desire of having the question in wrighting discussed
between us, seeing J have said some thing in answer to the third Section I will
say no more, but this, the motion was not aequall, nor did any propound it to
me.

Thirdly, where as he says, that he remembers not that ever I propounded any
Argument, in maintenance of mine opinion, the Reader may see how little his
memory is to be trusted in these reports, unles the profaning of Gods
ordinance, and the encouragement of Libertines, be not unlawful, which I
showed to be inseperably joined with this promiscuous baptising.

Fourthly, Whereas he loadeth me with reproaches, for wrighting down, when I
came home to my lodging, the speeches between us, without his knowledge, I am
so far from conceiving my self to be guilty of any fault therein, that I wish
heartily he had taken the same course, and then, I hope, the Reader should not
have been abused with so many misreports, as now he is, by the fault of his
memory. As for me; foreseing to what issue things might come, and distrusting
my memory, that I might be able to report the truth, I wrote down passages, as
I could remember, whilst things were yet fresh in memory, and kept the
wrighting, to this day, secret, having never shown it to any man, nor have, at
this time, related some things which, I thinck, the Answerer would be loath to
hear of in print, and those which he compels me to utter, I report
sparingly. Let the Godly Reader judge what offense I have committed herein, or
what injury he has done in such expressions, as he uses upon this occasion,
yea, whether it be not plain railing.

Fifthly, He pretends that, in my first wrighting to the Classis, J offend,
both in excess, and in defect. This is a mere cavil: which will appear, if
all that he says be granted, against which nevertheles* I have just exception.
But be it, that his question was, as he says: What measure of knowledge I
would, in my examination, require of parents for the baptising of their
children. Yet 1. Was this the only question? was not that question, which is
mentioned in my letter to the Classis, put by him? yea, was not that the
principal question? Else, it was not to the purpose. Was nothing else
propounded by me to be considered, in this case, but such a degree of
knowledge? If so; why did I except against professed Libertines, who may have
more knowledge then some members of the Church?

As for my answer to it, that the measure of knowledge could not be declared,
till the time of examining the persons; Let the Reader judge, whether a more
satisfactory answer could be given to that question, and whether it be from the
point, about which his question was.

Sixthly, His answer to what J wrote of my not ceasing, till he gave over, of
leaving it to the Dutch preachers, and of his saying, that he would speak no
more with me alone, is a plain concession that ^ll I say concerning that is
true. Only, he says, he did not say it then, whereas the time, when he said
it, is not mentioned in my wrighting, wherein I say only that I ceased not,
till he said so, and against that he says nothing.

His Answer to the 12. Sect. examined, containing the counsel of the five
Dutch ministers for my acco^modation.
IN this Section the Answerer does, in his policy, so express the ways of
accommodation propounded by others, as may best conduce to the justifying of
his way, and to the reflecting of some suspicion of obstinacy upon me, for not
yielding thereunto, but how truly let the Reader judge, upon the examination
of particulars.

Mr. Pots had long joined with him, in that order of administration of
Baptism, which he required me to observe.]

Secondly. He intimates that this advise of the five Dutch Preachers for
accommodation proceeded from his willingness to accommodate me.] If this were
really so; why did the Answerer refuse all the means of accommodation, which I
propounded, and knowing that no way would accommodate me, but that which would
secure me from future trouble about this matter, when he had rejected that
which would have ended the difference, seems willing to yield to any other
way. What is this, but, as when a man that has promised to do any kindness
that another shall request at his hands, being entreated to help him, in such
a straight, with money or countenance (or the like, his case necessarily
requiring it, and the other being very well able to do it) he should answer, I
will do any thing but this. Will any man value the freindship, or fair
pretenses of such an one.

Thirdly. He produces a Copy of the advice of the Dutch preachers set down in
wrighting by themselves in his house, in Dutch, thence, by the appointment of
the rest, one of them translated it into latin (which was sent to me) and now
is by him out of latin translated into English. Now that the Reader may see
how much he is abused, by this false translation of that wrighting, I will
publish (...), the very wrighting it self verbatim, without alteration of a
syllable as I received it from them, and then compare this translation with it.

The Latin copy, word for word.
Nos infra-scripti Pastores Ecclesiae Belgicae in civitate Amsteldamensi, a
viro Reverendo D. Pageto, fideli pastore in Ecclesia Anglicana ejusdem
civitatis, nec non a venerandis fratribus Senioribus ac Diaconis ejusdem
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, specialiter requisiti ac fraterne rogati, ut privatum
nostrum judicium in causa vocationis (quae ab universa Ecclesia praedicta
videtur expeti) Reverendi, Clarissimi, Doctissimique viri D. DAVENPORTII
sincere declarare, atque exponere non recusemus, idque in casu illo unico
particulari, spectante Baptismum eorum. infantium, qui in Ecclesia Anglicana
baptizandi offeruntur; Re tota utrinque been intellecta, rite perpensa, et ad
normam Verbi Dei, ordinemque receptum in Ecclesijs Reformatis harum
Provinciarum, in quibus praedicta Ecclesia Anglicana sese membrum profiretur
sub Class Amsteldamensi, probe examinata, sincere, ac coram Deo, in bona
conscientia responsum damus, atque declaramus; Nihil magis nobis in votis esse,
quam ut praedictus D. Davenportius cujus insignis eruditio, et singularis
pietas ab omnibus fratribus Anglicanis apprime probatur; laudaturque quemque
hoc ipso nomine, nec non ob alias virtutes ejus laudabiles, etiam ipsi D.
Pageto charissimum esse intelligimus, ad ministerium Ecclesiae Anglicanae
praedictae legitime promoveatur. Bonum insuper ipsius Zelum ac studium de
parentum ac susccptorum istorum liberorum praeuio aliquo examine privato in
religione Christiana instituendo, quam maxim quidem nobis probari, de re ipsa
tamen ita nos statuere, ut praedictum illud examen, quantum Ecclesiae
Anglicanae feret aedificatio, instituatur, sed si forte vel parents,
susceptoresve istud accedere ac subire renuant, vel ob temporis brevitatem, aut
alijs justis de causis fieri illud non queat, vel etiam qui accesserint,
fratris vel fratrum examinantium judicio non videbuntur, pro isto tempore,
satisfacere, ipse infans cujus parents, susceptoresve constat esse
Christianos, quique Christianam religionem, ad lectionem liturgiae Sacramenti
Baptismi public coram Ecclesia profitentur, a Baptismo propterea minime
arceatur, aut baptizari recusetur, sed ut ejusmodi ignorantes parents,
susceptoresve, post infantem baptizatum ulterus postea, quoad fieri potest,
edoceantur; quoniam, scilicet, infantes Christianorum suorum parentum,
susceptorumve, vel inscitiam, vel etiam ejusmodi inobedientiam far ac luere
non debent. Si quis tamen casus ullus alius obveniat, quo minus infans oblatus
baptizandus videatur, ut tum totius presbyterij Anglicani, vel etiam, si
necesse fuerit, aut commode fieri possit, Classis Amsteldamensis judicium
interveniat, audiatur, atque in eo acquiescatur. Sic actum, et transactum in
aedibus D. Pageti. Die 20. Ianuarij 1634.

Ioannes le Mairius. Iacobus Triglandius. Henricus Geldorpius. Rudolphus Petri.
Iacobus Laurentius.



2. The translation word for word.
We the underwritten Ministers of the Dutch Church in the city of Amsterdam,
being specially and lovingly requested and desired of the Reverend Mr. PAGET, a
faithful Pastor i^ the English Church of the same city, as also the the
Reverend brethren the Elders and Deacons of the same English Church, that we
would not refuse sincerely to declare and show our private judgment about the
calling of the Reverend, most famous, and learned Mr. DAVENPORT, which seems
to be desired of the whole Church aforesaid; and that in this particular case
alone, concerning the Baptism of those infants, which are offered to be
baptized in the English Church: having well understood and duly weighed the
whole matter, on both sides, and having thoroughly examined it, according to the
rule of Gods word, and the order received in the Reformed Churches of these
Provinces, in which the aforesaid English Church does profess it self a
member, under the Classis of Amsterdam, we do sincerely, and in the presence
of God, with good conscience answer, and declare, that we desire nothing more,
then that the foresaid Mr. DAVENPORT, whose notable learning and singular piety
is much approoved and commended of all the English our brethren; whom also, in
this regard, and for his other commendable gifts, we understand to be most
dear unto Mr. PAGET, may be lawfully promoted unto the Ministry of the English
Church aforesaid: we do also greatly approove of his good Zeal and care of
having some precedent private examination of the parents, and sureties of these
children in the Christian Religion; yet, touching the matter it self, we do
so judge, that this aforesaid examination be ordained, so far as may stand
with the edification of the English Church; but if happily the parents or
sureties shall refuse to come, and undergo this examination, or if, for the
shortness of time, or, for other just causes, it can not be done, or, if those
that do come, shall not seem, for that time, to satisfye the judgment of the
Brethren, one or more that do examine them, that yet the infant, whose parents
and sureties are manifest to be Christians, and which publicly before the
Church do profess Christian Religion at the reading of the leiturgie of the
Sacrament of Baptism, shall not therefore be excluded or deprived thereof* but
that such ignorant parents and sureties be further instructed, after the infa^t
be baptized, to wit, because the infa^ts of Christians ought not to bear and
suffer the punishment of the ignorance, or yet of such disobedience of their
parents, or sureties. If yet any other case fall-out, whereby it may seem that
the infant presented should not be baptized, that then the judgment of the
whole English Presbytery, or also, if need be, and if conveniently it may be
done, that the judgment of the Classis of Amsterdam be obtained and rested in.

So was it done and transacted in the house of Mr. PAGET the 28. day of January
1634.

Here it must be noated that the Answerer pretends to publish this wrighting.
1. So as it was done* and transacted in his house the 28. day of January 1634.
2. So as it was written down and read before him, when they enquired of him,
whether he, for his part, did rest therein, and he signified his consent with
them. These things being premised, J demand, by what pretense, will the
Answerer defend or excuse this his translation. Let me, without offense, desire
to know, why he has translated quorum parents, susceptoresve constat esse
Christianos, whose parents and suretyes are manifest to be Christians? when,
according to their wrighting, it should be translated whose parents or suretyes
are manifest to be Christians? Here is [or] a disjunctive particle changed into
[and] a particle copulative, to the manifest alteration of the sense of their
words. That this is not the error of the printer, but done purposely, by the
author, appears from his constant private report, that I refused to baptize
the children of such, whose parents were manifest Christians. To make this
good, the Reader has a false translation obtruded upon him. I demand
therefore, if that disjunctive expression of the five Duth Ministers in their
wrighting [viz, parents, or suretyes] were justifyable, why does he alter it
into a copulative expression. [viz parents, and suretyes?] If it were not
justifyable, why did he signify his consent with them, and that he, for his
part, rested therein? 2. Why am J blamed, yea, rejected, for not resting in it?
what will he, what can he say, in excuse thereof? That the Dutch preachers were
willing afterward, upon my showing my dislike, to change [ve into que] or,
into, and, and therefore he altered it. I answer 1. such a thing was in speech,
but never done: for when we began to take pen and paper and to wright down
agreements on both sides, after some little discourse, they altered their minds,
saying that they had no commission to make any agreements, till they had
acquainted the Classis therewith, which they would do. And after that time,
they never spoke more of altering any thing. So it stood, and stands to this
day unaltered. 2. Suppose it had been altered by them (as it was not) yet the
Answerer will have no advantage thereby: for he professes to translate it
according to that copy, wherein he signified his consent with them, and
required that I should rest, which is apparently falsified.

Fourthly, He blames me for complaining that he dealt extremely with me, and
rejected all my labor for a peaceable composing, prudent accommodating, and
brotherly ending of matters between him and me privately, or by the counsel
of the Elders of his own Church, nor would hearken to my advise without
consent of the Classis. All these reports, he says, are untruths. And this
wrighting, he says, witnesses for him, etc. Three things I affirm in those
wrightings, and they are all true.

First, that he rejected my labor for accommodation. The truth of that
appears in that himself said, in the beginning of this Section, that he
offered, that if any other convenient way of accommodation could be found out,
he would willingly hearken to it: Let it be noated that he says, any other,
and thereby plainly refused that which was propounded by me? else why is any
other way saught.

Secondly, that he would not yield any brotherly moderation unto me, and
refused all means of accommodation. The truth hereof appears in the means
which he embraced, or, rather put those Ministers upon to propound to me
(having praepossessed them with causeles jealousyes) when it is required, that
I should rest in a wrighting (which himself is loath to translate aright, that
the Reader may know the wholl truth) wherein I am advised to ^aptize all
children, whose parents, or suretyes are Christians, by which accommodation, I
shall be brought to do the thing which I judge unlawful. For, if a Christian
surety may give right to an infant for baptism, whose parents are neither of
them Christians, and such midwives, or nurses, or others as take no future care
of the child may pass for suretyes, and must be accounted manifest Christians,
if they nodd the head, or say yae, at the reading or pronouncing of the
formalier by the minister, though no man knows what they are, nor themselves,
it may be, understand a word that is said to them; who sees not that the
sacred ordinance of Baptism is hereby made common, and so to be promiscuously
administered, according to this wrighting?

Thirdly, that he would not hearken to my advice without consent of the
Classis. 1. That this is true, he must confess, unles he will deny his own
words: for himself said so to me, and he knows it, 2. The event shows it.
For though he would have me to rest in this wrighting (without consent of the
Classis) yet he well knew this to be no way of accommodation, hut a mere snare
to me.

And now, because the Answerer, not only seems to charge me with obstinacy
for not resting in that determination of the five ministers, but also to insult
as if J wanted warrant from the Scripture for mine opinion, because I did not
set it down in wrighting, that the question might be in wrighting discussed
between us, Sect. 11.
which he offered (as he says) to some of the Complainants sundry times,
(though the vanity of this pretense is in the former Section, declared, yet,)
being thus again challenged in print, I may not, without injury to the truth,
any longer forbear to give a public account of my judgment in this matter.
But first my humble and hearty request to the Reverend ministers of these
countries (especially to those in that part) is, that they will not impute it
to any contentious disposition, or to love of disputes, much less to a
malicious desire of discovering their imperfections to the world, least of all
to an arrogant polupragmony in me, as if I, being a stranger, assumed to my
self to be a reformer of these Churches, that I freely declare the grounds,
whereupon I refused to bind my self to observe that custom. Thus casting my
self upon their favorable construction, and praying them aequally and
judiciously to consider what J say, I will, with Gods assistance, (which I
humbly beg) proceed to declare my grounds after I have stated the question, by
showing the issue and sum of that wrighting of the five ministers, wherein
the Answerer would bind me to rest.

The state of the question.
Briefly, it was, that I should administer the sacrament of Baptism to all
infants that are presented thereunto, if those that present them (whether they
be parents, or suretyes) shall declare themselves to be Christians, by
professing Christian Religion, at the reading of the leitourgy of Baptism,
though the presenters are altogether unknown to us, yea, though they will not,
or cannot satisfye the minister before, that they are such, as in whom the
infant has a right to baptism. This to be so, will easily appear to the
intelligent Reader, if he examine the wrighting which they sent to me. The
Answerer and the five ministers required it, as a condition of my admittance to
the pastoral office, in that Church, that I should rest in this wrighting. By
resting in it they meant (as both, he and they whom the Classis deputed to
speak with me, expressed themselves) that I should promise to conform
thereunto: which is, in few words, to administer baptism promiscuously to all
that are presented, by whomsoever, according to the custom of that place.

This being the true state of the question, that the validity of my grounds
against this custom may appear, I must crave leave to premise some things, 1.
Concerning the confused mixture of all sorts of people in Amsterdam. 2.
Concerning their manner of admitting those that are brought to baptism. 3.
Concerning the manner of professing Christian Religion at the reading of the
leitourgy of Baptism.

Job. 30.5.
under the name of soldiers, and others, who are driven forth from among men
(as Job speaks) They cry after them as after a theife, V. 8.
children of fools, yea children of base men, viler then the earth, and
swarms of vagabonds, whom they call potters, which how-soever they range most
in troops, with their Harlots, in the Dorpes, yet they have their lurking
places in tapp-houses in the cittyes, called smuckle houses. It were almost an
infinite and impossible task to reckon up others which can give no account of
their life, religion, or baptism, it may be. Also many, who are unknown, and
therefore may be suspected. And these are of diverse nations, English, French,
Dutch, High Germans, Walloones. etc.



yae, to such dema^ds as are made by the minister, in reading the leitourgy of
baptism, though (as some times it appears, and may be often suspected) the
presenter understand not what the minister demands, or says, for want of
knowledge of the Dutch language, or be altogether unkowne to the Church, yet
the child is baptized.

These things being premised, I proceed to set down my grounds from the
Scripture, whereupon I refused thus promiscuously to administer the Sacrament,
which are four, and every one of them concludes it to be a sin, so to do.



That it is a profaning of the Sacrament who can deny, that acknowledges the
Sacrament then to be profaned, when it is communicated to those to whom (by
Gods appointment) it appertains not? And that, if the Sacrament be
administered to all comers, as that wrighting requires, it will be administered
to many such he that denies may as well deny that it is day with us when the
Sunshineth in this hemispaere. But that I may not be thought to broach some new
and singular opinion, let us considered what learned and eminent lights in the
Churches, in several ages and countries, have declared concerning this matter,
whose judgments I purpose to cull and single out, in such sort as becomes
one who would testifye and declare the truth rather by the weight of the
matter, then by the number of men.

Whittak: prelect. de Sacram: quest: 2, de necessit: Bapt: Cap 3.
Dr. Whittaker used this Argument against Bellarmine contending for the simple
and absolute necessity of Baptism to Salvation. For to prove that infants
dying without Baptism might be saved, he showed that the righteousness of faith
belongs to them before they are baptized, out of Rom: 4.11. Rom: 4.11 P. 237.
238.
where Circumcision and so Baptism) is called a seal of the righteousness
which is by faith: and thence he infers, that they must have a right to
Christ before Baptism, else baptism it self, being administered to them, will
be profaned; as the kings seal is profaned, if it be put to a false charter or
grant. This he amplifyeth by showing that baptism is a symbol and seal of
Adoption in Christ, and therefore aught not to be given to those that have no
part in Christ, because the seal follows the gift, and therefore to give the
seal to him that has not the gift, and to whom the promise is not made, is to
abuse the seal, and to profane it. Thus he.

Beza cont: Erast: Arg: 6. P. 60. Mat: 7.6. 1 Cor. 4.1 P: 61. 1 Pet. 3.
Beza, wrighting against Erastus, speaks to the same purpose, The Lord
forbids to give holy things to Dogs, Mat: 7.6. By holy things, says he,
are meant those holy mysteries whereof the ministers of Christ are dispensers,
1. Cor: 4.1. and the swine and dogs are those obstinate sinners, who are
convicted and judged by the Church to be such. Afterward, he puts a case of
one of years that desires baptism, and is ready to make profession of his
faith, but leads a wicked life, and being called upon (according to the other
demand in baptism) to profess his repentance and amendment of life, by
forsaking such and such evils, as are there mentioned, he refuses to do it.
Thereupon he asks Erastus, whether he thinck that the Sacrament of
regeneration should be given to such a man, impudently desiring it? or whether
he should not rather be repelled thence with shame? Again (which comes nearer
to the case of infants) showing how little the profession of faith will
advantage such, who, by reason of their obstinacy in sin, are convicted, and
judged by the Church to be swine and dogs, and that their estate is the worse
for their profession that they know God, Titus 1.16.
when in their works they deny him, he instanceth in Ismaell, and Esau, who
were boath circumcised and outwardly acknowledged the true God with Abraham and
Isaac, yet boath were disinherited and made lively patterns, both to that,
and succeeding ages, of Ecclesiastical excommunication etc. Thus far he. From
whence, how easily may it be collected that infants are deprived of right to
those holy mysteryes in such parents, as the Ismaelites, and Edomites were
deprived of right to Circumcision, in Ismael and Esau, though their parents had
been circumcised?

Before boath these, Mr. Cartwright declared the same thing more fully and
particularly to the case in question, Mr. Cart: Reply to Dr. W: in defense of
the Adm: p: 137.
upon the same ground. For Dr. W. (upon occasion of the sound faith and good
behavior of the parents required in the Admonition) asking the authors of
that book, What if the infant be the child of a Drunkard? what if it be of a
harlott? shall not (says he) the infant be baptized? Mr. Cartwright answers
thus. Because I see that Mr. Doctor does make of the holy Sacrament of baptism
(which is an entry into the house of God, and whereby the family of God must
enter) a common passage, whereby he will have clean and unclean, holy and
profane, as well those that are without the covenant, as those that be with in
it, to pass by, and so makes the Church no household, but an Jnne to receive
whatsoever comes; I will answer. If one of the parents be, neither drunkard,
nor adulterer, the child is holy, by virtue of the covenant, for one of the
parents sake: if they be boath, and yet not obstinate in their sin, whereby
the Church has proceeded to excommunication (themselves being yet of the
Church) their child cannot, nor aught not to be refused. To the second
question, wherein he asks, what if the child be of papists or heretics? If
boath be papists or condemned heretics (if so be J may distinguish papists
from heretics) and cut off from the Church, their children can not be
received; because they are not in the covenant. If either of them be faithful;
I have answered before, that the infant aught to be received. To other
questions, wherein he asks, what, if they err in some points of matters of
faith? If it be an error, and be not in those points that raze the foundations
of faith, because they still, notwithstanding that error, are to be accounted
amongst the faithful, their children pertain to the promise, and therefore to
the Sacrament of the promise.

Dr. W. p. 111.
Else where he demands, whether a wicked father may have a good child, a
papist or heretic father a beleiving child? Yes verily may they (says he) So
may have, and have the Turckes, and Jews, and yet their children are not to be
received, unles their faith does first appear by confession. But, you say, the
papists and heretics be baptized, and so are not the Jews and Turcks? Their
baptism, being cut off from the Church, makes them as much strangers unto it,
as was Ismael, and Esau, which albeit they were circumcised, yet, being cast
out of the Church, they were no more to be accounted to be of the body of Gods
people, then those which never, were in the Church. The same author, in his
next Reply to the same Doctor reasoning out of Beza in his epistles, that the
papists are to be compared with the Israelites with fell away from true
Religion, ^dem. 2 Reply concerning Church discipl: Tract: 11
and not with the Idumaeans, answers. This cannot help him, unles he first
show that the infants of those Apostates were lawfully circumcised. For, if
they were not circumcised, by Gods order and constitution, but rather at the
lust and pleasure of those, which, being fallen away from the covenant, ceased
not to put to the seal, as if they had been still within the covenant, it
follows, that, in this respect, there is no more succor for the papists, in
such resemblance with such Israelits, then when they are matched with the
Ismaelites or Idumaeans.

Mr, Cartwright his judgment is the more to be regarded in in this matter,
because what he wrote in those Replies, he wrote as a public agent, in the
name, and with the concurrent judgment of many worthy ministers, who pleaded
for the purity of Christ's ordinances, at that time. So that it is not to be
accounted his singular opinion, but the judgment of many m^n of eminent noate.

Master I: del'Espine minister of the word in the Church of Angers, upon a
most dreadful Apostasy, Mr. I: del'Espine Treat: of Apostasy.
and revolt of many from the profession of the truth, in the Churches of Anjou,
on St. Bartholomeus day memorable for ever and infamous for that bloody
massacre, wrote a learned and excellent treatise against those that persisted
in their Apostasy, wherein he proves them to be deprived of God, of Christ, of
the Spirit, and of those means whereby they may come unto God, that they have
no faith, and are without the Church, and that they are deprived of the
Sacraments, as well as of the word, of baptism as well as the supper of the
Lord. For their baptism no more serves them for a token to testifye and
declare them to be members of the Church, from which they are separated, or
that they pertayne any longer to the Father, to the Son, or to the Holy
Ghoast whose house and dwelling place they have forsaken. As if a Knight having
received that order of the King, and taken the accustomed oaths, if afterward
he should depart from the troth which he had given, in token whereof he should
send him back his order to signifye to him that he would afterward be freed and
released from his oath: So the Apostates, having given over the covenant of
God, have also, by the same means, forsaken the tokens and marks thereof,
etc.

Before all these, Johannes a Lasco, Anno 1550.
a learned noble man of Poland obtained of Edw: 6. K. of England, of famous
memory, that the Churches of strangers in London, principally of Germans, might
have the liberty of their Religion, under the broad seal of England, which was
by that most pious Prince graciously granted, not without the approbation of
renowned Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and other eminently learned and
godly men, at that time. What their care was to prevent the profanation of
this Sacrament by such a promiscuous admission of all, as is practiced in this
place, will appear in his own report, which I do translate from the latin
copy, thus.

Baptism in our Church is administered in the public assembly of the Church,
after the public sermon. For, John: A. Lasco. lib Forma ac Ritus tota eccles:
minist: p. 117
seeing Baptism does so belong to the wholl Church, that none aught to be
driven thence which is a member of the Church, nor to be admitted to it, which
is not a member of it; truly it is aequall that that should be performed
publicly in the assembly of the wholl Church which belongs to the wholl
Church in common. Forma ac Ritus administ. Bapt.
And Paul testifyeth that, by Christ's ordinance, the Church it self, without
excepting any member of it, is to be accounted clean (or holy) by the Ministry
of Baptism. Whence we may easily see, that Baptism does, neither belong to
those who are altogether without the Church, nor may be be denied to any
members of the Church. Now seeing our Churches are, through Gods blessing, so
instituted by the Kings Matie, that they may be, as it were, one parish of all
strangers dispersed thorough the wholl city, or one body corporated (as it is
called in the Kings grant) and yet, in the mean space, all strangers do not
join themselves to our Churches (yea, there are many, who, whilst they turn
from, and fly all Churches, will pretend to the English Churches that they are
joined with us, and to us that they are joined with the English Churches, and
so do abuse both them and us) we, least the English Churches, and the
Ministers thereof should be deceived by the impostures of such men (and that
under color of our Churches) do baptize their infants alone, who have
adjoined themselves to our Churches, by public confession of faith, and
observation of Ecclesiastical discipline. And that our Churches may be
certain that the infants, which are to be baptized, are their seed, who have
joined themselves to our Churches, in manner aforesaid; the father of the
infant to be baptized, if he can possibly do it, or other men or women of
notable esteem (or credit) in the Church do offer the infa^t to Baptism, and
do publicly profess that it is the seed of the Church. Yet we suffer no
stranger to offer their infa^ts to baptism in our Churches, who has not made
public profession of his faith, and willingly submitted himself to the
discipline of our Church: least, otherwise, they, who should present their
children to baptism, might, in time, plead that they belong to our Churches,
and so should deceive the English Churches and their Ministers. Yet
nevertheles, that we may openly testifye that the English Churches and ours are
one and the same Church, although we differ somewhat from them, both in
language and ceremonies, we do not refuse that the English may, as public
witnesses of the Church, offer the infants of our members to baptism in our
Churches, if they have, both the use of our languages and a certain testimony
of their piety: as, in like manner, our members are accustomed to offer the
infants of the English to baptism in the English Churches.

By this declaration, it appears what care they took, to prevent the
profanation of this ordinance, and how well this care of theirs was approved
of, in those days, by the public liberty they had so to do, under the broad
seal. The same thing will further appear, in the questions which they
propounded to those godly persons, by whom the infant was presented, which that
they might understand, and so answer, upon knowledge, one thing required in
them was that they should have the use of their language. To these men they put
three questions.

Answer. Yea.

Answer. Yea.



Before these, Chrysostom did bear witness against this evil, Chrysostom. de
compunct. cordis lib. 1.
and, upon the same ground, viz, because the Sacraments are profaned when they
are administered to unworthy persons, which he speaks of boath the Sacraments,
using the word, (...), in the plural number. His words may be thus translated.
Let us see also what other praecepts of the Lord contain. Give not holy things
(says he) to dogs, nor cast your pearls before swine. But we corrupted with
the love of praise, do things contrary to this praecept also, and do dispense
the holy Mysteries to men that have not a pure understanding, nor sound faith,
and moreover are blemished with great sins, not making any difference. And
afterward he complains that they were admitted to the holy things of
Christians which understood not Christian Religion.

Tertul. de Bapt. advers. Quintil. cap. 18
Tertullian (Chrysostoms Senior, who speaks more punctually to the case in
question concerning infants offered to baptism) shall conclude this catalogue
of witnesses. He speaks thus. Baptismum non temere credendum Credendum i. e.
committendum and administrandum petenti. De foro phrasis. Iunius Annot.
esse sciunt quorum officium est. They know, whose office it is, that baptism
is not to be administered rashly to every one that requires it. Give to him
thas asks. Luke. 6. is alleged for alms. In this case, give not holy
things to dogs, nor cast your pearls before swine Mat. 7. is rather to be
observed. And whereas some might object Mat. 19. suffer little children to come
unto me etc. (speaking of infants of strangers from the covenant, as Iunius
interpreted him) he says. Let them come when they are grown to years: Let
them come when they have learned and are taught wherefore they come: Let them
know how to desire Christ, that it may appear thou give to him that asks.

The validity of this Argument will be more manifest, if the ends and uses
whereunto baptism serves, by divine institution, be considered, which
judicious Calvin breifely declares, Calv. instit. cap. 15. Sect. 1. Ephesians. 5.26
Coll. 2.12. Tit. 35. 1. Pet. 3.21. Romans 6.3.
saying, that Baptism is a sign or Sacrament of initiation, whereby we are
taken into the fellowship of the Church, and, being ingrafted into Christ, are
reckoned amongst the children of God. Whence we gather, that, in Calvin's
judgment, two things are sealed and signified in baptism.

First our communion with Christ, in his merits and efficacy, for justification
and sanctification: which are employed in our Adoption, whereby we are the
children God. But, because all communion is founded in Union, it is
praesupposed, that there is some union between Christ and him, who partaketh
of this seal of the Covenant aright. Gall. 3.27 Mark. 16.16. Mat. 3. Act. 2.
Now that union is by faith, and therefore beleiving is joined with being
baptized, as a necessary requisite in him that aright partaketh of it,
according to that, he that beleiveth, and is baptized shall be saved. And,
because faith is not without repentance, repentance also is required to
remission of sins, which baptism, in the right use of it, seals. Yet I
confess, against the Anabaptists, that infants of beleiving parents, though
they have not actual faith, 1. Cor. 7.14. Genesis 17. Synops. pur. Theol. disp.
44. de bapt. These. 150
are accounted beleivers, as well as holy, in their parents by virtue of the
covenant. And I willingly assent to the Reverend Divines, the Professors of
Leyden, that it is a sufficient warrant for the baptising of infants, if in
either of the parents such faith and repentance are found, as, in the judgment
of Charity, may testifye to men their union with Christ, though but externally.
Yea, and I grant further, that evils in life, or errors in faith (whereby the
efficacy of the covenant is made void, and frustrate to the parents) may not
justly deprive the infants of such Christians parents of baptism, except in
the cases propounded by those grave and learned Divines before mentioned, (viz,
whittaker Beza, Cartwright etc.) or in cases parallel.

The second end and use whereunto baptism serves (in Mr. Calvin's judgment) is
to signifye and seal our fellowship with the Church, and people of God, in
respect whereof he calls it the Sacrament of initiation. How this is to be
understood Alstedius tells us, saying, Al ^^ed Supplem. ad Dan. Cham. Panst.
Tom. 5. Cap. 7.
that Baptism and Circumcision are called Sacraments of initiation; not,
because they make the beginning of Christianity, hut, because they signifye and
seal it, and so are opposed to the Sacraments of nutrition and growth, the
passover, and the Lords supper. Which he amplyfyeth by showing, that children
borne of Christian parents, are, in one sense, in the Church, in another sense,
not in it. They are in it; as they are in covenant in their parents; they are
not in it; as they are not yet added to the outward fellowship thereof; into
which they are received by baptism, as they are received into the covenant by
the promise of God, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.

From this end of uniting men in a visible profession of consent with the
people of God Chamierus collecteth another end of Baptism subordinate
thereunto, Dan. Cham: de Sacram. Manuscr.
viz, the distinguishing beleivers from all the world besides; which is a
necessary use of the Sacraments, since the fall of man, and has been almost
from the beginning. For, in the beginning, in the days of Seth, Genesis 4. and 6.
there began a different naming of men, some being called the sons of God,
some the daughters of men, who were also differenced from each other by
sacrifices, which to them were of the same use that the Sacraments were since.
Genesis 17.
Afterwatds, in Abraham, the Lord instituted circumcision, whereby the Church
and people in covenant with him, were distinguished from the rest of the world,
Ephesians. 2.12
who were strangers from the covenant, and therefore the one were called
circumcised, the other uncircumcised. The Baptism of John was of God, Mat. 3.
not of man, which also Christ our Lord instituted and ordained to continue in
the Church, as a noate of difference between his disciples, Mat. 28.19.
and all others (though not only or principally for that end) which use of it
the Apostles retained, after the ascension of our Lord, and perpetuated for
succeeding ages to the second appearing of Christ. Hereunto Paul had respect
when he demanded of the Corinthia^s, were ye baptized into the name of Paul? 1.
Cor. 1.13.
Intimating that in baptism, they professed openly their dependence upon
Christ only, and their cleaving to him as their only King, Priest and Prophet.
And this use was, in after times, retained in the Church, as Augustine
witnesses saying. Aug. contra Faust. Man. lib. 9. cap. 11. D. Ames de Consc.
l. 4. cap. 24. quest. 1. Resp. 5.
Men can not be joined together into any name of Religion, whether true or
false, except they be gathered by some fellowship of visible signs and
Sacraments. And Dr. Ames says expressly, that it can not be but the signs
whereby beleivers may be discerned from infidels must be confounded, if they
partake of them, who will join themselves to no certain particular Church,
alleging for that purpose. 1. Cor. 5.12. The issue and sum of all is.

To administer baptism to the infants of those who belong not to Christ, who
are convicted and judged by the Church to be swine and dogs, who obstinately
persist in their Apostasy, who slight and refuse all communion with all visible
Churches of Christ, who are strangers, and without, In a word, who have no
communion with Christ, nor fellowship with the Church and people of God, is to
profane it, according to the judgment of Whittaker, Beza, Cartwright, I:
del'Espine, I. A Lasco, Chrysostom, Tertullian, Calvin, Alstedius, Chamier, Dr.
Ames, etc.

But to administer baptism in Amsterdam thus promiscuously, as that wrighting
requires, is to administer it to many such.

Therefore to administer it, as that wrighting requires, is to profane the
Sacrament.



To clear this, I am to declare two things, 1. that it is a sin to give
offense. 2, that this practice does give offense (or scandal) to many.

First. That it is a sin to give offense, Cor. 10.2. Romans 14.13.21.16 15.
Ezekiel: 13.22. Rom: 14.3 10. Mat: 18.10. Rom: 14.15.20. 1 Cor. 8.12.
will appear by Scripture light, which forbideth it, and describes it to be a
putting an occasion to fall, or laying a stumbling block before a brother, a
making him weak, a giving him cause to speak evil, or to thinck hardly of
us, a pleasing our selves, with neglect of our brother, and it propceedeth from
a dispising and light regard of others in our hearts, and it tends to the
destroying of him. And, to conclude, it is to sin against our brother, and to
sin against Christ.

Secondly. That this practice does give scandal to many. This we will declare
by induction, and instances.

First. To the Jews it is an offense that we affirm our baptism to be in
stead of their circumcision, and of the same use and worth, and yet we
communicate it to those who are not in the Covenant, so much as visibly and
outwardly: which they know to be contrary to the law given to their fathers
concerning circumsion.

Secondly. To the Papists it is an offense that we, Tho: Aq: pars 3. quest: 68.
Idem. secund. secundae quest: 10. art: 12. and alibi. Whitt: prelect. de
Sacram: P. 291. 292.
professing reformation, do admit those to baptism whom they would refuse
(though they err grossly in many points about baptism, and de suscipientibus
baptismum also) for they hold it unlawful to baptize the infants or infidells
that are brought, without their parents consent: but such cases may often fall
out, in that place, by this course, and the minister and Church be ignorant of
it. Dr. Whittaker adds, that they do absurdly, who baptize the children of
unbeleivers, though the parents should desire it, as if (says he) the Church
might give baptism to whom they please. For then they might be baptized, even
without the parents consent.

Thirdly. To the Anabaptists it is an offense, who, because the Scripture
requires faith to baptism (not only unjustly, against the Scripture, dislike
the baptising of the infants of beleivers, but also) complain, and that
justly, of the promiscuous administering of baptism, even to those whose
parents cannot be numbered amongst beleivers. As appears in their private
discourses, public disputes and printed books.

Fourthly. To Libertines and Familists it gives offense and hardneth them in
their disorderly course, seeing they can partake of the outward privileges of
the Church as well as the members of it, without submission to the order and
government thereof, whereunto the members are subject. The same may be affirmed
of all disorderly persons that are obstinate in evil courses.

Anonym: in these: de rit: gub: Christi eccles: Anno 1595. impres: and ad
Illustr: Ampl. ord. in Geld: Holland: Zeland: Fris: adscript. these. 155. ad
these. 168. See Robb: Apol. Chap. 2. Idem ibid praeface. p. 9.
Fifthly. Ignorant and superstitious persons are strengthened in a slight
esteem of Baptism, and an Idolizing of the Lords supper, when they see that
any, without difference, are admitted to that, but care is taken that only
those that are approved are admitted to this; as if a fitnes were not as well
required, in him that would partake of the blood of Christ, and of remission of
sins by it, in baptism, as in the Lords supper. For the same remission of
sins is alike propounded in them boath.

Sixthly. To those of the Separation it gives no small offense, who, for this
cause, complain of the Dutch reformed Churches, as neither so true to their
own grounds as they aught (their practice being compared with their
profession) nor so well providing for the dignity of the thing, whilst they
administer the Sacrament of Baptism to the infants of such as are not within
the Covenant, nor have either parent a member of any Church. Though the more
moderate of them do profess, that, notwithstanding this, they do account
them the true Churches of Christ, and both profess, and practice communion
with them in the holy things of God, what in them lies; their sermons, such of
them frequent, as understand the Dutch tongue, and the Sacraments they do
administer to their known members, if, by occasion, any of them be present
with, them, etc.

Seventhly, To diverse others who fear God, and heartily desire to see the
ordinances of Christ established in their purity and beauty and are unfeignedly
greived that any blemish should be found in the reformed Churches, and truly
wish for the prosperity and perfection of them, and have witnessed against this
disorder in this place, as Dr. A. Mr. F. Mr. H. Mr. B. Mr. R. amongst whom I,
being called thereunto, do not only reckon my unworthy self, but also can
number others, not only English and French, but even of the Dutch also, who
have ingenuously professed their dislike of it, upon occasion of conference,
which I have had with some of them. To wind up all in one bottom.

That which gives offense to Jews, Papists, Anabaptists, Familists;
Libertines, obstinate sinners, ignorant and superstitious persons Seperatists,
and to diverse others that fear God, is a sin.

But to administer baptism so promiscuously, as that wrighting requires,
gives offense to all these.

Therefore to administer baptism so promiscuously etc. is a sin.



This is an Argument, ad hominem, which I restrain to these Churches, to show
the evil of this practice from their own principles, which it does, by
consequence, supplant, and subvert, at least, in the judgment of many, whether
necessarily or probably, and in what degree, I will leave to their wisdom to
consider, contenting my self with a short proposal of some particulars which
are considerable, especially that ground being laid which the Apostle makes
use of, in a like case, Gal. 2.18
If I build again the things that I have destroyed I make my self a
transgressour.

First. That baptism is only a naked sign, Soc in. disp. de Bapt: Cap 5. fol.
75.
or noate of Segregation from other sects, and profession of true doctrine, is
an error which these reformed Churches have destroyed, by professing in their
Confession, Sim. Episc. dis. 29. These: 8 Confess. art: 33, 34 Catech: quest.
73. 74.
and Catechism that it is not only so, but also a testimony to us, and a
symbol to assure us of remission of sins etc. according to the Scripture
Mark. 1.4 Acts 2.38 Cap. 16.30, 31 32.33 Coll. 3.12 Ezekiel. 16.51.52
: But this practice builds it again, whilst a naked profession of assent to
the doctrine and discipline of this Church is held sufficient to warrant their
baptism, though it be made, many times, by such as are not known to have any
right in the Covenant, whereof baptism is a seal, or at all to pertain to
Christ, but may be any of those, who were spoken of in the first Argument, for
aught any man knows: Hence some will collect that they do not account
Baptism any more then a naked sign of profession. And not only so, but it
justifyeth that error, as Israel justified Samaria, by establishing a worse.
For this practice seems to make baptism not so much as a profession of true
doctrine, or a noate of segregation from other sects, whilst it is appointed
to be administered thus promiscuously in Amsterdam (where people of so many
sects inhabit) to all infants that are presented, though they make no other
show of profession, then by saying, yae, or nodding the head, when they
understand not what is said to them, being of a different language, and are
allogether unknown to the minister and to the Church.

2. Confess: art. 16.17 21 Catech. quest: 20. 50, 51, 52 53, 54, 55 Synod Dort.
Art. 2 Sect. 7, 8.
Secondly. That the grace of Christ is universal, wherein all have interest is
an error which these reformed Churches have destroyed, restrayning it only to
the Elect, to beleivers, to the Church of God, according to the Scriptures
Psalm: 147, 20. Mat. 11 25. and 13 11 Act. 14.16. Rom: 8.30. Mat. 1, 21. Ioh:
10, 11, 16. Cap: 17, 9, 11, 12, 19, 20. Act. 20, 28.
: But this practice builds it up. For, if the seal appertain to all, why
not the Covenant also? Why not the grace? And who will not suspect that the
seal does appertain to all, in their judgment, whose practice is to
administer it to those infants, neither of whose parents are in the covenant,
so much as externally, and, it may be, were never baptized, or, having been
baptized, have, by their infidelity and other sins obstinately persisted in,
(being, convicted thereof and cast out of the Church) or by their wilful
Apostasy and forsaking the Religion which they professed, with themselves,
broken off their seed, externally and actually from the communion of the
Church, and holy things thereof. Jf they say; their grandfather was a
Christian, or great grandfather. I answer. Where must we stopp at last? If not
in the next parents, why in the grandfather, or great grandfather, till we come
up as high as Noah himself? And so neither the children of Jews, nor Turks,
nor heathen or infidels should be denied baptism.

Thirdly. The absolute necessity of baptism to salvation; so that, 3. Council:
Trid: Sess. 7. cap. 2. Confess. belg. art. 34. Genesis 17.
not only those of years, that refuse or contemn it, are damned, but even
infants also perish aeternally, through the want of it, is an error which
these Churches have destroyed, when they profess it to be of the same use to
Christians, whereof circumcision was to the Jews, who being borne in the
covenant, by their relation to their beleiving parents, by virtue of the
promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, were accounted in the
number of Abraham's children, before circumcision, without which, circumcision
did not appertain to them. According to the Scriptures, which declare David's
confidence about the salvation of his infant that died before the eighth day,
2. Sam. 12 23.
in which it should have been circumcised, and annexeth damnation to not
beleiving, not, to not being baptized, as Luther accutely noated out of those
words. He that beleiveth and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark. 16 16.
but he that beleiveth not, shall be damned. But this practice seems to build
this up again, For, if the necessity of it be such, as Gods order must be
violated rather then the infant not baptized, who will not suspect that they
account it simply necessary to salvation? And, if the plea, which is ordinarily
used by them, Call. instit. lib. 4. cap. 15. Sect. 20. 21. 22
that Baptism is not of such necessity, as that Gods order should be broken
for, it, be good against baptism by private persons, and by midwives and
nurses etc. Why may it not serve in this case also?

Fourthly. The efficacy of Baptism, 4. Council: Trid: Can: 8. Confess. art.
34. Catech. q. 72. 73.
when it is made a natural cause or instrument sanctifying those that partake
of it, by the work done, is an error, which these Churches have destroyed,
when they ascribe the working of grace to God, as the sole efficient cause, and
author of it, and account the Sacraments, signs and seals, and moral
instruments signifying and sealing and so exhibiting it instrumentally, in the
right use of them, which I will explain in the words of that learned Dr,
Whittaker, Dr. Whitt. prelect. de sacra: in gene: Ca. 1. pa. 62. 63.
because his exposition seems to be more clear then many, in reference to
the true state of the question between the Pontificians and the Orthodox. We
say, they are instruments (taking the name largely) because God uses them in
bestowing grace upon us: ye we do not mean that they are instruments, as our
Adversaries do, as if God were so tied to the^ as not to conferr grace without
them, as an artificer cannot make a bed, or bench, without a saw, or hatchet,
nor that they are able to work any thing of themselves by any hidden virtue
proper to them and inhaerent in them, as is in a medicine for procuring bodily
health, but because, in the right use of them, God works a nourishing and
increasing of grace. Therefore the Sacraments work nothing by the thing done,
no not in infants. For infants are not therefore partakers of grace only
because they are baptized yet neither are they baptized in vain, because they
are baptized, unto future faith and repentance, and because they are members of
the Church, and holy by the Covenant, and therefore the sign of the Covenant
is not to be denied them. Thus he witnesses against that efficacy that papalls
ascribe to the Sacrament, and joyneth with these Churches in destroying it,
according to the Heb. 2.4. Romans 3.28 Cap. 4.3 4.6.10. Bell. de Sacr. bapt. lib.
C p. 5. Whittak: de bapt. cap. 2. de necess: bapt page 237. 238.
Scripture. But this practice seems to build it up again. For, whereas our
Divines say that baptism is profaned, when it is administered to the unclean
the popish wrighters tell us, that baptism is not thereby profaned, but that
it does sanctifye them. And, upon this ground, Bellarmine says, that baptism
may be given to those that pertain not to Christ. To whom Dr. Whittaker
answers. This were true, if Baptism were a physical cause of grace: For
grace is not profaned when it is given to the unclean, but it sanctifyeth
them, to whom it is given: else (he demands of Bellermine) why may not
infidells of years be baptized, if they will suffer themselves to be baptized;
yea though they should profess that they do not believe in Christ, if
baptism will sanctifye them? But all men deny that. And why so? Because they
belong not to Christ: Therefore (says he) Baptism aught not to be given to
any that are not in Christ. I will not enlarge this point, by speaking of the
ignorant conceit of some, that baptism is their Christendom, and that they are
made Christians by baptism, whereas we have shown that they must be
Christians before baptism, else they may not be baptized.

Fifthly. The loose positions, whereby Libertines are hardened, 5. Confess.
Belg. Art. 28. 29.
in refusing to join themselves in doctrine and discipline with any visible
Church, are errors which these Churches in their doctrine have destroyed, by
professing, that every man that would be saved (of what rank or condition
soever) is bound to join himself with the Church of God, and to subject
himself to the doctrine and discipline thereof, though with hazard of his
life etc. according to the Scriptures. Ps. 65.4. and 133.3. Mat. 18.17. Mat.
18.17. Rev. 1.13. 1. Cor. 5.12. Heb. 10.24.25. 1. Cor. 12 25.27.
But this practice builds it up again. As appears in the example of that
Libertine who took encouragment to persist in his course, by a sermon, wherein
the Answerer affirms that the infants of such may lawfully be baptized,
though the parents refused to join with any Church: whereupon he came home
resolving, as himself told diverse, never to join with any Church, whilst he
lived, though he had been, as he said, 20 years before, in doubts about his
condition.

Sixthly. 6. Catech. quest: 85.
The opinion of Erastus against Ecclesiastical excommunication, is an error
which the doctrine of these Churches has destroyed, by affirming that the
power of excommunication belongs to the Church, according Numb. 19.13.20 Mat.
18.15. Mat. 7.6. 1. Cor. 5.5.6.11. 2. These. 3.6. and. 11.
to the Scriptures.

But this practice does build it up again, when they, not only administer this
Sacrament promiscuously to all that are brought, but also plead for it by some
of the Arguments which Erastus produced against that.

For, First Erastus alleges John's admitting the very worst men to his
baptism, viz, the Pharisees and Sadduces: whereunto both Beza and Mr.
Cartwright answer, to the same purpose, as I did some with whom I argued
against this custom, that John admitted none to his baptism, but those that
professed repentance and amendment of life. Therefore they are said to be
baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins, which, Mat. 3.6. Mark. 1.4
5.
after the manner of the Hebrews, signifies more then a bare acknowledgment
that they were sinners, even a profession of their embracing the doctrine of
remission of sins by Christ, and a promise of amendment. Psalm. 51. Dan. 9.4
Luke 15 Luke 18
Such confessions were David's, Daniels, the Publicans, Prodigalls. As for the
Pharisees and Sadduces (says Mr, Cartwright) which came in Hypocrisy to be
baptized, deriding the grace of God, I utterly deny that John baptized them:
yea, that he rejected them, it is evident by his sharp reprehension and
terrible threatening of them with death and cutting off. Those that pretended
repentance in words he admonished, that, if they would be baptized, they must
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, else they should be cut off.

did eat the same sprirituall meat, and drinck the same spiritual drinck. 1.
Cor. 10.4. 1. Cor. 10.4. Beza de presb. and excom: ad arg. 13. p. 28. 29 Morton
on 1. Cor. 10.
And, in effect, the same thing is objected by some, for the defense of this
custom, when they plead, that they were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud,
and in the sea. Therefore all infants that are presented, must be baptized.
Bezaes answer to him, in that case, may serve these in this case, out of whom
(and a learned Commentatour upon that place joined together with him) 2 things
may be answered.

1. That the things, there spoken of, were not to be numbered amongst those
things which are only Sacraments: however they were Sacraments, in a sense,
yet they were not Sacraments in that signification of the the word [Sacraments]
which is usually amongst Divines, when they call circumcision, and the
passover, Baptism, and the Lords supper, Sacraments: for they were not by any
solemn promulgation, expressed in the word, instituted and sanctified by God
to be seals of the covenant to beleivers (as circumcision etc.) which is
necessary to the constitution of a Sacrament. But as they were miraculous and
admirable types of Christ, so they were common, and temporal benefits serving
for the bodily refreshing and safety of the people of Israel in general, and
therefore that all, even the most unworthy of them, partaked of those, it was
for a peculiar reason, which has not place in the Sacraments. For the shadow
of the cloud covering the wholl army, as a shield, or buckler, received, and
kept from them the beams of the sun, which else in, that dry and hot region,
might have consumed them with burning heat, especially they being wearyed, and
faint with journying, therefore it was necessary, that it should be common to
them all. The same reason might be given for their passing through the sea, to
escape the rage of the tyrant that pursued them. But what is this to Baptism?

2. That the persons there spoken of were the Church of Israel, whom he calls
our fathers, because from them the Jews sprang which were the visible Church
of God, whose children also the Corinthians and all the visible Churches of
beleivers are amongst the Gentiles, who have received from them the privileges
of the word, Sacraments, Covenant, and other spiritual good things, as their
inheritance. But what are these to those Libertines and others, who cast off
all communion whith the Churches of Christ? To conclude this Argument in one
Syllogism,

To build again those errors which the doctrine and profession of these
Churches, according to the Scripture, have destroyed, is a sin.

But this practice of promiscuous baptising all that are brought, with out
difference, builds again those errors, which the Doctrine and profession of
these Churches, according to the Scriptures, have destroyed, as appears in
those six particulars.

Therefore to baptize all that are brought promiscuously, as that wrighting
requires, is a sin.



First. That good customs, taken up by Churches upon good grounds should not
lightly be broken and laid down. Wherein I do fully agree whith the author
of that elaborate co^mentary upon the fourth chapter of John, my reverend
Countryman, M. A. H. lect. on Ioh. 4. chap. p. 138. 139. 1. Cor. 11.16. 1. Cor.
15 1. Phil. 4.9.
who now rests from his labors, who, to prove this, produces Paul
alleging the custom of the Churches, to stopp the mouths of contentious men,
and commending sundry truths to the people of God, by this Argument, they had
received them, and making that a further bond unto their conscience, for which
end also he propounds that general rule given unto us, walk in the ways of
good men, Pro. 2.20.
and keep the ways of the righteous, and a promise which God has made to
them that will learn the ways of his people, Ier. 12.16
and conform themselves unto them, then shall they be built in the midst of
my people. To make this point more clear, I will add thereunto, from a
manuscript, Mr. I. C. in a manuscr.
the judgment of the worthy author of the praeface to that commentary
concerning the bindng force of good examples, who thus expresses himself.

Some good actions of holy men in Scripture are examples of Christian liberty,
others are patterns of Christian duty: examples of this latter sort be, 1.
such as are backed with some Divine praecept. So Sarahs obedience to Abraham is
set forth as a pattern unto her daughters, 1. Pet. 3.6
2. such as are held forth in the first institution of an ordinance. Thus our
Savior argues the sinfullnes of Polygamy, as an abberration from the example
or pattern of the first institution, Mat. 14.9
from the beginning it was not so. Hitherto belong sundry precedents set before
us, in the Acts of the Apostles, for guiding Church matters etc. Yet here also
this caution would be observed, that, in the first institution or celebration
of an ordinance, some actions were accidental, and taken up upon special
occasions, and such actions are not precedents, unless it be upon the like
occasion: other actions are part of the institution (whether essential or
circumstantiall parts) and belong, either to the compleatnes, or to the
comlines of it, and these may not be neglected without sin, 3. of the lawful
actions of holy men, in Scripture, some were civil, and of those there is more
latitude (as not needing an exact rule from Scripture, but admitting the light
of civil prudence for a guide) others are sacred as belonging to spiritual
things, and serving to spiritual ends. And of these, some of them are varying,
not always observed in one constant tenor, in Scripture (as the gestures in
prayer, preaching, and the places thereof, any of which are alike imitable)
others of them are constant, always the same, and therefore stand as a cloud
of witnesses requiring our imitation. The issue of all which is, that those
examples which are backed with some divine precept, or which are held forth in
the first institution of an ordinance, being part of the institution, or which
were the constant lawful actions of holy men in Scriptures, not, civil but
sacred, so bind us to imitation, as that, not to conform thereunto is a sin.

These things being premised, it is evident that promiscuous baptising in that
manner as that wrighting requires, if it swerve from such good customs of the
Church, and examples of holy men in Scripture, will be found to be a sin.

Secondly, that this practice agrees not with the good customs and practices
of the Churches of Christ will appear, if we examine the story of times from
the first institution of this ordinance.

First in the Jewish Church, circumcision (whereunto Baptism answers, being
a Sacrament of the same use that it was of) was, by Gods appointment, Genesis
17.7.8.9.10 11.12.13 Acts. 7.8. Romans 9.11
a token of the covenant made with Abraham and with his seed after him, to be a
God unto him, and to his seed after him (which the Apostle calls a seal of
the righteousness which is by faith) and therefore, by Gods ordinance, it was
limited to the men children of eight days old of his seed or that were borne
in his house, or bought with his money of any stranger, which was not of his
seed. So that, to circumcise any others, who were not of that seed to whom this
covenant belonged, was a sin. And therefore the holy fathers were careful to
follow this rule in keeping this sign joined with the covenant in those whom
they circumcised. Mat. 3.6.7. etc. Mark. 1.4.5. etc. Luke 3.3.16.


Afterward John Baptist walked in the same stepps, and by the same rule,
mutatis mutandis, administered Baptism in that Church whereof he was a member,
requiring of all that came to his baptism a profession of repentance and
amendment of life for remission of sins, whereof Baptism was the seal, and
preached Christ unto them.

This ordinance our Lord Christ, after his resurrection, established to
continue in the Christian Churches, giving a commission to his disciples to
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16 15.16.
and to gather Churches amongst them, and to baptize all such as should
believe, throughout the world, as a testimony to them that the righteousness of
faith did belong to them also, and not to the Church of the Jews only. Acts.
2.37.38.39.40.41 42.44.46 47.
Accordingly the Apostles and servants of Christ were careful to observe this
rule in their administering baptism. Thus Peter when he saw those 3000 souls
pricked in their hearts, preached unto them concerning repentance, remission of
sins, Christ, the promise, baptism, faith, and amendment of life, baptized
those that gladly received his word, and testified the same by joining together
in the profession thereof.

Act. 8.12.13.14.
The same course Phillip took with the Church that was gathered in Samaria
where many were baptized, but none till they professed their belief of the
Gospel, Act. 9.11 13.14.15 16.17.
and their receiving the word of God, and therefore it is said expressly, when
they believed Phillip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and
the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men, and women. when
Ananias was commanded to go and baptize Paul, he objected against it at first,
till the Lord assured him that he was one to whom that seal of the covenant
belonged, Act. 10 43.44.47 48.
and then he went, and did it. When Peter, and those that came with him, saw
that the Holy Ghoast fell on Cornelius, and those that were assembled at that
time in his house, whilst he spoke these words, To him give all the Prophets
witness, Act. 8.36 37.38 Act. 16 31.32.33
that thorough the name of Jesus, whosoever beleiveth in him shall receive
remission of sins, Peter demanded, Can any man forbid water that these should
not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghoast as well as we? And then
they were baptized. To conclude this catalogue, Phillip did not baptize the
Eunuch, though he desired it, till he had given him satisfaction by professing
his faith in express words, nor Paul the Iaylour and his household, till it
appeared unto him that they believed on the Lord Jesus. Nor is there any
example in the Scripture varying from this course, to warrant such a
promiscuous administration of baptism in a place where such heterogeneall
mixtures are of people of all sorts and sects, as Amsterdam is,

In the times after the first Century what care was taken concerning the
persons whom they admitted to baptism! The stories are clear concerning those
that were adulti, though we find little or nothing concerning infants, only that
they were baptized, by virtue of that right they had to it, in their beleiving
parents. But that which we find concerning the course which they took with
those of years, may serve to show their high esteem of this ordinance, and
how far they were from this promiscuous manner of administering it, though we
purpose not to examine, whether the first simplicity used by the Apostles was
in all things observed by them, nor how exactly they followed the rule in every
particular. They divided those that were turned from Gentilisme to embrace the
Christian Religion into three sorts, whom they distinguished by several names.
1. Whilst they were to be catechized and instructed in the grounds of Christan
Religion, they were called (...), and Audientes. Catechumenists and hearers. 2.
Afterward, having been compeleatly instructed, and earnestly now desiring to
be admitted to the Sacrament, they were called Competentes, petitioners. 3.
Being found meet, they were baptized, and then, and not before, they were
called fideles, and perfecti, perfect, and beleivers, viz, in respect of the
outward state and order of the Church, with reference to those degrees whereby
they must come to be baptized. And when they did baptize them, a public trial
was made of their fitnes (which aftertimes called Scrutinium, the Scrutiny) and
hereof there were two parts, 1. an abrenunciation, 2. a profession of faith. 1.
The abrenunciation was expressed by the party desiring Baptism solemnly, in
express words, in the Greek Churches. (...). And this part they accounted of
so much importance, as that, without it, either in word or deed expressed, they
accounted none fit to be baptized. 2. The profession of the faith was openly
made, and in the hearing of the people, by him that desired baptism, some
times in a continued speech, but more frequently by way of Dialogue, and by
certain articles. Ambros: de Sacram lib. 2. C.
Credis in Deum patrem omnipotentem? Credo. Credis in Dominum Iesum Christum?
Credo. Credis in Spiritum Sanctum? Credo. This custom at first instituted for,
and used only by those of years, who being converted from Gentilisme to
Christianity desired baptism, was, in aftertimes applied to the baptism of
infants, whose suretyes answered for them. Beza. epist 8.
This came in by abuse (says Beza) and gives too much advantage to the
Anabaptists. For, if baptism may not be administered, without a profession of
faith present, in the infant (which if they mean not, why is the infant asked
concerning its faith, in the suretyes, at that time, says he) why stay we not
with the Anabaptists (which God forbid!) till the child can profess its own
faith. And therefore elsewhere says Beza, Beza epist. 12.
As Chrisme and exorcisme, although ancient, are well abolished, we would
desire also, that not only superfluous, but also unfit questions were omitted
also, although Augustine, in a certain epistle, would excuse it, with a
certain interpretation, but he calls it infirmum commentum, and that fitly.
And therefore the practice of those Churches, in putting the question to the
father of the child is more suitable to the rule; because, in the Covenant
which God makes with the parents the right of the infant to baptism is
founded, and the power and care of educating the child in that faith lies upon
them. To let pass this digression. The custom of those times concerning men of
years, though it do not, every way, touch the case of infants, yet it shows
the piety of those times, and the judgment of the Ancients concerning the point
in question, de suscipientibus baptismum.

And howsoever, in those times, some superstitious rites were used in baptism,
and some errors in Doctrine are to be found concerning the absolute necessity
of baptism to salvation, yet not one of them, so far as my small reading has
enabled me to discover, defended such a promiscuous administration of it (as
that wrighting of the five Ministers required) as necessary or lawful. But if
any man will wrest that conclusion of those Ancients in Cyprian, to patronize
this course, (whereof Cyprian speaks thus, Cyprian. lib. 3. epist. 10.
haec fuit in concilio nostra sententia. A baptismo atque a gratia Dei, qui
omnibus misericors, and benignus, and pius est, neminem per nos debere
prohiberi.) Let him know, that those words, if they be taken apart from the
rest, may seem to favor the error of universal grace, as well as
promiscuous baptising.

And indeed they countenance boath alike, that is, neither of them at all,
being considered in Cyprians intendment, in that epistle, which was, to answer
Fidus who held that infants of two or three days old ought not to be baptized,
arguing from Circumcision, which was not administered till the eight day, and
from the bodily uncleanenes of infants at that age. Cyprian, in answer to his
first Argument, shows him that Circumcision was a shadow, which is now
vanished, and, in answer to the second, used those words, Acts 10.15. and
concludes thus. Si etiam gravissimis delictoribus etc. If remission of sins
be given to the most grievous sinners, when they afterward believe, and,
repent, and baptism is not denied to them, how much more ought it not to be
denied such infants. They that know how straight Cyprian was in nullifying the
baptism of those who had been baptized by haereticks, and such as were out of
the Church, cannot imagine that any help may be expected from him, for
warranting the administering of baptism to their infants, who are out of the
Covenant.

Now if any thinck that there is some color for the justifying of this course
to be found in the capitulation of Charles King of Sycily, with the Sarazens,
Speed. Chron: lib. 9. cap. 10. in the life of Edw. 1.
at the seidge of Tunis in Africa, the third Article whereof was that such as
were willing might freely receive the Sacrament of Baptism. Let him understand
that that agreement was only to establish the free exercise of Christian
Religion, not to warrant promiscuous baptising, which was not, at all, in
question at that time. Thus the records of ancient times are against this
disorderly custom, and concerning the judgment of later times, since the
reformation, if enough have not been said already, more shall be added, in
answer to the seventh pretense.

Only that I may omit nothing, that I meet with in my reading, which may seem
to carry any color of favoring that custom, though but in the letter, I have
produced those two instances of former times, and will now add to them two or
three of latter times. In whom I purpose not to examine or censure their
expressions, but only to show that this evil custom is not maintained, nor to
be defended by what they have written.

First. I will begin with that question which excercised the Ministers that
met in the Classis at Neocomum. Beza epist. 9.
Whether the infants of excommunicates, are to be baptized, and in whose faith,
seeing their parents are not members of the Church? The occasion whereof was
this. A certain man, of a very wicked life, having 4 bastards, and thrice
deceived the Church with hypocritical confession, and promises, was
excommunicated together with his harlot. The question was, whether the fourth
bastard, begotten after their excommunication, should be baptized?

The Ministers of that Classis declared their judgment, which they sent in a
letter to Beza, thus, we are of opinion that the infant being borne of such
desperate parents, is not included in the promise of blessing, and therefore
should not be baptized till it come to that age, wherein it may make profession
of its own faith, unless the parents, returning again to God by true
repentance, be again received into the bosom of the Church, or it be
presented by certain godly persons, who will bind themselves by promise to
perform the duty of parents to the child. Unless perhaps, because it is
borne within the Church, it should be baptized for the faith of the Church.
Thus they.

Epist: 10.
Beza, wrighting to them his judgment in this matter, distributeth those who are
not to be accounted members of the Church into four sorts far different one
from another. To omit the former three, as being not in question, the fourth
sort is of those, who being elect of God, and ingrafted into Christ, yet
falling through infirmity, and giving offense unto others, are delivered unto
Satan, that godly sorrow may work in them repentance. Of this last sort,
says he, is the question: Concerning whom he first supposes diverse things.

1. That they are such of whom we may judge in charity, that their estate is
not desperate.

2. That though they are great sinners, yet they are not Apostates which
forsake the Church, nor join themselves with adversaryes in persecuting the
truth.

3. That some difference is to be made between Turks and excommunicate
Christians, or Papists.

4. It is hard to judge, whether infants belong to the Covenant, in respect of
their first parents profession, or not.

Secondly. Upon these suppositions he concludes that the infants of
excummunicates that remain in the Church may not lawfully be denied baptism.
But this he delivers with two provisoes, or caveats. 1. That, a fit surety
bind himself to the Church for the holy education of the child. 2. That, upon
this occasion, the Minister do, at that time, seriously exhort the father,
being present, to repentance, in the presence of the Church, before he baptize
the child, Which he says was frequently done in their Churches, viz, in
Geneva. Thus he. Concerning whose answer I will propound two or three
considerations.

First. Though Beza was a very Reverend and judicious Divine, yet, in matters
of faith, it is not safe, vllius jurare in verba magistri, to rest upon the
authority of any man, without a warrant from the Scripture.

Secondly. Compare what was alleged out of Beza himself in my 1. Reason, in
this Section, with this passage, and what Mr Cartwright answers to some part
of this, in the same Section, and the Reader will see that it may easily be
declared that this sentence will not help the Advocates for promiscuous
baptizing.

Thirdly. Consider the state of the question, as Beza makes it, and it will
appear that the infants, for whose Baptism he pleads, are of such as we may
rationally judge to be ingrafted into Christ, and elect of God, only being
fallen by infirmity, are delivered unto Satan, that godly sorrow may work in
them repentance.

But what is this for the justifying of a promiscuous administration of
Baptism to all that are offered, in such a place as Amsterdam, concerning many
of whom we can not rationally have any such persuasion?

Fourthly. The four things supposed by Beza, as cases, wherein he dare not
give liberty of baptising, serve to discover the evil of this custom,
whereunto that wrighting would have bound me. For, if all that are presented,
though they refuse to make known before, who, or what they are, must be
received, may not the infa^ts of many, whose case is desperate in the judgment
of the Church, who are, not only Apostates from it, but persecutors: yea even
the children of Jews, Mores, and others, such like, without the parents
consent be offered to baptism, and so be baptized, which were to profane the
Sacrament, 2. Observe how timerously Beza expresses himself about the
parents, on whom the right of the infant to baptism depends, in this case,
whereby it may seem that he was not fully clear in it himself.

Fifthly. The cautions and provisoes, which Beza gives to be observed, in the
baptising of such children of excommunicates, as he there speaks of, do
strongly condemn the disorder of that place, where the father is so far from
being admonished publicly of his sin, that he is not so much as known, or
inquired after, and where they are so far from taking care for the holy
education of the child, that they regard not by whom it is presented, nor what
becomes of it afterward.

2. De consc. lib. 4. cap. 27.
Secondly. Dr. Ames comes next to be considered, and a passage in his book of
cases to be examined, least some ignorantly, others wilfully wrest it to the
countenancing of this disorder, which to be far from his meaning, himself
does abundantly declare, in the same place. For he so expresses his opinion
concerning the baptism of diverse sorts of infants there mentioned, as it may
appear that his judgment was against promiscuous baptising all that are
brought, according to the controverted custom: which I demonstrate thus.

That they be in the covenant of Grace, in respect of outward profession, and
aestimation, at least, in one of the parents. 2. That there is hope that they
shall hereafter be educated und instructed in the same covenant. Both which he
affirms upon the same ground which we laid in the first Reason, viz, Because
Baptism is a sign and seal of the covenant. But how can they be esteemed
Christian parents, or what hope can there be of the education of such infants
in the covenant, when both the parents and sureties are altogether unknown to
the Church, and that in such a place as Amsterdam, where is such a confluence
of people of all nations and Sects?

Baptism does most properly belong to those infants, whose parents, at least,
one of them, is in the Church, not out of it. And this he affirms, upon the
former ground, viz, Because, Baptism is the seal of the covenant. But who
knows not, that many people are in Amsterdam, who are not in the Church, but
out of it, in many respects? yet none must be refused that are presented to
Baptism.

Thirdly. He supposes that those, whose parents are unknown, are in charity
to be accounted Christians, when there is not just cause of presuming the
contrary. But, howsoever this might carry some show of reason with it, in such
places where all the inhabitants profess religion, and are joined to some
Church, yet in such a place as Amsterdam, how can a man presume otherwise then
the contrary of many that may be offered to Baptism?

Fourthly. He professes that a difference must be put between the infants of
those, who, in some sort, by profession, belong to the Church, yet do openly
break the covenant of God, and the children of others, in the manner of their
admittance to Baptism. viz, that, for the former sort, what is required by the
Covenant, and wanting in them must be supplied by others. And for this he
gives two Reasons. 1. Because a distinction must be observed in all holy
things between the clean and unclean. 2. Because else the ordinances of God
cannot be preserved from all pollution. For these reasons he does not allow
the Baptism of excommunicates, unless they have fit suretyes to undertake for
their education, nor of bastards, unless their parents have professed their
repentance, or other godly persons will take upon them the care of their
education; nor of papists, unless they be presented by fit suretyes, who have
power over the^ for their education. But is any such care taken, any such
course observed, about the admission of such to Baptism, in Amsterdam?

Thirdly. Mr. Attersoll, shall shut up this discourse of times, Of the Sacram:
of Bapt. 2. book. chapter 6
whom the Reader may suspect to favor this custom, if something be not noated
by us to prevent mistakes. Now, howsoever he may seem to be some what large in
his judgment this way, and to yield more then, either Mr. Beza, or Dr. Ames
have done in this point, and, it may be, more then himself would have done, if
he had fully understood the disorder against which we testifye; yet the
limitations and cautions which he propounds do discover the evil of that
practice, concerning which the present question is.

P. 218
For 1. he denies that the infants of Turks or Jews may be baptized against
the liking and good will of their parents. But it is very possible, and
probable that some such may be offered to Baptism by any that have stolle^
them, or for some other reason, for ought the minister knows, or demands,
in that place.

P. 219.
2. In the case of the children of impaenitent persons he supposes, two things
without which his plea for their Baptism falls. 1. That they are so borne in
the Church, and of it, that the Church may be said to be, as it were, their
Mother. 2. That they are in the Covenant, in regard of their Elders, of whom
they descend, as the Jews were in Abraham, though their next parents were
wicked.

P. 220. 221.
3. That they have such suretyes as will undertake their education in the true
knowledge of God, and faith in Jesus Christ. But, Js it the manner of that
place to be satisfied about these things before they receive them to Baptism?
Do they enquire whether the infant was borne in the Church, of what parents,
or forefathers, or how the suretyes will undertake to educate the child in that
faith? To conclude, that all misunderstanding of Mr. Attersoll may be
prevented, let the Reader consider one or two conclusions by the same Author
in the same chapter.

P. 211.
1. Conclus. That, besides the joining of the word to the outward sign, there
is necessarily required a fit person to be partaker of the Sacrament,

2. Conclus. Baptism is a common seal. But, as all have not interest to the
pasture, herbage, and privileges of a commons, but only such as are Tenants,
according to the custom of the Manner: so all have not title to Baptism, being
a Sacrament of the Church, but only such as are the Lords people, according to
the tenor of the Covenant. Apply these conclusions to this custom, against
which we plead, and it will be granted, that what ever may seem to an unwary
Reader, in the slight and superficial reading of that passage in his book,
yet indeed it does not serve to justifye the practice, about which the
question is. From the premises I argue thus.

If such a promiscuous administration of baptism as the wrighting of those
five ministers requires, be contrary to the good customs of the best Churches,
it is unlawful.

But such a promiscuous baptising etc. is contrary to the good customs of the
best Churches.

Therefore it is unlawful.

So much shall suffice for declaring the grounds, whereupon I refused this
custom.

Now let us consider their pretenses for it, 1. Pretenses for it.
so far as we can collect out of that wrighting of the five Ministers, or
otherwise.

None will present their children to be baptized but Christians?

Ans. 1. It is a conclusion amongst the schoolmen that, Aq: secund secundae.
art. 12. conclu.
Non sunt infidelium pueri, invitis parentibus, baptisandi. Children of
infidells are not to be baptized without their parents consent. Wherein they
suppose that such a case is possible. If so, why may not the child of a Jew, or
Moore, or Indian be brought by some one or other to baptism, without the
parents consent or knowledge? And the manner of Amsterdam is to refuse none
that are presented, by whomsoever, whereby it is very possible, that some
infants may be baptized, whose parents are no Christians, though the parents
would not have them presented.

2. Even parents, who themselves do not receive christian Religion, may be
content to have their children baptized either for the gifts sake, which are
customarily bestowed (by those whom they call Godfathers and Godmothers) upon
the children, or for some other advantages and respects, which, in those
countries where Religion has the countenance of the higher powers, may be
expected thereby. Genesis 34.3 21.22.2: Speed. Chron. lib 7. Cap. 36.
Have we not read of the Shichemites which were circumcised, yet received not
the Religion of the Jews? The Chronicles of our land can tell us how the
Danes, being vanquished, propounded to Elfred the 24. Saxon Monarch, in
England, for obtaining of their peace, that their king should receive baptism:
by which policy he got the country of the East Angles, by the gift of K. Elfred
his Godfather. In those times it was usual to make baptism a condition, and
to compel men to baptism, as king Edmond did the Danes to make them become
his subjects, which being done, they did soon cast off, both faith and fealty
at once. And are not many of the mind of that Roman pretext, of whom Ierom
speaks, who said scoffingly to Damasus. Facite me Romanae ^rbis espiscopum,
and ero protinus Christanus. I will conclude this passage with the censure of
learned Dr. Whittaker. Whittak: praelect. de Sacram. p. 291. 292.
Absurd faciunt ij, qui infidelium liberos baptizant, si parents volunt
baptizari, quasi ecclesia, suo arbitrio, quibus vellet, baptismum dare posset.
They do absurdly who baptize the children of infidells, if the parents be
willing to have them baptized, as if the Church, at their own pleasure can
baptize whom they will.

If the parents be no Christians, yet the suretyes are?

Ans. 1. The customary use of suretyes in baptising infants, though it seem
ancient by the mention that is made of them, in the Synod of Ments, Synod:
M^gunt. Can. 47. Aug. Sermon 116. 163. Epist. 23. ad Bonif: Tertull de Bapt. cap.
18.
under the name of Compatres spirituales, spiritual fathers and mothers, and,
before that, in Augustine, under the name of Sponsores, and fidejussores,
suretyes, and before him, in Tertullian, under the name of offerentes,
presenters: yet it is not from the Ancient of days, it was not from the
beginning, neither in the first institution of baptism, nor the practice of
the primitive Churches, in the first Century. The first original of this
custom seems to be this, that they that took the child from the minister
when it was baptized should be called spiritual fathers and mothers, that the
difference between the first and second birth of the child might be signified,
it being absurd (as they thought) that the same man should be the father of the
child, both in respect of generation and of regeneration. Hence the Papists
drew a spiritual kindred, and multiplied absurd inventions about it. Which
very original and abuse, it being not of Apostolical institution, should make
the Reformed Churches suspect it, especially seeing it is not of necessary use,
the charge of educating the child lying upon the parents, and the wholl Church
being witnesses.

2. Admit that, in some cases, there may be a lawful use of special
witnesses, or suretyes: yet, can these give the infant a right to baptism,
which had none in the parents? That the Covenant is made with parents for
themselves and their children, Gen: 17. 1 Cor: 7.
and that thereby the children are holy in the parents we read, but where do
we read so much of suretyes?

3. Admit, that, in some suretyes the children have a right unto baptism (viz,
such as were of Abraham's family, Genesis 17.3.
borne in his house, or bought with his money, and so such as are members of
Christian familyes, in a like state) yet, will it thence follow, that such
suretyes as many times present children to baptism, in that place, partake of
the same privilege, of whose familyes the infants are not members, nor are
their familyes ordered like Abraham's, themselves also are, some of them,
notoriously wicked, others of them unknown to the Church, and many of them,
such as have no power to see the child educated, and, it may be, shall never
see it after that day. Such an one was that unknown woaman, who seeing a harlot
delivered of a bastard, instantly took the infant, and brought it to the
English Church, in Amsterdam, where (as it fell out) she found the Congregation
dismissed before she came, who being asked by some of the members, why she came
no sooner, answered, how could I come before the child was borne? or to that
purpose, and so she hastened to the Dutch Church, where she found them baptising
many, and without delay presented the child, which was received, without any
difficulty or question. Judicious Calvin calls the promise made by those who
have no power to educate the child an open mocking of God. Calv. Epist: 149.


They are manifest Christians which profess Christian Religion, at the reading
of the Liturgy of Baptism?

Ans: 1. The name of Christians is a name full of Honor, and wherein
Nazianzene, professes that himself and Basil did glory more, Orat: 30. in
laud: Basil.
then Gyges in his ring, or Midas in his gold. Shall this honorable badge,
and, as it were, livery of Christ his faithful servants, be put upon a company
of varlets, whose fathers Job would have disdayned to set with the dogs of his
flock; as if the practice of a Christian life were not requisite to manifest
Christians?

2. If persons, otherwise unknown, are sufficiently manifested to be
Christians by such a profession of faith as is usually made there at the
reading of the Leiturgy of Baptism (which is done by saying yae, or some
gesture of the body only) to what use was such a declaration of their faith
required in the Apostles times, and many ages after?

3. Beza puts a case of a man convicted lawfully, in the presbytery, of
obstinacy in maintayning some dangerous errors against the immortality of the
soul and the resurrection of the body, and then asks Erastus, shall we
account this man a Christian? De presb. and excom: Arg. 4. Reas:
And answers minime opinor. I suppose not. In like manner, I will put a case
or two. Terentius of Harlem is infamous to this day for like errors, and for
the dangerous fruits thereof in diverse, who yet live in several places, and
some in Amsterdam, who, to this day, have not revoked their wicked errors.
Also the story of Robbert Roberts is notoriously known, who said he would have
one child baptized in the true Church, and having collected a catalogue of
several Churches, which he called the seven sisters, to the Arminians he
presented one of his children to be baptized, but, because he was a Libertine,
and a scoffer they refused to baptize it, except some other presented it:
another being about 14 years old he presented to the Anabaptists, but they
refused it, accounting him too young to make confession of his faith, one of
them was baptized (as I am told) by the Papists, another by the Lutherans, the
other in the ordinary Congregation, where he lives, as it is said. This is
published in a pamphlet printed to the view of all men. Again, the Dutch
preachers refuse to baptize the infants of Gypses, whom they call Heydenen,
because of their disorderly course, yet many of these will offer to make the
same profession, which is required at the reading of the Leiturgy, and some of
them will tell you, that they have been baptized. Are these to be accounted as
heathen notwithstanding that? why not others also, that are as bad they?

Lastly the Answerer himself refused to baptize the child of G. P. being
excommunicated, and of a profane life, as its said, and I. S. who held with the
Anabaptists and Arrians, besides some others, yet, I suppose, neither of those
refused to make such a profession as is required at the reading of the
Leiturgy. Now, if their denying to baptize infants in those cases be
warrantable; how can it be justified that they would compel me to baptize all
that are brought, by whomsoever, in that place?

The infants should not bear the punishment of their fathers sin?

Ans: 1. If they ground this Assertion upon Ezekiel: 18.14; Ezekiel. 18.14.17.
it is impertinent, it being there spoken of a son forsaking his fathers
sins, and doing the contrary, with whom the Lord deals not in the course of
his justice, but of mercy. Such were Abijah and Josiah: otherwise, it will not
hold in all cases. For, were not infants drowned in the old world, burnt in
Sodom, swallowed up of the earth with Corah, plagued in Aegipt (especially in
the death of the first borne) stoned with Achan, destroyed with the Cananites
and Amalekites, rooted out by judgments upon the familyes of Eli, Jeroboam,
Baashan etc. with their parents?

2. To come punctually to the question. With Cain, Genesis 4.16 Cap. 6.2. Vide
Bez. de excom. p. 35.
his posterity were driven from the face of God, except so many of them as
joined with the family of Seth, the Church of God, and thence arose the
different names of the sons of God and the daughters of men. So were the
Ismaelites and Edomites, with Ismael, and Esau, their Fathers. At this day, the
children of the Jews are broken off, with their fathers, for unbeleife, and
are become strangers from the Covenant of promise, and so have no right to the
Sacraments, the outward seals of the covenant.

3. What difference soever we make between infants, Deuteronomy. 29.2 9.
in this respect, yet 1. It does not enter into Gods decree concerning
Election. For secret things we leave to God. 2. Nor does it concern the
aeternall salvation of the infant, which is not at all praejudiced by the want
of baptism, it being not by its own contempt, or neglect of it, (else we must
conclude all those infants to be damned, which died in the wilderness, being
uncircu^cised, which God forbid!) but it only concerns their admission, or
not admission into a visible Church. And so a difference may, and must be made.
For, though all infants are by nature alike children of wrath. Yet, in respect
of the Adoption outwardly manifested, they are not alike, especially to us, and
in reference to Church privileges. For, I demand, was Jsaack, and the children
of the heathen alike, in this respect. And, if no child should be denied the
Sacrament for the parents sin, why are not the infants of Jews, Turks,
Indians, Moors, Gypses admitted, without any difference, to baptism?

The five Ministers yielded, that, if any other case fell out, whereby it may
seem that the infant presented should not be baptized, that then the judgment
of the wholl English presbytery, or also, if need be, and if conveniently it
may be done, that the judgment of the Classis of Amsterdam be obtained, heard,
and rested in.

Ans:] This concession of the five Ministers, which is used for a pretense
against me, is really and indeed much against themselves. For.

1. Their judgment is, that I should be left free, in any other case, to order
my practice in admitting infants to baptism, by the advice of the English
presbytery, without requiring the counsel of the Classis, or observing, the
custom of that place therein. If so, why not in this case also? The case
whereat I stuck, was to be free not to baptize those infants, whose parents,
being no members of that Church, are altogether unknown. For which purpose I
insisted upon this demand (which I still thinck to be aequall, and, in that
place, necessary) that none such should present their children in public to be
baptized by me, till I had before received satisfaction concerning them, by
private conference with them, or otherwise. Yet, to prevent all offense, I
freely offered, in any difficult case that might fall out, to acquaint the
English presbytery with it, and to seek their advise.

Now, if my demand, about being satisfied concerning the parents and
presenters, be judged by those five learned and prudent men fit to be granted,
in any other case, why not in this case? Let the difference be shown between
other cases and this, in reference to my demand. Will they say, this case is
already determined? Let them show where. If they say in the Scripture; Let them
allege one text from the first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations for
it. If they say, in some National Synod of these Countries; Let them name the
Synod, and produce the Canon, in any one Synod that has been from the
beginning of Reformation to this day. Jf they cannot, as it is certain they
cannot, where then? If they say in the Classis; It will concern the Classis to
show, 1, by what right they take upon them to limit the Churches in such cases,
wherein the Scriptures and the Synods have left them at liberty, 2. How this
comes to be so particularly and severely pressed upon the Ministers of the
English Church, seeing no more is required of the Ministers of any other Church,
by the Classical orders, then to subscribe to the Catechism, and to the
Belgic Confession, and to the last Synod of Dort, but no such practice is
taught or defended in any one of these.

2. This further may be collected out of the concession of these five
Ministers, that the judgment of the English presbytery is sufficient, in some
cases which may fall out and cause doubts in the Minister about baptizing some
that are brought, and that in those cases it is to be heard and rested in, if
it can be obtained, without the judgment of the Classis, which the Minister is
not bound to seek, but when it is needful, through his not obtaining the
other. Herein they contradict the Answerer, who concludes the Elders to be
insufficient for this, and that, Sect. 23. Ans. 6.
not by a common insufficiency that is in all men for holy administrations 1.
Cor. 2.16. but by a special insufficiency in cases of this nature. Which is
the rather to be observed, because there he says that the Classis has already
judged and determined it, and therefore they are insufficient: but here he
says, the five Ministers have referred me to the judgment of the English
presbytery, and elsewhere he says, Sect. 19.
that this wrighting of the five Ministers was by all the ministers of the
Classis, with one consent, approved and confirmed. If this be so; then the
Classis have not judged the Elders to be insufficient in cases of this nature.
Thus he may be found not only contradicted by the Classis, but also
contradictory to himself.

3. This also is employed in this expression of the five Ministers, that, if the
judgment of the presbytery cannot be obtained, and so it be needful to seek
the judgment of the Classis, that then it should be heard and rested in, so
far as the judgment of the presbytery should have been rested in, if it could
have been obtained. So far, I say. For, the Answerer says, there are cases,
Sect. 24.
wherein their judgment must not be rested in, but the matter must be brought to
the Classis. Whereunto I add, that there are cases, wherein we must not rest in
the determination of Classes, or Synods, but appeal to the Scriptures, as to
the highest judicatory, and therefore are alike bound to rest in the
determination of the presbytery, and of the Classis, that is, in neither of
them, further then they agree with the Scripture.

4. When they add, that the judgment of the Classis is to be saught, in case of
necessity, so far as it may be done conveniently, they suppose truly, that
the case may be such, as it cannot be done conveniently, or at all done, when a
Minister is put upon it suddenly. For even whilst he is in the pulpit, the
child is brought, many times: where shall he find the Classis, at such a time,
when he can not have time so much as to advise with the Elders that sit before
him, without making some public disturbance? which very consideration serves
to declare the reasonablenes of my demand for private satisfaction to be given
me before hand, to prevent all public disturbance.

5. This seeming concession is merely seeming, and it is contradictory to it
self. For 1, if there are cases, wherein the judgment of the Elders will be
requisite and necessary; why do they hinder me from the use of means to find
out those causes, when they bind me to baptize those that are brought, though I
have no knowledge of them, by private conference, or otherwise? 2. If that way
of having some precedent private examination of the parents and suretyes in
Christian Religion be so greatly approved by them, that they do judge that
this fore said examination be ordained, so far as may stand with the
aedification of the English Church: why do they afterward add, that if the
parents or suretyes shall refuse to come, and undergo this examination, or
those that do come, shall not seem, for that time, to satisfye the brethren
etc. yet the infant etc. shall not therefore be excluded from baptism, or
deprived thereof. This is that which the Satyr could not understand, that a
man should warm his hands and cool his pottage with the same blast of breath,
nor can I see how, by the same men, in the same wrighting, the same course
should be so greatly approved and applauded, that they judge that it must be
ordained, and yet afterward so much slighted, that men that will not submit to
it, are left free, and that by their ordinance, to do what they list. The end
of that ordinance was the aedification of the English Church, by a reverend and
right use of the Seals: If, for this end, that course is to be ordained: why
is it not to be maintained for the same end? Either it is too frivolou^ ^o be
ordained to such an end, or it is too weighty to be slighted, in such a manner,

6. What help can be expected from the English presbytery, in this case, when
the Answerer will always interpose, either to have matters concluded according
to this custom, and his former practice, or else he will protest against their
judgment in this matter, and carry it to the Classis, under a pretense that
they were insufficient, or partial, or there was some difference. How can it
be expected to be otherwise, if he resolve to carry matters in his way, or else
to make a difference, that there may be some ground for appeal to the Classis,
as to an higher judicatory?

This manner of admitting those that are brought thus promiscuously is approved
by the judgment of the five godly and learned ministers, who protest, in the
presence of God, that, in this advise they deal sincerely, and with a good
conscience, desiring nothing more then to further my calling.

Ans:] This pretense has so much show in it, that the Answerer himself was
deceived by it, and encouraged to place too much confidence in it, as appears
in the various uses he has made of it, upon several occasions. Jn which
respect, it will be convenient, that we examine it very particularly, which
that I may do, we will draw the strength of it into four heads, which we will
express in so many objections, and subnect their several answers.

This custom is approved of by the judgment of the five learned and prudent
men?

Yet Ierom taxes him for an error about monogamy, Hieron in Tit. Cap. 1 Aug:
de Civit. dei. lib. 21. Cap. 17. Hieron in Zep: 3. Aug: Epist 28. Chrisost:
Hom: 3. de Lazaro.
or the unlawfullnes of second marriages. Origin was a learned man: Yet
Augustine accuses him of an error about the salvation of the Devils, at
last. Hierom was a learned man: yet he erred in holding the merit of the
minister to be necessary to the making of the Sacrament. Augustine was a
learned man: yet he erred about the absolute necessity of baptism to
salvation. And Chrysostom was a learned m^^: Yet he erred when he hold, that
where spiritual books are, the Devils have no power. These 5 Ancients, all
men will confess, are not inferior in learning or prudence to the five Dutch
ministers who subscribed that wrighting, yet they erred.

2. The Answerer himself pretends the same cause for his not resting in the
judgment of more then five as learned and prudent men as these, Sect: 9. Ans. 3.
in a question that concerned me. Will such a plea hold in that case? Then much
more in this.

Though learned and prudent men may err apart: yet when so many consult
together, and conclude upon a point; their judgment jointly declared, should be
rested in?

The judgment of learned and prudent men is to be received with all due
reverence; though they severally and apart express it, much more, when they,
joining together in consultation, do consent and agree in one conclusion:
provided that the truth do not suffer praejudice by men's authority. In which
respect it was learnedly and prudently said by Augustine. Aug: Epist: 48.
Hear that which the Lord says, not that which Donatus says, Rogatus says,
Vincentius says, Hilarious says, Ambrose says, Augustine says. (yet these
were six learned and prudent men) but hear what the Lord says. 1 Cor: 1.12.
For to do otherwise, what is it but to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos,
and I of Cephas; which the Scripture condemns.

2. Why may not five together err as well as five asunder? 1. Suppose
Tertullian, and Lactantius, and Victorinus, and Ireneus, Hieron: in Ezekiel. lib.
11. Cap. 36.
and Apollinarius, five learned and prudent men, who held the error of the
Millenaryes (as Ierom reports) had subscribed a wrighting to assure Ierom of
the truth of that opinion: would he have thought himself bound to rest in that
their opinion, upon their naked affirmation, which he judged to be their
error? 2. Suppose that those five learned and prudent men, Dr. Ames, Mr.
Forbes, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Balmford, Mr. Roe had sent such a wrighting of their
private judgment against this disorder of promiscuous baptising to this
Answerer? would he thinck himself bound to rest therein? If not: why does he
require this of me?

But they protest in the presence of God, that they dealt sincerly, 3. Ob.
and with a good conscience?

Ans: 2. Sam. 7.25.
Nathan dealt sincerely and with a good conscience (as he thought, and would
have protested, if it had been required) when he advised David about building a
Temple to the Lord, and encouraged him thereunto: Yet he erred. Peter thought
he dealt sincerely and with a good conscience (and, before Paul had convinced
him of his evil, it may be, would have protested it also) in his temporizing
first with the Gentiles, Gal. 2.11.12.
and then with those of the Circumcision: yet he erred. Those famous lights,
spoken of before, thought they dealt sincerely, and with a good conscience, in
those opinions which they defended: yet they erred.

They desired nothing more then to further the promotion of Mr. D. 4. Ob.
to the ministry of the English Church?

Ans: 1. I do easily believe that the Dutch Ministers did really desire my
settling there, and that, when they went to the Answerer, their purpose was to
further it. And I am persuaded of them, that when they wrote to me, they did
it, upon some encouraging intimations suggested by the Answerer, that a letter
from them signifying the concurrence and consent of their judgment with him in
this point would prevail to draw me to yield to it. I am also confident, they
were the more apt to approve such courses of accommodation, as, they saw, would
best please him, upon a conceit that the Answerer himself did much desire me,
which also themselves did intimate in the wrighting subscribed by them. So that
their miscarrage in this buisenes was not from any disaffection to me, or
desire of hindering my settling there, but from too much credulity and
tractablenes to complye with the Answerer, in his way, the issue of whose
purpose, they foresaw not. These things being premised, I proceed to show the
reason, why I could not rest in their conusaile, in this particular.

2. Two things, especially, hindered me from resting therein. 1. Because the
same thing which they propounded, only as their private judgment, the Answered
pressed as a law to me, wherein I must rest, that is, conform thereunto, and
this my resting therein must be the condition, whereupon he would consent to my
settling there, else not. So that his finger was heavyer upon me, in this, then
their loins, and he assumed a power to himself of prescribing rules to me,
which the government of these churces has not given him, yea, more then is
given to the Classes themselves by any Synod, or to any Synod by the word of
God, to injoyne this thing to a Minister as a condition of his call to a
pastoral charge. 2. Because the five Ministers propounded their private
judgment nakedly without showing their grounds from the Scripture, so that they
seemed to me to deal by their authority, not by argument. Now the mere
authority, that is, the bare affirmation of godly and learned men, is less to
be regarded then their reasons, and yet their reasons, without the word, are of
no value, in Divine matters. For all men are liars, apt to be deceived, and so
to deceive, impossibility of erring being proper to the Scriptures, which
therefore are only fit to be the Canon or rule for the ordering of Ministers
concerning their wholl behavior in the house of God. 1. Tim. 3.14.15. Mat.
21.13. Mat. 12.3
Hence Christ and his Apostles, 1. reproved disorders by Scripture (so Christ
did the profaning of the Temple) 2, justified things well done by Scripture (so
Christ did the pulling of the ears of corn) 3. resolved and answered
questions by Scripture (so Christ did, Mat. 19.4 Mat. 15.4 Mat. 22.29.32. Acts.
2.1.34. Act. 15.
in the case of Divorce) 4. confuted errors by Scriptures (so Christ did the
Pharisees and Sadduces) 5. confirmed and proved Doctrines by Scriptures (so
Peter proved the resurrection and ascension of Christ etc.) 6. gave advice, and
made orders, not by their own authority, but by the direction of the Holy
Ghoast, which immediate assistance seeing we want, light must be fetched from
Scripture, if we will guide others safely by our counsel, without which
learned men may err, have erred, and do err, and therefore their judgments
must be tried, and judged by it, and no further be rested in, then they agree
with it. According to that of Ierom Quod ex Scriptura non habet authoritatem
caadem facilitate contemnitur, qua acceptatur. Hieron. in Math. 23.
That which has not authority from the Scripture is as easily despised as
received.

Seventh pretense. It is the custom of these Churches, which all, 7. Pretense.
that are admitted by the Classis, do promise to observe.

This pretense the Answerer insinuates in that which he said about the form
of Mr. B. calling, to minister the word, and the dependances thereof, according
to the order of these Reformed Churches, and especially with these which are
combined with the Classis of Amsterdam, Concerning that expression some thing
more may be noated, in the examination of the seventeenth Section, and when we
come to the eight and twentieth Section.

For the present,

First, oppose the Confessions of the Reformed Churches to this custom, Ham.
Confess- Sect. 13.
and it will be found that they cannot stand together, for, when they
described, qui sunt baptisandi, who are to be baptized, speaking of infants;
they say, they must be the children of persons that are in the Covenant Helvet:
poster. cap. 13.
of the people of God Helvet. prior art. 21. et Bohem. c. 21.
of holy parents Gallic. Art. 35.
, of those to whom the promises belong Belgic. Art. 34.
, who are inserted into the Church, and only them Saxon confess. Art. 13.
, the true children of Abraham Suevit. cap. 17.
such as are in alike condition as they were who had right to Circumcision
amongst the Jews. Now compare, with this doctrine of the Reformed Churches,
the practice of that place, as it has been declared, and it will appear that
their own Confessions plead against this custom. And, how can that be called
the order of these Reformed Churches, which agrees not with the doctrine of
these reformed Churches?

Secondly, oppose the Canons of the Synods of these countries to this custom,
and the thing will be manifested. In a Synod held at Dort in the year 1578.
Art. 59. It was referred to the judgment of the Ministers and Elders, whether
there be any lawful cause brought by any, why the child to be baptized should
be deferred from Baptism: and in Art. 61. It was ordered, that the fathers,
before they bring their children to baptism, shall go to the Minister, or an
Elder, that the Church may have notice of the parties that are to be baptized.
And in Art. 62. They are appointed to acquaint the Minister what name they will
give the child, and to show him how they will educate the child in that
Religion.

In a Synod held at Middleborough in the year 1581. the 22. question. It is
demanded, whether the parents of children do go first to the Minister, or
Elders, and certify them, that they desire to have their children baptized
before, to see whether they judge it meet to receive such witnesses or not? In
Art. 75. It is questioned, whether the Minister should be rebuked, when he
baptiseth children, whose parents appoint witnesses, which stand not for
religion? Ans. The parents shall be wonted, as much as is possible, that they
first speak with the Ministers before they present their children to baptism,
etc.

In a Synod held at Vtricht, in the year 1590. Art 1. It is decreed, that
Baptism is to be administered, according to the ordinance of Christ, without
Godfathers to bind themselves, only the father and mother to promise to train
it up in the Religion.

Now, compare the Canons of these Synods with the custom of that place, and
they will be found so far to varye from it, that it will appear not to be the
order of these reformed Churches, but a disorder crept in, as we have said
before.

I will conclude this examination of pretenses used in defense of this
unwarrantable custom with the judicious censure of Dr. Ames, who knew well the
miscarriage of this disorder, in these countries. De conscientia. Cap. 27.4
Incuria illa idcirco neutiquam potest excusari, qua promiscue, and sine
disermine, admittuntur quicunque, et a quibuscunque offeruntur. Therefore that
carelesnes can by no means be excused, whereby all, promiscuously, and without
difference, are admitted to baptism, by whomsoever they are presented. And so
much shall suffice for the examination of the twelfth Section, and for
declaration of the grounds, whereupon I durst not bind my self, by promise, or
otherwise, to rest in the judgment of those five Ministers, that is, to
conform to the custom of this place in administering Baptism promiscuously to
all that are presensed, and by whomsoever.

The Answer to the 13. Section examined. Of the order agreed upon in the
Consistory.
THat which here, he calls an order, will, upon examination, be found very
far from accommodating me. I will wright it down as I received it from the
Elders, out of the noate, which I have in keeping. Ian. 19. 1634. The
Consistory being gathered, Elders, and Deacons together, it was demanded,
whether that all persons being no members should be sent unto Mr. D. to desire
the baptism of their children, and to make confession to him, for his
satisfaction in his administration of that Sacrament? The answer was by all
voices, yea, if Mr. D. can be persuaded thereunto. And for the better, and more
convenient bringing of the parents or presenters of the children to the
Minister, it is agreed, by most voices in Consistory, that Th: A. the Coster
shall bring or direct the parties to the Ministers house. Afterward, this
question was propounded by the Answerer, and written down in these words.
Whether, if persons ignorant, being willing to receive instruction, allthough
not presently able to render a reason, shall be sent away by him, or admitted,
to wit, they approving of the doctrine of baptism taught in these Churches,
and as by us usually is propounded? A Copy of this pretended order, with the
questionw, as brought to me by some of the Elders to see what answer J would
make to them boath. Which when I had considered, I found the order too short,
and the question captious.

First for the order J let these five things be duly weighed.

1. The Answerer dateth this order Ian. 15. which the Elders date Ian: 19. as
he dated the ministers wrighting to me Ian: 28. which themselves, in their
latin copy to me, dated Ian: 20. which difference is not of much consequence,
only it shows that it is not safe for the Reader to be too confident of the
Answerers memory.

2. Where as I propounded three ways of accommodation (as the eleventh Section
shows) here is but one of them propounded in the Consistory.

3. That one is otherwise propounded then I expressed it. For I did not desire
that all, whose children should be presented to baptism, should be sent to me,
but only that it should be so, when it fell into my course to administer that
Sacrament (my motion being that we might not perform it jointly, but
severally, and alternis vicibus) neither did I require that they should make
confession to me, but that I might speak with them, before they presented them
in public, that I might have some knowledge of them, by private conference
with them, to prevent public disturbance.

4. The course, whereupon they agreed for accommodation, was not sufficient.
For 1. many present their children to Baptism that acquaint not Th. A. with it
before hand. The Answerer told me that they come many times in the sermon time,
no man having knowledge thereof before. How shall Tho: A. send such to me? 2.
They that do acquaint him with their purpose of presenting their children,
what if they will not come to me, upon his persuasion? Who sees not that I am,
in such cases, and the like, as far to seek for accommodation, as if no order
had been made? I told the Elders that this would not be sufficient, unless it
were added, that, no infants should be presented in public to baptism, whose
parents are not members of the Church, before the minister had received
satisfaction concerning the parents, in private. To this purpose, I required
that a firm order should be made in the Consistory, to secure me from further
trouble about this point, which the Elders promised, and endeavored to effect
(as I was told) but the Answerer resisted it, refusing his consent thereunto,
without the consent of the Classis.

5. The offer which he pretended that he voluntarily made, for the enlarging of
this order, and my further accommodation, to wit, that he would send to me
those parents, that should come to him etc. and so, departing from his right,
he was content to referr the wholl work of examination to my discretion, is a
vain boast of false liberality. For. 1. few, if any, come to him to advertise
him thereof. 2. If he should speak to them, they would choose, and it, may be,
refuse, and make contention, if a firm order were not made to prevent it. 3.
His referring of the wholl work of examination to me, was cast in for a
pretense, to evade the first mean of accommodation propounded by me: and by
the second course, Sect. 11.
which J propounded for accommodation also, it may appear, that this offer was
not for the accommodation which I desired, but to hinder it rather.

Secondly, for the question.] Any one may see, it was captious. For. 1. Why
does he speak only of knowledge, when I would (as he knows) be satisfied
concerning other things, as well as their knowledge? 2. Why does he speak of
the measure and degree of knowledge, so obscurely and suspiciously? 3. Why was
this question added to the order? Was it not to show that the order should no
further stand, then he received satisfaction in my answer to his question? And
hereby two things are manifested. 1. that the order was not absolute, but
conitionall, if I could be persuaded thereunto. 2. that I did not approve of
this order, as sufficient, as may further appear in my dislike of his
question, whereunto, if my answer had been to his content, to what end did he
procure the five Ministers to sign that wrighting which was sent to me
afterward, as him self confesses in the beginning of this Section? It had
been superfluous, and to no purpose, if the matter had been before concluded
amongst our selves.

For a Conclusion of this Section, to satisfye the Reader that this was to be
called rather a proposition or motion about an order to be deliberated upon,
then an order perfected by mature deliberation, these Considerations may be
added to what has been said.

1. That with this pretended order a question was joined, and my answer to
boath was required. This shows that the order was not absolute, but to be
assented to by the Answerer, if my answer to his question should please him.

2. That, in that order it is expressly said, [yea if Mr. D. can be entreated
etc.] which again shows, that it was no absolute order but to stand, if I
could be entreated etc. So that this could not be called an order, till the
Answerer had been satisfied about mine answer to his question, and till I had
yielded to what, by this order, should be propounded to me.

3. That, when the order was brought to me, though the word satisfaction and
content was spoken of by me, as a word fit to be in the order, yet I demanded
how this could be done by that order, upon the reasons before mentioned in my
fifth proof of the defectivenes of that order,

4. That, upon my mislike of it, the order was left with me to peruse, and to
add what I thought requisite, as it was fit it should, seeing the end of it, was
my satisfaction.

5. That, before J had polished and perfected that order, to my content, the
letter of the five Ministers was brought to me, which then put me out of hope,
till the Elders again promised me, the next day, that all should be made well.

As for their wrighting of this amongst the Acts of their Consistory, whether
it was only entered into a waste book, or written down, for a record, J know
not, let them look to that amongst themselves, but what I have affirmed, I
know to be true, in every particular.

The Answer to the 14. Section examined, concerning my falsely supposed
consenting to the wrighting of the five ministers, upon an order made in the
Consistory.
THe pretended order abovesaid being found insufficient, and, eo nomine,
excepted against by me, and the Elders having assured me, that, either that
should be mended, to my Content, or else a better and more sufficient one
should be made, it now remains that we examine his report of my consent to
the wrighting of the five Ministers, wherein also many things are misreported.

1. Here again we must differ about his report of the time. He says, that the
day, wherein this discourse was between us, was Ian. 22. 1634. and yet, that
it was after I had received the wrighting from the five Ministers, which
wrighting, in his translation, is dated Ian. 28. 1634. When the 22. day, shall
come to be after the 28. day, in the same month, this report will be true, not
before. 2. As untrue is his report, that then I signified my consent. To make
that appear, I will breifely relate the story of that matter. On saturday,
toward the evening, one of the Elders brought me that wrighting subscribed by
the five Ministers, which when I had read, I told him what I thought, and that
I durst not yield to it. Both he, at that time, and the next day, after the
fore noone Sermon (it being the Lords day) the other Elders prayed me not to
show my dislike of that wrighting to the Answerer, fearing that he would make
ill use of it, assuring me that all should be made well, to my content. The
same day, after the second Sermon, the Answerer asked me, if I had received a
wrighting from the five Ministers? whereunto when I answered affirmatively, he
demanded of me, whether I did rest therein? Being loath to give offense, I did
rather evade, then answer the question, by saying (not only, as he reports,
that the Dutch ministers had done what they could, but also) that the wrighters
them selves did seem not to require me to rest in it (seeing themselves say, in
their wrighting; that it is but their privatum judicium, private judgment)
but rather that they would be well content that some order might be made in the
Consistory, as appears in the close of their wrightingh, and accordingly I
did thereunto referr my self. When the Elders, fearing the Answerers drift, in
this discourse, hastened him into the Consistory, one of them saying he knew my
mind, he answered, that he desired to hear it from my self, and afterward,
when, upon my answer to him, they again endeavored to break off our
discourse, he said to them discontentedly, I perceive that he does not rest in
the wrighting of the five Ministers, further then it makes way for an order to
be made in the Consistory. When I charged the Answerer herewith, what replied
he? If this be true, it follows that he did consent and rest in that wrighting
of the Ministers. Is not this a strange inference? Let us see how he proves
it? Seeing this order (says he) was made and confirmed in the Consistory. I
professed my dislike of that order which was made, as insufficient, and the
Elders thereupon promised that an order should be made to my content, in this
particular, to this order to be made I referred my self, resting so far in
the wrighting of the five Ministers, as it made way for the making of that
order, which the Answerer had opposed formerly. And to this day, I could rest
so far in that wrighting, if I had any desire of being joined with him, from
which I am very far, having such experience of his spirit.

Whereas he speaks of my referring him for answer to Mr. W.] what likelihood
was there in that, when I had given mine own answer? I said indeed Mr. W.
knows my mind, and that I had given my answer to him. But what is that to
this? And if Mr. W, misunderstanding me, did report matters otherwise, then I
my self had done to the Answerer himself; who sees not, that he should have
accounted that to be the answer; which I my self gave to himself, not that
which Mr. W. gave so far differing from mine, if he gave any such.

The answer to the 15. Section examined, concerning their going to the
Magistrate
THis Section is begun, and ended with misreports, and filled up with causeles
reproaches, in the intercurrent passages. For. 1. he says, in the beginning,
that, upon my consent to the wrighting of the five ministers, considered with
the order above mentioned, it was thereupon resolved etc. The untruth of this
report is manifested to the Reader in the two former Sections, 2. In the
conclusion of this Section, he charge me with reproaching him, when I said in
my wrighting, to prove that he did not desire to have me with him, that the
conditions, whereunto he held me, showed it to be so, and added, upon which
terms, he is content to have others, whom he has no cause to desire for
Colleagues with him. This he says, is a great untruth. But I know it to be
true, and can demonstrate it, if I would fall into his vein of disparadging
men in print, and diverse of his Congregation will witness it to be true. 3. For
the intercurrent reproachful passages, the Reader may noate more then a good
many. But I let these things pass, and will relate the story of this passage
also, as it was. The Answerer (in all probability) by the help of this
wrighting of the five Minister, thaught that he had me now fast in his lurch,
which way soever I resolved upon. If I should rest in it; then the question was
yielded and I had bound my self to baptize promiscuously all that should be
brought, according to their custom: which I could not do, without sin
against my conscience. If I should refuse to conform thereunto; he had the
five Ministers now engaged to assist him, both with the Magistrates, and with
the Classis, to hinder my settling there. This groundwork being thus laid, it
was no hard matter to persuade him to go to either of them. Hereupon, at the
entreaty of the Elders, he accompanied them to the Burgomasters, whom, when
they made their address to them, they found praepossest with a false
information, about the cause of my coming into those countries, concerning
which they desired to be satisfied. For they had been told that it was not for
matters Ecclesiastical, but for some offense against the civil Magistrate.
which when I understood, I desired the Elders, that they would not prosecute
their request any further, till this matter were cleared. And, upon enquiry,
what had been said on both sides, I found that the Answerer was so far from
doing me full right (in clearing my innocence, as he might have done, having
understood the truth concerning the cause of my coming into these parts, by
mine own report to himself, in private) that what he spoke might seem,
rather to increase, then remove the suspicion.

The pretend cause of my trouble with the civil Magistrates in England (as it
appeared) was a pious work, wherein I (with others more worthy) was entrusted,
to wit, the redeeming of impropriations, and restoring of the means to the
right use, the maintenance of faithful and painful ministers, in those
places, where was most need. Wherein three other ministers (whereof two were
Doctors of Divinity) and four Lawyers (of which one was the Kings Serjant at
Law) and five Citizens (of whom one was Lord Major of London, when I came
thence) were trustees with me, by the entreaty and appointment of many, some
whereof are at rest, others are yet alive. The work it self was applauded in
that very order which was made in the Exchecquor against our proceeding in it:
Our faithfullnes in discharging that trust was testified by his Maties Attorney
general (who prosecuted the suite against us) upon his examination of our
accounts, which we gave in, upon our oaths. I had no more cause to fly for
fear of trouble about this, then the rest, nor had they, or I any cause to
withdraw our selves, at that time, when I came over. For the buisenes was
wholly ended before my departure. This objection being answered, and the
informer himself falling off from his report, the former motion, for their
consent to my calling to that ministry, was, without my knowledge, revived, by
the Elders. Before the Burgomasters had given their answer, they were informed
by one or two of the Dutch ministers, both concerning me, and concerning this
difference: when the Elders again waited upon them for their answer, the
Burgomasters told them. 1. that they were satisfied about the former report. 2.
That they had received a very good report from one or two of the Dutch
ministers, with whom they had speech, concerning me. 3. That the said ministers
had acquainted them with some difference, which had risen about this custom,
and that J had now promised to join with the Classis, and to conform to the
orders, and customs of the Dutch Church, and, in particular, in this their
manner of baptising all that are brought. And they concluded, in effect, in
these words, we expect that he do accordingly, and so you may proceed in your
choice. By this the Reader may perceive that matters were now so far from
being accommodated, that they were set in a worse state, then before. For now,
not only the five Ministers, but the Magistrates also were engaged so far in
this matter, that they gave but a conditional assent unto my calling, and had,
upon misinformation, made my conformity to this unwarrantable custom, the
condition thereof. So that, how easily might he, who before abused the
Magistrates with untrue reports about the cause of my coming over (to hinder my
admittance) by a malicious (though true) complaint of my not observing that
order, in some cases, cause me to be ejected thence? Now a gapp was opened to
every one, that hereafter should seek my hurt, to procure some such children
to be brought (of which sort there can be no want, at any time, in such a city
as Amsterdam) as they know I dare not baptize, that thereupon they might ground
a complaint against me to the Magistrate. Nor could I, in such a case, expect
any help from the Answerer, whom I have found an hinderer of my accommodation
hitherto, both in those three ways propounded by me, and in the order, which
should have been made in the Consistory, by the promise and endeavors of the
Elders.

An examination of his answer to the 16. Section, concerning their going to
the Classis to seek their consent.
THe truth of this passage I will breifely relate. After the Elders had
received this answer from the Magistrate; out of their desire to accomplish the
buisenes (and not finding me at home when they came to speak with me) they
went, without my consent, or knowledge, to one of the Dutch ministers, whom
they entreated to call an extraordinary Classis to meet on the monday
following, fearing (as it seems) least longer delays might occasion new
troubles. The minister, having granted their request, in their return
homewards from him, they told me what they had done, about the calling of a
Classis, I, being yet ignorant of the issue of their treaty with the
Magistrates, desired to know what conclusion they had made, and the very words,
wherein they had expressed their consent, which when I understood, I told them
that matters were now in a worse state then before: they also apprehended my
reason. I wished that the calling of a Classis had been forborne, and prayed
them to return to the minister, from whom they came, and to wish him not to
call an extraordinary Classis, for this matter, and to tell him that, upon some
considerations, they are willing that matters rest as they are, till the
ordinary time should come. They promised so to do, and went from me with that
resolution, but another of the Elders, with whom they met afterward, altered
their purpose, and therefore they went not. This change of their mind I knew
not, till it was too late to help it. The day when the Classis met, they were
with me, in the morning, before they went to the meeting. I prayed them to
deal plainly with the Classis, in telling them my judgment in this question,
and told them the danger of neglecting so to do. They promised me, and
purposed to do so, but perceiving that the Ministers of the Classis gave
consent to my call, without interposing any question about my conformity to
this custom, they did not perform their promise, still hoping and purposing to
secure and satisfye me by an effectual order that should be made for that end,
in the Consistory. Whereas the Answerer says, that the Ministers, at that
time, understood from them, that I had declared my consent with them, I am
informed by the Elders, that, not one word was spoken, to them, at that time,
thereabout. whereas he says, Had I known that he was unresolved to accord
with us, and to go on in the same practice with us, I would never have made
such a proposition for his admission, as I did, in the Classis. J answer.

1. Had he said so to me, at first, much trouble might have been prevented, but
he held me in expectation of a better end, by telling me that he would see what
he could do with the Classis, and that he would not answer me alone. etc.

2. What proposition he made I know not, but what opposition he made, both
concerning the tendering of a call to me in wrighting, and concerning the manner
of expressing my call, both he knows, and others can testifye that were there
present.

The answer to the seaventeenth Section examined, concerning my withdrawing of
my consent first made known unto him, as is pretended.
THe title of this Section supposes. 1. that I had consented, 2. that
afterward J with drew my consent: the untruth of both which assertions has
been shown in the foregoing Sections. Here, he speaks of matters that passed
between us the next Consistory, after this meeting of the Classis. The story
whereof was thus. A wrighting, wherein the agreement of the Answerer with the
officers of the Church about my calling, was delivered to me by the Answerer,
and Mr. A, which when I had read, I first gave them thanckes for this
expression of their good esteem of me, and then, to omit other passages,
desired to be certifyed, whether the order was made in the Consistory which was
promised. Whereby it appears that I still expected that an order should be
made, more to my content then yet it had been. For answer hereunto, the
Answerer told me, that they could do no more in that buisenes, then had been
done formerly When I heard this, and perceived, by a clause in that wrighting,
that, in accepting this call, I should bind my self to conform to the orders
and customs of the Dutch Church in this particular, as well as in others, I
made some demurr indeed, and desired time for deliberation, and being urged by
the Answerer to a speedy resolution, I gave my answer to them in the
Consistory, in the end of the same week. But desiring, and obtaining secret
conference with the Answerer, I acquainted him, in as inoffencive manner as I
could, with my still continuing unsatisfyednes, about the lawfullnes of that
conformity which was expected, praying him to help me with his advise, that my
desistance might be so ordered as might best conduce to the preventing of all
disturbance, and offense. He refused to give advice, saying he might do
nothing, of himself, in that matter. To omit other passages, seeing the
Elders, and Deacons were now come together, we agreed to speak with them in
the Consistory. As for his proceeding to hasten my calling, without delay, upon
my supposed consent; the examining of the former Sections, has sufficiently
given light to the intelligent Reader, for the discovery of the vanity of this
overture.

But if any man thinck I made too strict an interpretation of the words in that
wrighting, which the Answerer calls a form of calling (because, upon the
reading of it; I made some demurr, desiring time of deliberation) let him know
that, if I had accepted the calling delivered to me in that form, I had
actually bound my self to conform to that unwarrantable custom. Nor is this
my opinion alone, but the judgment of the Answerer, and (as he says) of the
Classis also, which will appear by his own words hereafter to be examined,
Sect. 28. p. 76.
wherein, to prove that M.B. was not of the same opinion with me, he produces
these words out of the form of his calling, which was sent to him in
wrighting. For (says he) being called to administer the word and dependances
thereof, according to the ^rder of these Reformed Churches, and especially of
those which are combined with the Classis of Amsterdam, and making no exception
against this form, but resting therein, after this question had been
propounded unto him, this is taken for an evidence that he was willing to
observe their order in the administration of Baptism. TO SVCH AS THEY USE TO
DO, and so it was understood by the Classis.

So that, it is not only the judgment of the Answerer but of the Classis also.
Nor was this Mr. B. case alone, to have such an exposition put upon those
words, in his form of calling, but in the same sense, the same form was
tendered me. Therefore the Answerer adds. And had Mr. D. accepted this call,
when it was, in the same form, offered unto him, that would also have been
taken for a grant of his professed agreement with us, etc. Now let the Reader
judge, whether, my apprehensions, concerning the purpose of those expressions,
so rightly concurring with the intention and meaning of the Classis, and of the
Answerer, and my judgment being so settled concerning the unlawfullnes of that
custom, and all means for accommodation being frustrated, I had not cause to
desire time for deliberation, and to be wholly turned, in my affections, from
that calling and employment, which was so clogged with ill conditions.

The answer to the 18. Section examined, concerning another Act of
accommodation for my satisfaction.
THe Answerer begins this Section with a misreport of my withdrawing my
consent, which, he says, I had formerly given, whereas the truth is, that,
from first to last, I was of the same judgment against this unwarrantable
custom, and so expressed my self, without any alteration.

The passages in the Consistory, the 11. of Feb. 1634. the Answerer reports
some what disorderly, in that he begins with that which was last, and makes
the testification of the Elders to follow that Act, which went before it,
whereby the right understanding of things is hindered. For, after that private
discourse, before mentioned, had passed between him and me, and after some
other speeches in the Consistory, and after I had walked forth, at their
entreaty, a great while, that they might privately consult, being called in
again to hear the issue, whereunto matters were brought, I found that the
order, spoken of in the 13. Section, was again renewed and enlarged, with this
addition, that the Elders and Deacons likewise promised to send such to me as
should come to them. Which was as much as just nothing. For, the same
objections which were made against the same offer made on the behalf of the
Answerer and of the Coster, in the 13. Section, are of force against this also.

Whereas he adds, that, both he, and they promised to prevent all further
occasion of offense, so much as in them lay, had this been done accordingly,
the Elders might well have added, in way of testification, their persuasion,
that no occasion would befall to work any scruple unto me in that which I
feared. For, then the order which I desired, had been made to prevent further
occasion of offense, seeing that lay in their power to do, if the Answerer
would have joined with the Elders lovingly and freely therein, and no other
course could help me, as the case now stood, which the Answerer knew, though
the Elders and Deacons did not, all of them, see so far into it. Now, seeing
this lay in them to do, and yet they did it not, neither would the Answerer
suffer it to be done, how was this promise performed of doing what lay in them?

When I had spoken somewhat, to show the insufficiency of this order to secure
me: they again prayed me to walk forth, and, after a shorter absence then
before, they sent for me to return to them, to hear what was added for
perfecting that order, which they wrote down, in these words. And further we
purpose if any should at unawares, bring such children, whose parents are not
members, we shall desire and counsel them by the Coster (without absolute
denial) to bring their children the next exercise following, that, in the
mean time, there may be convenience of examination.

Upon which Additionall I will noate some observations. 1. That the Elders and
Deacons, did, in effect, revoke that testification, which was last spoken of.
For, by their adding of this to what was then done, it appeared that themselves
saw that the former order was not sufficient to safeguard me from the thing
that I feared. 2. That this Additionall is only a declaration of their
purpose, but has not the force of an order, 3. That, considering that they
purposed only to signifye so much privately to those persons who should at
anytime so come (and not to have it published, that the wholl Church might take
knowledge of it) and that by the Coster, a mean man, whom they, to whom he
should speak, would easily slight, and his commission was only to desire and
counsel them, which they would easily reject, and ask him, what he had to
do to counsel them to deferr the baptising of their children, In this case,
what could he answer but this, J do only desire and counsel you, but I may
not absolutely deny you? And, how can such a course secure me?

Here again the Answerer misreporteth my answer: for he affirms, that this
would not content me, unless there might have benean absolute denial of
Baptism, in such a case, if entreaty would not serve. But I made no such
Answer, neither is any such answer recorded in the Acts of that Consistory,
which I have purposely examined. All that I stood upon, was, that a firm
order might be made in the Consistory to secure me from future trouble, about
that matter. But this the Answerer would not permit to be done, though it might
have been done, without any offense to the Classis, and with much content to
the Church. So that I have just cause to complain of his want of brotherly
moderation, in this point, what soever he seemed to yield, which, he knew, was
not sufficient to prevent the thing which I feared.

The following passage is an unjust reproach, which I will pass by, having
answered to the substance of it formerly. How unlawful that practice is, and
how necessary it was that I should witness against, it does appear in my
Reply to his twelfth Section.

In Conclusion. when the Elders prayed me to deferr my answer to another time,
the Answerer told me, that, when I should give mine answer, if I did accept of
this calling, I must promise to rest in, that is, to conform to, the wrighting
of the five Ministers. Whereby it appears, that, not withstanding all these
pretenses of accommodation, conformity to that wrighting, which bound me to
this disorder of promiscuous baptizing, was, first and last, the condition,
whereupon my calling to that ministry, must stand or fall, and that the
Answerer would have it so. Thus that day passed.

Now, though I had just cause of offense at these passages, yet, that it might
appear how much I was for peace and brotherly concord, the next day of their
meeting, being the 15 of Feb. I came into the Consistory to give my answer,
which was, that, if a promise must be made by me to conform to the judgment of
those Ministers set down as an order for me to rest in, I could not do it,
because the promise of doing any thing is a Confession that the thing is
lawful to be done, which I do not believe to be so, in this case, yet,
because I much prized their loves and tendered their peace (as I truly told
them) I was willing; if they desired it, to go on in assisting the Answerer,
as I formerly had done, for a convenient time, to see, if, in the interim, by a
freindly acquainting my self with the Dutch Ministers, I might be satisfied
about the lawfullnes of this custom, whereunto my conformity was required, or
procure that this question might be laid down, and might understand what those
other orders and customs of the Dutch Church are which I must observe, and more
fully know the members and state of the English Church, wherewith I should
join. In which motion I intended no intrusion (which I have always abhorred,
and was very far from, in that place) but only the peace and good of the
Church. This the Elders apprehended to be very reasonable, and desired that it
might take effect, but the Answerer was otherwise minded, as it is, in express
words, by the Elders recorded in the Acts of that Consistory.

His Answer to the 19. Section examined containing certain Acts of the Classis
after that my dissent and refusal of the call was known.
IN this Section we have the story of passages concerning this buisenes, in
three Classes, and with the Magistrates. But, before I examine them, it may be
demanded, why this matter was brought into the Classis, seeing I had in the
Consistory declared my not accepting the call, which was offered me, upon those
terms? was it because the Consistory had not power to give me a convenient
time for informing my self concerning the orders and customs of the Dutch
Church, by consent amongst themselves, without seeking to the Classis? But I
come to the particulars.

Concerning the first Classical meeting four things are reported. 1. their
dislike of my change. 2. Feb. 27. 28. 1634.
their approbation of the five ministers wrighting. 3. the deputation of
diverse Ministers to go to me. 4. the persuasions which these deputyes used.

To the first] The Reader, in considering the former Sections, will find that
my judgment has been against this promiscuous baptizing, which the Answerer
required, from the first to this instant, without any change.

To the second,] 1. It it is not to be expected that they should reprove, or
dislike that wrighting, which was framed in defense of their customs. 2. If
this be alleged for the reproof of my dissenting from them, how easily can I
reply that no Synod of these Churches allows them to require this of me: but
I will answer him, as Augustine does an Arrian, with whom he had to do,
saying, Neither may I allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of
Ariminum, Contr. Max. Arr Cap. 14
thereby to prejudice one another, but by the Scriptures which are witnesses
proper to neither, but common to boath, matter with matter, cause with cause,
reason with reason ought to be debated. But, neither the five ministers
produced any ground from the Scripture, to warrant their opinion or practice in
this particular, not the Classis, to justifye their approbation, and
confirmation thereof.

To the third] 1. That is more fitly called a command, then a counsel, wherein
a man is bound to rest, and that under such a paenalty. 2. Three Dutch
Ministers, being deputed to speak with me, desired to know what J disliked, in
that letter. I answered them, 1, that I disliked the wholl drift of it, which
is to deny me that liberty, in Holland, which the Dutch Churches have in
England, by a grant of Edw: 6, to Johannes a Lasco, under the broad seal of
England, which is continued to this day. 2. I told them the danger of that
expression [quorum parents, susceptor esve] whereby I am required to baptize
all infants, that are brought, if, either their parents, or suretyes are
Christians. For, by this rule, the children of Jews, Turks, and Pagans (of
all sorts) may be baptized, if a Christian present them. Then, they seemed
willing to alter that, and began to wright, but fell off again from their
purpose, saying that they would acquaint the Classis with what I said. And so
the wrighting remains unaltered, in my hand, to this day.

To the fourth,] If these two words, intreatyes and persuasions, signifye one
and the same thing, without any difference in the sense, I grant all to be
true, which he says, so that, to their desire of my accepting the call, it be
added, upon the condition premised. But, if, by entreaty, he mean mere
desires, without arguments to work upon my affections, and, by persuasions, he
mean intreatyes backed with arguments, to work upon my judgment and
affections, then, I grant, intreatyes were used, but not persuasions: For I do
not remember one argument used by them to induce me, but rather a professed
declining thereof, saying that they came not to dispute.

Concerning the second Classical meeting.] It is true, that then I sent them a
wrighting, by advise of one of the three ministers whom they deputed to speak
with me: the end thereof was to relate the truth concerning passages between
the Answerer and me, to prevent and remove misreports. 2. to persuade them by
reasons, not to require it of me, as a condition of my calling, to rest in that
wrighting. 3. to acquaint them with my desire of more time propounded by me to
the Elders, and accepted by them; wherein had the Classis condiscended to so
aequall a motion, it might have been much for the peace of the Church. I am
certain, I intended nothing else in it. But they were herein overswayed by
sinister suggestions, arising from a jealousy, that, if I had been in, for a
time, the desire of the congregation would be more strong toward me, where as
my true purpose was, in that time, if J could not conform to their orders, to
order matters so, that they, who much desired my settling there, might be
willing to thinck upon some other, and my purpose was to have given the best
help I could for the settling of some other, whom they should desire, in a way
of peace and concord. To conclude. All that I aimed at, in that motion, was,
either to accept their call, with satisfaction to my conscience, or to desist,
with the content of the members, that so no disturbance might arise, for my
sake. As for the deputation here spoken of; the ministers deputed, only again
prayed me to yield to that wrighting, as before. There were two of the Elders
present, at this time, with some others, witnesses hereof. From us they went to
the Classis, and, the same afternoon, returned to me with this answer, or to
this effect. That the Classis did judge that I had time enough already to
understand the orders, and customs of the Dutch Church, and to satisfye my
self concerning the conformity required in that wrighting, yet they were
content that I should proceed in assisting Mr. P. the month following, till
the next Classis, but required of me, that if, in the mean space, I could not
yield, that I should then desist voluntarily, else they must be constrained to
complain to the Magistrate. Which message I received in the presence of
diverse witnesses, and promised to do accordingly. This J promised and
performed, I confess, only for the Churches peace, and mine own, yet
disliking their injurious manner of proceeding, which I am content to pass by,
with such a touch, till further provocation.

May. 1.
at that time, I left my mind in wrighting with one of the Elders, both in
Latin, and English, to the end that he, or they whom the Consistory should
depute to be at the next Classis, might, either report by word, or show in
wrighting mine answer, as should be thought most expedient. It is also true,
that, in that wrighting, I signified that my mind was wholly turned away from
accepting that call (viz upon those terms) and that I did voluntarily desist
(viz; as the Mariner does voluntarily cast some goods into the sea, in a
storm, to prevent a greater hurt) and that I complained, at the same time, of
the Answerers unbrotherly usage of me in such particulars, as are there
mentioned; Neither were those complaints unjust, as the Reader may partly
perceive, by what has been said, and may more fully, when the Answerer shall
attempt to clear himself of the particulars there charged upon him, which
here he does not, neither indeed can he.





The answer to Sect: 20. examined, concerning my pretended preaching in a
private house.
THat the truth of this passage may appear, the Reader may be pleased to
understand, 1, that, after my desistance from the public work, I would have
returned to my own Country, but that it was now more unsafe and hazardous for
me so to do, then formerly, by a malicious and false report suggested against
me in England, by one in Amsterdam (whose name I will conceal, for some
reasons, at this time) this audacious Sycophant was not ashamed to inform that
I had, in the pulpitt, rayled against the government of England, against which,
the Answerer, and the wholl Church are able, and, I hope, ready to testifye for
my innocence, in that particular: yea, any that have heard or known me, I
thinck will undertake for me, that I am far from railing, at any time, much
more in the pulpitt, and mine own conscience abundantly clears me thereof,
in the sight of God. Yet this report was too easily received, and thereupon
much bitterness, in terrifying menaces, was expressed against me, in public
audience. This I only mention to show the cause of my staying in these parts.
2. Being thus hindered from returning to England, my family also being with me
in Amsterdam, I was willing to be as proffitable, as I might, to others,
without giving just offense to any. For this end, being requested by the Master
of the family, where I sojourned, I set a convenient time apart, every Lords
day, about 5 a clock in the afternoon, (which was above an hour after the
sermon was ended in the English Church) to catechize boath our familyes, upon
such grounds of Divinity as I collected from the Scriptures, which I opened and
applied to them. To this exercise at first, few came, afterward more coming
to the knowledge of it, more resorted: the greatest number (for ought I have
heard) which, at the most, have been observed to be present at it, exceeded not
80 persons. It is true, that, as the number increased, some forms were
provided for them to sit upon, to save the chayres and stools from hurt. I had
the less cause of suspicion, that this would be offencive, seeing it hindered
none from the public ordinances which my self and all the rest frequented
constantly, and seeing almost as great a number had resorted to a like
exercise, at the same hour, in a private family, with the Answerers
approbation, formerly. But now the case was altered, and the Answerer raised
causeles jealousyes, Sect. 21. line 14. 14
concerning this course, as if it had been the beginning of some Sect. But most
injuriously, as not only his own pen declares in the following Section, but
also those that heard can testifye, from the wholl scope of that exercise,
which was to arm them against the danger of being carried away by the errors
of Sectaryes, and the open carriage of it, manifests. For, not only the
Elders and Deacons would have showed their dislike, if any such sinister
courses had been attempted, as their place required, but also those, who came
as spies (and we knew to be such, yet excluded none) would have disclosed it to
the Answerer, and divulged it to the world. Yea? and mine own conscience
knows, that one main encouragement of my upholding that private exercise,
was, that thereby a rent in the Church might be prevented, and the public
peace preserved, whilst the members were somewhat quieted and contented with
that help, in private, which was denied them in public; and mine own heart
is privy to my intendments, at that time, of doing the best offices I could,
for the quiet settling of a faithful man, in the public work, if Gods
providence should offer one unto them, whilst I stayed with them, that so
peace and concord might be wrought between the Pastor and people, if it might
be, before my departure thence. This was my intent. And the event showed that J
was not wholly mistaken in my conjecture, as will be evident to him that shall
compare the carriage of matters, whilst I lived among them, with the accidents
that happened since. Yet, when I perceived that the Answerer took such offense
at this exercise, I desisted, before any spoke with Mr. Wh: from the Classis,
but with me none of them ever spoke about it. Thus J may say with him in
Aristophanes. (...) For doing well, I suffer ill. But the servant is not above
his Lord.

His Answer to the 21. Section examined, concerning some of the members
withdrawing themselves from the Lords supper.
AS one absurdity usually follows another, so was it with the Answerer in
penning this treatise. For, having taken liberty to cast the suspicion of all
other miscarriages, which have happened in others, upon me, (though most
injuriously) he now continues the same noate, saying that howsoever I do
mislike and speak against Separation and Schysme, and reprove the same, yet
can I not altogether clear my self of being some occasion of Division amongst
them, whilst I maintain such practices so different from them.

Ans: 1. It is well that his pen does clear me from inclining to Schysme or
Separation, whose tongue has unjustly raised suspicions thereof against me in
the minds of some. Yea, that his own hand wrighting, in this Section, Sect. 2.
and 10.
has cleared me of those contrary aspersions, and imputations, by himself
cast upon me, and written and printed against me in other Sections 2. What need
is there, that I should go about to clear my self from that which is not a
fault? For, if to be some occasion of division among men, by maintaining a
practice different from others be blameworthy, then Paul and Barnabas were to
be blamed for that practice of theyrs different from those beleivers who held
that it was needful to be circumcised, after the manner of Moses. Act 15.
(...). etc.
For, the text says, they had no small dissension, and disputation with them.
So were Paul and Silas, who were accused at Philippi, before the Magistrates,
as exceeding troublers of the city for teaching customs, Act. 16.20.21.
which were not lawful for them to receive being Romans. At Thessalonica,
Jason and other brethren are accused to be those that turn the world upside
down. Nor can it be denied that Paul was some occasion of that great stir and
uprore, Act: 17.6.
which arose in Ephesus, whereby the wholl city was filled with confusion.
And, howsoever he labored, by all concord with them in things lawful, to
enjoy peace at Jerusalem (as by purifying himself etc. Act: 19.23. Act:
21.26.28.29 30.
) yet, upon a causeles jealously of his bringing Greeks into the Temple
(because they saw Trophimus with him in the city, whom they supposed that Paul
had brought into the Temple) the wholl city was moved, and of this commotion
Paul could not altogether clear himself of being some occasion, by
maintaining some practices so different from the Jews. 3. The Answerer seems
to insinuate somewhat against my journey out of town, two or three days
before the time of administration of the Lords supper (wherein he says) I was
accompanied with some members of the Church, who (as he heard) did go with me,
and leave the communion, this, he says, gave great occasion of strife and
other offense to the Church, and was a course tending to Schysme. Repl. 1. For
the complanants, who, he says, separated themselves at that time; some of them
whom he examined, whether they had advise with me about it, have cleared me
fully, in their answer, and the rest are able and ready to do the like. Who
would thinck that, against so ample testimony, the Answerer should have the
boldness to accuse me so unjustly for that? 2. His accusation of me for my
journey out of the City, at that time, is as injurious, as that: For the case,
which caused my travayle, at that time, would have constrained me thereunto, at
any other time, as well as that, it being necessary, for the help of a
painful Minister, who, being very ill, craved my assistance, with much
importunity. My wife accompanied me thither, and the Mrs. of the house where we
lodged, was pleased to accompany my wife, being a stranger in these countries
(which I had no cause to refuse, but to take thanckfully) and, besides her, not
one member of the Church went along with us (unles the maid, which attended her
sucking child be a member, which I thinck she is not) Now, what was to be
blamed in this? This the Reader shall ordinarily find, that the Answerers
complaints, both against me and others, have no other root but the evil
surmises of his own jealous fancy: pluck up that root, and the most of his
complaints will dye of themselves.

His Answer to the 22. Section examined, containing a wrighting, first left
with a friend or two, and afterward, without my consent or knowledge, printed
MY defense of Answering his untrue reports, in my wrighting, and of having it
in the hands of one or two friends, that might speak in the cause of the
dumb, and maintain mine innocence, in my absence, the Reader shall find in my
reply to the second Section. Now, the cavills which are to be found in this
Section against that wrighting are to be examined. First. It is an injury to
call that wrighting injurious which was a necessary declaration of the truth
against slanders, which were, first secretly spread abroad by him, in private
speech, afterward, by a large letter which he sent to his friend at N. in
England, and now are by him scandalously published, not only against me (ego
enim non sum tanti) but against men of eminent worth and noate, both living and
dead.

Secondly. How justly that wrighting is called a true report of passages, the
Reader will see, by comparing what is said, on both sides, and how unjustly he
excepteth against that title.

Thirdly. When I assured the Reader that this English copy is a true
translation out of the latin, by, this English copy, I meant not which is
printed. For there are diverse faults in that, and it appears to have been
printed out of a very imperfect copy, but that which I wrote. As for his
exception against it, that having twice used that odious phrase [pro imperio]
imperiously; in the second place it is left out, in my translation.

Repl: The phrase is but a true expression of the thing, let the odious thing
be mended, and the odious phrase shall not be used. In the mean space the
expression must be suitable to the action. For is it not [actus imperij] an
imperious act, to deny a man convenient time for satisfaction about a matter of
such consequence, and to bind a man to observe customs and orders, without
showing the aequity thereof? Some would have called such an act tyranny and so
shall I, upon further provocation. 2. As the use of the phrase is condemned, so
the omitting of it once in the translation is reproved. Forgive me that wrong.
I thought he would see how unwilling I was to fasten their imperious dealing
with me, upon the Readers apprehension, by repeating the word imperiously
again. But let it stand, in this second place also, seeing the Answerer will
have it so, and he shall find me, with Gods assistance, prove it to be a fit
expression. 3. Is my translation untrue, because this word is once omitted? Let
the learned Reader judge, whether it be necessary to the truth of a
translation, that every latin word be rendered into English, especially when
the sense gives it sufficiently in the sentence. If this be not to seek a
knott in a bulrush, I know not what is.

Fourthly. In my first wrighting how unable the Answerer is to discover any
untruth (in my report of the private conference between us) the Reader will
see by my examination of his Sect: 11. in my Reply, and will be further cleared
hereafter.

Fifthly. In my second wrighting he seems to find a foul untruth or
falsification (after his usual manner of expressing himself) both in the
superscription, and subscription thereof. But what is it? I said that those
instructions were delivered by the Elders of the English Church deputed. But 1,
that translation says not by the Elders, but to the Elders, and that both in
the superscription and in the subscription. Is it not strange that he should
then falsifye the translation, when he complains, of falsification in the
translatour? 2. suppose it had been to the Elders deputed, and that by Elders,
I meant any lawfully deputed by the Eldership; yet I spoke and wrote truly.
For I left the wrighting with Mr. W. who was deputed before by the Eldership,
(having also told Mr. Wh: of it) praying him to communicate it with the rest,
that one or two Elders that should be deputed by the rest, might present it to
the Classis, and, having respect unto that agreement with them, I used that
expression, before the meeting, in confidence that it would have been so
ordered by them. Now, if no such deputation was made afterward, what is that
to me, who styled the Elder by that title which best expressed my purpose, and
expectation? neither was I in town to alter it afterward, nor did I ever
hear, that no deputation was made in the Consistory, till now.) The issue of
all this deep accusation, what is it now, but, as when a great expectation was
of the mountains birth, which was fained to be with child, after which nothing
appeared but a little mouse running thence? How just the complaint is also of
his want of brotherly moderation, I have noated in my reply to his Sect. 12.

Sixthly. In that which he speaks concerning my third wrighting, he
multiplyeth injuries.

1. In misreporting my intent in the three wrightings, which was, not to make
him odious to the Classis, nor to teach the Elders how to fill their mouths
with reproach of him, nor, to stir up and incense the Congregation against
him, but ingenuously and heartily to report the truth, whereunto I was called,
and compelled, for the necessary clearing of my self, and for the remove all,
in some, and prevention, in others, of causeles praejudices, and jealousyes,
which already did, or, by my silence, might arise in their minds against me, by
his suggestions: Would the wrighting of those things, accuse, undermine, and
defame him? It is a sign that his cause is not very good. And, if my wrighting
those particulars be a fault, who is to blamed for it, but he who constrained
me thereunto?

2. In charging me with unjust uprayding of him, for mine assistance of him,
and with a vain boasting of my self. To convince him of ill requiting me, yea
of rewarding evil for good, I remembered what labor and patience I had
excercised for his and the Churches peace. This was no uprayding, much less
unjust, nor vain boasting, but a just declaration of the truth (the case
requiring it) and a sad complaint of his unthanckfullnes. How he has answered
it, will appear in the examination of Sect. 2. 8. and 40. Whereunto as he
refers the Reader, so do I, and also to Sect. 11. and 14. that it may
appear how justly I complain of the two injuryes which he noateth. Also
concerning the five objections answered by me in that third wrighting I do
concur with him in referring the Reader to the Sections mentioned by him, and
examined by me.

where it appears that the first the second the third the fourth the fifth
is not refuted but remains unanswered in Sect. 14. Sect. 15. Sect. 15. Sect.
10. Sect. 18.

in like manner concerning my six reasons to prove that he never desired to
have me to be his colleague, of which reasons the first second third fourth
fifth sixth
is not answered in Sect. 9. Sect 8. Sect. 17. Sect. 12. Sect. 28. Sect. 6.

Seaventhly. In that which he adds, upon the grant of this supposition, that
he had not desired me, diverse things are considerable. 1. His unjust
accusation of me (by way of intimation) as if I did quaraile and contend with
him, because he did not desire me] whereas it is neither so, nor so. For
neither was it my intent, in that wrighting, to quaraile, but to answer
objections, nor did I blame him at all for not desiring me (for he may use his
liberty, for me, to place his desires upon a more desirable object) but for
pretending his desire to have me with him, when he did really hinder my settling
there. 2. His Sarcasticall insultation, when he tauntingly demands, Is he
such a man of desire etc.] Reply 1. It seems that I am not such a man of
desire, in his account, yet, in the esteem of that Church, and of the Classis,
how unworthy soever I am in my self, it seems, I am; Else, how comes it to
pass, that they account themselves so injuried by his opposing and rejecting
me (as appears in their complaints) and that these so much desired that I
might be promoted to the ministry of that Church, Sect: 12.16.19.
as he has formerly testified? 2. If I am not such a man of desire, in his
account, yet J should not be such a man of scorn and contempt, to be so
trampled upon in a strange land, and exposed to reproach, and that by a
brother, and in print, whereby I am now become a man of sorrows, and that in
many respects. 3. His voluntary concession, or acknowledgment (by way of
supposition and intimation) that he withheld his desire from me, in the act of
Election, is considerable. For, if, when his voice went with the rest for mine
election, he withheld his desire from me; how can it be thought, that he did at
all desire me? For did he give his vote for me? Did he subscribe my call with
his own hand in that wrighting, whereof himself was the penman? Did he
himself, accompanied with one of the Elders, bring it to me, and pray me to
accept of it? And yet did he withhold his desire from me, in the act of
election? No marvayle then, if he held me so to this question. No marvayle,
that he refused the means propounded by me for accommodation. No marvayle,
that he procured that wrighting of the five ministers (howsoever by some of
them intended in favor of me, they thincking that he saught to accommodate me,
but) which he made use of to strengthen himself against me. No marvayle, that
it was procured to be ratifyed by the Classis and Magistrates, that I should
rest in it, and conform thereunto. No marvayle, that an order which the Elders
would have made in Consistory, to secure me from trouble for that, was hindered
by him, and that the convenient time, which they agreed upon to allow me, for
satisfaction, was denied by him. No marvayle, that other usages (which I
forbear to mention) of me have been so unbrotherly (that I say no more) if he
did not desire me. 4. Jn the same way of supposition and intimation he seems
to say, that he was for another whom he might judge to be more lowly etc. 1.
This I complain not of as an injury to me, but I wish that he may both have
such an one to be with him, and may be such an one himself, as he there
describes, if he judge of these properties by a right rule. As for me: I shall
account him the most lowly, who with most selfe-denyall takes upon him Christ's
yoke, and him most loving, whose spirit closes most strongly with all good
men, in all good ways, and him to be most faithful and upright, who does
most exercise himself to have a conscience in all things void of offense,
both toward God, and toward man. In this sense he might have had men lowly,
loving, faithful, and upright, whom the Church desired, but enjoy not, to
their great grief, and loss, 2. It had been more brotherly dealing to have
admonished me in private (if he had discerned any thing in me contrary to those
properties) rather then thus to traduce me in print, or, if he would publish
such accusations, to have proved them to be just, and not thus, without proof,
to reproach me. 3. The five Reverend Dutch preachers did not apprehend him to
have such praejudices against me, when they composed that wrighting which
himself has translated, according to their words, and published, where
speaking of me, they say, whom, for diverse respects there mentioned, we
understand to be most dear unto Mr. P. It seems they were mistaken in their
opinion of the Answerers love to me, if his thoughts of me then were according
to this wrighting. 4. Himself subscribed the wrighting wherein I was called to
the ministry in that Church (which also was subscribed by all the Elders and
Deacons) wherein they thus express their esteem of me, in the fear of God
having considered of such as might be fit thereunto, we have set our eyes upon
you etc. being persuaded of your sufficiency, learning, and piety, hoping also,
that, through those gifts of the spirit wherewith the Lord has endued you, and
wherein we have received much contentme^t, you may be a special instrument of
building up the Church of God by your godly labors amongst us. This wrighting
was penned by himself, and his own name subscribed with his own hand,
wherein my fitnes for that place is so testified, that it may seem strange how
one and the same man should privately wright that, and yet publish this.

Eigthly. When he says, It is certainly a want of modesty and prudence in
him, to make such disputes about his own desireablenes. Ans: 1. I only show
the reasons of mine opinion that he did not desire me, but of mine own
desireablenes I do not speak at all, much less dispute. 2. Will any man
condemn me for expecting that he should desire me, with whom I should be
joined, as Colleague, in such a work? 3. What could I say less, or more
mildely? I did not say, he opposed me, rejected me, circumvented me, or the
like, but only, he did not desire me. 4. Upon my use of the same word
[certainly] in the second Section he said, it is against modesty and
conscience, to pronounce so certainly touching the issue of things to come, and
yet himself uses the same confident asseveration in a case more improbable,
as will appear to any man, or to himself, if he reduce his reasoning and
discourse (to prove such disputes as I have used about mine own desireablenes,
to be a want of modesty or prudence) into a Syllogism.

The 23. Section examined, of the Ansvverers rejecting the counsel of the
Elders, when matters have been referred to them, if he thought they would
conclude against his purpose.
THe usefullnes of the Eldership in the Church being considered, with the
Honor which the Holy Ghoast puts upon those who are called thereunto,
should warn all men to take heed of contemning them, or occasioning others to
despise them.

First. Act: 14. p. 155.
Their usefullnes appears in that the Holy Ghoast directed Paul and Barnabas
to ordain Elders by voices in every Church. Which text Mr. Nowell in this
Catechism alleges to show that there were in the well ordered Churches
certain Seniors chosen, and joined with the Pastor, and thereby he would show
that the Pastor should not excommunicate alone, without the judgment of the
Church. This place being so understood, we may from hence noate two things to
declare the usefullnes of such officers. 1 Thessalonians: 5.12.13. 1 Timothy 4.14. Act:
15.6.23.16.4. Ambros: in 1 Timothy: 5.
1. that they were appointed to every Church. 2. That they were solemnly
ordained, being commended to the Lord with prayer and fasting; which is not
used in slight matters. It appears also in that they are joined, by the
wisdom of God with other officers of as necessary use in the Church, as the
members are in the body, 1 Cor. 12.28.

Secondly. The Honor which the Holy Ghoast puts upon them, is very great,
as appears, first, in their employments, which are honorable services, as,
to assist the Pastor, 1. In admonishing offenders. 2. In imposition of hands at
the ordaining of officers. 3. in consulting and counsailing about Church
affairs, the Apostles refused not their help herein, and this use of them
continued (as Ambrose says) till it was altered by the sloth, or rather pride
of Teachers, who would seem to be some body, by doing all things alone. 2. In
the titles wherewith he honors them being thus employed, calling them (...)
Heb: 13.7 17.24.
Leaders, (...) 1 Thessalonians: 5.12. Rom: 12.8
Presidents, (...). Act: 20.28. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Overseers, (...) 2 Chronicles. 19.8. 1 Timothy 3.2 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Thessalonians: 5.12.13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17.
Governments. 3. In the qualifications required to be in them, viz. to be such
as do the duty of their place in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a
perfect heart, wise, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, blameless. In a word,
they must not be destitute of any good property, whereby they may be fitted to
rule well. 4. In the carriage which the Holy Ghoast injoyneth the people to use
toward them, in their well discharging their duty. As, to acknowledge them,
and to esteem them very highly in love, to account them worthy of double
honor. And to obey them.

Now then, if any man shall despise this office, as of no necessary use in the
Church of God, or, if any shall go about, by disparadging speeches, to disable
them from doing the work of their place, or to discourage and dishearten them
in it, by a needles, though true, publishing their imperfections, much more, if
the reports be untrue, and mere ungrounded reproaches, the injury is, not only
personal to the men, but public and common to the wholl Church, which is much
blemished, either for want of it officers, or for want of care to make a good
choice, and to see that they discharge their duty as they aught, and much
disordered, whilst those, who should be admonished by them, are now armed
against them, as men branded with a mark of partiality, and insufficiency, and
disorderly walking; and that by their Pastor, and in print.

In which respect (for the prevention of such dangerous consequences or
effects) it will be worth the while that we examine this second complaint
concerning his slighting the Elders, which I will breifely dispatch, insisting
principally upon those things which he calls me to examine by mentioning my
name, which he wrighteth at length, as his manner is, least else (it may be)
the Reader should forget that I am the mark he shoots at, thorough all these.

The Answerer says, this complaint is a very unjust slander. Ans: Reply. 1.
]

If it be a slander, it must needs be unjust: for no slander can be just. Yea;
if it be a slander, it is a very great one: for it is not against a private,
but a public person, a preacher of the Gospel, and their Pastor, and that,
not whispered in the ears of one, but published to the view of many. But, if
it be true; the Answerers sin is double: 1, that he gave just cause of this
complaint, in a case, not of private, but of public injury, by depriving of
his flock, not of civil, but of spiritual liberties, to the violation of that
order which Christ has settled in the Church; 2. That he unjustly charge them
with a slander, and so makes himself guilty of calling good evil, yea, of
the same sin, whereof he accuses them, viz, slander.

For the more clear and full understanding and judging of what is said, on
both sides, it must be observed that the first three pretended answers are mere
evasions and diversions of the Reader from the matter of the Complaint. For,

of those decissions and determinations which have been made by most voices in
the Eldership, but of those which have been hindered and rejected by him: nor of
his giving sentence by his authority alone, but of his rejecting the authority
of the Eldership, and interposing the authority of the Classis to hinder their
proceeding in things which might have been ended amongst themselves: nor that,
those resolutions which have been concluded in Consistory, have been transacted
without consent of most, but that some considerable conclusions, which most
have agreed upon, have been by him rejected, without sufficient cause. So that,
unless he can acquitt himself of rejecting those determinations, which have
been made by most voices in the Elderships, and of hindering their proceeding in
things which might have been ended amongst themselves, and that, without
sufficient cause; the complaint appears to be just, in this particular, and
no slander.

opposing, contradicting, or rejecting their opinions and counsels, when they
were against right, and truth, or hurtful to the Church, or to any member
thereof, but, when matters have been agreeable to truth, and right, and for the
good of the Church, upon unjust pretenses of the Elders insufficiency and
partiality, as in the cases instanced by them.

rejecting the counsel of the Elders only by showing his particular judgment,
as one Deacon may oppose the opinion of another in their own session, or as in
a Senate Civil, or Ecclesiastical, there may be difference, and so opposition
of opinions amongst men; without rejecting such conclusions as are made by most
voices in things lawful and aequall; but of this they complain, that he so
opposes and rejects their power, in some cases, that he unjustly depriveth
them of their power, upon untrue pretenses of their partiality, and
insufficiency to judge.



partial, in this controversy about me. And to make this cable strong, he
twisteth three causes, as cords, together, that they profess themselves to be
of the same opinion with me touching baptism. that they have, by their
example, allowed and countenanced the meeting of diverse, at a private
exercise, upon the Lords day, after the Sermons were ended. 3. that they made
an act for my preaching amongst themselves, as an assistant, for a certain
time etc.

These are new crimes, which former ages have not heard of,

For the first. Is it the sin of partiality, in the Elders, to hold with any
man in disliking, and witnessing against evil customs, as this promiscuous
administration of baptism is declared to be? or to join, without scandal or
Schysme, in a private exercise, after the public are ended? or to make an act
for a man's preaching amongst them as an assistant, the public necessity
requiring it, and the Church generally desiring it, for a convenient time, that
he might understand those orders and customs of the Dutch Church, whereunto his
conformity is expected, before he bind himself thereunto? If so; then to hold
the truth, to join in a peaceable and inoffencive use of private helps for
aedifycation, and to provide for the public good and peace is an argument of
partiality in an Elder. The vanity of this pretense is manifest. Let us see his
second proof.

Secondly. the Elders have made like complaints (as these Complainants)
heretofore, of his bringing matters to the Classis violently, without their
consent. The Classis has judged them parties.

Be it so. 1. Is not this alleged against himself? For, possible, may we
thinck, to find partiality, as well in the Classis, as in the Consistory? I
wish they had expressed more aequanimity in the carriage of this buisenes, for
their own, and the Churches sake.

Even the Elders themselves have acknowledged, that, when some such complaints
as these have been brought unto them, they had no power to judge thereof.

de jure, by right, to judge thereof, but may be understood, as a declaration
(or rather a complaint) of their want of power, defacto, by other men's taking
it out of their hands, without right. Now, if that power which belongs to
them be taken from them, without their consent, and so before it be given, and
without warrant of the word, and so before it be due: it is no partiality to
assume that, by a due claim, which was unduely withheld from them; and it is
no presumption in them, if, knowing their right* they give a new judgment of
that thing, which they had formerly waved, not knowing that they had power to
judge thereof. So much for his pretenses against them for partiality.

he professes not to speak of that common insufficiency that is in all men
etc. but he excepteth against their insufficiency in some special cases, and
namely in such particulars whatsoever have been already judged and determined
in the Classis.

in all cases whatsoever. Me thincks the Answerer should, upon a review,
voluntarily revoke this expression, or that the Classis should profess against
it, in public, as some of the ministers have affirmed to me in private, that
they do not assume any such power to themselves, or, if they be silent, the
provincial Synod should provide that convenient means may be used to stop the
spreadings of such an error, for many dangerous consequences, which their
wisdoms, I doubt not, will foresee, following thereupon. To me it is manifest,
that no National Synod, in these Countries, ever gave power to the Classes
thus far to deprive particular Churches of the right of judging things proper
to themselves, within themselves. Neither is there one word in these
complaints, which, being fairly construed, and (for aug^t I can discern)
according to the intent and expression of the Complainants themselves,
requires any thing, but what the National Synods have ordered and appointed
to be done for and to all the Churches, and which the Classes, if they be true
to their own rules, in their first constition, must see performed. So far are
they from attempting the innovation and alteration of discipline and government
so long practiced in these reformed Churches.

Sect: 24 25. 26. examined.
THeir second proof of his depriving the Elders of their power in government
for the good of the Church, is, Compl.
that he has protested against their judgment in matters which might have been
ended in the Consistory, and, in that respect, aught not to have been brought
to the Classis, yet he has carried them thither.

This passage I would have passed by, an agreement amongst the Elders that a
convenient time should be given me to, go on in assisting the Answerer, to
see, if, in that time, I could obtain that this question might be laid aside,
and inform my self more fully concerning the orders and customs of the Dutch
Church, whereunto my conformity was required Sect: 26. 3. Concerning his
refusal to let Mr. Weld preach, though he confessed he had nothing against
him, without consent of the Classis etc. ibid. Whereby it appears that they
do not complain of his seeking advise of neighbor ministers simply and
absolutely, but, 1. in certain cases, there mentioned. And therefore they do
not, in their wrighting, divide the one from the other into several Sections
(for that is his own contrivement) but relate all together in one entire
Sentence 2. the cases produced by them are such, wherein the matter might have
been determined, and concluded by the Eldership, without violation of any order
established in the government of those Churches. 3. The matter was so carried
by him, in this needles appeal to the Classis, that their agreement was
nullifyed.

These things being premised, the insufficiency of his five answers in the 24.
Section will be obvious to the indifferent Reader, in particulars; thus.



sins, and unfruitful works of darkness he will be found guilty of a double
sin. 1. that he opposed the Elders, without just cause. 2. that he
misapplyeth Scripture to justifye his unjust opposition of them.



very foundation of government, and institution of diverse judicatories, to
take, away disagreement, strife, controversies, or different pleadings among
men, will not help him in the cases questioned, unless he can prove, 1. that
the Classes are of the same use, by Divine institution, for the help of
Pastors which have the assistance of their Eldership, Deuteronomy. 1.12 with Cap. 17.8.
whereof that judicatorye was for the help of Moses (who was not able alone to
bear the cumbrances and strifes of the people) and of the Kings of Israel
afterward; which they deny. 2. that the causes in question, which he carried
from the Consistory to the Classis, 2. Chron. 19:8:9.10.
are of the same nature with those causes between blood and blood, between
law and commandment, statutes and judgments, which were deferred to the
Levites, the Priests, and chief of the Fathers of Israel, that men might be
warned by them, that they trespass not against the Lord. This also they deny,
and may justly accuse him of misapplying the Scriptures noated by him in the
margin.

buisenesses were so weighty that it has been agreed in the Synods that they
shall not be proceeded in, without advise of the Classis; nor, because they
concerned many Churches, and therefore require the consent of all What then? It
was, because the Elders could not satisfye him, nor he them, as he intimates
in the answer before. But, why was he not satisfied? Because he would not be
satisfied, unless the matter might be carried according to his will. For, no
sufficient reason was given by him against it, at that time. So then, if he
will end a buisenes in the Consistory, there it shall be ended, but, if he see
that it will be carried against his mind there, it shall not be ended there,
but be taken out of their hands and carried to the Classis, where he knows
how to bring his purpose about. Thus he has two strings to his bow. But, in
the mean time, is not the power of the Elders in government overthrown
thereby?

Sect. 25.
Jn the 25. Sect. they speak of an agreement amongst the Elders to make an
order that those who were not members of that Church should make themselves
known to me, Compl:
that I might be satisfied concerning them, before they should present their
children to Baptism in public, which, they say, would have ended that
difference between us, but he protested against it. If this complaint be just;
is it not a greivance? let us weigh his four answers to it.

there was no order made: therefore they speak untrue, and they know not what?



2. He says, there is no evidence in their Church book, that, either the
Elders had so agreed, or that he had protested against it.] Nor do they say,
it is recorded in the Church book. For how could it be recorded when it was
never made, and that by his hindering the making of it?

3. He says, If such an order had been peremptorily resolved upon, there had
been just reason for him to have protested against it seeing the Consistory has
no power etc.] Travers. de Discipl: Ecelcs. p. 121.
But herein he opposes Mr. Traverse who, in his elaborate treatise, de
disciplina Ecclesiastica, speaking of the office, of the Elders (whom he fitly
calls (...) he says, it belongs to them to see that all things in the Church
of God, be honestly, godlily, and orderly done. And therefore they are to
signifye to the ministers, if any from other parts come to dwell amongst them,
concerning whose Religion they are not satisfied, that they may be dealt with,
before they come to the Lords table: Also IF ANY INFANTS ARE TO BE BAPTIZED,
and if there be any thing, of that kind, which appertains to the knowledge of
the Overseers, for the proffitable and decent administration of the Church.
Neither is the Answerer only against Mr. Traverse in this, but reason it self
is against him, taken from the very foundation of that office in the Church, as
appears in what is already said concerning them in the 23. Section compared
with what has been by me declared against the disorder of promiscuous
baptising in the 12. Section.

4. He says, If he had protested against such an order etc. Such a protest
might have served for a direction to the right use of their power but did not
tend to the destruction thereof.] If it had been a mere declaration of his
judgment, and resolution, though delivered in form of a protest, and had been
strengthened with good reasons, and had been left to them to consider of, it
might have served for a correction and direction to the right use of their
power, without destroying it. But, when a peremptory and inflexible resolution
of opposing what they shall do against his mind, in this matter, is held
forth, without arguments from the Scripture, or good reason, to convince them
of the aequity of that stiffnes in opposing, and, when it is not left within
themselves, but carried from them to the Classis, that, by the interposition of
their power and authority, the Consistory may be hindered from executing or
making such an order, who sees not that, as, by the former, they have no
direction from him about the right use of their power, so, by the latter, their
power is destroyed, in this particular; which may be proved thus.

That Act, whereby the Elders are hindered, that they can not provide for the
godly, comely, and orderly administration of the Church, does deprive the
Elders of their power in government for the good of the Church.

But this Act of the Answerer, in hindering the ending of this difference about
baptism etc. by interposing the authority of the Classis, for that end, was an
hindering of them from providing for the godly, comely, and orderly
administration of the Church. Ergo.

Which proposition will he deny? The first? But that is taken from the nature
of the Elders office, as has been shown out of Scripture, and reason, before.
And he knows it to be true.

Will he deny the Assumption? That is proved by what I have shown in the 12.
Section against promiscuous administration of baptism, as it is in that place,
whence it will appear to be not godly, nor comely, nor orderly, and therefore
the Elders have power and are bound to provide that it be not done in that
Church.

Sect. 26.
In the 26, Section. Their second instance, whereby they would prove, that he
depriveth the Elders of their power in government for the good of the Church,
by carrying matters out of their hands, which might, and should have been ended
in the Consistory, Compl.
is, that agreement which was amongst them that I should have a years time to
go on in assisting the Answerer etc. Now let us see how this is answered.

Ans. 1.
First. He says, it is untrue that the Elders agreed I should have a years
time.] a years time, would be convenient for that purpose. 2. Not only they,
but the Answerer himself says as much, in effect. For in the 18. Section he
reports that I made this offer unto them, that, if the Consistory desired it,
I would continue, as an assistant, in preaching, for a convenient time, that I
might therein acquaint my self with the Dutch ministers, the orders of the
Classis, and Synod, and state of this Congregation etc. But, though our Elders
liked of this offer, says he, and thought good to desire him to remain with
us, as an assistant, as is before said; yet I thought it not safe (says he,
speaking of himself) without first taking advise of the Classis. Whereby it is
manifest that the Elders liked of the offer, as it was made by me. But they
knew that I was of opinion that less then a years time could not be
convenient, for those purposes, and that I meant that time, when I spoke of a
convenient time: yet, if they had agreed that six months, or three months
should be judged a convenient time, I should have rested therein, which seeing
they did not, but liked of the offer as it was made by me, it seems, their
purpose was to conclude for a years time.

Secondly. In stead of answering, Ans: 2
he recriminateth those that divulge the secret affairs of the Eldership, and
that untruely.]

Thirdly. His third answer is a mere evasion, Ans: 3
by putting off the fault from himself upon the Classis,

Fourthly. Ans: 4
In his fourth answer he pretends to give reasons for his carrying this
matter into the Classis, which are not reasons, but mere pretenses.

First. That, whilst matters were thus kept in suspense, the cord of
contention should have been drawn out, and lengthned.] But, who sees not that
this would have cut the cord of contention asunder when a convenient time had
been given for the composing of things to a peaceable conclusion, and when the
people should see his regard of their desire and content so far expressed.

Secondly. That, in the Consistory where he has most trouble, he should have
least assistance.] But, by this course he would have less trouble in the
Consistory, the spirits of men being somewhat quieted and contented. Besides, I
see not but he might have escaped many troubles there, if he had not made
troubles, when he found them not.

Thirdly. That, in the administration of Baptism, in stead of an Assistant he
should have a Resistant,] But, how could he be a Resistant in Baptism, whose
work was only to assist in preaching, as mine should have been, if this
agreement had stood. Again, suppose, after the expiration of that convenient
time, I had accepted of the pastoral calling, how could I have been a
Resistant to him in Baptism, if, either the Dutch Ministers could in that
time, have convinced me of the lawfullnes of that custom, (in which case, J
should have yielded to it) or, if I could have procured the laying aside of
that question, by their consent with me in establishing those means which I
propounded for accommodation?

Fourthly. That, hereby the calling of another minister would be hindered.] But
1. the event shows the contrary. For, that convenient time, which the Elders
would have given me, was but 12 months. Now, though, upon this pretense, the
Answerer opposed that, yet those 12 months were spent before they had any, and
9* months more, before one was settled with them. 2. My purpose, in that
proposition, was, to work, in that time, for the peaceable settling of any
faithful man, whom they should make choice of, if I saw not greater likelihood
of my comfortable settling there, then hitherto had appeared. Wherein my true
intent was to prevent the trouble, and procure the peace of the Church, as much
as in me lay.

The fifth pretenc^ is coincident with the fourth, and answered in that.

Sixthly. The Classis would have been offended, which had formerly disallowed
such an agreement about Mr. H.] But 1, consider, as great a matter as this has
been done there, without the leave of the Classis, when the Answerer had a mind
to it. Was not Mr. D, for a year and more, assistant to the Answerer in the
same Church, in preaching, without leave or consent of the Classis? 2. If the
Classis would be offended for this, it would be an offense taken, but not
given. For, what though they had formerly disallowed such an agreement of the
Elders about the intertayning of M. Hook? May not the Church do such a thing
without their allowance? What rule is transgressed thereby? If any: Let the
Answerer show it. If none; then the Classis disallowed that act, and would be
offended at this causelessly. 3. At most, this would have been an offense but to
the spirits of the Classis, who would have been angry at it, as a neglect of
them only; not as a sin against God. But the hindering of this agreement, by
their Pastor, and the Classis, is an offense to the consciences of some of the
Church, who are greived at it as a sin against God, both in the Pastor and
the Classsis, who have hereby straightened the liberty, and weakened the power
which Christ has given the Church, in procuring such spiritual helps for
their aedification, as they find proffitable, and desire, with a general
consent, especially there being no danger of haeresy and schysme, whereby
themselves or other Churches should be infected thereby. Now, compare these two
offenses together, and it will appear that the latter offense, in this case,
was more carefully to be heeded and prevented then the former.

The seventh, and last pretense is, that he esteemed this agreement as an act
of intrusion for me.] which he needed not to have feared, nor would have, by so
injurious a course, prevented, if he had known me, as he might have done, by
my wholl carriage in this buisenes. Himself reproacheth me for standing so
much upon his desiring me, and now he fears least I had some purpose of
intruding my self. How will these stand together? One while he tells the
Reader that I would not accept the call, another while, that I will not be
dismissed. A strange case, that I am so averse, that they can not get me in,
and yet so intruding, that they cannot get me out. By this it may appear that
his spirit was much distempered by needles Iealousyes, and groundles surmises,
which, in these passages, have caused much disquietment to himself, and
disturbance to others.

The 3. instance. And that it may appear that I wrong him not, in saying thus,
his own words, about the third instance, which they bring to prove that he
depriveth the Elders of their power in government for the good of the Church,
declare the same. For, speaking of Mr. Weld, whom they accused him for hindering
from preaching, without leave of the Classis, though he professed he had
nothing against him, he tells the Complainants that he had some thing against
Mr. Weld. If they desire to know what, he readily tells them, and all the
world, that he had something against his behavior, in general, which was an
offense and trouble unto him. It had need to be some great matter, some will
thinck, that so far set him off from Mr. Weld, as he there intimates To
prevent all wondering at the matter, he roundly relates more dislikes then one.
But, if you come to examine them, they will appear to be grounded upon needles
jealousyes, in his own mind. For, his first dislike was, because Mr. Weld
refused to declare himself, and to show his opinion touching their present
controversyes. And, have not others carried themselves in the same manner, as
well as he, which were greater strangers to him, then Mr. Weld, being not of
his nation, whom yet he has, not only willingly received to preach, but also
been willing to have joined with him in the pastoral office. His second
dislike of Mr. Weld was, that he saw him most familiar with those that were his
chiefest opposites, So then, there was opposition amongst them before I came,
and this opposition was raised to such an height, that the Answerer accounted
it a trouble and offense to him, that any minister should be most familiar with
those whom he accounted his opposites; and, that, upon fear, least Mr. Weld
should strengthen and animate them against him, he was unwilling to have him
preach. That this fear may not seem altogether causeles, he tells his
Reader how Mr. H. preached against that in the afternoon, which he taught in
the fore noone. The truth concerning this passage I have heard from diverse
witnesses, and have seen the noates of boath their sermons, as they were taken
by those that heard, and do find (so far as I can discern, by what I have
heard, or read) that the Answerer took offense at Mr. H: causelessly for that,
and that Mr. H. was called, and, in a manner, compelled to say what he did, at
that time. But, that I may return to Mr. W. was the Answerers fear of him
retained in his own breast? No, he tells us, in his second answer, that he
desired the counsel of the Dutch Consistory about this matter, and their
advise was that he should bring it to the Classis. Thus the Answerer is
troubled, the Dutch Consistory is troubled, the English Church also is
troubled, and all about his fear of Mr. Weld. But, was this fear well
grounded? was there sufficient cause for it? Let himself speak, and he will
tell us: yea, he has already told us, in his third answer, that, upon further
conference with Mr. W, he perceived in him a peaceable disposition, and
conceived, that he would not give offense by his preaching amongst them. It is
well that his apprehension is rectifyed, at last, to perceive that which he did
not before. That conference did not alter Mr. W: disposition, but his own
persuasion of him: so that the change was in the Answerer, not in M. W. As a
man in a ship thincks that the shore moves from him, whereas the ship, wherein
he is, is carried from the shore: so a man, whose passions are disturbed,
suspecteth every man to oppose him. When all was now quiet, what course took
the Answerer? He tells us, that he made the same known to the Classis;
whereupon he was admitted to preach. And, why must this be made known to the
Classis? Is it against the government of these Churches that a stranger, to
whom the Answerer can impute no error, and in whom he preceived a peaceable
disposition, and conceived that he would not give offense by his preaching
amongst them, being desired by the Church, should be permitted to preach a
sermon ^* 2, or 3, in the English Church, without leave of the Classis? Can not
the Elders do so much, without them? Then the complaint is just, that the
Elders are deprived of their power in government for the good of the Church:
And seeing, whilst the Answerer seemed unsatisfyed; the Dutch Consistory
seems to apprehend it to be a case of some difficulty to permit M^. W. to
preach, but when the Answerer is satisfied, the Classis consents, it
appears that the complaint concerning the injury is justly against the
Answerer, at whose instigation, and entreaty the Classis does interpose so
far in their matters, though in this they can not be excused, much less
justified, in that they assume a power to themselves of restrayning Churches
from having the benefit of the assistance of a stranger, and pass ^t, in such a
case, without their leave, which is more power then the government of these
Churches gives them, or any prelates ever challenged to themselves, for aught I
know.

Section 27. examined, concerning the undue power of the Classis.
IN this, and the four following Sections, they make their third complaint of
his government, viz, that he subjecteth that Church under an undue power of the
Classis, which they aggravate two ways, 1. by his indirect aims in it, for,
they conceive, that he does it merely for his own ends, 2. by his irregular
pitching upon such means for the attayning of his ends. For, they say, he
does it, without any warrant from the word of God. For our more orderly and
clear proceeding in examining these five Sections, I will premise some thing,
in thesi, concerning the power of Classes, and then descend to the hypothesis,
and try how just their complaint is. Whereunto the Answerer compels me, not
only by his frequent mentioning my name, which he wrighte^^ at its full length
every where (and in the next Section 30 times, in less then three leaves of
paper) but also by his acensing me as an opposite to the government of these
Churches by Synods and Classes. This to be a mere slander the indifferent
Reader will judge by what I have already said in examination of former
Sections. All lawful Authority I am always, and shall be ready to
acknowledge, with due submission thereunto, even when I freely testifye against
all usurpation and tyranny, and plead for the observation of those ancient
limits and bounds, which God has set. But I proceed to the matter, concerning
Classes.

It is not my purpose to speak of the original of them, nor of their
antiquity, nor to contend about the name given them, much less to condemn all
use of them, Medull. Theol: lib. 1. Cap. 39 Sect: 27.
from which I am so far, that I freely confess with Dr. Ames (though the
Answerer traduceth, both him, and me as otherwise minded) that particular
Churches, as their Communion requires, and the light of nature, the aequity of
rules, and the examples of Scripture teach, may, and, in many cases, ought to
enter into a mutual consociation, and confaederation, amongst themselves, in
Classes, and Synods, that they may use their common consent, and mutual help,
so far at it may commodiously be done, especially in those things, which are
of greater moment. Provided always that special care be taken that, under
pretense of helping the Churches, they do not hinder them, by taking away, and
diminishing that liberty, and power which Christ has given them. It was some
such abuse that made Greg: Nazianzen so bitter against Counsels, Epist: 42. ad
Procop.
that he resolved to shun all such assemblyes. Which Dr. Whittaker imputed to
the evil event, Contra. Camp: p. 83. edit. 1601.
whereunto the ambition and polypragmony of some men had brought matters, who,
in stead of composing former differences and ending those controversyes, made
new ones, which agrees with Nazianzens own expression of the reason why
evils were, rather increased then diminished, by them, (...). i. e. For
Contentiousnes and ambition prevayled more then reason. And, it may be, some
such provocation caused that learned politic man Hugo Grotius so to slight the
authority of Classes and Synods, Pietas. Ordinum Holl. ac West-Fris.
as he did, in that treatise which he published against Sibr. Lubbertus, upon
which Bogermannus published his Annotations learnedly and succinctly penned, in
defense of D. Sibrandus, wherein, for answer of that part which concerned the
necessity and authority of Synods, he referred Grotius to what Iunius had
written against Bellarmine de necessitatee^p otestate Conciliorum, wherein I
fully agree with Iunius. But we are now to speak of a more imperfect
combination of Churches, then that, which is in provincial Synods, viz, a
Diocesan union of them in Classes.

Betwixt which and the imperfect combination of Churches, in and about Geneva,
there is some difference. For that is a voluntary conjunction of the smaller
Churches with the greater, in one Consistory, for their help in their
particular Church buisenesses (the smaller Churches wanting men fit for the
manadging of their Church affairs, and making one presbytery, Zanch. in 4.
praecept.
with the next greater Church, which, being better fitted, meet weekly in
their own Consistory, and these with them) But this is a combination which is
between diverse Churches, which, having their several presbyteryes, or
Consistoryes apart, send their deputyes, viz, one Minister and one Elder, to
meet with the like deputyes from all other Churches, Synops: pur. Theol. disp.
49. These. 5.
in such a Diocese or division, at a time, and place appointed, to handle such
things as concern many Churches in common, and as could not be ended in the
Consistoryes of the particular Churches. Concerning these the question is, in
this and the following Sections; for the discussion whereof I will propound two
things to be considered, in thesi, or in general. 1. What kind of combination
that is which, is lawful amongst Churches? 2. What power that is which is due
to them over particular Churches, by virtue of that combination?

For the first. The combination of particular Churches, in Classes and Synods,
is, either such a consociation of them as is between aequalls, or such a
subordinatio^ of them as is between unaequalls. The first is by way of
counsel, or brotherly direction. The second is by way of command, or masterly
subjection. This we condemn, as being the first step, whereby the Pope
ascended into the chair of pestilence, and a mere inlet for tyranny to invade
and usurp the Churches right. The other is approved by the practice of the
most ancient Churches and by good reason.

First. The practice of the Churches of the first age is clear for a free
seeking and communicating of mutual help, by letters, and messengers, as
occasion required, and that, not only in Scripture Act. 15 1. Cor. 16. ult.
Revel 1. et 2.
but also in Ecclesiastical hystoryes Eusebius: lib. 3. Cap. 32. Cyprian. lib. 3.
Cap. 13. Catal. test. ver. lib. 9. p. 109. 110.
And Cyprian expressly declares that the Churches, in his time, did give
mutual help to one another, ex charitate, non ex subjectione, in way of
charity, not of subjection. And the Epitomatour of the Centurists fitly
expresses that combination which was, in those primitive times, among the
Churches, by the communion of the members in the body, and concludes that
those actions and offices of their mutual care, one for another, did not, ex
imperio aut subjectione quadam proficisci, sed ex charitate and aedificandi
studio i. e. did not arise from any authority, which one did exercise over
another, subjecting it to the rest, but out of love and endeavor of mutual
aedifying.

Secondly. The reasons, whereby it may be proved, are weighty. M. Parker has
saved me the labor of this task, by laying down six Arguments, for the
proof of this, in those his learned and elaborate treatises, concerning
Ecclesiastical policy, as 1, From the ground of this combination of Churches,
Dc eccles. pol. lib. 3. Cap. 22. p. 329.
which is love, not obedience. 2. From the form of it, which is communion and
consociation etc. 3. From the matter of it, which are Churches, who are aequall
among themselves, as members in the body, which have a vicissitude of offices
mutually to be performed, among themselves. 4. From the object of it, which is
res communis, that which concerns all the Churches, in common. 5. From the
outward manner of proceeding, which is eollatione conciliorum, by conference
and communication of counsels. 6. From the end of this combination, which is,
not to receive the mandates of other Churches, but their consent, counsel, and
approbation.

The second thing to be considered, in thesi, is what power or authority that
is which is due to Classes over particular Churches, by virtue of their
combination.

First. More generally, This will best appear by a right understanding of the
nature of that kind of assocication or combination, as it has been, in the
words immediately preceding, expressed. For, answerable to those two kinds of
combination, there is a twofold power, in the persons so combined, whereby they
may justly do such things, which others cannot, who are not, by such a
relation, thereunto qualifyed. Thus, to the unaequall fellowship which is
between superious and inferiors (as parents and children, Masters and
servants Princes and people) appertains jus Rectorium, the power of
government: Hugo Grot de jure pacis, et belli. p. 4.
but to that other society which is between aequalls (as brethren, Citizens,
friends, confaederates) belongs jus aequatorium, such a power of
communicating mutual help as may stand with the preservation of their
several libertyes and mutual aequality, safe and untouched. And no other
power is due to them, qua tales. If they assume any other, it is a mere
usurpation, and transgression of the bounds and limits of their combination.

Secondly. More particularly, to apply this to Classes, which are sociall
combinations of many Churches, for mutual help, it must be considered. 1.
What is the object of this combination. 2. What power it has, in reference to
that object.

First. The object of classical combinations of Churches is res communis. i.
e. that which concerns all the Churches, or many of them, in that division,
either of it self, or by accident. Beza declares Synods to be necessary for 3
causes, De triplic. Epist. page 91. 9. 3.
1. to preserve consent. 2. to provide common remedies, against common evils,
by common counsel. 3. to help those who thinck themselves injuryed by the
judgment of particular presbyteryes. The Synod of 3 nations in Can. 35 reduces
all to. 1. matters of doctrine. 2. matters of order, and ecclesiastical
policy. 3. particular facts. To be breife, these things are matters, either of
faith, or of fact, whether brought to them, or observed by them.

1. In matters of faith, their resolution is required, not their jurisdiction,
their counsayl, not their command, it being the end of the Churches
combination, in such matters, only to communicate their gifts in fellowship
together, to find out the sense of the Scripture more clearly and certainly,
for the satisfaction of all, then it could have been done by any, apart from
the r^st.

2. Matters of fact are, either common, or personal. Personal matters do
primarily belong to the particular Churches, and only to them, so far as they
are proper, but, if, by accident, they become common, they fall under the
deliberation of many Churches thus combined as in causa lapsorum, in the cause
of those who fell off, in those times of persecution, not only in some one,
but in many Churches, for the discussion whereof, Cyprian and the Affrican
Doctors also concluded, Cypr. lib. 1 Epist. 8. et lib. 4. Epist 2.
that a common meeting of many Churches was necessary, in a buisenes so common
and of so great consequence, that the plaster might be as broad as the sore,
and the remedy hold some proportion with the malady.

Secondly. For the power it hath] That it may be distinctly understood what
kind of power it is, which (in reference to the present question) is due or
undue to Classes, I will premise two or three distincttons.

1. Did: It is not potestas originalis, but derivata i. e. it not a power
which the Classis has originally, in, and from it self, but which is borrowed
and derived from others, viz, from particular Churches. So that, as the conduit
pipes can give no other water, then what themselves received from the springs,
nor the stars any greater light, then is communicated to them from the Sun:
so the Classes can exercise no other power over any particular Church, then
that which it self has freely given them. Hence it will follow, that the
Classes have not an absolute but a limited power, not a Magisteriall, but a
Ministerial power, not the power of lords, but of stewards, not of princes,
but of ambassadors, or heralds, not of lawgivers, but of cryers, or
publishers of proclamations, not to command (as princes do in the common
wealth) but only to signifye and declare the command and will of God. And
therefore, that they may not define, or determine matters by the opinions or
customs of men, but by the truth of God in the Scriptures, which they must show
for their warrant. Because the Church it self, from whence their power is
derived, has no other power committed to it. And none can give that to others,
which themselves have not. And therefore to require and injoyne men to rest in
their determinations, and judgments, without sufficient proof of their
agreement with the Scripture, is to give them an undue power.

2. Did: This derived power and authority, which is given to Classes, in these
things, is not a praerogative of jurisdiction, but of aestimation and reverence
rather. Because Gods ordinance has limited the former to particular Churches,
as his delegates in their own matters, and it is not in their power to
alienate it from themselves: But the latter is due to Classis consisting of
grave, learned, prudent, and faithful men, for their excelent personal gifts,
in which respect, their judgment is to be much valued, and received with due
regard. And for these causes the Affrican Doctors saught help of Damasus,
Ierom, Jnnocentius etc. in the great question, de lapsis, that the truth, being
confirmed by their testimony and consent, who were orthodox and sound in
judgment, might have the more authority with men generally, whose eyes are upon
men that are famous for wisdom and soundnes in the faith, Confer. Chap. 8. d. 6.
as Dr. Reynolds told Heart, yet, in the same place, he affirms that all
Churches which the Apostles planted were aequall in power. And therefore to
ascribe unto them a power of jurisdiction over particular Churches, and that in
things proper to themselves, is to subject particular Churches under an undue
power.

3. Did: Whatsoever power or authority is given to Classes, in reference to
particular Churches, it is given to them cumulative, not privative. i. e. for
the help and strengthening of them, in the exercise of that power which
Christ has given them not for the depriving them of it, or streightening them
in the due and right use of it. For, whatsoever Ecclesiastical power or
authority is given to any, it is, for aedification, not for destruction, in
this sense also. 2. Cor. 10 8.
And therefore all that power, whether assumed by them, or by others ascribed
to them, whereby particular Churches are abridged of their liberty and power,
in any particular, is an usurped, and undue power. These things being thus
premised, our conclusion is, that.

All that power which Classes have duly received by the free gift of
particular Churches as a praerogative of aestimation and reverence, or any
ways for the help and strengthening of those Churches, in the well manadging
of their own matters, is a due power. But whatsoever power of jurisdiction
they assume to themselves for the depriving of particular Churches of that
power, which Christ has given them, it is an undue power. From this conclusion
we will deduce two Consectaryes.

1. Consect: That there is a lawful expedient, and, in some cases, a necessary
use of the communion and combination of Churches, being rightly ordered for the
help of particular Churches in their proper affairs. As, First, In the
choice of Ministers. 1, for provocation, to quicken the particular Churches by
their exhortations and admonitions to seek out some fit man, if they be slack
therein. 2, for direction, to counsel and advise them, from the Scripture,
about the fitnes of the men, whom they would choose, and to admonish them of
any notable unfitnes in them, to prevent the danger of infecting themselves, or
other Churches, by any dangerous errors maintained by them against the rule of
faith, or otherwise of common and important consequence. 3, for countenance and
protection against any that would deprive them of meet helpers, either by
false suggestions to the Magistrates, or by raising contention and opposition
among themselves. Secondly. In the excommunication of members, which is a
matter of great moment, if the particular Churches seek the help of neighbor
Churches, to prevent any error among themselves, in a difficult case, or any
misreport which may arise concerning their proceedings amongst others, or to
add the more strength for the convincing of those whom they are to censure, by
the concurrence and consent of grave, and learned, and prudent men of neighbor
Churches, they shall do piously and prudently therein. Thirdly. In other cases
of difference, wherewith particular Churches are excercised, and whereby they
are so divided that the matter can not be ended, and the differences composed
among themselves, by reason of the aequall number of the opposites, on boath
sides, in matters that should be determined by voices, or the difficulty of the
case in question. In all these, and such like cases, much benefit and help may
and should be affoarded to particular Churches by their co^sociation with
others, in manner aforesaid, and they aught to seek and use their help
therein.

2. Consect: That, if Classes, under pretense of these ends and benefits,
assume unto themselves such a primacy of power, or such an authority of
jurisdiction over particular Churches, as 1, that they shall not choose their
own Ministers, excommunicate their members, etc. Without a power derived from
them, or, 2, that, the Church is hindered from enjoying Ministers of sound
judgment, and unblameable behavior, at their pleasure. or, 3. that they may
impose conformity to unwarrantable customs, or conclusions of their own, as a
condition without which Ministers may not lawfully be received by such a Church
into the pastoral office, or, 4, that their saying a man is not fit for such a
place, whom themselves acknowledge to be fit for any other place, and that
without showing the aequity of that their judgment from the Scriptures, or
aequally and judiciously weighing the lawful desires of the Church, and their
right in this particular, through a partial adhaering to one party, should, or
may deprive the Church of such men. or, 5. that the Church may not enjoy a man,
against whom there is no just and sufficient exception, as an assistant, for a
time, or to preach amongst them a sermon or two, as a passant, without their
leave: or, 6. that matters, proper to the Church and which may be ended in
their own Consistory commodiously, yet being brought to them, though but by
some one man, out of opposition to the rest, that he may sway matters according
to his own mind, by their help, may be taken from the Church and concluded
by them, in favor of one, against the mind of the Church, and the Church must
be bound to rest in their determination, though they show no warrant from the
Scripture to satisfye their consciences about the aequity of their so
determining and doing. In a word, whatsoever power they assume, or others give
them, to deprive the Church of that power which Christ has given it, in its
own matters, is against the end of their association and so an undue power.

Now, for the Hypothesis, or particular application of those generals to the
present question] The Answerer is challenged by the Complainants for subjecting
their Church under an undue power of the Classis, for his own ends, and
without warrant from the word. Out of question, if it be an undue power, it is
not only without warrant from the word, but also contrary to the rule. But, it
may be, they mean that he has done this, without showing them any word which
warranted his so doing. And, in that sense, it is a complaint of too masterly
and selfewilled a carriage of himself in Church affairs. Which they seem
indeed to intend by that addition, when they say, that he does it, for his
own ends. Now, to detract from another for a man's own commodity is against
nature, as the heathen man could say, and he proved it thus, Ci^. de offic:
lib. 3.
because, if that be done, the destruction of society and community amongst men
will necessarily follow. With-whom another agrees, expressing the same thing,
under a Metaphor, which he applies to men singularly and individually
considered, but I will apply to particular Churches, in reference to Classical
combinations. As all the members agree amongst themselves, because it
concerns the wholl that every one be safe: so men do spare one another,
because we are borne for communion. Scen: de ira 1. lib. 3 C. 32.
Salva enim esse societas, nisi amore and custodia partium, non potest: For a
society cannot otherwise be safe then by keeping the parts, whereof it is
compounded, from being hurt. But let us examine his answer to this complaint,
which consists of four particulars. In all which I will pass by the
overflowing of his gall, which he too frequently discovers.

1. In his first answer he charge them with slandring the Classis, when they
charge it with an undue power, which slander, he says, is against the very
state of government, and form of discipline observed and practiced in these
reformed Churches, and calls for proof. Wherein, me thincketh, he had
forgotten himself: for, in the three next Sections, he himself produces the
proofs which they brought: In examining his answers to those proofs, I doubt,
it will appear, that the complaint is just, whereunto I referr the Reader,
praying him, in the mean space, to noate that the thing complained of, is, not
all power excercised by the Classis, but only an undue power, whereof whilst
they complain, they do implicitly acknowledge so much power to be due, as
the word of God warranteth to them, and they suppose that the government and
discipline of these Reformed Churches acknowledges no other power to be due to
them. So that, if it shall be found that the Classis have assumed to themselves
an undue power over their Church, in any particular, the complaint against the
Classis is just, and the slandring of the very state of the government of these
Churches, is to be charged upon himself, not upon them.

2. In his second answer, he charge them with slander, for saying that he
has subjected the Church under an undue power. This also will appear in the
proofs of the justnes of this complaint, in the following Sections, whereunto
I referr the Reader.

3. In his third answer he charge them with sla^der, for saying that he has
done this merely for his own ends. This, he says, is a great arrogance, and
setting of themselves in Gods stead, whose peculiar it is to search, and to
judge the heart, and reins. But, is this to answer complaints? or is it not to
give new cause of complaints? that, whereas formerly they complained that he
deprived the Church of the power, which Christ had given it, now they may
complain, that he would put out the eyes of the members, and deprive them of
the reason and understanding which God has given them. For, if men may not
judge of men's intentions, how is it that our Lord has left it for a rule,
whereby to discern false prophets whose intentions are wolvish, and to raven,
how sheepish and harmless soever they seem to be, in their pretenses, when
he says, Ye shall know them by their fruits? Mat. 7.15.16:
Which I do not, nor dare apply personally to the Answerer, of whom I have
better thoughts, and esteem, but only to show that it is lawful for men, in
some cases, and so far as they keep to the rule, to judge of others men's
intentions. It is true; it is Gods praerogative to judge the heart. But, what
then? may not men, by the light of reason, which he has given them, Psalm.
139.2.
judge the actions? God knows the thoughts a far off, in their hidden
causes, and seminall preparations, and that, infallibly, this is his peculiar
glory, which is not arrogated by man, whilst he professes only to judge the
cause by the effect, and the end by the means, which is, as if a man should
say. The smoke appears out of the chimney; therefore there is some fire in
the house, or the man chooses such a way; therefore his intent is to travayle
to such a place. The light of reason and sense inableth a man thus to judge,
and the light of Scripture warranteth it. How then can any man justly condemn
it? As for the Answerers ends, in this action, reason in any of the
complainants says, they must be, either public, or private. If his ends were
the public good of the Church, the means would be directed thereunto: but it
seems to them that the means are such as tend rather to deprive the Church of
men, whom they warrantably desire, and to streighten the Churches liberty and
power in her own matters, Hereupon they conjecture that his end is not their
public good, but some private self respect. This judgment is but humane, and
therefore fallible. For it is possible that a man, by an error in his
judgment, may pursue a good end in wrong means: and so the Answerer, thincking
it to be more for the good of the Church to be straightened thus and limited by
the Classis, then to be otherwise, might have a good end, but mistook the
means. And therefore, if they missed of the matter of the complaint, in
chalenging him for unlawful ends, yet the complaint will be found just, if
they accuse him of using unwarra^table means. Yet I cannot free him, as I
desire, from their accusation of selfe-aymes, in what he has done, till he
shall deny it, and declare his intendments to have been for the public good,
which when he shall have done, the Complaint will appear to have been a
slander, and I shall rejoice to see his integrity cleared, in this particular.

4. In his fourth answer, he would feign know, he says, what that due power
is, by which they would have the Church to be governed. The truth is. In all
this passage appears much sarcasticall bitterness, unworthy of the learning,
gravity, and holy function of the Answerer. Yet, I suppose, the Complainants
would be ready, if they were called, to answer soberly that they desire no
other Church government, unto which they would willingly be subject, then that
which Christ has appointed the Church to be under. What that is, if they know
not, he aught to teach them: If they know it, and desire it, he aught to lead
them out, and to go before them, as a faithful shepherd, that the sheep may
follow him, as he follows Christ, and not to praejudice them against any good
way, by a scoffing proposal of men's differences in judgment, about some
particular tract, or turning in the way, to the great scandal and offense of
many, and the dishonor of the Gospel, and the hindrance of Reformation, by his
joining with the enimyes thereof, in an old cavil which has turned many out
of the way, and caused some to return back to a mere neutrality in religion,
till the professors of it agree among themselves about the path, wherein they
will walk.

Whereas he takes occasion again, without provocation, to mention Mr. Jacob
as an enemy to Classes and Synods, that I might speak a word in the cause of
the dumb, and of the dead, I have examined what he has written concerning
this point (more, upon this occasion, then formerly I had done, and, it may be,
Treat: of Chapter Government. Chap. 1. page 13. Chap. 7. 88. 89. 90 Confess: Art. 5.
more then else I should have done) and do find that he professes his
agreement, (that I may use his own words) even to an hair; with Calvin and
Beza, touching the substance of this matter, and that he acknowledges, with
them, both the parishionall and Diocesan presbyteryes: yea, the provincial,
and larger too, if occasion serve. How he explaineth himself herein the
diligent Reader will easily observe in other passages of the same book. And
else where he acknowledges that there may be, and, on occasion, there ought to
be, on earth, a consociation of Congregations, and Churches, and namely, by way
of Synods, but not a subordination, or, surely, not a subjection of the
Congregations under any higher spiritual authority absolute, save only
Christ's, and the holy Scriptures. Whereby it appears, that the single
uncompounded policy, which Mr, I, required, is not contrary to the government
of these reformed Churches, by Classes and Synods rightly ordered; Chapter
Government Chap. 7. p. 89.
nay rather he so far approves of it, that he says, it is Apostolical for
many ordinary Congregations, consociating together, in their spiritual
government, to have a Diocesan or larger Synod, or presbytery over them, for
their better direction, and, he adds, such the reformed Churches, at this
day, do enjoy. But, if he thinck, by mentioning the name of Mr. Jacob, to
leave the Complainants under the suspicion of adhaering to some sect, or of
depending upon the authority of man, and not upon the word of Christ, for their
rule, about Church matters, he will be found to be injurious, not to them
alone, but to Christ also, Mat. 18.17. 1. Cor: 5. Coll. 2.5. and 4.17. Acts
20.17.28. Rev. 2 and 3 1. Tim. 3.15. Cha. 5.21. Chap. 6.13. to 17.
and to the truth.

First. To Christ, seeing they acknowledge all that power to be due (and
thereunto they are willing to submit) which, by the word, is warranted to be
that whereby Churches should be governed, according to the mind of Christ, and
which agrees with the pattern which Christ left to his disciples, and which
the Apostles exactly followed, in planting those primitive Churches of Corinth,
Colosse, Ephesus, the 7 golden Candlesticks in Asia, among whom Christ walked.
etc. and which Paul so straightly charged Timothy to observe, in all Church
affairs which: is no other then the power committed by Christ to particular
Churches, as his delegates, for the right ordering of themselves, in their
Church government, and in all holy administrations and ordinances, according to
his command and direction in the Scripture, without dependence upon any Classes
or Synods, or whatsoever humane spiritual power for license or authority to be
received from them for their so doing. And, as they thus acknowledge all that
power, under which the Church is subjected by warrant of the word, to be due;
so they profess all that power, under which the Church is subjected, to be
undue, which the word does not warrant, and which takes away from particular
Churches that power which, by Christ his ordinance, is due to them, which, what
is it but to remove the ancient bounds, Prove. 22.28. Gal. 5.1.3. Ioh. 9.
and to thrust the Churches from the libertyes wherein they are commanded to
stand fast, and to affect an undue praeheminence in the Church?

Secondly. To the truth, whilst it is presented to the view of all men under
the show of some singular opinion (or error rather) of a particular man, or as
a forelorne thing, deserted of all her witnesses, excepting Mr. Jacob, whereas
so much as the Complainants seem to require (as appears in their referring
themselves to the warrant of the word) has been acknowledged by the faithful
witnesses in all ages, Heb. 12.1
with which cloud of witnesses we are compassed about, as the Israelites were
with that pillar of a cloud, wherein the Lord went before them, by day, Exodus
13.21.
to lead them in the way. Such were the Apostles, in their time, and those
worthyes, as Cyprian, and those of whom Eusebius takes notice, Cypr. lib. 3
Epist. 14. Eusebius. li. 3 et 4. et 5.
in many places, and in some succeeding instances, before the mystery wraught
to its full hight. The same thing may appear to those who are conversant in
the wrightings of the Centuriators. To these I may add those who have handled
the controversyes concerning the necessity, and authority of Councills, amongst
whom I will instance in Dr. Whittaker, who, Whitt. de Council: quest. 5. Arg.
speaking of the fullnes of that delegated power which Christ has given to the
Church, not to the Pope (which he applies to the Keys in binding and loosing,
shutting and opening, retayning and remitting sins) says, that this power
belongs primarily, principally, and essentially to the Church, but to the
several Bishops only accidentally, secundarily, and l^sse principally, and
explaineth himself by a rule in philosophy, which is, that when any power is
in two, in one necessarily and essentially, in another contingently and
accidentally, it is more principally in him, in whom it is necessarily and
essentially, then in him, whose it is only contingently and accidentally. As
the heat is more principally in the fire then in the water, because it is in
the water by reason of the fire. So (says he) seeing this jurisdiction and
fullnes of power is given to the Church necessarily and primarily, but to the
Pope only secundarily, and by the Church, it is manifest that it is more in
the Church then in the Pope. What that learned wrighter says of the Churches
power, in comparison with the Pope, holds in all other parallel instances.

To these I may add those who have written concerning the right ordering of
Churches, according to the Scripture. I will not stand to give a Catalogue of
their names, though I might be plentiful therein, but will content my self
with the three wrighters of this kind, whom the Answerer pretended, in
conference with me, to make for him, and I shall show them to be strongly
against him, Mr, Cartwright, and Mr. Fenner and Mr. Parker, men of our own
nation.

Sect. 4. p. 53.
1. For Mr. Cartwright. The very place in his book, whereunto the Answerer
referred me, I have examined before, and have shown how little help he will
have from him.

De Sacra Theol. lib. 7. p. 279.
2. For M. Fenner. He, speaking of the Ecclesiastical presbytery,
distinguishes between the Eldership of one particular Church (which, he
says, is properly called (...)) and the Eldership of many Churches.

P. 277. and 278.
The Eldership of the first sort, he says, is a compound office wherein all
the Elders do, in the name of the wholl Church, administer all the buisenesses
of the Church, that is, of the Lord, by common authority and counsel. And,
for this purpose, he alleges many texts out of the old and new testaments.
These buisenesses, he says, are either judiciary or extrajudiciary. Judiciary
buisenesses are such things as are to be defined by the judgment of the Church,
which are, either matters doubtful, which must be defined by the Scriptures,
or censures to be administered. Extrajudiciary buisenesses, are Elections,
ordinations, chief care of disposing the holy treasures, keeping of order in
the assembly, and all things which are to be done. Yet, in matters of greatest
moment, and which concern the good, or ruin of the wholl Church, he says,
the Elders, after consultation had among themselves, must tell their opinions
to the Church, that, if they have any thing to counsel, or to object, it may
be brought in, and afterward, the opinions and assent of all being declared,
matters are to be concluded, unless it be necessary to referr the buisenes to
a greater assembly of Elders, for the avoiding, or composing of differences,
which is then to be done when the difference is between the greater part of
the Church. And these matters, of the greatest moment, are, the censures,
excommunication, and absolution from it, which is to be done in the assembly,
by the AUTHORITY OF THE WHOLE CHURCH, orders also of the greatest moment to be
made, controversyes of faith to be composed, the elections and just deposing of
Ministers, and other things aequall to these, or greater then they all, which
must be thus transacted, as he plentifully declares from Scripture. Thus I
have faithfully translated the words of this eminent light, in his time Mr.
Dudley Fenner, who was joined with Mr. Cartwright in the public ministry to
the English Company in Antwerpe, to whom, and to that work of his Mr.
Cartwright, in an epistle to him praefixed to that book, gives a singular
testimony, comparing him to Moses, who, from Mount Nebo, viewed the wholl land
of Canaan, as it were, with one cast of his eye, to whom the Answerer him self
referred me (wherein I admire his confidence) as to one that made for him. The
Reader may see how he leaves the wholl power of jurisdiction in the particular
Church, and binds them no further to make use of other Ecclesiastical
Senats, out of themselves, then necessity requires, and he does not
acknowledge that it is a case of that necessity; but when the avoiding of
troubles and dissentions in the Church makes it necessary. And when is that?
Not when one alone contentiously differs from all the rest. But, when the
difference is among the greater part. And that, in such a case, the judgment of
the wholl Church is first to be tried and the opinions, and assent of all being
declared, matters are to be concluded. Idem ibid p. 280.
Else where he says, that the presbytery of many Churches is to compose and
end such things only as cannot be ended in particular Churches. Act. 15.1. to
8. 2. Chron. 20.33. Act. 16.4. And these are cases, either proper to those
Churches, which are brought to them, or things common to many Churches, and so
taken up by them. I demand of the Answerer, whether he be of this worthy
wrighters judgment, or not? If not; why did he referr me to him for
satisfaction? If yea; why is his practice so different from it? For, in this
buisenes, though of so great consequence, that it endangered the breaking of
the Church (if I had not sat down quietly, and suffered wrong, for peace sake)
the Answerer alone opposing the desire of the Elders, and of the greater part
of the Church, and the buisenes being proper to the Church, and which might
have been ended among themselves, yet, against the liberty and right of the
Church (if Mr. Fenners judgment be right) he would carry it to the Classis,
that he might effect his purpose.

De polit. Eccles: lib. 3. Chap. 1.
3. For Mr. Parker. He largely, and strongly proves this position, potestas
Ecclesiastica essentialiter and primario in ipsa Fccl^sia, tanquam in subjecto
proprio, residet. The power ecclesiastical does essentially and primarily
reside in the Church it self, as in its, proper subject. The sense wherein he
thus spoke, to prevent all suspicion of his pleading for popular confusion, he
declares out of Zanchy, who says, Zanch in praecept 4. quest. 3.
toti Ecclesiae dedisse Christum claves, sed ita ut in Ecclesia certi essent,
qui clavibus utantur ad salutem Ecclesiae, honoremque Dei. That Christ gave the
keys to the wholl Church, but so, that there should be certain men that
should use the keys to the good of the Church and glory of God. For the proof
of the former, that the right of power is in every particular Church, he uses
five Arguments, in the 6: and 7. chapters, and then, in the 8. chapter, he
comes to speak of the exercise and ordinary execution of this power, which
is, he says, in the Church Officers or rulers, yet, with this moderation, that
this dispensation of the Churches power in the officers be according to a well
tempered form, partly Aristocraticall, partly Democraticall, the Church
committing those things to the presbytery, which it can not commodiously
perform by it self, and retaining that exercise of power which belongs to
the dignity, authority, and liberty which it has received from Christ. Thus he
wholly destroys that democraty, or popular Anarchy, which Beza justly
condemns in Morellius, and is, by some, unjustly imputed to those that plead
for a due reformation of Churches, according to the rules of the word, and the
primitive patterns. Of the first sort of things, which the Church commits
to the Rulers, because it cannot commodiously perform them by it self, he
speaks in cap. 9.10.11. of the second sort of things, which the Church
retains in it self, because it can commodiously exercise them by it self,
he speaks in cap. 12. Wherein, by 22. Arguments, he proves the Churches
superiority over her Pastors and rulers, in 3 respects. 1. of the end, the
power which they have being given them for her aedification. 2, in respect of
the application of it to the persons, 3 in respect of regulating the use of it,
if it be abused. And in cap. 18. 13, making a comparison between a particular
Church, and Churches combined in Synods and Classes, he affirms that the
difference between them is, not in the intensive consideration of their power
(which the congregation has, in reference to the Keys, within it self) but
in the extensive power only, wherein the Synod has a power extended to more
objects, viz, to many Churches (in things common) whereas the power of a
particular Church is confined, and limited within its own compass. The same
author, in the 20 chapter, speaking of the summity, or supremacy of the power
of particular Congregations, propounds the due limits of it, wherein, he
conceives, it is to be understood, and bounded, as, that the power of
particular Churches is chief. 1. in its own matters, not in things common to
many Churches. 2. in case it be able to transact its own matters within it
self: as, if a doubt or controversy arise, the Church has power to terminate
it, if it can: as the Church of Antioch first disputed the matter among
themselves, and labored to compose the difference within themselves, but
finding (not a want of right to end it among themselves, but) need of more
help they sent to Jerusalem freely for the help of their counsel, in this
matter. 3. In case of right and lawful administration. 4. In case of no evil
administration praesumed by those, who, finding themselves wronged by an unjust
sentence, appeal to the judgment of the Synod. In which 3 last limitations,
other Churches (to whose judgment, or advice, persons injuried by an unjust
sentence appeal) do concur, in way of counsel, and declaration of their
judgment, to help particular churches to exercise their power aright, P. 47.
P. 239.
in their own matters, as was before noated out of Mr. Cartw. and Mr. Fenner,
and out of the Author himself in the foregoing passages, which being so
understood, does not justifye any undue power of jurisdict^o^, if it be
excercised by the Classis over that Church in the cases and manner complained
of by the Subcribers: and how fully it agrees with my stating of the question
in the beginning of this Section, will appear to the indifferent Reader, when
he shall have compared boath together. Casus conscient: lib. 4 c: 24. qu. 4 et
c: 25. qu: 5.


Thus we have examined his own witnesses, and find them wholly for us in this
cause. To these I might add Dr. Ames in that which he wrote, in his latter
time, wherein the Answerer pretends that he set down his jugdment more
warily, in this matter, Dioc: trial. p. 13. et 21.
then formerly. See his cases of conscience, the 4, Book where he speaks
clearly of this power as essentially belonging to particular Churches. To him I
may add Mr. Paul Baynes, a man of singular noate for learning and piety, in
Cambridge, where he succeeded Mr. Perkins, who freely expresses his jugdment
for the right of particular Churches, 1. part 2. l. 2. p. 104 105. etc.
and their independence, in this sense, in his Diocesans trial. With whom I
might join the Replyer upon Dr. Downams defense, who, not only declares his
own jugdment herein concurring with the above mentioned, but also joyneth with
them the suffrages of diverse others, as the Centurists, Illiricus, D. Andrews
Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Fulke, Willet, Thom: Bell, Ciprian, Augustine,
Gerson, Ferus,

Desp: cause. pap. lib. 2.
To the same purpose, has a worthy, and learned wrighter of these countries
Voetius, Professor of Divinity in Vtrecht whose words I thus translate. Sect.
2. cap. 12. p. 18. 6.
The Church is the spouse of Christ, which is the proper and adaequate subject
of that power, to whom Christ has committed that delegate right, reserving the
chief to himself. Which aught to be and to remain so proper to the Church,
that it, neither may be snatched away by the authority of others, nor lost by
their voluntary concession, nor committed to the trust of any other; although
diverse acts belonging to the calling of a Minister may and aught to be
performed by certain members of the Church. Thus he professedly vindicateth
the Churches right in an Aristocratico-Democratie, as appears in the title of
that chapter.

And, to conclude, thus it was ordered in the English Church at Franckford,
among the exiles in those Marian days, that, A Discourse of the troubles in
the Engl. Church at Franckf. Art. 62. Art. 67:
if all the Ministers and Seniors be suspected, or found parties; if any
appeal be made from them, that then such appeal be made to the body of the
Congregation etc. and that the body of the Congregation may appoint so many of
the Congregation to hear and determine the said matter, or matters, as it
shall seem good to the Congregation. Again If any controversy be about the
doubtful meaning of any word, or words in the Discipline, that first it be
referred to the Ministers, or Senjors: and, if they cannot agree thereupon,
then the thing be referred to the wholl Congregation.

The 28. Section examined.
IN this, and the three following Sections, they bring proofs of the justnes
of their complaint of his subjecting the Church under an undue power of the
Classis. Their first proof is, 1. Proof.
his giving them power to keep out such men as he would have kept out, though
they abhorred all haeresy and Schysme. And they instance in Mr. H: and me,
which is aggravated. 1. by the primary agent, he, viz the Answerer. 2. by the
innocence of the persons injuryed, they being such as abhor all haeresy and
schysme etc. 3. by the Answerers partial carriage, he would have had other,
that, to this day, hold the same opinion.

To keep out Ministers, whom the Church desires, being free from haeresy or
schysme, is not in the power of the Classis, by any warrant from the word, or
by any order established in the Synods of these countries. And therefore the
power, whereby they do that, is an undue power, and the complaint of the
members against it is just. Let us examine his answers which are six.

The 2 first, in reference to the first aggravation, serve to accuse the
Complainants of a double slander. 1. of slandering the Answerer, in saying,
that he gave the Classis this power. 2. of slandering the Classis, in saying,
they received and excercised this undue power, boath which he aggravateth
bitterly enough, after his manner. To be breife in so plain a case. Had they
power to hinder the settling of any Minister in any Church, before they had
examined his cause, or heard what he could say, in his own defense, as they
did in Mr. H. case? or to deprive the Church of a man, whom they desired, only
because he refused to baptize all that are presented, by whomsoever, though
they were, neither members of that Church, nor otherwise known, and that in
Amsterdam, as they did in my case? Or to proceed against men so far that
abhor all haeresy and schysme? From the Scriptures they have no such power,
nor from the Churches, nor from the Synods, nor from the fundamental laws of
their own constitution. Whence then? The answerer opposes men, upon needless
jealousyes, and then craveth the help of the Classis, to keep them out: they,
conceiving it to be their part to defend the ministers, interpose strenuously
(ab, that I could say, justly, and orderly!) and judge that such men are not
fit to be settled in that Church. Hereupon the members complain that he gives,
and they receive an undue power, in this particular. Where is now the double
slander? will he deny the fact? It is too evident. Will he deny it to be
unduely done? The very form of subscription, required by the Classis it self,
will witness against him, which excludes not any man from the Ministry in these
Churches for that cause. And can they duly and justly require that of the
preacher of the English Church, which is not required of any Dutch Minister, by
the orders of the Classis it self?

But the Answerer gave them not this power. The power which the Ministers of
the Classis have is not of my gift, says he, they had that power, which they
exercise, before I wae. The question is not of the power which they have, in
general, but of a power which they exercise, in some particular, viz, in
that, whereof they complain. And herein, they do not complain of his
approving their due power, but of his giving them an undue power, depriving
them of men, whom they desired, without sufficient cause. This power they took
not to themselves, till they were called upon to interpose for the prevention
of some imagined danger, in the English Church. Who suggested those jealousyes?
Did not the Answerer? Who importuned them to wright what they did, in the cases
here mentioned? Did not the Answerer? Who bound the Church to rest in the
wrightings of those Ministers, in these cases? Who, but the Answerer? Let the
Scripture be searched, and the text shown, wherein the word has given them
this power, to hinder the Church from choosing a Minister, otherwise free from
all exception, only for such causes? Let the Synods be examined. Js there one
Canon in them all to warrant their excercising such a power? Will the English
Church acknowledge that they have given the Classis this power? If the
Scriptures, the Synods, the Church gave it not them, if themselves saught it
not, took it not, till it was given them, it must needs be that the Answerer
gave it them. By what right, either he gave it, or they received it, I inquire
not, let them agree about that between themselves, or rather let them, in
simplicity and truth, satisfye, first their own consciences; then the
Complainants.

In his third answer he charge Mr. Hook: and me with schysme. It was
requisite he should do so, else, he knew, that the Classis and he must bear
the blame of usurping and excercising an undue power, to the wronging of the
Church. Let us see how he proves it.

First. In Mr. Hooker whom he charge with four opinions, which tended to
schysme, as he says.

1. The two first concern the Brownists. as, 1. his opinion that they might
lawfully be received for members of that Church. 2. that, in some cases, the
members of this Church might hear at their assemblyes.

To help the Reader to a right understanding of this cause (till Mr. H. shall
thinck it fit to speak for himself) I will show 3. things. 1. That Mr. H. did
not approve of the Brownists judgment, in the point of Separation: for, in
express words, he answers to the first question. To separate from the
faithful assemblies, and Churches in England, as no Churches, is an error in
judgment, and sin in practice, held, and maintained by the Brownists. And
therefore to communicate with them, either in this their opinion, or practice
is sinful, and utterly unlawful. 2. That he delivered his judgment herein
with considerable cautions. as 1. that men should renounce their opinion and
practice. 2. that care be taken to prevent offense, either by encouraging them
in their way; or by drawing ours to a further approbation of that way then is
meet. 3. that whatsoever moderation he allowed, in this case,, was to be
understood. 1. according to the former caution and interpretation, and 2. upon
supposition, 1. that they erred in this point, not obstinately, but for want of
light and conviction, as appears in his answer to the second question. 2.
that the person thus opinionated, is, in his judgment and life otherwise
altogether unblameable, and such an one, as, in the judgment of reasonable
charity, may be counted a member of Christ, and so a Saint. 1 Cor. 1.2. 3. That
the judging a man unfit to be received a member, for an erroneous opinion in
such a kind, is to confirm the Brownists in that unsupportable and absurd
censure which now they maintain, touching those that hold the Churches in
England true Churches, and profess they will occasionally communicate therein:
as appears in his answer to the third question.

These things being duly weighed, I leave it to the judgment of the
indifferent Reader whether a man allowing such men to be received members with
that Church, or others differing from them in judgment and practice, about
Separation, to hear with them occasionally, and extra casum scandali, without
offense, and expressing himself in these points, with such interpretations,
cautions, and suppositions, may justly be charged with schysme?

3. The third opinion which he held, and, the Answerer says, tended to
schysme, was that private men might preach and expound the Scripture etc. In
the 17. question propounded to him by the Answerer, he expresses his judgment
by a distinction of a double ground, from which this may be done, viz, either
ex officio, or ex dono. i. e. by virtue of an office, (and this no man may do,
without a calling thereunto from the Church,) or from the gift that Christ
does dispense to several members, according to their measure, and the place
they hold in the body, and that thus any Christian may privately do, as
opportunity and expediency serve, he holds, and therein professes his
agreement with Dr. Ames in the 14. Book of cases of consc: cap. 25. who
proves it, both by Scripture and reason. And will any man say that this is an
opinion or practice of Schysme?

4. The fourth opinion, which he held, and for which the Answerer accuses him
of schysme, is, that Churches combined with the Classis might choose a
Minister, either without, or against the consent of the Classis, under which
they stood. Let his ans. were to the 11. Quest: be examined, which we will
transcribe word for word out of the written copy.

11. Whether a particular Congregation have power to call a Minister without
the approbation of the Classis, under which they stand? Neg:

Before I answer the Quaere, I would ask one thing, which might give a little
light to that which shall be said afterward, namely, how the first Classis
that ever was upon the face of the earth came to be constituted? And, J
conceive, it cannot be denied, but that it was made up by the combination of
several ministers, and Elders, and of several Congregations. Whence it must
needs follow, that those particular Congregations had power from Christ for to
call, and so did, by that their power, choose and call their Ministers fully
and completely before there was a Classis, and therefore had their power not
derived from a Classis, or by it, but from the direct ordinance and appointment
of Christ, which power they may not give away, and none can take it away, being
a legacy left them by the Lord Jesus, as Dr. Ames disputes and determines in
his 4. book of his cases of conscience. page 165.

Touching the Quaere then my opinion is this: A particular Congregation has
complete power, by Christ his institution, to give a complete call to a
minister, without any derived power from a Classis. They which had complete and
perfect Ministers, before any Classis, had power fully to call them, without
any Classis. But a particular Congregation, had perfect and complete Ministers,
i. e. perfectly and completely called, before any Classis. Ergo. Yet, if by
mutual consent, the Congregation has freely combined it self with the
Classis, they shall do piously and expediently freely to crave the approbation
of the Classis, that they may be more confirmed, or, if doubts arise, better
directed in their course. Always provided, that, if the Classis should not
approve, they may lawfully, and without sin, choose without, or against the
approbation of the Classis, if they saw good reason, by the convenient fitnes
of the party to induce them thereunto. And so I judge of the 11 Quest.

Unto all which I will add, that those things were but secret, in his own
mind, till the Answerer, to get matter against him, drew them out by these
questions which he wrote to him, and required his answer to them, and they
should have so remained for ever (such is the peaceablenes of his disposition)
if the Answerer had desired him to conceal his judgment therein, for
prevention of offense.

Secondly. As for me; he lays the same accusation upon me also, and brings
three pretenses for it.

D. Field of the Church. bok. 3. chap. 5.
1. My preaching at set times in a private house.] For the answer of this I
referr the Reader to my examination of his 20 Section. Whereunto I add a few
words, to prove it to be no schysme, which I will declare from Dr. Field his
definition of Schysme, who describes it to be a breach of the Unity of the
Church. The Unity of the Church, says he, consists in three things. 1. The
subjection of the people to their lawful Pastors. 2. The connection and
communion which many particular Churches and Pastors of them have among
themselves. 3. In holding the same rule of faith. Which of these ways did this
action make me guilty of Schysme? 1. Not in the first. For, did I attempt to
draw the people, from their Pastoral relation, to a popular Anarchy, as Corah
would have done, in his conspiracy, Numb. 16.3.
under a pretense that all the Lords people are holy? or, did they, by my
persuasion, flee from their own Church or Consistory with complaints to other
Churches, in such cases as might have been ended among themselves, as those
Schysmaticks did in Cyprian? No. Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
I was so far from drawing the people from their Pastor, that, by that very
mean, I held them together, my self giving them example of constantly hearing
him, and deferring my private exercise, till above an hour after the public
was finished. And I am heartily sorry that my advise to their Pastor, and
entreaty, that matters might be quietly ended within themselves, prevayled not
with him to prevent the publishing of their distractions, in this manner, to
the world. 2. Not in the second. For, neither they, nor I refused to
communicate with any reformed Churches, in the performance of the Acts of
Religion, either out of self-conceit; as did Novatus, Donatus, Lucifer etc. or
for any other unwarrantable respects. 3. Nor in the third: For the Answerer
himself confesses (though unwillingly) that, in that exercise, I preached
against schysming, nor does he, in the middst of all his bitterness, nor shall
he ever be able to accuse me justly of forsaking the rule of faith in any point.

2. My approving the Act of the Elders in admitting me to preach, as an
assistant, without the consent of the Classis] whither did the Answerers
passion transport him, when he wrote this for an evidence to prove me guilty of
Schysme? For. 1. who ever heard that it is an act of Schysme for a man to
preach at the desire of any Church, only as an assistant, without the consent
of the Classis? By that rule, himself and the wholl Church was guilty of
Schysme for letting Mr. D. preach, a year or two together, without consent of
the Classis. For he did it as an assistant. But 2. He does not charge me with
doing it neither, but only with approving that act. If I be a Schysmatick for
approving it, what are the Elders that made it? And, why does he suffer them
to come to the Lords table, and to go on so long unconvinced, unreclamed from
their Schysme? Is Schysme such a small sin that he regards it not? or is this
proof of their Schysme so slight that he thincks they will not regard it? He
bol^ly calls it Schysme, but brings no proof that it is so from Scriptures
nor Reason. Why so? Is it because it is sufficient that he says it? or because
he cannot prove it? If the first; he is deceived: if the second; he deceives.
4. If the Church have power to choose a meet Pastor or assistant, the Ministers
of the Classis have no power to deprive them of him, or to hinder him from
accepting their call, or from satisfying their lawful desire. For, their power
is not privative, but cumulative, in that sense. And therefore, in such a case,
it is a Schysme from the Church in him that hinders the Church herein, not in
him that assisteth them.

3. My maintayning of the power of particular Churches to be chief in their
own matters, and applying this to the admission of Ministers to preach as
assistant etc. though these Churches be united in Synods and Classes. And is
this a sufficient evidence, whereupon to ground so deep an accusation, as that
of Schysme is? If so; let him show it by Scriptures, or good reason, but with
all, to guide his judgment, let him know that the mere preaching, as assistant
in a Church, at the entreaty of the Church, is not numbered among those common
causes, which, by the order of these reformed Churches, are appropriated to the
cognition or consent of the Classes: it is, in it self, to be accounted among
the things which are proper to particular Churches. And, is it a Schysmaticall
tenet to hold that things proper to particular Churches, are under the power of
particular Churches, which are chief in matters that are properly their own?
what then will he say to that Canon of the Synod at Midleborough. Those things
shall not be handled in the greater assemblyes, which may be ended in the
lesser. Can. 25. and to the Canons of the Synod of 3 Nations. Cap. 17. and 18.
and to the Sinod at Emden. Cap. 2. and to that Canon in the Harmony of the
Belgic Sinods, that those matters only shall be brought into the Classes which
cannot be ended in the Consistory cap. 7. art. 6. See Zepperus lib. 3. cap. 5.

Were these Synods schysmaticall Conventicles? or, were their Canons
schysmaticall conclusions? How then is this, which I affirm, schysmaticall?

To brand me with an imputation of schysme, he spares not these Synods which
deliver the same thing, in effect, that I say, and all those worthyes who have
written concerning Ecclesiastical discipline, or the authority of Councills,
of whom we spoke in the former Section, or, which have handled the power of
particular Churches in choosing their own Pastors, of whom we spoke in the
foregoing Section: Yea, I wish, he may not be found to bear false witness
against the truth it self in the Scriptures, which we have declared, in both
those Sections, to warrant so much as I have said in this matter.

4. His fourth answer supposes that eminent men may cause eminent danger by
their private opinions.] The men, in whom he instanceth, I confess, were not
inferior to either of us, in learning. But that which he intimates,
concerning opinions held by them which tended to the ruin and desolation of
Churches, if he apply it to this question, about the power of particular
Churches to admit of Ministers to preach as assistants, I cannot acknowledge to
be true, upon the former grounds, but, if he mean any other opinions or
practices, it is nothing to the matter in question.

5. In his fifth answer, upon his observation that the Complainants, in their
particular greivances, mention me, he infers, that their inordinate desire
of me, has made this trouble to the Church.] But. 1. neither the ground, nor
the inference is right. 1. Not the ground. For they mention not me alone, but
others also. 2, Nor the inference. For, will their complaining of injuryes done
to them, in a particular reference to me, prove their desire of me, to be
inordinate. By what medium? Let him frame his Argument into a Syllogism, and
it will appear to be Sophistical, and ridiculous. But I spare him. 2. How
easily may they, or I, upon the same ground and warrant, prove that his
inordinate desire of having his own will, that I say no more, has made this
trouble in the Church, by drawing all the lines of the several Sections, in
the circle and circumference of their complaint to that as the only center.
But I do not affect in Circuitu ambulare.

6. In his sixth answer, which is to their parenthesis, wherein they noate, that
he would have had others, that, to this day, hold the same opinion;] Such is
the invincible power of truth, that his own words concerning those two
instances are sufficient to prove the thing which he would deny* if what I have
written, in the 11. Section, concerning his private conference with me be
compared with what himself confesses Mr. B* wrote to him, and with his own
acknowledgment of Mr. R. agreement with me, in his third and last answer to
that instance. Nor is his desire of having them, complained of, (for in the
enjoyment of either of them they had been happy) but his partial sticking at
that in me, which he would have passed by in them.

The 29. Section examined. Concerning the undue power of the Classis in making
laws.
IN this Section, they produce the second proof of the justnes their complaint
of his subjecting the Church under an undue power of the Classis, viz, his
giving them power to make laws and orders, whereunto, whosoever will be
ministers of that Church must submit.] For proof hereof they give two
instances. 1. that they bind Ministers to observe the orders and customs of the
Dutch Church. 2. their second instance is concerning this order of promiscuous
baptising, which they made a condition of my admittance to that Ministry. The
justnes of their laying the blame of boath these upon the Answerer they prove.
1. Because some of the Dutch preachers themselves have declared their
willingness to cast off some of those customs, if the vastnes of their Church
would perm^^ it. 2. Because one of them said to the Answerer in the Classis
(upon occasion of his complaining of my not conforming to their orders) you
your self do not conform to all our orders. 3. Because they have professed
that they should have been glad that the differences had been ended among our
selves. 4. Because he has of late required of the Elders that an order might
be made in the Consistory, that whatsoever minister shall hereafter be called
to that Church should conform to that wrighting of the five Ministers.]

Now let us see what answers he pretends to make. 1. to their complaint
against the proceeding of the Classis, in this particular. 2. to their
complaint of his giving this undue power to the Classis.

First. To their complaint of the undue proceeding of the Classis.] Herein he
answers nothing to the purpose. For he, neither denies the fact, nor gives
any satisfaction about the aequity of it. In a word, he so answers, as if he
saught nothing else but how to evade answering, and to get some hole to hide
his head in. Wherefore, that the truth in this matter may appear, we will
consider two things. 1. de facto, whether they have made such laws and orders,
or not? 2. de jure, whether they have done it by a due, or by an undue power?

1. That they have made such laws and orders can not be denied. For, if the
praescription of necessary observances, be a law; if the imposition of any
thing with a binding power, be a law; if the decrees, to the obedience whereof
men are any way compelled, are laws; the things instanced in, to wit,
conformity to their ecclesiastical customs, and promiscuous administration of
Baptism, according to the wrighting of the five Ministers, were imposed as
laws upon me. For, did they not bind me to rest in that wrighting, and to
conform to those customs, under no less paenalty then my not admittance to
the pastoral work, in the English Church, notwithstanding the unanimous
desire of the Congregation? Was not this to make them necessary observances?
The case is so clear that the Answerer himself does not at all deny it.

2. Let us see, whether the power, whereby they have done this, be a due, or an
undue power. And it will appear to be undue, if, neither the Scripture, nor
the National Synods, nor the Church, nor any good reason have given them any
such power. And this we will declare, with Gods assistance, distinctly, in
every one of them.

First. The Scripture is so far from giving the Classis any power of making
laws to bind particular Churches, in cases of that nature, that it does not
once mention any such kind of combination, nor does allow any such power to
the deputyes of any Churches consulting together for their common good. The
Texts, which Bellarmine alleges for the power of Councills in making laws,
are the same which the Answerer sometimes harpeth upon, in this case, but
Iunius clearly shows, that they make nothing to the purpose.

Deuteronomy. 17.8.10. Sect. 24. Ans. 4.
The first is Deuteronomy. 17. Which place the Answerer alleges, to prove the
Classis to be an higher judicatory, and above the Church. Thou shall do
according to the sentence which they of that place shall show thee. To which
Iunius gives 2 answers. 1. The cases are not alike. For, in those times, the
mind of God was revealed to those Judges, in obscure and difficult cases, by
signs and answers from God himself. 2. He grants that the sentence of those
Judges was to be obeyed, servata clausula salutari; that holesom clause, which
Moses puts in, being observed, according to the sentence of the law, Verse. 11.
which they shall teach thee. So that the sentence of those Judges did no
further bind men to rest in it, then it was according to the sentence of the
Law. And yet these were Judges by Gods express appointment, which the Classes
have not to show for their judicatory, in the same manner as those Judges had.

Act. 15.
2. The other Text is Acts 15. alleged by Bellarmine to prove the binding
force of the decrees of Councills, and, by the Answerer, Sect. 31. Ans. 5.
to show the authority of the Classis: whereunto Iunius gives 2 answers also.
1. Non sequitur ex particulari, si custodienda fuerint decreta Concilij
Apostolici, ergo and omnium servari oportere. It does not follow, from a
particular, that, because the decrees of an Apostolical Council are to be
observed, therefore the decrees of all Councills must be so kept. Cont. 3. lib
4. cap. 16.
And, whereas Bellarmine affirms that the question there was not defined by
Scripture, but by the voices of the Apostles, Iunius denies that any thing was
ordained in that Council, but from the Scripture, as he had before
demonstrated, and thereunto refers the Reader. And, whereas Bellarmine says
that the decree of the Apostles was not left to the examination of the
Disciples, but, that they were simply commanded to obey, Iunius charge him
with falsely supposing two things. 1. That the Apostles alone made this order.
For the Elders concurred with the Apostles in this sentence, and the wholl
Church, all of them being taught by the spirit of truth, to thinck the same
thing. And this, he says, is the manner of proceeding in those Councills,
where Christ is praesident. 2. That the same respect is to be had to the
determination of others, as of the Apostles. Which is an error, he says, For
it was the singular privilege of the Apostles, that they had immediate
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and infallibility, in their Apostolical
determinations, so that, what they delivered was to be received without
examination, whereas the dictates and sentences of all other are to be examined
by their wrightings, whereby it appears that the Scripture acknowledges no
such power of making laws to be due to the Classes, unless they can produce
some other texts, which, when they shall be alleged, shall be further
examined, if God permit.

Secondly. No general Councills, or National Synods have acknowledged any
such power to be due to Classes, for aught I can find, if any others have found
out any such, let them declare the Canon of such Councills and Synods, wherein
it was so concluded, and, the ground of such a determination being found
sufficient, I shall willingly receive it, and submit thereunto. In the mean
space, let it be considered, that they, who distinguish between General,
National, Provincial, and Diocesan Councills, say, that the two former have
authority to make Canons, but the two latter only to see that the Canons
imposed by the two former, be observed, Praef* ad distinct. 18
as may be seen in Gratian.

Thirdly. The Church has not given them any such power, nor indeed, can it. 1.
It has not; as appears in their complaints of it as undue, and as a
greivance, and in the profession of diverse of the members that they never knew
that the Church was so subjected. 2, That it cannot; appears in this, that
the Church it self has no such power, and none can give what they have not.
In what sense this assertion is to be understood, and upon what grounds it is
to be received, we shall have occasion to declare in examining his answer,
shortly to follow, whereunto I referr the Reader.

Fourthly. That no good reason gives the Classis this power of making laws,
to bind particular Churches, will appear, if two things be declared. 1. what
things are required to the making of a law. 2. what instances they produce to
show the undue proceedings of that Classis herein. First, the things required
to a law are these, at least. 1. a due authority, or power orderly authorized
thereunto. 2. its consonancy and consent with the law of God. 3. that it is
referred unto, and does respect the common good. Secondly, let the instances
produced by them be brought to these rules, and it will be found, 1. that they
want sufficient authority for making of such laws, 2. that such a law agrees
not with the law of God. 3. that it is not referred to the public and common
good, by what has been already said, partly in this Section, partly in the 12
Section, and partly in other Sections. The issue, whereunto the instances
drive, is, that the Classis excerciseth an undue power, when it binds men to
any observance, upon no better ground then the mere custom of a place, which is
then done, when that custom is not warranted by the word. For, howsoever, in
civil administrations, in Common wealths, some customs have the force of a
law, Hist. 1. part 2. book. 4. Chap. 15. Sect: Vlp. li. 29
(as Sir Walter Raleigh well observes.) Yet, in Church matters it will not
hold, the reason of Churches and Commonwealths being not the same. But, if the
rule hold in Commonwealths, that, quod ab initio vitiosum est, non potest
tractu temporis convalescere, much more will it hold in the Church, in such a
case as that unwarrantable custom of promiscuous baptising, Sect. 12.
which I have proved to be unlawful, in Sect. 12.

Secondly. Seeing nothing has been said by the Answerer, in defense of the
proceeding of the Classis, in answer to their complaint of their excercising an
undue power, in this particular, let us now see if he answer sufficiently in
his own defense, wherein, we will, with Gods help, examine, what he says in
answer 1. to the general charge. 2. to the proofs of it.

First. The general charge is, that he has given them this undue power.
Hereunto he pretends to make five Answers.

1. He says it is untrue. He only says so, but does not show it to be
untrue, by declaring that, either the Scriptures, or the National Synods, or
the Church, or good reason has given it them. And so seems to be content
that the suspicion of usurping may lie upon the wholl Classis, rather then he
should be suspected to have given it them. But he will not so evade, if what
was replied to the same answer, in the foregoing Section, be considered, and
applied to this also.

2. In his second answer he seems so to deny his giving them this undue
power, as withal secretly to confess that he gave them counsel to use this
power. which he has not proved to be due. That it is undue has been proved
already,, and that, it being so, he has not behaved himself as a pastor in
the government of the Church, in counsailing them to use an undue power over
his Church, needs no proof at all, the thing done being sufficient evidence
against him.

3. His third answer is a mere retortion of the complaint upon the
Complainants, and a recrimination of them for allowing the Consistory to make
orders and laws, and thereupon he demands, can this power of making laws
and orders, be lawful, and due in a Consistory, and yet an undue power in the
Classis? Are they not condemned of themselves? For answer hereunto, it must be
understood. 1, That orders and laws are ill confounded by the Answerer, They
may make orders who have no power of making laws: So Iunius distinguishes
them fitly. Praelatorum non est (...) sive mandata dare: non praecepta, sed
ordinationes, (...). Ecclesiastical Governors may give orders, not laws, not
commands, not praecepts. Else where he says, the Fathers called them more
fitly Canons, because a Canon serves to direct agentem voluntary, one that
acts voluntarily, whereas a law, necessitate etiam cogit in voluntarium,
compels a man against his will, Chame^^^ also expresses himself acutely to
the same purpose, De ecclesia p. 367. 368.
saying, that the determinatio^s of Churches are more fitly called admonitions
and exhortations then laws, and that, when they agree with the word, they are
admonitions, in respect of the Church, but laws in respect of God only, to
wit, because the Church commends that which God has commanded, and that
which the Church so commends is the word of God.

2. That all mistake may be prevented, and the two extremes avoided, of
tyranny; by ascribing too much power to the Church, and of dissolute
libertinisme, and Anabaptisme; by denying its due power, in this particular, we
will declare what authority the Church has about laws and orders, by
distinguishing between laws already made, Luke 10.16. Mat: 18.17. 1 Cor. 4.21.
and laws to be made. In the first, we grant, that Church governors have
great authority and power, to wit, of providing that men yield due obedience to
all Gods laws and ordinances, which they are to commend and declare to the
Church, and to exact their obedience thereunto. And indeed this is the very end
of all Ecclesiastical authority. Romans 1.5. and 15.18. So that herein they have
more power then of admonishing, and exhorting, and reproving only, they have
the power of censuring, and thereby of compelling the several members to their
duty, and of seeing that all things be done in the house of God decently and
in order. 1 Cor. 14.40.


In this sense, I conceive, the order to be made in the Consistory, is to be
understood, the things thereby ordered being no other then that rule of having
all holy administrations performed decently and in order requires. And, being
so understood, it does not at all patronize that undue power of the Classis.
1. Because the Church has that power, in her own matters, which the Classis
has not. 2. Because this was but an order, for my accommodation, in my
voluntary obedience of the word warranted by the rule, but the contrary, made
by them, is a law, for the establishing of an evil custom, not warranted by
the word, and to compel me, against my will, to the observance of it.

As for the second. The things, about which laws are made, are, either
necessary, or indifferent. Things necessary are things commanded or forbidden
in the Scripture. And they are necessary, either absolutely or in some
considerable respect. Things absolutely necessary to godliness are so
constituted in the Scripture that no place is left for the impositions of any
new law givers. About things necessary, in some considerable respect,
Churchgovernours have power to give order, as did the Synod at Jerusalem
touching those things which they called necessary Act. 15.28. viz, necessary
during the time of the offense of the Jew which was necessary to be avoided.
Hereunto also serves that rule, Let all things be done decently and in order
Cor. 14.40. but the rule of that decency must be, not the will and pleasure of
men, but the light of nature, Scripture, or warrantable custom. For so it was
in the instances given in that chapter, as, for men to pray with long hair,
and women bare-headed, in those Eastern countries, and for women to speak
in the Congregation, and for many men to speak at once. Things indifferent are
such as, being neither commanded nor forbidden in the Scripture, may be
variously permitted or prohibited according to various circumstances And they
are, either improperly, or properly so called. Things improperly called
indifferent, are things not necessary, but only expedient in some respect. In
such cases Churchgovernours have power to declare the decency and expediency of
them: yea, and to advise and persuade the practice thereof, but not by standing
laws to bind the people thereunto. As the Apostle gave his judgment 1. Cor.
7.25.40. and advise concerning single life, in time of the Churches distress:
yea, and persuaded to it, for avoiding trouble in the flesh, verse. 26.28. but
would not bind them to it, neither in point of conscience, nor of outward
practice as having no commandment from the Lord (verse. 25.) and says that such
a commandment had been a snare (verse. 35. And herein the power of
Churchgovernours falls short of the authority of civil Magistrates, who may,
in civil matters, make standing and binding laws for any thing expedient to
the Common wealth. Whereunto subjects are bound readily to submit. (1. Pet.
2.13.)

Things properly called indifferent I do not find in Scripture that ever
Churchgovernours did advise and persuade them, much less charge and command
them, least of all make standing, and binding laws to determine them: nor does
that place in (1. Cor. 14.40.) give them any such power, nor have the Apostles
themselves received any such authority from Christ, as appears in the
commission given them, which was only to teach men to observe and do what
Christ shall command them, Mat. 28.20. Their office being only ministerial
and oeconomicall, Christ reserving to himself the sovereign lawgiving power,
as his praerogative.

For application of the premises to the case in question, I demand whether this
custom be thus imposed as a thing properly indifferent, or as expedient, or as
necessary in some considerable respect, or as absolutely necessary? If it be
properly indifferent; why do they, by command, make the practice of it
necessary? If it be expedient; let them show the expediency of it, and leave
men free. If it be necessary, in those considerable respects; let it appear
that the contrary practice will be so offensive or disorderly that, for the
avoiding of that offense or disorder, a minister is bound to do it. If it be
absolutely necessary to godliness; let the Scripture be shewe^ that commands
that practice, or forbids the contrary.

His fourth answer is not worth a Reply.

His fifth answer makes against himself. For, if they leave men at liberty
about things indifferent etc. (wherein they are to be approved as walking
according to the rule) why do they bind men, by unaequall conditions, to this
custom, which they, neither do, nor can sufficiently declare to be commanded
by Christ, or to be warranted by the rule?

Let us now see what he says to the proofs of the justnes of their laying the
blame of this miscarriage upon him, rather then upon the Classis.

First. They say, that some of the Dutch Ministers themselves are willing to
cast off some of their customs, if the vastnes of their Church did not force
them thereunto. Hereunto he gives two answers. 1. that things simply unlawful
are as well to be cast off in a great Church as in a small.] Reply. True: it is
a duty as necessary to be done in the one as in the other, yet, it may more
easily be done in the smaller Churches, and therefore the sin of the smaller
Churches is the greater, if they do not cast off such an unwarrantable custom.
The vastnes of their Churches does only excuse them, a tanto, not a toto. 2.
that, in the smaller Churches in the villages, the same order is observed.]
But. 1. it has not been expressly required of any of the Ministers of those
Churches (as a condition of their admitta^ce, as it was of me) that they should
rest in such a wrighting, which binds them to baptize all that are brought.
2. It may be questioned, whether all the Ministers, in those smaller villages,
do so promiscuously administer Baptism, as they do, in Amsterdam, seeing such
different sorts of people are not in those villages as in that City.

Secondly. They say, that one of the Ministers said to the Answerer in the
Classis (upon occasion of his complaining of my not conforming to all their
orders) why? you your self do not conform to all our orders. Hereunto he
pretends to give five answers. I say pretends. For, the first answer is no
answer, but only a question, who told this? His second answer is, that the
mind of the Classis is not to be collected by the speech of one.] Neither do
they say that all of the^ are of that mind, but that one of them said so,
whereof, it seems, the rest showed no dislike, and so seemed to consent to
it, and more then one of them have been heard to say as much as the
Complainants affirm. His third answer is, that the speech of the Minister is
not in right manner repeated by them.] But, if the matter be right, it is true
in the substance of their report, which is sufficient, in this case, what ever
failing may seem to be in a circumstance. His fourth answer is, that this one
Minister undertook in wrighting to satisfye my objections, and, having replied
to mine answer, received no answer to his second wrighting. It is true: I did
not answer his second wrighting. 1. Because, that wrighting did not
sufficiently answer my first. 2. Because, at that time, I wrote to the wholl
Classis, in which respect, there was no use of wrighting to one member of the
Classis alone. His fifth answer is, The national Synod, at Dort, in things
indifferent, Kercken ordeningh. Art. 85.
does allow Churches of other Nations in these Countries to vary from their
customs.] It is well they do so, and it is fit they should so do. But, if it
be so. 1. why was it required of me that I should conform to all the orders
and customs of the Dutch Church? 2. Why was I not allowed to vary from their
customs, in the practice of promiscuous baptizing, seeing I professed that I
could not do it with a good conscience, and they gave me no grounds from the
Scriptures to satisfye my conscience, that I might do it lawfully?

Thirdly. They say, that the Dutch Ministers have professed that they should
have been glad that this difference might have been ended among our selves:]
What says the Answerer hereunto? Just nothing. And it was his wisdom to be
silent here. For what could he say? He could not deny it, and the confession of
it to be true would discover him to have been a greater impediment of the
Churches desire, and my accommodation, then he was willing should appear. And
I wish, from my heart, he had been as silent in all the rest, that I might have
passed by all these injuryes in silence warrantably.

Fourthly. They say, that he has required of the Elders that an order might be
made in the Consistory, that whatsoever Minister shall hereafter be called to
that Church, should conform to that wrighting of the five Ministers.] Hereunto
he pretends to give five answers, but one good one were worth them all.

His first answer is only a question, as before, who told this?

His second answer is, in part, negative, but upon an ill ground, viz, because
the Classis had already approved and confirmed it. Concerning the vanity of
that pretense enough has been spoken already, yet, in part, he affirms it,
in saying that he showed it to be unreasonable if that order should not be
required of any other minister as well as of me. But, seeing there was no good
reason why it should be required of me, what reason is there that it should be
required of others? Is it a good course to hide an injury done to one by
professing to do the same injury to many?

His third answer is, that, by the motion of a Dutch Minister and a special
friend of mine, etc. the Dutch Ministers came to his house and made that
wrighting.] That Reverend Dutch ministers love and pains I acknowledge, with
all thanckfullnes, and am sorry that a learned and godly Brother, of another
Nation, should show himself more desirous of mine accommodation then mine own
countryman, from whom, in many respects, I had cause to expect more favor and
love then from forraigners, especially* seeing their labor proved no more
succesfull, thorough the violence of a contrary stream, of which enough has
been said in former Sections.

His fourth answer charge me with untruth in my wrighting to the Classis
that, at his request alone, they did in wrighting declare their private
judgment.] But, why did he not, at least, more roundly deny it, if it be
untrue? For, it may be true, notwithstanding any thing said by him to the
contrary. For, why might not that Minister propound it to the rest being
thereunto prepared by the Answerers private intimations or entreaty? But,
suppose the Minister propounded it, of his own accord, yet, what I wrote is
true, in the sense, wherein I meant it. For I spoke of the Answerer alone, not
in reference to the Ministers of the Classis, but in reference to the Elders of
his own Church, and in this sense it is true, that the Answerer (considered
with the Elders and the Church) did alone propound it: the motion came not from
the Elders, but from him only, in that sense. But, what is this to the order,
which he required the Elders to make in the Consistory, which is the matter in
question? Is this a fit place to speak of passages between the five Ministers
and him, when the Complainants charge him with seeking to make an injurious
order in the Consistory? Had not the twelfth Section been a fitter place for
this matter, where it is purposely spoken of? But I forbear to guess at the
reason hereof. Whereas he adds, if he had been the only secker thereof,
there is no cause for them, that mean to deal uprightly, to complain of such
a lawful and safe course] I need not to add any thing, in way of Reply
thereunto, having already said enough, in the foregoing Sections, to prove that
that course was, neither safe, nor lawful.

His fifth answer is a mere catching at an advantage, which one expression in
their wrighting seems to give him, I say, seems, for it does it not
really. They say, that they thinck no godly man will absolutely be bound to
conform to that wrighting.] To let pass his unworthy scoffs, he accuses
them of a rash and praesumptious judgment for saying so, whereas. 1. they
profess only that they thinck so. Now, every thought, though it may be rash,
is not to be accounted a praesumptious judgment. 2. they do not speak of
suffering themselves to be bound to such a wrighting, but of being absolutely
bound to conform to it. And there is a great difference between those two
expressions. 3. My name is altogether needlessly brought in here, as the Reader
may well perceive. But I pass it by. But, is his seeking to have that order
made in the Consistory, to bind all Ministers that shall be called in that
Church, proved to be lawful, and for the good of the Church, by this, or by
any thing else, he has said, in the 5 pretended answers? If not, It appears
that no satisfaction is given to the Complainants by his answers. And so their
second proof of his subjecting the Church under an undue power of the Classis,
which they produce for an evidence of his not behaving himself as he aught, in
his pastoral government, remains unanswered.

Sect. 30. examined, concerning the Answerers violent bringing matters into the
Classis when he cannot have his will unjustly satisfied in the Consistory.
IN this Section they produce the third proof of the justnes of their
complaint of his subjecting the Church under an undue power of the Classis, to
wit, his violent bringing of matters to the Classis, when he cannot have his
will unjustly satisfied.] Which complaint they agravate by the dangerous
consequent, or rather effect of it: for, they say, he destroys the power of
the Church utterly, often affirming, they can do nothing, in these cases,
without the Classis.] And, to prevent an objection against themselves about
what they had said concerning the undue power of the Classis, they profess
their reverent esteem of them for counsel and advise in all difficult matters
that cannot be ended in their own Consistory.

That what is said, on boath sides, concerning this matter, may the more easily
and clearly be understood, these things must be premised. 1. that they do not
complain of his taking advise and counsel of the Classis in difficult
matters. For therein, they say, they esteem reverently of them. 2. Nor, that
they bring such matters to the Classis as cannot be ended in their own
Consistory. But the thing they complain of, is. 1. that he brings such
things to the Classis as may be ended in the Consistory. 2. that he does it
violently, that is, without consent of the rest. 3. that his principal motive,
or inducement thereunto, is, the satisfaction of his own will. 4. That he
does it under a pretense that the Church can do nothing in such matters (to
wit, as those in question, the making of an order for a decent and orderly
performance of a Religious duty, in a right administration of baptism, and
the choosing of their own Pastors, when they pitch upon men abhorring all
haeresy and schysme, etc. and craving the help of an assistant for a time, in
the Churches necessity) which, they truly say, is a destroying of the power of
the Church.

Now, let us see his answers hereunto, which are fix.

1. His first answer is, It is no act of violence, but a refuge against
violence, to refer those things to the Classis, which men conceive to be
unjustly done; or delayed in the Consistory.] Reply. Violence is, either
opposed to that which is just, or to that which is voluntary. In their
complaint the sense seems carry it to boath, and so, that is violently done
which is done, both unjustly, and without consent. That he did it without
consent the Answerer acknowledges, but denies that he did it unjustly, and
retorteth the imputation of violence and injustice upon them, either for doing
or delaying some thing in the Consistory unjustly. He is now become an accuser
of them, and plaintiff, and therefore, according to his own rule, is to bring
proof. If he say, they did unjustly in making orders about such matters
(without the consent of the Classis) let him show what rule is transgressed
thereby. This he should have done before he had taken the matter out of their
hands, and carried it into the Classis, that they might have been convinced of
the aequity of his so doing. If he can not; Let him bear the just blame of
slandering the Co^sistory in print, and of depriving the Church of her due
power in her own matters, which the law of God, and the Synodall canons of
these lands acknowledge to be due to her in things of this nature, as it has
been formerly declared. And therefore he need not scoffingly ask of these
Complainants for their warrant, or evidence that he destroys the power of the
Church. Those spoken of in Sect. 27. have given it, Ioh. 12.7.
if he will give the days leave to speak, and the multitude of years to
teach wisdom.

2. His second answer accuses them of folly, and that order in the Church,
which they plead for, according to the ordinance of Christ, as a bondage,
servitude, burden, oppression etc.

Reply. They complain that when he can not have his will unjustly satisfied in
the Consistory, he violently, without their consent, brings matters thence
into the Classis. Jf this complaint be just, it is not slight. His carriage in
late differences makes it suspicious that the root of the matter is in him.
For let the ground of these troubles be considered, and it will be found that
the thing, for which he contendeth, is not necessary: either as a mean for
Gods glory, and the Churches aedification, or as commanded of God; nor is it
enjoined in any Canon of these Belgic National Synods; nor is it expressly,
and particularly required, by any Classis, of any Dutch Ministers in their
admission. So that it is not difficult to determine from what distempered
principle these disordered motions have arisen, and who is to be accounted
burdened, in this respect.

As for the folly, which he charge upon the Complainants, that, pretending to
stand for the liberty of the Church, they seek to bring themselves into
bondage; the question is, whether is the way of liberty or bondage to the
Church? That which Christ has appointed? or that which men, without Christ's
warrant, have devised? If the way of Christ is the way of liberty: the question
will be, which is the way of Christ? whether that particular Churches have
power within themselves to choose a fit Pastor, and to crave the help of one
well known unto them in time of the Churches necessity, and to see that
Baptism be decently and orderly administered? or that they so depend upon
Classes for their leave and permission herein, as to be hindered by them from
doing any of these, at their pleasure? If the first is the way of Christ; let
the Answerer beware that he be not found a false witness against Christ, and
his ways in making them ways of folly, and servitude, etc. If the latter be
the way of Christ, let him show it (and not say it only) I say, show, and
prove it by Scripture, for the satisfaction of the people that depend upon his
ministry. And till he can do that, let him forbear such expressions.

3. His third answer is by asking what men should do, when they thinck the
Elders to be in an error? Reply, If a man thinck them to be in an error, what
should he do else but show them their error by the word, and, if the case
prove difficult, crave (with common consent) the help of other men's, or
Churches light (as occasion shall require) to make the matter clear? But the
rule warranteth not any man, upon his mere thought that they err, to carry the
matters quite out of their hands and power, without their consent, or declaring
the aequity of his so doing to the satisfaction of the Church. For, upon such a
pretense, if the Classis be partially addicted to the Minister, all Church
proceedings will be hindered. And hence it was indeed, as Dr. Bilson observed,
that the frequency of Synods did diminish the authority and necessity of the
Consistorian meeting of Elders. For, after that the meeting of Synods twice a
year was ordained in the Council of Nice and Calcedon, the Elders began to be
in less use and account, the Synods as higher judges taking upon them the
examination and decision of those things, which were wont to be agitated in the
presbyteryes. What he says of the Hierarchicall Synods, in that place, will be
found true also of the Classis, by this course, and much more, seeing they meet
six times a year.

4. His fourth answer needs no other reply then what is made already to the
like (if not the same) pretense in his fifth answer, examined in the 23.
Section, whereunto J referr the Reader.

5. His fifth answer is already replied upon in examination of the 27. Section.

6. His sixth answer also is replied upon before, in several passages, and the
vanity of it discovered.

Sect: 31. examined, concerning his subjecting the Church under the Classis,
without their consent.
THe authority and power, which they complain that their Church is subjected
under, is still by the Complainants declared to be undue by another instance,
in that it is such as is not competent to any men that are not subject to
error, and hereunto they add another aggravation, viz, that it is done without
the Churches consent. Lib. 3. Cap. 26. p. 370.
M. Parker in his learned discourse of Ecclesiastical policy shows, at
large, that Churches are no furher under the authority of Synods then they have
subjected themselves by their own consent. And, as for binding men to rest in
their determinations, as if they were infallible, both Dr. Whittaker, and
Iunius, in showing that Councills are subject to error, have given sufficient
light for discovery of the evil of that practice.

But let us see what he answers to this complaint, in seven particulars.

1. His first is, after his usual manner, It is untrue, but, when, the Church
is hindered from making an order for the decent and orderly administration of
holy things, by their own power, under pretense of his taking advise of the
Classis, as it was in the question about Baptism, and when J was required (and
that for a condition whereupon I was to be admitted or refused) to rest in a
wright^ng of five Ministers, no rule being shown me by them from the Scripture
to warrant their so doing, these things showed it to be true.

2. His second answer is, that the same thing may be alleged against any
Pastor in the reformed Churches. But this is an injury to all reformed Churches
and Pastors, unless he can prove that, in the fame particulars, they subject
their Churches to the same undue power of Classes, and in the same manner as he
has done. Which he never will be able to do. It is true, that Classical
assemblies (or such like) are a special bond of union and sinew of government,
in them all, but to argue, from the lawful use, to justify the unlawful abuse
of them, is unsound reasoning.

3. His third answer is to their charging him with doing this under a pretense
of asking, and taking advise of the Classis. Which he denies, and says that
he professes openly the authority and power of Synods and Classis to be
lawful and necessary, as well as their counsel and advise. Neither do they
deny the authority, and due power of Synods and Classes to be lawful, and
necessary, but they complain of an undue power and authority ascribed to
Classes by the Answerer, and they declare, by instances, what that power is
which they account undue. Now, unless he can prove that power to be due, which
they have affirmed to be undue, he has not answered their complaint, which is,
that, under pretense of asking and taking their advise, he subjecteth the
Church under that power, which they affirm to be undue. That he does so
subject them has been showed, and that he pretends only to ask, and take
their advise, his own expressions, both by speeches, at other times, and in
diverse passages of this book, declare sufficiently.

4. His fourth answer is to their saying that the Church never acknowledged any
such power to be due, whereunto he answers, 1. by showing the agreement
between the ancient English inhabitants there, the Magistrates, and the Dutch
Ministers, which was to have such an English Church as should accord with the
Dutch, in the same order of Discipline and Government. 2. By declaring that,
since his first coming (but he says not how long after his first coming) he
was admitted to be a member of the Classis. 3. By showing the manner of their
receiving members, viz, by profession of the same faith with them, and by
solemn promise covenanting to submit unto the discipline of this Church
according to the rule of Christ.

But, what is in all these passages to prove their submission to any undue
power and authority of the Classis? Nay, when they profess to submit unto the
discipline of this Church, according to the rule of Christ, do they not
therein implicitly profess against submission to any undue power of the
Classis? And, as little does the practice of any members since, in resorting to
the Classis, upon occasion of asking their judgment in matters controverted
among them, establish any undue power of theirs. And, to what end should those
that join with his Church, leaving their separation, come with a protest
against the undue power of the Classis, when they knew not of their subjection
thereunto, no more being required of them in their Covenant, at their first
admission, then submission to the discipline of this Church, according to the
role of Christ? As for that, which he adds, of their choosing rather to
continue as they were, then to be of the English Synod, this does not testifye
their acknowledgment of their subjectio^ to any undue power of the Classis.
But, how, were they under the Classis, when, not long before that, the Answerer
himself (as Mr. Forbes assured me) labored to set up an English Classis or
Synod, which not succeeding, in his endeavor at that time, he never after
attempted to procure, nor would join with, being after set up, at the
procurements of others. As for St: Offw: report of Geneva; we have already
shown some difference between the association of Churches in Geneva, and the
Classes in these Countries. But, be that as it may, it makes nothing for the
warranting of any undue power of the Classis.

5. His fifth answer is to that passage in the complaint, when they say that
the power, which they complain of, is such, as the Scriptures do not in any
place give to such a company of Ministers. The fault that he finds herewith
is, that they do not allege any one place of Scripture to condemn the same.
As though Negative Arguments from Scripture were not sufficient proofs of the
unlawfullnes of a thing in matter of Religion. By the help of St. Offw: book
he accommodateth the 15. of the Acts. concerning the Church at Antioch seeking
help of the Church at Jerusalem, in a difficult question, to the present
question. But what is that to the undue power of the Classis whereof they
complain? In his next answer, it may be, he will give me occasion of showing
that that very place of Scripture makes strongly against that undue power,
which he ascribes to the Classis, in the particulars complained of, and such
like.

6. His sixth answer is to that part of the Complaint, when they say, that the
undue authority (whereof they complain) is such as does not become any,
except the Apostles, that could not err, to have. This, he says, is false,
and absurd, and, upon this occasion, he reproves me for a like speech, in my
letter to the Classis, touching my consent required to the wrighting of the
five Ministers, namely, that such a subjection is greater then may be yielded
unto any Council, whether of Classes or Synods etc. that thereby the
wrightings and decrees of men are made infallible, and aequall with the word of
God, which is intolerable.

Reply. It is true that I so wrote, and that which I wrote herein is true. Let
us now see what he answers. He says, what wise man is there that sees not
the strange folly and vanity of such assertions as these? Iunius was a wise
man, and yet he saw no folly, nor vanity, nor strangenes in a like assertion,
and so was Bogerman who relates it roundly, and without haesitancy from him, in
these words. Bogerm: Annot: in Hug: Grot ex Iuni: p. 225.
Servus mandatum Domini sui referens ad conservum suum obligat illius
conscientiam instrumentali ministerio suo, at cognitioni suae, aut foro suo
minime obligat. Hoc nunquam Dominus quisquam daturus, nunquam fervus fidelis
assumpturus. i. e. A servant relating the command of his Lord to his fellow
servant binds his conscience by his isntrumental ministry (that is, as I
conceive it, so far as he reports the Lords mind and command) but does not
bind him to his own outward jurisdiction. This no Lord will ever give, nor any
faithful servant assume. But, did not they assume this, and more, when they
would bind me to rest in that wrighting, and to be accountable to them for my
conformity to it, not having convinced or instructed me, that it was the will
of our Lord that I should do so? Also Dr. Whittaker was a wise man, Whitt. de
Council: Quest: 3. Chap. 2.
and yet he saw no folly, nor vanity, nor strangenes in a like assertion. For,
speaking of the definitions of Councills concerning matters to be believed, or
to be done, he shows, that to define a thing, signifies, either 1. to
declare what we are to believe and do, upon the authority of the Scripture,
because the Scripture teaches, that it aught to be so believed and done, and
that therefore they that believe or do otherwise, are in an error. 2. or else
it signifies to appoint and prescribe, by their own authority, what we are to
believe or do, so as men must rest in it, whatsoever reason they have against
it, and may not believe or do otherwise. The first he allows, and so did I,
and desired nothing else but to understand some rule from the word warranting
me to do that, whereunto they, in that wrighting, would have bound me. The
second way of defining he denies to belong to any Council, and affirms that
it appertains only to God, and to Christ, and to the Holy Ghost. Here I
might be large in alleging wrighters of the most eminent noate affirming the
like, and the same, for substance, with me, in this matter, and many of them
expressing their judgments in the same words. But these shall suffice, till a
further provocation. Afterward the Answerer demands, whether no truth be
uttered or described by men in our times, whereunto the consent of men may be
required? But what is this to the matter in question? Had they declared it to
be a truth, I was ready to have testified my consent with them in it? But that
they did not, nor has he done it in all this taedious discourse. So that this
is to argue ex non concessis, from that which is not granted. Or, will he say,
that, because every truth uttered by men, must be consented to, therefore we
are bound to consent to every thing which men shall utter? And to as little
purpose is that which he alleges concerning the subscription which the
Reformed Churches require to their confessions of faith; Whereas the matter in
question is not comprehended in any Article of those Confessions, and out of
those very Confessions we do dispute against it. But, was not the Answerer
driven far, and put hard to his shifts, when, to make some show of answer, he
demanded, how I could subscribe my name to my own wrighting sent to the
Classis, to show my consent to it, and whether I did thereby make my self an
Apostle, or my wrighting aequall to the word of God? To let pass his improper
calling it my consent to my own wrighting, my subscription to it was, not in
reference to my self, but to the word of God, whereunto it is consonant, and
it testyfyed unto them my persuasion that it agreed therewith: but, what is
this to the subscription, which they required, to injunctions and
praescriptions, which were not declared to agree with the Scripture, either in
that wrighting which they sent, or in any conference they had with me, though I
told them that unicum Argumentum etc. Any one Argument from the word should
prevayle with me, and that, besides other times, once in the hearing of some of
the Elders, and others. But, will it follow, that because a man, upon
persuasion of the truth, may subscribe to other men's wrightings, or to his
own, that therefore he may subscribe to those wrightings concerning the truth
whereof he is not persuaded?

Whilst he was wrighting these things a secret Monitour from within suggested
to him that all humane judicatoryes are subject to error, and that, when that
error is showed by the word of God, it aught to be corrected. But, if the
question be, who may judge of this error, and show it them? Here his answer is
defective. He says one Synod often reformeth that which has been decreed by
another. This shows indeed that Synods are subject to error. And do they
not therefore err because they fetched not their definitions and
praescriptions from the Scriptures? And is it not the best way, for rectifying
them, to reduce them to that rule? And how shall this be done, but by the
course which those Noble Beraeans took, by comparing them with, Act. 17.11.
and examining them by the Scriptures? And to whom does this belong? Indeed
the public Ministerial power of judging, in such cases, belongs to Synods
or Councills themselves. But the private judgment, which Divines call the
judgment of practical discretion, belongs to every Christian. So that no man
is bound absolutely to submit to, or to rest in the judgment of any man or
Council, but to try them by the Scripture, and to consent with them no
further then they appear to consent with that rule. This the Scriptures
abundantly declare, Mat. 24.4 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Gal. 1.8. Mat. 23.8
when they command all Christians to beware of Seducers, to try all things, to
try the spirits. Also, when they are called upon to receive the word of Christ
only, as their only Master. And to deny men the use of their private
judgment, in things taught them by their Pastors, or enjoined, and praescribed
by Classes, or Synods, what is it else, but to deprive man of his reason, and
man's understanding of its end, which is to search and find out the truth? yea,
to deprive Christians of the fruit of their faith, and supernatural
illumination, and of the spirit of Revelation? 1 Cor: 14.20. Ephesians: 4.14 Eusebius:
li. 5. C: 12.
Or, at least, to make those of riper years to be always as Children in
understanding? This were to revive the haeresy of Apelles, (...). that people
aught not accurately to weigh and examine what is propounded to them: Hieron:
in proem: ad Gal:
from which Ierom was so far that he much commended Marcella, a good woman in
Rome, for this, that she, wherever she met him, would be putting good questions
to him, and received his answers, not as Pythagoras his scholars did his
sayings (or as the Answerer would have had me to rest in the judgment of the
five Ministers) but she examined and weighed all things, so that he thought
himself to have, non tam discipulam, quam judicem, not so much a scholar as a
judge, and as he allowed a good woman this liberty in trying the words of a
learned and godly Teather, so Hylary gives the same liberty to all private
Christians in examining the decrees of Counsels. Hylar: de Synod: adv: Arrian.
Si contraria invicem senserint Concilia, debemus, quasi judices, probare
meliora. If Councills (or Synods) differ in their determinations, we aught, as
judges of our own actions, to approve of that which is better.

Whereas he adds. Yet does not this take away their authority for the
judging and deciding of controversies. For by such reasoning they might take
away all government and bring in confusion. I grant that it takes away no due
subordinate Ministerial authority from them, but a supreme Praetorian, or
Magisteriall authority, as that is, when they bind men to rest in their
determinations, without convincing them, that they are according to the mind of
God in the Scriptures, or so much as declaring to them sufficient ground out of
the word for their so doing. And so to do is not to take away all, or any
government, but tyranny, nor to bring in confusion, but to prevent it, and to
establish order.

Whereas he adds that, by these and such like injurious speeches, they do
exceedingly gratifye many sorts of Libertines, Arrians, Socinians and other
haereticks etc. What injury is it to witness against undue power, which is a
testifying against injury? And how can the Libertines, Arrians, etc. be
gratifyed by pleading against that undue power which is excercised in upholding
that disorder of promiscuous baptising which serves to strengthen them in
their damnable errors, as has been shown in the examination of the 12
Section? Nay, does not this undue power, which he ascribes to Classes, both
strengthen them in their opposition to that way of Government, and gratifye the
Papists also in their dangerous errors about the infallibility of Councills
and the Pope, and about implicit faith and blind obedience? For, it is not
subscription to any truth which is excepted against, but subscription to men's
customs and appointments, not agreeing with the truth, imposed merely by their
authority.

Sect. 32. to 40. examined.
IN the eight following Sections I find nothing which I am by name called to
examine, excepting that here and there my name is mentioned in his repeating
things already sufficiently cleared* only in the 39 Section, whereas they
complained of manifest injury done by the Answerer to me, whom he reproached in
public about the meeting of diverse to hear me upon the grounds of Religion
in Catechizing the family, where I lived (though enough has been said, in the
20 Section, for the satisfaction of the indifferent Reader, about my carriage
in that buisenes.) it will be requisite, upon a new provocation, to add 2 or 3
words, in this place also, for the removeall of some intimations injuriously
cast in by the Answerer to fasten a suspicion of disorder upon that private
exercise. For 1. in his second, answer, he supposes, that I there preached,
without a calling* whereas I neither preached (in the sense wherein he takes
the word, viz, by virtue of a public office in that place) nor performed that
private exercise, without a sufficient calling thereunto, both from the duty
of my private domestical relation to my own family, and from the desire of
the Master of that family, where I then lived, to those of his household, and
whereas others desired to partake of the benefit of it, their desire was
calling sufficient for their admittance to that private exercise, by virtue of
the spiritual relation which all Christians have mutually among themselves,
and the right which thereby they have to communicate in the gifts and labors
of one another, for their aedification. So that, even for this cause, there was
good reason for them and me to be offended at so public a slander of that
action, and of our intentions therein. As for the place of Scripture misapplyed
by him, out of Mat. 28.19, to reprove this duty; it does not forbid private
men any duty, the performance whereof is required in other texts. as. 1.
Masters to their own familyes in instructing them. Deuteronomy. 6.7.9. Deuteronomy.
11.19.20. Genesis 18* 19. Ephesians. 6.4. Phil. 2. 2. every Christian, according to his
gift, for the help of others 1. Pet. 4.10. Heb. 10.24.25. Mat. 3.16. 3. If yet
the Answerer is not satisfied, let him know that more may be pleaded, for the
warrant of that action, in reference to me, even from that place of Scripture,
then I will insist upon, if I would plead all that I might, or indeed need to
make use of, seeing it was a mere private exercise, performed, according to my
measure of gifts, with good warrant of the fore named texts, and not falling
within the meaning of that text, which he misapplyeth, in reproach against me.
So that the word of the Lord is not made a reproach to him, but I may say,
that, for the discharge of a Christian duty, I have borne reproach. Neither
was that the only sermon wherein I was reproached by the Answerer in public,
as many can testifye, which I strove to bear with patience, and should still
have borne in silence, if he would have suffered me to be quiet, at last.

In his third answer he girdeth at another, whose name he mentions not, but
the accusation is answered in the examination of the 24. 25. 26. Sections,

In his fourth answer, to make good his public reproaching me, he quarrelleth
the name given to that exercise, when it is called catechizing a family, which
he calls a mockery, but produces nothing to prove that name to be unfit for
that action, nor that action so done, to be unlawful, but venteth his passion,
because he wants Arguments against it.

In his fifth answer he says, that, not he, but the Classis deprived them of
those meetings, whereas I acknowledge no such power to be due to the Classis,
nor ever did they speak with, me about it, nor did I cease for any message
left by them with Mr. Wh. nor would I have given place, by subjection to them,
to have desisted from that work, in acknowledgment of their jurisdiction, in
such cases: but when I heard that the Answerer took offense at it, and
traduced it, by private whisperings, as tending to schysme, and when I saw that
my staying in that place was a burden to him, that I might not seem to give
offense to him, only, for peace sake, I removed my dwelling to another part of
the country, where I might be quiet, and so, not the Classis, but he only was
the cause of the cessation of that meeting.

In his sixth answer he charge some that resorted to that meeting with
offensive and ungodly schysming from the Dutch Church, how truly let him see
to it. For my part, I never heard that any of them were guilty of that crime,
nor do believe it to be true.

In his seventh answer he supposes that our own consciences told us that it
was not right, which we did, seeing at the word of man, we left it. Thus am I as
one that holds the wolf by the ear, when I have to do with such a spirit,
which, whether a man hold or let go, will not spare. But I will answer him in
two words, by remembering him that Christian actions are of two sorts. 1.
Actions of Christian duty. These must be done, who ever shall dislike them. 2.
Actions of Christian liberty. These may be done or omitted, according to
considerable circumstances. To apply this. For one to instruct his family by
catechizing, or otherwise, or for Christians to communicate their gifts for
mutual aedification, these are necessary duetyes which no man may forbid: and,
if they shall; yet they must not be omitted. But to receive such and such a
number of persons, is so in our liberty, as, in case of offense, we may omit
it. And, upon this warrant, I desisted, not from the duty (which I have
occasionally performed since, when J have been in that house) but from
performing it in the presence of so many. But let them, who, by taking offense
unjustly, hindered the good of many, provide themselves for their account to our
Lord Christ, in that day when hidden things shall be declared, when they, and
I, and the poor souls that are greived for their hindrance shall appear
together before his righteous tribunal. In hope and expectation whereof, is my
comfort in the midst of these troubles (as it was Jobs, Job: 19.3. v: 25.
whom his friends had reproached ten times.] For I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the last day upon the earth, etc.

The 40. Section examined,
IN this Section the Complainants show themselves aggreived for his pulpiting
against me, in a reproachful, uprayding manner, about the point in question.
Which they aggravate. 1. By his not satisfying their expectation. 2. By my
professed disagreement with the Anabaptists, and Brownists in this point, with
whom, he nevertheless injuriously joined me. 3. By his sinister intent in thus
falsely traducing me, viz, to justifye his keeping me out of the Church. 4. By
the injury done to the Church hereby, in that they are deprived of me, whom
they much desired, and bewail their want of me. Lastly they show the aequity
of their complaining against the Answerer for this, by his laboring to work
the Ministers of the Classis to further his purpose, telling them, that to
tolerate me, in a different practice, would be a condemning of their own
practice, and that therefore, if they would give way to me, they must make an
order to condemn their own practice, or to that effect, This is their
complaint. Let us now consider his answer.

Hereunto he pretends ten answers; but they are such as (to say no worse) I
marvayle he would print them.

His first answer is, that it is no reproach to call my assertion an error,
Reply.] But. 1. To call that an error which he has not proved, nor can prove
to be an error, is a reproach. Himself says it is no reproachful uprayding
of me, unless they could convince him of error for so speaking, Enough has
been said in the twelfth Section, and more may be added hereafter to convince
him, unless he be of his mind who said non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris,
though you do convince, yet I will not be convinced. 2. To rank the party,
whom he supposed to err, with Anabaptists and Brownists, when he professes,
and is ready to declare that he differs from them, is a reproachful
uprayding and injurious 3. To do this in the pulpit, where the people expect
nothing but words of truth, and passages tending to peace and aedification, and
from whence a public brand of reproach and disgrace may be left upon a
brother, was a more rude expression, then the Complainants used concerning
their thought that no godly man will be absolutely bound to subscribe to that
wrighting. 4. It is a poor evasion when he insinuates that I said in effect
Mr. Hook: was in error, when I said that I was not of his opinion in some
points. For, to say so much only declares that mine opinion differed from
his, but not that he was in error, seeing that difference might arise from my
not understanding him aright, not from his dissenting from the truth. And it
savoured of modesty in me, that I would not charge him with error, from whom I
differed in opinion, which is far from justifying, and serves justly to
reprove the reproachful speeches of the Answerer, as a ruder language.

His second answer is, that he performed his promise, and said enough, in that
sermon, to satisfye their expectation by his Arguments, against mine opinion
(as he calls it) and, for proof hereof, refers his Reader to his noates
which he wrote down of purpose, and it is like, keeps by him of purpose
also. The issue of all is, the assertion of those men is false and erroneous,
that complain he avoided the question between us. The sermon here spoken of,
it seems, was preached when I was absent, and, out of town: therefore I can
say nothing, upon mine own knowledge, in this matter, but that the constant
report, wherein all, whom I heard speak of it, concurred, was, that what he
said was so far from satisfying them, that they did not conceive that he spoke
to the point in question, but evaded it rather. And those noates of his sermon,
which some of them took from his mouth, and showed me, did apparently make
good, in my apprehension, what they said. But, if the Reader shall be pleased
to examine his stating of the question, in this very Section, and to compare it
with the true state set down by me in the 12. Section, it will easily appear
that he did not deal against my opinion (as he calls it) in every Argument,
nor in any Argument as he should. For the difference between him and me was
about my refusing to conform to the custom of the Dutch Church, in that place,
in baptising all that are presented, by whomsoever, though the parents were
neither of them members of any Church, nor at all known unto us. Now he
brought not one Argument to prove the lawfullnes of this custom, or to convince
me of sin for not binding my self, by subscription, or promise to conform
to it.

His third answer is, that, upon his motion, I made an offer of showing how
far I differed from the Brownists, which I performed not, which he says, if I
had done, mine opinion must have fallen together with it.] But it is neither
so, nor so. For, neither did I offer it, upon his motion, but upon mine own
motion, to vindicate my assertion from his calumnies, nor is there such
affinity betwixt their opinions and mine, in this matter, that, like twins,
they must live and dye together. For, what I affirm will stand, upon other
grounds and principles, then those whereby their separation is upheld. To wipe
off this aspersion I will show that it is an injury, as to me, so to the truth
also, in this particular, when it is affirmed that the error of the Brownists
could not be refuted by me but that mine own opinion must fall together, and
that, like twins, they must live and dye together. For, I suppose, the error
of the Brownists, which he means, is, that separation from the Church
assemblies of England, in such sort as to have no spiritual Communion with
them, is necessary. If so; I demand, how does this assertion of the lawfullnes
of admitting only their infants to baptism, who are members of a true Church,
necessarily argue such separation from true Churches (for defects and
corruptions which are found in them) to be a bounden duty? If yea; let him
demonstrate. 1. How it strengthens them in their refusing private Religious
Communion with good Christians, because they stand members of some
Parish Church in England, which is one error held by some of them, as he
knows. 2, How it confirms them in refusing to hear the word preached by
any ministers of any of those Churches, which is another error maintained by
many of them also? 3. How it establishes any man in refusing any public
Religious communion with any true Church? If nay; let him acknowledge his
slander. But, that the vanity and untrueth of this suggestion may be more
evident, I will declare the truth, in this matter, by manifesting, both mine
own judgment about the truenes of Churches, and the practice of the
Seperatists themselves.

1. Mine own judgment and persuasion I will express in Dr. Ames his words
thus. Second Manuduct p. 33. 34.
So many parish assemblies of England as have any competent number of good
Christians in them united together for to worship God ordinarily in one
society, so many have essential and integrall form of a visible Church, and
all they have entire right to Christ, and to all the means of enjoying him:
however they are defective in the purity of their combination, and in the
complete free excercising of their power. To prevent all mistake, he declares
what he means by essential and integrall form thus. The essential form of
a visible Church is the covenant of God, or true faith made visible by
profession; the noates and marks whereof are the word and Sacraments rightly
administered, and received with fruits of obedience. The integrall constituting
form is that state, relation, or reference which a Congregation of such
professors have one to another by virtue of their settled combination, the
noate or mark whereof is their usual assembling together into one place, and
watching one over another. So that, however the defects and corruptions, in
those Churches, are to be witnessed against, and howsoever it is the duty of
Christians to endeavor (as much as in them is) to procure the reformation of
those defects, and not to partake in the sins of any Church. Ephesians. 5.11. and
amongst true Churches to make choice of those, whereunto to join themselves,
which are most pure, Lib. 4. Cas. Cons. cap. 24. quest. 2.
so far as they are able (as the same learned wrighter says, elsewhere) yet
to dischurch them wholly, and to separate from them, as no Churches of Christ,
or to deny baptism to the infants of their known members is not warranted by
any rule in the Scripture, that I know, nor justified by my assertion or
practice.

2. The practice of the Seperatists themselves shows that this assertion
does not strengthen or countenance the error of the Brownists in matter of
Separation. For, they profess to hold spiritual communion with other
Churches, who do extend the use of baptism to as great largenes as England
does, and greater also (as I am able, with Gods assistance, to prove) though
they freely witness against it, as a disorder in those Churches, which also
many Godly learned ministers of these Countries are so far from justifying,
that they confess it to be unwarrantable, and wish it may be reformed. By all
which it is manifest that there is no such affinity between these opinions,
that the error of the Brownists could not be refuted by me, but that mine own
opinion must fall together. As he untruely pretends.

3. Hereunto I will add, that in thus reasoning the Answerer imprude^tly armeth
his opposites against himself with his own weapon. Polit. Eccles. lib. 1.
Cap. 14. e^ 13. Fresh Suite p. 207. Treat: of the necess. of separation.
For this plea is taken up, 1. by the those that plead for the Prelates, both of
former times, whom Mr. Parker has fitly answered, by clearing the seekers of
Reformation from this imputation, and retorting it upon themselves, and of
latter times, whom Dr. Ames, in like manner, has briefly and fitly answered.
2. by those of the Separation, for Mr. Can, the Answerer knows, pretends,
in his book, to prove a necessity of separation from the Church of England by
the Non-conformists principles, and professes to oppose it especially to Dr.
Ames, only in the point of separation. Whereby it appears that he accounts
him, and such like, opposites, in that point, notwithstanding their agreement
in some truths. Concerning which book I have many things to say, in Dr. Ames
his defense, which if I should here insert, this tractate, which already much
exceeds the proportion, at first purposed by me, would swell to too great a
volume. But I may well be silent at this time, seeing others (as I hear) have
undertaken it, and a more fit occasion may be given hereafter, if it be thaught
requisite, but especially seeing he has not answered Dr. Ames his second
manuduction at all, wherein he has said enough for the clearing of his
judgment in this matter, nor indeed has he taken away the force of that little,
which the Doctor said in answer to the Rejoinder, though he expressed himself,
but in few lines, and as answering, on another occasion, and not dealing
professedly against the Separation. All which might easily be demonstrated,
but, at this time, I purpose to abstain from by-controversyes.

As for his objection, that I performed not that promise, though I had time
enough, my answer is, that he, neither required it of me, nor encouraged me so
to do, by assuring me that the performance thereof would end the difference,
Nor did it fall fitly in my way to speak of this point, in any Argument which
I handled in public afterward.

His fourth answer tends to a s^ighting of my labor of love in 6 months
assistance of him, in a time of their extremity. It becomes unthanckfull men
thus to elevate that kindness which they have not hearts to value, nor purpose
to requite. For this purpose, he sets 6 months, wherein that wrighting, as
he says, was given out by me, and 6 years resistance, which, he says, is
procured by my opposition to the practice of the Dutch Church, and as much
recompense, he says, received by me for that, as some godly ministers have in
twice 6 months.

Reply. Concerning the wrighting I have spoken sufficiently in the 2 and 22.
Sections, and in other places, wherein I showed how he compelled me to it, for
declaration of the truth against his unjust reports, and how himself, before
he heard of any such wrighting from me, had traduced me, in the dark, in a
larger wrighting secretly sent to his friend in N.

Concerning the ground of 6 years resistance. Seeing he compelled me thereunto,
in defense of the truth, I cannot help it, nor am to be blamed for it, unless
it be a fault to bear witness to the truth, when I am called thereunto.

Concerning the collection, which he, in too mercenary a phrase, calls a
recompense for my labor, I answer. 1. I received none of it from him; though
some other English preachers are put to that charge: so that, to him it was a
kindness. 2. I contracted not with him for any recompense to be made me from the
Church, by his means; so that, in me it was a kindness. 3. I received no
gratification from the Churchstock, as other Ministers have done, by his
procurement. So that the poor had no damage or hindrance thereby, as in some
other cases they have had, through his holding up these contentions. 4. The
most of that which was given was from their purses, whom he contentiously
calls my friends. 5. What ever I received from them they know, I was no
gayner by it, when the necessary charges of my diet are deducted, and the hire
of an house, which, at their request, I took, but never lived in, thorough his
opposition against me, and for which I was constrained to pay the wholl years
rent. 6. As he made no allowance toward this recompense, so he propounded it
not to others, by them to be considered, and when, by others, it was propounded
to him, though he hindered it not (for that was not in his power) yet, when he
saw that they purposed to express their love some what liberally, he took
occasion to cast in discouraging speeches against it, in a sermon preached by
him at that time, when I was absent, as they, that heard him, told me. 7.
Whereas I received that fruit of the love of some among them for my 6 months
labors, in that place, the opposition, which the Answerer has raised against
me, has put me to the charges of thrice 6 months in these parts, by
compelling me, for peace sake to remove to some other place, where I might live
quietly, though upon mine own charges, whereas, in that place, it was offered
me, by some of them, that the ordinary allowance, which the Dutch Ministers
receive, should be given me, if I would live amongst them though privatily. But
I preferred peace before outward advantages, and departed thence, to my outward
dissadvantage, and loss, through his unquietnes.

His other answers which he pretends to make to the Complainants, but
thorough them smites me, are already examined.

In his fifth answer he blames them for false imaginations touching his
thoughts and intents.] How just this reproof is, his own conscience knows:
but he is very unfit to be a reprover of evil surmises, who is so abundantly
culpable of the same evil in so many passages of this book: yea, in the next
immediately precedent passage he expressed a false imagination concerning my
intention in preaching against Schysming to those that frequented the private
exercise: wherein he dealt injuriously with the^, and me.

In his sixth answer he would persuade the Reader that the Church did not
desire me, after this difference, which is contrary to the professions of
persons of all sorts, except Th. All.

What he says in the 7, 8, 9, and 10 answers has been examined before.

The last passage, in this Sect: concerns the preaching and prophesying of
Ia: Cr: and Tho. Flet. which is elsewhere also repeated. Whereunto I am
content, at the importunity of one of them, P. 102. P. 106. See p. 30. 71. 82.
106. Aug. contr. Iul. Pelag. lib. 1.
(viz Ia: Cr.) to say some thing. Wherefore, passing by his scornful manner of
naming them, which is very usual with him (though it better became Iulia^ the
Pelagian then the Answerer) I will only relate the answer which I received
from him in wrighting, contracting it thus. 1. That he never read and applied
Scripture, at any meeting, out of his own house. 2. That in his own family,
he remembers not that ever there were, in any private Religious exercise,
above 5 or 6 persons, of other families, at one time. 3. That he has not had
such meetings above 5 or 6 times, in 8 or 9 years. 4. That he remembers not
that any one has been at any such duty in his family, these 4 or 5 years
past, at least, except some allowed minister were there present. 5. That when
they did meet, he did not preach, but read the Answerers, or some others men
labors. 6. That the Answerer never admonished him of any fault herein
privately, nor did he ever hear that it was disliked, till the Answerer girded
at such meeting, in a sermon, 3 or 4 years since. 7. That when he saw that the
Answerer had wronged him in print, by an untrue report of these matters, he
went to his house to convince him privately thereof, but departed thence without
satisfaction. 8. That a few days after, as he heard, the Answerer saught for
witnesses, and found 2. (as it was said) Ia. Cr. spoke with them boath, and
found the one very defective, and more against the Answerer then for him. The
other said that, about some 5 years since, he heard Ia. C. read in the bible,
and some wrighting concerning it, but whether the Answerers sermons or any
other, he dare not say. But Ia. Cr. constantly affirms, that this witness was
never at his house at such an exercise. If this be so, let the Reader judge
whether this action deserves to be so censured, or published.

In the 41 Section I find my name but thrice mentioned. That which he says of
me, in his fifth answer, is a direct contradiction to that which he said of me
in the 14 and 15 answers of the second Sect. The other passages in this Sect.
which concern me are answered.

In the 42 Sect. he falls again into his old guilt of false imagination by
misjudging our intentions in a private fast. Concerning which ill usage of his
J may take up the Psalmists complaint. Psalm. 96.10.
When I wept and chastned my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.

His answers to Allegations of Scripture brought by me examined.
BEfore I search into the particulars of his answer I have just cause to
complain that my Tenet, in this question, is not proposed but mangled, and
counterfeit, and that, though some prints and lineaments of it are represented,
yet, not in their true decency and proportion: like certain looking glasses,
which representing the visage misshapen, yet, after a sort, praeserve something
of the hue and complexion. Which will appear by co^paring what is here said by
him with that which I then wrote to the Classis, which, because it was large
and in lattin, and a private wrighting, I forbear now to publish, till further
provocation. Whereby the learned may see, 1. What mistakes were in the
Translation, as it was published, in that printed pamphlet, against which I
protested in print. 2. That my intent in wrighting to the Classis, was, not to
dispute the point, but to declare passages between the Answerer and me, for
the removeall of calumnies which had been cast abroad among the^. 3. That the
4. first Scriptures were alleged, not to prove that no infants should be
baptized, whose parents are not members of that Church, but to show, that they
had no power to require any more of me then to perform the duetyes of the
pastoral office, to the members of that Church (whereunto I should have
relation) which I was ready to perform. So that my wrighting served only to
prevent that trouble, which I foresaw would follow, if the Classis, to gratifye
the Answerer, should assume to themselves an undue power of binding me to rest
in, Sect. 12. 13. 14.
and conform to that wrighting spoken of before. And that such power is
unjustly assumed by the Classis I prove thus.

That power which exceeds the bounds of Apostolical authority is unduely
assumed by any Classis.

But the power of binding a Pastor to perform a duty of his pastoral office
unto those who are not members of his Church exceeds the bounds of
Apostolical authority.

Therefore the power of binding me to baptize those that are no members of that
Church, whereunto J should be Pastor, is unjustly assumed by the Classis.

Which proposition will he deny? Not the first, unless he will affirm that
the Classes have a greater power over particular Churches then the Apostles
had. Which, J thinck, he will not say, much less go about to prove. Will he
deny the assumption? Those 4 texts of Scripture were alleged by me for the
proof of it.

To prevent all mistakes, I pray the Reader to be informed that my intent, in
alleging these Scriptures, was only to advertise the Ministers of the
Classis that they have no authority to exact this of me, as a condition of my
admitta^ce to that pastoral charge (as my very words in that wrighting
declare) not to show the unlawfullnes of my baptising any that are not members
of that particular Church: for I profess, in express words after, that, in
regard of the communion of particular Churches among themselves, I neither did,
nor do refuse to baptize their infants, who are not members of that Church: so
that I may be satisfied that they are indeed Christians. So that the question
is only, whether the Classis has power to exact such a thing of any minister
to be admitted to a particular Church amongst them, as a condition of his
admittance? Jn this case, I might have put them upon showing their warrant and
commission for their so doing (as I now do require of the Answerer, when he
shall defend his pretended answer, in his next book) but, to make short work,
I then produced the Apostles practice, whose commission was larger then any
Classis has received, and showed that they never assumed so much, which they
would not have failed to do, in one place or other, the necessity of the
Church, in those times, so requiring, nor to have recorded it, for the
instruction of posterity, if they might have done it. To this end I noated
three places of Scripture. Let us now consider them, and his answer.

1. Text. Acts. 20.28. Wherein Paul charged the Elders of Ephesus to take heed
unto themselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them
Overseers. Where, he did not extend the excercising of their office farther
then the Holy Ghost exte^ded their relation. Let us examine his eight answers,
which he gives, rather by number then by weight.

His first answer is, ad hominem, to the man more then to the matter. For he
says. By what right Mr. D. himself, being no member of this Church, did
communicate with us in the Lords supper, by the some right may a Pastor
exercise his Ministry, in some acts of it, to those who are no mrmbers of his
Church.

Reply. This answer is nothing to the matter in question, For, 1. the question
is not, what I may lawfully do, but what the Classis may warrantably exact, in
manner aforesaid. For, some lawful things are arbitrary, and in our liberty,
and to be done sometimes, and sometimes omitted, as circumstances and respects
vary the case, and those no man may impose as necessary. It had been more to
the purpose if he could have said. By what right the Classis did compel him to
administer the Lords supper to unknown persons, that are no members of his
Church, etc. by the same right they may compel me to baptize the infants of
those that are no members. 2. The cases are not alike, between mine admittance
to communicate at the Lords table, and the admittance of those to baptism,
concerning whom the question is. For J conceive, that (besides my relation else
where, and the right which these Churches give to known passants, of being
admitted to the communion, for a short time) both himself, and the wholl
Church, acknowledged me for a member with them, for the time of my abode in
that service, which they testified by desiring the help of my public labors,
and their cheerful admittance of me to that ordinance, during that time,
without the least scruple. Now, let the Reader judge, whether it be alike to
receive a man so known, and acknowledged among themselves as a member (for a
time) to communion in the Lords supper, and the baptising of those infants,
whose parents are members, neither of that Church, nor of any other, for aught
any man knows, being not at all known unto the Church.

His second answer is, that the Apostle might have laid upon them a further
duty, in some other place, though no more was required, in that place.

Reply 1. If he would have answered to the purpose, he should have produced
some other place, wherein the Apostle did so: but that he did not, because he
could not. 2. That Paul did not impose any such injunction upon the Pastors of
Ephesus, at this time, being to leave them, nor afterward in the Epistle which
he wrote to them from Rome, nor at any other time (which the Scripture
mentions, and it would have been recorded, if it had been done, being a
matter of such moment, and no where else in Scripture propounded) wherefore was
it, but because he received no such command from the Lord? Which if he had
done, it stood not with his faithfullnes, Act: 20.20. v. 27.
who professes to keep back nothing that was proffitable, and to declare all
the Counsel of God, to conceal. 3. That, neither Paul, nor any of the
Apostles could impose any such injunctions upon Pastors, The 5. book of the
Church. Chap. 27. p. 497. Cartw. 1. Repl. p. 43.
I prove thus. Because it had been to confound the Apostolical and Pastoral
office, and to bind men to break the limits of their office, which had been a
violation of Gods order, as D. Field and Mr. Cartwright show, whom it
concerns the Answerer to answer in this point.

His third answer, he says, is more particular, but, I say, it is no more to
the purpose, then the former. He says. The preaching of the word is a
Ministerial act, which Ministers are bound to perform to some without, when
they invite Heathens, Turks, or Jews to hear them. Pro: 9.3.4.5. Mat.
28.19.20.

Reply. But, 1, what is all this to prove that the Classis has the authority
whereof the question is? Bring it into a Syllogism, and see. 2. For the
Assertion it self, though I grant that the preaching of the Gospel by a
Minister is an act of his ministry, yet, Prove: 9.2.3.4. Mat. 11.19. Dan: 12.3
it is not so in every man. For one that is not one of wisdoms maidens, by
virtue of office, yet may be one of wisdoms children, whom God may bless in
the exercise of the gifts and graces of his spirit to be an instrument of
turning many to righteousness. And, for that other place in Mat. 28.19.20. I
know not to what purpose it is alleged, unless to show that the Classis may
give ordinary Pastors such a commission as Christ gave the Apostles, to go and
preach the Gospel to all Nations. 3. To what end does he speak of preaching
the Gospel to Heathens, Jews, and Turks, in this question? Is it to intimate
that Baptism may be as lawfully administered to the infants of such, as the
word is preached to their parents? Or, what other use serves it to?

His fourth answer is, that the administration of the Sacraments, is also a
duty of the ministry to be performed by a Pastor to more then the members of
his particular Congregation, etc.

Reply 1. Here again I must continue and renew my complaint that the Answerer
proves not the power of the Classis in the particular in question. 2. To admit
those that are known members of another Church to communion in the Sacraments,
upon fitting occasions, I hold lawful, and do profess my readiness to
practice accordingly, but, is this any thing to those who refuse to join with
any Church (concerning whom, and such like the question is) Is the
administration of the Sacrament a duty of the ministry to be performed by any
Pastor to such? If he say, yea; let him prove it. If nay; why then am I blamed
for refusing it?

His fifth answer is ill bottomed, upon a false supposition, that the practice
of the Church at Antioch, in sending to the Church of Jerusalem, warranteth
Classes to exercise such authority over particular Churches as is now
questioned.

Reply. 1. I say, it is ill bottomed. For, it will be hard for him to prove, 1,
that meeting to be Classical, which was but of 2 Churches consulting upon an
extraordinary occasion in a difficult case. 2. That this meeting consisted of
Ministers only, seeing the text says that, at Antioch, they gathered the
Church Act: 14.27. What was that? the multitude. Act: 15.30. and, at Jerusalem,
the Church, Apostles, and Elders are joined together in receiving those
messengers. Where the Church again signified the Multitude. v. 12. who are
also called the wholl Church and brethren. v. 22. 23. 3. That those that dwelt
at Jerusalem dealt in the case of those at Antioch by way of Classical
jurisdiction and authority, seeing Paul and Barnabas were sent, who were not
inferior to the rest of the Apostles, either in authority or in the infallible
direction of the Holy Ghost, and they were sent principally for the stopping of
the mouths of those Seducers, which pretended that they were sent by the
Apostles, as the Apostles intimate in their epistle to the Church at Antioch.
Act. 15.24. 4. That the Classes have power to impose their decrees upon other
Churches, that have no delegates with them, as the Apostles did at that time,
upon all the Churches of the Gentiles. v. 23.28. Cap. 18.4. 2. As his answer is
ill bottomed, so it is ill built, unless he can prove that it is a part of
every ministers office to be excercised in governing the members of many other
Congregations (as well as his one) combined in Classes, which he does not go
about to do, nor will be able out of Scripture, where no such property of a
minister is expressed, either in the Acts, or Epistles of the Apostles. 3. As
his answer is ill bottomed, and ill built, so is it ill added to prove the
power of the Classes in the matter, concerning which the question is, which it
does not prove at all.

His sixth answer, wherein he pretends to come nearer to the place Act.
20.28. (and so he had need to do: for hitherto he has gone far enough from
it) is, that the flock is attended by the labor of the Pastor, that it may be
increased, which is done by the labor of faithful ministers seeking to bring
those into the fold, which, at first, are no members of the Church.

Reply. 1. If all this were granted, yet it will not conclude the point in
question, as will appear to him that shall frame it into a Syllogism. 2. It
may be questioned whether this drawing into the fold be the pastoral
attendance there meant, though I doubt not that it is lawful, and a duty, but
it seems not to be intended in that charge left with the Pastors of Ephesus.
1. Because the work of the Pastor, qua talis, is to feed a flock already
gathered, 1 Cor. 14.2. Ioh. 4.39. Act. 8.4. with Ch: 11.19.20 21. Mat: 18.19.
James. 5.19.20.
not to gather a flock, unless by accident, God casting in some to hear by a
providence, as that unlearned man that came in amongst them whilst they were
prophesying, or in some such like way; though, I doubt not, it is a pious work
and a bounden duty for a Pastor to labor the gayning of others. 2. Because
the labor of bringing in others into the fold has been undertaken by those
that were not Pastors, with blessed success, the Lord giving this glory to his
own word made effectual by his spirit, and not limiting it as a privilege
peculiar to any office in the Church. And therefore even those out of office
also are bound to labor in it.

His seventh answer is that to assist a Church, that is destitute of their
Pastor, in convincing erroneous person^ judicially in the Church is a duty,
and yet may be required of a neighbor minister. Therefore men may exercise
some acts of their ministry toward such as are no members of their
Congregation.

Reply 1. Here again somewhat is said, but nothing to the point. For, will it
follow that, because a Minister may help a neighbor Church, in convincing
those that err, that therefore the Classes have a right to exact of me, as a
condition of my admittance to the pastoral office, to baptize those infants
whose parents are not under my pastoral charge? 2. Though it be true that it
is required of a Pastor to be able to convince erroneous persons, and that,
when he does it, according to Christ's order, it is a part of his pastoral
work, yet, will it follow, that wheresoever he excerciseth that ability, he
does execute a part of his pastoral office? If not, to what use serves this
discourse?

His eighth answer is, that my profession of my readiness to baptize their
infants, who are not members of this Church, if I may be satisfied that they
have a right to it, by their membership elsewhere, in regard of the communion
among particular Churches, does plainly refute my self,

Reply. 1. The thing that I question is the power of the Classis to bind me to
such a condition. 2. Suppose I had expressly denied them to have this power, as
indeed, I do, by consequence, in the places of Scripture alleged by me
against it, how does this profession plainly, or darkely, or at all refute
that? He says, diverse ways. 1. Then it is an error to thinck that a Pastor
may not exercise his ministry, in some acts of it, toward those who are no
members of his Church. But I have already shown that the question between us
is not whether I may lawfully baptize such, but by what right the Classis can
exact it of me, in the manner aforesaid. How will he make good this inference?
Because it is not lawful for the Classis to exact, it in that manner,
therefore is it not lawful to be done? Or, because he erreth that holds it not
lawful to be done, therefore he erreth who holds that the Classis may not
exact it, after that manner? 2. he says, It is vain to call in question,
whether they be Christians who are members of a true Church. But, is not this a
vain answer? For, how shall I know them to be members of a true Church, who
are otherwise altogether unknown, without questioning with them about it? And
as vain is his third answer. For, therefore do I require a precedent
examination of the members of another Church, and not of the members of his
Church; Because my relation to that place would have made the members of that
Church known to me, without such examination, but not strangers, who are
altogether unknown. 4. He says, particular persons, members of the Catholic
or Universal Church may also have their infants baptized, though not joined to
a particular visible Church. Reply. 1. How does this serve to prove that J
plainly refute my self? For, how can a man be said to refute what he said
concerning the members of a particular Church, by saying nothing about the
members of the Catholic Church? Do men use to refute by silence, or by saying
nothing? I wish he had so refuted the printed pamphlet for his own credit, and
peace, that men might have thought he could have said something, in his own
defense, more then, it now appears, he can. 2. For the matter of his answer.
When he shall answer me what he means by the Catholic Church, whether it be
a visible or an invisible Church, of which he speaks, and shall give a
character or description whereby a man that refuses to join with any
particular visible Church may be known to be a member of that visible, or
invisible Catholic Church, then I shall have a fit occasion to tell the reason
of my mentioning only the Communion of particular Churches in this question.
5. He says, that I, having resigned up my Pastoral charge in London, and not
now established minister of any particular Congregation, do yet, upon
occasion, preach for Mr Balmford, and Mr. Peter's etc. he would know upon what
ground I administer the word to them.] Reply. 1. What ever the ground be, it
will help him nothing at all to prove that I have refuted my self in what I
said concerning the power of the Classis, in this case. 2. Seeing I must give
my account, take it in few words. I have preached for these men, upon the same
ground, whereupon I preached for him, almost six months together, not by
appointment of the Classis, nor by virtue of office among them, but, with the
consent and entreaty of such as have authority to dispose and govern such
actions, I have been willing and ready to employ my talents, and exercise my
gifts for the good of many, according to the rule. 1. Pet. 4.10.11. Now I
demand. wherein I have refuted my self?

To wind up all these extravagancies, like so many odd; and broken ends
together, into one bottom. My demand to the Classis, in reference to their
practice, was, by what right the Pastor of a particular Church must be bound to
perform a work of his ministry to those that are not members of his Church,
seeing the Apostles never exacted, required, or persuaded it? To this question
the Answerer pretends to make eight answers, which must be thus expressed,
or else they are not to the question. 1. The Classis may exact this of any
Minister, by the same right that Mr. D. had to come to the Sacrament in that
Church whereof he was not a member. 2. By the same right, whereby the Apostles
required as much, for aught we know, for we cannot find it written. 3. By the
same right whereby Ministers are bound to labor the conversion of those
without. 4. By the same right whereby Pastors may administer the Lords supper
to the members of other Churches. 5. By the same right whereby the Church of
Jerusalem afforded help, in a difficult case, to the Church at Antioch being
desired so to do. 6. By the same right whereby Pastors must labor to increase
their flock. 7. By the same right whereby ministers may help a neighbor
Church to convince erroneous persons. 8. Because Mr. D. is willing to baptize
those infants, being brought to him, whose parents are, neither of them,
members of any true Church. Is not this question soundly answered?

Or, take my interrogation for a strong denial of their power to bind me to
this condition of baptising those who are not members of the Church committed
to me, as indeed it was, in my intent. This denial of their power he
accounts mine error, and he goes about to confute it by eight Arguments,
which must be thus framed, to conclude the question.

1. Arg. Mr. D. did communicate with us in the Lords supper, being no member of
our Church. Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to baptize those that are
not members of his Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

2. Arg. Though the Apostle required no more of the Pastors of Ephesus, but to
feed their own flock, yet he might lay some further duty upon them
elsewhere. Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to baptize those that are
not members of his Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

3. Arg. Ministers are bound to preach the word for the conversion of those
that are without. Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to execute his
ministry to those that are not of his Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

4. Arg. Pastors must administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
supper in neighbor Churches that are destitute, being required thereunto.
Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to execute his ministry to those that
are not of his Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

5. Arg. The Church at Jerusalem helped the Church at Antioch, in a difficult
question. Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to execute his ministry to
those that are not of his Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

6. Arg: Pastors attend their flock, by laboring to increase it, and to bring
others into the fold. Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to execute his
ministry to those that are not of his Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

7. Arg. Ministers being desired, may lawfully assist neighbor Churches in
convincing erroneous persons. Therefore the Classis may bind a Pastor to
execute his ministry to those that are not of his Church. Reply. I deny the
Argument.

8. Arg: Mr. Davenport is willing to baptize the infants that are brought,
whose parents are members of any true Church. Therefore the Classis may bind a
Pastor to perform some work of his ministry to those that are not of his
Church. Reply. I deny the Argument.

Again, if I would multiply questions, which I am unwilling to do, J could
show, in the same manner, how little or nothing he has said to prove the very
thing which he pretends to prove, to wit, that it is the duty of a Pastor
to discharge some work of his ministry toward those that are not of his flock
and charge, by denying the Argument in every one of his proofs. But enough
has been said already, and my desire is only to satisfye all men concerning
what I wrote to the Classis, being called and compelled thereunto.

2. The second text is in Coll. 4.17. Say to Archippus, Take heed to the
ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

Ans: The Answerer says, the answer made to the former allegation may serve
for answer of this.

Reply. It may so, even as fitly as for that, that is, not at all, as has been
showed in the examination of those Answers, only one thing more we will add,
from hence, to what has been said. That as the Apostles took no such power to
themselves, to bind ministers to do the work of their ministry to those who
are not of their Church; So the Church also has not power to require any more
of them, and therefore the Classis cannot, who have no more power then is given
them by the Churches in that combination.

Ans. 1. Yet from hence also diverse things are to be observed. 1. that, if the
ministry aught to be fullfilled, then not to be lightly forsaken etc.

Reply. True: but if the Church give an orderly dimission upon just cause (as
it was in my case) the ministry is not lightly forsaken, but fullfilled, so
far as the Church did, or could reasonably require it, and therein that text
is satisfied.

Ans: 2. If the ministry aught to be fullfilled, then are the ministers to
declare the wholl will and counsel of God, so far as it is revealed to them,
for the good of Gods people. Act. 20.20.27.

Reply. True: Neither have I been altogether wanting to the discharge of this
duty in my measure, and in that manner as might be for the good of Gods people.

His third answer has been replied unto in Sect. 20. and therefore to add more
in this place, were but actum agere, lost labor.

As the Answerer would have every godly Minister consider whether it be not
meet that each of these things should be duly regarded of them: So I could
add other considerations and observations which might be not unproffitable;
yet, least I should seem to render reproach for reproach, I will forbear
them, and spare him.

3. The third Text is in 1. Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock, (...) which is among you.

Ans: The strength of that objection, which is employed in these words, has
been already taken away in answer to the former allegations. Act. 20.28.

Reply. As in the former places, so in this, no more is required of Pastors, by
virtue of their office, then to feed that flock, to the tending whereof
themselves were designed by a singular appointment.

Ans. 1. The similitude taken from shepherds does not restrain ministers
from excercising some acts of their ministry toward those who are no members
of their Church, seeing shepherds, for the defense and benefit of their flocks,
combine themselves etc.

Reply. The combination of shepherds is a good emblem of a well ordered
combination of diverse ministers. For, 1. it is in common cases of danger to
the flock, or for mutual assistance in difficult cases, as appears in those
instances alleged by him. Genesis 29.7.8.9. Esaias. 31.4. Luke. 2.8. 2. it is for
the good, and help, not for the hurt, and hindrance of the flock. 3. no one
shepherd is straightened in the discharge of any pastoral duty to his flock,
or bound to perform the office of a shepherd to any other flock, or sheep,
then those whereunto he is appointed by the Lord and owner of the flock, from
whom he receives his commission. And, in such a way of combination among
ministers, much good may redound to particular Churches, and to the Pastors
thereof.

Ans. 2. The word translated feeding does also signifye to rule and govern: if
this kind of feeding be restrained to one Congregation, then is the authority
of Classes overthrown, then is it unlawful for assemblies of ministers to
give their voices for the decision of controversies in any Congregation but
their own, contrary to Ezekiel. 34.12.

Reply. To feed, in this place, is to govern, as becomes shepherds that are
servants, Luke 22.27.
not as lords of the flock, which is there forbidden. verse: 3. from the
appearance whereof they are not free, Dr. Ames in 1. Pet. 5.3.
1. that will have the Church, in any sort, to depend upon their authority. 2.
which prescribe any thing as necessary to be done by Pastor or people which is
not drawn out of the Scripture. 3. who declare the will of God it self too
imperiously, having no respect to their infirmity, with whom they have to do.
Now, such a government does not overthrow any lawful authority of Classes,
much less does it argue it to be unlawful for assemblies of ministers to
give their voices for the decision of controversies, whereby the right ordering
of particular Churches is not hindered, but furthered. Neither does that
Scripture, alleged by him, contradict any thing here spoken, nor indeed does
he show how it serves for the purpose for which he produces it.

Ans. 3. If we consider the persons, to whom Peter wrote this Epistle, the
elect strangers dispersed. 1. Pet. 1.1.2. and their manifold necessities, in
those times of persecution; what an unreasonable thing is it to imagine that
the ministers of those Countries might not exercise some act of their ministry
for baptising of those dispersed strangers? etc.

Reply. Seeing the question is only of the power of the Classis in binding a
minister, according to the tenor of that wrighting of the five ministers, and
seeing I acknowledge it to be lawful, and profess my readiness, to baptize
those that are not members of this Church, if they are members of any true
Church, I see not how this exception is of any validity against any thing said
by me, in that wrighting, unless he will accuse the Apostles of
unreasonablenes in not making some order for that Classical authority which he
fancyeth.

4. His fourth answer is of no use, in this question, the premises being
considered.

Another place of Scripture, Rom: 14.5.23. was alleged by me to show, that
they might not warrantably bind me to the thing in question, seeing I could not
do it with persuasion of the lawfullnes of it, and feared that, in doing it, I
should sin against Christ.

Ans: 1. The Apostle here speaks of doubting about things indifferent, etc.

Reply. 1. If this thing be necessary to the calling and office of a minister,
which is in question, it had concerned them, or him to show in what respect it
is necessary, whether by any command of Christ, which could not be obeyed in
the discharge of of the pastoral office, without doing this, or as a mean
necessarily conducing to the ends whereunto the pastoral office serves. 2. If
the Apostle will not have men bound to the doing of things indifferent,
concerning the lawfullnes whereof they are unpersuaded, much less would he
have them bound to that which they judge to be a sin, and they, who bind them
thereunto, cannot declare to be lawful, the one thincking it necessary to be
avoided, and the other (what ever they pretend to thinck) not being able to
prove it necessary to be done.

Ans: 2. The Apostle here speaks of receiving men as brethren, not of
receiving men into office. Romans 14.3.

Reply. What will he infer from thence? That men may be refused from an
office, for refusing to do those things which Christ has not commanded, and
concerning the lawfullnes whereof they doubt, as in the case questioned, or the
like? It seems he intends that: But then it lies upon him to prove it; else
his assertion is delivered, too Dictatorlike, in a more masterly then rational
way, without proof.

Ans: 3. The doubting and wavering in matters of Religion is very dangerous,
and a great evil to be taken heed of.

Reply. Though I spoke of doubting yet I took not the word in that strict
sense, wherein it is used to express an haesitancy between assent and
dissent, the mind inclining no more to one part then to the other, but, I
modestly called it a doubt, that I might provoke them to satisfye me with
convincing Arguments: yet the Arguments, which persuaded me of the unlawfullnes
of it seemed to me not only praeponderant, but convincing, which the Reader
may find in the 12 Section.

4. His fourth answer has been already examined, and found too light.

Other texts of Scripture I alleged, to express whom I account to be
Christians, to wit, such as answer that reason for which the name was at first
given to those that professed to believe in Antioch. Act. 11.21.26. and whom I
account the children of Christians, namely, those, whose parents, at least one
of them, in external profession, are within the Covenant. Genesis 17.10.
Faithful. Romans 4.11. Called. Act. 2.39. Herein the Answerer seems to agree
with me, yet afterward really differs about the means, whereby that
external profession is made, whence they may be denominated Christians. I deny
that the saying yae at the reading of the Liturgy of Baptism publicly, or the
nodding of the head, or some other gesture used by persons altogether unknown,
and that in such a place as Amsterdam, to make show of consenting to that which
is read (and it may be, they understand not) is sufficient proof of their
being Christians. He affirms it is. Let us see how he proves it.

1. The baptising of Turks, or Jews, Mahometists, or Heathens, or Infidells,
of what Nation or Sect soever, is not practiced, nor allowed in the Dutch
Church, and if any such case, or apparent cause of scruple had fallen out,
then, by the wrighting of the five ministers, it was permitted to Mr. D. to
have referred the baptism of such infants to further deliberation, and
judgment of the Eldership, or Classis. And therefore Mr. D. does unjustly call
it promiscuous baptising of all infants, without difference.

Reply. 1. I grant that the children of known Turks, Jews, etc. are not
admitted to Baptism, upon the parents saying yea, or nodding the head etc. nor
do any people so grossly, throughout the Christian world; yet nevertheless I
do justly call their manner of administering this Sacrament, in that place,
promiscuous baptising, for these Reasons. 1. Because, they profess to admit
all that are brought: and who knows not that there are of all nations and
Sects among them? 2. They take no course whereby it may appear that they make
a difference of persons, either before the dispensing of the Sacrament, to know
the parents, or in the time of administering, no other questions being put to
unknown strangers, then are put to the known members of other Churches, or
their own. 3. That, which with them passes for a profession of Christianity,
may be done by any Turk, Jew, or Infidel among them: for even they may nodd
their heads, or say yae, to they know not what, as well as others, if they have
a mind so to do. 4. Though the infants of known Jews, or Infidells are not
received, seeing no care is taken to know who they are, that are presented,
before they be brought in public, it may easily come to pass that a nurse, or
some other body (without the parents consent, or knowledge) may bring such
infants (and their manner is to admit them, by whomsoever they are brought) and
say yae, or nodd the head, in testimony of her consent, out of a superstitious,
and ignorant conceit, that, in so doing, she has made a Christian 5. The
Infants of many other persons are admitted to baptism, who have no right to
that ordinance, who are no Jews, nor Turks, of whom we have spoken in the 12
Section, in respect of whom also it may fitly be called promiscuous baptising.
6. Whereas he says, that, in a cause of apparent scruple I had liberty to take
the advice of the Eldership, or Classis, about baptising, or refusing those
that were brought. This does not at all salve the sore. For. 1. it is too late
to take advise, when I am put upon the action in public, I being in the
pulpit, as the manner is. 2. what cause of scruple can be apprehended to be in
one stranger more then in an other, all being alike unknown, and one and the
same form used to all, and all speaking the same word yae, or using the same
gesture, as nodding the head?

2. To prove that such a testification of faith and repentance, as that is, in
question, by saying yae, or some gesture of the body, is sufficient for
persons, otherwise altogether unkowne, to procure the admission of their
infants to have the seal of baptism, he pretends to say somewhat which now
we are to examine.

First. To prove that the word Yea is sufficient, he alleges first, Mat:
5.37. Let your communication be yea, yea, and Mat: 9.28. where, when our
Savior Christ asked the blind men, that came unto him for cure, Believe ye
that I am able to do this? They said unto him: Yea Lord. and Mat: 13.51. where
our Savior Christ, having opened diverse parables unto them, asked his
Disciples, Have ye understood all these things? They said unto him: Yea Lord*
and Ioh: 21.15. where Christ asked Peter, love thou me more then these? He
said unto him: Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee.

Reply. 1. I grant that the word, yea, in ordinary speech, serves to express
consent, 2. that it does so many times also in matters of Religion. But what is
this to the question? The question is not, whether men do by such an
expression testifye faith or repentance, but, whether such a testification be
sufficient to cause men otherwise altogether unknown, to be reputed in the
covenant, so far as to procure the admission of their children to Baptism?
The places alleged by him serve not for proof of it. For, 1. Let your
communication be yea, Mat. 5.37.
yea, is a rule for prevention of unlawful oaths, in ordinary discourse, not
for a trial of men's being in Covenant. 2. when Christ asked the blind men,
that came unto him for cure. Mat. 9.28.
Believe ye that I am able to do this? In them, yea, was a sufficient answer
in that case. 1. Because it was joined with suitable actions, as their
following him, crying to him, and saying. Verse. 27.
Thou son of David have mercy upon us. verse. 27. Wherein they continued,
following him into the house. 2. Which Christ accounted sufficient, who knew
what was in man, and witnessed, that they did inwardly believe, according to
that profession, in curing them, after he had said, according to your faith be
it unto you. verse. 29.30. V. 29.30.
To apply this. I grant that the word, yea, is sufficient to testifye their
being in Covenant, at the time of administering the Sacrament, who are
sufficiently known, by other trials, to have true faith; but, what is this to
those who are altogether unknown? For the 3. Where our Savior Christ, after
he had opened diverse parables, asked the Disciples. Have ye understood all
these things? They said unto him, Mat. 13.51.
yea Lord. Here is no speech about their being in the Covenant. What is this to
the matter in question? For, it is not denied, that by saying yea, men have
testified their faith, and sufficiently, if their faith has made it self
otherwise known, as it did in the Disciples, but it is denied to be a
sufficient testification of faith in persons who are otherwise altogether
unknown. The same answer may be given to that place in the fourth text, where,
to Christ demanding, Peter love thou me? Ioh. 21.15
Peter answered, yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee. And Christ did know
it, by his weeping bitterly for his denial of him, and by the inward
impression which he left upon Peter's heart, by his divine power, when he looked
upon him in the high Priests hall, and before. And so, to Christ it was
sufficient to say, yea Lord, and to referr himself to his knowledge of him.
But, will it thence follow, that it is sufficient for us, if any one shall say
so? These are the places which he noateth, for the use of the word, yea, and
the Reader may see, how little to the purpose. The same answers may serve to his
other texts concerning Amen, which are needlessly produced, and serve not at all
to prove the thing in question. As for his other proofs taken from short
expressions, as in making of Covenants, All that the Lord has spoken, we will
do, or the like, I marvayled much that the Answerer alleged those which make
wholly against him. For, 1. there is a great deal of binding force in this
expression, which is, in no sort, answered by the word, yea. 2. it was made by
a people whom God had chosen out, from all the world, to be his peculiar ones,
upon experience of the admirable passages of his fatherly providence, and upon
their acquaintance with his ways, unto whom, the people, against whom I have
excepted, are, in no sense, to be compared. 3. If the proof which himself
alleges out of Josh. 24.15.16. etc. be well examined, Josh. 24.15.16.17
18.19.20 21.22.23 24.25.
it will be found, that they not only understood the Covenant, whereunto they
bound themselves, in those short answers, but also, the Covenant was
propounded, and their assent to it required, in another manner, and with more
vehemence, then a mere once declaring of it, on Gods part, or one short answer,
on their part, seems to carry with it.

Secondly. To prove that nodding with the head, or some gesture of the body is
a sufficient testification of a man's being in the Covenant, so far as to
procure the admission of his child to baptism, he searched out the use of the
latin and greek words, which serve to express that gesture, and are used to
show the consent, or dissent of the will in any matter. But, to what purpose I
know not. For, it is not doubted that such words and gestures do signifye the
consent of the will, nor that they are used in the worshipping of God, nor that
solemn covenants and professions of special persons in the Church, are so
expressed, as the stipulation of ministers, Elders, and Deacons received into
office, and the profession of public repentance before the Congregation, are
accomplished with saying, yea, and some gesture of body. But, will all this
prove the point in question? Surely no. For, 1. the persons, in the forenamed
cases, are members of the Church, or sufficiently known to the Church, but
these are, neither of that Church, nor of any other, or not known to be such;
otherwise those expressions would not be judged sufficient, in a doubtful
case. 2. they know and understand what is propounded to them, and whereunto
they give such a testification of assent, which many of those, of whom the
question is, do not. 3. the profession, in those cases, is made by the parties
themselves, but in this, by any nurse, or other person, in the parents absence,
and yet those also are as unknown as the parents* yea, such parents and
sureties are so far from being known to be beleivers, that they are (many of
them) notoriously known to live, as without God in the world, in all loosenes
and profanenes.

In his third Answer he says, he comes more particularly unto the places of
Scripture alleged by me. I wish he may be found to do so, in the issue, that
we may find some ground for faith to rest upon.

1. For the first text Acts. 11.21.26. It is not professed by what words or
signs they professed their faith and conversion to God. How can it be proved
from hence, that such as said, yea, and bowed their heads and bodies, in
testimony of their approbation, and liking thereof, might not thereupon be
admitted to baptism, and their infants?

Reply. 1. It is enough that they satisfied the Apostles, that they believed
and turned to the Lord, and that they did so in truth appears by the
testimony which the Holy Ghost gives them in that place. It matters not by
what words, or signs, more or less, it was done: but, had there been no more
done then saying yea, or nodding the head, by persons otherwise altogether
unknown, it would not have satisfied. 1. Because faith and conversion to God
do appear, where they are, in more, and better fruits, and evidences then
those, as himself, I believe, would manifest, if he were to handle that text.
2. Because, more reverent and religious respect was had in those times to the
seals of the Covenant, then to pollute them by such a promiscuous dispensing
them, as is used in Amsterdam.

2. But, what an unreasonable demand is that? How can it be proved hence etc?
For, 1. I deny that such a saying of yea, can be proved, in the Apostles times,
to be a sufficient evidence of ones being a Christian, and allege this place
wherein Christians had their name given them at the first, wherein I find no
such thing. The proof lies upon him, who affirms it to be sufficient, not
upon me, who deny it. 2. The force of Negative Arguments from Scripture would
be none at all, if such answers were any thing worth. For, when, in arguing
against popish devises, we bring them to the rule, where no such thing is
appointed, or approved, by this evasion they might easily seem to answer any
such Argument. For instance, when, to show the unlawfullnes of chreame, oil,
spittle, exorcisme, etc. in baptism, we bring them to the institution, and to
primitive patterns, where such things were not appointed, nor approved, how
easily might they answer (as he does) how can it be proved from hence, that
such as used those things, sinned in so doing? 3. Suppose an Anabaptist should
put him to prove, from that text, that infants were baptized, or a Libertine
should put him to prove, from thence, that those that were to be baptized were
presented in the Congregation, would not he thinck himself unreasonably dealt
withal? To conclude, that place of Scripture sufficiently proves that for
which it was alleged, namely that beleiving and turning to the Lord, are the
characters of Christians, and that joining with a true particular visible
Church, where it can be done, is an evidence of beleiving and turning to the
Lord. For so I find them joined in that Text. Act. 11.26. Let him prove all
those, whose infants are admitted to baptism, in that place, to be such, as,
in respect of external profession, may, in the judgment of reasonable charity,
be judged such, and their saying yea, or nodding of the head, or bowing the
body, shall make no difference between us.

2. For the second text, Gen: 17.10. It can not be showed, says he, that more
questions were propounded, in old times, to circumcised parents, that brought
their children to be circumcised, then are now propounded to those that bring
their children to be baptized, or that circumcision was denied those who showed
their consent and willingness to embrace the Covenant, in such breife answers
and gestures, as we speak of.

Reply. 1. The end for which that text was brought was to show that none were
circumcised but the infants of those that were in the Covenant. How they
declared their embracing of the Covenant, if he demand, the Scripture elsewhere
shows, viz, by their joining with the Church of God, in walking according to
the laws delivered unto their fathers by the ministry of Moses. And this they
declared more by their works, in their ordinary conversation, then by words
at Circumcision. In which case, we will not much stand upon words, if the
parties are joined to any true Church, now under the Gospel, as they were then
to the Church of the Jews, under the Law. 2. This answer is as a sword,
wherewith he wounds his own cause. For, he says, they were circumcised
persons, wbo brought their children to be circumcised; and we know, that such
were of the Church of Jsraell. But many, for whose admittance he pleads, are
children of such parents as are of no Church, and some of them may be such, for
aught he knows, as never were baptized.

3. Text. Rom: 4.11. This Text was alleged to show that they must be
beleivers, at least one of them, in external profession, whose infants may be
admitted to baptism, which is (as Circumcision was) the seal of righteousness
that is by faith.

Against this he answers nothing, and hereby does tacitly and implicitly
confess, that the seal properly, and by due right, may be administered to none
but to beleivers, to whom the righteousness which is by faith appertains, so
far as men may, by the judgment of charity, conceive and apprehend, from
which, how far they are, against whom we except, is obvious to him that will
judge by a rule. Let us now consider what he says.

He says, Abraham is there called the Father of them that believe, whether
they were members of a visible Church or not. And, for aught we know, that were
not of his family, nor under the government or guidance of any particular
Church. If a son, or bondsman of Ephron, or of any Amorite, or Canaanite were
then brought unto the knowledge of the true God, why might not the infant of
such an one have been circumcised, though not living in a visible Church?

Reply. 1. All these words are besides the matter: For, if all he says were
granted, yet it proves not that all those may be called beleivers (and so
Christians) whom they admit to Baptism, which he should have done, if he
would have justified their custom of baptising their infants (under the name of
Christians children) who can not be accounted beleivers, according to the sense
of this text. 2. His wholl answer is made of mere conjectures, which cannot
establish the conscience of any man in a well grounded persuasion of the
warrantablenes of that action, concerning the lawfullnes whereof it doubts,
that it may be done in faith. Which to me is a clear evidence of his want of a
rule to bear him out therein, which if he could have found, his expressions
would not have been so conjecturall, and uncertain. 3. To the particular
conjectures.

First. Whereas he says, that Abraham is the Father of the faithful whether
they were members of a visible Church or not. That the vanity of his
conjecture, in reference to the matter in question, may appear, we must
consider the drift of the place, which is to confirm, what he had formerly
said concerning the special universality, or community of the subject of
justification, whereof he began to speak in Chap. 3. v: 22. and afterward
prosecuted v: 29. showing that one and the same God, is the God, both of the
Jews and of the Gentiles, and therefore does justifye them boath, one and the
same way, to wit, by faith, though the one be circumcised, the other not: which
he proves by the example of Abraham, to whom faith was imputed for
righteousness being uncircumcised, and, when he was circumcised, it was not that
he might be justified by circumcision, but that the righteousness, which he had
by faith being uncircumcised, might be sealed to him, by that sign. Now, in
that Abraham was justified by faith before he was circumcised, hence he became
the father of all those that believe, among the Gentiles, who are
uncircumcised: and, in that he was circumcised afterward, that the
righteousness of faith might be sealed to him: hence he became the father of
those who believed among the Jews, and were circumcised. Thence the conclusion
follows. Therefore, according to Abraham's example, righteousness is imputed to
those that believe among the uncircumcised Gentiles, as well as among the
circumcised Jews. But, in what order comes Abraham to be a father to the
beleiving Jew? In what sense is Abraham called their father? As he is an
example of faith. v: 12. and of righteousness imputed by faith, in this 11. v.
And they are called his children who are justified, according to his example,
by beleiving. And these his children are of two sorts. 1. Invisible to men, but
known to God only. Of these the question is not. 2. Visible to me^, in
respect of outward profession manifesting their faith. And, concerning these,
if the question be. In what order is he the father of a beleiving Jew, and he
his child? It will be answered, he must profess the faith of Abraham, and
testifye it, by being circumcised. Now, none were circumcised but those who
were joined to the visible Church of the Jews. In like manner, if it be
demanded. In what order is he visibly the father of a beleiving Gentile, and he
his child? The answer will be. He must receive baptism, a sign and seal of
righteousness by faith, which is come into the place of circumcision: and this
belongs only to those infants, whose parents testifye their faith, by being
joined to some visible Church among the Gentiles, as circumcision belonged to
those only, whose parents were joined to that visible Church of the Jews. So
that, though Abraham may be a father (in some sense) of many that believe, who
neither are joined to any Church, or baptized; yet visibly, and, (so far as
appears to men) he is not a father to such, much less to such as regard not
baptism, or refuse, wilfully, or carelessly neglect to be joined to a
particular visible Church. For, of those the question is. So much of his first
conjecture.

His second conjecture he thus expresses. For aught we can find, there might
be some beleivers in Abraham's time, not of his family, nor under the government
or guidance of any particular Church. Reply. To what use this conjecture
serves, I know not. It may be, there were, and, it may be, not. In such cases,
a man may safely be ignorant of that, concerning which the Scripture is silent.
But, suppose there were; what will he infer thence? That they were
circumcised, though not of the Jewish Church. How will that follow? There may
be many beleivers now, in some parts of the world, that are not yet baptized,
and so there might be beleivers then, that were not circumcised. If we speak
de posse, it will not be denied. What then? Will he gather thence that they
aught to be circumcised, though they were not of Abraham's family, nor joined
with that Church? I deny it, for this reason. Circumcision was a seal of the
Covenant which God made with Abraham concerning Christ that should come, as
concerning the flesh, of Isaac, and so of Jacob, of whom were the 12 tribes,
who were the Israelites, Rom: 9.4.5.
to whom pertayned the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the
giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises: whose are the
Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, as Paul shows. So
that, as in Abraham's time none were bound to be circumcised, but those that
were of his family, as being borne there, Gen: 17.12.13.
or bought, and so brought thither, which were not of his seed. So afterward,
none were bound to be circumcised, which were not borne in the family of Jacob,
and the Patriarchs, or joined to them: and after their coming out of Aegipt,
none were bound to be circumcised, but the children of the Jews, then the
only Church of God, and those that desired to join unto them.

His third conjecture is to as little purpose. If a son of Ephron the Hittite,
or of a Canaanite were brought to the knowledge of the true God, why might not
the infant of such an one be circumcised, though not living in a visible Church.

Reply. It concerns him to show and prove that he might. For I deny that
Circumcision, by Gods ordinance, belonged to any in Abraham's time, but to those
that joined with his family, or after his time, to any but to those that joined
with the only visible Church, that then was in his posterity, descending from
Isaac and Jacob, lineally; and this assertion I ground upon the institution of
Circumcision expressed in Genesis 17. But, as any one then so joining to that
Church might be circumcised, so now, they that profess a right faith, and
testifye it by joining with any Church so professing may be baptized.

The 4. Text is Act. 2.39. which was alleged to show that they must be
called; at least one of them, whose infants may be admitted to Baptism,
because the promise belongs only to such, whereof baptism is the seal. And
the context shows that those 3000 souls declared that they were called. 1.
By their being pricking in their hearts for crucifying Christ v. 37. 2. By
their joyful receiving the word that Peter spoke to them, concerning
repentance, baptism, the promise, and those other words, wherein he exhorted
them to save themselves from that froward generation. verse. 38.39.40. Which
joyful receiving of this word was declared by their joining together into a
Church communion, wherein they continued steadfastly, in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and prayers. verse. 42. And to this
Church the Lord added daily such as should be saved. verse. 47.

Now let us see what he says to this Text. He grants that the promise is
made unto such as are called. But concerning the characters of those that are
called, he seems too large in his judgment, for thus he says. Who can show
that such are not to be accounted outwardly called, and in some measure within
the privilege of the Covenant, who being themselves already baptized, and
withdrawing themselves from other sects and Churches, do bring their infants
unto the true Church to be baptized, being there also ready to make a public
profession of their faith before the wholl Congregation. Reply. That I may say
no worse, the answer is too slight, whether the subject of the question be
respected, or the words of the Text. For. 1, he supposes that they are persons
already Baptized. But, say I, how shall that appear in persons unknown, if
there be not liberty of a praecedent examination? 2. He supposes that they
withdrew themselves from other Sects. But, what advantageth it that a man
withdraw him self from all Sects, when he joyneth himself with no true
Church? Is not he as far from being justly accounted one that is called, who
is of no Religion, as he that is of a false Religion? Who knows not, that in
calling there are two terms, not only that from which men are called, namely
the kingdom and power of darkness, Romans 1.6 1. Cor. 1.2
but also that whereunto a man is called, namely the kingdom of Christ, which
is visibly set up in Church assemblies, whereunto when men have been orderly
joined, they are said to be called, Gal. 1.6. Coll. 3.15.
and to be called in one body: And so, how can a company of Atheists and
Libertines, who reject all Church communion, be accounted persons called, in
this sense? 3. He supposes that those persons thus withdrawing themselves from
all sects, bring their infants to the true Church to be baptized, whereas, 1.
it is not required in their manner of administering baptism, that the parent
present the infant, neither, is the parent at all inquired after: it suffices
if any one present it, though parents and presenters are alike unknown. 2.
They that bring the infant, do it not with respect to the truenes of the
Church, which they seldom understand, or regard, but because baptism is there
administered, and it is nearer the place where the child was borne, or for such
like respects. His 4 supposition is, that the persons, who present their
infants, are there also ready to make a public profession of their faith
before the wholl Congregation. Reply. 1. How can they be called their infants,
who, neither are their parents, nor have the education of them, and who, it may
be, shall scarce ever see them again after that time? 2. what profession of
faith is it to say yea, or to nodd the head at a few words, in the Liturgy,
which they understand not many times, or regard not when they are uttered, it
being done by persons otherwise unknown? It is a bad cause which must be
pleaded for after this manner, when the Advocate flies from it, and in part
hides it, as a thing whereof he is ashamed.

The 5. Text is, 1. Cor. 5.12. which was alleged to show that Church
ordinances, (i. e. ordinances which are given to the Church) belong only to
the members of some particular Church, which we apply to Baptism a pari, from
the parity between it and another Church ordinance, namely the Church
censures, whereof the Apostle speaks in that place, and limiteth only to
those that are within the Church, as belonging only to them, and not to those
without. Upon the same ground may I limit Baptism (which is another Church
ordinance) to those that are of a true Church and so within, excluding all
others from it, as men, in that respect, without. And herein what can be
denied? will they deny that Baptism is an ordinance belonging to the Church?
The Scripture is clear for it. Romans ^.^. Psalm. 146.20.

Will they deny that Church ordinances are limited to those that are in
communion with the Church? Reason is against it, taken from the title that is
given to the members of particular Churches, who are called Citizens with the
Saints and, of Gods household. Ephesians. 2.19.
Now the liberties of a city, or of a house, every man knows, are peculiar to
those who are incorporated into that city and family. What then? Will they deny
that there is the same reason of the Sacraments and of the Censures? Let them
show the difference in reference to those that are wholly without all Church
relation. And, in the mean space, let them consider the ground whereupon the
Apostle refuses to judge those infidells of whom he speaks. He says, it is
because they are without, thereby implying, that the reason why Church censures
did not belong to them, was, because they were not within the Church of
Corinth, nor any other, by a visible communion therewith. Now, if that reason
be good against the unbeleiving Corinthians, why will it not serve against any
others, that may be truly said to be without, in the same respect, though not
in the same degree. And, if the reason be sufficient, in respect of that
ordinance, why not of this also? seeing this is as proper and peculiar to the
Church as that, and in boath, the rule holds, Chrisost: lib. 3. de sacerd.
parium par est ratio. There is a like reason of things alike. And therefore
Chrisostom, upon this ground, that Baptism is given to the Church, as the
power of the keys is, inferres that Baptism is to be administered only by the
ministers as the keys of the Church are to be excercised and dispensed by
them, and not by every one of the people. This I noate, only to show how I
draw my Argument from this place, for the Answerers satisfaction, which he
might easily have perceived, if he had had a mind to see it. For Mr. Cartwright
saw it clearly, 1 Reply. p. 34. to the 4. differ: Demonst: of Disc: p. 31. ob.
5. Cas: Cons: lib. 4. C. 24 qu: 1. R: 5. Dr. Field of the Church. 1. book 12.
chap: Naz: panegyr: Bannes secund: secundae quest: 1. art: 10. Gall: Confess:
Harm: Sect: 13. Art: 35.
and used it to the same purpose. So did the Author of the Demonstration of
Discipline, So did Dr. Ames showing the necessity, for all Christians, of
joining to a particular Church. And, that Baptism belongs to those only who
are in external communion with a true Church, is not so strange a doctrine in
the Churches, whether of former or of latter times: For, former times did not
only deny baptism to those that were infidells, but also to others that were
not so far without, even to beleivers, whilst they were Catechumens; for
these were not thought to be far enough within, though they were in vestibulo
pietatis, and though they were merito in Ecclesia, as the Schoolmen speak,
yet, because they were not in it, numero, that is, though they deserved to be
admitted, yet, because they were not yet actually united with the Church, and
numbered amongst the members of it, they were not baptized. For latter times,
that which we have shown in the grant of Edw: 6. to Johannes a Lasco, for the
Churches of strangers, in the 12 Section, is sufficient. Whereunto may be added
the Confession of the French Church, in the Harmony of Confessions. But I
hasten to examine his pretended answer to that which, he says, is obscurely
objected from this place.

Three sorts of persons, he says, may be said to be without. 1. Those that
being members of a visible Church, are without faith. 2. Open infidells and
heathen. 3. Those who, not living under the discipline and government of some
particular Church, do yet make some profession of the same Religion with the
true visible Churches, and bring their children unto them to be baptized,
making solemn promise to bring up their children in the faith that is
professed in those Churches. These, he says, in special, are the persons that
in our question, are without.]

Reply. 1. Seeing himself excludes the two first from being comprehended in
this question, and limits it only to the last, I am content to let pass
whatsoever I might have collected out of those particulars. 2. For the third
sort I except against his implicit report of their practice, as imperfect and
defective. For, 1. he intimates that all, whose infants are baptized, make
profession of the same Religion with the true visible Churches, 2. That they
bring their children to be baptized. 3. That they solemnly promise to bring up
their children in the faith that is professed in those Churches, whereas, 1.
many of them do not know, what that Religion is, nor at all live according to
the rules of it, nor are joined to any of the Reformed Churches. And how can
such be said to profess the same Religion? 2. Many parents do not bring their
children to baptism, but some other body, as much unknown to the Church as
they are, bring the children, it may be with, it may be without the parents
knowledge or consent, for aught the Minister knows. 3. What promise do they
make that are absent, or that understand not the language, or that are
altogether ignorant of the faith that is professed in those Churches?

2. I demand of him, in what sense such persons may be said to be of such
Churches, who, neither live under the government of those Churches, nor so much
as hear the word at all amongst them, for aught any man knows, nor are in
any respect accounted amongst the members of those Churches, nor should be
received into visible communion with them, if they should offer themselves
thereunto, being neither able to give any account of their faith, nor testimony
of their good conversation.

3. Again I demand, why he pretends that they baptize only such as are
there described, when he knows, that many are admitted by them which are not
capable of that description? Is it not because he cannot plead for the
admittance of such, with any show of Reason? If not; Let him produce his
Arguments in defense of such promiscuous baptising, which yet he has not done,
or confess that he has done the Church, and me wrong in the opposition and
strife which he has injuriously raised, to deprive me of that relation,
whereunto I was called, for refusing to do that which he cannot prove to be
lawful. As for those, who, he says, though they are without (in respect of
joining with any Church) yet have more knowledge of the truth, and are more
frequent in attending upon the publick^worship of God, and are otherwise more
unblameable in their conversation, then some of those that are members of the
Church; his labor had been to better purpose, if he had indeavored to convince
them of the evil of this their neglect of joining to some particular Church,
that they might not rest contented in their present condition, to the apparent
hazard of their souls, that so they might, with good warrant from Gods order,
have partaked of the ordinances, which are given to the Church, by virtue of
their relation to, and communion with the Church, rather then thus to interest
them in those privileges wherein they have no right to communicate, in that
state wherein they stand, without violation of Gods order, as has been
formerly shown, and may be hereafter more plentifully, upon further
provocation. Though I had rather reserve the full handling of that to a
positive discourse which may, in due time, be published.

For the present, I pray the Reader to understand that, in all the examination
of these allegations of Scripture, the Answerer has drawn us from the true
question between him and me, which was not about limiting of baptism to the
members of a true Church, concerning which (whatsoever I intimated, in a word
or two, in my wrighting to the Classis) neither the ministers which were sent
by the Classis to speak with me, nor the Answerer at any time, first or last,
had any, the least word of difference with me, but both they and he required my
conformity to their custom of baptising all that are brought, in manner
aforesaid. So that this was not, but the other alone was the question between
us. So that it lies wholly upon him to prove the lawfullnes of that
promiscuous administration of baptism, which is in use among them, and to
convince me of sin for refusing to conform thereunto, which I expect that he
perform, in his next book, if he be able. But, if it be confessed to be
evil, and the question be^, how shall it be removed or cured, in such a place
as Amsterdam? I answer, disorders are best cured by introducing and settling
that order, in place of them, which appears to be most agreeable to Gods
revealed will, and that is, that baptism be administered only to such infants,
whose parents, one of them, at least, is a member of some particular visible
Church, and that Church privileges be denied to those that refuse
Church Communion.

For that which again he repeateth concerning me; it is but a colewort twice
sodd, and has been already answered, in examination of his descant upon the
first proof alleged by me, Act. 20.28.

His observations upon the protestation reveivved.
WHat care I had of his credit and peace himself declares in the first lines
of his observations, when he says, upon the coming forth of the book of
complaints against him, Mr. D. immediately sends out a protestation against it,
and signifyes he could have no rest in his spirit until he had resolved upon
this protestation. I did so indeed, and in so doing I showed my self more
tender of him, then he was of himself, or of me, and thereby deserved better
usage at his hands then I have found in many bitter passages of his book. The
special matters contained therein. he says, are a three fold Protestation,
and a threefold Confession, and a threefold Quaere, and a threefold Request. It
seems in deed so it fell out occasionally, without affectatio^ on my part,
either of observing odd numbers (as of 3) or of making them aequall (by being
cast into 4 rancks or orders) or of putting my discourse into such a mold or
frame.

1. For the threefold protestation.] The sum of it was, that I, neither
consented to, nor knew of, nor approved of the publishing of that pamphlet.
There is nothing in his five observations worth minding, and that has not been
already answered by me. Only the third is an observeable character of the
Answerers spirit, who fiercely stricketh at me for striving to save him from
the stroke of his Antagonist. For, he propounds it for an observation of a
just reward of the inordinate affection which the publisher showed, in
contending for me, in that by me, sentence is pronounced against him unknown,
for his injury done in printing. Any ingenious man would rather have observed
my sincerity and aequanimity, who, without respect of persons, witnessed
against evils in whomsoever, and my love of truth, which I praeferred above
particular respects to friends, when I was called to declare my self, and my
tender respect of him, in that, passing by all personal injuries received from
him, I made have, as the occasion required, to interpose, in favor of him,
against those, who, he says, contended for me. And that their contending for
me, in that case, was no evidence of their inordinate affection toward me,
has been already showed. And, by this passage, the Reader may see how
necessary it was that I should speak, so far as I might justly, in defense of
the subscribers and others in this cause, least, in his next book, he should
style it a just reward of their in ordinate affection to me, in that I had now
deserted them, and minded only mine own defense, as he traduceth me for
giving sentence against the publisher of the pamphlet unknown.

As for that he speaks of giving way to contentious spirits, with which title
he brandeth both the publisher and all the subscribers, enough has been
spoken, for the clearing of them, in the first and second Sections.

2. For the threefold Confession.] The sum of it was that, upon much
necessity and importunity of friends, I set down in wrighting some breife
answers to false reports spread abroad, which I left with a friend or two, to
communicate, in a private way, to those who were any way praejudiced unjustly
against me.]

His 11. observations, upon this passage, make a great show, but have no
substance in them.

1. He says, the complaints are already shown to be unjust.] They may seem
so to some, till my Reply shall be examined, and then they will be found, and,
by all indifferent Readers, acknowledged to be just.

2. He says, Injurious reports did not prevayle with him to answer them in
wrighting.] The first part of this speech is true. For I know not of any
injurious reports that were spread concerning him, and therefore things that
were not, could not provoke him to wright. But the second part is untrue, as I
have shown already, in that he wrote a large letter to a friend of his in
England, about the same time, when I wrote my breife answers, which contains
the substance of this book, so far as concerns matters of fact.

3. He admonishes men to beware of importunity of friends.] Solicitation of
friends, in some cases, is to be regarded, and followed, as in cases of this
nature, when friends solicit a man to discharge a bounden duty, such as the
declaring of the truth is, for the clearing of his own innocence, necessity
compelling thereunto.

4. He says, that to give a wrighting to two, might be as much as to give it
to twenty.] It might be so, and it might be not, as the men might be. But, in
this case, I am certain, it was not so.

5. He says, that my retayning of the original copy does not more excuse me,
then if he that made a libell, etc.] Nor did I allege it for an excuse (for
the fact needs no excuse, it being a manifest duty) but to show that
errors, and mistakes might be in the printed copy, which I could correct by
the original, which J had in mine own keeping, and so there were mistakes
indeed not a few. But how comes he to compare this to a libell seeing my name
was to it again and again expressed?

6. He denies that it was done, in a private way, because I say, let the
Reader judge, and that, it was done for the satisfaction of the members of the
English Church, etc.] Seeing I professed to wright it for satisfaction of those
Dutch or English, who were causelessly praejudiced, it must necessarily be
supposed that such must read it, and that I intended so: else, why did I wright
it? And what hindered but this satisfaction might be given in a private way,
notwithstanding that? Upon this occasion, he descants upon a picture printed in
the title page of that protestation, which suits with my dealing in that
matter, he says. A thing which J never observed in mine, till I read it in his
book, and enquiring into the reason of it, J found that the Printer dwells
at the sign of the Fame, and has such a picture before his door, and his
manner is to print it also, as his sign, in the books which he printeth. Was
not the Answerer well employed, when he spent his thoughts upon such descants?
How easily might I answer him (if I affected such vanities) with a like descant
upon the first letter of his praeface, which is a great C. the first letter of
Contention (as well as of Christian) where a man stands like a Champion with
his military weapons and troops, and thereupon fall into a vein of
conjecturing, 1. who that Champion is. 2. what those troops mean. 3. who
those two are at the foot of the C, and divided from it by the lower stroke of
it. 4. Why that dominering Champion points with his finger one way, and
casts his countenance another way, as it were, giving direction, concerning
those two men at the foot of the C, to one who seems to stand ready at his
beck, and then tell him that his dealing suites well with this emblem, in
these contentious passages. But I affect not to feed my self or others with
froth and scumme.

7. He says, the more private the way was, the greater was the injury to him.]
He says true, if it had been an untrue or needless report. But it was true,
and being so, the more public it is, the worse it will prove for him, I fear,
in the issue of the printed contests, but it is his own fault.

8. He says, I aught much more to have written for satisfying the members of
my Parish Church in London about my leaving them.] Thus he must kick, because
he is skittish. For, what is this to the protestation? I let pass his
scornful gird at my Parish Church in London, which (that I say no more) was
in no respect inferior to his Parish Church in Nantwijch; neither will I
answer by retorting a censure upon his Church in Amsterdam: nor indeed do such
strivings become the servants of Christ. But, how knows he whether I have
written to them, or not? And what need is there of my satisfying them about my
leaving them, which was done with their consent? And, if others disliked it, he
should have said, who they are, and upon what grounds they disliked it, or have
sent them to me, or directed me to them, that I might have satisfied them, as I
thought I had done him, and do persuade my self, that I did, though his
passion has thus distempered him causelessly, at present.

9. He quarrelleth my profession of my hoping and praying for that which I have
long expected, to wit, that God would sweetly order and dispose the spirits of
pastor and people, in that Church, to unity and concord, pretending that the
wrighting, which I made in mine own defense, served to provoke unto further
contention]. That wrighting served, in my intention, only to declare the
truth, upon urgent provocation and compulsion: and therein I was so far from
irritating any men's minds to strife, that I forbear the report of some things,
and mentioned other things sparingly, and favorably, contenting my self only
with showing that he did not desire me, but concealing how he hindered my
settling there, to prevent inconveniences. As for their complaining, which he
says, they learned by mine example: he cannot forget that this was not the
first cause, or time of their complaining, but that they had shown their
greivance for the like ill usage of others, before my coming to Amsterstam: nor
was he forced thereby to publish an Apology, seeing a private answer might have
been sufficient in that case, as has been shown.

10. He speaks suspiciously of those conclusions, and ways which, I hoped,
might be agreed upon, for their mutual peace and concord. What I mean by
them, he says, he knows not.] It was not my purpose to propound any
conclusions, or ways, for that purpose, but my hope was that God would direct
them, after he had prepared their hearts to humble themselves for former
miscarriages, and made them more pliable to his revealed will, then hitherto
they have seemed to be. He blames the order of my proceeding in this buisenes.
1. That I did not admonish the supposed offender alone, or with witnesses. But
enough has been done that way both by my self and others, to draw him from
the error of his way, without any good success. Nor did I substitute any
talebearers (such courses I abhor) but furnished two friends with Answers for
my defense, in case any should traduce me, or misreport matters. The other
passages in that answer have been already examined elsewhere, and declared to
proceed from no other cause, then needless and causeless jealousies, in his
own mind.

2. Whereas I profess my utter dislike of that pamphlet, both for the
unseasonablenes of the work, and for the unreasonable, and uncharitable
bitterness of the publisher, he seems to be discontented that I speak not
against the matter of the book, nor against the authors thereof.] But how
unjustly and vainly will be evident to him that shall consider 1. That my
protestation was only against the publishing of it, with such a title page,
and postscript, in which respects I called it a pamphlet 2. That the matter of
it, so far as it concerns me to examine, has been proved to be true in this
Reply. 3. None of those men (whom he mentions) had a hand in printing of it,
but W. B. only.

3. For the threefold Quaere.] His first observation is, that these three
Quaeres are confused and indistinct. Indistinct? when Paul confessed that he
had been injurious, 1. Tim. 1.13:
did he mean that he had been a buisy body? when the Apostle Peter warns
beleivers that none of them suffer as buisy-bodies in other men's matters, 1.
Pet. 4.15.
does he mean nothing else but as injurious persons, or sowers of discord?
when Solomon reckons up, among the things which God hates, Pro. 6.19
him that sows discord among brethren, does he mean nothing else then one
that is injurious, or a buisy-body? How slight is this challenge! But how
proves he that these terms are so indistinct? Because they all express the
same thing But that does not prove that they are indistinct, unless they
express the same thing under the same respect. Nay rather, for that reason,
they are distinct, because they serve to express the same thing, in different
respects, and so cause the apprehension to discern diverse evils in one,
according to the diverse considerations of it, every one of which serves to
aggravate it. But, is this a just reward of my pleading for him? Is this his
kindness to his Friend?

His second observation is to show wherein the publisher was injurious. This
the publisher himself has already answered, in print.

His third observation is to charge me with injuriousnes many ways, and this,
he says, according to my threefold Quaere. But, if my threefold Quaere do
indeed describe many ways of injuriousnes, then the terms are distinct, and
not so confused, as in his first observation he pretended, so that he has
already contradicted himself. But we will examine the particulars.

Ans: 1. For injuriousnes etc.

Reply. Here I may return upon him justly the accusation, which he unjustly
laid upon me of confused, and indistinct expressions. For, he says, the first
way of the many, wherein I have been injurious is, 1. for injuriousnes. Is this
an elegant expression, and worthy of him who is so quick in censuring? But I
take no pleasure in such jejune critical trifling. I mention it only to show
how unjustly he reproacheth me with confused and indistinct Quares, wherein
himself has found some distinction: else his wholl ensuing discourse is
confused and immethodicall. But, to come the matter.

He says that I have been injurious, and a sower of discord, and a buisy-body
for framing that wrighting, and leaving it in the hands of those two persons.

Reply. 1. Upon what necessity I wrote it, and how W. B. published it, without
my privity, has been shown already. Now, that it may appear how
sophistically he reasons, we will frame it into a Sylogisme.

He who leaves in wrighting, with a friend or two, a necessary and short
defense of his own innocence against injurious reports, which afterward is
shown to others, for their private satisfaction, by his appointment, or
published by any, without his consent, is injurious, a four of discord, and a
buisy-body.

But Mr. D. has left such a wrighting, which has so been shown, and
published. Therefore Mr D. is injurious, a sower of discord, and a buisy-body.

Is not this deep accusation, according to the threefold Quaere, soundly
proved? In his next book I expect that he prove his major Proposition, which
is false, and, till that be done, he lies bound (as by a threefold cable) in
the guilt of a threefold slander.

2. In that the Answerer labors to cast the blame of every man's miscarriage
upon me, and striveth to have me blamed, at least, as the occasion, if not as
the cause of publishing that pamphlet, against which I protested, the Reader
may see how far he is from the spirit of Beza, who dealt more favorably in a
case far more offensive. For, a scandalous book which Erastus made against
Ecclesiastical excommunication, was published, after the authors death, and
with it some private letters of other men. What did Beza in this case? Did he
fall foul upon those men for wrighting such things, and for giving occasion
thereby of having them published? No, but, in the praeface of his book against
Erastus, he labors to free him from all suspicion of causing it to be
published, till his widdow^s affirmation, that upon his deathbed he commanded
her, and bound her with an oath to publish it, made that impossible to be
hidden. Yet, even then, Reverend Beza carried the matter, as one that suspected
rather her truth, then her husbands guilt. And, whereas the evidence against
him might seem sufficient to some, yet he would suppose that, if his hand was
in it, it was done by him, non satis jam sibi constante, when he was not
himself, but distempered in his head, and sharpeneth his style, not against
Erastus the author, but against Castelvetrus the publisher for publishing
that, and with it, privatas magnorum virorum literas aliquot, certain private
letters of worthy men. Those worthy men were Bullinger and Gualter, whom he
honors with the title of great men, (as he did Erastus also styled by him,
vir clarissimus) notwithstanding their difference from him in judgment, about
that particular. And he gives a good reason of his tartnes against the
publisher. Because, to divulge such private wrightings quid aliud est quam
tollere e vita, vitae societatem, et amicorum absentium colloquia. What is it
else but to take from the life of man the society of his life, and the
conferences of absent friends? With what joy would Beza have embraced such an
occasion of clearing those men, as was put into the Answerers hands, if any of
them had printed a protestation against the publishing of that book, or of
those printed letters, though they had not shown any dislike of the matters
contained in it! But from contrary principles what can be expected but contrary
actions?

4. For the three fold request.] 1. My request to him was, that he would rest
satisfied with my ingenuous profession, in this particular. How he has
answered that, this book shows, and the accusation immediately preceding, in
his third observation, shows, and his own words in this place show: For,
when he cannot accuse me of causing the publishing of it, yet he will misjudge
my intention, as if, for my own credit, not for any respect to Religion, or to
him, I would not have it printed.

My second request was to the publisher, 1. to burn the pamphlet, 2. or to
affixe my protestation to it, in stead of a postscript, which seeing he did not,
I procured 450. as I take it, of the 500. to be bought, and kept up, the rest
having been sold before I could prevent it.

5. He adds that this my printed protestation contains in it a threefold
public provocation of him to answer my wrighting, more then he had before. As
the odd numbers which were made even by the method, whereinto my protestation
was accidentally cast, are now made odd again by this intimation of a
threefold provocation unjustly added thereunto: So the differences which I have
many ways labored to compose and reconcile, he has, by this contentious
book, and too much obstinacy in his way, continued and increased. That this is
added unjustly will appear in examining the several pretended provocations.

1. By my avouching that I wrote nothing but the truth in my declaration.]
Reply. It was necessary that I should wright so much. Else it would have been
thought that I was guilty of some untruth in that declaration, and therefore
protested against the publishing of it, which also the Answerer frequently
intimates in his suspicious manner of speaking, concerning traducing men in
the dark. And that whatsoever I there wrote is true, this Reply does witness
sufficiently. But what was there in that little which I wrote in that
declaration (which, except the letter to the Classis, was not half a sheet of
paper) to cause the publishing of a book of above 20 sheets of paper?

2. By intimating further matter which I have to add besides that which I have
already written.] Reply. This book declares it to be true which I then said,
and, upon further provocation, the next book shall show, with Gods assistance,
that I have yet much more to say, and that I have but sparingly replied in this.

3. Because this printed protestation makes all more public then they were
before.] Reply. 1. Both book and protestation were suppressed, after a few
copies of the protestation had been dispersed, in favor of the Answerer, to
free him (as much as in me lay) from any hurt that might come by the pamphlet,
to which end, I am informed, it was of use, and do not repent of that labor
of my love to the truth, though the Answerer have thus ill requited me, by
rendering evil for good, one while reporting that I made that protestation
only for my credit, being ashamed of what I had written, another while,
glorying that I printed the protesta^on, to keep him from answering my
wrighting, but I should not so escape.

Now if I should set down the provocations which he has given me to make his
reply, I might name 30 for 3. For the book it self, whereunto this reply is
made, is nothing else but a bundle of provocations. But, having thus
discharged, in some weak measure, a necessary duty, though unwillingly, I
rest, desiring rather, that, for the future, we may be more proffitably
excercised in considering one another to provoke to love and good works. And,
in that resolution and desire, I commend the issue of this unpleasing task to
the blessing of the only wise God, who knows how to bring order, out of
seeming confusion, and aedification to his Church, out of those very accidents
and events, whereby Satan seeks the ruin of it beseeching him to compose the
hearts of pastors and people every where (and in that place specially) to a
conscionable discharge of the duties of their relation mutually, and so
effectually to recover the Answerer out of these snares, by unfeigned
repentance, that his Elder years may be a crown of Glory, being found in the
way of righteousness, and the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made him
Overseer, may have plentiful cause of blessing God for making his old age fat
and flourishing in the blessed fruits of pastoral faythfullnes acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ! Amen.

FINIS.

