A PANEGYRIKE CONGRATVLATORIE TO THE KINGS MAJESTY. Also certain Epistles, By
SAMVEL DANIEL.

Carm^^ ai^^t quisquis carmina digna gerit. A PANEGYRIKE CONGRATVLATORIE TO HIS
MAJESTY.
1
LO here the glory of a greater day
Then England ever heretofore could see
In all her days. When she did most display
The Ensigns of her power, or whenas she
Did spread herself the most, and most did sway
Her state abroad, yet could she never be
Thus blesst at home, nor ever come to grow
To be entire in her full Orb till now.
2
And now she is, and now in peace therefore
Shake hands with Union, O thou mighty State,
Now thou art all great Britain, and no more,
No Scot, no English now, nor no debate:
No Borders but the Ocean, and the Shore,
No wall of Adrian serves to separate
Our mutual love, nor our obedience,
All Subjects now to one imperial Prince.
3
What heretofore could never yet be wrought,
By all the swords of power, by blood, by fire,
By ruin, and destruction, here is brought
To pass, with peace, with love, with joy desire:
Our former blessed union has begot
A greater union that is more entire,
And makes us more our selves, sets us at one
With Nature that ordained us to be one.
4
Glory of men, this have thou brought to us,
And yet have brought us more than this by far:
Religion comes with thee, peace, righteousness,
Judgment and Justice, which more glorious are
Then all thy Kingdoms, and art more by this,
Then Lord and Sovereign, more than Emperor
Over the hearts of men that let thee in
To more, than all the powers on Earth can win.
5
God makes thee King of our estates, but we
Do make thee King of our affection,
King of our Love, a passion borne most free,
And most vn-subiect to dominion:
And know, that England which in that degree
Can love, with such a true devotion
Those that are less than Kings, to thee must bring
More Love, who art so much more than a King.
6
And King of this great Nation, populous,
Stout, valiant, powrefull, both by Sea and Land,
Attemptiue, able, worthy, generous,
Which joyfully embraces thy command:
A people tractable, obsequious,
Apt to be fashioned by thy glorious hand
To any form of honor, to any way
Of high attempts, thy virtues shall assay.
7
A people so inured to peace, so wrought
To a successiue course of quietness,
As th'haue forgot (and O b'it still forgot,)
The nature of their ancient stubbornness;
Time altered has the form, the means, and brought
The state to that proportioned evenness,
As to is not like again to will ever come
(Being used abroad) to draw the sword at home.
8
This people, this great State, these hearts adore
Thy Scepter now, and now turn all to thee,
Touched with as powrefull zeal, and if not more,
(And yet O more, how could there ever be
Than unto her, whom yet we do deplore
Amidst our Joy?) And give us leave if we
Rejoice and mourn, that cannot without wrong,
So soon forget her, we enioyde so long.
9
Which likewise makes for thee, that yet we hold
True after death, and bring not this respect
To a new Prince from hating of the old;
Or from desire of change, or from neglect;
Whereby O mighty Sov'raigne, thou art told
What thou and thine are likely to expect
From such a faith, that does not haste to run
Before their time, to an arising Sun.
10
And let my humble Muse whom she did grace,
Beg this one grace for her that now lies dead,
That no vile tongue may spot her with disgrace,
Nor that her fame become disfigured:
O let her rest in peace, that ruled in peace,
Let not her honor be disquieted
Now after death: but let her Grave enclose
All but her good, and that it cannot close.
11
It adds much to thy glory and our grace,
That this continued current of our love
Runs thus to thee, all with so swift a pace;
And that from peace to peace we do remove,
Not as in motion put from out our place,
But in one Course, and do not seem to move,
But in more joy than ever heretofore,
And well we may, since thou will make us more.
12
Our Love we see concurres with Gods great Love,
Who only made thy way, thy passage plain,
Leuel'd the world for thee, did all remove,
That might the show but of a let retain:
Vnbarr'd the North, humbled the South, did move
The hearts of all, thy right to intertaine,
Held other States imbroyld, whose envy might
Have fostred factions to impugn thy right:
13
And all for thee, that we the more might praise
The glory of his power, and reverence thine,
Whom he has raisde to glorify our days,
And make this Empire of the North to shine:
Against all th'impious workings, all th'assayes
Of vile disnatur'd vipers, whose design
Was to imbroyle the state t'obscure the light,
And that clear brightness of thy sacred right.
14
To whose reproach, since the issue and success
Does a sufficient mark of shame return,
Let no pen else blazon their ugliness;
Be it enough, that God and Men do scorn
Their proiects, censures, vain pretendences:
Let not our Children that are yet unborn,
Find there were any offered to contest
Or make a doubt, to have our kingdom blesst.
15
Bury that question in the eternal grave
Of darkness, never to be seen again,
Suffice we have thee whom we ought to have
And to whom all good men knew did appertain
The Inheritance thy sacred birthright gave,
That needed n'other suffrages t'ordaine
What only was thy due, nor no decree
To be made known, since none was known but thee.
16
Witness the joy the universal cheer,
The speeede, the ease, the will, the forwardness
Of all this great and spacious State, how dear
It held thy Title and thy worthiness:
Haste could not post of speedy anywhere,
But Fame seemed there before in readiness,
To tell our hopes, and to proclaim thy name,
O greater then our hopes, more then thy Fame.
17
What a return of comfort do thou bring
Now at this fresh returning of our blood,
Thus meeting with th'opening of the Spring,
To make our spirits likewise to imbudde?
What a new season of encouraging
Begins t'inlength the days disposed to good?
What apprehension of recovery
Of greater strength, of more ability?
18
The pulse of England never more did beat
So strong as now: nor ever were our hearts
Let out to hopes so spacious and so great,
As now they are; nor ever in all parts,
Did we thus feel so comfortable heat,
As now the glory of thy worth impartes:
The whole complexion of the Commonwealth
So weak before, hoped never for more health.
19
Could thou but see from Dover to the Mount,
From Totnes to the Orchades, what joy,
What cheer, what triumphs, and what dear account
Is held of thy renown this blessed day,
A day which we, and ours must ever count
Our solemn festival, as well we may,
And though men thus court Kings still which are new,
Yet do they more, where they find more is due.
20
They fear the humors of a future Prince,
Who either lost a good, or felt a bad,
But thou have cleer'de us of this fear long since,
We know thee more, then by report we had,
We have an everlasting evidence
Under thy hand, that now we need not dread,
Thou will be otherwise in thy designs
Then there thou art in those judicial lines.
21
It is the greatest glory upon earth
To be a King, but yet much more to give,
The institution with the happy birth
Unto a King, and teach him how to live:
We have, by thee, far more then thine own worth,
That does encourage, strengthen, and relieve
Our hopes in the succession of thy blood,
That like to thee, they likewise will be good.
22
We have an earnest that does even tie
Thy Scepter to thy word, and binds thy Crown
(That else no band can bind) to ratify
What thy religious hand has there set down,
Wherein thy all-commanding Sov'raintie
Stands subject to thy Pen and thy Renown,
There we behold thee King of thine own heart
And see what we must be, and what thou art.
23
There great exemplare prototipe of Kings,
We find the Good shall dwell within thy Court;
Plain zeal and truth free from base flatterings,
Shall there be entertained and have resort:
Honest discretion that no cunning brings,
But counsels that lie right, and that import,
Is there received, with those whose care attends
Thee, and the State, more then their private ends.
24
There grace and favor shall not be dispos'de
But by proportion, even, and upright,
There are no mighty mountains interpos'de
Between thy beams and us, t'imbarre thy light,
There Majesty lives not as if inclos'de,
Or made a prey t'a private benefit:
The hand of Power deals there her own reward,
And thereby reapes the whole of men's regard.
25
There is no way to get vpto respect,
But only by the way of worthiness:
All passages that may seem indirect,
Are stopped up now, and there in no access
By gross corruption, bribes cannot effect
For th'undeseruing any offices:
Th'ascent is clean, and he that does ascend
Must have his means as clean as is his end.
26
The deeds of worth and laudable deserts,
Shall not now pass through the straight report
Of an imbasing tongue, that but imparts
What with his ends and humors shall comport:
The Prince himself now hears, sees, knows, what parts
Honor and Virtue acts, and in what sort,
And thereto gives his grace accordingly,
And cheeres up other to the like thereby.
27
Nor shall we now have use of flattery,
For he knows falsehoode far more subtle is
Than truth; baseness than liberty,
Fear than love, t'inuent these florishes:
And Adulation now is spent so nie
As that it has no colors to express
That which it would, that now we must be feign
T'unlearne that Art, and labor to be plain.
28
For where there is no care to be abused,
None will be found that dare t'informe a wrong,
The insolent deprauer stands confused,
The impious Atheist seems to want a tongue,
Transformed into the fashion that is used,
All strive t'appeare like those they live among;
And all will seem composed by that same square,
By which they see, the best and greatest are.
29
Such power has thy example and respect
As that without a Sword, without debate,
Without a noise, (or feeling in effect)
Thou will dispose, change, form, accommodate
Thy kingdom, people, rule, and all effect,
Without the least convulsion of the State,
That this great passage and mutation, will
Not seem a change, but only of our ill.
30
We shall continue one, and be the same
In Law, in Justice, Magistrate, and form,
Thou will not touch the fundamental frame
Of this Estate thy Ancestors did form,
But with a reverence of their glorious fame
Seek only the corruptions to reform,
Knowing that course is best to be obseru'de
Whereby a State has longest been preserved.
31
A King of England now most graciously,
Remits the injuries that have been done
T'a King of Scots, and makes his clemency
To check them more than his correction,
Th'annoynted blood that staind most shamefully
This ill seduced state, he looks thereon,
With the eye of grief, not wrath t'auenge the same,
Since The Authors are extinct that caused that shame.
32
Thus mighty rivers quietly do glide,
And do not, by their rage their powers profess,
But by their mighty workings, when in pride
Small Torrents roar more loud, and work much less:
Peace Greatness best becomes: calm power does guide
With a far more imperious stateliness,
Then all the force of violence can do,
And easier gains those ends she tends unto.
33
Then England, thou have reason thus to cheer,
Reason to joy, and triumph in this wise,
When thou shall gain so much, and have no fear
To loose aught else but thy deformities:
When thus thou shall have health and be set clear
From all thy great infectious maladies,
By such a hand that best knows how to cure,
And where most lie those griefs thou do endure.
34
When thou shall see there is another grace
Then to be rich; Nam vbi cupido diuitiarum inuasit, neque disciplina, neque
arts bonae, neque ingenium vllum satis pollet.
another dignity
Then money: other means for place
Then gold: wealth shall not now make honesty;
When thou shall see the estimation base
Of that which most aflicts our misery:
Without the which, else could thou never see
Our ways laid right, not men themselves to be.
35
By which improouement we shall gain much more
Then by Peru, or all discoueries;
For this way to imbase, is to instore
The treasure of the land, and make it rise:
This is the only key t'unlocke the door,
To let out plenty that it may suffice,
For more then all this I Will, for more increase
Of Subjects then, by thee, there can increase.
36
This shall make room, and place enough for all,
Which other wise would not suffice a few,
And by proportion Geometrical
Shall so dispose to all, what shall be due:
As that without corruption, wrangling, brawle,
Intrusion, wresting, and by means undue,
Desert shall have her charge, and but one charge,
As having but one body to discharge.
37
Whereby the all-incheering Majesty
Shall come to shine at full in all her parts,
And spread her beams of comfort equally,
As being all alike to like deserts;
For thus to check, imbase and vilify
Th'esteeme of wealth, will fashion so our hearts
To worthy ends, as that we shall by much
More, labor to be Good, then to be Rich.
38
This will make peace with Law, restore the Bar
T'her ancient silence, where Contention now
Makes so confused a noise, this will debar
The fostring of debate, and overthrow
That ougly monster that foul rauener
Extortion, which so hideously did grow,
By making prey upon our misery,
And wasting it again as wickedly.
39
The strange examples of impou'rishments,
Of sacrilege, exactions, and of waste,
Shall not be made nor held as presidents
For times to come, but end with th'ages past:
Whenas the State shall yield more suppliments
(Being well employed) then Kings can well exhaust;
This golden meadow lying ready still
Then to be mowed, when their occasions will.
40
Favor, like pity, in the hearts of men
Have the first touches ever violent,
But soon again it comes to languish, when
The motive of that humor shall be spent:
But being still fed with that which first has been
The cause thereof, it holds still permanent,
And is kept in, by course, by form, by kind,
And Time begets more ties that still more bind.
41
The broken frame of this disioynted State,
Being by the bliss of thy great Grandfather,
Henry the seventh, restored to an estate
More sound then ever, and far stedfaster,
Owes all it has to him, and in that rate
Stands bound to thee that art his successor:
For without him it had not been begun,
And without thee, we had been now undone.
42
He, of a private man, became a King,
Having endured the weight of tyranny;
Mourned with the world, complained and knew the thing
That good men wish for in their misery
Under ill Kings: saw what it was to bring
Order and Form to the recovery
Of an unruly State: conceived what cure
Would kill the cause of this distemp'rature.
43
Thou, borne a King, have in thy State, endured
The sour affronts of private discontent
With subjects broiles; and ever been inured
To this great mystery of government:
Whereby thy Princely wisdom has allured
A State to peace, left to thee turbulent:
And brought us an addition to the frame
Of his great work, squared fitly to the same.
44
And, both you (by the all-working providence
That fashions out of dangers, toils, debates,
Those whom it has ordained to commence
These first, and great establishments of States)
Came when your aid, your powers experience
(Which out of judgment best accommodates
These joints of rule) was more then most desired,
And when the times of need the most required.
45
And as he laid the model of this frame,
By which was built so strong a work of State,
As all the powers of changes in the same;
All that excess of a disordinate
And lustful Prince: nor all that after came,
Nor Child, nor stranger, nor yet women's fate,
Could once disioynt the couplements, whereby
It held together in just Symetry.
46
So thou likewise art come as fore-ordain'd
To reinforce the same more really,
Which oftentimes has been but entertained
By the only style, and name of Majesty:
And by no other counsels often attained
Those ends of her inioy'd tranquillity,
Then by this form, and by th'incumbrances
Of neighbor states that gave it a success.
47
That had thou had no title (as thou have
The only right, and none has else a right)
We yet must now have been inforcde to have cast
Our selves into thy arms, to set all right;
And to auert confusion, bloodshed, waste,
That otherwise upon us needs must light:
None but a King, and no King else beside
Could now have saved this State from being destry'd.
48
Thus has the hundredth year brought back again
The sacred blood lent to adorn the North,
And here returned it with a greater gain,
And greater glory than we sent it forth:
Thus does th'all-working Providence retain,
And keep for great effects the seed of worth,
And so does point these stops of time thereby,
In periods of uncertain certainty. It is just a hundred years since the Lady
Margaret was married to JAMES the fourth, King of Scots.

49
Margaret of Richmond (glorious Grandmother
Unto that other precious Margaret,
From whence The Almighty worker did transfer
This branch of peace, as from a root well set)
Thou mother, author, plotter, Councellor
Of union, that did both conceive, beget,
And bring forth happiness to this great State,
To make it thus entirely fortunate:
50
O could thou now but view this fair success,
This great effect of thy religious work,
And see therein how God has pleased to bless
Thy charitable Councels, and to work
Still greater good out of the blessedness
Of this conjoined Lancaster and York:
Which all conioyn'd within, and those shut out,
Whom nature and their birth had set without.
51
How much have thou bound all posterities
In this great work, to reverence thy name?
And with thee, that religious, faithful, wise,
And learned Mourton who contrived the same,
And first advised, and did so well advise,
As that the good success that thereof came,
Shewdwel, that holy hands, clean thoughts, clear hearts
Are only fit to act such glorious parts.
52
But Muse, these dear remembrances must be
In their convenient places registered,
When thou shall bring stern Discord to agree,
And bloody war unto a quiet Bed:
Which work must now be finished by thee:
That long has layne undone, as destined
Unto the glory of these days, for which
Thy vows and verse have labored so much.
53
Thou ever have opposed all thy might
Against contention, fury, pride and wrong,
Persuading still to hold the course of right,
And Peace has been the burden of thy Song,
And now thy self shall have the benefit
Of quietness which thou have wanted long,
And now shall have calm peace, and vnuion,
With thine own wars, and now thou must go on.
54
Only the joy of this so dear a thing
Made me look back unto the cause, whence came
This so great good, this blessing of King,
When our estate so much required the same,
When we had need of power for the well-ord'ring
Of our affairs: need of a Spirit to frame
The world to Good, to Grace and worthiness,
Out of this humor of Luxuriousness.
55
And bring us back unto our selves again,
Unto our ancient native modesty,
From out these foreign sins we entertain,
This loathsome surfets ougly Gluttony,
From this unruly and this idle vain
Of wanton and superfluous bravery,
The wrack of Gentry, spoil of Nobleness,
And spare us by thy temp rate Soberness.
56
When Abstinence is fashioned by the Time,
It is no rare thing to be abstinent,
But then it is, when The Age full fraught with crime
Lies prostrate unto all misgouernment.
And who is not licencious in the prime
And heat of youth, nor then incontinent
When out of might he may, he never will;
No power can tempt him to that taste of ill.
57
Then what are we t'expect from such a hand
That does this stern of fair example guide?
Who will not now shame to have no command
Over his lusts? Who would be seen to abide
Unfaithful to his vows; to infringe the band
Of a most sacred knot which God has tide?
Who would now seem to be dishonored
With the unclean touch of an unlawful bed?
58
What a great check will this chaste Court be now
To wanton Courts debaucht with Luxury?
Where we no other Mistresses shall know
But her to whom we owe our loyalty:
Chaste Mother of our Princes whence do grow
Those righteous issues, which shall glorify
And comfort many Nations with their worth,
To her perpetual grace that brought them forth.
59
We shall not fear to have our wives distained,
Nor yet our Daughters violated here
By an Imperial lust, that being vnrain'd
Will hardly be resisted any where.
He will not be betrayed with ease, nor trained
With idle rest, in soft delights to wear
His time of life. But knows whereto he tends,
How worthy minds are made for worthy ends.
60
And that this mighty work of union now
Begun with glory, must with grace run on
And so be closed, as all the joints may grow
Together firm in due proportion;
A work of power and judgment that must show
All parts of wisdom, and discretion
That man can show: that no clowd may impair
This day of hope, whose morning shows so fair.
61
He has a mighty burden to sustain
Whose fortune does succeed a gracious Prince,
Or where men's expectations intertaine
Hopes of more good, and more beneficence:
But yet he undergoes a greater pain,
A more laborious work, who must commence
The great foundation of a Government,
And lay the frame of order, and content.
62
Especially where men's desires do run
A greedy course of eminency, gain,
And private hopes; weighing not what is done
For the Republicke, so themselves may gain
Their ends, and where few care who be undone,
So they be made, whilst all do entertain
The present motions that this passage brings
With the infancy of change, under new Kings.
63
So that the weight of all seems to rely
Wholly upon thine own discretion,
Thy judgment now must only rectify
This frame of pow're, thy glory stands upon:
From thee must come, that thy posterity
May joy this Peace, and hold this union:
For whilst all work for their own benefit,
Thy only work must keep us all upright.
64
For did not now thy full maturitie
Of years and wisdom, that discern what shows,
What art, and colors, may deceive the eye,
Secure our trust that that clear judgment knows
Upon what grounds depend thy Majesty,
And whence the glory of thy greatness grows,
We might distrust least that a side might part
Thee from thy self, and so surprise thy heart.
65
Since th'arte but one, and that against thy breast
Are laid all th'ingins both of Skill and Wit
And all the assaults of Cunning are addresst
With stratagems of Art to enter it:
To make a prey of grace, and to inuest
Their powers within thy love, that they might sit,
And stir that way which their affection tends,
Respecting but themselves, and their own ends.
66
And see'ng how difficult a thing it is
To rule, and what strength is required to stand,
Against all the'interplac'd respondences
Of combinations, set to keep the hand
And eye of power from out the provinces,
That Avarice may draw to her command,
Which, to keep hers, she others vows to spare,
That they again to her might use like care.
67
But God that raised thee up to act this part,
Has given thee all those powers of worthiness,
Fit for so great a work, and framed thy heart
Discernible of all apparences:
Taught thee to know the world, and this great Art
Oford'ring man, Knowledge of Knowledges,
That from thee, men might reckon how this State
Became restored, and was made fortunate.
68
That thou the first, with us, in name, might be
The first in course, to fashion us anew,
Wherein the times has offered that to thee,
Which seldom the other princes could accrue:
Thou have the advantage only to be free,
T'imploy thy favors where they shall be dew,
And to dispose thy grace in general,
And like to Jove, to be alike to all. Est Jupiter omnibus idem.

69
Thy fortune has indebted thee to none,
But t'all thy people universally,
And not to them, but for their love alone,
Which they account is placed worthily:
Nor will thou now frustrate their hopes, whereon
They rest, nor they fail in their loyalty;
Since no Prince comes deceived in his trust,
But he that first deceiues, and proves unjust.
70
Then since we are in this so fair a way
Of Restoration, Greatness and Command,
Cursed be he that causes the least stay
In this fair work, or interrupts thy hand,
And cursed he that offers to betray
Thy graces, or thy goodness to withstand,
Let him be held abhorred, and all his race
Inherit but the portion of disgrace.
71
And he that shall, by wicked Offices,
Be the author of the least disturbancie,
Or seek to auert thy godly purposes,
Be ever held the scorn of infamy:
And let men but consider their success
Who Princes loves abused presumptuously,
They shall perceive their ends do still relate,
That sure God loves them not whom men do hate.
72
And it is just, that they who make a prey
Of Princes favors, in the end again,
Be made a prey to Princes, and repay
The spoils of misery with greater gain;
Whose sacrifices ever do allay
The wrath of men, conceived in their disdain:
For that their hatred prosecuteth still,
More then ill Princes, those that make them ill.
73
But both thy judgment and estate does free
Thee, from these powers of Fear and Flattery,
The conquerours of Kings, by whom we see
Are wrought the acts of all impiety:
Thou art so set, as thou have no cause to be
Jealous, or dreadful of disloyalty,
The pedestall whereon thy Greatness stands,
Is built of all our hearts, and all our hands.
TO SIR THO: EGERTON KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT SEAL OF ENGLAND.
Well has the powreful hand of Majesty,
Thy worthiness, and Englands hap beside,
Set thee in the aidfulst room of dignity,
As the Isthmus, these two Oceans to divide
Of Rigor and confused Uncertainty,
To keep out th'entercourse of wrong and pride,
That they ingulph not up vnsuccoured right
By the extreme current of licencious might.
Now when we see the most combining band,
The strongest fasting of society
Law, whereon all this frame of men does stand,
Remain concussed with uncertainty,
And seem to foster rather than withstand
Contention, and embrace obscurity,
Only t'afflict, and not to fashion us,
Making her cure far worse than the disease.
As if she had made covenant with Wrong,
To part the prey made on our weaknesses,
And suffered Falsehood to be armed as strong
Unto the combat as is Righteousness,
Or suited her, as if she did belong
Unto our passions, and did even profess
Contention, as her only mystery,
Which she restraines not, but does multiply.
Was she the same sh'is now in ages past,
Or was she less when she was used less?
And grows as malice grows, and so comes cast
Just to the form of our unquietness?
Or made more slow, the more that strife runs fast,
Staying t'undo us ere she will redress?
That the will she checks seems suffered to be ill,
When it yields greater gain than goodness will.
Must there be still some discord mixed among
The Harmony of men, whose mood accords
Best with Contention, tuned t'a note of wrong,
That when war fails, peace must make war with words,
And b'arm'd unto destruction even as strong,
As were in ages past our civil swords;
Making as deep, although vnbleeding wounds,
That when as fury fails, wisdom confounds.
If it be wisdom, and not cunning, this
Which so imbroyles the state of truth with brawles,
And wrappes it up in strange confusednesse
As if it lived immured within the walls,
Of hideous terms framed out of barbarousnesse
And foreign Customs, the memorials
Of our subjection, and could never be
Deliu'red but by wrangling subtlety.
Whereas it dwells free in the open plain,
Vncurious, Gentile, easy of access:
Certain unto it self, of equal vain,
One face, one color, one assuredness;
It Is Falsehood that is intricate, and vain,
And needs these laborinths of subtilnesse.
For where the cunningst cou'rings most appear
It argues still that all is not sincere.
Which thy clear eyed experience well discries,
Great Keeper of the state of Equity,
Refuge of mercy, upon whom relies
The succor of oppressed misery:
Altar of safegarde, whereto affliction flies
From th'eger pursuit of severity:
Haven of Peace, that labourst to withdraw
Justice, from out the tempests of the Law.
And set her in a calm and even way,
Plain and directly leading to redress,
Barring these counter-courses of delay
These wasting dilatorie processes:
Ranging into their right, and proper ray,
Errors, demurs, essoines; and trauerses,
The heads of Hydra springing out of death
That gives this Monster malice still new breath.
That what was made for the utility.
And good of man, might not be turned to his hurt
To make him worser by his remedy,
And cast him down, with what should him support:
Nor that the State of Law might loose thereby
The due respect, and reu'rence of her port,
And seem a trap to catch our ignorance
And to entangle our intemperance.
Since her interpretations and our deeds,
Unto a like infinity arise,
As being a Science, that by nature breeds
Contention, strife and ambiguities:
For altercation controversy feeds,
And in her agitation multiplies:
The field of Cauell lying all like wide,
Yealds like advantage unto either side.
Which made the grave Castillian King devise
A prohibition, Ferdinand king of Castile.
that no Advocate
Should be conuaid to the Indian Colonies,
Lest their new setting, shaken with debate,
Might take but slenderroote, and so not rise
To any perfect growth of firm estate,
For having not this skill, how to contend,
Th'vnnourisht strife would quickly make an end.
So likewise did th'Hungarian, when he saw
These great Italian Bartolists, The king of Hungary.
who were
Called in, of purpose to explane the Law,
T'imbroyle it more, and make it much less clear,
Caused them from out his Kingdom to withdraw
With this infestious skill someother-where:
Whose learning rather let men farther out, Difficultatem facit doctrinae.

And opened wider passages of doubt.
Seeing even Injustice may be regulare;
And no proportion can there be betwixt
Our actions which in endless motion are
And th'Ordinances which are always fixed.
Ten thousand Laws more, cannot reach so far,
But Malice goes beyond, or lives immixt
So close with goodness, as it ever will
Corrupt, disguise or counterfeite it still.
And therefore did those glorious Monarchs, (who
Divide with God the Style of Majesty
For being good, and had a care to do
The world right, and succor honesty)
Ordain this sanctuary whereunto
The Oppressed might fly, this seat of Equity
Whereon thy virtues sit with fair renown,
The greatest grace and glory of the Gown.
Which Equity being the soul of Law
The life of Justice, and the Spirit of right,
Dwell's not in written Lines, or lives in awe
Of Books; deaf powers that have nor ears, nor sight:
But out of well-weigh'd circumstance does draw
The essence of a judgment requisite:
And is that Lesbian square, that building fit,
Plies to the work, not forc'th the work to it.
Maintaining still an equal parallel
Just with th'occasions of humanity,
Making her judgments ever liable
To the respect of peace and amity:
When surly Law, stern, and vnaffable,
Cares only but it self to satisfy:
And often, innocence skarse defends,
As that which on no circumstance depends.
But Equity that bears an even rain
Upon the present courses, holds in awe,
By giving hand alittle, and does gain
By a gentle relaxation of the Law;
And yet inviolable does maintain
The end whereto all constitutions draw;
Which is the welfare of society
Consisting of an upright policy.
Which first being by Necessity composed,
Is by Necessity maintained in best estate, Necessitas est lex temporu^.

Where, whenas Justice shall be ill disposed
It sickens the whole body of the State:
For if there be a passage once disclosed
That Wrong may enter at the selfsame gate
Which serves for Right, cladde in a coat of Law,
What violent distempers may it draw?
And therefore do thou stand to keep the way,
And stop the course that malice seeks to run
And by thy provident Injunctions stay
This never ending Altercation;
Sending contention home, to the end men may
There make their peace, whereas their strife begun:
And free these pestred streets they vainly wear
Whom both the State, and theirs, do need elsewhere.
Lest th'humor which does thus predominate
Convert unto it self all that it takes;
And that the law grow larger then debate,
And come t'exceede the affairs it undertakes:
As if the only Science of the State
That took up all our wits for gain it makes;
Not for the good that thereby may be wrought
Which is not good if it be dearly bought.
What shall we think when as ill causes shall
Enrich men more, and shall be more desired
Then good, as far more beneficial?
Who then defends the good? who will be hired
To intertaine a right, A remedy for defending ill causes.
whose gain is small?
Unless the Advocate that has conspired
To plead a wrong, be likewise made to run
His Clients chance, and with him be vndunne.
So did the wisest nations ever strive
To bind the hands of Justice up so hard,
That lest she falling to prove Lucratiue
Might basely reach them out to take reward:
Ordaining her provisions fit to live
Out of the public as a public Guard
That all preserues, and all does entertain,
Whose end is only glory, and not gain.
That even the Scepter which might all command,
Seeing her s' impartial, equal, regulare,
Was pleased to put it self into her hand;
Whereby they both grew more admired far.
And this is that great blessing of this land,
That both the Prince and people use one Bar,
The Prince, whose cause, (as not to be withstood)
Is never badde but where himself is good.
This is that Balance which committed is
To thy most even and religious hand;
Great Minister of Justice, who by this
Shall have thy name, still gracious in this land:
This is that seal of pow're which does impresse
Thy Acts of right, which shall for ever stand:
This is that train of State, that pompously
Attends upon thy reu'rent dignity.
All glory else besides, ends with our breath,
And men's respects scarce brings us to our grave:
But this of doing good, must out-liue Death,
And have a right out of the right it gave:
Though the act but few, the example profits
Thousands, that shall thereby a blessing have.
The worlds respect grows not but on deserts,
Power may have knees, but Justice has our hearts.
TO THE LORD HENRY HOWARD, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCEL.
PRaise, if it be not choice, and laid aright,
Can yield no luster where it is bestowde,
Nor any way can grace the giuers Art,
(Tho'it be a pleasing color to delight,)
For that no ground whereon it can be showed
Will bear it well, but Virtue and Desert.
And though I might commend your learning, wit,
And happy vttrance, and commend them right,
As that which decks you much, and gives you grace,
Yet your clear judgment best deserves it,
Which in your course has carried you upright,
And made you to discern the truest face,
And best complexion of the things that breed
The reputation and the love of men.
And held you in the tract of honesty
Which ever in the end we see succeed,
Though often it may have interrupted bin,
Both by the times and men's iniquity.
For sure those actions which do fairly run
In the right line of Honor, still are those
That get most clean, and safest to their end,
And pass the best without confusion,
Either in those that act or else dispose,
Having the scope made clear whereto they tend.
When this by-path of cunning does s'imbroile
And intricate the passage of affairs,
As that they seldom fairly can get out;
But cost, with less success, more care and toil
Whilst doubt and the distrusted cause impaires
Their courage, who would else appear more stout.
For though some hearts are builded so, that they
Have diverse doors, whereby they may let out
Their wills abroad without disturbancie,
Int'any course, and into every way
Of humor, that affection turns about,
Yet have the best but one to have passage by.
And that so surely warded with the Guarde
Of Conscience and respect, as nothing must
Have course that way, but with the certain pass
Of a perswasiue right, which being compard
With their conceit, must thereto answer just,
And so with due examination pass.
Which kind of men, raised of a better frame
Are mere religious, constant and upright,
And bring the ablest hands for any' effect,
And best bear up the reputation, fame
And good opinion that the Action's right,
When th'vndertakers are without suspect.
But when the body of an enterprise
Shall go one way, the face another way,
As if it did but mock a weaker trust,
The motion being monstrous cannot rise
To any good, but falls down to bewray
That all pretenses serve for things unjust.
Especially where th'action will allow
Apparancie, or that it has a course
Concentrike with the Universal frame
Of men combind, whom it concerns how
These motions turn and intertaine their force,
Having their being resting on the same.
And be it, that the vulgar are but gross
Yet are they capable of truth, and see,
And sometimes guess the right, and do conceive
The Nature of that text, that needs a gloss,
And wholly never can deluded be,
All may a few, few cannot all deceive.
And these strange disproportions in the train
And course of things, do evermore proceed
From th'ill-set disposition of their minds,
Who in their actions cannot but retain
Th'incumbred forms which do within them breed,
And which they cannot show but in their kinds.
Whereas the ways and counsels of the Light,
So sort with valor and with manliness,
As that they carry things assuredly
Vndazeling of their own or others sight:
There being a blessing that does give success
To worthiness, and unto constancy.
And though sometimes the event may fall amiss,
Yet shall it still have honor for the attempt,
When Craft begins with fear, and ends with shame,
And in the whole design perplexed is.
Virtue, though luckelesse; yet shall skape contempt,
And though it has not hap, it shall have fame.
TO THE LADY MARGARET COUNTESS OF CVMBERLAND.
HE that of such a height has built his mind,
And reared the dwelling of his thoughts so strong
As neither Fear nor Hope can shake the frame
Of his resolved powers, nor all the wind
Of Vanity or Malice, pierce to wrong
His settled peace, or to disturb the same,
What a fair seat has he from whence he may
The boundless wastes, and weilds of man suruay.
And with how free an eye does he look down,
Upon these lower Regions of turmoyle,
Where all these storms of passions mainely beat
On flesh and blood, where honor, power, renown
Are only gay afflictions, golden toil,
Where Greatness stands upon as feeble feet
As Frailty does, and only great does seem
To little minds, who do it so esteem.
He looks upon the mightiest Monarchs wars
But only as on stately robberies,
Where evermore the fortune that preuailes
Must be the right, the ill-succeeding marres
The fairest and the best-fac't enterprise:
Great Pyrat Pompey lesser Pirates quails,
Justice, he sees, as if seduced, still
Conspires with power, whose cause must not be ill.
He sees the face of Right t'appeare as manyfold
As are the passions of uncertain man,
Who puts it in all colors, all attires
To serve his ends, and make his courses hold:
He sees that let Deceit work what it can,
Plot and contriue base ways to high desires,
That the all-guiding Providence does yet
All disappoint, and mockes this smoke of wit.
Nor is he moved with all the thunder crackes
Of Tyrants threats, or with the surly brow
Of power, that prowdly sits on others crimes,
Chardg'd with more crying sins, then those he checks:
The storms of sad confusion that may grow
Up in the present, for the cumming times,
Appall not him, that has no side at all
But of himself, and knows the worst can fall.
Although his heart so near allied to earth,
Cannot but pity the perplexed State
Of troublous, and distressed mortality,
That thus make way unto the ougly birth
Of their own sorrows, and do still beget
Affliction upon imbecilitie:
Yet seeing thus the course of things must run,
He looks thereon, not strange, but as foredun.
And whilst distraught Ambition compasses
And is incompast, whilst as craft deceiues
And is deceived, whilst man does ransack man
And builds on blood, and rises by distress,
And the inheritance of desolation leaves
To great expecting hopes, he looks thereon
As from the shore of peace with vnwet eye
And bears no venture in impiety.
Thus, Madame, fares the man that has prepared
A rest for his desires, and sees all things
Beneath him, and has learned this book of man,
Full of the notes of frailty, and compared
The best of glory with her sufferings,
By whom I see you labor all you can
To plant your heart, and set your thought as near
His glorious mansion, as your powers can bear.
Which, Madame, are so soundly fashioned,
By that clear judgment that has carried you
Beyond the feeble limits of your kind,
As they can stand against the strongest head
Passion can make, invr'd to any hew
The world can cast, that cannot cast that mind
Out of her form of goodness, that does see
Both what the best and worst of earth can be.
Which makes, that whatsoever here befalles,
You in the region of your self remain,
Where no vain breath of th'impudent molests,
That has secured within the brazen walls
Of a clear conscience, that without all stain
Rises in peace, in innocence rests:
Whilst all what malice from without procures,
Shows her own ougly heart, but hurts not yours.
And whereas none rejoice more in revenge
Then women use to do, yet you well know,
That wrong is better checked, by being contemned,
Then being pursued, leaving to him tauenge
To whom it appertains, wherein you show
How worthily your Clearenesse has condemned
Base malediction, living in the dark,
That at the rays of goodness still does bark.
Knowing the heart of man is set to be
The center of his world, about the which
These reuolutions of disturbances
Still roll, where all th'aspects of misery
Predominate, whose strong effects are such
As he must bear, being powrelesse to redress,
And that unless above himself he can
Erect himself, how poor a thing is man?
And how turmoyld they are that level lie
With earth, and cannot lift themselves from thence,
That never are at peace with their desires,
But work beyond their years, and even deny
Dotage her rest, and hardly will dispense
With Death: that when ability expires,
Desire lives still, so much delight they have
To carry toil, and travail to the grave.
Whose ends you see, and what can be the best
They reach unto, when they have cast the sum
And recknings of their glory, and you know
This floting life has but this Port of rest,
A heart prepared that fears no ill to come:
And that man's greatness rests but in his show;
The best of all whose days consumed are,
Either in war, or peace conceiving war.
This Concord (Madame) of a wel-tun'd mind
Has been so set by that all-working hand
Of heaven, that though the world has done his worst,
To put it out, by discords most unkind,
Yet does it still in perfect union stand
With God and Man, nor ever will be forced
From that most sweet accord, but still agree
Equal in Fortunes inequality.
And this note(Madame) of your Worthiness
Remains recorded in so many Hearts
As time nor malice cannot wrong your right
In th inheritance of Fame you must possess,
You that have built you by your great deserts,
Out of small means, a far more exquisite
And glorious dwelling for your honored name
Then all the gold of leaden minds can frame.
S. D.
TO THE LADY LVCIE, COUNTESS OF BEDFORD.
THough virtue be the same when low she stands
In the humble shadows of obscurity
As when she either sweats in martial bands,
Or sits in Court, clad with authority:
Yet Madame, does the strictness of her room
Greatly detract from her ability:
For as inwalld within a living tomb
Her hands and arms of action, labor not;
Her thoughts as if abortiue from the womb,
Come never borne, though happily begot.
But where she shath mounted in open sight
An eminent, and spacious dwelling got.
Where she may stir at will, and use her might,
There is she more her self, and more her own:
There in the fair attire of honor dight,
She sits at ease and makes her glory known,
Applause attends her hands, her deeds have grace,
Her worth newborn is straight as if fulgrowne,
With such a goodly and respected face
Does virtue look, that is set to look from hie,
And such a fair advantage by her place
Has state and greatness to do worthily.
And therefore well did your high fortunes meet
With her, that gracing you, comes graced thereby,
And well was let into a house so sweet
So good, so fair; so fair, so good a guest,
Who now remains as blessed in her seat,
As you are with her residencie blesst.
And this fair course of knowledge whereunto
Your studies, learned Lady, are addressed,
Is the only certain way that you can go
Unto true glory, to true happiness:
All passages on earth besides, are so
Encumbered with such vain disturbances,
As still we loose our rest, in seeking it,
Being but deluded with apparances.
And no key had you else that was so fit
T'vnlocke that prison of your Sex, as this,
To let you out of weakness, and admit
Your powers into the freedom of that bliss
That sets you there where you may ouersee
This rolling world, and view it as it is,
And apprehend how th'outsides do agree
With the inward being of the things, we deem
And hold in our ill-cast accounts, to be
Of highest value, and of best esteem.
Since all the good we have rests in the mind,
By whose proportions only we redeem
Our thoughts from out confusion, and do find
The measure of our selves, and of our powers.
And that all happiness remains confind
Within the Kingdom of this breast of ours.
Without whose bounds, all that we look on, lies
In others Jurisdictions, others powers,
Out of the circuit of our liberties.
All glory, honor, fame, applause, renown,
Are not belonging to our royalties,
But to others wills, wherein they are only grown.
And that unless we find us all within,
We never can without us be our own:
Nor call it right, our life we live in.
But a possession held for others use,
That seem to have most int' rest therein.
Which we do so disseuer, part, traduce,
Let out to custom fashion and to show
As we enjoy but only the abuse,
And have no other Deed at all to show.
How often are we constrained to appear
With other countenance then that we owe,
And be our selves far off, when we are near?
How often are we forced on a clowdie heart,
To set a shining face, and make it clear.
Seeming content to put our selves apart,
To bear a part of others weaknesses:
As if we only were composed by Art,
Not Nature, and did all our deeds address
T'opinion, not t'a conscience what is right:
As framed b'example, not aduisednesse
Into those forms that intertaine our sight.
And though Books, Madame, cannot make this mind,
Which we must bring apt to be set aright,
Yet do they rectify it in that kind,
And touch it so, as that it turns that way
Where judgment lies: And though we cannot find
The certain place of truth, yet do they stay,
And intertaine us near about the same.
And give the Soul the best delights that may
Encheere it most, and most our spirits inflame
To thoughts of glory, and to worthy ends.
And therefore in a course that best became
The cleerenesse of your heart, and best commends
Your worthy powers, you run the rightest way
That is on Earth, that can true glory give,
By which when all consumes, your fame shall live.
TO THE LADY ANNE CLIFFORD.
Unto the tender youth of those fair eyes
The light of judgment can arise but new
And young the world appears t'a young conceit,
Whilst through th'vnacquainted faculties
The late invested soul does rawly view
Those Objects which on that discretion wait.
Yet you that such a fair advantage have,
Both by your birth, and happy powers t'out-go,
And be before your years, can fairly guess
What hew of life holds surest without stain,
Having your well-wrought heart full furnished so
With all the images of worthiness,
As there is left no room at all t'inuest
Figures of other form but Sanctity:
Whilst yet those cleane-created thoughts, within
The Garden of your innocencies rest,
Where are no notions of deformity
Nor any door at all to let them in.
With so great care does she, that has brought forth
That comely body, labor to adorn
That better part, the mansion of your mind,
With all the richest furniture of worth,
To make y'as highly good as highly borne,
And set your virtues equal to your kind.
She tells you how that honor only is
A goodly garment put on fair deserts,
Wherein the smallest stain is greatest seen,
And that it cannot grace unworthiness;
But more apparent shows defective parts,
How gay soever they are decked therein.
She tells you too, how that it bounded is,
And kept enclosed with so many eyes,
As that it cannot stray and break abroad
Into the private ways of carelessenesse,
Nor ever may descend to vulgarize,
Or be below the sphere of her abode.
But like to those supernall bodies set
Within their Orbs, must keep the certain course
Of order, destined to their proper place;
Which only does their note of glory get.
Th'irregulare apparances enforce
A short respect, and perish without grace.
Being Meteors seeming hie, but yet low placed,
Blazing but while their dying matters last,
Nor can we take the just height of the mind,
But by that order which her course does show:
And which such splendour to her actions gives,
And thereby men her eminency find,
And thereby only do attain to know
The Region, and the Orb wherein she lives.
For low in the air of gross uncertainty,
Cofusion only rowles, Order sits hie.
And therefore since the dearest thing on earth,
This honor, Madame, has his stately frame
From th'heau'nly order, which begets respect,
And that your nature, virtue, happy birth,
Have therein highly interplac'd your name,
You may not run the least course of neglect.
For where, not to observe, is to profane
Your dignity, how careful must you be
To be yourselfe, and though you may to all
Shine fair aspects, yet must the virtuous gain
The best effects of your benignity:
Nor must your common graces cause to fall
The price of your esteem t'a lower rate,
Then does befit the pitch of your estate.
Nor may you build on your sufficiency,
For in our strongest parts we are but weak,
Nor yet may overmuch distrust the same,
Lest that you come to check it so thereby,
As silence may become worse than to speak;
Though silence women never ill became.
And none, we see, were ever overthrown
By others flattery more than by their own.
For though we live amongst the tongues of praise
And troops of soothing people, that collaud
All that we do, yet it is within our hearts
Th'ambushment lies, that evermore betraies
Our judgments, when our selves become t'applaud
Our own ability, and our own parts.
So that we must not only fence this forte
Of ours, against all others fraud, but most
Against our own, whose danger is the most,
Because we lie the nearest to do hurt,
And soon'st deceive our selves, and soon'st are lost
By our best powers that do us most transport.
Such are your holy bounds, who must convey
(If God so please) the honorable blood
Of Clifford, and of Russell, led aright
To many worthy stemmes whose offspring may
Look back with comfort, to have had that good
To spring from such a branch that grew s'vpright;
Since nothing cheeres the heart of greatness more
Then th'Ancestors fair glory gone before.
TO HENRY WRIOTHESLY EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON. Nonfert vllum ictum illaesa
foelicitas.
HE who has never warred with misery,
Nor ever tugged with Fortune, and Distress
Has had n'occasion nor no field to try
The strength and forces of his worthiness:
Those parts of judgment which felicity
Keeps as concealed, affliction must express;
And only men show their abilities,
And what they are, in their extremities.
The world had never taken so full note
Of what thou art, had thou not been undone,
And only thy affliction has begot
More fame then thy best fortunes could have done:
For ever by adversity are wrought
The greatest works of admiration,
And all the fair examples of renown,
Out of distress and misery are grown.
Mutius the fire, the torturs Regular,
Did make the miracles of Faith and Zeal:
Exile renowned, and Graced Rutilius:
Imprisonment, and Poison did reveal
The worth of Socrates: Fabricius
Poverty did grace that Commonweal
More then all Syllaes riches got withstrife,
And Catoes death did vie with, Casars life.
Not to b'vnhappy is unhappiness;
And misery not to have known misery:
For the best way unto discretion is
The way that leads us by adversity:
And men are better showed what is amiss,
By th'expert finger of Calamity,
Then they can be with all that Fortune brings,
Who never shows them the true face of things.
How could we know that thou could have endured
With a reposed cheer, wrong and disgrace,
And with a heart and countenance aslur'd
Have looked stern Death, and Horror in the face?
How should we know thy soul had bin secured
In honest councels, and in ways vnbase?
Had thou not stood to show us what thou were,
By thy affliction, that descride thy heart.
It is not but the Tempest that does show
The Sea-mans cunning: but the field that tries
The Captains courage: and we come to know
Best what men are, in their worst ieoperdies:
For lo, how many have we seen to grow
To hie renown from lowest miseries,
Out of the hands of death, and many a one
To Have bin undone, had they not bin undone.
He that indures for what his conscience knows
Not to be ill, does from a patience hie
Look, only on the cause whereto he owes
Those sufferings, not on his misery:
The more h'indures, the more his glory grows,
Which never grows from imbecilitie:
Only the best composed, and worthiest hearts,
God sets to act the hard'st and constant'st parts.

