A SERMON PREACHED before His Majesty At Whitehall, on Easter day last. 1618.

By the Bishop of Elie, His Majesty's Almoner.

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XVIII.

I. Corinth. Cap. XI. Verse. xvi. Si quis autem videtur contentiosus esse: nos
talem consuetudinem non habemus, neque Ecclesiae DEI. But if any man seem to
be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. THIS is
no Easter Text, as we are wont to have: Nothing of the Resurrection in it. It
is not for the day.

1 How the Text may serve for Easter.
It is not, not directly: But if it should happen there were any contention
about Easter, that would bring it within the word contentious here. Specially,
if that contention about Easter were, whether it has been ever a custom in
the Church of God; for that would bring it within the word custom, here
mentioned: And so would it both ways fall, within the compass of the Text.
The custom of Easter made a contention, would make it an Easter day Text.

The Text two ways qualified.
I say not, any such contention there is: I desire to proceed (as the Apostle
does) without the least offense. Videtur Seems.
He says not, there be any contentious; but, if any seem to be. That any be
contentious, it may not be said. They will deeply protest, that from their
hearts they abhor all contentions, and desire to walk peaceably. Be not,
then: but, seem to be.

Si quis If any.
Nay, not seem to be, neither: S. Paul says not so much: says only, Si quis,
If any; puts but a case, (and there is no harm in that.) No more will we go
no further, then the Text: If any such seem to be; this Text tells what to
do: If none be, none seem to be, it is but a case put. All upon supposition.
And so, by way of supposition, be all said, that shall be.

The Division.
Upon the view, three points give forth themselves. 1Here are co^tentious: and
2here are customs; and 3 customs, opposed to the contentious. These, the
three heads.

Contentions.
To break them yet further, into certain Theses or propositions, to proceed
by. 1First it should seem, there were contentions in the Apostles times. 2
Contentions, about what? About matter of circumstance. So was this here,
Whether men were to pray uncovered, and women veiled, or no? 3And that there
were, which did not only contend, but (which is more) were even contentious
about these. 4For those that were so, here is a si quis set up, If any seem to
be such, what to do to them.

We have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. And so oppose the Churches
custom to contention.

The Church customs.
In which saying, there are these heads. First, that the Church has her
customs. 2As she has them, so she may, and does allege them. 3And allege
them finally, (as the Apostie here, we see, resolves the whole matter into
them, as into a final resolution.) 4And all this, by Scripture confirmed: even
by this Scripture: on which, the customs of the Church are grounded, and the
power that shall be ever in them, to ouerrule the contentious.

Non habemus talem, Matthew. 12 39. The Text the last year. Negative in show;
Affirmative, in effect.
And let not this move you, that it seems to be negative, Non habemus talem. As,
(this time twelve month) Non dabitur nisi (a negative in show) proved an
affirmative, Dabitur, sed nonnisi: So will this Non habemus talem, prove to
Habemus, sed non talem. Custom we have, but none such. To apply it to the
Apostles purpose: None, to sit covered at prayer, Non talem, None such; But the
contrary, rather; To be uncovered then, talem, Such is our custom; Such a
one, the Church has.

The Two marks of a right custom.
Where, because the negative referrs not to habemus, but to, talem; And, a
custom is not therefore good, because we have it, but because it is talem, so
qualified; The talem to be: 1
First, If we (that is) the Apostles have had it, if it were Apostolic: The
non talem to be, if our new Masters have taken it up the other day, and the
Apostles never knew it. 2The talem to be, if the Churches of God in general
have had it, if it be catholic. The non talem to be, if the Church of
Corinth, or some one Church perhaps had it, but the rest never had any such.

The Church-custome for keeping Easter.
Then, will we descend to show the keeping of Easter, to be such: Ever in use
with the Churches of God, from the time of the Apostles themselves. Which, if
we can make plain, here is a plain Text for it: That, if one should ask,
What Scripture have you, why Easter may not be laid down? It may well be
answered, Non habemus talem consuetudinem, nec Ecclesiae Dei. Custom to keep
it, we have; the Apostles, the Church had it: but to abolish it, such custom
have we none; we depart from them both, if we do.

There wants not Scripture for Easter.
Protesting yet, that we have no purpose to waiue Scripture quite, for the
keeking of Easter. Saint Augustine is plain, Hoc ex authoritate diuinarum
Scripturarum, per anniuer sarium Pascha celebratur. Epist. 119. cap. 14.
Even by authority of divine Scriptures it is, that every year, Easter is
kept solemnly. We have touched two Scriptures heretofore: The day, which the
Lord has made (118. Psalm.) Psalm. 118.24.
applied ever to this Feast. That Text for the Old. And for the New Testament,
that verse in this Epistle, Christ our Pass^ouer is offered, let us therefore
keep a Feast. 1. Cor. 5.7.8.


But the Churches custom is more kindly.
But every thing stands safest and surest, upon his own base: And the right
base of this, I take to be Custom. We do but make our selves to be pitied
otherwhile, when we stand wringing the Scriptures, to strain that out of them,
that is not in them, and so can never come liquide from them: when yet we have
for the same point, the Churches custom clear enough. And that is enough by
virtue of this Text. There is, and shall be enough ever in this Text, to auow
any Custom; The Apostles, the Churches of God, had it: to disauow any: The
Apostles, the Churches of God, had it not.

The use of the third point about Easter.
The fruit of our labor will be this (I hope) at least, to confirm us in the
keeping of it. We keep Easter, many of us, we know not upon what ground. By
this, we shall see, we have a ground for that we do. We do no more, then the
Churches of God, then the Apostles have done before us. So, our ears shall
hear the voice in Esaias behind us, Haec est via, This is the way: Ambulate in
ea, Walk in it; Esa. 30.21.
as you do, you are in the right, and there hold you.

any. This (if) I take it, is no idle if, no vain supposition; to say, if
there be any; where there were none. No: contentions there were. I Contentions
in the Apostles time.
When? when (we:) who be they? S. Paul and his fellow Apostles, when they
lived. And the Churches: what Churches? the Churches under them, of their
times. In the very prime of the Primitive Church, then were there Contentions.

And those not with an enemy without (Jew or Gentile) that were (...) war
abroad: this is (...), but a jar at home, among themselves. That former
(abroad) they represent by Ismael and Isaac, and they were of two venters. Gal.
4.29.
This latter (at home) by the two twins in Rebecca's womb. Genesis 25.23.
(I fear the time: else could I let you see this strife, in every Church of
them.)

This I note first, that we may not (...) (to use S. Peter's term) think it
strange, 1. Pet. 4.12.
it there be contentions in our times. They shall be no strangers with us, in
ours: They were not with them in theirs. Neither co^tentions, (in this verse.)
Nor schisms (in the next, the 18.) Nor haeresies (in the 19. next to that) It
is of the fiery trial, S. Peter speaks it (of persecution.) It is as true, of
the watery trial (of contention.) As true it is of the last, as of the first
Church: I proved thee also at the waters of strife. Psalm. 81.7.
Those waters, the waters of Meriba, will hardly be dreined ever.

2. Contentions about matter of circumstance.
There were contentions then: About what? For, though peace be precious, yet of
such moment may the matters be, as they are to be contended for, yea, even to
the death. For what then were these? for nothing, but a matter of Rite. Men
praying, whether they should be uncovered; women, whether veiled or no. Verse
4, 5.
For a Hat and a Veil was all this ado. It was not about any the high
mysteries, any of the vital parts of Religion, Preaching, Prayer, the
Sacraments: Only, about the manner, how: the gesture and behavior, wherewith:
in what sort, to carry themselves, at Preaching, Prayer, the Sacraments: about
matter of circumstance merely, and nothing else.

And even these, even the meanest things would be done for the better, not for
the worse (says the Apostle in the next verse) And the more order, the better.
So the Apostle had set order for them, and inter alia, for this too. Other his
ordinances (he says) Verse 2.
they remembered well, but not this: This was opposed. For, with some, all is
not worth a rush, if they see not further then their fellows, nay, their
betters, then: It they find not somewhat to find fault with, if it be but a
ceremony. And to pick a quarrel with a ceremony, is easy. A plausible
theme, not to burden the Church with ceremonies: the Church to be free: which
has almost freed the Church of all decency.

3. Yea, contentiousnesse, which is more then contention.
About such points as these, were there, that did not only contend, but that
grew contentious. (...) is one thing, to contend: (...) another, to be
contentious. The Apostle says not, If any contend: but, si quis contentiosus.
And (osus) is full. (...), is one that loves it, is given to it. Strange, any
such should be. But the Apostles if, proves to be no if. We see it daily in
persons, but meanly qualified (God wot) yet so peremptory, as if the word of
God had come, if not from them, yet to them only, and to none besides. 1. Cor.
14.26.
Good Lord! why should any love to be contentious? why? It is the way to be
somebody. In time of peace, what reckoning is there of Wat Tiler, or Jack
Straw? make a sedition, and they will bear a brain with the best. Primianus
and Maximianus were the heads of the two factions of Donatists in S. Augustines
time. He says it was well for them, that faction fell out: Else, Primianus
might have been Postremianus, and Maximianus been Minimianus, well enough. But
now, in schism, either of them was a jolly fellow, head of a party. This
makes, we shall never want contentious persons, and they will take order, we
shall never want contentions.

4 Such contention not to be neglected.
Well, if any such should happen to be, what is to be done in such a case? What
says the Apostle? Says he thus? Seeing it is no greater matter, it skilles
not greatly whether they do it or no, covered or bare, sit or kneel, all is
one: sets it light, and lets it go. No: but calls them back to the custom of
the Church, will not have them swerve from that; makes a matter of it. For we
see, he presses the point hard; spends many words, many verses, even half
the Chapter about it.

Not any contention.
Why does he so? For two reasons. 1First, he likes not contention at all. Why?
If it be not taken at the first: within a while, (within one verse after) ye
shall hear of a schism, (look the 18. verse:) And within a little after
that, (look but to the 19.) ye shall have a flat heresy of it. The one
draws on the other: if the contentious humor be not let out, it will fester
straight, and prove to an aposteme.

No, not in these small matters.
2Nor, he likes not the matter, wherefore; (though it seem but small) S. Paul
knew Satan's method well: he seems somewhat shamefast at first, asks but
some small trifle: Give him but that, he will be ready for greater points. If
he win ground in the Ceremonies, then have at the Sacrament: If he can
disgrace the one, it will not be long, but he shall hear of him at the other.

For from Ceremonies to Sacraments.
Speak I beside the book? was it not so here? At the very next verse, there he
falls in hand with an abuse of the Sacrament, and that takes up the rest of the
Chapter.

For, when they had sit covered at Prayer a while, they grew even as
vnreuerent, as homely with the Sacrament: Eat and drunk there, as if they had
been at home, in triclinio, that the Apostle is feign to tell them (at the 22.
verse) They had homes to be homely at: the Church, the House of God, they were
to be used with greater reverence. He did not commend them for this their rude
carriage, at the Sacrament. Did not commend them? you know what that means
(minus dicitur, plus intelligitur) He blamed them much for it.

Then, are we to make stay at these less matters at first, (as the Apostle
does) To think the wise man's counsel worth the following, Ne sit tibi
minimum, non negligere minima, Count it no small matter, not to neglect small
matters. What so small as an hair? when these small hairs were gone from
Samson, his strength left him. Judge. 16.19.
In it self, in his own nature, a Rite is not so much: This is much; that by
it, they learn to break the Churches orders; and that thereby they are
fleshed, to go on to greater matters.

To these contentions the Church custom opposes.
Lays for his ground, this, Non habemus talem. The force of his reason is, If
we, if the Churches of God, had any such custom, it were somewhat; that were
warrant enough, for a Rite. But now, we and they both, have none such; nay, we
and they, have the quite contrary: therefore, let us hear no more of it.

1. The Church has her customs.
Where, it is plain, the Apostle is for the Church customs. 1And first, that
she has them. Every Society, beside their Laws in books, have their
customs also in practice: and those, not to be taken up, or laid down, at
every man's pleasure. The Civil Law says this of custom, Imo magnae
authoritatis hoc ius habetur: quod in tantum probatum est, vt non fuerit
scripto comprehendere necesse. Pand. 1. Tit. 3. de legib. 35.
Men (it seems) had a great good liking to their customs, that they remembered
them without book, that they never needed to be put in writing, as their Laws
and Statutes did. Now, as every Society: so the Church, besides her habemus
legem, has her habemus consuetudinem too. There is such a thing, as mos populi
Dei.

And fear not traditions a whit. Those respect credenda, points of doctrine:
These, but agenda, matter of practice: And that, not in points of substance;
reach only to matter of circumstance, go no further. Nor do we even them
with, much less oppose them to, that which is written. Never any custom,
against that: No custom, that comes from the will or wit of man, against
Scripture, which comes from the wisdom and will of God. But, haec oportet
facere, and illa non omittere. Mat. 23.23.
Only so.

The Apostles and their Churches had their customs.
The Church then, has her customs. I add, these (we) here, (that is) the
Apostles had them; and the Churches under them, had theirs. It was but early
day then, yet had they their customs, even then. At the writing of this
Epistle, it was not at the most 30. years from Christ's ascension. If that were
time enough, to make a custom: Now after these 20. times 30. years, and 30.
times 30. years, and a 100. years to spare, shall it not be a custom now, by
much better right? A custom is susceptible of more and less: The further it
goes, the longer it runs: the more strength it gathers, the more gray
hairs it gets, the more venerable it is: for indeed, the more a custom it
is.

2. The Church alleges her customs.
Now then, as the Church has them, so she stands upon them: fears not (we
see) to allege them, to say habemus, or non habemus. Habemus, to uphold an
ancient good one: Non habemus, to lay down an evil one, new taken up.

In the Negative.
Here, negative, Non habemus talem. As our Savior likewise, A principio non
fuit sic. Mat. 19.8.
And yet, by implication, this here is, One we have, but not such a one. And
our Saviors there, A way there was from the beginning, but this was not it.

In the Affirmative.
But otherwhere, it is positive also, to affirm, and to maintain a good: And
men positiuely referred, to know, what has been the use in former times.

Has ever so alleged. Moses.
Higher then Moses we cannot go. Moses as a Lawgiver, one would think, would
be all for Law. He is positive full, for custom too. Enquire (says he) of
the days that be past, how it has gone: since the day God created the earth.
Deuteronomy. 4.12.
(And that, in the second edition, or setting forth of the Law.)

Job is for it too. Job 8.8.
Enquire, I pray you, of the former Age, and set your selves to ask after the
Fathers (for we are but of yesterday) shall not they tell you, thus, and thus
it was, in their times?

The Prophets.
And, say not the Prophets the same? Stand upon the ways (it is Jeremy) and
there look for the good old way, an that way take, it is the only way to
find rest for your souls. Ier. 6.16.


The Fathers.
To all which, agreeable is that, wherewith I will shut up this point; which all
the Fathers in the first Nicene Council took up, and which, ever since, has
been the Churches cry, (...): Mos antiquus obtineat. Let old customs
prevail, let them carry it. By this you see, Habemus consuetudinem, has been
counted a sound allegation, not only from the Apostles, but even from Moses
time.

3. The Badges of a right custom, two.
And now, for the talem. For, it is not the habemus that binds, but the talem.
Not, because we have it, but because it is so qualified. It is not every
custom, hand over head, we may stand on. Why binds not this? 1Because though
it may be, it was at Corinth ( Ecclesia Dei, a Church of God, one Church) yet
Ecclesiae Dei, the other Churches of God, had it not; the word is plural.
2Because, though it has liked some, not long since, to like well of it: yet
the Apostles never knew it. or (the other way) if it have liked them to dislike
it, and lay it down; yet the Apostles liked it well enough.

Nontalem (says the Apostle) none such. Qualem then? How shall we do to know
the right talem? Thus. Non talem is here opposed, to two: To the Churches of
God: To nos (that is) the Apostles.

If it be Eclesiarum Dei.
If it be but of some one Church, but at Corinth alone, it is too narrow, not
large, not general enough. If it be but taken up by some of our masters of
late, it is too fresh, it is not ancient enough: Non talem. No such.

But, by these two, we know our right qualem. If it be Ecclesiarum (that is)
if it be General. If nos come to it (that is) the Apostles, if it be
ancient: then it is rightly qualified; then it is as it should be; then it may
be alleged, and stood upon, then it will bind: and then, if any oppose,
videtur contentiosus esse.

I begin with the Churches (in the plural.) Every Church has power to begin a
custom; and that custom, power to bind her own children, to it. Provided,
her private custom affront not the general, received by all others: for then
binds it not. By the Rule in the Mathematiques, ever, Totum est part maius:
And by the rule in the Morals, Ever turpis pars omnis, toti non congrua.

As neither is any particular Church, bound to the private custom of another,
like particular, as it self is. But if the other Churches custom, have also
bin the general custom of the Church: then it binds, and may not be set
light: For then said it must be, that S. Augustine does say, If the whole
Church usually have observed ought: to go from that, or to question, whether it
be to be observed, insolentissimae insaniae est. Epist. 118. ca. 5.
It sauors of a distemper, a distemper coming of a heat, or humor of pride:
For, only by pride (says Solomon) comes contention. Prou. 13.10.
This for the Churches custom.

If nos (that is) the Apostles had it.
But, if to this we add, or rather, if before this we set, this (nos) the
Apostles had it too, that it is Apostolic: we have the^ said as much, as in
this point can be said, as much as may content any, that is not contentious,
that, is not more wedded to show his wit, then to seek the truth: and more set
(...), to maintain his own position, then to regard the Churches peace. For
sure, if a custom be to be esteemed by antiquity; such a custom is ab
heroicis vsque temporibus: for they be our Heroes. 2If it be to be esteemed by
the author: what authors more worthy in themselves, more worthy of our
imitation, then they? Nothing can be devised more reasonable, then that in the
118. quaest. ad Orthod. in Justin Martyr, That, of and from whom we received
(...), to pray: of and from them, we should also receive (...) how and when,
at what time, at what feasts to do it. Their example (that is, the Apostles)
the Church commended to her children to practice (a better she could not.)
that practice, in time grew to a custom. That custom is talem, may safely be
alleged.

4. The Use of this argument from custom.
Lastly, as this shows it may be alleged for a good argument in Divinity: So
does it, 1what the men are against whom: 2what the matters, wherein: 3what the
penalty, whereupon it may be alleged.

Against what parties.
1. Whom against. This may be alleged against si quis videtur contentiosus
esse, such as are, or at least seem contentious. Habemus, or Non habemus
consuetudinem, is their proper answer. No reasoning with such, it will be to
small purpose, they will be sine fine dicentes. S. Augustine says well, they
cannot distinguish between respondere posse, and tacere nolle. They take them,
for all one. So they cry lowdest, and have the last word, they take it they
have answered sufficiently. Against these it lies most properly. None so ready
a way, to stop their mouths: for custom is matter of fact, Habemus or Non
habemus may be put to twelve men, and there is an end. S. Paul then using it
here against these, teaches us to use it against the like. Against such
parties; against si quis videtur contentiosus esse, to put it upon this; Is
there a custom, or is there none?

In what matters.
Specially, if the matter be of the nature of this here in the Text, where the
question seemed to concern but matter of circumstance, and outward order;
there has it his right use; that the proper place of it. You will say; But had
it not been good though, to have used some reason for it? It had: And the
Apostle used diverse (if that would have served) from the signification, at the
third verse; from decency, at the thirteenth; from nature, at the fourteenth.
But (to say the truth) such as he saw a wrangling wit would elude. The nature
of the question afforded none other. It was well observed, and set down for a
rule by the Philosopher, That in moral matters, men may not look for
Mathematical proofs. The nature of the subject will not bear them. If not in
moral, in rituall much less: they of all other least susceptible of a
demonstratiue reason.

The Apostle saw this, and therefore finally resolves all, into the Churches
practice by custom confirmed: in matters of this kind, enough of it self, to
suffice any that will sapere ad sobrietatem. In so doing, as he took the
right course (we are sure) so he taught us by his example, in points of this
nature, of ceremony or circumstance, ever to pitch upon habemus or non habemus
talem consuetudinem. This to be final.

Upon what poenaltie.
3. And then follows upon what penalty. Upon no other pain, but to be
pronounced to be fallen into the Apostles Si quis; to be taken and declared,
pro contentioso. Then if any, for every point of rite that takes him in the
head, will hazard the Churches peace, will not acquiescere, but set himself
against the Churches custom: he knows his doom here. For it turns back
reciproce. As, if any be contentious, the Churches custom is against him: So,
if any turn upon the Churches custom, be against it: it is no good sign,
videtur, (says S. Paul.) to the Apostle he seems so (and he had his eyes in
his head.) And what such seemed to him, they may well seem to us, and we take
them for no less, that are alike stirring in matters of no more weight. The
argument final.
And so an end of this matter. For the Apostle, when he had said this, thought
he had said enough, needed to say no more. The Churches custom shall ever be
of force, to overrule such as are contentious. And when S. Paul had said this,
he had said. And so have we.

The keeping Easter is such a custom.
THis then being set down, That Customs so qualified are to be kept: Shall
we now go on to the hypothesis, that the keeping of Easter is such? (And now I
would the hour were to begin again, so much is to be said for it)

The time to make this custom.
One foot of our compass we fix in the Apostles times. The other where? They
appoint us Gelasius time, who was fast upon the 500dth year. Be it so.

How long the Apostles. 100.
From the Apostles age, (which ended with S. John, who suruiued Christ 68.
years, and dyed the year 102. under Trajan) to Gelasius age. Of these 500.
the first hundred years, are for (Nos) the Apostles time. How long the
Churches. 400.
From thence, for the 400. years following, are for the Churches. Which 400. we
may divide again, into two even moities. 200. under persecution: 200. under
peace.

Proofs for the custom of the Churches.
To prove (then) our habemus consuetudinem: 1. Proof. From contentions above it.
We cannot better begin, then with this in the Text, the contentions, that
from the beginning rose about it. Those very contentions prove it. It must
be, that must be contended for: and then, it must be, when it is contended
for. These 3. things in this one proof. 1The contentions that were about it,
even presently upon the Apostles times: The church took part with Easter.
The great care had, and continual pains taken, to lay them down, that is,
the Churches contending for the Feast: Censured ever for Haereticks, that
against it.
The censuring of those that took them up, with S. Paul's contentiosus here,
and with somewhat more: (Of Blastus, at Rome in Europe; Of Crescentius in
Egypt, for Afrique: Of Audaeus, in Syria, for Asia:) These were the
principalls, these were all written up in the black book, by those that
registered the Heretics; by Tertullian, Epiphanius, Philastrius, Augustine, and
Theodoret, (all five.) Tert depresor. c. 53. Epiphan. Here Is. 70. Syn. Antioch.
Can. 1.


The Contention not about the Feast, but the time only.
But as God would have it, the question never was of the Feast it self, but of
the time of it only. All kept Easter, though not all at one time. For the
keeping, they had the Churches custom: for the time of keeping, they had their
own: the Feast of the Christians; the time of the Jews.

How the contention first came.
And I will tell you how this came, first. From S. James (who was the first,)
there were successively one after another, fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem, all
of them of the Circumcision. These, (the sooner to win their brethren the
Jews) condescended to keep their Easter, 14a. Lunae, as They did. That which
was by them thus done by way of condescension, was after by some urged as a
matter of necessity, as if it were not lawful, but on that day to hold it.

The first that it took thus in the head, ( Tertullian in the end of de
praescrip, Cap. 53.
says) was one Blastus about the days of Commodus. He began a schism. And
Irenaeus presently wrote de schismate contra Blactum Hie. desor. 35.
But after, from schism Blastus fell to heresy, and began that of the
Quartodecimani: Epiphan. haer. 50
to whose manner of keeping it, for the most part, other heretics did cleave,
leaving the Churches custom of purpose, since they were departed from her.

Great pity, some in our days had not been then living, to have advised the
Church to have saved her pains, and never have striuen so about it: the
shorrest way was, to have made no more ado, but kept none at all. But, non
habemus calem consuetudinem, would have been their answer. For you will
easily guess: if these, for not keeping it at the right time, were scored up
for heretics; what would have become of them, that had been against the
keeping of it at all.

None against Easter, but Aerius;
Til now in our days, there was never any such but Aerius; he took it away
clean as Jewish. His reason was (says Epiphanius scorning it) Epiphan Haeres.
75.
because Christ our Passover is offered. Christ our Passover is offered, let
us therefore keep a feast (says S. Paul.) 1. Cor. 57.
Let us therefore keep none (says Aerius) holden for so saying, for little
better then crazed. There was neuerany Council called about him: but as Aerius
was his name, so was his opinion, and so it soon vanished into air, and was
blown over straight. All else keep Easter, the old Puritans, the Nouatians
and all.
Otherwise, all heretics, an Easter they had: Not so much as the Nouatians,
that called themselves Cathari (that is, the Puritanes of the Primitive Church)
but one they had: but like good fellows (by their Canon adiaphorus) Socr. l.
5. c. 20.
they left every one at liberty, so he kept one, to keep it whether way he
listed, but keep one he must. This contending about this custom from the
beginning shows from the beginning, such a custom there was.

2. Proof From the Cycli Paschales.
Next we avouch the Cycli Paschales (for the keeping it right) which were
indeed the Churches yearly Calender, (which to this day the Greek Church
call their (...)) made of purpose for the just keeping it, at the very time. A
pregnant proof for this custom, if there were none but it. Hippolytus first a
famous Bishop and holy Martyr (His was the 16. year Canon) set forth by him
so timely, as it ended in the first year of Alexander Seuerus.

And after him, that of eight years, devised by Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria,

Then came Eusebius, whose devise the Golden number was, Theophilus of
Alexandria's began.

Now the time of the setting of his, is recorded to have been the year 380.
Prosper came after him, And last came Victorinus of Aquitaine about the year
460. Gelasius.) 1. Victor Capuanus. 2. Dionys. Exiguus.
Two more came after these, before it was fully settled: (but we will not pass
our bounds:) If no such custom were, what needed all these pains, all this
ado, in these Cycles setting, and calculation of times? It shows the great
esteem, the Church had the Feast in, that it was so careful of the precise
time of it, every year.

The use of the Cycli Paschales.
And there was reason for it. Otherwhile they were at an after-deale, about the
time. The year 454. (within a year or two, after the Council of Chalcedon)
all were at a stand. Easter fell so high in April, they were in doubt, they had
been wrong: Yea Leo himself (that then lived) and all. Presently fell Leo to
writing letters about, to all, reputed any thing seen that way. To the Bishop
of Paschasi^.
Lilybaeum in Sicil. To the Bishop of the Isle Iulianus Ep. 68.
Coos. To the Ep. 64.
Emperor Martian himself (and to the Ep. 65.
Empress to solicit him) that he would not fail, but send to Proterius
Bishop of Alexandria to help them out: As he did. And the like fell our in S.
Ambroses time. Damasus and all, were to seek about it, and he then feign to
clear it by his 83. Epistle, to the Bishops of AEmylia.

3 Proof, From the Paschales Epistolae, or (...) of the Bishop of Alexandria.
Now, upon the consulting the Bishop of Alexandria, there hangs a third proof.
The paschales epistolae, yearly sent abroad by that See, to this end Leo
confesses to the Emperor, That because, they of Egypt were held for the most
skillful in the Mathematiques, best at calculations; it was by the first
Council of Nice laid upon them, (this trust,) yearly to calculate the day
exactly, and to give notice of it in time to other Churches, yea to Rome and
all.

And it was antiqua consuetudo, says Cassian, Collat. 10.2.
(who lived with Chrysostom, and was his Deacon) that every year, the morrow
after their Epiphania, the Bishop of Alexandria sent abroad his paschales
epistolae, to warn Easter, over the world. And, when (after) by reason of
wars in the Spring time, in many places they were intercepted, that they came
not time enough: Order was taken anew by the great Council of Aphrique, Conc.
Carthag. Can. 74.
that letters for warning Easter should come forth sooner by the 21. of August
every year, that so they might have time to come, whither they were sent soon
enought.

These Paschales epistolae were ever famous, and of high account, for other
good matter contained in them. Three of them of Theophilus, we have extant, so
highly esteemed by S. Hierom, as he took the pains to turn them into
Latin, and to him we owe them. But, though by the Nicene Council this was
laid upon the Bishop of Alexandria; I would not have you conceive, it began
then. Ruffin says, L. 1. c. 6.
the Council did but antiquum Canonem tradere, deliver the old Canon, deliver
the old Canon, that had been before in use. L. 7. c. 20. Niceph. l. c. 11.
For long before, Eusebius mentioned those Paschales epistolae sent about, by
Dionyse Bishop there, even under the persecution.

4. Proof. From the Fathers in the Churches peace the latter 200. years.
Now if we will follow Jobs advise, and set our selves to ask of the Fathers:
Job 8.8.
we shall find habemus talem consuetudinem, clear with them for it. 1Those
first, that lived after the Churches peace: 2Then those, that during the
persecution. Those in the Churches peace, four ways. By the Homilies upon
Easter day.
1By the Homilies or Sermons made purposely by them, to be preached on that day.
We have a full Jury, Greek and Latin, of them, and that of the most choice
and eminent among them. S. Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Nyssen, Theophilus
Alexandrinus, Cyrill, Chrysologus, Leo, etc. And yet I deal not with any of
those in Ambrose, Austin, Maximus, now extant, I know they are questioned. I
rely only on the report of S. Hierom and Gennadius, who saw the right copies,
and what they saw have reported.

I will give you a taste of one. It shall be Nazianzen, surnamed the Divine,
and so one, that knew what belonged to Divinity. Thus begins he a Sermon of
his upon it. Easter day is come, 1. in Paschae.
Gods own Easter day, and again I say: Easter day is come, in honor of the
Trinity: the Feast of Feasts, the solemnity of all solemnities, so far
passing all other Feasts, holden not only by or for men, but even in honor of
Christ himself, as the Sun does the Stars.

And, in his funeral Sermon for his father, there, having occasion but to name
it by the way (for that his father once brought to the last cast in a long
sickness of his, suddenly, (as it were by miracle) recovered upon an Easter
day morning) It was (says he) Easter, the great and famous Feast of Easter,
the Queen and the Sovereign of all the days in the year. That in his days
they had sure such a custom.

(And so it seems they had in Ignatius days: for from him borrowed he that
term of Lady and Queen of days, out of his Epistle ad Magnesianos.)

By the Hymns upon Easter day.
2. By the Hymns set for this day, to be sung on it. By Prudentius that lived
in S. Ambrose time. By S. Ambrose himself. Before him by S. Hilarie. But,
Paulinus I insist on. He, in his ninth Panegyric for Felix, sets down in
particular all the Feasts in the year, as they were then in use among them.
Easter, for a chief Feast. He lived with S. Augustine. A pregnant record, for
the Churches custom then.

By their writings touching Easter.
3. By their writings. 1Some of them in their Commentaries (as S. Hierom,) and
namely on the Galatians, and on that place (ye observe days) If that be a
fault (says he) we Christians do incur that fault, all. For weekeepe (by
name) Easter, but not the Jews Easter, of unleavened bread (which the Apostle
excepts to) but the Christian Easter, of the Resurrection of Christ. 2Some by
way of Epistles and answers: as, S. Ambrose 83. Epistle, full to it. S. Austin
118. 119. set Epistles concerning questions about it. 3Some, by their (...), As
Epiphanius (the Treasure of antiquity) in his 50 70. and 75. heresy, ad
oppositum. Positiuely in his Co^pendiu^ of the true Churches orders, at the end
of his Panarium, whereof one is (...). The great solemnity upon Easter day.
2As S. Austin expressly contra Adimantum, the 16. Chap. and the 32. book
against Faustus (that found fault the Church kept it, yet kept it not as the
Jews:) confesses the one, (the Churches keeping:) trauerses the other, that
she ought neither at that time, nor in that manner to keep it, as they did:
and that at large. 4Some by short treatises, as Ambrose de mysterio Paschae.
And some by full books, as Eusebius, who wrote a book of the whole Order of
the Churches Service then, dedicated it to Constantine, was by the Emperor
highly commended for it.

By matters of fact.
4. Lastly, as by writing, so by matter of fact. Of Chrysostom Socrat. l.b. ca.
18.
As Chrysostom, who when he was deposed, and so enjoined not to come in any
Church: yet Easter day coming, so loath he was not to keep it, as he got him
in Thermas Constantini (a spacious great building, for the public bath of the
City) and there held his Easter, with a very great company, that would not
forsake him. Of Athanasius Apolog. ad Constantium.
As Athanasius, who being accused to Constantius the Emperor, for keeping the
Feast of Easter in the great Church at Alexandria (then but newly finished, and
as yet not dedicate) he lays the blame from himself upon the people, that
would have it kept there, do what he could, the other Churches were so narrow,
and the concourse to the Feast so great, as he says it would have done the
Emperors heart good, to have seen it.

And, in his Epistle ad Africanos, with open mouth he cries out upon the
Arrians that came in military manner to instal their new Bishop, and the many
outrages by them done. Above all, that not only they did those outrages, but
did them (of all days) upon Easter day, Et ne ipsum quidem dominicum diem
sanctissimi Festi vlla in reuerentia habuere, And had not in any reverence, not
the very Sunday of that most holy Feast.

Custom for the three Holidays at Easter.
Not the Sunday: for we are to know, the custom that is continued with us
still, they then had, to keep two days beside the Sunday, three in all: For
the Latin Church, plain, by Saint Austine de ciuitate Dei. 22. In 3um Festi
diem. Cap. 8. Hom. 1. in Pascha.
For the Greek, by Nyssen, who expressly terms it, (...).

Thus, all these ways, by singing, by saying, by writing, by doing, all bear
witness to it: and I may safely say; there is not one of them, but one of
these ways or other, he has his hand in it, and among them they make up a
full proof, of this habemus consuetudinem.

5. proof From the Councels.
From the Fathers, I pass to the Councils, and plead it by all the four. The
Nicene first.

The Nicene.
1. Two causes there were (says Athanasius de Syn. Arim. and Sell.) of the
assembling that Council. Nam and claudicabant circa Festum (and he makes that
the first cause) They halted about the Feast, kept in not uniformly: and that
was set straight, against Cresce^tius. And, the Deity of the Son of God was
questioned, and that was put into the Nicene Creed, against Arrius. Theodor. l.
1. ca 9. Socrat l. 1. c. 9.
You have the Councels Epistle for the settling it: you have the Emperors Sacra
for the ratifying it, directed ad omnes Ecclesias (in the third book of his
life, by Eusebius.)

The 2. of Constant.
2. For the second General at Constantinople. As Constantine in the first; so
Theodosius at this, was not behind. His Law remains, whereby he provided, that
for 15. days, from the Sunday before the day, till the Sunday after, no
process should go forth, none should be arrested, a general cessation of all
both processes and proceedings, in honor of the High Feast. That you have
Easter day, and the custom of holding it solemnly, in the body of the Law
too, in Theodosius Code.

3. At the third of Ephesus, there have you in the 2. Tom. c. 32. Rudius,
Hesychius, and Ruffin, three Quartodecimani heretics, publicly in the face of
the Council recanting their error, subscribing, and promising ever after to
conform and keep their Easter, after the custom of the Churches of God.

4 At Chalcedon.
And at the fourth of Chalcedon, the sixth Session (the Emperor being there then
present in person) the whole Council with one voice made this acclamation,
Vnum Pascha orbi terrarum: Thanks be to God, One Easter now, and but one, all
the world over.

Custom in England.
But before all these (the Nicene and all) by a dozen years at least, was the
Council of Arles, and in it, this custom proclaimed. I mention it, not so much
for the antiquity, as that by it appears, how the custom of Easter went
here with us in this Realm; for at it was present and subscribed, the Bishop
of London, Restitutus. A plain argument, We had such a custom then.

Custom in Scotland.
And for the other Realm, Gelasius shall speak. In a Synod of 70. Bishops,
where he and they decreed what books were to be read, what not: Sedulius.
they say, there was then a Poem of venerable Sedulius (who had the addition of
Scotus for his nation) which they do insigni laud praeferre, (that is) very
highly commend. Sedulius intitles it, his Opus Paschale, and begins it, with
Paschales quicunque dapes -- as it were inuiting his Readers (his countrymen,
I dare say, specially, if they will come to it) to a Feast, upon Easter day.

Custom in both.
But for both, Constantine.
none so worthy a witness, as the Emperors Constantine, who in his rescript
about Easter, directed to all Churches, expressly names this Isle, the isle of
Britannie, among those places, where this custom was duly and orderly observed.

6. Proof. From the Fathers in the first 200. years of persecution.
All this while the Church had rest: during the persecution how went it? Two,
between peace and persecution.
Two we will take in, in the passage between the times of peace, and
persecution. Lactantius, Pierius. Hier. de. Scr. 76.
1 Lactantius, the most part of his life, lived under the persecution, but died
in the Churches peace. 2So did Pierius of Alexandria (for his excellent
learning, called Origin the younger.) In Lactantius 7. book 19 Chapter, there
is a plain testimony for the solemn keeping of Easter Eve. And Pierius (says
S. Hierom) has a long Sermon upon the Prophet Hosee, made by him, and preached
at the solemn assembly on Easter Eve. And if the Eve were so held, we make no
doubt of the day.

Under the persecution. The fact of Philip the Emperor. L. 6. c. 34.
1. Now in the midst of the persecution, there fell out a special case of
Philip the Emperor, (supposed to have given his own and his sons name to
the Christian profession, as Eusebius reports) in sign thereof. He, on
Easter Eve offered to join himself at the Church service, as knowing that to
be their chiefest solemnity: which they failed not to keep, no not then, when
their case was at the hardest.

Eusebius. 1.7. cap. 22. Dionysius Alexand.
2. And even then at Alexandria, Dionysius the Bishop there, held this custom.
Thus writes he to Hierax (a Bishop too, and to others) out of prison: That,
though the persecution then raged much, and the plague more; yet were the
Christians, even then, so careful not to break this custom, as they kept
their Easter, some in woods, some on shipboard, some in barnes and stables;
yea, they in the very jail, keep it they did even then, persecution and
plague both notwithstanding.

Cyprian Epist. 21.24.40.
3. Cyprian held this custom: Not by his Homily (I waiue it as doubtful) but
in four of his Epistles I find it. I name but one, his 53. Some had consulted
him, in a question of some difficulty. He writes back, It was now Easter,
his brethren were from him, every one at his own charge, solemnizing the Feast
with their people. So soon as the Feast was over, and they met again, they
should hear from him, he would take their opinions, and return them a sound
answer.

Origin.
4. Origin had this custom. In his 8. against Celsus frankely he confesses,
That other Feasts, Easter by name, the Christians held then; and that (as he
says) (...), in more solemn manner, then Celsus, or any heathen men of them
all, held theirs.

5. Tertullian had this custom: Tertullianus de corona mil. c. 3. ad vxorem l.
2. c. 4. contr. Marc. 4.3. 5.4.
many places in him. Only one I cite, in the 14. chap. de Iejunio: Quod si
omnem in totum deuotionem dierum erasit Apostolus, cur Pascha celebramus annuo
circulo? If it were the Apostles mind, to raze out all devout observing of
days quite, how comes it to pass, we celebrate Easter yearly, at the circle
of the year turning about?

Irenaeus.
6. Irenaeus had this custom: His Epistle to Victor shows it: to Victor, and
to many more (says Eusebius) Eusebius. l. 5. c. 26.
about that question, (understand still the question of the time, not of the
Feast.) A book also we find he wrote de Paschate in the 115. quest. in Justin
Martyr. So he will be for it, certainly.

Seven books then written for it.
7. And it is strange, even during the persecution, how many books we find
written, to deduce the custom by. 1Beside that of Irenaeus, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 32.
2One by Anatolius the great learned Bishop of Laodicea: Hier. de Scrip. 43.
3By Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, and Hieron. de. Scriptor. 44.
4by Bacchyllus Bishop of Corinth, either of them one. Ibidem 61.
5Another by Hippolytus, that made up the first cycle. Yet Ibidem 38.
6another, by Clemens Alexandrinus. And last, which indeed was first in time of
all, two books Ibidem 24.
7by the holy Martyr and Prophet Melito Bishop of Sardis, (in the next Age to
the Apostles themselves) set forth by him (as he says) at the time of the
Feast, and in the very holy days of it.

7. Proof. From Councels in the persecution.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23. 1. Palaestine. 2. Pontus. 3. Osroena. 4. Italy. 5.
France. 6. Grecia. 7. Asia minor.

Nay, there wanted not Councels then neither, and that in seven several parts
of the world at once: all in the midst of the feruor of the fiery trial, when
the Church (God wot) could but evil intend it. It was no time to contend,
then. But it shows, they made a matter of it, and no slight reckoning of the
retaining it. Else might they have slipped it, without any more ado.

Enough (I trow) to show, such a custom there was in all the Churches these
parties lived in, which were all the Churches God then had. They must needs
seem contentious, that will contend against all these. I see not how they can
escape the Apostles Si quis, that do. And this I say, if some one example of
some eminent man of worth, will serve to make an authority: If, that: Then
this cloud of witnesses, and those, 1not persons, but whole Councels and
Churches: 2not in some one Region, but in diverse all the world over: 3and that
not for one time, but so many Ages successively continued, from generation to
generation: what manner of authority ought that to be? the greatest sure, and
none greater, but of God himself.

Proofs, That this custom was Apostolic.
1. Proof by testimony.
Now to (Nos) that is, to the Apostles themselves. Augustine.
First, that it was a a custom Apostolic and so taken, Saint Augustine is
direct in his 118. Epistle to Ianuarius, who had purposely sent to him, to know
his opinion touching certain questions, all of them about Easter. Thus says
he there. For such things as come to us not by writing, but by practice (and
yet such as are observed quite through the world) we are given to understand,
they come commended to us, and were instituted either by the Apostles
themselves, or by general Councels, whose authority has ever been accounted
of as wholesome in the Church. Now what be those things so generally observed
toto orb terrarum? These: that the Passion, the Resurrection, the Ascension of
Christ, and the coming of the holy Ghost from heaven, anniuersaria solennitate
celebrantur, are yearly in solemn manner celebrated. And (says he) if there
be any beside these: for these, are most clear.

First, he is clear, It was the custom of the Church, far and wide the
world through. Then, that it must either by the Apostles be institute, or by
some Council. Not by any Council: Many met about the time: about the Feast
never any: that, not questioned at all: taken pro confesso ever, and so,
Apostolic. They be his own words ( lib. 4. de Bapt. contra Donat. cap. 24.)
If the whole Church observe any thing, not having been ordained by some
general Council, rectissime creditur we are to believe, rectissime, by as
good right as any can be, right in the superlatiue, that it came to us, nonnisi
ab Apostolis, from the Apostles, and from none else, nor by any other way. So
Saint Augustine is for nos habemus talem. So he held it.

Constantine.
A hundred years before him, Constantine is as direct in his Epistle ad omnes
Ecclesias. Eusebius. l. 3. vitae Constantini.
Many remarkable things there are in that Epistle. 1 The most holy Feast of
Easter, four times he calls it. That is the good Emperors style. 2 In so
great a matter, in so High a feast of our Religion to disagree (...) utterly
unlawful. And 3(...); what more honest? what more seemly, then that this
Feast should be inuiolably kept, by which, we hold our hopes of immortality?
(Mark that reason well.)

But, for Apostolic: Be it lawful for us Christians (says he) rejecting
the Jewish manner, That day (...), which day ever since the very first day of
his passion, we have to this present kept; to transmit the due observing of it,
to all ages to come. Mark the words. 1 They had kept Easter from the first day
of CHRIST'S passion, till that present time. 2And after that, We have received
it of our Savior. 3And yet again, which our Savior delivered to us. And
concludes, that 4accordingly, when he came among them, he and they would keep
their Easter together. Nothing can be more full, that in his time this custom
was, and that it was reputed to have come from the Apostles, as begun from the
very day of Christ's passion. Which, Leo shortly, but fully expresses, Legalis
quippe festiuitas dum mutatur, impletur. Leo Hom. 7. de Passione.
The legal Feast of the Passover, at the fulfilling of it, was changed, both
at once. Fulfilled and changed, at one time, both. No distance between. And
fulfilled (I am sure) it was in the Apostles time, and so changed then also.

2. Proof, by Story.
If you will see it deduced in story, that may you too. Thus. Of himself
Irenaeus writes, Eusebius. 4. c. 14.
that he was brought up in Asia under Polycarpus; and that he (young though he
were) observed and remembered well all his course of life. And namely, how
coming to Rome in Anicetus time, he kept his Easter there. Not when Anicetus
kept it, but keep it he did though. In the keeping they agreed: in the time
they differed. Either held his own.

Polycarpus then kept Easter. Now Polycarpus, had lived and conuersed with the
Apostles, was made Bishop by them, Bishop of Smyrna, ( Irenaeus and Tertullian
say it directly) Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Tertull. de praescript. c. 32.
and he is supposed to be the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.8. And
Polycarpus (as says Irenaeus) Polycarpus kept Easter with S. John and the rest
of the Apostles. (...).
kept Easter with S. John, and with the rest of the Apostles, totidem verbis.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 26.

Polycrates in his Epistle there (in Eusebius) expressly says, Eusebius. l. 5.14.
S. Philip the Apostle kept it.
that S. Philip the Apostle kept it. If Saint Philip and S. John (by name) If
the rest of the Apostles had it, then, nos habemus is true; then, is it
Apostolic.

3. Proof from the Lords day.
But yet we have a more sure ground then all these: The LORDS DAY has
testimony in Scripture, Apoc. 1.10.
I insist upon that; that Easter day must needs be as ancient as it. For how
came it to be the Lords day? but that, as it is in the Psalm, the Lord made
it? Psalm. 1 8.8.
And why made he it? but because on it, the Stone cast aside (that is CHRIST)
was made the Head stone of the corner? that is, because then the LORD rose,
because his Resurrection fell upon it? Aug. Ep. 119.13. Dies Dominicus
Christianis Resurrectione Domini declaratus est, and ex illo habere caepit
festiuitatem suam.


Now, what a thing were it, that all the Sundays in the year that are but
abstracts (as it were) of this day (the very day of the Resurrection) that they
should be kept: and this day, the day it self, the prototype and archetype of
them all, should not be kept, but laid aside quite, and be clean forgotten?
That, the day in the week we should keep; and the day in the month it self,
and return of the year, we should not keep? Even of very congruitie, it is
to be as they, and somewhat more.

Take example by our selves. For His Majesty's deliverance the fifth of August:
for His Majesty's, and ours the fifth of November (being Tuesday both) for these
a kind of remembrance we keep, on Tuesday every week in the year. But when
by course of the year in their several months, the very original days
themselves come about: shall we not? do we not celebrate them in much more
solemn manner? what question is there? weigh them well, you will find the case
alike. One cannot be, but the other also must be Apostolic.

8. Proof of the Churches custom for Easter
1 The custom of Baptism.
1 For the last proof I have yet reserved, one: or rather, three in one. 1The
custom of Baptism, known to have been ministered as upon that day, all the
Primitive Church through. A thing so known, as their Homilies de Baptismo were
most upon that day. Saint Basils I name. In his upon Easter day, he shows the
custom of baptizing then, and the reason for it.

2 The custom of the censures then determining.
2 The use of the keys, at that time specially. Then, were the censures
inflicted: then were they released. 1Inflicted: Against that time, did S. Paul
cut off the incestuous person, that a little leven might not swore them all.
Even against the time that 1 Cor. 5.7.8.
Christ our Passover was offered, and they therefore to hold this Feast. Can.
5.
2Released. So you shall find the Council of Ancyra (elder then that of Nice)
order, the censures should determine all, endure no longer then the Great Day
(so in their common speech they termed Easter) and then, all to be restored.
Can 5.
3To which purpose the Counsel of Nice took order, there should be in Lent a
Synod yearly to this end: that by it all quarrels being taken up, and all
things set straight, they might be in better case, to come with their oblation
at Easter, to the Sacrament.

3 The custom of a Communion.
And last, by the never broken custom of a solemn Eucharist, ever upon this
day. Origin in his seventh upon Exodus, he says, Our Easter day far passes
the Jewish Easter. They had no Manna on theirs: (The Passover was eaten in
Egypt, Manna came not till they were in the wilderness:) But we (says he) we
never keep our Passover, but we are sure of Manna upon it, the true Manna,
the bread of life that came down from Heaven. Ioh. 6.50,58.
For they had no Easter then without a Communion.

Leo ioynes both; Hom. 6. de Quadrag.
(he might well all three.) Paschalis quippe solennitatis hoc est proprium,
This is a peculiar that Easter day has, vt in ea tota Ecclesia, remissione
gaudeat peccatorum: That on it, all the whole Church obtains remission of
their sins. One part, qui sacro Baptismate renascuntur, by virtue of the
solemn Baptism then ministered: The rest, by benefit of the Eucharist they
then receive; ad rubiginem mortalitatis (it is his term) to the scouring off
the rust which our mortality gathers by the sins and errors of the whole
year.

I will conclude all, with the words which Saint Ambrose concludes his 83. (his
Paschall Epistle, with,) to the Bishops of Aemilia: Ergo, cum tot veritatis
indicia concurrant, iuxta maiorum exemplum, Festum hoc publicae salutis, laeti
exultantesque celebremus. Since then there be so many proofs for this truth
that thus meet: according to the example of our forefathers, let us with joy
and gladness keep this Feast of our common salvation. How? Sumamus spiritu
feruenti Sacramentum in azymis sinceritatis. Let us receive the holy Sacrament,
with the sweet bread of sincerity. Posts nostros, vbi est ostium verbi,
sanguine Christi, in fide passionis, coloremus. The posts of the door of our
mouth (that is) our lips, let us die them with the Blood of Christ, in the
faith of his blessed Passion. Ensuing the steps of the Apostles and the
Churches of God (all:) with whom joining in both, let us expect the blessing of
GOD upon us. etc.

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XVIII.


