A Short discourse of the life of Seruingmen, plainly expressing the way that
is best to be followed, and the means whereby they may lawfully challenge a
name and title in that vocation and fellowship.

With certain letters very necessary for Seruingmen, and other persons to
peruse. With diverse pretty inventions in English verse.

Hereunto is also annexed a treatise, concerning manners and behauiours.

Imprinted at London for Ralphe Newberrie, dwelling in Fleetestrete, a little
above the Conduit.

1578.

Precepts for Seruingmen.
WHO dwelles in place where Envy raines,
and spendes his life in clubbish soil,
Shall reap but heaps of endless pains,
and put his life to weary toil.
Who so believes tattling tales,
Proceeding out of every pate,
The fort of Envy surely scales,
and yeldes him self to froward fate.
Who hears much and medleth least,
shall escape the sling of chiding chaps:
Who seeks to live at quiet rest,
must be content what ever haps.
TO HIS LOVING Cousin Marmaduke Darell, and to all Seruingmen: Walter Darell
wishes you long life, with happy days.
MY well-beloved Cousin,
each living thing created on earth, as well the brutish beasts, as also
fethered souls, yeldes tribute to man. The Ox yeldes his neck to the yoke,
his skin to make shoes, and his flesh to be eaten. The Sheep, his carcass
for the relief of man, his fleese to make cloth to cover our limbs, whereby
we are defended from stormy Winter. The Goose gives her feathers to make
shafies for defense of our country, her quilles to make pens, which write
laws and statutes: whereby our Common weal is maintained and vpholden. If
this disposition be found in things mere void of reason and understanding,
much more ought man to yield account of his talent, since God has created him
after his own similitude and likeness, endued him with wisdom, and given
him such preeminence, that all things on earth are under his subjection. The
consideration whereof (my well-beloved Cousin) has moved me at this present to
pen this simple volume, as a testimony of the good will which I bear you:
whose ability, had it been answerable to good will, would have then assuredly
presented you with a jewel of far greater value, the which, if you accept in
good part, my labor has his hire, and you shall not only encourage me to
employ my study to a matter of deeper judgment, but toward you always,
during life, bind me firm and faithful.

To the Reader.
THIS one thing I find most true and evident (gentle Reader,) that nothing
more infecteth the mind of man, then the horrible monster idleness: by the
which we daily see, no small number drenched in the Seas of manifold miseries.
Like as iron, if it be not occupied, will quickly wax rustie: and as a flower
or plant placed in fertile soil, without water will lose the sap, and become
withered: even so, the mind of man, if it be not exercised, will eftsoone
become dull, and alter his quality. This being undoubtedly found most plain
and manifest, that idleness is incident to so many casual calamities, has
encouraged me to present thee with these simpleinuentions, altogether for an
exercise, then any vain glory: least otherwise, my mind fraught with
idleness, become dull for want of exercise. Thus, hoping thou will take them
in good part, I bid thee farewell.

A pretty and short discourse of the duty of a Seruingman.
Although the Seruingman be disdained, and had in small regard amongst a
number: yet does he deserve to be had in high estimation for his worthiness
and calling. Who in all our country makes a brauer show at a triumph then
the Seruingman? Who sooner trained to battle and becomes a Soldier? Who
better delights the mind with pleasant exercise, as hawking, hunting, and
such like, then the Scruingman? Not every one having a blade by his side, or
liuerie cote on his back, may be termed a Seruingman: for some there are which
will crowd them selves into their company, whose brutish lives never saw one
point of service: such may be properly called Hindes. Hindes.


For four especial points there are, whereby to know a Seruingman:
Godliness, Clenlinesse, Four points to know a seruingman, to be godly,
cleanly, bold, and diligent.
Audacitie, and Diligence, which are the chiefest ornaments that garnishe his
person, without the which he may not be embraced amongst that worthy
company. For this word Seruingman, has great relation to his kind: for a
Seruingman may be applied to diverse commodities: as serving God, serving his
Prince, serving his Country, which way he may profit his Common weal, and
not to bear the name of a Seruingman only for outward show, who in living are
viler then senseless beasts, wanting civil government, who may be well
compared unto Drones, which lurk in the hiues of Bees, and live by their
labors. But him I account worthy that calling, which for one singular quality
Who deserve to be rightly and properly called Seruingmen
deserves the same: as some for the gift of the mind, some for the exploites
in defense of his country, some for actiuitie, some for cunning in weapons,
some for riding of horses, some for service at a table, with diverse other
things apt for a seruingman, which are evident tokens that he has employed his
youth to that end and purpose, whereby to attain to some preferment and win
credit, whereby he may be received into the number of Seruingmen.

What makes the Citizens, yea and the countriemen have in such disdain the
seruingman? Only Causes of contempt and disdain conceived against Seruingmen.
his lewd government, as riott in apparel, drunkenness, quarelling in the
streets, playing unthriftily at dice and cards their substance, swearing most
detestable and horrible other: whereby we daily see, by that means they
hazard their health, and discredit themselves by such disorder: who wantonly
consuming the same, are forced through extreme want and necessity, to robb
and steal, that oftimes hardly they escape without peril of death. By this
means they much hinder the preferment of Seruingme^. Such have I thought good
to be termed reprobates: for there cannot be more commendation Reprobates.
in a Seruingman, then to see his life clearly lead by virtue, always
applying his mind to honest exercise: for otherwise his estate and calling of
due order and government is deprived: for happy days exceed the heaped
sums. And of this be assured, such company as thou frequentest, of such
conversation art thou judged. Therefore the more thou indeuourest thy self in
virtuous exercises, the greater is thy glory and renown.

Percase to some in this world, to live in such sort, thou shall be
accounted ridiculous. It may be of those which want government: but such as
are lead by wisdoms rule, and policy, shall have thee in no small price and
high estimation: the more virtue thou embracest, the greater is thy credit.
And further, there is annexed to ye duty of a Seruingma^, these three
special points, to be Gentle, Trusty and Careful; for wanting Gentleness, he
is contemned: having no Credit, always mistrusted: Gentle, Trusty, Careful.
void of Care, little regarded.

We see daily by experience, how circumspecte each Gentleman is, in receiving
a servant, doubtful to take him without great warrantize: and this is, by
reason that youth having their liberty, and nouzeled so long in idleness, are
prone and apt to vice and wickedness, utterly undoing them selves thorough
their own wilfulness, that impossible it is, to bring them to any perfection,
as the old saying manifestly affirms. Naturam expellas furca licet, vsque
recurret.


That which is ingraffed by nature, neither threatenings, or any persuasion may
alter: And if it happen such one, who having their liberty, be enterteined
into service: what offense so ever he commit to his master, he thinks it
great scorn to be reformed, be is of so vile and dogged a nature: and this is
the cause, so many are maisterlesse: whereby it comes to pass, that services
are purchased by money. For a number, having good qualities, and descended of
honest parentage: by their means are greatly hindered. For what is the common
saying amongst most men? If a Seruingman repair to a maid or widow, by way
of marriage, whereby to win himself preferment, but straightway they murmur
amongst themselves, backebiting him shamefully with flaunderous speeches,
calling him spend thrist. A lamentable hearing, that all Seruingmen, for some
lewd perfome sakes, should be condemned: for this is most certain, that the
least fault a Seruingman comitteth, is greatly remembered: therefore it
stands them upon, to have special regard to avoyde suspicion, considering
their credit is their chiefest riches, which once being lost, of the world they
are forsaken.

An other kind of Seruingmen there is, which professes that life but upon
extremity, and that is the Seruingmen upon extremity.
rich Farmours son, who hearing the drum sound preparing to muster, is
meruellous fearful to become a soldier, lamenting heavily to his cockering
mother, to he a means for him he may not be pressed: for (says he) I am your
only dearling, and to see me miscarrie it would shorten your days: for of this
I am assured, that if I go on warfare, I am never like to return home again
to my fathers house: for my fortune was read me, when I was a little one, that
I should be shot quite thorough with a gunne: therefore, (honnie mother) as
you tender my safety, procure me a service, that I may farrie at home. Then
the mother, (to save the pretty soul) seeks out some present, and in have
repaireth to some Gentleman of credit, and upon request made, forthwith is
received, and thus for fear of his costerd becomes a Seruingman. Then
Gentlemen perceiving they may have servants Gratis, Service without wages.
without wages, which will play the Seruingmen, and drudge in their business,
turn out old seruitors to go pick dasies, who far from friends and
acquaintance, being vnexperte of trade and occupation, fall into desperation,
by means of poverty.

So that hereby the Farmour makes a rod for his own tail: for it stands
by good reason, that being once in adversity, if they have any spark of
manhood in them, rather then they will want relief they will seek to come by
it by unlawful means. And who will they lie in weight to rob, and be
revenged of, but on such rich churles, as were causes of their undoing. And
thus they, by their double diligence, labor and take such pains, that they
creep in such favor with their master, who with their profitable service is
so infected with covetousness, that he has no consideration of his old
servants true and faithful diligence, who for their long service, have well
deserved a just recompense. So that the Gentleman and the Yeoman, as well the
one as Gentlemen and yeomen do cause service to decay.
the other, have brought services to a very weak stay, that a number at this
day have servants and give them no wages: and if they have any one serving
him, which wants living, if he has not some good quality, in good faith of
his master he shall be little regarded.

Therefore the estate of a seruingman is brought to this point, that if he
practice not some trade in his youth, let him be assured to beg in his age,
as the proverb manifestly affirms: Qui ante non cauet post dolebit. He that
has no care before what mischiefs may afterward ensue, shall greatly repent
him.

Those which upon such extremity profess the life of Seruingmen, may be
properly called Sucklinges, or otherwise Caterpillars: for they hinder
Sucklings or Caterpillars.
those which long time have served, not profiting them selves, but wasting
their substance: So that hereby they think to eschew one mischief, but
undoubtedly they fall into a worser. For they use a kind of diligence, but to
serve their own turns: But as soon as the brunt is past, they begin to
wax lazy, and take heart at grass, thinking with them selves, What dizards
are we having rich parents, A supposed speech.
and wealth enough to maintain our calling, to moyle and toil in such sort,
and other of our fellows, having little or nothing to take to, carry the
countenance of Gentlemen, and we to live thus like slaves? Then labor is
turned to loytering, the nosegay in the hatt to an Ostrich fether, his russet
slapp to a french hose, his buckled shoe to a Spanishe pumpe, his sparing life
to prodigality, until of All upon brauer(...)e.
force they become soldiers: for they creep so deep into the merchantes
books, and beecome such proper Billmen, that in the end their silks sweates
out all their revenues. Thus they, not content with their own estates, aspire
to be Gentlemen, by means of their fine array, that they grow so lusty, that
they think scorn of their own parents: but it is commonly seen, The forward
tree bears less fruit.

What avails the mariner to sail without his compass? What good does a
fair house wanting implementes of household? What profits brave clothes in
any person wanting wit and government? They may be aptly compared unto a
corrupt Carrion in a golden cup: let them deck themselves never so gaie, and
want the chiefest ornament, that is Wisdom, in good faith, they shall be but
embraced amongst the most sort of men for lucre or gain, and Wisdom a
principal ornament.
foothed for that they have. Therefore, in my simple opinion, I think it more
credit for them, to go in the fore ward amongst the number of yeomen, then to
come last in the number of Gentlemen, being always fearful to challenge that
title: so that, when all is gone, from the country cart they came, and to the
London cart they must, that they ring such a peale that they draw a yearde of
clean hemp besides the knott.

But now, to come to the chief point and purpose which beautifieth a
seruingman, which is, To To be godly is the chiefest thing that beautifleth a
Seruingman.
be godly. Nothing can prosper which we take in hand, or go about, unless we
apply our mind to the service of God: for him must we honor above all
things, either in heaven or earth, believe in him only to be our Savior, ask
for all good things of him alone: We must be content, not only for the glory
of God, to bestow our goods, but also our life, if God so requires: to cleave
unto him as the foundation of all goodness, to look for health at his hands,
to serve him in all kind of fortune, to seek his glory above all things,
and to serve him according to his word, to walk in such sort as seems to
his glory, not in banqueting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying: but always have God before our eyes.
Remember we live not to eat, but eat to live: for nature is content with a
little: whatsoever is superfluous, is sinful and damnable. Remember that
Adam and Eve did fall thorough gluttony. Remember that Noe, when he was
drunk, was Particular examples touching the in conueniences springing from
excessive eating and drinking.
uncovered in his tent, and lay with his priuities bare. Remember that Loath,
when he was drunk, committed incest with his daughters. Remember when the
children of Israel sat down to eat and drink, they did straight way fall
into idolatry and worshipped the golden Calfe. Remember that Amon, the brother
of Absolon, was slain at a banquet, when he was drunk. Remember that
Holofernes being drunk, was slain of a woman. Remember that at a banquet, it
was granted that Saint John the Baptist should lose his head, and yet no
cause why: but for informing the king with truth, which the flatterers
misliked of, and could not abide. Remember the rich glutton, that fared
deintily every day, was buried and thrown down into hell. Remember the
wickedness of Sodom was pride, fullness of meat, and abundance of idleness.
How many diseases come thereof? Solomon says, Where is woe? where is sorrow?
where is strife? where is bralling? where are oaths: but amongst those which
use such vices? These are terrible histories to admonish a seruingman:
therefore it is the duty of a Christian, to eschew such company: for such as
are dronkards and riottous persons shall come to poverty. Therefore we must
frame our lives in such sort, that we may live soberly, discreetely, and
sagely: to institute our lives in such sort, that our own conscience never
accuse us of any evil, but testify with us, that Who may rightly challe^ge
the name of a Seruingman.
we live to do all things godly, and he that lives thus, may rightly
challenge the name of a Seruingman.

There is a certain drunkenness as well in the mind, as in the body: for like
as the body is counted in sober and safe estate, so long as it is not
distempered with superfluity of meats and drinks: so in like manner, so long
as the mind is not troubled with vicious affectes, but remains in his native
purity, it is recounted sober. For a man must have aspeciall respect to the
mind, which being dronken with vices, what does the sobriety of the body
profit? If I keep my body sober, and in never so good temperance, and my
mind be dronken with ire, desire of vengeance, whoredom, unclean thoughts,
and such other carnal affects, and worldly lusts, what does the sobriety of
the body profit? Therefore, as the body is to be kept from dronckennesse, so
must the mind be kept from vices: so shall we honor God highly, serve our
Prince truly, and profit our selves greatly, and beecome right Serving men.

And now touching the second point, called The second point required in a
Seruingman.
Cleanliness, which is meant, that we should wear our garments in comely
order, according to our ability and calling, and according to such laws as by
our Prince are set forth and established: and not always in excess, and
delighting in new fashions, which declares that our minds are unsteadfast,
and always wavering: wherein we work our utter undoing. For we are so pufte
up in such pride and prodigality, that if we may not wear silks and veluets,
we think it a great disgrace to our personages, wherein we hinder our
Country, and inriche foreign nations. For if we would wear cloth made in
our own Country, according to our predecessors, we should find it a great
deal more commodious, and minister much relief to a number of poor people,
in setting them aworke: where now, they remain in extreme poverty, and all
by means of prodigality, being not content with the benefits of our
Country. The Frocke makes not the Friar more devout, but is rather a sign of
Religion, then a proof of holiness. The feathers make not the bird, nor the
garments the man. So, glory rests not in the outward show, be it never so
sumptuous, but in the person garnished with honest qualities. For the mind
delighting in pride and prodigality, lusts after much wickedness. It is not
the rich ornament that carries commendation, but a modest mind and honest
conversation. If a man, having small portion, spends riotously far beyond
his ability, men straight way will conjecture that he comes by it by
fraudulent means, and is reputed amongst them as a wicked liver. And if any
unlawful attempt be committed, be he assured, he shall be suspected. And
although he be neither privy or consenting to the fact, yet by means of
suspicion his name is brought in question. Therefore, in any wise have respect
to thy calling.

I know a number within these few years, if I said an hundred I went within
my compass, having large possessions left them, have prodigally consumed the
same: wherein, if they had observed a civil order, they might have had
sufficient enough to have kept their estates, and besides mainteyned good
hospitality: But where wisdom wants, there follows decay. A ship not
guided, is subject to danger: the brains being distempered, the pate will be
idle: the roots being rotten, the tree will perish. And so thirdly concerning
audacitie, which may be properly called boldness, which being tempered with
modesty, sets forth a Seruingman Audacitie and boldness sets out a
Seruingman in comely order.
in comely order: for this word Boldness, has many good virtues in it
comprehended. Be bold to honor God. Be bold to defend thy Country. Be bold
to follow such laws as thy Prince has ordained. Be bold to speak truth.
By boldness in battle, great honors have been won. By boldness, mean
persons have inioyed fair Ladies. By boldness the valiant captain has
discovered many strange countries. And, as the proverb affirms: Audaces
Fortuna iuuat timidosque repellit.
Fortune much favors the stout and the valiant: but the faint heart, and the
coward she utterly forsakes. And if it chance, thou art sent of any message,
be bold to do thy duty: with humble reverence let thy talk be tempered, in
such modest manner, that each word be couched in due order. Have respect to thy
talk, that thou use comely gesture: thy legs not crooked, but straight as
may be: neither thy hands playing with any of thy garments: thy eyes not
staring, but always keeping a modest countenance. And if upon courtesy thou
art called to any worshipful table, let not thy tongue be lavish, or run at
liberty: so shall thou discredit thy self, and be accounted simple. Use not
often quaffing at thy meal, but three or four times let be sufficient. Reach
not thy hands over the table, nor put thy fingers often in the dishe: for it
exceeds good manner. For being a stranger, each one will carue thee. Keep
not thy knife always in thy hand, but at such time convenient, as thou have
occasion to cut thy victuals, but lay it on the cloth along by the trencher.
And if thou art asked a question, answer him sagely with humble reverence.

And so fourthly, concerning diligence, which Diligence, what preferments it
procures to such as use it.
may be aptly applied to Painfulnesse. We see no man can atteine to any riches,
without great labor and diligence: as to watch, when other sleep: to
travel, when other rest: to work, when other play. How many have we daily
seen raised from mean estate, to rule and govern Commonweals, and only by
their diligence? Have not diverse by their industry been called to Princes
Counsel? Have we not seen the Lawyers pass by degrees, and determine causes
in seat of Justice? The simple scholar has thereby much profited. The
unskillful apprentice, in time has been very cunning in his trade and
occupation. By diligence, we may quite alter our wicked lives, and become
Christians.

Lastly, have not many men, serving their lords and masters, been rewarded
with livings, thorough painfulness, whereby they have been maintained during
their lives? Therefore, Lilly herein most wisely affirms, saying these
words: Nil tam difficile est quod non solertia vincat:
Nothing is so hard to learn, but by diligence it is brought to pass.
Aristotle spent his youth very Aristotle. Plato. Cato.
riottously, and Plato was no less addicted to delight in amorous verse. Cato
was old before he learned Latin letters, and yet became one of the greatest
Orators of his time. These examples are sufficient to prove, that by diligence
any perfection may be atteined. Let no man stand so much in his own conceit,
as to say, I will do no more then my covenant requires: Or, if thou art
descended of a worshipful stock, to grow in stomache by means of
gentilitie. Neither, if thou art borne to any possessions, to think it a
scorn by means of thy riches. For this hinders not so much thy self, but
does rather minister ill counsel to a number, and makes them withdraw their
minds from doing well, and to follow lewd example. For if thou be never so
noble of birth, if thou once become a servant, whatsoever thou do to thy
master above thy promise, if it tend to his profit and commodity, is but
thy bounden duty. Again, if such a one which does his duty far beyond
his covenant, if for his labor he be not considered, in good faith he serves
a simple master. But be he assured, although he find no reward on earth, his
master in heaven shall largely yield him double recompense.

I never saw as yet, any in my life, for too much diligence employed to their
masters, that did ever want in their aged days: but many (the more is the
pity) I do know, for slacking their duties, and untrusty service, have
beggered their masters, who with a just plague for their labor, have been
rewarded according to their deserts: whose estates at this present time are
most miserable to behold: wandering as outcastes amongst the froth and
Untrusty servant, frothe and scomme of the people.
scomme of unhappy people. What if thou did acquaint thy self to learn
or practice all kind of things touching the charge of housekeeping, from the
simple plowman unto the superior servant? were this any disgrace to thy
calling? no certainly, but rather a commodity: for thou shall gather thereby
great knowledge and understanding. For, what thing is more perfect then that,
which we learn by experience? We may not think to live always in service,
but at the last to have house and family of our own: then the experience
which we have learned through our diligence, shall instruct us the better, what
belongs to the duty of our own servants.

And if so be thou art in credit with thy master, that it pleases him to
make account of thee above Pride and disdain must be avoided.
the rest of thy fellows, be not therefore proud, and disdain not thine
inferiors, for so shall thou have many enemies: but rather the more in
credit, the more courteous. For, courtesy, is the only badge of a Gentleman
and descends from nobility. Again, Courtesy the cognizance and badge of a
Gentleman.
gentle communication and friendly countenance, one to another, expels all
rancour and malice, and purchases many friends. Did not Antonius the lusty
gallant prefer Cleopatra the black Egyptian for her incomparable courtesy
before all the blasing stars in the city of Rome? It is the only pathway to
praise, and the brightness thereof is eclipsed by pride and arrogancy. What
is Honor, Wealth, Beauty, or brave Attire, without courtesy? It is assuredly
nothing else but a goodly green tree, which florisheth with leaves and
blossoms, and brings forth no fruit.

Some there are, which will stand highly upon their reputation, for that they
have a reasonable portion to lean unto, and holds it great scorn to
associate them selves with their fellows of inferior calling, being not of
like ability: some again, for their stock and kindred. Such persons as will
grow hautie by means of their wealth (being the gifts of Fortune, which is
uncertain) abuse the Vanity and folly to brag of kindred or of riches.
same. And such which glory in them selves by means of their great aliaunce,
declare to be in them but mere foolishness. Assure thy self of this, that if
thou art alied to many, and yet have but fews friends, what profits thee
to boast of thy high birth? For, if thou have never so many kinsmen, and if
thou do not endeavor thy self some kind of way to pleasure them, their
friendship toward thee in time of need will become weak and very slender,
and thou thy self little accounted of. But perhaps, if thou visitest them as a
stranger, much welcome: but if thou account it as thy home, they will compare
thee to a fresh water fish, which being kept long, will savor and become
lothfome: Even so, if thou burden thy friends otherwise then a guest ought to
do, they will repine at thee. Therefore, neither for birth or riches, be not
disdainful, but the more courteous, if thou will be well thought of. For, have
we not read of Kings governing whole kingdoms, and other Nobles, with large
revenues living in all felicity, have abandoned their countries, and lived in
most miserable bondage? Such is the reward of those that grow proud, and
are unthankful for that they have. For Fortune fraudulent and faithless.
it is commonly seen, that when Fortune smileth most on any mortal wight,
then works she greatest deceit. As she has pleasure to raise mean persons
to credit and dignity, so likewise takes she as great delight to throw
them down into adversity.

Delight not to complain of any of thy fellows, Complaints must be eschewed.
to currie favor and disquiet thy master: but after a friendly manner use
gentle persuasions, that if any of thy fellows have neglected his duty, tell
him secreatly that it may be reformed. At thy masters table have great care
and diligence, and especially Precepts concerning manners and behavior.
at such time as there are many strangers. Listen not to every tale that at
the board is recited: and if so be it minister occasion of laughter, yet in any
wise do thou refrain and keep silence. Let thine eyes be fixed round about
the table, lest bread, beer, or clean trenchers be wanting. Never offer to
take any dishe from the table, unless thou set a better in his place, or
else when thou see it almost empty: but if there be not diversity of
dishes, then take up the table: notwithstanding, be not so hasty, but until
such time as they have talked awhile after their victuals: but at the court,
Quick Caruers in Court.
the sooner the better: for there are quick caruers. Use not often figging in
and out with a trencher, more delighting to fill thy paunche, then thou have
care of thy service: although thy master epsy thee not, yet strangers will
mark thee. Use not any uncomely speech at thy meal, which shall exceed the
bounds of honesty, amongst thy fellows, and Chastity once spotted is never
reiouered.
chiefly before maids: considering their chastity is a dangerous treasure,
which once being spoiled, is never recovered. For, that maid, whose ear is
pliant to lascivious talk, although her chastity take no damage, yet
suspicion does grawe amongst the common people. Take heed in any wise of
horrible swearing, least that thou incur Gods Swering may not be used.
heavy displeasure: for Falsa iuratio est damnosa, vera iuratio est
periculosa, nulla iuratio est secura. A false oath is damnable, a true oath is
perilous, and no oath is safe, unless it be before a magistrate: in causes of
controversy. Report not any thing which shall be spoken at thy masters table,
unless it touch thy Prince and Sovereign, for so shall thou soon purchase
his heavy displeasure: but always have this saying in thy mind, Video and
taceo, I see and hold my peace: which (no doubt) well observed, shall further
thy quietness. Challenge not to thy self finer fare then reason requires:
neither find often Behavior at boorde.
fault with any of thy victuals, unless thou see it very scarce and
unreasonable: reuite not the cook for the same, until thy master be privy
of his dealings: for some time thy master may fare but homly by means of
foul weather, and other casualties: for many misfortunes be happen in
housekeeping. Therefore, be content with such fare as thou would give thine
own servants, if thou had a house of thine own. And if thou happen to
travel Behavior abroad.
to any place, where thou see any novelties, which thou art assured thy
master or maistres well likes of, spare not for the price, although it be
dear: but buy somewhat. For, what is better esteemed then that which is
geason? And it is worthy double thanks, then if thou were required.

When thou ridest any journey with thy master, do not use to loyter far
behind, and chiefly when he passes through any town or village: but while
thou art in presence of people, keep a comely order: for that is commendable,
and much for his worship: but if thou be careless; then thou challengest an
interest amongst the four and twenty orders.

When thou come at night to thy Inn, have care of thy master, that his
lodging may in any wise be sweet and cleanly, his sheets white washed, and
very well ayred, his boots see forthwith made clean and stuffed with straw
in time of foul wether, and bring them up to his chamber: see nothing be
wanting when he rises next morning. Have care to the Tapsters, what
necessaries they bring, and reckon what things they set on the table: for
Tapsters use iuggling.
they will use iuggling to maintain their bravery. And when thou art abroad
in journey with thy master, be not negligent: but at night, when thou go to
bed, and quietly art laid, call to mind what things thou have done all the
whole day, as also what weighty affairs have been committed to thy charge,
and thou shall with continual use bring thy self to a most quick and
perfect memory, and shall not only by this means have a good remembrance,
but besides, if thou have spent the day in the abuse of God, and his glory,
thou may with a repentant heart call thine own conscience to reckoning, and
ask God mercy, and the sooner prepare thy self ready when God shall call
thee.

Certain Letters very necessary for Seruingmen.
W. B. to his singular good Lord for his captivity.
RIght honorable,
the consideration of my present calamities, causes me to make my careful
co^plaintes, with all humble and duetifull submission, persuading my self,
that there is no such way to remedy my grief, and restore again to it self
a mind perplexed and pitifully plunged through diverse deep distresses, then
there to unfold the same, where justice with mercy, where severity with
remorce, where pity with pardon in the meanest offenses rules and has her
Souereigntie. And whereas I know my self guiltles of any grievous and
notorious Remedies against grief.
crime, I am the more imboldened to write unto your honor, not doubting, but
there I shall find favor and grace, where God and Nature has most
abundantly bestowed the same: and that you will of your exceeding bounty,
clemency, and goodness, pardon folly not joined with any impiety, I
beseech you, even for his sake that saved us all, that you will not suffer me
to be utterly cast away: A petition opening his present case.
for I am destitute of money and all manner of friendship: and unless you
speedily show grace and favor, I utterly perish, being threatened to be
thrown down amongst the froth and scomme of the unhappy people. I trust
your honor remembers well, that more true praise and glory is atteined by
pardoning, then by punishing. All the Roman Princes were of this opinion. We
hold it (says the history) more honorable, to pardon such as offend us,
then to chasten those which resist our power. And verily, punishment is a thing
natural and humane: but to give pardon and life, is the gift and blessing of
God: by which it comes to pass, that men esteem not the greatness and
majesty of the immortal God for the punishment where with he corrects us,
as for the mercy he uses. Wherefore, I humbly yield, and most willingly
submitt my self to your honors grace, favor, and mercy.

R. S. to his friend T. D. for his long imprisonment.
RIght honorable.
If two brutishe creatures, together long continuing, be separated, they will
(according to their kind) show forth a passion: the Lion will roar, the Cow
will yell, the Swine will grunt, the Dog cannot but fill the air with an
intolerable and yrke some howling. If this disposition be found in things
mere void of reason and understanding, much more is the condition of man
subject to sorrow and heaviness, in whom Nature breeds a more quick and
raging sense of feeling: in so much (I think verily) that so many times a man
suffers death, how often in a day he sees him self shut up, or divided
from the society he dearly and tenderly loves: or exiled the place which he
chiefly likes. It is (no doubt) right terrible to the flesh, to die with the
sword: but to To be in perpetual sorrow and heaviness of mind, what it may well
be termed.
be in perpetual sorrow and heaviness of mind, may not so well be termed a
death, as a very fury and hellishe torment. And better it were for many to
suffer without fear, that which they expecte in grief and pensiveness of
spirit, then trembling to be always in martyrdom. Right honorable, I utter
not these speeches, to show my guilt, which I trust appears not heinous in
your eyes: as to manifest my grief, which to me is found most tedious, and
too too exceeding raging: feeling (as it were) my body faint and wearied,
being pressed with the weighty burden of your heavy displeasure.

Wherefore (most worthy counselor) exercise upon me the plenty of your
bounty, that I may living rather commend your mercy, then in silence
complain of your severity. And thus leaving your worthiness in the hands of
your counsel, I wish you those felicities which your own heart desires.

H. L. to his singular good maistresse, for procuring his pardon.
THis one thing I learned by the instinct and benefit of nature, (my
Sovereign good maistres) had I never perused learned treatises discoursing
manifoldly the self same in effect: that, Happy days exceed the heaped
sums, and long life, (according to the opinion of all) to them cheefely is
found most sweet and plausible, who being daungerously intrapped, have
despaired of pity, or as Long life, to whom it is most sweet and pleasant.
wanderers through want of a skillful Pilote, have fallen into the swallowing
surge of Silla, ready to be devoured in that gulf, and as it were yelding to
so great a misery and wretchedness. For this stands in common regard with
all, rather to seek to prolong our life, then increase our wealth. And the
Sovereign delight, and the pleasure of our days, is the solace of life. This
being undoubtedly found most true and evident, that there is in us ingraffed an
earnest and ardent affection of life, and that life to them is found most
dear and pleasant, who have been in peril of death: How should I be
addressed, or in what manner may I yield all obseruaunce to her, by whose
petition and earnest suite, I have avoided the terror of death? Uerily, it is
not in my slender capacity to disclose the duty that aunswers your desert,
the insufficiency and baseness of the one, is so much inferior to the other,
Desert exceeding duty.
in the exceeding greatness and goodness. Wherefore, since my skill and
ability is too simple to express lively a thing of so high a nature, I close
my lips, as one vanquished with the excellency of your goodness. Thus
rendering imnortall praise for your great goodness, and craving pardon for my
presumptuous boldness, I most humbly take my leave, beseeching God to lend
you long life with happy days.

W. S. to his loving father, declaring that the cause why he did not write, was
for his unhappy state.
I Have this long time forborne to write unto you (dear father) not in any
negligent respect, as not remembering with what humility I am bound by the
law of God to obey you, or with what affection I am enjoined by the law of
Nature to reverence The cause of slacking duty.
you: but Fortune, since my departure from you, seems to have dealt with me
so frowardly, that I have been by no good order induced to give you
intelligence of my estate, lest that percase the opinion of misliking which is
already in your ingendered, viewing the continuance of these my so many
casual calamities, might to my great hinderaunce confirm in you a judgment.
And yet, what have I not to fore painefully abode, which presently I do not
with all patience suffer, reteining always a resolute and unconquerable mind?
For this, by perusing witty and profound discourses of Philosophers, I learn:
that albeit adversity has power to vex and trouble the condition of mortal
men: yet it has no power to change the constancy and courage of a valiant
and puissant mind, which in all resolutions and chaunges of times, reteines
one firm and immovable virtue: Even as a tree which being well rooted,
although it be shaken with many violent winds, yet in his firm there is no
power to supplant him. We through adversity become humble, wise, and perfect:
and the offender is better reformed by the proof of afflictions, then by any
other means: for, knowing them to be the messengers of God, he debateth not
the griefs he feels, but calls his own conscience to a reckoning:
Afflictions are the messengers of God.
he glorifieth him self in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings
patience, patience breeds experience, experience raises hope, hope thus
wrought and couched, cannot be confounded. In consideration whereof, I deem
him most unhappy, which has not been unfortunate: for he that He is
unhappy that has not been in fortunate.
has not been accussomed with adverse and crooked Fortune, has least power
over his passions. And such as never have felt perplexity, can little judge of
the worthiness of patience. Wherefore (dear father) mislike not of that which
in the end brings true and perfect felicity. I most humbly take my leave,
craving your fatherly favor and blessing.

T. D. to his inconstant wife, for her malicious stomache against him.
WIfe, I do not a little marvel at your discourteous dealing toward me:
howbeit, as I have just cause to stomache the same, so assure your self, I
will not be unmindful in yelding recompense, as opportunity and occasion
shall serve. In the mean while, I am content to speak little and suffer
much, not for that I stand in awe of you or any of yours, but that I see you
void of reason and government Women are void of reason and government.
belonging to a woman, whose crooked inclination is such, and in you so
deeply rooted, that it can no more change your condition, then the Uiper his
poisoning, or the Leopard his spots. You profess outwardly a marvelous
show of religion, I much marvel then that such mischief can harbor in so
godly a creature, whose undermining pate sought means to shorten my days. But
now I find the old proverb true? Amongst sweet flowers does lurk the
stinging Snake. It is not the point Latet anguis in herba.
of any woman once coupled in the bands of Marriage, to minister any occasion
of slander, whereby the life of him, whom she has peculiarly chosen, may be
defamed: but by all means possible to endeavor her self to avoid suspicion,
weying that all The glory of the wife rests in her husband.
her glory rests in her husband, and that in the husband is contained the
estimation of the wife. If this be the point of any honest woman to thirste
after blood, let all the world judge: for mine own part, I can but lament
your folly. In hurting me you hinder your self: I bear with your
infirmity, for that you are a woman. Wherefore, if you will further your
quietness, leave off those slanderous speeches, lest the world condemn you,
and yield you up to misery and shame.

H. W. to M. H. being moved without cause.
I Received your letters, which when I had read, me thought they were so dark
and obscure unto me, that scarce I understood your style: notwithstanding, in
perusing them over, I partly understood your meaning. But now to the purpose.
Have I gone about at any time to shorten your days? or Speeches expostulatorie.
have I sought means to erect bloody scaffoldes of murder, whereby you might
possess your untimely grave? I perceive for a trifle you can frame complaint,
but your words uttered without discretion, would move a Saint to use cursed
language. And whereas you lay an action of unkindness against me that I
should deliver a ring to one which does profess little friendship or good will
toward Charged with an action of unkindness.
you: this is (as it were) a going about the bushe, and (as one would say) to
steal a Goose and stick down a fether. Well, I fear me your flattering face
will cost me a glass of dissembling water. Thus leaving at this time to
trouble you any further, I yield you up to your own folly.

A. D. to his friend M. B. that he would procure her fathers good will.
I Received your letters, giving you a thousand thanks for your wise and
courteous answer: aduertising you, that I mean to procure my friends, which
shall (I doubt not) but according to my expectation, move your father of the
excellent love and Duty in the one, wisdom in the other.
singular affection which I bear toward you. And for as much as duty
binds you to obey your parents: so likewise wisdom warns me, not only
to obey, but also to endeavor my self to be at the will and disposition of my
friends. For sure, your godly bringing up, and your virtuous disposition, has
so bewitched my understanding, that will I or nill I, my heart honors you. And
if all the friends Patheticall phrases.
I have would hinder my desires, yet are they not able to quench the fervent
flame which tormenteth my fancy, and vexes the lively spirits of my mind.
Therefore, I shall desire you from the bottom of my heart, that when soever
my suite shall be heard, or that by the means of my friends, the effect of my
love shall be opened unto your parents, you will remain a just and steadfast
friend toward me, who has already yielded him self, his life, and all that
he has into your hands. If you seem to judge otherwise, unhappy wretch
that I am, you thrust To be thrust down from the top of hope, to the bottom
of despair.
me down headlong from the topp of all hope and comfort, into the bottomless
pit of cruel despair, where I shall as one bereft of a heavenly joy, torment
my self with a hellishe care. But when I call to mind the sundry virtues that
God and Nature has endued you withal, I fully persuade my self, that such
cruelty cannot harbor in so gentle an heart. And thus I cease, etc.

T. B. to his singular good L. for his liberty, being accused without desert.
IN most humble and dutiful manner shows unto your honor, that whereas it
pleased your good Lordship to accept most courteously my former letters, I am
the more imboldened at this time to write unto your Lordships grace and lawful
favor, desiring your protection no further to extend it self, then the
righteousness of my cause, and the simplicity and plainness of my meaning
shows forth it self. My cause lawfully and generally is A clause
excusatorie.
this. I am for an attempt lately committed, more lightly accused of some
unknown crime and trespass, then truly accused and substantially convinced
of any apparent fault. My good Lord, not every mistie and duskie vapor, but an
exceeding heavy and dark cloud well pressed prophesies rain. Not every
vain suspicion so fondly immagined, or lightly His allegory expounded.
fraught, but firmly grounded, brings with it undoubted truth and
estimation. The state of my cause, the condition of my accuser, with the
particular notes thereof, may fully manifest to your honor the cause to be
honest and good. I humbly therefore pray, that your Lordship will, with your
helping hand, assist my happlesse hap, giving you to understand, that I have
been in durance this four months, long destitute of all manner of favor,
and friendship, finding in my self no more force remaining, whereby I shall be
able to bear this heavy and intolerable burden.

H. B. to his inconstant and cruel wife.
WIfe, I fear me, lest that you, either through too much familiarity which
you have with some froward and sinister friend of mine, or malicious persuasion
of others: or, (to speak the truth) thorough an extreme oversight of you, in
deed, by detecting a secret sting of malice in your own breast long
conceived, and unto the world unknown until this time, have changed your
accustomed quality, and causes you to be so malicious and full of envy. For,
how can that woman brag of honesty, which is found to her own husband
not so much courteous, as to show some spark of good nature That wife has
little honesty which hates her husbands but she none at all that procures
his death.
in time of danger: but most cruel and full of tyranny, in procuring his
death? When this shall be openly known and manifestly published: what
countenance will all men give you which defend honesty? I say, what
interteinment, what cheer, what commendation may all such women yield to you,
who are directed by wisdoms rule and policy, whose lives are clearly ledd
by virtue? Consider that virtue is the only beauty that carries commendation
with it at all times, which makes men Virtue commends such as have it.
to love those, whom they never knew. It is the only pathway to praise, and
the brightness of all beauty is eclipsed by cruelty.

E. D. to my L. S. in the behalf of his kinsman.
MY very good Lord,
I have an earnest suite to your honor, touching one of my near kinsmen, who
has a great goodwill to bestow his time in your Lordships service, and of all
noble men has made you his singular choice. Wherefore, if you would of your
accustomed goodness, viewing the person, to receive him, you bind me in
triple bonds to requite your courtesy. And thus craving your friendly answer
herein, I most humbly take my leave.

R. S. to a widow to be circumspect in her choice.
AS my ability is not of the greatest to bestow on you such gifts, as
(perhaps) my well meaning mind pretends: yet am I not so spurned of Fortune,
but that I enjoy an honest portion. As my years are young, my wisdom but
small to give counsel: yet, nevertheless, if my words shall savor of
reason, yield thanks to the writer, and I rest contented. As God has blessed you
with the Wholesome precepts and documents.
gifts of Fortune, forget not the giver, neither yet abuse them. Lean to such
friends as are wise and of good experience. Ouershoote not your self so far,
to like without great deliberation, lest your delights be tempered with
pills of sorrow, exchanging your quiet days into extreme misery. And, in
your choice beware of painted bravery: for, to match your self to such,
brings a gnawing repentance. Therefore, let your renown be assured on such
a one, which is garnished with honest qualities. Even as the valiant Captain,
before he A man endued with honest qualities makes his wife renowned.
buy horses, he runs them, trains them, makes many trials of them, refusing
the unlikely, and makes choice, of what price so ever he buy them: even so in
this short race of life, which you mean to perform with your husband, in
comfort, solace, and pleasure, you must not stand so much upon contemplation
of wavering love, which perhaps is professed unto you for lucre or gain, but
with advise and consideration wey the manners and conditions of your husband,
with whom you pretend that way: for in him rests your estimation, and
renown. If thy husband be unchaste, sharp in words, doubtful to trust,
vain in life, wilful to be ordered: If lastly he has no conformity with
thy conditions, then to his own liking: Will not these things be an occasion
of thine untimely death? Yea alas, they are poisons of them selves, and galls
whose bitterness can never be taken away. If you seem to divide the pleasures
which you challenge peculiar to your self, shall you not then be deceived in
your vain choice, for whom is reserved a smarting, penance? If you marry
more for gredinesse of gain then any settled affection, it is impossible, To
marry for gain and not for affection purchases an unquiet life.
but you shall purchase to your self an unquiet life. For, Friendship kindled
in light heat will soon vanish, by means of the small force: where as such
which rest upon the immovable pillar, are never subject to ruin, as long as
the body is subject to life. I do not deny, but wealth does well: and where
want is, there cold friendship remains. Cold friendship where want is.
neither do I counsel you to marry for mere love, for diminishing your
substance: but as your living is able to maintain an honest port, so in
devour to match your self to some worthy personage, exchanging your
solitary life for a pleasant liberty. Wherefore, since a pleasant liberty is
of precious price, make your pleasure privy to your choice: and when you bend
your affection to any creature, be sure to angle with an inchaunted hook, and
this To angle with an inchaunted hook.
being done, you shall live in safety.

R. D. to a widow, for absenting her self upon certain speeches.
IF ever fish desired the sounding and deapth of waters: or woman with child
were desirous to see her offspring, and to be delivered: I assure your self,
none can be more joyful of any thing, then I would be to enjoy your presence,
nor gladder to see you contented. Wherefore (good widow) come hither, and
pass away the time as you have done, and think of me according to my
meaning, and then assure your self, you will not fall into these womanlike
storms (undeserved) with your friend, which means but well. I speak not
this to flatter you, I protest before God: I think you have reason sufficient
to consider, that either it booteth or needs not: but for that I would see you
in friendly order, as I have done, hoping that that quarelling speech shall
not be used. For I have set down my rest in this order: if you grieve or be
disquiet, it shall nothing content me: if you laugh, I will do A mutual
condolencie or sufferaunce promised.
the like for company: so that I hope to deal in such order, as shall neither
offend you, God, nor the world, if you do me right. And what injury as has
been offered, I have forgotten, esteeming them vain, and as women's humors.
And thus farewell, wishing to you as well as to my self.

W. S. to a widow whose malice was somewhat digested.
BEing fully persuaded by some of my friends, that your choler is somewhat
digested, I am by that means the more willing to write unto you these few
lines, to manifest plainly, that these womanlike storms, which of late you
have dwelt in, do peradventure savor of a self willed malice, then any reason
that led you to the contrary. For, I do assure you, behind your back, in
report or otherwise, I have not offended you, although perhaps you will say to
my face, I have more plainly He excuses him self of offense, by charging his
widow with obstinate malice.
then wisely dealt with any thing, otherwise then I should. But for any hurt
ever meaning, other then I would should happen to my self, then God confound
me. For mine own part, I am persuaded, that what in malice you will have, I
am content it shall nothing anger me, unless it hurt your self: the which I
would be sorry to see. Wherefore, as I am content to tread down such
injuries as have been offered unto me, who never offended: so, if you forget
such slanderous speech, then I think my labor well bestowed, you must
think I have been beholding unto you. First let me recompense you, and then
if I abuse you, blame me. In the mean while, think me not of so vile a
nature, for goodwill to yield you hatred, etc.

T. B. to his loving friend M. D declaring what love he bears her.
F. S. as one not a little sorrowful at your soudon departure out of town,
for that I had an earnest occasion to have spoken with you, hoping to have
renewed the familiarity of our old acquaintance, Long absence breeds
forgetfulness of familiarity.
which is almost forgotten, by means of my long absence, which if I had not
come at so unfortunate a time, might (no doubt) have been somewhat renewed.
Notwithstanding, since there is no remedy, I will arm my self with patience,
trusting hereafter we may meet again, where (no doubt) I may manifest unto
you the good will I bear you, and utter such secrets as long time have lien
hidden within the secret closet of my mind vnvttered, which I only refer to
your maidenly judgment. And surely, for the modesty, courtesy, and honest
behavior which I see you endued withal, yeldes me such good liking of you,
that if every penny I have were worth a pound, I could vouchsafe to make you
the maistresse of it, and as soon choose you He desires to be dealt withal
as he deserves.
for a wife and spouse, as any creature on the earth: whose words, if
hereafter they be not agreeable to my deeds, then let my good will be rewarded
with floutes.

H. D. to her singular good uncle, being an executour.
FOrasmuch as the shortness of time does somewhat Acknowledgement of
benefits received, as well corporal as mental.
hinder me at this time, to do my duty, as well of commendations, as of
hearty thanks, for your large and innumerable benefits, that is to say, in
finding me not only with the gifts of the body, but also with the gifts of
the mind: by the which all things in this world are maintained and vpholden.
We see daily before our eyes, that the Common wealth is maintained with the
gifts of the mind, that is, wisdom, and learning. But now to the purpose.
If there be any spark graven in me, the which spark may engender a great
deal, (as this wise and prudent saying does affirm: Concitat ingentes flammas
scintilla minuta.


A little spark ingendreth a great deal of fire:) then am I bound with an
ardent bond of love, to render with all endeavor continual thanks. But
chiefly before I write any further, I ought to pray A conclusion answering to
his exordium.
to God for your prosperity and health, and to thank him of his goodness,
that he has left me such a friend, (my father being dead,) that will not
grudge to bestow such large benefits on me, and to accept me as I were his
own.

W. D. to his loving friend M. G.
THE long absence, sithence my departure, can no less minister occasion to
write, then my will is apt and agreeable to accomplish the same: not using any
variety of words, but rather a friendly greeting, according to your
worthiness: not doubting, but you will be agreeable to the old saying: To
accept the heart of the giver more then the value of Not the gift but the
giver is chiefly to be considered.
the gift: the which accepted, I rest contented: and so presuming upon your
courtesy, I thought good to write these few lines unto you, which are the
messengers of my well meaning mind toward you: wherein (I hope) that the
long absence, or distance of place, shall not be the occasion of
forgetfulness. Thus reposing my self wholly in your wonted friendship, I
committ you to the Almighty.

E. S. to his singular good maistres, for redeeming one of his friends, being
in durance.
MAistresse,
I am once again enforced to write, A letter intercessorie or mediatorie.
and not without just cause, it touches so near my dear friend: wherein, if
you further my suite, you bind me (during life) to rest at your
commandment. A matter of some importance, the setting free of one M. L.
whose estate my L. knows very well, and means to retain him into his
service. Which person, if you were acquainted with, as I my self am, his
honest behavior and wisdom Commendation derived from manners and behauior.
is such, that you would lament his long imprisonment, and desolate life, and
rejoice again at his liberty, when you shall enter into the society and
fellowship of so worthy a Gentleman, Wherefore, I most earnestly desire you,
that whin my L. shall be at convenient leisure, you will put him in mind with
daily suite, that this my friend may be released. In which doing you bind me
always firm and faithful to you and your progeny.

R. C. to the Justices of peace, for the S.
RIght worshipful.
These are to require you, in the absence of my husband, who is not in Country
to answer his own cause, to stand his friend touching the S. and to assesse
him at the sum Allegations for the mitigation of the S. by non ability.
aforetime paid, which was ten pounds, and now is twenty: whose ability
is not so able to bear it, as of him is reported, by means he is indebted,
and grown to a greater charge. Wherefore, if the truth were thoroughly known
unto you, either he him self present before your worshippes, to answer his
own case: I doubt not but you would bear with his disabilitie, and assesse
him at the sum aforetime paid. In which doing, you minister unto us both an
acceptable pleasure, and give us occasion, according to our power, to requite
your courtesy.

G. W. answer to his brother, that she would be circumspect in her choice.
I Received your letter the xj. of August, the sight Concerning matters of
marriage counsel given and taken.
whereof has ministered unto me no small comfort, yelding you most hearty
thanks for the great good will you bear me: whose good counsel, if I should
not have in regard, in me might be reputed great unthankfulness. And
whereas you write unto me, to be circumspect in my choice, it stands me
upon (no doubt) to take great deliberation: it touches so much my making, or
undoing. Wherefore, if it be so, that I do marry again, (as all is in the
will of God,) assure your self, I will not couple my self in such sort, but
that the life of him whom I take, shall be of credit, and carry good
commendation: neither spurned of Fortune, neither forsaken of friends. And
until such time as you come to L. I will not make any promise. I would have
been glad, if your affairs had not been otherwise, to have had your advise
in drawing my husbands will: but your soudeine departure was a let to the
contrary: which did not a little discomfort me, being at that time deeply
distressed, by means A necessary cause to engender sorrow in the wife.
of my husbands sickness: knowing none, in whom I might repose any such
confidence, as in you, being my natural brother, whom I make dearest account
of.

H. S. to his friend. T. D.
FRiend D.
for that I did not take my leave of you, I am very sorry, and ashamed:
nevertheless, A letter excusatorie for departing from his friend unsaluted.
time did so fall out, that I could not, although willingly I would.
Therefore, in recompense of my mishappe, and so souden departure from you,
without a farewell, I presume at this time, (by your patience) to trouble you
with a few lines of remembrance: although but rude, yet they proceed from a
faithful heart, and such a one, which wishes to you as well as to my self:
trusting, that you, being my friend, will take them in good part. And thus
fare you well.

A. F. to his sister H. F. giving her counsel in prosperity, to be mindful of
adversity.
RIght well-beloved sister,
among many things which are incident to this our life, there is none An
epistle persuasorie.
more circumspectly to be considered, then the variableness of fortune, and
the not so often as souden alteration of the best and most sovereign
benefits, where with this our transitory life is blessed and advanced.
Wisely, and not so wisely as truly said a philosopher, that What we have,
we have not: A sage sentence
and what we lack, we possess. Meaning hereby the uncertainty of those
things, whereupon our life principally depends. For, though we have this
days prosperity, we may not withstanding tasse to morrowes adversity: And
though this hour minister mirthe unto us and store of ioyfulnesse, yet may the
next peradventure ouerwhelme us with heaviness. Thus much is spoken of me, to
put you in mind of the time past, the time present, and the time to The end of
his purpose.
come: for that you have been sometimes a Gentlewoman under obedience, though
now you have others at service and commandment, and how long this liberty
will last, he best knows, from whose sight nothing is secret: That by
conferring time with time, and circumstance with circumstance, you may forget
to be ambitious, proud, and insolent: and remember to be lowly, content and
indifferent. The best things and the fairest, shall sometimes suffer A clause
comparatiue.
shipwreck: And what is there or has been though never so precious and
amiable, but has in the end sustained loss of valor, and lack of love? The
sweetest perfumes in time give up their virtue. The fairest flowers keep not
continually their color. A calm follows a storm, and after a tempest
insueth security. Finally, there is nothing but it has a spring and a fall, a
Winter and a Summer, an ebb and a flow, a day and a night: I mean, a time
wherein to be amiable and gracious, and a time to be despighted and counted
contemptuous. Wherefore (good sister) as your gifts are the more rare and His
conclusion exhortatorie.
excellent, so let your wisdom have the larger government: that in the
pearl of your beauty, you remember wrinckled old age: in health, think on
sickness: in wealth, be mindful of poverty: in abundance, consider of
scarsitie: in ease, forget not labor: finally, ii: all your prosperity to
account of the contrary. But leaving you to the gracious guiding of the
highest, I bid you farewell. Your loving brother,

A. F.

Certain inventions in verse, devised at sundry idle times.
W. D. to his friends, exhorting them to beware in time.
MY secret griefs bewray my mind,
I sigh to think on passed youth,
Bent so to pleasures of the world,
Respecting profit vain forsooth.
I serude in hope of Courtly gift,
No whitt esteeming crooked age:
Green youth did hedlong run so swift,
I lamde my self in fancies barge.
No care I took, I sailde on still,
(God wott) to haven of vain delight:
Until that reason set up sail,
Provoking will to banishe quight.
Hence slowly sailde my broken Bark,
And waits time till Fortune please.
The Tackels torn, the Maste ^emaind,
Half spoiled in the furging Seas.
By Mermaides singing past she forth,
Inuirond round with gaping jaws,
Now Neptune King help thou (quoth wit,)
I fall into their gaping jaws.
Now like to ship on boiling Seas, Youth compared to a ship sailing at
uncertainty.

Compare I youth and gadding years,
On dangers tossed a thousand ways,
Unless the helm good counsel steares.
Regarding sport, I speilde my youth,
Time wild me think on withered age:
When pinching cold shall nippe thy limbs,
How will thou shun his angry rage?
Eschew to drink on wanton cup,
Remember years do waste away:
Eschew each mate of Uenus troop, Exhortations full of good counsel.

Ne care thou for such wanton play.
And quite detest all fancies fond,
Unfolde the tables of thy life:
Give up thy right of childish years,
Have care to get for wedded wife.
To turn in time is wisdom great,
In wishing when it is too late,
Shall cause thee fall in deep decay,
And bring thy end to wretched state.
Where wealth does want, there friendship cold:
Example seen by daily proof,
Bought wit is dear, (the Proverb says:)
Unstayed heads will soar aloof.
Trust not thy foe once reconcilde,
Unless thou seek thine own decay,
And credit not each glosing style,
In trust is treason often (men say.)
Now farewell youth and wanton will,
Detesting Follir train,
I yield my self to Wisdoms skill,
Supposing pleasures to be vain.
Proof wills me yield my self with speed,
Once caught in snare to shun the trappe,
Respecting profit wisdom brings,
Then shall I sleep in virtues lap.
W. D.

Of one, who thinking to have wedded a rich widow, purchased an unquiet life.
I Likt where no love was,
I matched in hope to gain,
I sought for sweet, and tasted sour,
And wedded proud disdain.
I lead a loathed life,
Exild from present joy.
The yoke of bondage wear I on,
Which threatens mine annoy.
I sayld in seas of grief,
And washed with waves of woe,
I must abide appointed course,
My fate ordeines it so.
I now must weaue the web,
Which canckard care has spun,
And reele up that against my will,
Which youth would gladly shun.
I sow my seeds in vain,
I plant on barren stock, Pretty and pithie.

And naught I get but blossom flowers,
For wealth is under lock.
For this by proof I find,
Not well he often speedes, A proper allusion.

That sowes his corn in such a soil,
Where nothing grows but weeds.
Thus live I void of joy,
And spoil my youth with age,
My life is worser then the bird,
Which fast is pent in cage.
I lead a sparing life,
The dainty fare I shun,
And yet I waste, I know not how:
As snow against the sun.
A just revenge (no doubt,)
To me for passed life,
For that I live, as I do now,
With such a dogged wife.
Perforce must be content, Patience perforce.

Though fate on me do frown,
I must content me with my lot,
Since fortune keeps me down.
W. D.

Of one which commended diligence, and despised bravery.
I Serve in hope of that to come, Short and sweet.

I pass not for no slavery,
I see a number are undone,
And all for painted bravery.
I know a number lusty laddes,
Which had possessions plenty,
And begin streates with pitious mones,
And find rewards but scantie.
Wherefore I Will yield my scepter up,
And hold my self contented,
And labor like the busy Ant,
For fear my pursse be empty.
W. D.

W. D. to his unconstant friend.
AT age of twenty years and two,
Dame Uenus told me on,
To fix my fancy upon a maid,
whose person now is gone.
I likte her well, she loud me dear,
I wooed her day and night:
Ill hap was mine to love her well,
And yet to lose her quite.
For mischief made such means,
And woorked such debate,
That I of force was made to yield,
And love was turned to hate.
Then right and reasen durst not speak.
For might withstoode the same,
Her faith they counted but a jest,
And termd it Uenus game.
For my good will thus have I got. Whilst one beats the bush another takes
the birds.

Most bitter brall and strife,
For she whom I did fancy best,
is now a wedded wife.
Now lie I drenchte in deadly lake,
No mercy may I crave,
Her friends for spite have forste her quite,
No comfort I can have.
Now do I wallowe in the woes
of Cupide blinded boy:
My pleasures all are turned to pain,
My deareling looks so coy.
The great good will betwixt us twain,
is now abandond quite,
She naught regardes my iourneis cold,
nor riding night by night.
Perforce must be content,
For mourning is but vain,
To like or love where love is lost, To love where love is lost is double
grief.

increases double pain.
And thus I end, fare well, fare well.
Farewell, again I say:
I would be sorry at my heart,
to see thee cast away.
W. D.

Certain verses written to a maid, to be circumspect in her choice.
Wisdom does warn all maids that be wise,
a heed for to have, in hearing every wind, A lesson for maids to learn
that are wise.

Lest lessons lewd, of such as can devise,
Trim tempered talk, to allure the simple mind:
Else may she through secret grief,
Repent too late their rash and lewd belief.
Delight not in words, for they are but wind:
Approve him well that shall be thy mate,
Remember in shows is harbourd deceit,
Eschew it in time, lest it be too late.
Love him therefore that loves thee again,
Long else shall thou love in dolor and pain. Love and beloved.

W. D.

An Epitaph upon the death of the worshipful Edward Darell, Clarke of Catrie
of the Queens Majesty's most honorable household.
IF ever cause constrained man,
with shrikes to fill the Sky,
If ever woe did will a wight,
with tears his tunes to try:
Then cause have I poor silly man,
to wail with watered eyes,
The death of Darell dead and gone,
which cold in earth now lies.
Whose death a thousand thousand times
I do lament full sore:
And whilst my brething ghost remains,
I shall do evermore.
If plaints or woeful cries at all,
Could raise him up from grave,
Then would I wayle in yearnfull sort,
The life of him to have.
So godly was his life on earth, Properties praise worthy

Even to the latter end,
So patient eke in troubles still,
And faithful to his friend.
In court so careful for his prince,
So clear of judgment sure,
In all his dealings just of word,
Of conscience very pure.
So well reported all abroad,
So courteous and so mild,
Most dearly loved every where,
Of woman man and child.
A Gentleman in every point,
His life declarde the same,
Who for his virtues manifold,
Has won immortal fame.
W. D.

Of the Dear intoyled in a progress.
THe Dear pursued, him self sore turmoyles,
Over bramble and briars his bodies rebounds,
Good luck yet may chance him, to pas through ye toiles,
And free with his life to escape from the hounds.
W. D.

A dittie of hunting:
to the tune of Light of love, etc.
OF all the pleasures in country and court, Hunting is healthful.

Hunting with hounds is the gallantest sport,
Though painful it seems, yet health it does bring:
It is a pastime for a Duke or a King.
Merrily chaunts the hounds in the wood,
Most men it delights, the noise is so good.
Hunting expels the wanton delight, Hunting tameth the flesh

Which often enchaunteth each kind of delight,
The pleasures of Uenus with other vain sport,
Hunting preuenteth all such kind of sport.
Merrily, etc.
If youths would delight in hunting with hound, Hunting mainteineth
thriftinesse.

Unthrifts so many would scarcely be found,
House keeping would never so souden decay:
Nor gentle would iet it in going so gay.
Merrily, etc.
In hunting is harbourde most pretty conceits, Hunting makes men active and
expert.

As writers at large most trimly intreates:
Manhood is proved, cunning is learnde,
Minds are revived, sleightes be discerned.
Merrily, etc.
A King in New forest by chasing the Heart, Danger in hunttig.

By Fortuue was slain of a fethered darte:
Diverse besides in huntiug the Boar,
Have ended their days being wounded full sors.
Merrily, etc.
Hunting resembles a battle in field. Hunting compared to a battle.

And pretty conceits of war it does yield:
A pastime truly well worthy of fame,
And all that loves it deserves the same.
Merrily, etc.
The hounds be the battle pitched very square,
The grehounds the wings to follow the hare, Proof of the premises.

The horns blows chase and sound the retire,
To courage the dogs where game does appear.
Merrily, etc.
When game to the covert speedeth apace,
The horsemen give charge to follow the chase, The proof continued.

Their spurs imbrued, their horse they do strike,
Which makes them rebound over hedge and dike
Merrily, etc.
Yet some there be certain which hunting do scorn, Hunting found faulty.

Because of their hedges and spoil of their corte:
What pleasure (say they) to hear a dog ball?
A labor they count it, no pleasure at all.
Merrily, etc.
In hunting (say they) great charges arise, Discommodities in hunting.

In filling their mawes, to stop their outcries,
Stenches most filthy unseemly to views,
In keeping of dogs besides does ensue.
Merrily, etc.
The dronkard detests it, and hunts for good ale,
The leacher does loath it, and hunts for his tail, What manner of men abhor
hunting.

The gamster does shun it, and curses the same:
And hunts after dice and other lewd game.
Merrily, etc.
But those that be honest such pastime will fly, Hunting highly esteemed among
the honorable.

For mischiefs full many arises thereby:
But hunting with hounds does carry such fame,
That nobles and Gentles does honor that game.
Merrily chaunts the hounds in the wood,
Most men it delights, the noise is so good.
FINIS.
The treatise of Master Ihon Della Casa, wherein under the person of an old
unlearned man, instructing a youth of his, he has talk of the manners and
fashions, it behoues a man to use or eschew in his familiar conversation:
entitled Galateo, of fashions and manners.
FOr as much as thou doste now enter the iourny, whereof I have allredy run
forth the better part (as thou see) I mean the transitory way of this
mortal life: I have determined (such is the Love I bear thee) to show all
the dangerous straights thou must pass: For my experience makes me fear, yt
walking that way thou may easily either fall, or by some means or other go
astray. To the end thou may once, taught both by my instructions and
experience, be able to keep the right way, as well for the health of thy
Soul, as the commendation and praise of the Honorable and Noble house thou
do come of. And because thy tender Age, is unfit (as yet) to receive more
principal and higher precepts, reserving them for fytter time, I will beginn
to discourse of such things as many men will deem, perchance, but trifles: I
mean what manner of Countenance and grace, behooves a man to use, that he may
be able in Communication and familiar acquaintance with me^, to show him self
pleasant, courteous, and gentle: which nevertheless is either a virtue, or the
thing that comes very nere to virtue. And albeit Liberality, or magnanimity,
of themselves bear a greater praise, then, to be a well taught or manored man:
yet perchance, the courteous behavior and entertaynement with good manners and
words, help no less, him that has them: then the high mind and courage,
aduau^ceth him in whom they be. For these be such things as a man shall need
always at all hands to use, because a man must necessarily be familiar with
me^ at all times, and ever have talk and communication with them: But justice,
fortitude, and the other greater, and more noble virtues, are seldom put in
ure. Neither is ye liberal and noble minded man, caused every hour to do
bountiful things: for to use it often, cannot any man bear the charge, by any
means. And these valiant men yt be so full of high mind and courage: are
very seldom driven to try their valor and virtue by their deeds. Then as
much as these last, do pass those first, in greatness (as it were) and in
weight: so much do the other surmou^t these in number, and often occasion to
use the^. And, if I could well intend it, I could name you many, who, (being
otherwise of little account) have been and be still, much esteemed and made of,
for their cherefull and plesaunt behavior alone: which has been such a help
and aduaunceme^t unto them, that they have gotten great preferments, leaving
far behind them, such men as have been endowed with those other noble and
better virtues, spoken of before. And as these plesau^t and gentle behauiours,
have power to draw their hearts and mynds unto us, with whom we live: so
co^trarywise, gross and rude manners, procure me^ to hate and despise us.
Whereby albeit the laws, have enjoined no pain for unmannerly and gross
behauiours, as the fault that is thought but light (and to say a truth, it is
not great) yet we see notwithstanding, yt nature herself punishes the^ with
sharp and shrewde correction, putting them by this means, besides ye company
and favor of men. And truly eue^ as great and foul faults, do much harm:
so do these light, much hurt, or hurt at least more often. For, as me^ do
commonly fere ye beasts yt be cruel and wild, and have no manner of fear of
some little ones, as ye gnats and the flies, and yet by ye continual noiau^ce
they find by the^, complain the^ selves more of these the^ of ye other: so it
chau^ceth yt most me^ do hate in manner as much, ye unmannerly and untaught, as
ye wicked, and more. So yt there is no doubt, but who so disposes himself to
live, not in solitary and deserte places, as Heremites, but in fellowship with
men, and in populous Cities, will think it a very necessary thing, to have
skill to put himself forth comely and seemly, in his fashions, gestures and
manners: the lack of which parts does make those other virtues lame, and little
or nothing can they work to good effect, without other helps: wheare this
civility and courtesy, without other relief or patrimony, is rich of it
self, and has substance enough, as a thing yt stands in speech and
gestures alone.

And that you may now more easily learn the way unto it, thou must
understand, it behoues thee, to frame and order thy manners and doings, not
according to thine own mind and fashion: but to please those, with whom thou
lyuest, and after that sort direct thy doings: And this must be done by
Discretion and Measure. For who so applies himself to much, to feed other
men's humors, in his familiar conversation, and behavior with men, is rather to
be thought a Iester, a Iugler or flatterer, then a gentleman well taught and
nourtured: As contrariwise, who so has no care or mind to please, or
displese, is a rude, untaught, and discourteous fellow. For as much then, as
our manners, have some pleasure in them when we respect other men, and not our
own pleasure: if we diligently search forth what those things be, that most
men do generally like or dislike: we shall in such forte wisely and easily
find out, the means and ways, to choose and eschew, those fashions and
manners, we are to leave or take, to live amongst men. We say then, that every
act that offends any the common senses, or ouerthwarteth a man's will and
desire, or else presents to the Imagination and conceit, matters unpleasant,
and that likewise, which ye mind does abhor, such things I say be naught,
and must not be used: for we must not only refrain from such things as be
foul, filthy, loathsome and nastie: but we must not so much as name them. And
it is not only a fault to do such things, but against good manner, by any act
or sign to put a man in mind of them. And therefore, it is an ill-favored
fashion, that some men use, openly to thrust their hands in what part of their
body they list.

Lykwise, I like it as ill to see a Gentleman fettle him self, to do the
needs of Nature, in presence of men: And after he has done, to trusse him
self again before them. Neither would I have him (if I may give him council)
when he comes from such an occupatio^, so much as wash his hands, in the
sight of honest company: for yt the cause of his washing, puts them in mind of
some filthy matter that has been done aparte. And by the same reason, it is no
good manner, when a man chances to see, as he passes the way (as many times
it happens) a lothesome thing, yt will make a man to cast his stomach, to
turn unto the company, and show it them. And much worse I like it, to reach
some stynking thing unto a man to smell unto it: as it is many a ma^s fashion
to do, with importunate means, yea, thrusting it unto their nose, saying: Foh,
feel I pray you, how this does stink. where they should rather say, smell
not unto it: for it has an ill sent. And as these and like fashions offend the
se^ses, to which they appertain: so to grynde the teethe, to whistle, to make
pityfull cries, to rubb sharp stones together, and to fyle upon Iron, do
much offend the Ears and would be left in any case. Neither must we
refrain those things alone, but we must also beware we do not sing, and
specialy alone, if we have an untuneable voice, which is a common fault with
most men: And yet, he that is of nature least apt unto it, does use it most.
So there be some kind of men, that Neesing.
in coffyng or neesing, make such noise, that they make a man deaf to here
them: other some use in like things, so little discretion, that they spyt in
men's faces that stand about them: besides these there be some, that in yauning,
braye and cry out like Asses. And yet such, with open mouth will ever say and
do what they list, and make such noise, or rather suchroaring, as the dumme man
does, when he strives with him self to speak. All these yllfauoured
fashions, a man must leave, as loathsome to the ear and the eye. And a man must
leave to yawne much, not only for the Yawning.
respect of the matter I have said already, as that it seems to proceed, of
a certain werynes, that shows that he that yawneth, could better like to be
else where, then there in that place: as wearied with the company, their talk,
and their doings. And sure, albeit a man be many times disposed to yawne, yet
if he be occupied with any delyght, or earnest matter to think upon: he shall
have no mind to do it. But if he be lumpishe and idle: it is an easy matter
to fall in to it. And therefore, When a man yavvneth, in place where there
be slothful and Idle folks, that have nothing to do, the rest, as you may
see many times, yavvne again for company by and by: as it he that yawned, had
put them in mind to do it, which of them selves they would have done first,
if he had not begoone unto them. And I have many times heard learned and wise
men say, that A yavvner means as much in Latin as a careless and Idle body.
Let us then fly these conditions, that loathe (as I said) the eyes, the Ears,
and the Stomach. For in using these fashyons, we do not only show that we
take little pleasure in the company, but we give them occasion withal, to judge
amiss of us: I mean yt we have a drowsye and heuie nowle, which makes us ill
wellcom, to all companies we come unto. And when thou have blown thy nose, use
not to open thy Blowing of the nose.
handkercheif, to glare upon thy snot, as if you had pearls and Rubies
fallen from thy brains: for these be slouenly parts, enough to cause men, not
so much not to love us, as if they did love us, to vnloue us again. As the
Sprite of Labirintho does testify (who soever he were that made it) who (to
quench ye Look in the beginning of Corbaccio.
heat wherewith Master John Boccase burned in desire and Love of his Lady
unknown) tells, how she cowred her tail over the ashes, sytting upon her
heels, and coughed and spatte out Collops. It is also an unmannerly part, for
a man to lay his nose upon the cup where another Dropping of the Nose.
must drink: or upon the meat yt another must eat, to the end to smell unto
it: But rather, I would wish he should not smell at all, no not to that which
he himself should eat and drink: because it may chance there might fall
some drop from his nose, that would make a man to loath it: although there
fall nothing at all in deed. Neither, by mine advise, shall thou reach to any
man, that cup of wine whereof thy self have first drunk and tasted: without he
be more then a familiar friend unto thee. And much less must thou give any
part of the pear or the fruit, which thou have bitten in thy mouth before.
And esteem not light of my talk, for that these things be of little account:
For even light stripes (their number may be such) be able to slaye fast enough.

Now you shall understand, there was in Giouanni. Matheo. Giberti, bishop of
Verona.
Verona, a bishop a wise man, a learned and of a singular good wit by nature,
whose name was Gioua^ni Matheo Giberti: Amongst many good parts yt were in him,
he was very courtious and liberal, to all gentlemen and noble men that came
unto him, doing the^ all yt honor he could in his house, not with over much
pomp and cost, but with convenient entertainment and measure, such as besemed
well a man of the Clergy. It chanced in his time, a noble gentleman called
Count Richard, passing that way, to Count Richard.
spend a few days with the Bishop and his householde together: which was
thoroughly furnished with honest gentlemen and very well learned. And because
they found him a Noble gentleman, courteous and well beseene in all good
behavior, they praised him much, and made much of him, save that one
unmannerly fashion they much misliked in him. When the Bishop was advertised of
it, consulting with some of his familiars about it (as he was a wise man in all
his doings) strait they concluded, it should be necessary to let ye Count have
knowledge of it: albeit they feared, they should offend him. Upon this, ye
Count taking his leave, and ready to ride away the next morning, the Bishop
called one of his servants unto him, (a man of good discretion) and gave him in
charge to take his horse, to bear the Count company, some part of his way:
And when he saw his time, after an honest sort, to tell him, that which they
had determined between them selves. The same gentleman that had this charge,
was a man well strooken in years, very learned, and marvelous pleasant, well
spoken, comely, and had much frequented in his time, ye Courts of great
Princes: who was (perhaps) and is, called Galateo: at whose request and
council, I Galateo.
first took in hand to set forth this present treatise. Ryding with the Count,
he found him plesaunt talk enough, and passing from one matter to another,
when he thought it time to return to Verona, in taking leave at parting, with
a gentle and cherefull countenance, he used this speech unto him. Sir Count,
my Lord yealdeth you many thanks for the honor you have done him, in that it
has pleased you to vouchesafe his poor house: and that he may not be
unthankful, for this your great courtesy shevved unto him, he has given me
in charge, that I must leave a present with you in his behalf: and he sends
it unto unto you with earnest request, that you please to take it in good
worth: and this is the gift. You are a goodly gentleman, and the best manered
man my Lord has ever seen: So that very heedefully beholding your
behauiours, and particularly considering them all, he finds no one that is
not very comely and comendable, only one unseemly trycke alone excepted, which
you make with your lips and your mouth together, feeding at your meat with
a certain strange noyes, unpleasant to all men that hear it. This my Lord
willed me to tell you, and prays you to endeavor your self to leave it, and
vvithall to accept in levve of a beter present, this loving admonition and
council of his: for he is sure, there is none in the world, would make you
the like present. The Count (that never wist of his fault till now) hearing
himself reproved, changed his countenance a little, but (as a man full of
stomach enough) taking heart at grass, he said: Tell your Lord, that if all
the gifts that men wont to give each other, were such as his, men should be
much more rich then they are. And for his great courtesy and liberality to
me, give him many thanks I pray you, and let him be sure, I will not fail
from henceforthe to mend my fault, and God be with you.

Now what shall we think this Bishop, his modest and honest company about him
would say, if they saw these whom we Greedy feeding.
see other while, (like swyne with their snouts in the wash, all begroined)
never lift up their heads nor look up, and much less keep their hands from
the meat, and with both their cheeks blown (as if they should sound a trumpet,
or blow the fire) not eat but rauon: who, besmearing their hands, almost up
to their elbowes, so bedawbe Fyling the napkyns.
yt napkyns, that ye clothes in the places of easement, be other while
cleaner. And to mend these slouenly manners, be not ashamed, many times with
these filthy napkyns, to wype away the sweat that trickleth and falls down
their brows, their face and their neck (they be such greedy Sweating with
feeding.
guts in their feeding) and otherwhile to, (when it comes upon them) spare not
to snot their sniueld nose upon them. Truly these beastly behauiours and
fashions, deserve not alone, to be thrust out of this noble bishops house, that
was so pure and clean: but to be thoroughly banished all places, where any
honest men should com. Let a man then take heed, he do not begrease his
fyngers so deep, yt he befyle the napkins to much: for it is an ill sight to
see it: neither is it good manner, to rub your gresie fingers upon ye bread
you must eat.

The servant that be appointed to wait upon the table, must not (in any
wise) scratche and rub their heads, nor Precepts for servant.
any part else in the sight of their Lord and Master: nor thrust their hands
in any those parts of their body that be covered, no not so much as make any
proffer: as some careless fellows do, holding their hands in their bosom, or
cast under the flappes of their coats behind them. But they must bear them
abroad without any suspicion and keep them (in any case) washed and clean
without any spot of dirt upon them. And they that carry the dyshes, or reach
the cup, must beware at that time, they do not spit, coughe or neese: for in
such doings, Suspicio^ is as great, and offends as much, as the very deed
it self: and therefore, servants must forsee, they give no cause to Masters
to suspect: For that which might chance, anoyeth as much, as if it had
chanced indeed.

And if thou do roaste any fruit, or make a toaste at the fire, thou must not
blow of the ashes, (if there be any) for it is an old saying, that, vvinde
was never without water. But you must lightly stryke it upon the the plate,
or after some such sort or other beat of ye ashes. Thou shall not offer thy
ha^dkerchiefe to any man to use it, albeit, it be very clean washed: for he to
whom thou do offer it, can not (perhaps) away with it, and may be to curious
to take it.

When a man talks with one, it is no Breithing in a man's face.
good manner to come so near, that he must needs breathe in his face: for
there be many that can not abide to feel the air of another man's breathe,
albeit there come no ill favor from him. These and like fashions, be very
unseemly, and would be eschewed, because their senses, with whom we acquaint our
selves, cannot brook nor bear them.

Now, let us speak of those things which (without any hurt or anoyau^ce to the
senses) offend the minds of most men, before whom they be done. You shall
understand, that The appetites of men, (through a natural instinct and
inclination) be very strange and diverse: Some be cholerike and hasty, and may
not be satifsied with out revenge: other do give them selves clean over, to
pamper the belly: this man sets his delighte in lust and sensuality: that man
is carried away with his covetous desires: and many such appetites more there
are, to which man's mind is too subject: but you shall not in any company,
easily judge or discern between them, where and in what, they be most
affected. For, these matters do not consist in the manners, the fashions and
speech of men: but rest in some other point. They seek to purchase ye which
the benefit of mutual conferrence may yeald them, and that do (as I ween)
good will, honor, comfort and pleasure, or some other thing like unto these:
and therefore we must neither say or do the thing, that may give any sign of
little loving or esteming them, we live withal.

So that, it is a rude fashion, (in my co^ceipte) yt some men use, to lie
lolling a sleep in that place, where honest men be met together, of purpose to
talk. For his so doing, shows that he does not esteem the company, and
little rekoneth of the^ or their talk. And more then that, he that sleeps
(and specially lying at little ease, as he must) wonts (for the most part) to
do some foul thing, to behold, or hear: and many times they awake sweating
and driueling at the mouth. And in like manner, to rise up where other men do
sit and talk, and to walk up and down the chamber, it is no point of good
manner. Also there be some that so buskell them selves, reach, streatch and
yawne, writhing now one side, and then another, that a man would ween, they
had some fever upon them: A manifest sign, that the company they keep, does
weary them.

Likewise do they very ill, yt now and the^ pull out a letter out of their
pocket, to read it: as if they had great matters of charge, and affairs of
the common weal committed unto the^. But they are much more to be blamed,
that pull out their knyues or their scisers, and do nothing else but pare their
nails, as if they made no account at all of the company, and would seek some
other solace to pass the time away. These fashions to, must be left, ye some
men use, to sing between the teeth, or play the dromme with their fingers, or
sho ofle their feet: For these demeanours show that a body is careless of
any man else.

Besides, let not a man so sit that he turn his tail to him that sits next
to him: nor lie fottering with one leg so high above the other, that a man may
see all bare that his clothes would cover. For such parts be never playde, but
amongst those to whom a man needs use no reverence. It is very true, that if a
gentleman should use these fashions before his servants, or in the presence of
some friend of meaner condition then him self: it would betoken no pride, but
a love and familiarity.

Let a man stand vppright of him self, and not lean or loll upon another
man's shoulder: and when he talks, let him not pounche his fellow with his
elbowe, (as many be wont to do) at every word they speak, saying: Did not I
say true Sir. Master. N. It is Master. H. And still they be iotting with
their elbowe.

I would have every man well appareled, Apparel.
meet for his age and calling: for otherwise, they seem to have men in
contempt that be better attyred then themselves.

And therefore the Citizens of Padua, were wont to take it done of spighte unto
the^, when any gentleman of Venice walked up and down their city in his
coat, as though he thought him self in the country. And a man's apparel,
would not be made of fine cloathe alone: but he must frame it, all that he may,
to the fashions that other men wear, and suffer him self to be lead by
common use: although (perchance) it be, and seem to be less commodious,
less gallant, and less fair in show, then his oulde.

And if all men else, do wear their heads powled: it shall be an ill sight for
thee alone, to wear a long bushe of hair. And where other men, make much of
their beardes and wear them long: thou shall not do well to cut thine of, or
shave it. For that wear to be ouerthwarte in every thing: which thou must (in
any case) beware of, except necessity require it, as thou shall hear
hereafter. For this singularity, beyond all other ill customs, makes us
generally spyted of all me^. Thou must not then go against common custom in
these things, but use them measureably: that thou may not be an odd man
alone in a country: that shall wear a long Gown down to the foot, where
other men wear them very short, little beneath the waste. For as it hapens to
him, that has a very crabbed ylfauoured face, (I mean such, as is more hard
and sower the^ most men's be, for nature does mostly shape them well in most
men) that men will wonder and (with a kind of admiration) gape most upon him:
So fares it with the^ that attire them selves, not as most men do: but as they
are egged by their own fantastical heads, with long hear spread down to
their shoulders, their beardes short and shaven, and wear quaiues or great
cappes after ye Flaundres fashion: that all men do gaze upon them, as
wo^dering at such, whom they ween have taken upon them, to conquer all
countries wheresoever they come. Let your apparel then, be very well made, and
fit for your body: for they that wear rich and coastly garments, but so
illfauouredly shaped, that a man would ween the measure had been taken by
another: give us to judge one of these twain, that either they have no regard
or consideration how to please or displease: or else have no skill to judge of
measure or grace, or what does become them.

Such manner of people, with their rude behauiours and fashions, make men with
whom they live, suspect, they do esteem them but light. And that causes
the^ worse welcome whersoeuer they com and ill beloved amongst men.

But there be some besides these, that deserve more then bare suspicion: their
deeds and their doings be so intolerable, that a man cannot abide to live
amongst them by any means. For they be ever a let, a hurt and a trouble to
all the company, they be never ready: ever a trimming: never well dressed to
their minds. But when men be ready to sit down to the table, the meat at
the boorde, and their hands washed: then they must write or make Table.
water, or have their exercise to do: saying, It is too early: we might have
tarried a while: what haste is this, this morning? And thus they disquiet all
the company, as men, caring for them selves alone and their own matters,
without consideration in the world of other men. Besides this, they will in
all things be preferred above others: they must have the best bed, and best
chamber: they must take upon them the highest place at the table, and be first
set and served of all men. And they be so deintie and nice, that nothing
pleases them, but what they them selves devise: they make a sower face at any
thing else. And they be so proud minded, that they look that men should wait
upon them when they dyne, ride, sport, or solace them selves.

There be other so furious, testie and waywarde, that nothing you do can
please them: and what soever is said they answer in choler, and never leave
brauling with their servants, and railing at them, and continually disturb the
company with their unquietness: using such speeches: Thou cauledst me well up
this morning. Look here how clean thou have made these pynsons. Thou
beast, thou did wait well upon me to Church. It were a good deed to
break thy head. These be unseemly and very foul fashions: such as every
honest man will hate to death. For, albeit a man's mind were full fraught with
all humility, and would use these manners, not upon pride or disdain, but
upon a rechelesse care, not heeding his doings, or else by means of ill
custom: yet notwithstanding, because his outward doings, would make men
think him proud: it cannot be chosen, but all men would hate him for it.
For, Pride is none other thing, then to despise and disdain another. And as I
have Pride.
said from the beginning: Each man desires to be well thought of, Albeit
there be no valor or goodness in him.

It is not long, since there was in Rome a worthy gentleman, of singular good
wit and profound learning, whose name was Vbaldino Bandinelli. This gentleman
was Vbaldino Bandinelli.
wont to say, that as often as he went or came from the Court, although the
streets wear ever full of gallant Courtiers, of Prelates and Noble men, and
likewise of poor men, and people of mean and base condition: yet he thought
he never encountered any, that was either better or worse then himself. And
without doubt he could meet with few, that might be compared in goodness to
him: respecting his virtues, that did excel beyond measure. But we must not
always in these things measure men by ye Elne: We must rather way them in the
millers scoles, then in the goldsmythes balaunce. And it is a courtious part,
redily to receive them in to favor: not because they be woorthe it: but as
men do with coins, because they be current,

To go further, we must do nothing in their sight whom we desire to please,
that may show we covet, rather to rule and to reign, then to live in a
familiar equality amongst them. For hautines of heart and ambitious
disposition, as it kindles an ill opinion: so it ministers much cause of
contempt, which in conclusion will so work against thee, yt thou shall be
clean cast out of honest company. But our doings must rather bear a A lowly
mind.
sign and show of reverence, meekenes, and respect to ye company, in which
we fellowship our selves. So that, what so ever is done in meet and
convenient time, may hapely deserve no blame: but yet in respect of the place
and the person, it may be reproved well: although for it self, ye matter
deserve no rebuke. As to brawle and to rail at your servant (which we have
talked of before) but much more to beat them. Because these parts, are
as much as to reign and to rule: which no honest and civil gentleman will use,
in presence of them he does respect with any reverence or courtesy. Besides
this, the company is much offended with it, and their meetinges are broken,
and especially, if it be done at the table, which is a place of solace and
myrthe, and not of brawle and scolding. So that I must needs commend Currado
Gianfigliazzi for his civil behavior in yt he multiplied no words with
Chichibio Boccaccio. Cior. 6. nouel. 4. fo. 194.
to trouble his guests: albeit he deserved to be sharply punished for it, when
he would sooner displease his master then Brunetta. And yet if Currado had made
less ado about it then he did: it had been more his praise. For then he should
never have neded, to call upon God, to witness his threatenings so much as he
did.

But to return to our matter: it is not good for a man to chide at the table
for any cause. And if thou be angry, show it not, Chiding at the Table.
nor make no sign of thy grief, for the reason I have told thee, and
specially if thou have strangers with thee: because thou haste called them to
be merry, and this will make them sad. For, as the sharp and tarte things yt
other men do feed upon in thy sight, do set thy teeth likewise on edge: so
to see other men vexed and out of quiet, it makes us unquiet too. I call them
FROMVVARD people, which will in allthings Fromewarde.
be ouertwhart to other men: as the very word it self does show. For,
Fromewarde, signifies as much, as Shorn against the wool. Now, how fit a
thing this frowardnes is, to win the good will Frowardenes.
of men, and cause men to wyshe well unto them: that you your self may easily
Judge, in that it consists in ouertwharting other men's desiers: which
quality never maynteineth friendship, but makes friends become foes. And
therefore let them that desire to be well thought of and welcome amongst men,
endeavor the^ selves to shun this fault: For it breeds no good lyking nor
love, but hatred and hurt. I would council you rather to measure your
pleasures by other men's wills: where there shall come no hurt nor shame of it:
and therein always to do and to say, more to please other men's minds and
fausies, then your own.

Again, you must be neither clownishe Clownishe and Lampishe
nor lumpishe: but pleasant and familiar. For there should be no odds,
between the Mystell and the Pungitopo: but that the one is wild: the other
grows in gardens. And you must understand, that he is pleasant and courteous:
whose manners be such in his common behavior, as practice to keep, and
maintain him friendeship amongst them: where he that is solleyne and
waywarde, makes him self a stranger whersoeuer he comes: a stranger, I
mean, as much as a foreign or alie^ borne: where contrariwise, he that is
familiar and gentle, in what place so ever he comes: is taken for a familiar
and friend with all me^. So that it shall be necessary for a man, to use him
self to salute, to speak, and to answer after a gentle sort, and to behave
him self with all men so: as if he were their countryman borne, and of their
old acquaintance. Which some can ill skill to do, that neither give a man a
good countenance: easily say, No, to all things: never take in good worth,
the honor and courtesy that men do unto them (like to the people I spoke of
before, rude and barbarous) never take delight in any pleasant conceits or
other pleasures: but ever refuse it all, what soever is presented or offered
unto them. If a man say: Sir, such a one willed me to commend him unto you:
They answer strait: what have I too do with his greetings? And if a man
say: Sir, such a one your friend, asked me how you did: They au^swer again
in choler: Let him come feel my pulse. These carterlyke and clownishe aunswers
and manners, and the men them selves that do use them: would be chased and
hu^ted away, out of all good and honest company.

It ill becomes a man when he is in Muscing.
company, to be sad, musing, and full of contemplation. And albeit, it may be
suffered perchance in them that have long beaten their brains in these
Mathematical studies: which are called (as I take it) the Liberal Arts: yet
without doubt it may not be borne in other men. For, even these studious
fellows, at such time, when they be so full of their Muses: should be much
wyser to get them selves alone.

Again, to be to nyce or to deyntie: it Nycenes and Deyntines.
may not be abiden, and specially in men. For, to live with such kind of
people: is rather a slavery then pleasure. And sure there be some such, so
soft and tender: yt to live and deal with such people, it is as dangerous:
as to meddle with the fynest and bryttelest glass that may be: So much they
are affrayde of every light touch. And they will be as testy and froward, if
you do not quickly and readily salute them, visit them, worship them, and
make the^ answer: as some other body would be, for the greatest injury yt can
be done unto them. And if you do not give them all the due reverence that may
be: they will presently take a thousand occasions to quarrel and fall out with
you. If you chance to Master him, and leave out his title of Honor or
worship: he takes that in dougeon, and thinks you do mock him. And if you set
him beneath as good a man as him self at the table: that is against his honor.
If you do not visit him at home at his house: then you know not your duty.
These manner of fashions and behauiours, bring men to such scorn and disdain
of their doings: that there is no man, almost, can abide to behold them: for
they love them selves to far beyond measure, and busy them selves so much
in that, that they find little leisure to bethink them selves to love any
other: which (as I have said from the beginning) men seek to find in the
conditions and manners of those with whom they must live: I mean, that they
should apply them selves to the fancies and minds of their friends. But to
live with such people, so hard to please: whose love and friendship once won,
is as easy lost, as a fine scarf is lightly carried away with the wind: that
is no life but a service: and, besides that it yealdeth no pleasure, it geues a
man great disdain and horror. Let us therefore leave these soft and wanton
behauiours to women.

In speech a man may fault many ways. And first in the matter it self that is
in Talk and Communication.
talk, which may not be vain or filthye. For, they that do hear it, will
not abide it: as ye talk they take no pleasure to hear: but rather scorn the
speech and the speaker both. Again, a man must not move any question of
matters that be to deep and to subtle: because it is hardly understood of
the most. And a man must warely foresee, that the matter be such, as none of
the company may blushe to hear it, or receive any shame by the tale. Neither
must he talk of any filthy matter, albeit a man would take a pleasure to hear
it: for, it ill becomes an honest gentleman, to seek to please, but in things
that be honest. Nei

Neither in sport nor in earnest, must a man speak any thing against God or
Holy things must not be Ieasted at. Ciccro. Mala and impia est Consuetudo,
contra deos disputandi: sieve serio fit, sieve dissimulate.
his Saints, how witty or pleasant so ever the matter be. Wherein, the
company that Giouan Boccaccio has brought to speak in his Nouelles and
tales, has faulted so much: that me thinks every good body, may justly blame
them for it. And you must think It is not only a token of great detestation
and Impiety in a man, to talk in iestinge wise of God: but he is a wicked
and sinful man, that will abide to hear it. But you shall find some such
good men, as will fly as much as the plague, the company of such as talk so
irreverently, and without respect, of the incomprehensible Majesty of God. And
we must not alone speak religiously of him: but in all our talks we must
avoid what we may, that our words may not witness against our life and our
works. For me^ do hate their own faults otherwhile, when they see them in
another.

Likewise it is unsavory, to talk of things out of time, not fitting the
place Talk out of time.
and company: although the matter it self, and spoken in time, were otherwise
both good and godly. We must not then rehearse Friars sermones to young
gentlewomen, when they are disposed to sport themselves: as yt good man did,
that dwelles not far hence, nere to S. Brancatio. And in feasts and at table,
we must beware we do not rehearse any sorrowful tales, nor put then in mind
of wounds, of sickness, of deaths, of Plagues, or of other doleful matters.
But if another man chance to move such matter: it shall be good, after an
honest and gentell sort, to exchange that talk, and thrust in some other, yt
may give them more delighte and pleasure to hear it. Albeit, not long since I
heard it said to a worthy gentleman our neighbor, that Men have many times
more need to weep then to laugh. And for that cause he said, these doleful
tales, which we call Tragedies, were devised at first, that when they were
played in the Theaters (as at that time they were wo^t) they might draw fourth
tears out of their eyes, that had need to spend the^. And so they were by
their weeping, healed of their infirmity. But albeit it be good to do so:
yet it will il beco^e us to drive men into their dumpes: especially where they
be met to feast and to solace themselves, and not to mourn. For if there be
any, yt has such weeping disease: it will be an easy matter to cure it, with
strong Mustard or a smoaky house. So that, in no wise, I can excuse our friend
Philostrato, for his Boce. Gior. 4. fol 183. In the beginning.
work that he made full of dule and of death, to such a company as desired
nothing more then myrthe. We must the rather use silence, then discourse of
such sorrowful matters.

And they do as much amiss too, that never have other thing in their mouth,
then their children, their wife, and their nourse. My little boy, made me so
laughe yesterday: hear you: you never savve a sweeter babe in your life: my
wife is such a one, Cecchina told me: of troth you would not believe what a
wit she has: There is none so idle a body, that will either intend to
answer, or abide to hear such foolish pryttle prattle. For it yrcks a man's
ears to harken unto it.

There be some again, so curious in telling their dreams from point to point,
using such wonder and admiration withal, Dreams.
yt it makes a man's heart ache to hear them: and specially because (for ye most
part) they be such kind of people: as it is but labor lost to hear, eue^
the very best exployts they do, when they be most awake, and labor most to
show their best. Wherefore we must not trouble men with so base and absurd
matter as dreams be: especially such foolyshe things, as most times men
have. Albeit I have heard say many times, that wisemen in times past, have
leaft in their books many sorts of dreams, containing matters of deep
knowledge and understanding: it follows not yet, that we, the unlearned and
common sort of people, should use it in our familiar and common talk. And
sure of all the dreams that ever I heard (albeit I hardly listen to any) in my
conceit, I never heard any, that was worth the hearing but one alone, which the
good Master Flaminio Tomarozzo a gentleman of Rome did see, a man not unlearned
and M. Flaminio Tomarozzo.
gross: but full of knowledge and singular wit. And thus was his dream,
This ge^tlema^ Master Flaminio Tomarozzo, thought he was sitting in a very
rich Apothecaries shop, a near neighbor of his. And after he had been there a
while (what soever the occasion was) the people were up in a rore one a
sudden, and fell to spoilyng of all that was in the shop. One took on
Electuarie another a Confectio^, some one thing, some another, and presently
eat it up all: So that within a while, there was neither vitell glass,
ertherne pot, wodden box, nor any pot else of drugges, that was not emptied
broken, or overthrown. But amongst them all there was one very small glass,
full to the top of very clear water, which many did smell to, but no man
would taste. He stood not there long, but there came in a tall man, an aged
and very grave man, to look unto. This Aged father beholding this unfortunate
Apothecaries boxes and pottes, and finding some emptyed, some overthrown, and
the better part broken: at lenght casting his eye aside, he chanced to see
the small glass I spoke of before, and setting the same to his mouth, he
drank it up so clean: that he leaft not one drop. And this done, he went
from thence as the rest did before. Master Flaminio was abashed and marueled
much at this matter. And therefore turning to the Apothecarie he said unto
him: Sir, who is this that came last? and why did he drink up so sauourly,
all the water in that little glass, which all the reast refused. To whom
the Apothecarie seemed to make this answer. My son, this is the Lord God.
And the water, that he alone drank, and all the reast refused and would not
taste as you savv: was discretion: which, you know well enough men will not
taste of, by any means.

Such kind of dreams, I hold well a man may rehearse, and hear with much
pleasure and profit. Because they do more resemble, the Cogitations and
thoughts of an awakened mind: or better, I should say, the virtue sensitive:
then the visions and syghts of a drowsy head. But those other dreams, without
shape, falshio^ or sense: (which the most part of such men as we are, be
wont to have) would be forgotten clean, and lost with our sleep. Howbeit, I
do not deny but the dreams of good men and learned, be better and wiser then
theires of the wicked and more unlearned sort.

And albeit a man would ween, there can be nothing in the world more vain
then Dreams: yet there is one thing more light then they, and that are Lies.
For there Lies.
is yet some shadovve, and, as it were, a certain feeling of that which a
man has seen in his dream. But there is neither shadovve nor body of a
truth in a lie. And therefore we should less busy men's ears, and their
minds to harken to lies, then to dreams, because they be otherwhile received
for truethes. But time, in the end, discouers such pelf: that liars, not
only do gain no credit, but no man vouchesafes to harken unto them, in
otherwise (as the men that carry no substance in their words) then if they
had said nothing Men have a pleasure to lie othervvhile.
or blown a little wind. And you shall understand, there be many yt use to lie,
not minding any ill purpose in it, or to make their own peculiar proffit by
it, to hurt other men or shame their neighbor: only they do it, for a
pleasure they take to tell a lie: as men that drink not, all for thirst: but
for a pleasure they take, to taste of the wine. Other some do tell lies, to
make a vain glorious boasting of them selves: vaunting and telling in a
bravery, what wonderful exploits they have done, or bearing men in hand, they
be great doctors and learned men.

In Silence too, after a sort, without speech, a man may tell a lesynge: I
mean Lefinges and Countresectinges.
with his gestures and grace: as some you shall see, that being of mean, or
rather base condition and calling, use such a solemnity in all their doings,
and march so stately, and speak with such a prerogative, or rather discourse
like Parleament men, setteling them selves, as it were, in a place of
Judgment, proudly prying about the^ like Peacockes: that it is a very death to
behold them.

And some such you shall find, that allthough they be combered with no more
wealth then easily serves their turn: yet will they never appear unless their
necks be laden with chains, their fingers full of rings, their cappes beset
with agletts, and every other part bespangled, as though they would defy ye
King of Castiglio. Whose behauiours be full of follies and vain glory, which
comes of pride, growing of vanity it self. So that we must eschew these
faults, as foul and unseemly things. You shall understand, in many Cities,
and those of the best, the laws do not suffer, that rich men should go much
more gorgeously attyred, then the poor. For poor men think they have a
wrong: when me^ seem, but in countenance alone, as it were Imperiously to
reign over them. So that we must carefully beware we fall not into these
follies.

Neither must a man boaste of his Nobility, his Honor or riches: much less
vaunt of his wit, or gloriously rehearse to much of his deeds and valiant
Acts, or what Glorious bostinge and braggeing.
his Ancestors have done, nor upon every occasion, fall in reherfall of such
things, as many men do. For in such case, a man would ween, they seek,
either to contend with the Company, (if they be, or will take upon them to
be, as good Gentlemen, and of as much wealth and worthiness, as they be:) or
else to ouercrowe them, (if they live in meaner condition and calling, then
they do) And as it were to vpbraide them, their poor and base condition of
life.

A man must neither embase, nor exalte him self to much out of measure: but
rather Exalting and embasing.
bury in silence some part of his merits, then arrogate to much unto him.
Because Goodness it self, when it excedeth much is ever enuyde of some. And
you may be sure, they that embase them selves thus beyond measure, refusing
that worship and honor that is but duly their own of very right: show more
pride in this contempt, then they that usurp those things, that are not so
due unto them. So yt a man perchance, might say, Giotto has not deserved
those Co^mendatio^s yt some believe, in yt he refused Bocc. Nouel. 5 Gior. 6.
fo. 291
to be called Master: being not only a master but without doubt a singular and
cunning master in his art in those daiez. But be it blame, or praise yt he
deserved: it is most sure, he that refuses that which every man else does hunt
for: shows therein, he reproves or contemns the common opinion of men. And,
to contemn the honor and renown, which other me^ gape for so much, is but to
glory and magnify him self above other. For as much as there is no man
(without he be mad) will refuse and reject things that be dear and of price:
unless he be such, as has plenty and store of those dear and deintye things.

We must not boast of those good things that be in us, nor set them to light:
for in yt one, we do vpbraide men their faults: In the other, we scorn to
much their virtues. But it behooves every man to speak his own praise, as
little as he may. And if occasion drive him unto it: it shall be good, modestly
to speak the truethe, as I have told you before.

And therefore, they that desire to do me^ a pleasure: must needs leave one
fault, yt is to common with all men: they must not show them selves so
afraid and fearful to speak their minds, when a man does ask their
advise. For, it is a deadly pain to here the^, and specialy if they be me^, in
ye Judge me^t of ye world, of good understanding and wisedo^e. What a fetchig
about is this, ere they come to ye matter? Sir I beseech you pardon me, if I
do not say well. I will speak like a gros man as I am: and grossly according
to my pore skill. And Sir, I am sure you vvil but mock me for it. But yet, to
obey you: and they draw their words forth so long, and put the^ selves to
such pain: yt, while these ceremonies be a doig, ye hardest question yt is,
might have been determined with fewer words and shorter time: because they
cannot get out of these protestations, when they be in.

They be also very tedious to men, and their conversation and manners are very
troublesome: who show too base and abject a mind in their doings. And where
the chefest and highest place, is apparently due Abiecte Mind.
unto them: they will ever creep down to the lowest. And it is a spiteful
buisynes to thrust them up: For they will strait iogge back again, like a
resty Jade, or a Nagge that startleth a side at his shadow. So that, there is
much a do with them, when we meet at a door. For they will not (for all you
can do) in any case enter before you, but so trauerse their ground, go back,
and so fray and defend with their arms and their hands: that at every third
step, a man must be ready to wage battle with them: and thus they break of,
all solace and pleasure, and otherwhile, the buisynes they meet about.

And therefore, Ceremonies, which we name, as you hear, by a strange term,
as Ceremonies.
lacking a word of our own, because our elders, having no knowledge of those
superstitious fashions, could not well give them a proper name. Ceremonies, I
say, (in my Judgment,) differ not much from lies and dreams, for their own
very vainesse it self. So that we may couple and join the^ together in this
our treatise, sith occasion serves so fytt to speak of them here, As a good
man has often showed me: those solemnities that church men do use at their
Altars, and in their divine service both to God and his holy things, are
properly called Ceremonies: but after, men did begin, to reverence each other
with curious entertaynements, more then were convenient, and would be called
masters and Lords, amongst them selves, yealding bending, and bowing their
bodies, in toke^ of reverence one to another, uncovering their heads, using
high titles and Styles of honor, and kyssing their hands as if they were
hollye things: some body, by like considering all these things well, and
finding these new found curious follyes without any name: thought good to
Christen and call them Ceremonies, but sure in a jest as I take it: as to be
merry and make good cheer, we term it in sport, a triu^ph: which custom, no
doubt, took not his being at us, but else where, as barbarous and strange:
and not long since, from whence I know not, transported into Italy: whose
deeds being wretched, and effects base and vile, has gotten increase and
honor, in vain words alone, and superfluous titles.

Ceremonies then, if we consider well theie inte^ts that use them: are but
vain shows of honor and reverence, toward him to whom they be done:
framed of semblance and words touching their titles and courtious offers. I
say vain: In that we honor me^ to their face, whom we reverence not in
deed, but otherwhile contemn. And nevertheless, because we may not go against
custom, we give them these titles: The most honorable Lord such a one: the
Noble Lord such a one. And so otherwhile we offer them our humble service:
whom we could better vnserue then serve, and command then do them any duty.

The^ not Lesinges alone, but also Treacheries and Treasons, shall be called
Ceremonies. But because these words and these titles above rehearsed, have lost
their strength: and waste, (as a man may say of Iro^) their te^per, with such
continual occupying of it as we do use: we must not so precisely way them as
other words, nor so strictly construe the meaning of them. And, that this is
true, that which always happens to all men, does show it plain inoughe.
For if we meet with a man, we never saw before: with whom, upon some
occasion, it behoues us to talk: without examining well his worthiness, most
commonly, that we may not offend in to little, we give him to much, and call
him Gentleman, and otherwhile Sir, although he be but some Souter or Barbar,
or other such stuff: and all because he is appareled neat, somewhat
gentleman like.

And as men in times past, were wont to Titles by Privilege.
have under the Privilege of the Pope and Emperor, peculiar and distinct
titles of honor, which might not be untouched, without doing wrong to the
priuileged men: nor again attributed and given without a scorn, to them that
were no such priuileged persons: So at this day, we must more freely use
those titles, and the other significations of honor, like to those titles:
because Custom the mightiest Lord has largely therewith, priuileged men of
our time.

This use and custom, though so fair and gallant without, is altogether vain
within, and consists in semblance without effect, and in words without
meaning. But this notwithstanding, it is not lawful Custom must not be altered
for us to change it: but rather, because it is not our fault, but the fault
of our time, we are bound to follow it: but yet we must discretely do it.

So that we are to noate, that Ceremonies The end why ceremonies be used.
Ceremonies for profit.
are used, either for a Profit, or for a Vanity, or for a Duty. And every
lie that is told for a man's private profit: is a deceit, a sin, and a
dishonest part: for, in what so ever it be, A man can never honestly lie.

And this is a common fault with flatterers, that counterfeit them selves to be
our friends, and apply them selves ever to our desiers, what soever they be:
not because we would have it so, but to the end we should do them some
pleasure, for it. And this is not to please us, but to deceive us. And albeit
this kind of fault be, peradventure, by reason of custom sufferable: yet
notwithstanding because of it self, it is foul and hurtefull, it ill becomes
a gentle man to do it. For it is no honesty to seek a pleasure by the hurt
of another. And if lies and false flatteries, may be termed Ceremonies (as I
have said before:) so often, as we use them for respect of our gain and profit:
so often we do hazard our good name and credit: so that this consideration
alone, might move us well to leave all Ceremonies, and use them no more.

It rests now that I speak of those yt Dutiful ceremonies.
be done of Duty, and of those that be done of a Vainesse. As touching ye
first, We must not leave them undone in any wise. For he that fails to do
them, does not only displease, but does a wrong to him, to whom they be due.
And many times it chances, ye men come to daggers drawing, eue^ for this
occasion alone, that one man has not done the other, that worship and honor
upon the way, that he ought. For to say a truth The power of custom is
great and of much force, Custom is a law.
(as I said) and would be taken for a law, in these cases. And that is the
cause we say: You: to every one, that is not a man of very base calling, and in
such kind of speech You.
we yealde such a one, no manner of courtesy of our own. But if we say:
Thou: to such a one, then we disgrace him and offer Thou.
him outrage and wrong: and by such speech, seem to make no better reconing
of him, then of a knave and a clown.

And although the times past, and other countries, have used other manners: let
us yet, keep our selves to our own: And let not us dispute the matter, which
is the better oftwaine. For we must observe, not those, that we Judge in our
own conceits to be good: but such, as be current by custom, and used in our
own time: as laws, which we be bound to keep, though they be not all of the
best, till such time, as the magistrates, the Prince, or they that have power
to amend them, have changed them to better.

So that It behoues us, hedefully to mark the doings and speech, wherewith
daily practice and custom, wonteth to receive, salute, and name in our own
country, all sorts and kinds Bocc Nouel. 6 Gior. 5. fo. 259
of people, and in all our familiar communicatio^ with men, let us use the
same. And notwithstanding Peter the King of Aragon.
the Admerall (as peradventure the manner of his time was such) in his talk
with Peter the King of Aragon, did many times: Thou him: Let us yet say to our
King: Your majesty: and your highness: as well in speech as in writing. And if
they have followed the use of their time: then let not us break the fashions
of ours. And these do I call Duetifull Ceremonies, because they proceed not,
as we would, or of our free wills: but are laid upon us by the Laws: I
mean, Common custom.

And in such things, as carry no evil meaning in them, but rather some face
of courtesy: reason would and commands, we should rather observe common
Custom, then dispute and lay the law for them.

And albeit, to kiss in show of reverence, of very right appertains to the
relics of Saints and there holy matters: yet if it be the manner of your
country, at parting, to say: Signori, Io vi bascio la mano. Or: Io son vostro
seruidore: Or else: vostro schiauo in catena: I kiss your hand: I am your
servant: your staue in chain.
you must not disdain it, more then other. But, In farewelles and writings,
you must salute and take leave, not as reason, but as custom will have you:
and not as me^ wont in times past, or should do: but as men vseat this day:
for it is a chorlishe manner to say: What great gentleman is he I pray you,
that I must master him: Or: is he become master parson, that I must kiss his
hands, for he that is wont to be (Sird) and likewise (Sirreth) other: may
think you disdain him, and use some outrage unto him, when you call him to
his face, by his bare name, and give him no addition.

And these terms of Seignory, service, and duetye, and such other like unto
these, as I have said: have lost a great part of their harshnes, and (as
herbs long steepte in the water) are sweetened, and made soft and tender, by
reason of much speech in men's mouths, and continual use to speak them. So
that we must not abhor the^, as some rude and rusticall fellows, full of
foolish simplicity, do: that would feign begin the letters we write to
Kings and Emperors after this sort. vz. If thou and thy children be in
health it is well: I am also in health: saying, that such was the beginning
of the letters, the Latins did write to the magistrates of Rome. If men should
live by their measure, and go back to those fashions and manners, our first
fathers did use: the world the^ by little and little, would come so about, that
we should feed upon acornes again.

And in these Duetifull Ceremonies, there be also certain rules and precepts,
we must observe: that we may not be touched with Vanity and plyde. Respect of
country.
Vainesse and Pride. And first of all, we must consider the country where we
do live. For all customs be not current a like in all countries. And
peradventure that which they use in Naples, which is a City replenished with
gentlemen, of good houses and Lords of great power, were not so fit for
Florens and Luke: Which are inhabited, for the most part, with Mercha^ts and
plain gentlemen, without any Prince, Marquis, or Barone amongst them. So that
the brave and Lordelike manners of the gentlemen of Naples transported to
Florence: should be but waste, and more then needs: like a tall man's gown
cast over a dwarf: as also the manners of Florence should be to pinchinge and
strait, for the Noble natures and minds of the ge^tleme^ of Naples. And
although the ge^tleme^ of Venice, use great embracings and entertainementes
amongst themselves, and fawn without measure the one on the other, by reason
of their offices, degrees and favors they look to find when they meet and
assemble and choose their officers: yet for all this, it is not convenient,
that the good men of Rouigo, or the Citizens of Asolo, should use the like
sole^nities, embraceings and entertaineme^ts one to another, haueing no such
kind of cause amongst them: Albeit all that same country (if I be not
deceived) is feign a little, into these kind of follies, as over careless and
apt enough by nature, or rather learning those manners of Venice their Lady and
Mistress: because Every man gladly seeks to tread the steps of his better:
although there be no reason for it.

Moreover we must have a regard to Time, age, condition and calling must be
respected.
the time, to the age, and the condition of him, to whom we use these
ceremonies, and likewise respect our own calling: and with men of credit
maintain them: but with men of small account cut them of clean, or at least,
abridge them as much as we may, and rather give them a beck the^ a due
guard: Which the courtiers in Rome can very well skill to do.

But in some cases these Ceremonies be very combersome to a man's business, and
very In what case Ceremonies be cumberlome.
tedious: as, Cover your head, says the Judge, yt is busied with causes, and is
scanted of time to dispatche them. And this fellow so full of these Ceremonies,
after a number of legs and shuflinge curtesis, aunswers again: Sir I am very
well thus. But says the Judge again, Cover your head I say. Yet this good
fellow tourning twice or thrice to and fro, making low conges down to the
ground with much reverence and humility, aunswers him, still: I beseache your
worship, let me do my duty. This business and trouble lasts so long, and so
much tune is trifled: that the Judge might very nere have dispatched all his
business within that space. Then, although it be every honest man's part, and
the duty of every meaner body, to honor the Judges, and me^ yt be called to
worship and honor: yet, where time will not bear it: it is a very troublesome
thing to use it, and it must be eschewed, or measured with reason.

Neither be yt self same Ceremonies semely for young me^, respecting their Age:
yt old me^ do use together. Nor yet can it become men of mean and base
condition, to use the very same, yt ge^tleme^ and great men may use one to
another. And if we mark it well, we shall find, yt the greatest, ye best men,
and me^ of most valor, do not always use ye most Ceremonies the^ selves, nor
yet love nor look a man should make many goodly curtsies unto them, as men
that can ill spend their thoughts one matters so vain.

Neither must handy crafts men, nor me^ of base condition, buisie the^ selves
to much, in over solemn Ceremonies to great men, and Lords: it is not looked
for in such. For they disdain them, more then allow the^: because it seems
that in such, they seek and look, rather for obedience and duty, then
honor. And therefore it is a foul fault in a servant, to offer his master
his service: for he cou^ts it his shame, and he thinks the servant does make a
doubt, whether he is master or no: as if it were not in him to employ him, and
co^mau^d him too. These kind of Ceremonies would be used frankely. For, What
a man does of duty, is taken for a debte, and he finds him self little
beholding to him that does it. But he that does more, then he is bound to: it
seems he parts with somewhat, and that makes men to love him, and to
commend him for a liberal man. And I remember me well, I have heard it
said, that a worthy Graecia^ a great versifier, was ever wont to say: that
He that could skill to entertain men with a small adventure, made a great
gain.

You shall then use your Ceremonies, as the tailer shapes his garments, rather
to large then to little: but yet not so, that he cutteth one hose large enough
to make a cloak. And if thou do use in this point, some little gentle
behavior, to such as be meaner then thy self: thou shall be counted lowly.
And if thou do as much to thy betters: thou shall be said a Ge^tlema^ well
taught, and courtious. But he that does her in to much, and is over lauishe,
Vanity.
shall be blamed as vain and light: and perhaps worse thought of too: counted a
busy body, a fidging fellow, and in wise men's sight, a flatterer: which vice,
our elders have called, (if I do not forget me) dowble diligence. And there is
no fault in the world, more to be abhorred, or yt worsse beseemes a
gentleman, then this. And this is the third manner of Ceremonies, which simply
proceeds of our own will, and not of custom.

Let us the^ remember, that Ceremonies, (as I have always said) were not so
necessary by nature, but a man might do well enough without them: As for
example, our country lived (it is not long since) in manner clean without any.
But other men's diseases have infected us, with these infirmities and many mo.
So that, custom and use observed: the rest that is more, is but waste: and
such a sufferable leesing, as if it be more in deed then is in use, it is not
only insufferable, but forbidden: and so upon, the matter, a cold and
unsavory thing to noble minds, that cannot brouse upon shrubbes and shows.

And you shall understand, that trusting my own skill but little, in writing
this present treatise: I thought good to consult with many, and to take the
Judgment of better learned men then my self. And this in my reading I find.
There was a King, they call him Oedipus: being banished Oedipus.
and driven out of his country (upon what occasion I know not) he fled to
King Theseus at Athens, the better to save him self and his life, from his
enemies, that Theseus.
mainely pursued him. This Oedipus now coming before the presence of Theseus,
by good chance hearing his daughter speak, (whom he knew by her voice, for
he was blind and could not behold her with his eyes) he was so presently
stricken with joy, that, not tarying to do his allegeau^ce and duty to the
King, he did presently embrace, and make much of his daughter before him: his
fatherly affection so led him, and ruled him so. But in the end finding his
fault, and better aduising him self of his doings: he would needs excuse it to
Theseus, and humbly prayed his grace to pardon his folly. The good and wise
King, cut of his talk, and bad him leave his excuses, and thus said unto him:
Comfort thy self Oedipus, and be not dismayed at that thou have done. For I
will not have my life honored with other men's words, but with my own
deeds. Which se^te^ce a man should have always in mind.

And albeit men be well pleased, that me^ do give them worship and honor: yet
when they find them selves cuningly courted, they be soon weary of it, and
also disdain it. For these glauerings, or flatteries I should say, to amend
their knaueries and falsehoodes, have this fault withal: that these glauering
fellows do plainly show, they count him, whom they court in this sort, but
a vain, and arrogant body, an ass of gross capacity, and so simple, yt it
should be an easy matter to bayte him and take him too. And these Vain and
Curious Ceremonies, besides that they be superfluous: so they bear with all a
shape of flattery, so slenderly covered, that every man does openly see them,
and know them plain: in such sort, that they that do them, to the end to
make a gain, besides that ill that is in them, whereof I spoke before: show
them selves also, gentlemen ill taught, without good manner or any honest
fashion.

But there is another sort of Ceremonious people, who make it an art and
merchandise, and keep a book and a reconing of it. One these men (they say)
they must smile, on such men they must laughe: and, ye better man shall sit in
the chayr, and the other upon a low stool: which superstitions Ceremonies, I
believe, were transported out of Spain into Italy. But our country, has given
them but cold entertainment, and as yet they have taken but slender root
here: for this precise difference of worship, and gentry, is not liked of, with
us. And therefore it is but ill manner, for a man to make him self Judge, which
is the better man.

But it is much worse for a man to make a sale of his Ceremonies and
entertainme^ts, (after ye manner of harlots) as I have seen many gentlemen do
in the court, giving good words and fair countenaunces for a reward and
recompense, of the goods and the time, their servant have spent in their
service.

And sure they that take a pleasure to use over many Ceremonies, more then
need: show they do it upon a lustines and bravery, as men that have nothing
else in the^ of any valor.

And because these follies are learned with ease enough, and carry withal a
little fair gloss in show: they bestow all their whole minds none other
way. But grave matters they can not abide to weelde, as things to far above
their reach: and could find in their hearts to dwell in these toys and
tryfles, as men whose capacity conceiueth naught of Importance: like tender
mylkesops that can bear no bru^t: or that, beside a glorious outside, have not
metal enough in the^ to abide a flea biting. And therefore, they could wish
it worse: that these entertainments and acquaintance with me^, should go no
further then the first sight. And of these there be an infinite number.

And some again be to full of words, and abound to much in curtious gestures
to cover and hyde the defects and faults of their treacheries, and their vile
and base natures: For they see, if they should be as bare^ and rude in their
words, as they be in their deeds and their doings, me^ would in no case abide
them. And to say a truth, you shall find yt out of these two causes, draw
most men one, to use these wast and needles Ceremonies, and nothing else: which
lightly most men cannot away withal, because they be hindered by them, and
their means, to live as they would, and lose their liberty: which a man
does prefer above any thing else.

We must not speak ill of other me^, nor of their doings: although it
plainly appear, that men do willingly be^d good ear to hear it, as easily
moved thereto, by ye nature of malice and envy, that pynes at our Neighbors
prosperity and rising to worship and honor: for at length me^ will eschew the
acquayntau^ce of Slau^derous Slaundering.
people, as much as they shun the Ox, ye goreth with his horns, or strikes
with his feet: making their reconing, that what they tell them of us, as much
they will tell us, of them.

And some there be, that so quarrel at every Quareling. Wrangling. Ouerthwaring.
word, question, and wrangle, that they show they have little skill in other
men's natures: for, Every man desires the victory should go one his side: and
hates it as much, to be mastered in words, as to be vanquished in any other
act that he does. So yt, wilfully to ouerthvvart a man, it workethe no Love
and good will: but rather displeasure, rancoure and malice. And therefore, he
that sekes to be well thought of, and would be taken for a plesaunt and good
Companion, must not so redily use these speeches: It was not so: And, Nay: it
is as I tell you. I will lay a wager with you: But he must rather take payns,
to apply himself to other men's mi^ds concerning such things, as have matter of
small importance: Because the victory, in such cases, is dangerous: for, the
gayninge the cause, in tryfling questions, does often loose the Love of a
faithful friend. And men are so far out of love and liking, of such hot
fellows: that they will by no means grow acquaynted with such, least they
be driven every hour to bralle, to chide, and to fight with them for it. And
such kind of people do purchase these names: Master Vniciguerra:
Conqueror. Ouerthwaiter. Know all. The subtle Doctor.
Or, Sir Contraponi: Or, Sir Tuttessalle: And sometime: il Dottor suttile.

And if you chance otherwhile, to be entreated of the company to speak your
mind: I would have you do it after a gentle sort, without showing your self
so greedy to carry the bucklers away, as if you would eat them up for haste.
But thou must Leave to every man his part: And be it right or wrong,
consent to the minds of the most, or the most importunate: and so leave the
field unto them: that some other, and not your self, may beat and sweat, and
chase in the winning of the cause. For these quarelous contentions, be foul
and ill favored fashions for gentlemen to use: and they get them ill will and
displeasure of all men for it: and they be uncomely for their own
vnseemelines, which of it self offends every good honest mind, as it may
chance you shall hear hereafter.

But the common fault of men is such, Counceling and reproving
and each man is so infected with this self love and liking of him self: that
he has no respect or care to please any man else. And to show them selves
fine headed, of much understanding, and wise: they counsel, reprove, dispute,
and bralle, to daggers drawing, and allow nothing else but that they say them
selves.

To offer advise unrequested: what is it else but to vaunt your self wiser
then he is, whom you do counsel: nay rather, it is a plain check to him, for
his Ignorance and folly. And therefore, you must not do so, with all your
acquaintance generally: but only with your very friends, or such who^ you are
to govern and rule: or else, when a man hapely stands in danger and peril,
how much a stranger so ever he be. But in our common Acquaintance and
conversation, Let us not busy our selves, and meddle to much with other men's
doings. In which fault many do fall: but most of all, the men of least
understanding. For, Men of gross apacities, consider but little: And they take
no long time to debate with them selves, as men that have little business to do.

But how so ever it be, he that offers He that counsels has ever a good
conceit of him self.
and gives his counsel: geues us to think, he has this conceit of him
self: that all the wit is in him, and other poor men have none at all.

And sure there be some, that stand so much in conceit of their wit: that
they will be in manner, at wars, with him, tha: will not follow the counsel
they give them. And thus they will say. Very well: a poor man's counsel will
not be taken: such a one will do as he list: such a one geues no heed to
my words. As though there were not more Arrogancy in thee, that sekest to
bring a man to follow thy Counsel: then there is in him, that follows his
own advise.

And they do also make the like fault, yt take upon them to reprove and
correct Reproving and correcting of faul.
men's faults, and to give a definite sentence in all things, and lay the law
to all men. Such a thing would not be done: You spoke such words: Do not
so: say not so: The wine that you drink is not good for you: but would bered
wine. You should use such an Electuarie, and such pills: And they never
leave to reprove and correct. And let us pass that over, that otherwhile, they
busy them selves so much, to purge other men's grounds: that their own is
ouergrowen, and full of thorns and nettles. For it is a marvelous pain unto
them, to hear one that side.

And as there be few or none, whose mids can frame, to spend their life with a
Physician, a Confessor, and much less a Judge that has jurisdiction and
power to controwle and correct all criminal faults: so is there not one, that
can take any pleasure to live, or make himself familiar with such Censors: so
hard, and severe. For, every man loves liberty: and they would rob us of
it, and get to be our masters. So that it is no good manner to be so redye to
corect and give rules unto me^: we must give Scholemasters and Fathers leave to
do that. And yet that notwithstanding, experience does show, the childeren and
scholars both, do often hide them selves from them, you see.

Do not allow, that a man should scorn Scorns and Scoffs.
or scoff at any man, what so ever he be: no not his very enemy, what
displeasure so ever he bear him: for, it is a greater sign of contempt and
disdain, to scorn a man, then to do him an open vvro^g: forasmuch as wrongs
may be done, either of choler, or of some covetous mind or other. And there is
no man will take a displeasure with that, or for that, he does not set by: nor
yet covet that thing, he does altogether contemn.

So that, a man does make some account of him he does wrong: but of him that
he scoffs and scorns, he makes no reconing at all, or as little as may be.

And the Nature and effect of a scorn, is properly to take a contentation and
pleasure to The Nature of a scorn or a scoff.
do another man shame and villainy: though it do our selves no good in the
world. So that, good manner and honesty, would us beware we scorn no man in any
case: wherein they be much to be blamed, that reprove men those blemishes they
have in their person, either in words, as Master Forese da Rabatta did,
laughing at the countenance of Master Giotta: or in deeds, as many do,
counterfeting those that stutter, haulte, or be crooked shoulderd. And
likewise, they that scoff at any man, that is deformed, ill shapen, lean,
little, or a dwarf, at much to be blamed for it: or, that make a gybing and
jesting at such follyes as another man speaks, or the words that escape him
by chance: and with all, have a sport and a pleasure to make a man blush: all
these spiteful behauiours and fashions, worthily deserve to be hated, and make
them that use them, unworthy to Boec, Nouel. 5. Gior. 6. fo. 297.
bear the name of an honest gentleman.

And such as use to jest at a man, be very like unto these: I mean them that
have a good sport to mock and beguile me^, Morkes.
not in spite or scorn, but on a meriment alone. And you shall understand,
There is Difference between a scorn and a mock
no difference betvveene a scorn and a mock: but the purpose alone and intent
a man has, in the meaning the one the other. For a man mockes and laughes
otherwhile, in a sport and a pastime: but his scorn is ever in a rage and
disdain. Although in common speech and writing, we take the one word
sometime for the other. But He that does scorn a man: feels a contentation
in the shame he has done him: And he that does mock, or but laughe: takes
no contentation in that he has done: but a sport, to be merry and pass the
time away: where it would be, both a grief and a sorrow, per chance, unto
him, to see that man receive any shame, by any thing he said or did unto him.

And although I profited little, in my Grammar in my youth: yet I remember
that Mitio, who loved Aeschines so much, that he him self had wonder at it:
yet other while, took a sport and a pleasure to mock him: as when he said to
him self: I will go to give him a mock: so that, I must infer, that the
self same thing, done to the very self same body: according to the intent of
him that does it, may be either a mock or scorn.

And because our purpose, cannot be plainly known unto other men: it shall
not be good for us to use such parts, as bring men in doubt and suspicion, what
our intent and meaning is in them: but rather let us eschew them, then seek
to be counted Iesters. For, It many times chances, in boording and Jesting,
one tackes in sport, the other strykes again in earnest: and thus from
playing, they come to fraying. So, he that is familiarly mockte in pastime,
recons it, otherwhile, to be done to his shame and dishonor, and thereat he
takes a disdain. Besides this, A mock is no better, then a deceyte. And
naturally, it greueth every man to err and be deceived. So that, many Reasons
there be to prove, That He that seeks to purchase goodwill, and be well thought
of: must not make him self to cunning in mockes and Iestes.

It is very true, we are not able, in no wise, to lead this paineful life,
altogether without some pleasure and solace: And because Iestes do give us some
sport, and make us merry, and so co^seque^tly refreash our spirits: we love
them that be pleasant, merry conceited, and full of solace. So that a body
would think, I should rather persuade the contrary: I mean, I should say:
It is convenient and meet in company, to use pretty mockes, and otherwhile some
Iestes and taunts. And without doubt, they that can slint after a friendly and
gentle sort, be much more made of, and better beloved then they that cannot
skill or have no wit to do it. Howbeit, it is needeful in this, to have a
respect to many things.

And forasmuch as it is the intent of him that does Jest: to make a sport and
pastime at his fault, whom he does love and esteem, and of whom he does make
more the^ a common account: it must be well lookte to, that the fault, wherein
his friend has fallen, be such, as he may sustain no slander or shame, or
any harm by any talk or Ieste he makes upon it: otherwise, his skill does ill
serve him, to make a good difference between a pleasant Jest, and a very
plain wrong.

And there be some men, so short and so testy, that you must, in no wise, be
merry, nor use Bocc. Nouel. 8 Gior. 9. fo. 430
any jesting with them. And that can Biondello well tell, by Master Philippo
Argenti in the gallery of Cauiccioli.

And moreover, It cannot be good to ieaste No Jesting in matters of weight or
of shame.
in matters of weite, and much less in matters of shame. For, men will ween
that we have a good sport (as the common saying is) to brag and boast in
our evil: as it is Bocc. Nouel. 7 Gior. 6. fo. 294.
said, the Lady Philippe of Prato, took a singular pleasure and conte^tation
in the pleasant and pretty au^swer she made, to excuse her Lupo is the proper
name of a man as well as a wolf.
loose and wanton life. And therefore, I cannot think that Lupo of Vberti did
any thing extenuat or lesse^ his shame: but rather increaste it greater, by the
Ieste that he made to excuse his fault, and qualify the opinion of his
cowardly mind. For, where he might have kept him self safe without danger in
the castle of Laterin, wherein he was besieged round about, and shut up: he
thought he had plaide the man good inoughe, in that he could say at the
yealding it up: that A wolf does not love to be besieged and shut up. For,
where it is out of time for to laughe, there to use any Iestes or daliaunce, it
has a very cold Grace.

And further, you shall understand, there be some Iestes yt bite, and some yt
bite not at all. For the first sort: let yt wise counsel that Lauretta gave
for that point, suffice to teach Bocc Nouel. 3 Gior. 6. fo. 288 Iestes and
Taunts.
you: That Iestes must bite the hearer like a sheep, but not like a dog. For
if it pinche, as the byte of a dog: it shall be no more a Ieste but a wrong.
And the laws almost in all countries, will, that who says any villainy unto a
man, shall be grievously punished for it. And, perchance, it were not amiss, to
provide with all, some sharp correction for him, that should byte in way of
jesting, beyond all honest measure. But gentlemen should make account, that the
law that punishes wrongs, extends as far to iestes, and that they should
seldom or very easily nyp or taunt any man.

And besides all this, you must understand, that a jest, whether it bite, or
bite not, if it be not fine and full of wit, men take no pleasure at al to
hear it, but rather are wearied with it: or at least wise, if they do laughe,
they laughe not at the jest, but at the iester him self, that brings it forth
so cold.

And because, Iestes be no other thing but deceites: and deceit (as a thing
that is framed of subtilenes and craft) cannot be wrought but of men, that have
fine and ready wits, and very present: therefore they have no grace in men
that be rude, and of gross understanding: nor yet in them always, that have
the best and floweing wits: as, peradventure, they did not altogether beco^e
Master John Boccaccio.

But tau^tes and Iestes be a special redines and aptnes of wit, and quicken the
motions of the mind: wherefore they that have discretion, do not in this
point, consider their will, but their disposition of nature: and after they
have once or twice tried their wits, and find them unfit for such purpose:
they leave to labor them selves any further in that kind of exercise: that it
may not chance unto them, that hapt to the knight of the lady Horetta. And if
you Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287.
look in to the manners of many, you shall easily see, this that I tell you is
true: I say, that To Jest or to taunt, is not current with every man that will,
but only with them that can. And there be many that for every purpose, have in
their mouth ready, many of these words, which we call Bicticcichi: that have
no manner of sense or meaning in them. And some, that use very foolishly and
fondly to change Sillables into words. And some you shall hear speak and
make answer, otherwise the^ a man would lightly Because these speeches have no
grace in our English tou^ge, I leave them in the Italian. But our tongue has
such absurd jests as plentifully as any other tongue.
look for, without any wit or pleasure in the world in their talk. And if you
do ask them, Dove e il signore? they answer again. Dove egli ha i piedi: and
likewise. Gli frae vnguer le mani con le grascia di signore Giouan Boccadoro.
Dove mi manda egli? Ad Arno. Io mi voglio radere, Sarebbe meglio rodere. Va
chiama il Barbieri. Et perrhe non il Barbadomanie. Al which be to gross, to
rude, and to stale: and such were almost, all the pleasant purposes and iestes
of Dioneo. Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281.


But I will not take upon me at this time, to discourse of the best and the
worst kind of iestes, what they be: as well for that other men have written
treatises thereof much more lernedly and better the^ I can: as also, because
iestes and tauntes, have at first sight, a large and sure proof of their grace
or disgrace: such, as thou can not do much amiss in this point, without thou
stand to much in thy own conceyte, and think to well of thy self: for where
the jest is pretty and pleasant, there a man strait is merry, and shows a
liking by laughi^g, and makes a kind of admiration of it. So that, where the
company geues forth no liking of thy sportes and conceits, by their mirthes
and their laughing: hold thy self still then, and jest no more. For it is thy
own fault thou must think, and not theirs that do hear the: forasmuch as the
hearers, as it were allured, with the redye, pleasant, and subtle aunswers or
questions (do what they can, will they or nill they) cannot forbear their
laughing, but laughe in spyte of their teeth. From whom as from our right and
lawful Judges, we must not appeal to our selves.

Neither must a man, to make other men merry, speak foul and filthy words,
nor make ill-favored gestures, distorting his cou^tenau^ce, and disfiguring his
body. For, No man should, for other men's pleasures, dishonest and dishonor
him self. It is an art for a Iuggler and iester to use: it does not become a
gentleman Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281. It is the beginning of a so^g.
to do so. We must not then, imitate ye common and rude behauiours of Dioneo.
Madonna Aldruda Alzate La coda.

Nor we must not cou^terfet our selves to be fools and unsavory doltes: but
as time and occasion serves, tell so^e pretty tale or so^e news, never heard
of before, he yt ca^: and he yt cannot, let him hold his peace. For, these be
ye parts of ye wit: which, if they be sudden and pretty, give a proof and a
show of ye quicknes of ye wit, and the goodness of ye manners of him yt speaks
the^: which thing does very much please men and makes the^ our lovers and
friends. But if they be otherwise, they work the^ a contrary effect. For, a
man would ween the ass would play his part: or ye so^e hody dody and
louberly lout would friske and dau^ce in his doublet. There is another
plesau^te kind of co^mumratio^: Long talk and discourse.
and yt is when ye pleasure and grace does not consist in one merry co^ceite
alone, but in long and continued talk: which would be well disposed, well
uttered, and very well set forth, to show ye manners, ye fashio^s, ye gestures
and behauiours of the^ we speak, of so properly and liueas ye hearer should
think that he hears the^ not rehearsed, but sees them with his eyes do those
very thigs he hears them to speak of: which be very well observed by the
gentlemen and gentlewomen both, in Boccace: although yet otherwhile (if I be
not deceived) they do affect and counterfeit, more the^ is sightly for a
gentleman or gentlewoman to do, like to these Comedy Players. And to do this
well, you must have the matter, the tale, or the story, you take upon you to
tell, perfect in your mind: and words so ready and fit, that you need not
say in the end: That thing, and the other thing: This man, what do you call him:
That matter, help me Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287.
to term it: And, remember what his name is. For this is just the trot of the
knight of the lady Horetta. And if you do rehearse any chance, in which there
be many speakers: you must not say: He said and he answered: because this
word (He) serves for all men. So that the hearer that harkens unto it, is
easily deceived, and forgets who^e you mean. Then, It behoues them that
discourse matters at length, to use proper names, and not to change them after.

And more over, a man must beware that he say, not those things, which vnsaide
in silence would make ye tale pleasant inoughe, and, peradventure, give it a
better grace to leave them out. As to say thus. Such a one, that was the son
of such a one, that dwelt in Cocomer street: do you not know him? he married
the daughter of Giansigliazzi, the lean scragge, that went so much to Saint
Laraunce. No? do not you know him? why? do you not remember the goodly straight
old man that ware long hair down to his shoulders? For if it were nothing
material to the tale, whether this chance befell him, or him: all this long
babble, and fond and folishe questions, were but a tale of a Tubbe: to no
purpose, more then to weary men's ears that harken to it, and long to
understand the end. As peradventure our Dant has made this fault otherwhile,
where he says: And borne my parents were of yoare in Lu^bardie,
And eke of Ma^tuaes soil they both by country be.


For, it was to no purpose, whether his mother were borne at Gazuolo, or else
at Cremona.

But I learned once of a stranger, a Rethorician very learned, a necessary
lesson concerning this points: that Men must dispose and order their tale,
first with by names, and then rehearse them (as need is) that be proper. For,
the bynames always bear the respect of the persons quality: but the other
are to be used at the Fathers discretion, or his whom they concern.

And therefore, that body whom in your thought and imagination to your self,
you do conceive, might be Lady Covetousness her Bocc. Nouel 6 Gior. 1. fo. 41.
self: in speech you shall call Master Erminio Grimaldie: if such be the
common opinion, the country has of him. And, if there be no man in place
where you dwell, so notoriously known as might serve the turn fit for your
purpose: you must then imagine the case further of, and set him a name at your
pleasure. It is very true, that With much greater pleasure we harken, and
better behold (as it were with our eyes) what soever is told us of me^ of our
acquaintance, if the matter be such as touches their manners: then what we
do hear of strangers and men unknown unto us. And the reason is this: when
we do know, that such a man is wont to do so: we do easily believe, he
has done so indeed: and we take as much knoweledge of him, as if we were
present: where it chances not so with us, in the case of a stranger.

Our words (be it in long discourses or other communication) Must be so
plain, that Words would be plain.
all the company may easily understand them: and withal, for sound and sense
they must be apt and sweet. For if you be to use one of these two words: you
shall rather say, Il ventre: then L'Epa. And where your country speech will
bear it, you shall rather The, Belly. The Liver. The Paunche. The Belly. The
Body.
say: La Pancia, then L'Ventre: Or, il Corpo. For, by these means you shall be
understood, and not miss understood, as we Florentines say, nor be dark and
obscure to the hearers. The which thing our Poet, meaning to eschew: in this
very word it self (I believe) sought to fi^de out another, not thinking much
of his pains (because it lyked him well) to seek far to borrow it else where.
And said: Remember how the Lord a man was feign to be,
For man's offense and sin in Cloister of virginity.


And albeit Dant the learned Poet, did set by such kind of rules: I do not
think yet, a man should allow well of him in doing so. And sure, I would not
counsel you to make him your Master in this point, to learn A Grace:
forasmuch as he him self had none. For, this I find in a Chronicle of him.
This Dant, was somewhat proud for his knowledge, scornful and disdainful,
and much (as Philosophers be) without any grace or courtesy: having no skill
to behave him self in company.



But to come to our purpose again: I say, our speech must be plain: which
will be easy enough to do: if you have wit to choose those words that be
naturally bred in our soil: and with all not so old with Age, that they are
become rotten and withered: and as over worn apparel, leaft of and cast a
side. As, Spaldo, and Epa, and Vopo, Old words out of use,
and Sezzaio, and Primaio. And moreover, the words you shall use, must have no
double Gergo is a very doubtful manner of speech, as it were in Riddles: and
very ambiguous.
understanding, but simple. For by coupling such words together: we frame
that speech that is called Aenigma. And to speak it plainer in our own
language, we call it Gergo. As in this verse:

Io vidi un che da set passatoi
Fu da un canto all' altro trapassato.
Again, our words would be, (as nere Apt words and proper.
as they might be) aptly and properly applied to that thing we go about to
deliver, and as little as may be, common to other matters: for, in so doing, a
man shall ween, the matter it self is openly laid before him: and that it is
not expressed with words, but pointed forth with the finger. And therefore
we may more properly say: A man is known by his countenance, then by his
figure or counterfeit. And Dant did better express the matter, when he said.
Dant. 23. Infer.
The weightes
That peize the weight do make the bala^ce creek,
Then if he had said Cry out and make a noise.


And it is a more proper and peculiar speech to say, The shiuering of an ague,
then to call it The cold. And flesh that is Tidie, to term it rather, Fat:
then Fulsome.

There be some words more in this place to like effect, which I mean not to
stand upon now: by cause our English tou^ge cannot hansomely deliver their
perfect meaning. For the Italians have (as we have, and all other Countries
else as well as we) certain peculiar words and terms, so naturally and
properly their own, as it is not possible to express them aptly and perfectly
in any other Language. And therefore the Author him self, fearing, or knowing
as much in the sense of these words, which he has inferred in this place (as
it were preventing a blame) in manner excuses and speaks as much as I say, as
the matter it self that insueth does show. For, the Author him self
following his purpose says thus.

I am well assured, if some stranger should, unhappily for my credit, hit
upon this tteatise of mine: he would laughe me to scorn, and say that I
taught to speak in riddles, or else in Ciphers. For as much as these words,
be almost so properly our own, that other countries have no acquaintance
with them: or, if they vvoulde use them, yet they cannot tell how to
understand them. For, who is it that knovves what Dant meant in this verse:

Gia veggia per Mezzul perdere o Lulla. Dant. 28. Infer.

Sure, I believe no man else but we that are Florentines can understand it.
Notvvithstanding, for any thing that I have said, if there be any fault in
this text of Dant: it is not in the words. But, if he have faulted, it is
rather in this: that (as a man somevvhat vvilfull) he would take upon him, a
matter hard to be uttered in words, and peradventure unpleasant to hear:
then that he has expressed it ill.

It is not then for a man to use any talk, Talk in a foreign Language.
with him that understands not that language you talk unto him. Nor yet,
because a Douche man understands not the Italian tongue, must we (for that
cause) break of our talk, to hold talk with him, to make our selves
counterfets, as Master Brufaldo did, and as some other be wont, that fondly
and coldly, without any grace, thrust them selves in to Chat in their language
with whom they talk, what so ever it be, and chop it out every word
preposteroufly. And many times it chances, the Spaniard talks Italian with
the Italian, and the Italian babbles again in a braueuery and gallantnes, the
Spanishe tongue with the Spaniard. And yet, it is an easier thing to know, yt
they both talk like strangers: then to forbear to laugh at the folish follies
that escape them both in speech. Let us not therefore use our foreign
language, but when it is needful for us to be understood, for some
necessity or other, that appertains un to us: And in common use, use our
own tongue, though not altogether so good: rather then a foreign language,
better then our own that is natural unto us. For a Lumbarde shall speak his
own tongue more aptly (which is, notwithstanding, but base and barbarous) then
he shall speak the Tuscane, or other language: even because he has not so
redily, so proper and peculiar words, although he study much for them, as
we our selves that be Tuscanes.

But yet, if a man have a respect to them with whom he talks: and for that
cause forbear and leave out those singular words, (which I have spoken of)
and instead of the^ use the general and common: his talk, by such means,
shall have the less pleasure and delight.

Besides this, it becomes every honest Words that have no honest meaning in
them.
gentleman, to eschew those words that have no honest meaning. And, The
goodness of words consists either in their sound, or pronouncing: or, in
their sense and meaning. For a much as some words speak an honest matter, and
yet, perchance, there is a certain dishonest sense perceived to stand in the
pronouncinge of the word it self: as Rinculare: which, notwithstanding, is
Rinculare, is to draw back ward, arselonge.
daily used of all men. But if a man or woman should speak after this sort,
and at that very warning do it in fight of any (I mean shuffle backwarde
upon their tail) then would the grosenesse of the word plainly appear unto
them. But our Palate, through Custom and Use, happily tastes ye wine (as it
were) and the bestnes of the sense of the word, and not ye Dregs or Leeze.
She gave the Spanish sigge
with both her thumbes at once. Dant. 25. infer

Says Dant. Fiche, is the thrusting of the thumb betvveene the forefinger:
which either for the word or the remembrance of somthinge thereby signified,
is reputed amongste the Italians as a word of Shame.


But our women, would be much ashamed to speak so: yea to shu^ne this
ambiguous word, you signifies a worse matter, they rather say Le castagne.
Albeit yet some of them at unawares, many times, name that unadvisedly, which if
another man had spoken to try them, would have made them blushe to hear that
remembered in way of blasphemy, which makes them women. And therefore, such as
be, or would be better mannered or taught, take good heed they do eschew,
not only things unclean Potta di me
and dishonest, but words also: and not somuche those that be evil indeed,
but those that may be, or do but seem to be dishonest, foul and filthy: as
some men say these are of Dant. She blewe large blastes of wind Dant. 17.
Infer.

Both in my face and under.
Or else these. I pray thee tell me where about the hole does stand.
And one of the Spirits said. Then come behind and where the hole is it may
be scand.


And you must know, that albeit two, or more words, otherwhile chance to tell
one self thing, yet the one is more cleanly then the other. As for example,
to say: She lay with him: and she satisfied his desire with her person. For
this self same speech, if it were in other terms, would be to broad before and
to filthy to hear it. And speaking of Endymion, you may more aptly say: Il
Vago della Luna. then you can say Il Drudo, although both these words do
import and signify A lover, and a Friend. And a much honester speech is it,
if you talk of Aurora, to call, her. Tritons pretty gerle and lover, then
Concubine. And it better becomes a ma^s and woman's mouth, to call Harlots,
vvome^ of the world (as Belcolore did, who was more ashamed to speak it then
to do it) then to use their common name: Thais is a Harlot. And as Boccace
declared ye power of whores and boys. For, if he had termed the males, by
their beastly occupation, as he termed the women: his talk would have been
foul and shameful. And withal, A man must not alone bevvare of dishonest and
filthy talk. but also of that which is base and Base words and Vile.
vile, and especially where a man talks and discourses of great and high
matters. And for this Cause, perchance, woorthely some blame our Beattice,
sayeing:

To pass through Lethes flood,
the highest Fates would blott,
If man might taste the Viandes such, Dant. 30. Purgato.

as there do fall by Lot,
And not pay first a due
repentance for his scott.
For, in my conceit, these base words that come out of the Tauernes, be
very uncomely for such aworthy discourse. And when a man has like occasion
to speak of ye Sun, it shall not be good to call it The Candell or the Lamp
of the world: because such words do put us in mind of ye Oil, and the
stuff of the kitchyn. Neither should a man that is well advised, say that
Saint Dominicke was Il Drudo della Theologia. Drudo, signifiethe a lascivious
lover.
Nor yet talk, that the glorious Saints have spoken such base and vile
words: As for Example to say. Dant. 22. Infer.
And leave to scratche whereas
the scabs of sin break out,


For they savor of ye dregs, and ye filth of ye common people, as every man
may easily see.

Again, in your long and large discourses, you must have yt like
co^sideratio^s and cares, and some more: yt which you may more co^modiously
learn of your Masters yt teach you yt art, that is commonly called
Rhetorike.

And amongst other things, You must accustom your self, to use such gentle
and courtious speech to men, and so sweet, that it Gentle words in
Communication.
may have no manner of bitter taste. And you shall rather say, I cannot tell how
to say it: The^ say: you ar deceived: Or, it is not true: Or, you know it not.
For, it is a courteous and friendly part to excuse a man's fault, even in that
very thing, wherein you know how to blame him. And withal, it does well, to
make the proper and peculiar fault of your friend, indifferent and common to
you both: and first, to take one piece to your self, and then after, to blame
and reprove him for it. We were deceived and failed much: we forgot our
selves yesterday to do so. Although such negligence and error, or what
soever it be: be altogether his fault and not yours. And Restagnone forgot him
self much, when he said to his companions: If your words do not lie. For,
A man should not bring another man's faith and honesty in question and
doubt. But, if a man promise you any thing, and do not perform it: it shall
not do well, for you to say unto him: You have lost your credit with me:
without some necessary cause do drive you to say so, as to save your own
credit and honesty. But, you shall rather say: You could not do it: Or, you
did not remember to do it: The^, you have clean forgotten me. For, these
kind of speeches, have some prickles and stinges of Complaint, Anger and
Choler. So that, such as use them selves to speak such churlishe and
fuinishe words, are taken for sharp and sower fellows: and men do as much
shun their acquaintance: as to thrust them selves upon thorns and thistles.

And because I know some, of this naughty co^ditio^ and quality: I mean some
yt be so hasty and greedy to speak, yt they take not the sense with them, but
over pass it and run before it, as the grehound, that does not pinche by
ouershooting his game: therefore I will not spare to tell you that, which may be
thought needeles to touch, as a thing to well known: and that is, that You
shall never speak, before you have first considered and laid the plot in your
mind what it is you have to say. For in so doing, your talk shall be well
delivered and not borne before Parto and non Isconcratura.
the time. I trust, strangers will easily bear with this word: if at least
they vouchsafe to read these trifles of mine. And if you do not skorne my
precepts: it shall never chance you to say: vvelcome Master Agostino, to
such a one, whose name is Agnolo, or Bernardo. And you shall never need to say,
Tell me your name: Nor say again, I said not well: Nor, Lord what do I
call him: Nor to hack and to stutter long together, to find out a word,
Master Arrigo: no Master Arabico: Tushe, what do I call him I should say,
Master Agabito. These fond and foolish behauiours and fashions, pain a man
as much to hear the^, as to be drawn and haled with cords.

The voice would be neither hoarse nor shrill. And, when you laugh and sport
in any Voice and Tongue.
sort: you must not cry out and criche like the Pullye of a well: nor yet
speak in your yavvning. I know well it is not in us, to give our selves a
ready tongue or perfect voice at our own will and pleasure. He yt does
stutter, or is hoarse: let him not always babble and gabbe, and keep a court
alone: let him rather a mend the defect of his tongue with silence, and
hearing: and withal (if he can) with study diminishe the fault of Nature.
It is an ill noise to hear a man raise his voice high, like to a common
Crier. And yet I would not have him speak so low and softly, that he that
harkens, shall not hear him. And if he be not heard at ye first time he
speaks, he must speak, the next time, somewhat plainer: but yet, not yoape
out aloude, that he make not men think he is wood and angry with them: for
he shall do but well, to rehearse that again he has spoken, yt men may
understand what he said.

Four words would be disposed, even as the common use of speech does require
Manner of Speech.
and not vnsorted, disordered and scattered co^fusedly: as many be wont to do
upon a bravery, whose manner of talk is more like a Scriuener (me think) that
reads in his mother tongue, the Inde^ture he has written before in latin:
then a man that reasons or talks in his Natural language: as this for
example. They draw by sent of false
and fained steps of truth.


Or if a man should preposterously place his words thus. Those times did
blossoms give
before their time of soothe.


Which manner of speech, may be otherwhile allowed in versifiers: but it is
utterly forbidden in common talk.

And, it behoues a man, not only to shu^ne this versifying manner of speech,
in his familiar and common discourse, or talk: but likewise eschew ye pomp,
bravery, and affectation, that may be suffered and allowed to inriche an
Oration, spoken in a public place. Otherwise, me^ that do hear it, will but
spyte it, and laughe him to scorn for it.

Albeit perchance, a Sermon may show a greater cunning and art, then common
talk. But, Every thing must have his time and place. For, he that walks by
the way must not dance, but go. For, every man, has not the skill to dance,
and yet every man ca^ skill to go. But, Dancing is meet for feasts and
weddings: it is not to use in the streets. You must then take good heed you
speak not with a majesty. It is thought by many Philosophers.


And such is all Filocolo, and the other treatises of Master John Boccace,
except his greater work, and little more perchance Corbaccio.

I would not for all this, that you should use so base a speech, as yt scum, as
it were, and the froth of the meanest and vilest sort of people, Launderers
and Hucksters: but such as gentlemen should speak and talk, which I have
partly told you before, in what sorr it may be done: that is, if you talk of
matters that be neither vile, vain, foul, nor lothesome. And if you have
skill to choose amongst the words of your own country speech, the purest
and most proper, such as have the best sound, and best sense, touching nor
remembering, in no case, no matter that is foul, vile and base: and if you can
place your words in good order, and not shoofle them together at randon, nor
yet, with over much Curious study, file them (as it were) one your beads.
Moreover, if you do dispose such things as you have to say with discretion. And
take good head that you couple not unfit and unlikely matters together: as for
Example. As sure as God is in Heaven:
So stands the staff in the chimny corner.


And if you speak not so slow, as if you were unlusty: nor so hasty, as if
you were hu^grie: but as a wise and a temperate man should do. Likewise, if you
pronounce your words and your sillables with a certaie grace and sweetness:
not as a Scholemaister ye teatheth young Children to read and to spell. Neither
must you mumble them nor supp them up, as if they were glued and pasted
together one to another. If you remember these and such other rules and
precepts: your talk will be liked, and heard with pleasure enoughe: and you
shall well maintain the state and countenance, that well besemeth a gentleman
well taught and honest.

Besides these, there be some, that never Talkatiue Fellows.
hold their tongue. And as the ship that sails, does not presently stand,
still, by taking down the sails: So do they run forward, as carried away
with a certain brayde: and loosing the matter of their talk, yet leave not to
babble, but either repeat that again that is said, or else speak still they
cannot tell what.

And there be other so full of babble, that they will not suffer another to
speak. And as we do see otherwhile, upon the flowers in the country where
they thresh corn, one Pullet pull the corn out of the others beak: so do
they catch the tale out of his mouth yt began it, and tell it themselves.
And sure, such manner of people, induce men to quarrel and fight with them for
it. For, if you do mark it well: Nothing moves a ma^sooner to anger: then when
he is soudainely cut short of his will and his pleasure, be it of never so
little and small importance. As when you gape wide with yawning: another
should thrust his hand in your mouth: or when you do lift your arm ready to
hurl a stone: it is soudainly stayde by one that stands behind you. Even
then, as these doings, and many more like unto these, which tend to hinder the
will and desire of another (albeit but in way of sport and of play) are
unseemly, and would be eschewed: So in talk and communication with men, we
should rather pull one, and further their desiers, by what means we can, then
stop them and hinder them in it.

And therefore, If any man be in a redines to tell his tale: it is no good
manner to interrupte him: nor to say that you do know it well. Or, if he
besprinckle his tale here and there, with some pretty lie: you must not reprove
him for it, neither in words nor in gesture, as shaking your head, or scowling
upon him, as many be wont: gloriously vaunting them selves, that they can, by
no means, abide the taste of a Lie. But, this is not the reason of this, it is
the sharpenes and sowernes of their own rusticall and eager Natures, which
makes them so venomous and bitter in all companies they come: that no man cares
for their acquaintance.

Likewise, It is an illfauoured condition to stop another ma^s tale in his
mouth: and it spites him as much, as if a man should take him by the sleeue and
hold him back, even when he is ready to run his course. And when another
man is in a tale, it is no good manner for you, by telling the company some
news, and drawing their minds to other matters, to make them forsake him
clean, and leave him alone. For, it is an vncourtious part for you to lead
and carry away the company: which the other (not you) has brought together.

And, when a man tells his tale, you must give good ear unto him: that you may
not say otherwhile, O what? Or, how? which is many a man's fashion to do. And
this is as much trouble and pain to him that speaks: as to shoofle against ye
stones, to him that goes. All these fashions, and generally, that which may
stop, and that which may trauerse the course of another man's talk, must be
shunned.

And, if a man tell his tale slow like a draw latche: you must not yet hasten
him forward, nor lend him words, although you be quicker in speech then
he. For, many do take that ill, and specially such, as persuade themselves
they have a Ioly grace in telling a tale. For, they do imagine you think not
so well of the^, as they the^ selves do: And that you would give them
instructions in their own Art: as Merchaunts that live in great wealth and
plenty, would count it a great reproach unto them, that a man should proffer
them money, as if they lived in lack, and were poor and stood in need of
relief. And you must understand, that, Every man in his own conceit, thinks
he can tell his tale well: although for modesty sake he deny it. And I cannot
guess how it comes to pass, that the veriest fool does babble most: which
over much prattle, I would not have a gentleman to use, and specially, if his
skill be but scant in the matter in talk: Not only, because it is a hard
matter: but, He must ru^ in many faults that talks much: but also, because a
man weenes, that, He that talks all the talk to him self, would (after a
sort) prefer him self above them all that hear him, as a Master would be
above his scholars. And therefore, It is no good manner for a man to take upon
him a greater state, the^ does become him. And in this fault, not men alone,
but many countries fall into, so cackling and prattling: that, woe be their
ears that give the^ hearing.

But, as over much babble makes a man weary: so does over much Silence
procure Silence
as great disliking. For, To use silence in place where other men talk to
and fro: is in manner, as much a fault, as not to pay your share and scot as
other men do. And as speech is a mean to show men your mind, to whom you
speak: so, does Silence again make me^ wene, you seek to be unknown. So yt,
as those people which use to drink much at feasts, and make them selves
drunk, are wont to thrust the^ out of their company, that will not take their
drink as they do: So be these kind of mute and still fellows, coldly
welcome to pleasant and merry company, that meet to pass the time away in
pleasure and talk. So that, It is good manner for a man to speak, and
likewise to hold his peace, as it comes to his turn, and occasion requires.

As an old Chronicle makes mention. There was in the parts: of Morea, a very
good workma^ in ye stone: Who for ye si^gular good skill he had in his Art, was
called (as Maestro Chiarissimo.
I take it) Maestro Chiarissimo. This man (now well strooken in years) made a
certain treatise, and therein gathered together al ye precepts and rules of his
art: as the man yt had very good skill to do it: showing in what sort the
proportions and lineaments of the body, should be duly measured, as well every
one a part by it self, as one respecting another: yt they might justly and
duly be answerable ye one to the other: which treatise of his, he named
Regolo. Meaning Regolo.
to show, that according to that, all the Images and pictures, that from
thensforth any workema^ should make, should be squared and lined forth: as yt
beams, and ye stones, and the walls, are measured by ye rules and precepts of
that book. But, for that it is a much easier matter to speak it, then to
work it, or do it: and besides that, The greatest number of men, especially
of us that be profane and not learned, have our senses much quicker then our
understanding, and consequently, better conceive particular things and
Examples, then the general propositions and Syllogismes (which I might term
in plainer speech, Reasons) for this cause this worthy man I speak of, having
regard to the Nature of workmen: whose capacities are unfit and unable to
weeld the weighte of general Precepts and rules: and to declare more plainly,
with all his cunning and skill: having found out for his purpose, a fine marble
stone, with much labor and pain, he fashioned and shaped an Image of it, as
perfectly proportioned in every part and member: as the precepts and rules of
his treatise had before devised. And as he named the book, so did he name that
Image, and called it by name of Regolo.

Now, (and it pleased god) I would I could but one part of those twoe points,
which that noble Ingrauer and worckeman I speak of, had perfect skill and
knowledge to do: I mean, that I could gather together in this treatise, after
a sort, the due measures of this Art I take upon me to treat of. For, to
perform the other, to make the second Regolo: I mean, to use and observe in
my manners, the measures I speak of, framig and forming, as it were, A Visible
Example, and a material Image of them: it were now, to much for me to do.
For as much as, It is not enough to have knowledge and Art, in matters
concerning manners and fashions of men: But it is needful withal, to work
them to a perfect effect, to practice and use them much: which cannot be had
upon the soudaine, nor learned by and by: but it is number of years that must
win it: and ye best part of mine be run fourth already, you see.

But for all this, you must not make ye less reconing of these precepts. For,
A man may well teach another the way: although he have gone out of the way
himself. And peradventure, they that have lost their ways, do better remember
the hard ways to find: then they that never went a miss. And, if in mine
infancy, when minds be tender and pliable, like a young twigge, they that had
ye charge and government of me, had had the skill to smoothe my manners,
(perhaps of Nature somewhat hard and rude) and would have polished and wrought
them fine: peradventure I should have been such A one, as I travail to make
thee Now, whom I love no less then if thou were my son. For albeit, the
power of Nature be great. yet is she many times Maistered and Nature must be
maystered by Reason.
corrected by custom: But, we must in time begin to encounter and beat her
down, before she get to much strength and hardines. But most men will not do
so: but rather yealding to their appetite without any striving, following it
where so ever it leads the^, think they must submit themselves to Nature:
As though Reason were not a natural thing in man. But, Reason has (as a Lady
and Mistress) power to change Reason does change old Customs and helps
Nature.
old customs, and to help and hold up Nature, when she does at any time
decay and fall. But very seldom we harken unto her. And yt for ye most part,
makes us like unto the^ whom god has not endued with Reason: I mean brute
beasts, in whom notwithstanding, something yet works: not their own
Reasons (for they have none of them selves) but ours: as in horses you see it:
which by nature would be ever wild, but yt their ryder makes them tame, and
withal, after a sort, ready and very well paced. For many of them would have a
hard trot, but that the rider makes them have an easier pace. And some he does
teach to stand still, to galopp, to tread the ringe, and do the carreere: And
they learn to do it all well you see. Then, if the horse, the dog, ye hawk,
and many other beasts besides, more wild then these, be guided and ruled by
Reason, and learn that which their own Nature cannot attain, but rather
repugneth: and become after a sort cunning and skillful, so far as their
kind does bear it, not by Nature, but by custom and use: how much then may
we think we should excel them, by the precepts and rules of our Reason, if
we took any heed unto it. But, The Se^ses desire and covet present
delights, what soever they be: and can abide no pains, but puts them of. And
by this means, they also shake of Reason, and think her unpleasant,
forasmuch as she sets before them, not pleasure, many times, hurtful: but
goodness and virtue, ever paynfull, sower and unsavory in taste. For, while we
live according to the Sense, we are like to the selly sickma^, to whom al
cates never so deinty and sweet, seem untoothsome: and he chideth still with
his Cater and Cook, in whom there is no fault at all for it. For, it is the
Nature of his disease, and the Extremity of his sickness, and not the fault of
his meat, that he does not sauourly taste what he eats. So Reason, which of
it self is svveete and sauourie: seems bitter in taste unto us, though it
have no ill taste in deed. And therefore as nice and deity fellows, we refuse
to make any taste of her: and cover our grosnes, with saying that Nature has no
spurs nor raines yt can prick her forth, or hold her back. Where sure, if
an Ox or an Ass, or a Hog, could speak: I believe, they could not lightly
tell a more foul and shameful tale the^ this. We should be children still
all the time of our riper years, and in our extreme age: and wax as very
fools with gray hoary heads, as when we were very babes: if it were not
that reason, which increases in us with our years, subdueth affections in
us, and grown to perfection, transformeth us from beasts in to men. So that
it is well seen, she rules our senses and bridleth our wits. And it is our
own Imperfection and not her fault, if we do swerve from virtue, goodness,
and good order in life.

It is not then true, that there is not a bridell and Master for Nature. Nay,
she is guided and ruled by twain: Custom I Custom and Reason, tvvoe brydles
of Nature.
mean, and Reason. But, as I have told you a little before: Reason without
Custom and use, cannot make an uncivil body, well taught and courtious:
Which custom and use, is as it were, bred and borne of time. And therefore
they shall do well, to harke^ betime unto her, not only for that, by this
means, a man shall have more time and leisure to learn to be such as she
teaches, and to become as it were a household servant of hers, and one of her
train: but also because The tender age, as pure and clean, does easily
receive all Impressio^s, and reteineth more lively, the colors vvherevvith she
is dyed: then when a man comes to ryper years: And also, because The things
wherein we have been nourished and trained from our youth, do ordinarily
please us, above all other things. And for this cause, it is said that Diodato,
a man that had a singular good gift and grace Piodato.
of utterance, would evermore be the first that came fourth upon the stage to
show his Comedy: allthoughe they were all but cou^terfets unto him, whosoever
they were that should have spoken before him. But he would not his voice should
occupy other men's ears, after they heard another man speak. Although, in
respect of his doings, it were a great deal Inferior to his. Seeing then, I
cannot agree my works and my words together, for those causes I have showed
you before, as Maestro Chiarissimo did: who had as good a skill to do it, as
he had knowledge to teach it: let it suffice that I have told in some part
what must be done, because I am not by any means able to do it in deed. He
that lives in darkness, may very well Judge what comfort it is to enjoy the
benefit of light. And by an over long silence, we know what pleasure it is
to speak: so when you behold my gross and rude manners: you shall better
Judge, what goodness and virtue there is in courtions behauiours and fashions.

To come again then to this treatise, which grows now to some end: we say
that Those be good manners and fashio^s, which bring a delight, or at least,
offend not their senses, their mynds, and conceits, with whom we live. And
of these, we have hitherto spoken inoughe.

But you must understand with all this, that, Men be very desirous of
bevvtifull things, well proportioned and comely. And of counterfeit things
foul and ill shapen, they be as squemish again, on the other side. And this
is a special privilege given to us: that other creatures have no capacity, to
skill what beauty or measure means. And therefore, as things not common with
beasts but proper to our selves: we must embrace them for them selves, and
hold them dear: and yet those, much more, yt draw nerest to ye knowledge of
man: as which are most apt and inclined to understand the perfection which
Nature has left in men.

And albeit, it be a hard matter, to show precisely, Bevvtie, what manner of
thing it is: Bevvtie.
yet yt you may have so^e mark, to know her by: you must understand, yt Where
jointly and severally, every part and the whole has his due proportion and
measure, there is Bevvtie. And that thing may justly be called fayer, in which
the said proportion and measure is found. And by that I did once learn of a
wise and a learned man: Bevvtie he said, would consist but of one, at the
most. And Deformity contrariwise, measured her self, by Many. As Deformity.
you may see by the faces of fayer and goodly women. For, the even lineaments
and due proportions of every of them: seem to have been created and framed by
the judgment and sight of one face alone. Which cannot be thought in them that
be foul and deformed. For, when you behold a woman, that has, peradventure,
big and bowl eyes, a little nose, blubbe cheeks, a fsat mouth, an out
chinne, and a brown skin: you think strait that that face is not one
woman's alone: but is molded of many faces, and made of many pieces. And yet,
you shall find amongst them, some such, whose parts considered alone by the^
selves, be very perfect to see to: but all set together, be foul and ill
favored: not for any other cause, but that they be ye lineaments of many fayer
women, and not of one: So that a man would ween, she had borrowed her parts,
of this and that woman. And it may be, that Painter that had all the fayer
maids of Calabria, naked before him: had none other intent therein, then to
judge and discern in many, ye parts yt they have, as it were, borrowed here
one, and there another, of one, alone: to whom restoring from each yt was her
right: imagining yt Venus bewty should be such, and so proportioned: he set him
self to paint her.

And, you must not thik, yt this is to be seen the faces, the parts, and the
bodies of women alone: but it happens more or less, in speech, in gestures
and doings. For, if you should chance to see a Noble woman gorgius and
gallant, washing of cloutes in a River by ye high way side: Although if this
were not, you might hapely pass away by her, with little heed to her person or
state: yet this would not brook you nor like you, yt her servile doings do
show her more the^ one. For her state should answer her honorable condition
and calling. But her work is such, as is meet for women of base and servile
life: and although you shall feel, neither ill savor nor sent come from her,
nor hear any noise that should offend you, nor any thing else to trouble your
mind: yet the foul and filthy manner of doing it, and the unseemly act it
self: will make you much to loathe it. You must then beware of these foul
and uncomely behauiours, as much, nay, more then of those other, I have spoken
all this while. For, it is a harder matter a great deal, to know when a man
faulteth in these, then when he faulteth in them. Because, It is easy much,
we see, to feel then to understand. But yet, it may chance otherwhile, that
even that which offends the senses, may also offend the mind: though not
altogether after one sort, as I have told you before: Apparelling according to
the Time.
showing you that A man must apparel him self, according to the fashions that
other men use: that it may not be thought he does reprove and correct their
doings: The which thing offends most men that seek to be commended: And the
wisest me^ that be, mislike it too. For, the garments of the old world, have
lost their date, for men of this age and this season to wear. And it is such
an ill shapen sight, to see a man clad with other men's clothes: that a man
would ween there would be a fray between the doublet and ye hose: their
clothes do sit, upon them so unto wardly.

So that, many of those matters I have spoken of allredy, or peradventure all,
might be aptly rehearsed here again: forasmuch as this measure I speak of here,
is not observed in these things: nor the time, nor ye place, nor the work, nor
the worker, accorded and fitted together, so well as it should be. For men's
minds and fancies do like it, and take a pleasure and delight in those things.
But I thought it good to apply and speak these matters, rather under ye badge,
as it were, of the Senses and desires: then properly assign them to the mind:
that a man may the more easily perceive them: because It is a natural thing,
for every man to feel and desire: but every man cannot so generally
understand, and especially that, which we call beauty, gallantnes or
entertainment.

It is not inoughe for a man, to do things that be good: but he must also
have a care, he do them with a good grace. And a good grace is nothing else,
but such a manner of light (as I may A Grace, what it is.
call it) as shines in the aptnes of things set in good order and well
disposed, one with another: and perfectly knit and united together. Without
which proportion and measure, even that which is good is not fair: and the
fairenes it self, is not plesaunt. And as meats, though they be good and
sauourie will give men no mind to eat the^, if they have no pleasant relish
and taste: So fares it with the manners of men other while (although in them
selves in no respect they be ill, but foolish a little, and fond) if a man do
not season them with a certain sweetenes, which you call (as I take it) Grace,
and Comlines.

So that, every vice of it self, without any further matter to help it (it
cannot be chosen) must needs offend a man. For, Vices be things so foul and
filthy: that honest and modest minds, will grieve to see their shameful
effects. And therefore, it shall behoue them that seek to be well thought of,
with their familiar acquaintance, above all things else to eschew vices, and
especially those, that be foulest and worst: as Leachery, Covetousness,
Cruelty, and other. Of which, some be beastly, as Drunkenness, and Gluttony:
some unclean, as Leacherie: other some horrible, as Murder, and such other:
all which for them selves, and for the very naughtines, that is properly in
them al, all men eschew more, or less: But, as erst I said, generally al, as
things of great disorder, make a man misliked much of all men.

But, because I have not taken upon me to show unto you, men's sins, but
their Errors: it shall be no part of my charge at this time to entreat of ye
Nature of vices and virtues: but only of the seemly and unseemly fashions
and manners we use one with another. One of the which unseemly Count Richard.
fashions was, that Count Richard did use: of which I told you before. Which,
as unseemly and unfitting with those other his good and fair manners he had
besides: that same worthy Bishop (as a skillful and cunning Master in music
will eaeasily here a note out of Tune) had quickly found out.

It shall be then, necessary for gentlemen and men of good behavior, to have a
regard to this measure I speak of: in going, in standing, in sitting, in
gesture, in port, in apparel, in talk, in silence, in rest and in action.
For, a man must not apparel him self like a woman: that the Attire may not be
of one sort, and the person of another: as I do see it in some that wear
their heads and their beards curled with bodkins, and have their face, Beardes
and Heads curled with bodkins.
and their necks, and their hands, so starchte and painted, that it were to
much for a girl, nay harlot, that makes a mercha^dize of it, and sets her
self to the sale.

Hou must smell, neither of sweet nor of sower: for a gentleman would not
savor Sweet smeles
nastily like a beggar: nor yet should a man carry a savor and sent about him,
like a harlot or whore. I do not by this forbid, but you may very well use
some sweet smelles of sweet waters.

Your apparel must be shaped according Apparel according to the fashion and
calling.
to the fashion of the time, and your calling, for the causes I have showed you
before. For, We must not take upon us to alter customs at our will. For time
does beget them, and time does also wear them out.

Every man may apply those fashio^s, that be in common use, ye most to his
own advantage, that he can. For, if perchance your legs be very long, and
men use but short garments: you may use a mean, not to long, nor to short. And
if your legs be to small, to great, or crooked: make not your hosen of to
light and garishe a color, that it may not call men to look and to gawre
upon your deformity. Thou must wear no garment that shall be to light, or
ouermuche daubde with garding: that me^ may not say, thou have Ganymedes hosen,
or wearest Cupides doublet. But, whatsoever it be thou wearest, let it be fit
and well made for thy body: least thou seem to brave it, in another man's
clothes.

But with all, thou must in any case respect thy condition or estate. For, A
man of the Clergy, must not be attired like a Soldier: nor a Soldier go
like a Player. When Castruccio was in Rome with Lodouico Bauero at a great
Pomp, and triumph: who was both Duke of Lucca and Pistoia, and Count of
Palazzo, and Senator of Rome: this Castruccio, being Lord great Master of
the said Lodouico Bauero his househoulde: for his bravery, made him a coat of
crimsin, upon the breast whereof, there was this devise, in letters of Gold It
is even as God will.
And upon the back behind. And it shallbe as God will.


I believe, you think this garment, would have become Castruccio his Trumpeter
better, then it could become him.

And although Kings be free from check, and may do what they list: Yet, I
could never commend King Manfrede, Who ever more used, to suite him self in
green. We must then have a care, that our apparel be not only well made for
the body: but that it be meet for our calling. And withal, it be such, as
the country does use, Apparel acording to the Country
where we live. For, As in diverse places be diverse measures, and yet bying and
selling every where used. So in sundry lands be sundry customs, and yet
every where a man may behave him, and apparel him self, soberly and comely.

These same feathers, which the Neapolitanes and Spaniardes be wont to wear,
and braueries and Embroderies: have but ill place amongst grave gowned men,
and theattires that Citizens do wear. But their Armor and weapons become
such place a great deal worse. So that, look what hapely might be allowed
in Verona, would not, perchance, be suffered in Venice. For as much as these
gallants, all begarded, and huffing in feathers, and warlike fellows, would not
do well, in this Noble City so peaceful and Civil. Such kind of people be
rather, in manner, like nettles and burres, amongst good and sweet garden
flowers. And therefore, they come out of season to me^ that meddle with grauer
matters then they do.

I would not have a gentleman to run Running and going in the streat and
other such gestures.
in the streate, nor go to fast: for that is for lackies, and not for gentlemen
to do. Besides that, it makes a man weary, sweat, and puff: which be very
unsightly things for such men to do. I would not yet have a man go so soft
and demurely, as a maid or a wife. And when a man walks, it is no good sight
to see a man shake his body to much, nor to hold his hands bare and empty:
nor yet cast and fling his arms up and down, in such sort as a man would
ween, he were soweing of Corn in the field: nor Stare in a man's face, as if
he had spied a mares nest.

There be so^e again, in their gate pull up their fete as high as a horse yt has
ye spaue^: yt a man would thik they did pluck their fete forth of bushel.
Other again stamp their feet so hard on the ground: that they make allmoste
as much noise as a carte. Another goes as if he were splay footed. And such a
one quiuers with his legs, as he sta^ds. Some other again, at every foot,
stoop to stroke up their hose as they go. And so^e set their hands to their
sides, and iet up and down like a Pecocke: which fashions do much offend
men: not as well, but as ill beseeming a man to use them. For, if your horse,
perchance, do champe and play on the bit, and gape or lill out his tongue,
albeit this give little proof of his goodness: yet it commends him well to the
sale: and you should find a miss of it, if it were otherwise: not because ye
horse should be therefore the worse: but because he should show the less
courage and pleasure. Now, if it stand so, that Comelines and Grace, be so much
made of in beasts, and also in things without life or sense, as experience does
show, that, Two things of equal goodness and commodities, bear not for all
that, a like price, if a man do behold a finer proportion and beauty, more in
the one then he sees in the other: How much then more, should it be esteemed
and commended in men, capable of Reason.

It is a rude fashion for a man to clawe Gestures and Fashions, at the Table.
or scratche him self, when he sits at the table. And a man should at such
time have a very great care yt he spit not at all. But Spytting.
if need enforce him, then let him do it, after an honest sort. I have heard
tell, many times, of such countries that be so sober: that they do never
spitt. And what should then let us, but we may well forbear it for such a
little while. We must also beware Greedy Eating.
we do not eat so greedily, that we get the hicket, or belche withal: as
some that feed so fast, that they noy the company with it: they blow and
puff so loud. Likewise, you must not rub your teeth with Scovvring of the
teethe
your napkyn, and much less with your fingers. For these be tricks for a
slouen. Neither Washing the mouth.
must you openly rynce your mouth with the wine, and then spit it fourth.
Neither is it gentleman like, to carry a stick in your Carrying a Stick, in
the Mouth.
mouth from the table when you rise, like ye bird that builds her a nest: or
put it in your ear, for that is a Barbars trick.

And to wear a toothpicke, about your To wear a Toothepicke about your Neck.
neck: of all fashions that is ye worst. For, besides that it is a bauld
Jewel for a gentleman to pull forth of his bosom, and puts me^ in mind of
those Toothdrawers, that sit one their benche in the streets: it makes men also
to think, that the man loves his belly full well, and is provided for it. And
I see no reason, why they should not as well carry a spoone, about their necks,
as a toothepicke.

It is a rude fashion besides, to lean over the table, or to fill your mouth
so full of Chearing at the table.
meat, that your cheeks be blown up wtall: neither must you by any manner of
means, give another man to know what pleasure you take, in the meat or the
wine. For yt is for Tauerners and Bousers, to use such fashions. And to
entertain men ye sit at your table, with these words: You eat nothing this
morning. There is nothing that likes you. Or, taste you of this or of that: I
do not allow of these fashions, although they be commonly received and used
of all men. For, albeit by these means, they show they make much of those
they have invited unto them: yet, many times, they make me^ to leave to eat
where they would. For, it geues them to think, they have their eyes, always
upon them, and that makes them ashamed to feed.

Again, I do not like it, that a man shall Carueing.
take upon him to be a caruer of any meat that stands before him: if he be
not much the better man, that is the caruer: that he to whom he carues, may
think he receives some credit and honor by it. For, Amongst men that be of
like co^ditio^ and calling, it makes a heart burning: that he that plays the
caruer, should take more upon him then another. And otherwhile, yt which he
carueth, does not like him to whom it is given. And more the^ this, by this
means he shows, that the feast is not sufficiently furnished, or at least
not well disposed in order, when some have much, and other none at all. And ye
Master of the house, may chance to take displesure at that, as if it were
done to do him shame. Nevertheless in these matters, a man must demeasne him
self, as common use and custom will allow, and not as Reason and duty would
have it. And I would wish a man rather to err in these poits with many, the^
to be singular in doing well. But whatsoever good manner there be in this case,
thou must not refuse it, whatsoever is carved unto thee. For it may be thought
thou do disdain it, or grunt at thy caruer.

Now, to drink all out every man: which is Drincking and Carrovvsing.
a fashion as little in use amongst us, as ye term it self is barbarous and
strange: I mean, lck bring you, is sure a foul thing of it self, and in our
country so coldly accepted yet: yt we must not go about to bring it in for a
fashion. If a man do quaffe or carrouse unto you, you may honestly say nay to
pledge him, and geueing him thank, confess your weakness, that you are not
able to bear it: or else, to do him a pleasure, you may for courtesy taste
it: and the^ set down the cup to them that will, and Drincking, much used in
Graecia: and by Socrates.
charge your self no further. And although this, Ick bring you, as I have
heard many learned men say, has been an ancient custom in Greece: and that
the Graecians do much commend a goodman of that time, Socrates, by name, for
that he sat out one Socrates.
whole night long, drinking a vie with another good man, Aristophanes: and yet
ye next Aristophanes.
morning in the break of the day, without any rest upon his drinking, made
such a cunning Geometrical Instrument, that there was no manner of fault to
be found in the same: And albeit they say besides this, that Even as it makes a
man bold and hardy, to thrust him self venterously otherwhile, in to
dangerous perils of life: so likewise it brings a man in to good temper and
fashion, to enure him self otherwhile, with the dangers of things not ever
chauncing: And because the drinking of wine after this sort, in a vie, in such
excess and waste, is a shrewde assault to try the strength of him that
quaffes so lustily: these Graecians, would have us to use it for a certain
proof of our strength and constancy: and to enure us the better, to resist
and master all manner of strong temptations.

All this notwithstanding, I am of a contrary mind: and I do think all their
reasons to fond, and to foolish. But, we see that Learned men have such art
and cunning to persuade, and such filed words to serve their turn: that wrong
does carry the cause away, and Reason cannot prevail. And therefore let us
give them no credit in this point. And what can I tell, if they have a secret
drift herein, to excuse and cover the fault of their country, that is corrupt
with this vice. But it is dangerous, perchance, for a man to reprove them for
it: least as much happen to him, as chanced to Socrates him self, for his over
lavish controuling and checking of every man's fault. For, he was so spited of
all men for it: that many articles of heresies and other foul faults were put
up against him, and he condemned to die in the end: allthough they were false.
For in truth, he was a very good man, and a Chatholike: respecting ye Religion
of their false Idolatry. But suer, in that he drunk so much wine that same
night: he deserved no praise in the world. For, the hoggshead was able to
hold and receive a great deal more, then his companion and he were able to
take: if yt may get any praise. And though it did him no harm, that was more,
the goodness of his strong brain: the^ the continency of a sober man. And let
the Chronicles talk what they list of this matter, I give God thanks, that
amongst many the Plagues that have creapt over the Alps, to infect us:
hitherto this worst of all the rest, is not come over: that we should take a
pleasure and praise, to be drunk. Neither shall I ever believe, that a man can
learn to be temperate, of such a Master as wine and drounkennes.

The Steward of a Noble man's house, Inuiting of strangers.
may not be so bold to inuit strangers, upon his own head, and set them
down at his Lord and Masters table. And there is none that is wise, will be
entreated to it, at his request alone. But otherwhile, the servant of the
house, be so inalepert and saucie, that they will take upon them, more then
their Master: of which things we speak in this place, more by chance, then
that the order we have taken from the beginning, does so require it.

A man must not uncase him self, in the presence of any assembly. For it is a
slouenly A recapitulation of sundry precepts. Vneasing.
sight, in place where honest men be met together of good condition and
calling. And it may chance he does uncover those parts of his body, which
work him shame and rebuke to show the^: besides yt, it makes other me^
abashed to look upon the^. Again, Washing of hands and combyng of heads.
I would have no man to comb his head, nor wash his hands before me^. For such
things would be done alone in your chamber, and not abroad: without it be, I
say, to wash your hands when you sit down to the table. For, there it shall
do well, to wash them in sight, although you have no need: that they with
whom you feed, may assure them selves you have done it. A man must not come
forth with his kercheif, or quaife one his head, nor yet stroke up his hosen
upon his legs in company.

Some men there be, that have a pride or a use to draw their mouths a little
awry, Gestures of the face and Countenance and other parts.
or twinckle up their eye, and to blow up their cheeks, and to puff, and to
make, with their countenance, sundry such like foolish and ill-favored faces
and gestures. I council men to leave them clean. For, Pallas her self, the
Goddess, (as I have heard Pallas.
so^evvise me^ say) took once a great pleasure to sound the flute and the
cornet: and therein she was very cunning. It chau^st her, on day, sou^ding her
Cornet for her pleasure over a fontain, she spide her self in the water: and
when she beheld those strange gestures she must needs make with her mouth as
she played: she was so much asha^ed of it that she brake the cornet in pieces
and cast it away. truly she did but well, for it is no instrument for a woman
to use. And it becomes men as ill, if they be not of yt base condition and
calling, that they must make it a gain, and an art to live upon it. And look
what I speak, concerning the unseemly gestures of the countenance and face:
concerns likewise, all the parts and members of man. For it is an ill sight,
to lill out ye tongue, to stroke your bearde much up and down (as many do use
to do) to rub your hands together: to sighe, and to sorrow: to tremble or
strike your self, which is also a fashion with some: to reatche and stretche
your self, and so retching, to cry out after a nice manner, Alas, Alas: like a
country cloune, yt should rouse him self in his couche.

And he that makes a noise with his mouth Mopping or mowing.
in a token of wonder, and other while, of co^tempte and disdain:
counterfeteth an ill-favored grace. And Counterfeit things, differ not much from
truethes.

A man must leave those foolish manner of laughings, groase and uncomely. And
Unseemly Laughinges.
let men laughe upon occasion, and not upon custom. But a man must beware he
do not laughe at his own gestes, and his doings. For that makes men ween he
Laughing at ^^s own G^stes.
would feign praise him self. It is for oother men to laughe that hear, and
not for him that tells the tale.

Now, you must not bear your self in hand, that because each of these
matters considered a part, is but a small fault, ye hole therefore together
should be as light: but you must rather persuade your self yt Many a little
does make a mickle, as I told you from the beginning. And how much less they
be, so much the more need a man has to look well in to the^: because they be
not easily perceived a far of, but creep in to us by custom, before we be a
ware. And, As light expenses often used, in Continuance of time, do covertly
waste and consume a great mass of wealth and riches: So do these light
faults with the multitude and number of the^, in secret overthrow all honest
and good civility and manner. So yt we must not make a light reconing of them.

Moreover, it is a needful observation to bethink your self, how you do
move Mouinges and gestures of the body.
your body, and specially in talk. For, it many times chances, a man is so
ernest in his tale, that he has no mind of any thing else. One wagges his
head. Another looks bigg and scowles with his brows. That man pulls his mouth
awry. And the other spittes in and upon their faces with whom he talks. And some
such there be that move their hands in such a sort, as if they should chase
ye flies as they go: which be very unhandsome and unseemly manners to use. And I
have heard it said (for you know I have been familiarly acquainted with
learned men in my time) that Pindarus that worthy man was wo^t to say: that
Pindarus.
Whatsoever it were that had a good and sauourie taste: was seasoned by the
hands of the Graces. Now, what shall I speak of them ye come forth of their
studies with their pen in their care: and nibble their hankercheifs in their
mouth, or ly lolling with their leg over the table, or spit one their fingers,
and of a number of other blockishe gestures and fashio^s more then these, which
cannot be all rehearsed well: nor shall not, I mean, put me to further pains
to tell the^ al if I could. For, there be many perchance will say this is to
much, that I have said allredie.

FINIS.

