D. BANCROFTS RASHNESS INRAYLING AGAINST THE CHVRCH OF SCOTLAND, NOTED IN AN
ANSWER TO A LETTER of a worthy person of England, and some reasons rendered,
why the answer thereunto has not hitherto come forth.

By I. D. a brother of the said Church of Scotland.

EX MVLTIS PAVCA. AT EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT WAL DE-GRAVE. ANNO. 1590.

A PROOF OF D. BANCROFTS RASHNESS AGAINST THE CHVRCH OF SCOTLAND.
MEN of any sound judgment (good Sir) that hard or read that declamation
made at Paul's Cross the 9. of February, 1588. in time of Parliament, by
RICHARD BANCROFT, D. of Divinity, and chaplain, etc, (as he will needs be
styled) and afterward enlarged by him, and set forth in print, may easily
perceive that (small regard had to godly edifiyng, by the right cutting of that
worthy text of Scripture. Believe not every Spirit, etc. 1. JOHN. 4. 1. which
then he took to entreat) he made the whole drift of his speech, to serve his
intended turn, for a bitter inuection against the godly brethren of England,
who urge Reformation of that Church, and chiefly, the remoouing of that heavy
bondage of Antichristian government by lofty Lords, wrongfully called
Bishops, (an hurtful relicke of Romish confusion) and restoring in the place
thereof, the joint administration of Christian Discipline by the Ministers and
Elders of the Church, which is most clearly proved by them and others, to be
established by the word of GOD, to continue to the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ: whose godly endeavors, when for a while he has labored to improoue,
after his manner, he leaves the matter in question at last altogether, and
sets himself against their persons, and trauaileth with tooth and nail (as
they say) to bring them into extreme hatred with the supreme Magistrate, as
men who by this their new government (so it pleases him to speak of it)
intend no les matter then hie Treason and rebellion, by overthrowing her
Majesty's authority in Ecclesiastical causes, and highly derogating thereby,
to her supreamacie in that case, to the apparent indangering of her person and
state in the end, except good order be taken with the matter in time: Then the
which, what can be more odiously affirmed, and more worthy of extreme
punishment, if it be true.

But how does he prove all this gear I pray you? even from his own fear
forsooth, which rises upon his falsely coniectured suspicions, without al
grounds of truth, to wit, that as outlandish means and practices have been
traitorous and rebellious, in erecting and establishing of this new government
(as he speaks) so he fears, that they, who so exactly, and with such hot
persuit, follow the outlandish precepts in this case, will fall to the same
means in England, page of his book 83. 84. and least his credit should come
in question, for abusing his auditors with untruths in this matter, he will not
seem to speak any thing without his warrant: and therefore finding nothing to
charge the good breethren at hoame withal in this case: (such is the mercy of
GOD toward them, that the very adversary himself, seeking matter of
accusation against them, can find no hole in their coat, do his best, but by
his unwilling silence, is compelled, in a manner, to justify their dewtifull
modesty, in seeking Reformation hitherto.) Not being able then I say, to find
any thing against the brethren of England in this case (for otherwise they
should have heard of it, ye may be sure) he raungeth abroad, and as a
stranger curious in an other Commonweal, making choice, especially of
Scotland, he sets upon it with all his maine, assuring himself of sure proof
of his purpose from thence, Page 72. In doing whereof, as he most outragiously
vpbraideth our whole Ministry, and Christian Discipline of our church, with a
cartful of calumneis, vtered against them both: So he cannot refrain himself
from most reproachful slaundering of the K. Majesty himself, as after shall be
seen, and disdaineful contemning of the whole inhabitants of the land. A
perrilous practice (whose Chaplain so ever he be) against the happy amity
between the two Realms, especially now, in these dangerous days, wherein our
common peace is so highly endangered, as well by the domesticque male-contens and
conspirators at home, as by the foreign detected enemy abroad: good men in the
mean time pillars, as it were, and chief intertainers thereof, daily waxing
fewer and fewer in both the lands.

Nevertheless, so egar is the man in the matter, that before he will not
bring his stick to the fire, he will not spare to speak evil, even, of those
things which he knows not, and very boldelye, though most rashly, build
up an ugly heap of most slanderous accusations against our said Church,
and that upon the false testimonies of the friuelous reports of other me^, and
chiefly of two, the very bare naming of whom, where they are known, is
sufficient enough of it self, to discredit whatsoever is alleged in their
names: For as touching the former of them, corruptly and falsely called Bishop
of S. Androis, P. Adamson
it is much better that the legend of his lewd life be buried in eternal
oblivion, then that Christian ears should be polluted with the unsavory
mention thereof. Although it is not hard to guess, the whole course of his
proceedings (as a Lion may be known by his claws) by one spe^iall action.
For what will that man be ashamed to do, that durst father his own forgerie
upon the Lords lieuetenant the K. Majesty himself, and that in a matter of
no less importance, then the declaration of the meaning of some acts of
Parliament, which howbeit it was but his own declaration (as his Majesty has
plainly witnessed by his own hand writ yet extant to be seen) and not the
Kings. Yet durst he be bold to give it out in the Kings name, as though, he
had been the very undoubted author thereof: If this be not to play the falsarie
forger, and that in the hiest degree, let the Chaplain himself be judge.

But here he will reply, that this is but our Ministers affirmation (who
says he, page 75. dare say what they list.) Otherwise, as the declaration is
the Kings: so, as for the King, he is not altered. Ictus piscator sapit, etc.
Whereby he will not only have that counterfeit and bastard declaration bound on
the Kings back, whether he will or not: But before it shall not be so, he
dare be bold, in the same page above cited, to charge his Majesty with deep
dissimulation, while in effect, he affirms, that howbeit the king by his
writing, speaking, and actions, would seem to approve the present exercise of
that same discipline, which so flatly is condemned in that foresaid
declaration: yet he does not approve it in heart, because (says the Chaplain)
he is not altered, to wit, from that thing which he would have him to have set
down in that declaration, flat contrary to his present practice, allowing it
after all the ways foresaid. In the which saying, he necessarily does implie
deep dissimulation to be in his Majesty, while he will have him to condemn
that in heart, which in deed so manifestly he does allow: let it be judged
then, whether it be our ministers that speak as they list, or he.

It had become his person and place to have spoken and written, at the least,
more reverently of his Majesty, how uncharitably so ever he had judged of
him in his mind: yea, charity would have made him think with himself (if
there had been a sponke thereof within him) that now being of perfect age,
and years of discretion, he is christianlie moved in singleness of heart, by
his auctority to approve that christian discipline, which now he clearly
sees to be so well warranted by the word of God, which perhaps in his
minority and none age (being misled by crafty men) he did not so perfitly
understand. But let not his majesty, nor any prince, look for any better
dealing at the hands of any of his coat, when their honor, and these men's
profits come into their way to be balanced.

But God be praised, it has pleased his majesty, not to wink at this
malapert calumny, but to note it with a coal, to their confusion that allowed
of that lie, while by his own hand writ, set down in the margent of
BANCROFTS book, page foresaid, just over above these his most impudent
assertions. For the K. he is not alte red: Ictus Piscator sapit. his crown and
their sovereignty will not agree together, most plainly he declares the
singlenes of his heart in this behalf, flat contrary to these impudent
assertions in the words following.

MY SPEAKING, VVRITING, AND ACTIONS, WERE AND ARE EVER ONE, VVITHOVT
DISSEMBLING, OR BEARING UP AT ANY TIME, WHAT EVER I THOUGHT.

Whereby, as he purges him self of al dissembling in times past, so he
protests, that his speaking, writing, and actions in approving the present
exercise of Discipline, are fully agreeing to his thought and mind, and
therefore he concludes in these words following.

Ergo CASTS THE LIBEL, nequid asperius.

Which is as much to say, as, wherefore the D. assertions are untrue, to use no
rougher terms, which after his accustomed manner, is subscribed as follows:

I. R. That is, Iacobus Rex.

Which words uttered in Scottish after this sort, if the Chaplain shall go
about to misconstrue, or wrangle from this his true meaning, his M. has
faithfully promised to give him such a categoricke, and simple answer by a
plain lie in round english, as shall make him, and al his maintainers in this
cause, to be ashamed that ever they meddled with this matter. Thus god
recompenseth the foolish, while he makes deceit to return into the heart of
them that forge evil.

And touching that truthles TVRINVS, of whom the Chaplain had the pattern of
this pagean: he is presently as far out of his majesty's favor (let the
Bishopists of England trust the intelligence given by him to them of the
contrary, so much as they lift) as ever before he seemed to be in it. But
whether he shall receive the like recompense in the end, that that his
predecessor did, at the the hands of that worthy emperor Alexander Seuerus,
while being fastened to a stake, the crier stood thus crying to the people,
smoke he sold, and with smoke he is punished, it rests to his majesty's
discretion to consider.

But yet I think that so the Chaplain will not let go his hold: but will
allege that in noe wise he is to be blamed for building upon the testimony
of this his author, in that declaration at least (what ever the man be
otherwise) seeing, so publicly and universally, in a manner, it was received by
many of his betters, for the K. own declaration, in so much, yt it was printed
again, and reprinted with a most odious preface at London, without any
controlement, in so far as it co^cerned us, red, and remarked diligently by
many, and vigilantly insinuated to the view of some chief personages of the
state, who were made so to like of it, and to think it to be of truth, like to
some new gospel, that some, not of the most inferior of such, who are called
children of the most high among them, have not spared, as we hear, to take
boldness thereby of late, in their publict Judiciary trials reprochfully, to
vpbraid our countrymen, in the persons of such as were tried before them,
comparing them to Scottish men, who when the K. proclaimed a feast, would needs
have a fast, or contrariwise, when the K. would have a feast, they proclaimed a
fast, alluding to that false narration, touching the banketting of the French
Ambassador, set down in that counterfeit declaration. And last of al, for the
perpetual triumphing memory thereof against us, it was insert, word for word,
in the Chronicle of England, co^piled by HOLINSHED, and published to the
posterity in print. To the which I answer, that as the multitude of offenders
authoriseth not an error: so he should not have followed a multitude to do
evil, much less should he have added evil to evil, and done worse then any
that went before him: but before the publishing of so weighty a matter after
such a manner, he should without partiality have examined the truth of the
thing to the bottom: and not otherwise so impotentlye have suffered him self,
to have been carried away through the apish Imitation of men, perfitly known to
him to be partially affected in this case: yea, and to speak further, howbeit
the most part of the things contained in that slanderous libel, after due
trial, had bin found true, yet charity would rather have buried, even, the
multitude of sins, then so bitterly have blown abroad some ouersights, to the
reproach of a whole reformed church. What could the veriest Papist of them al
have done more?

But what should be said to a belly that has no ears, that poor DEMAS (if
he be no worse) hunting appearandly for promotion to some Prelacie (as the
manner is) is so incorporate with that company of climers to preferment (as
they call it) and imbracers of this present world, that he is as corrupt, and
partial in this case, as the proudest of them: so that of one, ye may learn
all: Otherwise, if there had been but a sponke of sincere judgment in him: as
worthelie he might have suspected that marvelous heap of most horrible
accusations, to have been incredible in a Church, namely, where so long the
truth has been sincerely preached and professed: So, he needed not to think
it any strange or new thing, for crafty miscreants, hauiug credit in Court, and
church, to find the means many times, to abuse the names of Princes and
excellent men: yea, and of God himself, as cloakes to cover their devilish,
and naughty devises. Whereof, let these examples be witnesses, to wit, of IOAB,
IES ABEL, HAMAN, GEHASI, the old Prophet of Bethel, and all the false Prophets,
false Apostles, and false teachers that ever spoke, or speak the vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord: and who ran and run
when the Lord has not sent them.

And last, touching the printing again and reprinting of that forged
declaration at London, and joining it to the chronicle of England, where
through some, whom the Lord has called Gods, thinking all cock sure, take
occasion of vpbraiding the Ministry of our Country when it pleases them: As
these shall die ignominiously like men, except they repent: So, what honor
those have procured thereby to their Country, and what credit to the chronicle
thereof, let them brag of it, when the vprightnes of our cause sufficiently
cleared by this and the like writings, shall justify it self to their faces,
and the true story thereof, that shall remain registered to all posterities,
shall witness the honesty and duetifull dealing of our Church in all things, to
their shame.

Thus much then being spoken, touching the former of the Chaplains two
witnesses: let us now come to the other, his inconstant Countryman (as he
describes him, R Brown
for as for me, he shall be no worse, then he himself makes him) the
naming of whom, belike, might do his cause more harm, then his testimony can
do it good, and therefore he contenteth him self, with a very slender
description of him: so that not without a note of reproach in the end he sendes
him packing in these words following. This man's opinion herein (says he) I
know will be greatly contemned, because I think he has bin of an other
judgment, etc. Howebeit let him find what favor at their hands he shall: I
must indeed confess, that if this matter had only depended upon his report
or opinion: I would not at this time have made mention of him. Whereby you see
what a wethercock he makes of him, and how rediculously he leaves him, to
beg credit where he may find it, for he can give him none. Here I omit to
make mention of the Iar, that is fallen out since between our Chapleine, and
his suborned witness, for that, that upon no fair promise of recompense, he
could procure new furniture at his hands, of some more particular matter
against the new onset, that with long preparation he has intended against us:
Seeing then, that no man's pen nor tongue can more discredit this his second
witness, then he does him self (partly by the words above rehearsed, and partly
by the D. words following in his declamation, where he flatly again makes him
to be of a changeable humor.) If he drink no better by his means, then he
has brewed, let him blame himself, understanding that evil advise is worst to
the aduiser: I will not speak at this time of the shameless falsehoode that is
alleged out of the testimonye it self, which whenever it shall be
particularly examined, will make the D. repent that ever he cited such a
testimony, and specially, where most impudently it is affirmed, that he has
known the King in great danger, and fear of his life by their lordly
Discipline, the contrary whereof, as it is clearly known to all the worthy
persons, Ambassadors of England, who have had their long residence here among
us, and private intelligence of al our affairs, after an other manner, then
ever his wandering witness could attain unto: so is it many ways affirmed by
the K. himself, and daily experience, God be praised, does confirm the same.

Both the Chaplains authors then, being such pretty fellows, as has bin
declared, I trust it be not hard to be seen, how little credit is to be
given to his declamation, grounded upon their railing reports (to leave the
demo^stration of the falsehood of the matter uttered by them, to the own time
and place.) For he should have considered, that of how little credit soever he
was himself, yet it behooved his witnesses to be free of infamy, according to
the saying, a Proctor may be infamous, but not a witness. But it seems, that
either he was not greatly careful of his own name, who would repose upon the
cracked credits of such defamed persons, in so weighty a matter, or else he
thought (as GYGES did, by means of his ring) to walk invisible, as in a cloud,
that none could or would espy his nakedness. But good man, he is far deceived,
as by the answer to his several asseuerations (if need be) more thoroughly
and sensibly he shall understand.

It is easy then to be seen, how far short the Chaplain has come in
probation of the alleged treasonable outlandish practices, of men of the new
government (as scoffingly he calls the vrgers of Reformation) whereof he
would seem to take such fear, that except good order be taken to prevent the
like at hoame, things will grow to some extremities, page of his book 83. And
therefore I trust the Q. M. and her honorable Council, will see this surmised
proposition of danger of outlandish practices, by the means of Christian
Discipline, to be somewhat better proved, before they will fear any danger to
ensue to their state through the same: yea, and I think, if they knew, but
even so much, as here truly I have set down to you (Sir) in this short
discourse, touching this matter, as the cause of christian discipline should even
be the better liked of them all, seeing it, and the favorers of it, to be so
shamefully belied: So the D. patrons in this case, should pride themselves but a
little, of that slanderous declamation, and think them and their cause but
smally beholden unto it, what ever has been their opinion thereof before.

For let any wise man judge, if one eg can be more like another, then the D.
manner of reasoning is to that form: that REHVM SHIMSHAI, and the rest of the
me^ bejond the river, used in a letter to K. ART AHSHASHTE, for hindering the
building of Jerusalem, EZ. 4. save only, that the judgment of them beyond the
river, was found to be in the authentik books of the chronicles, according as
was alleged by them: and our chaplains argument leans only upon the
counterfeit, and forged chartales of known and confessed infamous persons, and
a false Chronical grounded thereupon. Wherefore, if their authentike books of
Chronicles, did not truly convince Jerusalem to be a rebellious city to kings
and provinces, of what force should this Chaplains infamous libel be (I pray
you) against the good brethren of England, to prove that they will be
rebellious to their Princes, if that christian discipline be admitted to have
place within that land? For as Jerusalem was not a rebellious city to kings
and provinces indeed, howbeit the books of their Chronicles did bear so: So
the exercisers of christian discipline in Scotland, are not necessarily to be
accounted rebellious to the K. for exercising of the same, howbeit, the books
of the register of the acts of Scotland did contain the same. How much less
then, ought false surmised forgeries of known infamous men have credit in that
case?

And if the envy of the sect of the Nazarites urged by profane TERTVLLVS, is
not sufficient to bear down PAVLE, as a seditious mouer of the people,
because he professed, preached, and followed Jesus of Nazaret, whom the Jews
most iniustly and wickedly slew, as a seditious person, and blasphemer, by the
means of two subborned false witnesses, Why should the good brethren of
England, that seek reformation, be charged with a mind hereafter of sedition,
by the means of Discipline, because the Church of Scotland, in respect of the
same Discipline exercised in it, is unjustly, condemned of sedition, by the
hie Priests of our days, two false witnesses being alleged for that purpose,
by their TERTVLLVS at Paul's Cross? I see no reason why they should. Let not
the comparison be odious, because, I compare not the persons in themselves, but
in the causes, which have their own likeness and agreement in some proportion. I
have insisted the more in this matter, bicaus, your cause and ours, are most
near linked together. For the adversaries would terrify her M. from admitting
of christian discipline within her realm, for fear of like inconveniences to
fall out thereby to her quiet government, which are falsely alleged to have
fallen out by the same, to our K. and state. How be it, it be not good logic,
to charge the good cause of discipline, with any infamy, by reason of the
faults of the Ministers and favorers thereof, yea, even put case they were
sufficiently proved, seeing that is but a sophisme from the person to the
cause, (as they say) How much less then, ought it to be condemned, when the
adversaries are not able, do their best, to blot even the persons, by accusing
of whom, they labor to condemn the cause. But I persuade my self, that all
this their paralogizing, and false manner of reasoning shall help them, and hurt
us as little in the end, as the sophistry of REHVM and his companions beyond
the river, helped their cause, and hindered the bulding of the Temple: and as
the smooth Rhetoric of TERTVLLVS, prevailed not against PAVLE, no more shall
their course always prevail against the good cause in England. Wherefore,
let GAI and ZACHARIAS do their parts faithfully, and without fainting, exhort
al men acording to their callings, to further this holy building, not doubting,
but God in his time, shall move DARIUS fully to authorize the building of
Jerusalem: howbeit, through the injury of these days, men may be forced to
leave of building for a season: And let PAVL stand stoutly to the defense of
his just cause, saying confidently: Neither can they prove the things,
whereof now they accuse me. Act. 24. 13. And TERTVLLVS, and his maintainers
shall find themselves disappointed, and PAVL by little, and little, shall grow
to some greater liberty, and his cause shall prevail in the end.

But now let us come, according to your desire, to the causes why that
declamation of D. BANCROFTS, so far as concerning Scotland, is not answered,
wherein howbeit I am not to prejudge the church of Scotland, yet for your
further satisfaction, I have thought good to set down the causes of the delay,
so far as ever I could learn or perceive. And first you may be assured that it
was not for lack of ability in the meanest of a thousand in Scotland to
have confuted that calu^nious chartale, fraughted with as many lies almost, as
it has lines, I. W.
that it was not answered: howsoever it pleases some of your grand DD. (very
learned men, T. C.
ye may be sure, if they be not far deceued) reprochefully to point out some of
our well approved brethren, and especially one, by the note, of like an
unlearned, yea then, a very unlearned Scot: Whom yet notwithstanding they never
hard nor saw, more then D. BANCROFTE did hear and see the Church of Scotland,
and the things wherewith most rashly he does charge it: But who is so bold, as
they say, as blind bayard. Yet if any ARISTARCHVS among them, has taken
occasion of the writing of any brother here, so to speak, let it be judged
by the learned, what just cause he had so to do: and I doubt not, but he shall be
found to have had little learning, and less conscience in so doing, which is
spoken, not so much for the Apology of any man at this time: as to note the
disdainefull contempt of these hauty persons. For he must be of very rare
learning, as not a few can bear me witness, in whom this sort (for I speak not
of all) of the generation of Bishopists will acknowledge any learning to be, if
once directly and seriously, he oppone himself to their pride: For as there
is nothing, wherein they commonly boast them selves more, then in the beard, and
show of learning: as though who forsooth but they only: So is there no shaft
that oftener flies out of their bag against others, then the boult of lack
learning. Howbeit, if it were not for avoiding of uncomely, and unchristian
rendering of reproach, for reproach, it were no hard matter shortly to decipher
the profound science of those two especially, who were chief authors of that
reproach, and to let the^ understand, of what form and class among the learned,
learned men indeed, did ever esteem them to be, notwithstanding, all the
windye volumes written by them: For Scribimus indocti doctique, etc. Howbeit,
yet I deny not so much knowledge unto them otherwise, as shall be a witness
against them, if they use it not better, and as might profit the Church in some
measure, if they had grace to employ it to the right end.

But to return to our purpose, as the answer was not delaied, for lack of
sufficient qualified men amongst us for that, and for a greater purpose, God
be praised, if need be: so it was thought needles, and superfluous, here
amongst our selves, where the truth of those things alleged in that Pamphlet
were so clearly known, as there needed no other confutation of them, then the
shameless impudency of themselves: And as for the answer, in respect of
others, it was delaied first, as I take it, for avoiding of unhappy contention,
that is wont to arise upon such occasions, whereby it might have come to
pass, that dangerous alteration might have been wrought between the two
Realms, as a godly and wise man of yours, commending the discretion of our me^
in that case, did not conceal, in a letter written to some of good account in
our Country, not long ago. For the firebrand of selfeloue, and great ardency
of men, in defending their own sayings and doings whatsoever, suffers the^
not many times, so much to regard the truth and peace of the church, as their
own stinking estimation: whereof, there is too great proof in manifold
lamentable examples, as well of antiquity, as of our own days, both far and
near, to the timely admonition of us all, if advisedly we consider of the
counsel of gods spirit, saying: The beginning of strife, is as one that
opens the waters, therefore or the contention be meddled with, leave off:
Which howbeit more fitly, it may be applied to the adversaries (in this case)
the persuers then to our Church, yet no man I trust, can blame the Ministry
of Scotland, to regard it greatly, so long as there is any hope that the
truth, and their innocence may be in faftie without their answer: otherwise,
they are not ignorant, that, there is no les danger, alwais to keep silence,
then never, as HILARIE speaks.

Secondly, the answer was deferred, as I take it, in hope of due redress to
be put to that offense by the Q. M. and her Honorable Counsel, who our men
thought (as they think yet) esteemed so of their friendship, that they would
not suffer them to lie under any opprobrie vnremooued, so far as lay in them,
neither would suffer them to receive any injury uncorrected, at the hands of
any whom they might command: For there are not many years past, since it
plesed her M. not without signification of a thankful mind, by her letters, to
acknowledge the Ministers of Scotland by name, to be her most loving and trusty
friends in Christ (as yet God be praised they continue to this day, which is not
unknown to her M. and faithful counselors) in regard whereof, they yet expect
the due amendment of that wrong, and that so much the more, as they have been
put in hope thereof, from thence by writ, purposly written to that effect, from
some great personages, who, howbeit now they rest from their labors (to the
no small forewarning of the present state of England, if the matter be well
marked) yet our men think, that they shall not lack such favor in that
Counsel, as shall procure redress of that injury in due season, in respect of
the good opinion they understand (and that even by writ of late) her Majesty
and Counsel, yet retain of the Ministry of Scotland, and their christian
friendship toward them, and that estate.

Thirdly and last, a secret bridle of God (who rules the actions of men
acording to the dispensation of his providence) stayed the^ from answering, for
causes known only to himself, as they so sensibly in a manner have perceived
(especially they, who were privy to the matter) that the knowledge thereof,
may sufficiently satisfy the mind of any modest man, who will acknowledge the
provident dispensation of God to be such, as howsoever the heart of man
purposes his way, yet the Lord does direct his steps.

This much I thought meet (good Sir) to impart unto you, touching the dangerous
rashness of D. BANCROFT, in slandering our whole Church so unadvisedly, after
such a public manner, and that upon the naked reports, of two such infamous
witnesses (partlye, by manifest demonstration of treacherous dealing in one of
them, and partly by his own confession, touching the other) as are not to have
credit against any particular Christian, much les, against a whole Church, a
King, and a Realm: As also touching the causes of the deferring of the answer
thereunto, so far as I understand, which things, if they were known to the D.
and his accomplices, (but even as here rudely they are set down) they might
peradventure let them have experience (which is a fools, though not a foolish
master) that they have run to far headlong into these slanderous and new
devises: and so hearafter might learn more advisedly and charitablie, to deal
with their neighbors and brethren, who have deserved no such things at their
hands: Yea, it is very like, if these same things were read, or summarily and
shortly reported in her Majesty's hearing, either by your self, or some other
good Christian, who has credit and favor about her royal person (For alack
good princess, the true report of things, especially in these and the like
matters, comes seldom to her ears, a common calamity of princes, who
commonly of all others in the world, are most destitute of faithful persons
about them, trewlie and without flattery to inform them of the truth of
matters as they are in deed.) If these things, I say, were truly known to her
M. I surely persuade my self, that those lordly brethren of DIOTREPHES, who
rule or rather tyrannise above their brethren with violence and cruelty, should
be quickly charmed from authorizing such rash liberty of public railing,
and defaming of a whole neighbor church, which always has so well deserved of
the present state of England, and their proud horns should be hastily
hamered down, that they should not be able hereafter, to thrust with side and
shoulder, and push all the weak with their horns, til they have scattered
them abroad, and to make such havoc of the Church, by a disguised
persecution, as presently they do: Yea this much at least, I doubt not should
be granted, that (all bitter inuection and persecuting of the good brethren of
England, that are of the same judgment with us, A loving challenge of
disputation,
surceasing) the controversy should be decided by the word of God in a lawful
assembly, and brotherly conference, appointed by the supreme Magistrates to
that effect: Otherwise, if this come not to pass (which God forbid) as we must
not cease to commend the troubled estate of those our christian brethren, to
GOD in our private and public prayers, so must we not leave the just defense
of our honest cause of Christian Discipline, which (touching the substance
thereof, which chiefly is in controversy) has no les warrant to be continued
perpetually within the Church, under this precept of Christ, feed my sheep,
then has the preaching of the word, and ministration of the Sacraments, and
so consequently flows no more from the authority of the Civil Magistrate
then they do, whateuer formal professors in word, but not admitters of the
yoke of Christ on their neks indeed, cry out to the contrary. This much (good
Sir) I thought good by writ to answer to your letter, after this manner, here
before set down, both to satisfy you and others, touching this matter in some
measure, which if it shall seem good to you, ye, either by your self, or by
some other, may briefly impart unto her M. Farewell,

from Edin. the 18. of September. 1590. Yours in the Lord. I. D.


