THE IVDGEMENT OF THAT REVEREND AND GODLY LEARNED MAN, M. LAMBERT DANAEVS,
Touching certain points now in controversy, contained in his preface before
his commentary upon the first Epistle to Timothy, written in Latin, and
dedicated by him to the Prince of Orange.

BUT NOW TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH, FOR THE BEHOFE and comfort of all those,
who (not understanding the Latin tongue) are desirous to know the truth in
those points.

TO THE RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, WILLIAM Prince of Orange, Earl of
Nassaw, the most valiant maintainer and defender of Christ's glory, in Holland
and Zeland: grace and peace from the Lord.
IT is an old saying, (most noble prince) used also of Aristotle, that there
is nothing more beutifull in the whole frame of nature then comeliness and good
order. For what confused and disorderlye thing can be pleasant to the eye,
Order how necessary.
or delightsome unto the mind of man? verily nothing at al. And in deed if
these things that either we look upon with the eyes of our body, or consider
with the faculties of our mind, seem unto us neither to be orderly disposed,
nor to cleave together by any comodious situation: nor ordered by any decent
and seemly manner, we presently give sentence, that they have neither profit,
nor delight in them. And we do noe less abhor such uncomely sightes, then
we delight to look upon those things which are distinguished into their natural
and proper parts. And this that I speak is verified to be true in kingdoms, in
common wealths, in towns, in vilages, in private houses, in gardens, in
feildes, in wildernesses, and in whatsoever either nature brings forth, or
man's wit and industry inuenteth: as not only experience it self, but even the
common voice of al men, both godly and profane does witness. To be brief,
the world it self being the most beutifull work of Gods own hand, is of the
Grecians called kosmo for the order and comeliness that is therein.

Whereby their opinion apeareth to be most detestable, Order or beauty.
which not only delight them selves in disorder and confusion: but also (by
removing of al good order) do endeavor to turn every thing vpside down, and to
induce a general mixture of al things both private and public. The which sort
of men, as being the monsters and common plagues of mankind, the Ancients were
wont to call unruly and unbridled spirits. But concerning comlines and good
order, this we are to think of it, that as the same is not only profitable,
but also most necessary every where: so especially ought it to have place in
the church of God, as the Apostle Paul by express commandment does teach
us. 1. Cor. 14.40.
For the church is the house of God, that great King of Kings. Wherein
therefore al things ought to be done circumspectly, seemly, and decently, and
as Paul him self speaks, The dishonor of god joined with the disorder of the
Church.
honestly and according unto good order, but nothing confusedly and disorderly,
least the disorder of the house be a stain, and a dishonor unto the Majesty of
the houshoulder him self, who is the great and the mighty God. And to this
purpose he himself of his great mercy has prescribed in his word, not only
those things, which are necessary to eternal life, and concearne the
groundwork and salvation of his Church: But also has manifested those
points which are behoofefull unto the right government and beauty of his
Church, least there should be any thing appertaining to the right constitution
of his house, whereof, we should not be fully and sufficiently instructed out
of his own mouth. And to the end that those rules which belong unto the
regiment of the church, should expressly, be severed and distinguished, from
those points which contain the doctrine of iustifiyng faith, they are
generally called of all men, Ecclesiastical Discipline.
by the name of Ecclesiastical Discipline. For even as that part of gods word,
and the knowledge of his truth, which teaches us what we are to believe,
concerning God the Father, concerning Christ, together with his natures and
offices, concerning the holy Ghost, concerning the causes of our salvation, and
concerning eternal life, does contain the very bones and sinows, and as it
were, the being and essence of the body of the church. So the same part of ye
word of God, which sets down the rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline, does
make up the ornaments and jewels of the body of the church, whereby it is
attired, and without which it is no other, then a body naked, and without
clothing. So that hereby we may see, what a nere conjunction and agreement
there is between these two, to wit, between the doctrine and discipline of
the Church. For except you join ecclesiastical discipline, unto the light and
profession of the truth, an assembly of men, even embrasing the purity of the
word preached, shall be nothing, but a naked body bereaved and destitute of al
attire, and ornaments. And therefore is this ecclesiastical discipline rightly
termed by some of the Ancient fathers, to be the keeper of the doctrine of
faith, the mother of virtue, the bond of honesty, and the very sinewe of
christian society. The force whereof indeed, is so great, that it alone
brings unto the church, whatsoever we account to be the comeliness, beuty,
brightness, and ornament thereof, and it makes the same so pleasant unto the
eyes, that (as Tertullian says) the heretics (which were always the
greatest and most deadly enemies thereof) did spitefully call ecclesiastical
discipline, a bait to ensnare, and alure men to love the church.

Ecclesiastical discipline when it began.
Seeing therefore this discipline is a rule and a part of that justice, whereby
the outward order and the lawful government of the whole church is contained:
who are they that with any coulor can pretend, that either the same is to be
despised, or not to be labored for? Whose institution began not first under
the new Testament, but was first ordained under the law by God himself, as
that worthy professor of the Hebrew tongue, and my fellow laborer, Cornelius
Bertram, has long since very learnedly taught in his book concerning the
policy of the Jews. For what else but the prescribing of ecclesiastical
discipline do the laws of God mean, which distinguishe the tribe of Levy
from al other tribes, that out of it only, the ministers of the temple should
be chosen, and within the same tribe, do severe the office of the priest from
the Leuits, and set down what was the authority both of the high priest, and
of the rest of those that had to do with the priesthood. And what else do
these laws mean, which set down, what rites and drink offerings were
required in every kind of sacrifice? To conclude the whole ceremonial law
appointed by the Lord him self, what else I pray you is it, but a most ample
and a most clear description of ecclesiastical discipline? And as the Lord was
not sparing in the institution hereof, under the old testament, so has he
as largely under the new, instituted (or rather restored it being fallen down
and decayed) the same by his Apostles, as being a matter altogether most
necessary for the right constitution, and government of his Church. The which
thing appears out of many places in the new testament, and especially out of
the Acts of the Apostles the first epistle of Paul to the Corin. the first to
Timothy, and that to Titus. In all which, and the like places, whatsoever
apertaines to the right and laweful government of the Church is carefully, and
largely set down: Whether you regard the ordering of the whole Church in
general, or the governing of some few in particular. In consideration whereof,
I think it a wonderful and an absurd case, that afterward so many cannons,
so many decrees of synods, so many constitutions of churches, The Canons of
general and provincial Councels for the most part vain and needles.
both general and particular, were written and established for the ordering of
Ecclesiastical government. For what need was there of this labor? which only
did arise from the great contempt, and ignorance of these precepts, which the
holy Ghost had set down by the pen of the Apostles, and that because men
despised the ways of God, that they might establish the inventions of their
own brains, and bring into the church their own tradicions, which for the
most part, were too absurd and childish, and always mere contrary unto the
Discipline prescribed in the word of God.

But here some man will demand, whether this discipline be so precisely set
down, Note.
and prescribed in the new testament, as nothing can be added unto it, and
appointed so strictly under pain of the Lords displeasure, as men may not
swerue any whit at al from it? In the answer of this question, I must be feign
to use a distinction. For there are many and sundry parts of Ecclesiastical
discipline: whereof the one does contain and describe only a general way and
mean of placing, guiding, and ruling the Church, in whatsoever place and
country of the world it does remain. As for example, that only the voice of
our Lord Jesus Christ is to be hard in the church, and no other. That the
sacraments are only to be delivered unto the godly, and faithful, and all
other points that are of like kind, which generally respect the conservation
of the Church. The other part does handle, and declare more particularly the
rule of governing the same. This latter part of Ecclesiastical discipline
contains 4. heads. First the election of these persons, which are called
unto some Ecclesiastical office. Secondlye, a description of the offices and
callings of the persons that are elected? Thirdly, the way and manner of
administering church censures, as well publicly before the assembly of the
elders, as otherwise. The fourth is concerning the receiving into the Church,
of them that are under the ecclesiastical censures, either suspended, or
excommunicated. When as the question is therefore, whether every particular of
these heads, be so set down in the word, that nothing can be added thereunto.
Some things essential, some things accidentarie in the regiment of the church
I answer that in every work, cause, and action, there are some things
essential, and some things accidental. Those things are essential, which
contain the whole nature of the thing, or some part thereof, as in this
argument. If any man in the laweful calling of Pastors or other church
officers, that are to be chosen shall deny, either that their life and doctrine
are to be tried: or that the approbation of the people, is to be had in their
choice, he denies those things which are essential unto al laweful elections.
In like sort, if any man shall say that this trial is not to be had by the
church, and that by many: but by one man alone, and shall teach that the
Church is to stand in this case unto the meare determination of one, he takes
away those things which are essential in election. But if a man should reason,
that this trial by many is to be done in this or that place, at this or that
time, after this or that manner, he speaks only of those things which are
accidental. As for example, the ancient manner in times past of election, and
trial of Pastors was, that he should be chosen by 3. Bishops, or Pastors that
were next unto him, together with the Eldership, and church whereof he was to
be Pastor. And this was done only in the metropolitan City, at a certain and
an appointed time, namely in the time of public fast: to be short, he was
chosen not by the bare consent, and voice of the people, but by the lifting up
of their hands which was called cherotona, al which things are to be accounted
accidentarie, and not essential in election. This therefore we conclude, that
whatsoever by the word of God is commanded to be done and observed in the
government of the church, whether it be concerning ye election, or the offices
of those that are called, or whatsoever head of ecclesiastical discipline it
does respect: we conclude I say, that to be altogether essential. But as for
those things which are adjudged, and appointed in every particular province,
or Church, to be most commodious to effect, and practice the former points, we
hold the^ to be but accidentary matters. As that the preaching of the word
should be at this hour, rather then at an other. That the church should rather
have this number of Elders and deacons, then that. Al which things are to be
held accidentary, and in no wise essential unto the government of the Church.

Now therefore unto the present question in hand, according unto this
distinction we answer after this sort, that we utterly hold it unlawful,
that such things as are essential unto Church government, should be either
augmented or diminished, by the commandments and laws of men. But as for the
things that are accidental we deny not, but they may be increased, diminished,
qualified or augmented, not only by every province, but even by particular
Churches, as they find them convenient, or incommodious unto their state, and
to speak in a word, as occasion of the circumstances of places, times, and
persons, shall require.

And after the self same manner, we answer unto that other demand of some,
which would know, whether the Church may swerve from that order of government,
which is set down in the writings of the Apostles, and whether the one and the
self same form of Church regiment and discipline, ought to be established in all the churches that profess the Gospel? For, if they speak of those things
which are essential unto the government of the church, the answer is, that al
churches are bound alike to observe and keep them inviolable, as that the
government of the Church should be Aristocratical, that is in the hands of
many, and not monarchical, that is in the hands of one, and that every
congregation should have in it a Senate or company of Elders, Al churches
therefore are bound to be governed by the eldership.
chose by the church, without whom, neither the Pastor, nor any man else, is to
deal in the affairs of the church, and that in every congregation, there be
some censuring of wickedness, and of unruly manners, which censures are not to
be administered, by the arbitriment of one man: but by the deliberation and
judgment of the leaders, and gouerners, and as Ierom says, of the Elders of
the church. To be short, it is essential unto ecclesiastical discipline, that
the sentence of excommunication be given forth against the obstinat, and that
it be pronounced, not according to the mind and judgment of ciuilians, and
such as give sentence according unto the laws of man: but by the direction of
the officers of the church, which judge acording unto the laws of God, and
that it be given forth, not in a corner by one man alone: but by the consent,
and in the presence of the Church, the same being gathered together for that
purpose. And therefore we answer plainly and directly, that the substance, or
essential parts of ecclesiastical discipline, ought to be the same, in all the
churches that profess the Gospel, or carry the name of any reformation with
them.

But if the question be concerning outward things, which only are accidentary
unto this discipline, wherein only the conuenience or discommodity stands in
the practice, or the omitting of some things indifferent, we hold that those
points may be changeable: yea and that often times it is requisite they
should be changed, in consideration of the respect, that is to be had, unto
the diversity of times, places and persons. So far are we in this point, from
requiring that every country and region should be tied unto the same form of
outward order. For it may fall out that these things which in this place, and
in this country is well and commodiously done. (As for example, the lords
supper is administered in France once every quarter) cannot be so conveniently
practiced in other regions and countries. After this manner it is, that the
sentence of excommunication in some places is red out of book, which in other
Churches is denounced by the Pastor, as the Lord directs him to speak for
the present time. Even so also, the manner is in this Church of Geneua, that he
who has fallen to Idolatry, and desires afterward to be reconciled unto
the Church, makes confession of his fault upon the Lords day only: whereas in
other Churches, he might do it at any other day, that the Church thinks
convenient. Here with us the penitent reads his confession, in other places
he speaks it, as he is moved for the present. Al these indifferent things
then may have a diverse form, according to the diversity of places and times,
etc: so that always the correction of manners, the acknoweledging of the
fault, the separation of the goats from the sheep, be retained in the lords
house, and those things done, which God requires to be put in execution. And
so this point be evermore practiced, that the Church and house of God be
orderly governed, that it may appear not to be a cadge of unclean birds, but
the well governed family of the living God.

The substance therefore and essential parts of discipline, ought to be one
and the self same, in all the Churches of God in what age or place soever they
be, but as for such things as are accidentary thereunto, they may be
changed. And therefore in this question, we hold it needful that men should
learn always to make a distinction between the accidental and the
essential parts of Church discipline. Furthermore, we account it merely
unlawful, that any man, yea the supreme Magistrate, or yet the universal body
of the true Church, should go about to change, alter, remove, diminish or
augment any thing that is Essential in Ecclesiastical Discipline. For
although in civil causes the King, The government of the church not to be
changed.
or the chief magistrate, may by virtue of the authority granted unto him by
the Lord, make new laws, and abrogate the old: yet notwithstanding he has
not the like authority, either in abolishing and changing, the essential parts
of ecclesiastical discipline, or yet in adding any thing of his own thereunto.
The reason whereof is most manifest and clear. For seeing the especial scope,
and end of Ecclesiastical Discipline is: first, that the Pastors which take
charge of Gods people, have a laweful calling. Secondly that the consciences of
men be ruled, and by true conversion and repentance, brought unto the
obedience of Gods will: it must needs follow, that the ordaining and appointing
of ecclesiastical discipline is only in the Lords hand: because that he alone
is the Lord, king, ruler and lawgiuer of his Church, and he alone, the only
true and lawful judge, and governor of the consciences of men. And therefore
he alone, is both to prescribe the rules of the lawful callings, of such as
are to bear office in his house, and also to set down the way, how the
consciences of men may be moved, and repentance wrought in them. In which
two points (as we have said) the chief force and drift of Ecclesiastical
discipline is contained. And concerning these matters, neither king, nor yet
the whole body of the Church, have authority to prescribe any other laws then
those, which Christ himself has set down. For the Church it self is no
other then a servant, to be ruled by the commandments of God her sovereign
Lord, and not a Queen, or a Lady to prescribe unto her self, what law she
likes best, and as for Kings and Princes, they are members and not heads of the
Church, members indeed, that are to be reverenced above the rest, in respect
of their calling, yet members in such sort, as in the governing of the Church,
they are not to command as they list: but their duty is only to be careful,
that the commandments of the Lord may be put in execution, by, and amongst
their subjects. For out of all controversy, the Lord alone is to appoint and
ordain Ecclesiastical vocations and callinges, as he is the only searcher
and ruler of the soul and conscience. And therefore, seeing the ruling of the
consciences of men, and the subduing of them unto the obedience of God, is the
end wherefore Ecclesiastical Discipline is ordained: The way and the means,
whereby that work is to be effected, can be showed by none, save only by the
Lord alone, because he only made and formed the conscience and mind of man,
he only knows how they may be ruled, turned and changed: and he only is the
Lord of them. Whence it is, that to seek any where else (especially from the
mouth of natural man) save only at the word of God, the laws to rule and guide
the conscience, is nothing else, but to hunt after errors and delusions, and to
offer extreme injury unto the majesty of God, which claims this authority
unto himself alone. We do not deny, but that kings and Princes together with
their counselors, and such as are well seen in matters of state may devise
and enact wholesome laws for the maintaining of public peace among their
subjects: but to invent and ordain new laws (besides those that are
prescribed in Gods word) wherewith they would rule and bind the consciences of
men, or to appoint and enact ordinances and constitutions, concerning the
lawful callings of those that govern the Church, (which is the house of God,
and not the mansion of any earthly Prince) they have no warrant nor authority
at all. Yea, (and as has been said) the whole Church of God, gathered and
assembled together in a general Council, has no authority at all, to take
any such work in hand. In so much as, whatsoever general Councels have
enacted and constituted different from, or contrary unto the substance of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, prescribed in the word of God, it was nothing else,
but plain tyranny, and a most injurious usurpation of the right which
belongs unto the Lord alone, although it cannot be denied, but those
Councels and assemblies persuaded themselves that they went about no such
matter, but intended a far better, and a more holy purpose. The confusion,
and miserable ruin of the Church, followed upon their purposes, do manifestly
show the truth hereof. For if they had retained that discipline of the
Apostles, and appointed no other, the Church of God had not fallen into that
horrible disorder, wherewith, at the length, it was lamentably overthrown.

Do you then, will some men say, condemn all those Churches, that received
the gospel, wherein, either no Ecclesiastical discipline at all, or at the
least, that ordained by the Apostles, is not observed, but have either
corrupted the true Discipline, or substituted a false, in stead thereof. Unto
this odious question, wherewith we have been often cumbred, we answer
plainly, and yet lovingly and modestly, that we indeed do not condemn those
Churches and congregations, where idolatry is banished, and the pure and true
preaching of the Gospel retained, as not being the Churches of GOD:
notwithstanding, that they want and in joy not the true gouerenment of the
Church. For the fundamental, and true, and infallible note of gods Church
here upon earth, is only one, namely, the word of God truly preached by a
lawful Pastor, the which true preaching of the word, wheresoever it be, there
men may boldly conclude, the Lords flock to be a remnant, according to the
saying of our savior Christ, My sheep hear my voice: yea, and we hold this
flock to be the flock of God, although it want both the administration of
the sacraments, and the use and practice of the true Discipline of the Church.
And whereas these 2. last marks, to wit, the sacraments, and discipline, are
by some thought necessary to point out the true Church, their meaning in this,
is nothing else, but to show what and how much is necessarily required, to the
perfect and absolute constitution of the outward face of a Church. But they
are very far from thinking that those congregations cannot be at al
accounted the Churches of God, which want ecclesiastical discipline, so that
the word of God be truly and soundly preached in them. Those congregations and
assemblies then, which want Discipline, are indeed the Churches of God, but yet
lame, imperfect and maimed Churches. As we call him a man, though he have both
his arms cut off, so that he be living and have the use of his reason.
Notwithstanding, all those Countries, who (having banished idolatry, and
received the true and lively word of God) do as yet want this discipline, ought
to know, that this should be their chief care and continual endeavor, even that
they may without delay, join and add unto their Church this notable ornament,
namely, Ecclesiastical Discipline, as it is prescribed in the writings of the
Apostles, and so they shall not only have the bones and sinowes, but enjoy the
blood, color, beauty, and retain the absolute strength of a Church. And in
this point, that speech of the holy ghost, is carefully to be hearkened unto,
that we ought to make straight steps unto our feet, least that which halteth,
be at length clean turned out of the way. For if those things which are
needful, be through carelessness neglected in the Church of God, it will come
to pass, that in process of time, the Church it self, will be clean alienated
from God. And in as much as this Discipline whereof we speak, is set down in
the first Epistle of Tim. therefore I have principally chosen it, in the
expou^ding whereof, I thought good, briefly to set down my judgment concerning
this whole argument. Diverse and many, both new and old writers, being indeed
learned men, have written upon this Epistle: But amongst the rest, one Claudius
Spensaeus, especially endeavored to show, how much he was able to write,
concerning the Discipline of the Church. For besides a large commentary that
he has written upon the text it self, he has also published no less then
three tedious books of digressions (as he calls them) upon this very same
Epistle. But he is so far in my judgment, from being a help unto any man by
his books, that in my days, I have known nothing more obscure, then his
very commentary, and nothing more confused, and out of order, then are his
intricate discourses. For these Schoolmen, of whose number this Spensaeus was
on, are blinded by the just judgment of God, and so given to obscurity, that
in the most things they understand not themselves, because their only
bringing up is in darkness, and vain iangling. Indeed, when I had lighted upon
these commentaries, and could profit my self nothing at all by them, the best
course that I could take, was to betake me from his wandering digressions, unto
the right way it self, that is, unto the text of the Apostle, and so as the
old proverb faith, I drank, and hasted away. For my self, what I have
attained unto by this my travel, and how much I have manifested this cause,
which otherwise, for want of practice, now these many years was grown out of
use, and the knowledge of men, let others judge. Thus much I may bouldlye
affirm, that I was not able to bring to light these old rubushes of
antiquity without great labor, and pains. Howsoever it be, I entreat the
Lord God, that these my labors may be profitable unto his Church: and
acceptable unto the godly.

And as for your excellency (most noble prince) unto whom I do most humbly,
and willingly dedicate this work, if it may be but approved of you, I shall
take your acceptance, as a great fruit of the labor bestowed herein. There
are many and diverse causes of weight, why, I should dedicate this travel of
mine unto your excellency, but this in special. And that is, that whereas, by
the blessing of GOD, and your great wisdom, and strength the Churches of
Zealand, Holland, and the whole coast therabouts have obtained peace I think
nothing more profitable, and more necessary, for the establishing and
preserving of a right government in them, then are the things which I have
handled in this Commentary. For even as the contempt and neglect of the
Church Discipline, has brought ruin unto the Church: so the careful
observation thereof, being ordained according unto the rule of the Apostles,
has not only maintained the soundnes and purity of the heavenly doctrine
amongst men: but also has amended (and retained in the obedience of GOD) the
manners and behavior of those that professed the name of Christ, if at any
time they seemed to decline from the sincerity of their profession.

To be short, this self same Discipline is both a most strong fortress
against heresies and Schisms that are coming up, and a most excellent
preservative, and counterpoyson against those that are already grown. And
although I know, that your excellencye wants not the means to come unto the
knowledge of these things, by the learned conferences, which you may have with
diverse of great knowledge and learning, and especially with that honorable and
worthy man, Phillip Marnixus, the Lord of the mount of Saint Aldegond, and
with that faithful Minister of God, M. Taffinne, yet notwithstanding I thought
it not amiss for me, to bestow this my talent according unto mine ability,
unto the common behoof and profit of your Churches, that they may understand,
both what great good will, I bear unto them from my heart, even in respect of
your excellency, and also how incessantly I pray unto the Lord, to vouchsafe
them all peace and prosperity.

To come under your self (most noble Prince) it is not unknown, how well you
have deserved, both at the hands of all men professing religion, and
especially of our Country men in France. Of whose safety and preservation,
both your self, and that noble Earl your brother, Count Lodowick (whose
famous and happy memory, I hope, will never decay in Gods Church) have been
always especially careful. For by the force and counsel of you two, the
French Churches have been a long time protected from the most barbarous
cruelty, which by their enemies have been offered unto them, contrary to the
laws of their Country, and the custom of all antiquity. In conclusion, your
renown, and the commendacions of those exploytes that you have achieved, for
the defense of gods glory, is so rife in the mouths of all men in Christendom,
that your match in the constant defending of the good cause, is not every where
to be found amongst men. For you have delivered the Country committed unto
your government, from the tyranny of the Spaniards, and all foreign enemies:
you have by unexpected ways, and almost after an extraordinary manner, healed
the breaches of the Lowe-countrey, that was lamentably torn in sunder by
inward broiles and discord, and have restored them to their former ancient
liberty and honor. You have put the enemies to flight, being now ready to
divide the spoil, and carrying before you the ensign of Christ's cause, gotten
the victory and triumphed over them. You are renowned by all men, as a patron
of godliness and piety, and the most valiant vphoulder of public justice and
peace. So that you which have done so great and so excellent things, for the
enlarging of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the defense of the
liberties of your Country, do also justly deserve to be well spoken of by
all men. For as Euripides says, men's good deeds do always procure good
speches to be uttered in their praise and commendacions. As to my self, right
excellent Prince, seeing I do understand, that so many of your admirable and
worthy actions, are every where commended through the world, I thought it my
duty, to leave this work as a testimony of my dutiful good will toward your
excellency, and of my poor endeavor to publish abroad the commendacion of
your deserved praise and renown. The which labor of mine, I earnestly entreat
your excellency, to accept in good part. The Lord who is God alone, eternal,
wise, good, just and merciful, strengthen and confirm you, as he did Daniell
with his holy spirit, and preserve you among us, and especially in the
Lowe-countries for the support and defense of his church in quietness and
prosperity many years.

Geneua, the calends of August. 1577. Your excellencies most bounden LAMBERT
DANAEVS.


