A new ballad Entitled, Daniels siftyng in these our days: aptly applied to
the true Prea chers of the Gospel.
What God has wylled us, to that good ear give:
For Daniels are abroad: siftyng with their Seeue.
GOOD Daniels sifting, in Gods church about,
The footsteps out findyng: or those as be stout.
Against Gods word divine, which all ^ught to know
In their own mother tongue: what duty they owe.
To God alone justly, to serve him with love,
For all are not trusty: as his word does prove.
Now if God we obeyed, as be has us taught,
Then were our says stayed: in him that us bought.
By Daniels, the Preachers: so this understand,
Which do preach Christ truly: in every land.
Without Pope or popery, our souls for to save,
By faith in Christ only, of whom we it crave.
And Gods book this Seeue is, that they in hand take,
And his word the Ashes, there out for to shake.
In Temples and Churches, where people resort,
To have for their souls health: the food of comfort.
The people is the ground, on whom now does fall,
Those high divine Ashes: that makes the true trial.
Whose footesteppes shall ap^ere without trawde or guile,
Of young and old people: now mark well this style.
By these footesteppes I mean, the whole life of man,
And of all women kind: these things now well scan.
Who so in these Ashes, now treads awrye,
Their steps shall be well known: to God and man's eye.
As was in Bells Temple, a God without life,
Whereas footyng was found: of Man, Child, and Wife.
Who cate up the vittells, from that false God Bell,
And deceived the King: as the text does tell.
But Daniell by siftyng, all them to light brought,
And also Bells Pristes: that wickedly wrought.
Even so now our Sisters, that siftes at this day,
With Gods word shall find out: those in the broad way.
When they hear the law red, unto them full plain,
As God has commanded: so to be certain.
The which law and Gospel, receive in good part,
And out of the broad way* betimes took ye starte.
The footesteps that Adam, and Eve first did trace,
To the forboden tree: brought them in woe case.
And all we by their fall in bondage be set,
Day by day masked still in Satan's great net.
The first bloty footestep^, that Cayne did commit,
To his brother Abell: remaynes in some yet.
As in Ruffians and Rogges, that desperate be,
Whose footesteps from much sin cannot escape free.
The pride of great Nemrode, that in him did rain,
Was known by his footesteps, and all his whole train.
So likewise shall theirs do, that buyldeth excess,
In any kind of trade: abusing Richesse.
Queen Iezabell that did, Gods true Prophets kill,
Her footeyng was found out: against her own will.
The Dogs her blood lapped in Iezraell,
This sore greuons plague: was cast on Iezabell.
So lykwyse the footsteps of Gods enemies,
Shall well be spyed: when as his will is.
And have their reward due, for shedyng of blood,
Of Gods elect people: when the Lord thinks it good.
Remember how Pharao, though he was a King,
His footesteps were found out: of persecutyng.
He with his whole army, of men drowned were,
In midst of the red sea: God did them not spare.
Even so from time to time, you may read and see,
How God plageth Tirants: for their iniquytye.
He is the same God still, sinners to correct,
Except they repent now: he will them reiecte.
Sodom and Gomorra, their footyng was found,
What ways they then walked: upon the Lords ground.
They lived to them selves in the sink of sin,
Till fire and brimstone: thereby they did win.
Let this be a warnyng, so now in like case,
To whores and whore mongers: that yet lacks grace.
Whose close trippyng footesteps, will shortly app^ere,
By our Daniells siftyng: they can not escape clear.
The coueiteous footesteps, of Ahabs great spite,
To have Nabaoths viniard: did come unto light.
For the which the Lord, with Abab was wroth,
And sent to him Elyah: who told him the troth.
Now the Lord would plague him and all his household,
For the death of Nobaoth: as Elyah him told.
Beware now by Ahab, to get worldly muck,
For many one thereby: has had but ill luck.
Sir Rapax, sir Capar and sir Tenax also,
And you master Vserers: that now in wealth flow.
Be not imps of Ahab, common wealth to annoye,
I cast you with your footesteps: the Lord do destroy.
The Scribes, the Pharasies, and Lawyers likewise,
Their footyng was well known: of their enterprise.
How they came unto Christ, to take him in a trip,
But be ever came them: and gave them the slip.
So Lawyers that wrest law, and matters prolong,
Their footesteps will appear of making right wrong.
Woe be to such says Christ, whose sentence is great,
Wherefore repent in time: and for mercy entreat.
Thus for to conclude now, let all men repent,
And to lead a new life: by Gods Testament.
Ere death steal upon us, our footesteps to find,
Contray to Gods will: and to natures kind.
Wherefore siftyng Daniells, now ply your vocations,
Declare Gods word truly, unto all nations.
God is your head Captain, your shield and defense,
Without fear or parcialytie, now do your dilygence.
By siftyng and sortyng, the good from the bad,
Then God will be pleased: and his people glad.
To hear what God wylleth, to that good ear give,
And to all such Preachers, as use well the Seeue.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Richard Iohnes: dwelling in the upper end of
Fleetlane, at the sign of the spread Eagle. And are to be sold: at his Shop
ioynyng to the Soutwest Door of Saint Paul's Church. The xxij day of October.
1572.


