A JUST COMPLAINT AGAINST AN VNIVST DOER.

Wherein Is declared the miserable slaverie and bondage that the English Church
of Amsterdam is now in, by reason of the Tirannicall government and corrupt
doctrine, of Mr. John Pagett their present Minister.

The Which things are plainly manifested in two certain letters, the one
written by Mr. John Davenport to the dutch Classis, the other given up to the
English Consistory by some of the brethren. With other brief passages tending
to the same effect.

Published by one that much pitties them and prays daily for their deliverance.

Math. 23.15. We unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye shutt up the
Kingdom of h^aven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Son. 2.15. Take us the foxes the
little foxes that spoil the vine. Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut off
which trouble you. Printed Anno 1634.

A COPPIE OF MY LETTER TO THE CLASSIS.
IT does greive me not without cause, Excellent and learned men, reverend
brethren, that our first meeting happens to be in a way of dispute, which
that it might have been pleasing and peaceable by the full agreement of our
opinions, was my chief desire: yet my full persuasion of your (not humanity
only but also) brotherly affection toward me, does somewhat mittigate that
sorrowing, in confidence whereof I will briefly relate to your prudence
(reverend brethren) with all due reverence, the cause of the slow proceeding of
my confirmation in the ministry, whereunto I seemed to be called.

The calling it self I profess my self to accept willingly, though not
without trembling, and am very ready to discharge that office as I am able:
but some things have happened between the call, and my confirmation, beyond
my Expectation. for

1. First I understand that both the worthy brethren, Pastors of the dutch
Church, and the reverend Mr. Pagett, did propound, and appoint, as a condition
of my admittance, that I should conform to the orders, and customs, of the
dutch Church, whereas I do not yet understand, what those orders and customs
are, for which cause, I propounded to the consistory of the English Church,
that some convenient time might be given me, rightly to inform my self
concerning those canons and customs of the dutch Church, and concerning the
state of this English Church, before I should; by taking upon me this Pastoral
office, bind my self to either of them, this the consistory not only judged
equal: but also with one consent concluded that it should be so, Mr. Pagett
only excepted, who would not agree with them in that matter, without consent of
the Classis: whereas nevertheles, the Power of every particular Church; is
chief in its own particular matters, (or in things which are proper to it
self) as a Synod has the chief power, in things that are common to many
Churches, witness Cham. Cont. Bell. lib. 2. With whom agree the canons of these
Churches, as appareth in the Harmony of the dutch Synods, where it is decreed
that only such things, shallbe brought unto the Classis, which can not be ended
in the consistory. Chap. 7. Art. 6. As that which can not conveniently, be
decided by the Classis shallbe brought into the Provincial Synod. Chap. 8.
Art. 6.

Secondly it was required of me that I should conform, unto a particular
custom of the dutch Church for the unlimited Baptisinge of all infants, which
were presented in thc Church, of what nation or Sect soever, allthough, that
either of the paren^s were christians, was no otherwise manifest, then by their
(all) answering yea, at the reading of the leiturgy of baptism publicly, or
by nodding their head, or some other g^sture, they seemed to be willing to
answer.

First I neither did nor do deny, to baptize their Infants who are members of
this Church, which seeing it is so, I desire to understand by what right, the
Pastor of any particular Church, can be bound to exercise his ministry in any
act of it, toward those who are not members of his Church, seeing the Apostle
Paul required no more of the Pastors of Ephesus, then to take heed to
themselves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made them
overseers. Act. 20.28. The same is required of Archippus, to take head to the
ministry which he had received of the Lord, (viz. amongst the Collossians) that
he fulfill it. Col. 4, 17. as also Peter exhorts the Elders, Pet. and 2. If
it be objected that all that are under the Classis of Amsterdam, ought to
conform to the custom of the dutch Church in Amsterdam. An. 1.
I answer that, even for that reason, the English Church ought not to be bound
thereunto, it being not nessessary to require it of them, saying that the dutch
Church: (which is in the same city) refuses none, but baptiseth all that are
brought, without difference, especially, 2lie. Seeing that the Pastor of the
English Church, can not satisfy his conscience, that it is lawful for him so
to do, yea he greatly fears: least Christ will Judge him guilty, if he
suffer himself to be in bondage under such a custom, which is contrary to the
canon of the Apostle, let every man be persuaded in his own mind. Romans 14.5.
and whatsoever is not of faith is sin verse. 23.

Secondly in regard of the communion of particular Churches amongst themselves,
I neither did nor do refuse to Baptize their Infants, who are not members of
this Church: so that I may be satisfied, by some precise Examination, if
otherwise they be unknown to me, that they are Christians in deed.

When Mr. Pagett asked me, what Questions I would propound, to such as are not
members of this Church: ^or otherwise known to me? I answered, I will inquire
of what religion they are of, and of what Church they are members, and
concerning that faith (which they seem to profess, and wherein they promise to
educate their Children. It seems to me that herein, Mr. Pagett dealt extremely
with me, in that he rejected all my labor, for a peaceable composing, prudent
accommodating, and brotherly ending of matters between him and me privately, or
by the counsel of the Elders of his own Church, nor would hearken to my
advise for accommodation without consent of the Classis.

At last the matter was brought to five eminent brethren, Pastors of the dutch
Church: Who being desired (as it is said) by some of the Elders of this Church,
that they would endeavor to inclyne, Mr. Pagett to some freindly agreement
herein, upon Mr. Pagetts request alone did in writing declare their private
Judgment in this question, yet therein they professed, that they very much
approved, of my good zeal, and care concerning the private examination of the
parents or suertyes of such infants, before the child should be baptized, and
that the foresaid examination, ought to be ordained, as far as it might stand
with the edification of the English Church: (having thus said, they add
afterward) but if the parents or suertyes shall refuse to be ^xamined, or if
for the shortness of time, or for other Just cause, it can not be done, or, if,
when they do come they shall not seem to give satisfaction, to the Judgment
of him that examineth them, the infants whose parents or suertyes, appear to
be christians, and who do profess the christ^an religion, at the reading of
the Leiturgie of baptism, publicly before the Church, shall not for that
cause be sent away, without baptism.

The day following, Mr. Pagett asked me, whether I would rest in the writing of
the 5. Ministers? To whom I answered, the writers themselves do not require
this of me, and for ought I can see it would give them content, if an order be
made in consistory to put an end to this controversy. But if any marvel, why
I did not rest in that writing, I will tell the reasons, for by what right
could it be exacted or expected that I should rest in the writing, when first
the writers themselves professed that it was but their own private judgment.
Secondly this their private judgment was nakedly prepounded, without any proof
from the word of God, whose prerogative it is to be rested in, for its own
Authority. Thirdly such a subjection, is greater then may be yielded unto any
counsel, whether of classis, or Synods, and where it has been granted or
suffered, it has been the cause of many mischeifs in the Church, for thereby
the writings and decrees of men are made infallible, and equal with the word
of God, which is intolerable. Fourthly those reverend brethren, take the word
christian more largely then I, for they account all christians which profess
christian religion at the reading of the leiturgy of baptism publicly, before
the Church, though it be done only in one word, yea or by bowing the head or
body, when they say nothing, yea some of them go so far, that they hold
that the very offering of the child to Baptism, gives it a right thereunto,
though the parents be not christians, because (they say) it may be their
grandfather or great grandfather were christians, and another adds (if my
memory fayles not) that infants are holy in the root, if they be borne where
the Gospel is preached. But I take the name of christians, (in this question,)
in the same sense wherein the multitude of believers in Antiochia, were called
christians. Act. 11, 21, 26. So that I account them to be christians children
whose parents, at least one of them, in external profession, is within the
covenant. Genesis 17, 10. Faithful. Romans 4, 11. Called. Act. 2, 39. Joined to
some true Church: 1. Cor. 5.12. Because the seal of the covenant belongs only
to those in the covenant: nor can a man be judged to be in the covenant,
without faith, nor to have faith unless he be called, nor to be called, unles
he be taken off, from the world, and joined to the congregation of the
faithful: whereunto agree the divines of the dutch Church in their confessions,
and all the reformed Churches, in the harmony of confessions, read also, Spe.
contr. Pelag. Act. 28, 34. Kuchl. de baptism. These. 15. Dr. Ames cas. Con. cap.
27. to conclude, all divines agree in this.

As fot that which is objected, concerning particular Cas. con. An.
that which Beza writes in his Epistle to the ministers of Neocomum, or
Perkins, or Ames, in their cases, or the Professors of Leyden, in their Theses,
makes nothing against my opinion, if they be taken in a good sense, and made to
agree with the Pattern of wholesome words.

The consequence, which some object, for the avoiding

Concerning the troubles, which some object may arise one applied to me, as if
I should be judged to be the author o them.



Afterward, without the desire or consent of the consistory, the matter was
brought into the Classis, they confirmed the writing of the five Ministers, and
decreed that conformity thereunto should be required of me as a condition
whereupon I should be admitted: but I desired the reverend brethren earnestly;
not to bind me to that condition, seeing that, first, that practice, is
grounded upon no authority of Gods Word.

Secondly, nor upon any ca^^n of any Synod.

Thirdly, nor is required of any one to be chosen to the Pastoral office, as a
condition of their admittance, in any reformed Church.

4lie. This practice is not so absolute, or unlimited in any Churches, as it is
required of me.

5lie. It is propounded: as a greivance in many Dutch Churches, from whence
they would be delivered and freed if they could.

6lie. It is manifest that the noble and learned Polonian Ioannes Alasco Baron
and Superintendent of the Church of strangers in London, in the reign of Edw.
6th. Did obtain and that under the broad seal of England, liberty not to
baptize any such (as) against whom I except, which liberty your Dutch Church
do now enjoy under our most mighty King Charles, and is not in any thing
bound unto any of the canons of the Church of England.

Nevertheles Mr. Paget propounded to me in the consistory that I should
consider and conclude with my self, when I should give my last answer, whether
I would promise to baptize all infants, that should be presented to baptism,
refusing none, unto which question, the next week I gave (in the same place)
this answer, I dare not promise to baptize all that shall be offered thereunto:
Because the promise of doing it, is a confession that the thing is lawful to
be done, which I do not believe, yet, because I much prise your love, and
desire your peace, I will, if you desire it, continue assisting Mr. Paget a
convenient time, such as we shall agree upon, wherein I may make my self known
better to the Dutch Pastors, and obtain that, by their means, this question
may be laid aside, and your Church may obtain liberty therein, and I may more
fully understand the other Customs of the Dutch Church and the state of this
Church. This proposition was cheerfully embraced by the Elders, who consulted
about allowing a years time for this purpose, whereunto I hope, you, reverend
brethren, will assent, which if you do, it shall be my part to endeavor, that
neither you may reprent of your benevolence, nor the magistrates of their
indulgence, but that many thanks may be given both to you and them, both by
Mr. Paget, and by the English Church, by him, for the continuance of an
Assistant (such a one as he is) and by it for the preservation of peace amongst
them, which all desire, whereunto I pray God to give his blessing, and to enrich
you, reverend brethren, with the spirit of wisdom, Christian prudence, and the
fear of God, that you may well order this business. So prays.

John Davenport Englishman, Bachelou^, of divinity in Oxford. At present, 6
Stranger in Amsterdam.

LET the reader judge, what I could say less, or more mildly, being to give an
account of the passages in such a business? or what passage herein might justly
be thought offencive, considering the premises? And who would not have thought,
that the Classis would have approved of the desire of the Consistory, that a
years time should be granted me, for the ends aforesaid? yet on the contrary,
they seemed to be offended at the writing, threatened to complayn to the
Magistrates and after much debate, concluded, that I shall have but a months
time, in which if I do not answer, categori ally that I will conform to the
orders and customs of the dutch Church, and to this, particularly in question,
restinge in the judgment and resolution of the 5. dutch Preachers. and join
with the Classis, or voluntarily desist, they will complain to the Magistrates,
etc. what remained now to be done, but either voluntary desistance on my part,
or violent rejection, on theirs? in this month also Mr. Paget, both in public
and in private, showed his aversenes from my joining with him more then
formerly, wherefore to prevent disturbance in the Church, and further
disquietment of my self upon serious consideration and good advise, I
voluntarily desisted, and left the ensuing Coppie thereof in Lattin and English,
with the elders, with this liberty, either to show or conceal the same, as
they should judge it most expedient, entreating them in these words or in words
tending to this purpose, to express my resolution to the Classis.

CERTAIN INSTRVCTIONS delivered to the Elders of the English Church deputed,
which are to be propounded to the Pastors of the Dutch Church in Amsterdam.
FIrst, the reverend brethren, Pastors of the Dutch Church under the Classis of
Amsterdam, are to be entreated not to accuse Mr. Davenport, as the cause of
this trouble, that that particular question concerning baptism, between Mr.
Paget is brought unto them, which by his will, should have been privately ended
between themselves, and the brethren should not have been troubled, more then
was necessary with such questions, who have matters of greater moment to take
care for in their classical meeting.

Secondly let them be certified that, for many we ghtie reasons, Mr. Davenport
can not rest in that writing of the five brethren, whose judgment nevertheles,
he does very much esteem, concerning which matter (though he has much to say,
yet passing by other things) this alone he professes at present, that his
judgment is, that Dr. Ames, his opinion herein is most agreeable unto the word
of God, who in the 4th. book of his cases of conscience. Chap. 27. Concerning
baptism, (having affirmed that it is nescessary that the Infants to be
baptized be in the covenant, in external profession, and estimation, in their
parents, and that their is hope, that they shallbe instructed, and educated in
that covenant afterward, and that at least one of the parents is within the
Church, not out of it, does conclude, that their negligence can by no means
be excused, who do promiscuously admit to baptism whosoever is offered and
by whomsoever.

Thirdly, let them understand, that Mr. Pagets former delays in this business
of Mr. Davenports call, and his stifnes in that question concerning baptism,
without yealding any brotherly moderation to Mr. Davenport, so much as to bear
with him in so small a matter, (as this seemed both to them and him to be) and
to take upon himself that which he can do, (if occasion require, with full
persuasion,) but Mr. Davenport can not do with inward peace, and his rejecting
all Mr. Davenports endeavors for a peaceable composing and ending of this
difference privately between themselves, or with the counsel of the Elders of
his Church, and certain sharp and biting Sermons preached by him, of late,
and his private conferences with cert^ine persons do abundantly demonstrate,
that Mr. Paget has no desire that Mr. Davenport should be his Colleague, but
does endeavor the hinderance, rather then the furtherance thereof.

Lastly. Seeing peace and a greement between the Pastors does much conduce to
the edification of the Church, and seeing that (for the reasons aforesaid) there
is no hope of peace and christian concord between them, Mr. Davenport being
studious of the peace of the Church, his mind is wholly turned from taking upon
him the office of Pastor in the English Church, in this city, and does
voluntarily desist from his public ministry in this place, and does commend
unto God the brethren in every good work, and committ himself wholly to the
only wise father, to be disposed elsewhere, as it shall please his infinite
wisdom, to his own glory. April. 28. An. 1634.

THAT THESE INSTRVCTIONS were written by himself, and by himself delivered to
the Elders deputed, he witnesses, by subscribing his name, John Davenport.
THough I have deserved better usage at Mr. Pagets hands for almost 6. Months
assistance of him, and have done and suffered so much to preserve his peace,
and the Churches, which if I had not exercised much patience and industry,
would certainly have fallen from him, being over burd^n^d with the loss of so
many men, so much desired by the congregation, and other passages, which I will
for the present spare to mention, Mr. Paget not content with former Injuries
adds these following.

First he says and reports, that he has often desired to dispute or confer
with me about this point, but that I refused it: whereas he knows we were in
continual discourse about it diverse weeks, before others knew of the
difference, neither should it ever have been known, if any brotherly love had
wrought in him, or my advise and desire might have prevayled. In this time
there passed 2. or 3. serious conferences between us, wherein this point was
disputed, which I have in writing by me, nor did I cease till he gave over,
and said, that seeing his judgment could not prevayle with me, he would leave it
now to the dutch Preachers, to see if they could prevayle with me; from which I
disswad. earnestly, but in vain, at last he told me that he would speak with
me alone no more about those matters, from that time I have ceased to come to
his house.

Secondly, he reported that I am gone from my promise, for I said, I would rest
in the writing of the five Ministers, but now I will not, whereas he knows
that from the first to the last, himself never heard me speak any such word,
and the night before they went to the Magistrates for their consent to my call,
he apprehended my answer rightly, and told the Elders that he perceived that I
did not rest in that writing of the 5. Ministers, further then it made way for
an order to be made in the consistory, whereat he showed himself discontented.









a conditional consent to my call, and made my conformity to this custom of
promiscuous baptisinge, the condition thereof, so that now matters were in a
worse stat^ then before. It is apparent that if Mr. Paget was at that time
content to have me join with him, it was but conditionally, that I would do
whatsoever he, or the Classis would have me, upon which terms he is content to
have others, whom he has no cause to desire for colleagues with him.

But Mr. Davenport did purpose to yeald, when he

He saw the questions in London,

But Mr. Pa., did so much in that business, that he says, if

If ever he did desire me,

But it seems to me that he never did desire it, for these reasons. 1. bec.
before I came hither, when he heard I was to come over, he preached publicly
against my resigning up my place, which afterward he just^fied, when I related
to him the cause thereof, the carriage therein, and the consent of many worthy
devines, and of the congregation it self thereunto.

Secondly because several times he showed his dislike of my coming hither,
without his desire or consent in sending for me, though it is apparent that God
sent me hither at a needful time, when without me they would have been
destitute, he being unable to preach, or to come to the Church.

Thirdly, because he delayed the calling of me so long, that the Elders began
to be impatient of his delays, for what reasons he best knows.

4lie. because as soon as he found my Iudgm. differing in this point from his
practice, he discovered how little he desired me, by refusing all means of
accommodation, though by them the difference might have been hid, and
peremptorily resolving to have it brought into the Classis, though I told him
it would make matters worse, he pretended he might not do otherwise, though
some of the Dutch Preachers, said it might be best ended in the Consistory, and
wished it might be so, and approved of what I had said to Mr. Paget, that
matters would be worse else: For it is unlikly that the Classis would make an
order in favor of me, to condemn their own customs.

5lie. He pressed earnestly to have Mr. Balmford of the Hage, though he gave
him the same answer to the question which I had done before I came into these
parts: and since has nominated Mr. Roe of Flushing: though he in answer to a
letter which Mr. Paget sent to him concerning this matter professed himself to
be of my judgment.

6lie. Because he has always so much urged to have one that has lived some
years in this country, and has hitherto opposed diverse worthy men that have
come immediately from England, my hope is at an end, and I must cease. John
Davenport.

THE GREIVANCES, AND COMplaints of the burdened and oppressed members of the
English Church in Amsterdam. Anno 1634. The 18 of October.
Whereas offense has been taken, that some of us whose names are
underwritten, did absent our selves, from the Lords Supper the last communion
day, we thought good to give the reason of our absences in writeing, with our
names subscribed thereunto, being willing to bear our blame, if it shall be
proved to us out of the Word of God, that we have sinned in so doing; for
which we confess that the cause thereof was no contempt or slight account of
the Lords Supper, the free enjoyment whereof in a right manner, we account an
especial privilege, and whatsoever hinders us from it a very grievous
affliction.

In which respect we are the more deeply, and inwardly greeved with the sinful
proceedings of Mr. John Paget, which deprived us of so great a comfort at that
time, for howsoever we do not think that the personal sin of any man can
defile the ordinance of God to us, if we be meet and fit to partake thereof,
yet we know that a man may make himself partake of other men's sins, by
neglecting his duty in seeking reformation, and so communicate unworthily.

Wherefore having waited that something should have been done by others in
this case, but in vain, we durst not approach to the Lords table till we had
in some measure discharged our duties in this particular, which we thought we
should have a fit opportunity to do, when we should be called upon, to show
the reasons of our absence at that time, which formerly we could not obtain.

We conceive that Mr. Paget does administer the Lords supper to us by virtue of
his pastoral office whereunto he has been called in this Church. And that
amongst communicants, especially Pastor and People, there should be an union
in christian love and affection, and communion in all the fruits thereof, one
whereof is seasonable admonition, which in case of public scandal and
offense, must be public, as we conceive it is in this present case, which we
would have borne, if the injury had been but personal to any one of us, and
covered, if it had been a mere infirmity, or but a private offense, but
seeing the matter is a public injury, and obstinately persisted in, to the
great dishonor of God and hurt of the Church, we are not to be silent any
longer, but by these presents do testify to all men, principally to you the
Elders of this Church, that howsoever Mr. Paget bears the name; fills up
the place, and does many works of a Pastor amongst us, yet he does not behave
himself as becomes a Pastor, neither in government nor doctrine toward us.

That he does it not in government will appear in these particulars, first he
depriveth the Church of that liberty and power which Christ has given it, in
the free choice of their Pastor, contrary to, Act. 6, 3. and 14.23.

This we prove by his rejecting, and opposing of the most worthy servants of
God (who came out of England for the same cause he did) whom the Church with
one consent desired, as Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Davenport of later times, and also
Mr. Parker, Dr. Ames, Mr. Forbes, Mr. Peter's, etc.

Secondly by his pressing others upon the congregation, abuseing his interest
in the Magistrate and Classis to that purpose, to the unspeakeable injurye and
grief of the Church, in which course he has prevailed so far, as to procure
that none of our own nation that com immediately from England, though never so
fit and able, should be admitted, but we must be forced to take one that can
speak Dutch, and one in this country, though the Lord has fought against his
course hitherto by the great unfitnes of those who have preached here by his
nomination or consent in sending for.

Secondly, Mr. Paget depriveth the Elders of their power in Government, for the
good of the Church, which will thus appear.

First when matters have been referred to the Elders to determine, he has
rejected their counsel, and opinions, sometimes accusing them of partiality,
sometimes of insufficiency to judge, when he thought they would conclude
against his purpose.

Secondly, when the Elders have declared their judgment with one consent, he
has protested against it, and carried it to the Classis, though the matter has
been such, as, seeing it might have been ended in the consistory, ought not to
have been brought thither, as,

First, when the consistory agreed that an order should be made, that all that
were not members of this Church should make themselves known to Mr. Davenport,
that he might be satisfied concerning them, before they should present their
children to Baptism in this Church, which order would have ended the
difference between them, if it had taken place, but Mr. Paget protested
against it.

Sec. When the Elders agreed that Mr. Dav. should have a years time to go on
in assisting Mr. Paget in preaching, to see if in that time he could procure
that this question might be laid down, and might be fully informed of all the
orders and customs of the Dutch Church, whereunto Mr. Paget would bind him to
conform, as a condition whereupon he was to be admitted to the pastoral office
in this Church, Mr. Pa. opposed this, as if the consistory could not have power
to do so much without the Classis, and many the like things might be brought;
as that he would not let Mr. Wells Preach whom he professed he had nothing
against, without the leave of the Classis, etc.

Thirdly, he subjecteth this Church under an undue power of the Classis, which
he brings it under, merely for his own ends, as we conceive, without any
warrant from the Word of God, as thus appears.

First he gives them power, to serve his ends in keeping-off any Minister,
whom he would have kept out, for causes pretended by himself, (though he
would have had them that to this day hold the same opinion) though such as he
keeps out be known to be most eminent, able, and Godly men, and such as
abhor all heresye, and Scisme; which he has caused the Classis to execute
upon Mr. Hooker and Mr. Davenport, which we are confident they would not have
done but by Mr. Pagets suggestion to the great grief and hurt of the members
of this Church.

Secondly, he gives them power to make laws, and orders whereunto whosoever
will be minister of this Church must submit, as to observe all the orders and
customs of the Dutch Church, though some of them are such as the Ministers of
the dutch, would cast-off if the vastnes of their Church (being but one in so
great a city) did not force them thereunto; of which the promiscuous baptizing
of all that are brought without difference, or knowledge of them, is one; for
which Mr. Davenport is kept out of this Church, though there is no need of
tying the Minister of this Church to that custom, the congregation being
small, and who can think that they would tie us so strictly to all their
orders, when one of them said to Mr. Paget. (on occasion of his complaint in
the Classis of Mr. Davenport not conforming to their orders) why? yuur self do
not conform to all our orders; and certainly they would all have rejoiced, to
have heard that all our differences had been ended amongst our selves; yea he
has of late as we heard, required of the Elders to make an order in the
consistory, that whatsoever Minister shall hereafter be called to this Church,
should conform to a writing which he got 5. Dutch Ministers to make in his
own house about that question, and sent it to Mr. Davenport, which we think
no Godly man will absolutely be bound unto.

Thirdly, he violently, without consent of any of the consistory, brings
matters from thence, to the Classis, when he can not have his will injustly
satisfied, and so destroys the power of the Church utterly; often answering,
they can do nothing in these cases without the classis, of which we reverently
esteem for Counsel and advice in all difficult matters, that can not be ended
amongst our Consistory.

Fourthly under pretense of asking and taking advise of the Classis, he
subjected the Church under their authority and power, as he calls it, tho the
Church never acknowledged any such power to be due, as the scriptures in any
place gives not to such a company of Ministers, nor as becomes any except the
Apostles that could not err, to have.

Fourthly he does not the duty of a Pastor to the particular members of this
congregation, we prove after this manner.

First, when Godly persons make their complaint of those that walk disorderly,
and that the censures are not executed against offenders, they that seek the
good of the Church are checked and discouraged by him.

Secondly, when some have been suspended from the Lords table, they may live
many years, and dye in their sins, before he looks after them to reclaim
them.

Thirdly the visiting of the members at their houses is so far neglected,
that not only diverse members never were once visited by him in diverse years,
but also the visitation of the members against the sacrament is wholly left off.

Fourthly whereas it was desired, that the weekly sermons on wendesdayes, and
those usual before the Sacrament, should again be begun, and assistance has
been offered him therein without his charge at least, he neither would perform
them himself, nor suffer any other we could get to do it, though the Eldership
agreed it should be so.

Secondly for his Doctrine, we have much against it. But to let pass his
slight Sermons, which be many for a man of his abilityes.

First his self preaching, and misapplying of holy truths, which has been
done with such bitterness of late, that some of us are discouraged, from hearing
him, and all of us are sent home with sad hearts, when those of his side are
made glad, and insult, who pretend to cleave to Mr. Paget, out of their enmity
against us, and those ways of Godliness wherein we desire and endeavor to walk.

Secondly for his taking of text of purpose, fit to stir up contention, as
of late, that of the 5. of Esaias about the vinyard upon which five first verses
he has taught a great while, which with what bitterness he has taught against
the Godly, many Passages, and members will witness, and insinuating things
against us, that we never thought of, making us vile before the whole
congregation, and to be insulted over by unworthy terms, from those of his
side: to our great grief and continual vexation, and 10. days since strain^d
the 5. verse which tells what God will do to his vineyned, and spoke altogether
of men's disorders in the Church.

Thirdly he has preached very bitterly and provokingly, against private
meetings, not only long since, but of late, has done very unjustly, and
manifest injurye to Mr. Davenport whom he (plainly enough) reproached in his
pulpit, about the meeting of diverse to hear him open the grounds of religion,
in Catechysing the family where he lived, every Lords day after the sermons
were ended, at 5. a Clock at night; where many received much edification, which
he has injuriously now deprived us of, to the great grief of many Godly souls.

Fourthly about the question between him and Mr. Davenport, for the baptising
of all Children that are brought, though the parents were altogether unknown,
he very reproachfully upbraided Mr. Davenport of error, and gave out that he
would answer him in the pulpit, and when the day came wherein we expected the
performance of his promise, he avoided the question between them, and fell
upon the Anabaptists and Brownists, from both which Mr. Davenport differs in
that point, as he has told him formerly, and offered him to declare in public
how far he differed from them therein, is this brotherly dealing, thus to use
a minister who has so loveingly assisted him and us, in our necessity? and to
traduce him falsely and injuriously in this manner, and all to the end that he
may seem to justify his keeping of him out of the Church, whom the Church,
has so much desired, and bewaileth that they are deprived of him, which the
Classis at first consented unto (though they knew the difference) till Mr.
Paget brought it again to them by force, to have them make an order to
condemn their own practice, and therefore we conceive Mr. Paget the only
cause we are deprived of such heavenly means for our Edification.

Now we pray you our Elders in the fear of God to take these our complaints to
heart, and to give your judgment w^ether it be not fit, and more then time,
that some lawful course be taken for the redress of these grievances, and to
consult which way, it may best be done; that so in that great day of the Lord
you may give up yours account, for the discharge of this Trust committed unto
you, with joy, which if you shall upon this our solemn complaint neglect to
do, we do protest before the Lord, and his Church, to be wholly guiltles of
all these evils, having done our utmost endeavor for the redress of the
same; and the sin thereof, to lay upon Mr. John Paget our present pastor, as
the principal cause of all these evils, and next upon your selves, who have
the chiefest authority in the Church, for the redress of all evils.

So beseeching the Lord to bless our indevours, and desireing you to cause
these our complaints to rest upon record in the register of this Church, that
after times may see how these evils have been witnessed against, we subscribe
our names as follows, desireing also, that place may be left in the register
for all others, that hearing hereof, shall desire to have their names
underwritten, for the more full witness of these things, because we have not
gathered many names as we could have done of many, (because you might have
nothing to take offense at that way) which we conceive would gladly have joined
with us herein, not only of men but of many Godly women also, that are of the
same mind with us.

W. B. N. I. I. C. I. P. I. St. L. C. T. F. H. P. A. H.
We who last time, did not with our brethren above written abstain from the
Lords Supper, yet desire to join as one with them in these complaints, and
Grievances, and therefore have underwritten our names as follow.

S. O. D. B. T. A. R. P. I. H. G. B. E. P. L. D. T. P. E. S. F. D. P. L.
After these greivances were given unto the consistory, diverse members more
hearing thereof, desired to join in the same and subscribed their names also.

Now for conclusion, since the case so stands as is here reported, under such
plentiful testimony, what remains, but that every one that would approve
himself to God (if redress cannot be had) labor to keep himself pure, and not
partake of others sins, by continuing the servants of men, against the power
and liberty purchased by Christ for his Church of saints, knowing the way of
the upright is to depart from evil. Stand fast therefore, quitt you like men,
in striving for the maintenance of this part of the faith, and the Lord will be
with you if you will be faithful unto him.


