To the most noble, famous, renowned, invincible and victorious Realm of
England: Be all flourishing felicity, happy prosperity, and matchles
tranquillity long to endure.
TO manifest the poor good will and dutiful love I owe thee (O famous and
renowned England). for that I perceive thine extremities are dangerous, I have
presumed (though more presumptuous I confess then skillful) to present thee with
this potion, compounded of gentle persuasions and charitable exhortations,
which although it be somewhat bitter and unpleasant to thy taste, yet doubt I
not (it being taken as it ought) but in operation it will effect thine
amendment, or at least expel (in some measure) the mischeeuous humors that
causes thy drowsinesse, and procures thy danger. And that it may so do: I
will not cease to pray unto him that neither slumbreth nor sleeps, but
watches over thee vigilantlie for thy peace and safety, who is al in all, and
thy God for ever.

He that is always pressed to die to shield thee from danger: John Dauies:

A private man's potion, for the health of England.
Now Gallants to you, Job, 22, 13 14, and 24, 1 2, 34, 19 Psalm, 10, 4, 13,
and 14, 1, and 53. 1, and 73. 11.
that say in your hearts there is no God: and so consequently no Heaven, no
hell, no resurrection, no judgment. And why? because (say you) we have the
world at will: we give our eyes their desires, our bodies their appetites, and
our lusts their delights, and yet we wallowe in all worldly prosperity, yea
we flourish like the laurel, our leaves are always Not to be tempted and
exercised with afflictions, is rather an argument of reprobacie, then a
testimony of Gods favor. For the cross of affliction is laid on all true
believers. Gen, 4 8. and 27, 41, and 37, 18 Exodus 2, 15 1 king. 19, 2, Matthew.
10, 9 10, 16, and 24 9. Mark, 13, 9, 13. Luke. 14, 26 and 21, 17 John, 15, 18
and 16, 2 Acts. 9, 14 Gal. 4, 26 1 These. 3, 3, 4 2 Timo, 3. 12 1 Pete, 4, 22
green and fade not. We are not pinched by poverty, crucified with cares,
martyred with miseries, tormented with troubles and crossed with mishaps as are
these precize livers. What need we fear the vengeance and judgments of God so
terriblie thundered forth against us by our preachers or rather praters, when
as our minds are quiet, our hearts merry, our thoughts pleasant, and none of all
those calamities befall us nor ours. What reason have we then to fear their
menacings, or believe their saiengs, when as they rear up their voices aloft
and say the kingdom ofheauen is at hand, and the day of judgment draws
near. Tush so said the prophets and Apostles many hundred years since, and
yet has no such matter come to pass, and therefore, those were nothing else
but the imaginations of a vain thing, their prophesies fantasies, their
preaching leasings, and their religion most ridiculous. Therefore we will
fill up the measure of our earthly happiness, with all that may content our
humors, and live in all carnal liberty, for upon earth alone is man's chief
felicity. Oye Atheistical reprobates, what manner of reasonings and obserua^ces
are these? What infernal fury bewitcheth you that you thus har den your
hearts to persevere in your wickedness? know you whom ye pro uoke, by this
your curssed conclusions? or know ye whom ye incense by these your rebellions?
If you do not, or at least will not: then know ye, and weet ye well it is the
holy one of Israel, from Exodus 29. 45 Deuteronomy, 10, 15 Psalm. 148
whose bosom al beginnings took their beginning. It is a majesty unspeakable,
mighty in power, whose name is Jehovah: dreadful, wonderful, and Gen, 1
very much to be feared. He it is that by his only word created heaven and
earth, with all that is in them contained, and with half a word can destroy the
same again. He whose breath shakes the mountains Esaie, 66, 1 Matthew, 8, 26
and 14, 32
and makes the foundations of the earth to tremble and quake. He whose seat is
in the glorious heavens, and whose foot stool is the round world. He that
stilleth the raging of the seas, and rebukes the winds when they arise. He
at whose presence the earth melts like Dan, 7, 9, 10
wax, as not being able to endure the brightness of his countenance. He whose
throne is a flame of fire, his cha riots burning fire, from his face issues a
flame of fire, a thousand thousand do serve him and ten thousand hundred
thousands do assiste him. He that dwells in inaccessible light, which 1 Timothy, 6, 16
no mortal man can abide to behold. He unto the least spark of whose
glorious majesty, the majesty and glory of all the kings of the earth may not
be compared. He whom angels praise, dominations adore, the powers do tremble
and the highest heavens together with the Cherubins and Seraphins do
vncessantlie lawd and magnify. a Iere, 23, 24 Ecclus. 16 verse, 17, 18
He whose power replenisheth heaven and earth, and from whose knowledge nothing
can be concealed. Mat, 19, 26 Luke, 18, 27 Mark, 10, 27
He with whom all things are possible, and whose power no violence is able
to resist. Deu. 32, 39
He that only afflicts and heals, that kills and giuetl, life again. 1
Kings. 18 ve. 36, 37, 38
He that sent fire to consume Eliahs sacrifice, to declare himself thereby to
be the only God of gods, and Lord of lords. Isa. 4 2, 8 and 45, 23
He unto whom al knees do bow both in heaven and earth, and unto whom alone
belongs all honor and glory. 2 Chro, 36 verse 23 Est. 16, 16
He that is the preserver and guider of kings and kingdoms, and establishes
or subuerteth them at his good pleasure. He upon whose virtue, Matt, 10, 26
Acts, 17, 18
power and providence all the creatures in heaven and earth do wholelie
depend, and by whom alone they live, and have their being, and without who^
they would all utterly perish. He at whose commandment the sun do Gene.
1, 14 15, 16. 17, 18
arise to manifest the day, the moon and stars do lighten the night, and
never fail nor be weary in their watch. He from whom every good and perfect
Genc. 33. 11 James. 1, 17
gift proceeds, who is the father oflightes. He that ofhis mere love Genes.
1, 26
and unspeakable good will, bestowed upon thee thy creation, making thee of
nothing, like unto himself, brethed into thee a living soul, capable of
imortalitie, and created all the creatures under heaven, besides for thy only
use and service, and putting them al under Mat. 27, 46 47, 48, 49 Romans. 5. 8
1 Cor. 15, 3 2 Cor, 5, 15 1 Peter, 3, 18
thy subjection. He yt of his unutterable goodness and mere mercy, laid the
torments due to thee, upon the shoulders of his dear and only son, which were
so great and grievous, that the agony thereof, constrained his blessed Exodus,
14, 21 22, 23, 27, 28 29
body to sweat blood and water, for thy sake: He that gave the children of
Israel passage through the red sea, as upon dry land, and enclosed Pharao and
all his host in the bowelles thereof. He that speaks the word and it Gen, 1
is done: and as he will so comes every thing to pass. He that opened Gen,
6, 17, and 7, 10
the windows ofheauen and drowned the world, and preserved Noah with his family
to replenish the same again: He that rebukes kings, for the love of Dan, 6,
16, and 14, 16, to 31
his chosen, making them to tread upon the Lions without fear or danger. He
that stayed the sun in the midst of the Joshua, 10, 12
firmament at the desire of Iosuah, and gave him victory over his enemies
before the setting thereof. He on whom the eyes of all living things do
wait, and he gives them food in due season. He at whose presence the very
angels do tremble, and all the powers ofheauen do praise incessantly. He unto
whom the Cherubins and Seraphins continually do cry, holy, holy, holy, Lord
God ofSabaoth. He in whose land the saints evermore do sing, and whose only
sight is their inconceivable solace. He that confounds the devises of the
proud, Gen, 11, 9
and scatters the imaginations of their hearts. He that bruseth his enemies
Psalm, 2, 9
with a rod ofIron, and breaks them in pieces like a potters vessel. He
whose outstretched arm turns the wheel of providence, and keeps all
things in a wonderful order. He that Exodus, 8, 2. 3 4, 5, and 9, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
and 10, 5 6 Dan, 4, 3, 4
did many wonders in the land of Egypt and showed many mercies in the land of
promise. He that humbled Nabuchadnezar, for all his pride and plagued him right
sore for all his tyranny. He Gen, 19, 24
that rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomor, and preserved Lot
from the fiery storm. He that says ofhimselfe I am Alpha and Omega, Revel, 1,
8, 11, 17, and 21, 6 1, Cor, 8, 6 Ephesians, 4, 6
and he that is father of all, above all, through all in all, yea all in all,
and the same for ever. He: yea even he it is (O earth and ashes) whom thou
do provoke by thy lewd inventions and incense to wrath thy licentious
living, and careless security. O crooked and perverse generation! do ye
make the merciful forbearance of so great a majesty, an occasion of sin, will
you for that he is full of long suffering (and not as a mortal prince revenge
by death the least injury offered) more and more offend him. Will you for that
the king prorogeth his great session of parliament, for your only good and
gain (because he would have you repent and not die in your sins) conclude
there shall be no such session, yes sure there shall or else the Matt. 24, 30
31, 39
son of God is a liar, which to think were in the highest degree, most
blasphemous, etc. Therefore omitting all that, which might procure you to love
him, where is become the natural care you have to avoid punishment, which might
provoke you to fear him, if not as children yet as servants or subjects.
Think you (O ye obdurate Libertines) that because GOD (if you think there is
a God) is merciful, he is not therefore just, O know (ye athists) his justice
is as great as his mercy, and either of both as great as himself. For as soon
can he cease to be God as cease to be just, justice and mercy are properties
peculiar to him and deny them by your words, and deny him, as (to your greater
damnation) you do by your works. If this be true (as most damnable it were
to doubt thereof) what fury then so bewitcheth you, that you can cast off all
care, yea and yt natural fear, whereof the very brute beasts are not
deprived. And with such greedy appetites, from day to day seek to fill up the
measure of your iniquity to the brim. As though indeed there were no God, or as
though there were no future reckoning to be made. As though you could keep your
transgressions from his knowledge, or as the eye maker, did not or could not se
your abominations: he both knows them and sees them (though with greef)
and will in the day that you so doubt of, and least suspect, pay you home
with a vengeance (if you prevent it not by your speedy repentance) which day
though it has pleased him to delaie for the trial of his chosen, yet for
their Matt, 24, 22,
sakes he will shorten it, and he that is coming will come, and bring his
reward with him: Most joyful to the godly, but woeful to the contrary. And
therefore ye wanton worldlings, whose eyes do as it were swell with fatness
ofyour abundance, and surfeit with all worldly delight: call to mind your
mortality: abandon your iniquity: forsake your infidelity, and so remember
Gods mercy, that you forget not his justice, being his property, which is a
depth without bottom, it glorifies the godly, and confounds the wicked. Trust
not unto thy riches, and say not Eccle, 5, 1, 3. 4, 6. 7, and 7. 3
I have enough for my life, for it shall not help in the time of vengeance and
indignation, and say not I have sinned and what evil has come unto me? for the
almighty is a patient rewarder, for he will not leave thee unpunished. Say
not the mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins, for mercy
and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes down upon sinners, make
no long tarrieng to turn unto the Lord, and put not offfrom day to day, for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shalt be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance. Sow not upon
the furrows of unrighteousness, least thou reap them seven fold. Wisd. 2, 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 10.


Say not with your selves, our lives are short and tedious, and in the death
of a man is no recovery, neither was any known that has returned from the
grave.

For we are borne at all adventure and we shall be hereafter as though we had
never bin: for the breath is a smoke in our nostrils, and the words as a spark
raised out of our hearts.

Which being extinguished the body is returned into ashes, and the spirit
vanishes as the soft air.

Our life shall pass away as the trace of a cloud, and come to naught as the
mist that is driven away with the beams os the sun, and cast down with the
heat thereof. Our name also shall be forgotten in time, and no man shall have
our works in remembrance.

For our time is as a shadow that passes away, and after our end there is no
returning for it is fast sealed so that no man comes again.

Come therefore let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, and let us
cheerefullie use the creatures as in youth.

Let vsfill our selves with costly wine and ointments, and let not the flower
of youth pass by us.

Let us crown our selves with rose buddes, before they be withered.

Let us all be partakers of our wantonness, let us leave some token of our
pleasure in every place, for that is our portion and this is our lot.

Therefore let us oppress the poor that is righteous, let us not spare the
widow, nor reverence the white hears of the aged. O debate not on this wise
with your selves, but fly from evil and do good: for God regards thee
deeds of every man.

Call to remembrance the perilous times wherein we live, and the uncertainty
oflife. How near Gods judge ments (if not his general judgment) approaches
us. If we with a sound discretion consider it, we shall find great cause to
fear it, and prepare our selves to preueut it. Our lives (as by hourlie
experience we prove) hangs by a slender twine by reason of our mortality
incident to al men generally. But our lives hangs by a weaker twine,
incident to us in England (as our case now stands) especially. Which are
compulsionsforcible enough to draw reasonable men to integrity of life and holy
conversation. Yet fares it with us as with senseless pictures, that have eyes
and see not, ears and hear not, heads and conceive not, the iminent dangers
hanging over our heads. We harden our hearts with Pharao against the God of
Israel, they are not touched with threats, nor terrified with torments, till
they be inflicted upon us, as now they are too too near us.

Now the xxxiii. Sun most happily inuironeth in the firmament, since our
blessed deliverance out of the power and grievous thraldom ofPharao and Egypt.
The gouernesse of this thrice happy land (for so it may be said in regard of
such a gouernesse) being not only the instrument of our so happy deliverance:
but also the sole and absolute cause (under God) of this our matchless
tranquillity. Our God by her as by one for whose sake we (beyond the measures
of the graces of our brethren and the prosperous course of our fathers) enjoy
this peace and plenty, has in the abundance ofhis ineffable grace and mercy,
continued and prospered the same upon us hitherto. And what other blessings he
has like the dew ofHermon distilled upon our Sion (as that of the free passage
of the gospel and infinite others) the whole world can witness, and we to our
unspeakable consolation have experienced. He has not left us an Anarchy, and
hedlesse dissolution, as to the Canibals a most preposterous and misshapen
government, streming with blood, and smoking with the mist of palpable error
and ignorance. Nor as to the Antichristians, seared in the forehead with the
mark of the image of the great whore of Babylon. Not a barbarous wast and
heathenish estate, as to the Tartarian herds of curssed Cham and unto the
miserable inhabitants of Meschech, or to the ravenous swarms and turbulent
hosts of Tubal-gog. But contrariwise he has by her led us forth as a
flock of sheep, and fed us upon the pastures of his own Gosen, giving unto
us for wars, peace: for barbarous brutishness, humanity and gentleness: for
gross ignorance, pro found knowledge: for painted superstition, sincere
religion: for scarsitie, plenty: for vnprouidence, civil policy: for iarring
discord, uniformity and concord: making us to dwell in safety under her
gracious government as under the wings of his Almighty protection.

In these her blessed years has been seen, the golden days of her father
David, and the no less prosperous then peaceable regiment of Solomon. The
earth has yielded her fruitfulnes, the sea her store, the clouds their drops,
the heavens their oriental beauty, the sun his heat, the year his increase,
the val lies covered with corn, the furrows moistened, the woods and groves
crowned with joy. The mountains singe with mirth, our folds replenished with
cattle, our sons and daughters flourish like the ceadars of Libanus, our
young men see visions, and our old men prophecy. Whilst the sword of the
destroier has smitten the neighbor nations, from the first borne sitting upon
the princes throne: unto the slave grinding at the handmill, whilst the firm
lands adjacent have been overflowed by the rage of the seas, our Island have
dwelt in peace, sent her ships into Ophir for gold, and prepared her Navy
against the enemy. This worthy instrument then of Gods goodness, and express
image of his majesty, have been and yet is (as erst I said) the only organ
and instrumental cause of all this our fore remembered felicity; and who is also
the very breath of our nostrils, the light of our eyes, and the total sum
of our welfare. If then it pleased God in the severity of his just conceived
displeasure against our sins, to call her from this her earthly Monarchy,
to rain with him in his heavenly Hiarchie: what day I pray you might the day
ofhir departure be called? might it not be properly said to be a day
ofiudgment? a day of dole, of wrath and of vengeance? It might well be so
called, for the effects procee ding from it. For if our lives and livings, and
consequently all that here content or delight us, depend upon hirs (as
truly they do) that precious life (which I pray God long maintain) giving
place to nature, as once needs it must. For Death is the way of all flesh.
Tell me I pray you, in what predicament were we, where were then our lives,
our liuinges, our pleasures and contentments? where is then our tranquillity,
peace and plenty? where is the government become, whereby the nobles were kept
within their compass and the commons slept in safety. Where is then the fear
of maiestracie and the regard of our prelacie. Where is beecome the due
execution of wholesome laws and statutes and the force of our statutes whereby
the commonweal did flourish like a Palm and spread her branches over the
whole body of this realm. Where is the knowledge of mine and thine: and
lastelie where is the due administration of Gods word and sacraments whereby
he was glorified and our consciences comforted: are they not all to be feared
(except God be now merciful then we deseru) last the violence of foreign
invasion, or the sword of domestical dissension should cut them of, and quite
subvert them. Well wantons well, I fear your comicall progressions would be
then changed into tragical conclusions. For my own part so my wish might be
with Gods good will) I would I might not live to see that day, though I am
persuaded not only my life but many thousands more would be even determined
with that day, that yet notwithstanding (with long desires) expect that day.
But foul befall (as daily do befall) such wild bores of the forest, that
would so feign (if so they durst without danger) spoil this vinyard which
Gods own right hand has planted, confounded be they and put to shame
together with as many as have evil will unto our peace. But how far these
callamities are from our considerations, our perseuerant pride, and perverse
behauiours daily do manifest which the more God blesses us with earthly
benedictions, the more freely we run into our own destructions. How true it
is, our manifold rebellions against God and his anointed daily do testify:
Such and so great is man's improuidence, that he is only carried away with the
prosperity of the time present, but ye calamities of the time fu ture, he
never thinks upon, until their sudden approach, admitting no time for
repentance) drowneth the simple secure liver in many seas of miseries: even so
were the days ofNoah, and such were the wicked ones in those days, they did
wallow in the mire of sin and iniquity, as we do now: they eat and drank and
made merry as we do now, they bought and sold, and chopped and changed as we do
now, they had prosperity, peace and plenty, as we have now, they abused and
mispended the same as we do now: they were unthankful for those benefits
and blessings as we are now: they provoked God by their licencious living: as
we do now, they were disobedient to his word as we are now: they mocked his
prophets, and believed not their threatenings, as we do now: they hardened their
hearts, to effect their misdeeds as we do now: they lived secure and careless
as we do now, and all was hushed as it is now: and Gods vengeance came upon
them vna wares, as it may do now. O therefore think upon these and such like
examples mentioned in the mirror of truth, Gods blessed book and true
chronicle, and so think upon them, that we may profit by them: that is, to
learn by their harms to avoid the like: for though Gods plagues be long in
coming (by reason ofhis great patience) yet when they come, they come with a
witness, they come with a terror, they fall with a mighty and insupportable
weight, yea with such a weight as on whom soever they light, they will grind to
powder.

Much more might be here incerted, touching the severity of Gods justice, and
our sinful carelessnesse. But what hope may I conceive, that my persuasions
(being a man as corrupt as the corruptest) should prevail with the wantons
of this world, when neither the powerful persuasions, sweet promises, sugared
allurementes, nor thundering threats, which (with an heavenly eloquence) are
written (by the spirit of truth) in the sacred bible, together with so many
learned and godly treatises, all tending to this purpose now extant cannot
prevail: no not in the least measure, with this froward generation: How be it
though there be nothing more common then books of such importance, yet have
I thought it convenient to publish this brief, bearing my self in hand, it
shall rather amend many then offend any: except such as unto whom Christ
himself is become an offense. For such as I covet not to please, so care I
not to displease.

A contemplation full of heaviness of mind and anguish ofspirit it is, to
consider the hugeness of the iniquity of this present age, the weight whereof
makes the earth to groan as not being able to sustain so intolerable a
burden. It compelles every man regenerate and truly mortified to say. O that
my soul had wings like a dove, that I might fly away from this wicked and
stiffnecked people, and escape the vengeance to come, this people of
uncircumcised hearts and ears, whose consciences are seared with hot irons,
Phil, 3, 19,
whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, and whose ends are
damnation. They do as it were oppose themselves against the Lord of hosts, and
with might and maine persecute his saints. They are so fraught with pride,
lust, envy, and gaullie bitterness, and so full of mischief, and devilish
practices, that they offer violence to their own souls, in effecting their
abominations, and stand at open defiance with heaven, the sempiternall seat
of the highest. Their vineyard is the vinyard Deu. 32, 32, 33
ofSodomites, their grape is the grape of gall and their clusters of grapes are
most bitter. Their wine is the gall of Dragons, and the poison of Cockatrices
incurable. They put their Esaie. 59, 4, 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11
trust in things of nothing, and do talk vanities, they conceive labor and
bring forth iniquity: they break the eggs of serpents, and weaue the
webbes of spiders: he that eats their eggs dies the death, and that which
is hatched thence is a Cockatrice: their webs make not cloth to cover them, for
that their works are al unprofitable, and the work of iniquity in their
hands. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent
blood, their thoughts are wicked thoughts, desolation and destruction is in
their paths.

The way of peace they know not, and there is none equity in their goinges,
they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goes therein shall not know
peace.

Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does justice come near unto
us, we wait for light but lo it is darkness for bright nesse, but we walk in
darkness.

We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as onewithouteies, we
stumble at the noone day as in the twilight, we are in solitary places as dead
men.

Weroare all like Bears and mourn like Doves, we lookefor equity but there
is none, for health but it is far from us.

But O sacred Sovereign, and my peereles Princess, in whom, for whom and by
whom we enjoy these blessed benefits of peace and plenty, with infinite
others. Let it please thy Royal Majesty, of thy superaboundant clemency, to
take in good worth these few aduisementes fent from the senter of a poor
subjects heart, that reuerenceth thee (as it is most bounden) in greater
measure then words can posfibly express. And albeit the rare and admirable
discretion, which is always resident in thee (as in the local place, where it
of right ought to be) together with the most sound advise of those prudent
Senators, which are of the council, can and do foresee with great
circumspection, the imminent dangers ensuing thy absence and cut off (with such
due regard as well befeemeth them) al occasions that may prejudice thy sacred
life, crown, and dignity: yet o yet give thy poor subject leave (with all
humility prostrate upon my face, I beseech thee) to mind thee of that, which
(in respect of earthly welfare is our summum bonum: namely, thy safety whereon
depends the safety, lives, and liuinges of so many thousands. If then the
head cannot perish, but the members must needs come to naught, and that the
loss of thy dear life, is the catastrophe of ours. It stands me in hand to
the uttermost of my power, to practice by all possible endeavors (though
conscience compel me not) all that might tend to the preservation of the same.
And therefore I beseech your majesty, in the bowels of a dutiful and loyal
heart, to restrain the access to your princely presence, of such as may any
way be suspected of disloialtie, be they high or low, or of what condition
soever. and although my request seem unto your great wisdom needless in
respect of your own proper care, yet have I some reason to mind you of this,
for that it is well known you have been heretofore (with your merciful leave
be it spoken) too too affable unto the bloudthirstie, and ouerbold with such
as have intended your destruction and ours, which although it be a gracious
disposition in you: yet to us your poor subjects it is no small danger, and
although ye innoce^cie of your heart make it void of fear and suspicion, how
beit in regard of our sins, and Gods justice, be yet the more circumspect.

And albeit (by reason of human ignorance) you cannot understand the
thoughts of their hearts, that intend mischief, yet with heedefull regard
(the power which have hitherto preserved you pulling their maskes from their
faces, and discovering their hands) you shall apparently perceive their
treacherous countenances, and plainly descrie their butcherly hands imbrued
with blood, and all outrageous villainy. Take heed therefore good Queen
again I say, take heed, give not the unknown or suspected opportunity,
least the Lord in the heat of his wrath now justly kindled by reason of our
sins, deprive us of you, to the end he may be avenged on us as on a people
unworthy of so praise-worthie a princess, and so pay us home with such
insuiug plagues and calamities as since the calling home of our grand ancestors
to humaino civility, was never seen in our la^d. Therefore o sweet comfort of
Israel, as much as in you lies, prevent these miseries if not so much for
your own sake, yet for your poor subjects, and the gospel sake, that we
may live in safety, and long enjoy this thrice happy tranquillity.

ANd you Ladies of honor and others, that live under her obeisance, speak
honorably, and think reverently of her: for whose sake and by whose means
you are so highly honored and reverenced. Backbite her not, no not in your
privy chambers: for the doore-cheekes of those clossets will blab it abroad, to
your perpetual shame and deserved destruction. Please God and this renowned
Paragon, by your unfeigned obedience: so shall you prevent these calamities, we
shall live in safety, and enjoy this blessed peace and tranquillity.

ANd you o (noble Lords of England) let neither the cause of conscience,
ambitious desire of honor and soueraign tie, conceived unkindness or secret
envy, nor ought besides that may be imagined, falsify the faith and
allegiance you owe to her majesty, her crown and dignity, but prevent these
calamities, in being honorably resolved to die in defense of her, and your
country, containing your selves within the lists of loialtie. So shall we her
subjects live in safety, and enjoy this blessed peace, and matchless
tranquillity.

YOu Lords spiritual unto whose vigilant regard our souls are committed: see
well to your charge, and as your callinges are, so let your conuersations be,
instruct your flock'es as well by works as words, Plant sound and sincere
doctrine, that it may fructify and increase knowledge. Abandon sloth and
covetousness from your houses. In steed whereof entertain holy exercise and
hospitality for their relief and comfort that are in adversity. Suffer none
(by any means) to enter the ministry, but such as you shall find by the
touchstone of trial, to be sufficient for so high a function, whose gifts may
every way answer the sincerity of their calling, and ifyou may or can
expel all those that are already entered, which either are ungodly or
unlearned. Set your affections on things invisible (for so it well beseems
you) and not on things mortal: for so the heathen do. And for that our
merciful God many times conuerteth the practices of the wicked, to the profit
of the godly, and would that they should make the most of this profit. Imagine
it pleased him (in his inscrutable wisdom) as knowing what is most behouefull
for you, to suffer a pack of puritants (falsely so called) to revile and slander
you, yea and to put forth libels against you, thereby to awake you, and to make
you attend the work of your vocation more diligently and carefully. Now
therefore, let this be to you an advantage make your profit hereof, and if you
so do, rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so
slandered they the Prophets and Apostles which were before you, and practice
henceforth by preaching and prayer to prevent these calamities, that we and
you may live in safety, and long enjoy this peace and tranquillity.

OYe grave and learned Judges of this land, pervert not the laws for love of
lucre, let not the glorious glass of gold, which is but painted earth,
dazell the eyes of your understanding and corrupt the secret corners Wild. 6.
2, 3. 4, 5. 7.
of your consciences. For Solomon the prince of prudence speaks unto you on
this manner. Give ear ye that rule the multitude, for the rule is given you of
the Lord, and power by the most high, which will try your works and search
out your imaginations, because that ye being officers of his people, have not
judged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the will of God.

Horribly and suddenly will he appear unto you: for an hard judgment shall
they have which bear rule. For he that is Lord over all will spare no person,
neither shall he fear any greatness: for he has made the small and great,
and cares for all alike.

Take no bribes therefore, neither by your selves nor by substitutes: for though
by that slight you can avoid a check ofhir majesty, you cannot escape his
curse that raines in eternity. But measure your sentences by the line of
equity, suppress vice without partiality, and advance virtue with all
possible industry. So shall you please God, and prevent each callamitie. We
shall be safe, and live in peerless prosperity, and long enjoy this peace and
matchless tranquillity.

YE knights, Squires, and Gentlemen ofEngland, O surcease your civil
dissentions, whereby the greater number of our shieres are divided and
mightily disquieted, to the utter wrack and ruin of many partakers, and
whereby also the most Honorable industrious, and worthy Lord Chancellor with
others in authority (that else should otherwise be occupied) spend most of
their time in appeasing of discords and making of concordes. Surcease I say,
these uncharitable con tentions, embrace each others love and friendship,
ofreconciled foes become unfeigned friends and in amities band. Knit all your
powers together, to repel and subdue the power and pride of the common enemies
of us all. So shall you by your charitable dispositions each to other, and
byyour knightly prowess and manly resolution, each for other and each with
other, prevent their purpose, that would procure this calamity. So shall we
live in peace and safety, and long enjoy this prosperous tranquillity.

YOu Landlordes of this land, improve not your rents nor inhance your fines,
but afford your poor Tenants (that always rests at your disposition) a
livers bargain: entreat them as neighbors, and not as villains, extend not
your power to oppress them by might, but stretch out your hands to defend
their right, that they may hereby be enabled to pay your rent, maintain
their families and answer her Majesty such taxes and impositio^s as shall be
laid upon them, for the defense and preservation of our safety, that we may
enjoy this happy tranquillity.

YE Counselors and learned in the laws of this land, be ye more industrious
in dispatch of your poor clients causes, use no procrastination painful to
them, though gainefull to you. If neither law nor conscience favor their case
(as many such Cases shall come to your handlings and most commonly prosecuted
by the wealthy worldlings) O then flatter them not in their perverse
proceedings, but a duise them to cease their suits and misdooings, yet for that
many causes are so ho nest and lawdable in appearance at the first, (though in
truth they are nothing less) and therefore you cannot discern the right from
wrong, until by due course oflaw it be discussed. O yet when you shall
perceive (by exami nation of every circumstance in particular) that you have
the weaker side, by reason of the weakness and insufficiency of the cause, o
then: even then I say, advance not the glory of your wits in the maintenance
of falshoode and dishonest actions. Think it not a discredit to give place to
truth, but rather a foul impiety to oppose you against her: wander not in the
wilderness ofsophisticall sorceries, nor deck your speech with flowers of
eloquence (compassed about with presumptions and shows of probabilities) to
inchant the judge with such magical trumperies. And although hereby your
profit shall be somewhat lessened, yet your praise amonge^st good men shall be
greatly augmented. So shall ye please God who will prevent these calamyties,
and every man posses his own in safety, to enjoy this most ioyefull and
gladsome tranquillity.

YOu Merchants, tradesmen, and Citizens of London (for to you especially I
direct my speech) o carry a conscience to speak the truth, much more to
swear the truth (though your oath ought to be but yea, yea, and naie, naie.)
Make not fraud your broker to utter your wares: but when true meaning
cheapeneth them, let plain dealing price them at a reasonable rate, and for a
computent gain. Imploie not your heaps of coin to usury, no although it be
(as your fleshely reason judges) for mean profit, and such as our statutes
tollerateth: yet know the statutes of God, do utterly disanull the ninth
part of a farthing to be so taken, and pronounces them accurssed, that
sets out their money for such considerations. But lend thy money to thy
needy brother freely, and relieve his wants with thy necessaries and God will
repay it thee again, in his high Exchequer of heaven. Nor utter your wares and
commodities to young gentlemen (upon statute Merchant assurance) for double and
treble vallue; whose forwardnes many times to run into your debt and danger, to
maintain their prodigality and inordinate expenses, is the cause of the ruin
and utter extirpation of them and their houses: and yet you think it
justifiable before god and man to make ye most of your wares in what sort
soever. O deceive not your selves by practizing to deceive him that neither
can deceive, nor be deceived, your thoughts are known unto him, much more
your deeds. In a word, GOD here with is greeuouslie offended, poor gentlemen
and others greatly impouerished, and these calamities violent lie hastened.
Therefore, if not for shame and conscience sake, yet for fear of Gods
vengeance, forsake this manquelling mischeef, think not that well gained, that
is evil gotten; and though you could be content to offend your Prince and
oppress her people for your private profit, yet grieve not God for any earthly
benefit. Be sorry for what is past, and make amends by restitution. So shall
they not need to fear executions, but inioyethis tranquillity without
molestation.

YE Angel-like youths ofEngland, in whose beautiful forms the wonderful
workmanship together with the unspeakable glory of the creator shines: oh
seeing he has so richly adorned you with the ornaments of nature, do
nothing vndeacent or ill beseeming your comlines. But alas, it is to true (the
more it is to be lamented) that what God has formed, you have by your brutish
behauiors and reckles insolence deformed, for what ungraciousness is resident on
earth, unto which you are not inclined: yea and unto what lewdnes may the sons
of Adam be inclined, but you in the fullest mea sure and highest degree are
thereto addicted, bearing your selves on hand with a vain persuasion, that all
your faults are taken and imputed perfections, and al your bad properties are
esteemed as good qualities, if so they be (as I nothing doubt but so they are)
it is with those whose faults are as great as your follies, whose affections
are full fraught with all imperfections, and whose lusts are as lewd as your
lives. And though thorough the corruption of this age, things that are not, are
call led and reputed as if they were, for each proud man termed a proper man: each
murderous manqueller, a courageous cauilere: and each blasphemous swearer, a
man of good demeanure: yet shall these trim titles falsely given nothing avail
in the day of visitation, the naked truth of things, and not the painted show
of things shall then be in high est regard.

My heart (as being plunged in the deapth of dole) is over whelmed with waves
of woe, yea and my soul is sore vexed and unquiet within me, when I consider
amongst the multitude of evil customs, wherewith this vngra tious age is
polluted, the impious, odious and most damnable custom of swearing, the wrong
whereof the Savior of the world sustaines, in requital of his unutterable good
will toward unkind mankind: and art thou o sacred savior, thus injuriously
dealt withal in recompense of all the injuries suffered in thy precious
passion? Naie have I, wretch that I am, that presumes now to reprehend
others with such monstrous impiety, so aquitted thy great kindness, than
which none can be greater: for greater love can no man show, than to suffer
death, yea a most odious, bitter, and reproachful death to testify his love?
then o my soul, my ouersinfull soul, by whom (during the good pleasure of
him thou so offendest) my body has his motion and being, crucify thy self
with anguishe and sorrow, and seeing thy power has such dominion in my
wretched truncke, express thy sorrow by sending to mine eyes a fountain of
tears: wherewith I may wash away (in some measure) thy loathsome filthiness,
if thou do it not, the very steel and adamant, yea and stones of hardest
temper shall rise against thee in judgment. For had they reason they neither
would or could refrain from tears, yea and that in great abundance, to
behold thy wilful and outrageous insolence.

O Gentlemen and loving countrymen what fury so inchanteth me, and you, that
we make no conscience of so great a sin, that so greatly greeueth the
holieghost: for though before I have (in the vexation of my soul) reprehended
in sort the enormities of our time, yet no one before touched, in extremity
of evil, is to this iniquity comparable. For here with the king of glory is
eftsoons tormented and crucified in heaven, as before he was by the cruel
Jews on earth, that heart, which before Longious spear wounded, is hereby
again, violently rented. The precious blood, wherewith miserable man was (from
the misery whereunto he was fallen) redeemed is thorough our wilfulness in this
respect, rigorously effused, the wounds pearsed again, the face buffeted
again, the body scourged again, the head pricked again: and in disdaining the
rebuke of the godly which in the zeal of his soul, for this sin of sins
he gives, we spit on him again and contemteously mock and deride him again.
How comes it to pass the devil so prevails, that for every trifling
occasion: we vomit up such execrable oaths against the harmless and innocent
lamb of God, in whose precious blood and holy wounds the sins of the whole
world are coueted from the wrath of his father, alas how happens it that
that blessed body, which in the heaviness and dolor of his spirit, swet
the most unkind sweat of blood and water for our health, is so unkindly dealt
withal by us, we are (to our shame I speak it) we are more cruel then the
Jews against the Lord of glory. For they crucified him but once, but we
every day, (yea every hour of the day) crucify him again and again: he
sits at the right hand of his father, making intercession for us in heaven:
we like unnatural paracydes tear and pull in pieces his blessed members on
earth, yea and martyr him in more despitefull manner then the unbelieving Jews.
He blesses while we banne, he prays for us earnestly while we swear, and
dishonor him contemptiously: and finally we requite al his sufferings with
scoffings, his merits with mockes, his torments with tauntes, his love with
hate, and his humility with pride and all impiety, and in a word, his holy
and virtuous living, with wilful and horrible swearing: o cruel tormentors, o
unkind and pitilesse tyrants: how can we hope to have the benefit of his death,
that as much as in us lies, daily put him to death? but far is it from us
to hurt one hear ofhis head, saving that he is grieved to behold our
ungraciousness, and much displeased with our unthankfulness. We are forbidden
in his gospel, to swear by ought that god made, yea by the least hear of our
head, because (for so it yields ye reason) we can make neither of them white
or black, but what is forbidden us that most willingly we do.

The instruments, yea the curssed instruments, wherewith satan provoke us to
offer such violence against our Christ, Is cards and dice, which though for
recreation they may in decent sort be used, yet a wiseman was of opinion that
no wise man ought to use them, were it for ought or naught, because they are
the very elements and first beginners of this blasphemy. For when the games
will not frame in sort as we desire: and if the play that is offered us, be
not as square as the die, but through the one and the other we are without
further trial of law, dispossessed of our proper right, then do we curse
and ban, swear and stare, yea with variety of oaths (which are thundered
forth with all asperitie) we blaspheme the blessed body and precious blood of
our dear Savior, reputinge it but a sport or at least a petty offense so to
do: and he that can most terribly tear him, we have in highest estimation,
and without he can so do, he is too too simple to be a gamester, naie if such
a one loose (as commonly those that pertaines to Gods election seldom win,
because by their losses he would weane them from it) it will be said he loses
for want of swearing, and with such words of contempt be openly derided: As
once I heard yt a gentleman in name though (otherwise in condition) the dice
bereauing him of more money then stood with his patience to lose) should burst
forth into a marvelous great outrage of swearing and impatiencie, amongst the
rest of whose blasphemous oaths, he swear some fearful and unaccustomed oath
which greatly offended the ears of a kinsma^ of this, that reproved him in
this man ner: O cousin (says he) what madness moves thee so to blaspheme thy
god, beyond the measure of all that ever yet blasphemed him; be sorry for thy
fault, and God forgive thee: unto which he replied, let him never forgive me,
for I swear it willingly. I wondered greatly at his reply, but I woondered
more, yt God in his just and severe judge meant against sin, (especially of
so odious a nature) did not open the bowels of the earth to swallowe him up
quick as he did Chore, Dathan, and Abiron. But wonderful yea and unspeakable
is the greatness of thy mercy and long suffering O Lord, which dooest permit
vile duste and ashes to abuse thy sacred Godhead and almigh tie Majesty: how
unsearchable is the depth of thy patience, that can endure so to be provoked,
and how unspeakable is the brutish boldness of man's heart, that dare presume
so to pro uoke thee. But O miserable man, think thou that for because God
prolon geth his punishments (as erst I said) thou shall escape unpunished? or
thin kest thou that for because his lightning and fearful thunderbolts
lights upon trees, herbs, stones, and other sense less creatures, which
might more deservedly light upon thee, that thou shall avoid his final
judgment? O no, it stands not with Gods justice (if thou prevent it not by
repentance) so to acquit thee. Excuse these faults how thou can, they are
utterly inexcuseable, will thou answer it as thou art wont? and say it is
good to have the name of the Lord always in mind and the blood of Christ still
in remem brance, or when thy brother charitably rebukes thee for swearing by
him will thou reply (as often thou dooest) what have thou to do with the man
or the matter, I swear by no friend of thine? if so thou will, thy will be
done; but hereof I can assure thee, that that wilful will of thine, which is
so repugnant to Gods holy will, will in conclusion procure thy damnation. It
is good indeed to have the name of the Lord always in mind (as thou say)
and the blessed blood of Christ ever in remembrance as thou alleagest, but it
is not good to have it in so evil a manner; naie far better it were, that
thou never name him or think upon him, than so to name him or remember him.

But remember thou the fearful example of Senacherib king of Ashur, mentioned
in the xviii. and xix. chapters of the second book of Kings, who for that he
blasphemed the God of Israel, and with an hie hand and outstretched arm
opposed himself against him and against his servant Hezekiah, king of Judah,
was first bereft of an hun dred four sc ore and five thousand sol diars of his
camp, by the visitation of an angel, at what time he besieged Hezekiah and
his city Jerusalem, and after murdered by Adramelech and Sharezer his own
sons, as he was in the temple worshipping Nisroch his god. The great
Antiochus, in like sort, breathing out blasphemy in the pride of his heart
against the Lord of hosts, was smitten with an incureable and invincible
plague, for even with the fault, a remediless and peerless pain of the
bowels, and sore torments of the inward parts came upon him, and was thrown
from his chariot in the swift course thereof in such sort, that all the members
of his body were sore bruised with the fall; whereof it followed that worms
came out of the body of this wicked blasphemer in great abundance, and
whilst he was yet living, his flesh fell from the bones, with pain and
tormente, and all his army was greeuouslie annoied with his smell: so that no
man, nay he him self could not abide his own stink, that a little before
thought he might reach to the stars of heaven, command the floods of the
sea, and weigh the high Mountains in a balance, so proud was he, beyond the
common condition of man. Thus the blasphemer died a most miserable death in a
strange country amongst the mountains.

Nicanor, for his presumptuous blas phemie against the God of Israel was
likewise in the battle which he fought against the Jews (after five and
thirty thousand of his host were slaughtred) slain himself, his head, hand,
and shoul der struck off, and his blasphemous tongue cut out, and divided in
small pieces and given to the fowls of the air, as a just recompense of his
outrageous madness.

These with many thousands more, whereof written verities makes menhaue been
even in this life plagued with strange torments and vnacspected deaths for
their great wickedness in this behalf, it have brought the vengeance and just
wrath of God upon whole countries and nations: and for that no laws are made
to suppres and punish this offense on earth, God him self will punish it with
vengeance from heaven.

But O dear father I beseech thee, in the abundance of that great mercy,
which thou (the almighty creator ofheauen and earth) extendest toward us the
banishedbrats of Eve, at what time thou sentest into the world, the liuelye
image of thy own substance, even thy word of promise, thy dear and only Son
Christ Jesus, that he by poverty, humility, meekenes and charity, by
buffers, whippinges and torments, and finally by the most cruel and shameful
death of the cross, should redeem and ransom unrighteous mankind, being in
captivity (fast bound with the chains of sin) under the great prince of
darkness and of death, that it would please thee in the greatness of that
mercy and goodness of thine, to spare this Realm of England from the
punishment, which we (through our wilful periuries and odious blasphemies)
worthily deserve, and as it were with strong hand pull upon us: Spare us good
Lord, spare the English nation, and especially the supreme head and gracious
gouernesse thereof. Pardon our sins, and defer thy ven geance, till thy
wrath be ouerpassed, and our penitencie purchase thy pardon. Consider o
almighty monarche of the celestial world, how prone all mankind is to sin,
by natural corruption, engraffed in their flesh by Adams disobedience,
therefore and for the innocence of thy son Jesus (which by firm faith is
ours) grant us grace leisure and respite, to arise out of the cradle
ofsecuritie, in which we are by sins delectation rocked asleep. Let thy
great mercy exceed thy hie justice to us wards, and let thy holy Spirit
(which we beseech thee power on us abundantly) so prevail with us, that
henceforth we refrain our toonges from blasphemous swering, and our lips from
leasing, that we may speak of thee reverently as becomes christians, and
think of thee religiously as becomes thy servants. So shall it come to pass
that living (as we ought) virtuously, we shall possess this peaceful plenty
and long enjoy this peereles tranquillity.

YE contentious wranglers, and restless busibodies, which under the show of
simplicity harbors hypocritical dissimulation, and under pretense of
plainness do shroud much perverseness, prosecuting law for each lawless
occasion, devising driftes, to deceive each other by guile and falshoode,
bending the powers of your wealth and wits, to effect your contentious
cauillatio^s, regarding nei there the duty of christian love and charity, the
admonitions ofholy writ, nor the comfort of neighbourly society, but with
inward delight, and outward cheerful semblance, pursue your wilful purposes,
with such earnest desire of each others downfall, that until your purses have
cast up all their pence, no composition nor agreement will be had: and when
beggerie has attached you by writ of want, then untimely repentance strikes
the stroke of agreement. Mean while the lawyers laughes, when you have cause
to weep, they smile to see you sad, they solace themselves in your sorrow:
whose peevishness have occasioned your own impouerishments, whose coin have
caused their credit, and whose wealth have supplied their wants, yet to
prevent ye sentence of law, you think your selves happy if they discover
ought yt may procure delaie, whicha shallow stude^t may easily do, for though
ye laws in themselves be perfect, yet he that will be contentious (having
the golden engine, which is of force to wrest them awrie) may find starting
holes a number: for the galls of the laws are as bitter as worm wood, which
to my pain I have too lately proved: for which (as for my greatest cause of
grief) all the Rubarbe in Alexandria, will scarce purge my melancholy.

And therefore my good and loving countriman, attend that I shall (in a word)
unfold unto thee. I speak by costly experience, to the end thou may eschew
the like experimentes. Our Lawyers for the most part will more regard thy
money then the matter, for after he has once set down the circumstante of
thy cause in his baneful book of Mementos and therein entered thy name: take
this of me as long as there it remains, thou shall never thrive, till either
neighborly concord cross thee out, or beggerie blot thee out: for though the
laws ought to be free for all the Queens natural subjects, yet neither
sergiant, chancellor, or atturneie will understand the cause without thy coin:
for his case is best, that is best vnderlaid with wealth and worship, for
though it be dark, the glittering shine of gold can illustrate the same, yea
and though it be bad, yet if that sovereign metal be thereto applied, it will
mend it much, and cover the defectes: for doubtless ye lawyers pleadings are
most effectual, and his proceedings most judicial, when he finds the gifts
to be most liberal: then will they with their painted eloquence, and
rethoricall words ofslender substance, put such a glorious gloss upon thy
matter, that the dark shall seem light, and the wrong right.

Hereof I advise thee, that thou beware and be warnd by me and other poor
men that too late have experienced the same, let it not grieve thee to loose a
penny, to spare a pound. Oppress not each other by riguor oflawe, and be not
avenged on every wrong, remembering that proverb which says: He that will be
avenged on every wrath, the longer he lives the less he has. Consume not
thy goods in such unhappiness, expel those cotentious affections which
wastes thy substance, so shall the same be multiplied abundantly, thou shall
have Gods blessing, if thou live in charity, and have a good report of all men
generally, and long enjoy this peace and happy tranquillity.

YOu English Romanistes, you that play inordinately before the golden calfe,
of your own inventions, and commit spiritual fornication with the great whore,
who (like her self) in censeth you to seek, by sundry practices, the ruin
and subversion of our gracious Queen, her state and kingdom, o seeing she
has dealt so mercifully with you (as had you not first attempted violence
against her sacred person) you might have inioyed your liuinges and liberties,
both of bodies and consciences. Surcease your treacheries and touch not the
Lords anointed, for Christ Jesus will suffer no violence, (as we to our great
comfort have seen and perceived) to be done unto his dear spowse our Queen
and gouernesse, but will manifest your conspiracies be they never so secret to
your confusion and ignomies. But ifGod, for our deserved plague, should suffer
you to prevail in your tyrannical attempts, o what are your hopes? or what
should you gain thereby. Think you not to participate with us the ensuing
calamities? O yes no doubt, for those that makes no conscience to set you on
work, to effect so damnable a villainy will make no conscience to deprive you
of lives and living for their own commodity. And therefore most lamentable
it is to see, how fowly you are bewitched and misled, by the instistigations
and hand leadinges of such unholy holy ones, who seek to plant religion with
the sword (utterly forbid den by God) and to moysten the same with thebloud
ofhis dear saints. O cast your eyes upon the miserable plight of your native
country, that have nourished, fed, and brought you up, if your treasons should
(but I hope never shall) take effect: what hauockes, what spoils what ruins,
what rapes, what merciless massacres, what consuming with fire, what cities
laid waste, what towns overthrown, what famine in our coasts, what misery in
our streets, what lamentations on our walls, and finally what calamity is
there on earth, that shall not in England then plentifully abound? Can you that
seem so holy, professing Christ as we do (though not as we do) for common
humanity sake, (if not for our sakes whom you hold heretics, endure so
ruthful sight, or brook such barbarous cruelty. If so you can, then dare I
avouch there remains in you, neither fear of God, saint, or devil. But I
know (as far forth as man may know) some of you are better disposed though too
many ofyou be traitorously minded, which better sort, I beseech God, as in
duty and charity I am bound, in his good time to inlighten with his truth,
that the mist of error and ignorance, being taken from their eyes, they may
behold the bright sunshine of his sons glorious gospel, that we with
them, and they with us may, in unity osfaith, pray for the peace of lerusalem,
all the days of our lives: so shall God be pleased with us and preserve us from
such calamities, that we may live in safety, and enjoy this peerless
tranquillity.

ANd lastly let us protestants be thankful to God, for that it has pleased
him in his vnrecountable largess and good will toward us, by means of
Elizabeth our Queen, his dear daughter, to prosper the passage ofhis sons
sacred Gospel, and let each of us in our several degrees, and callinges walk
worthy of so blessed a benefit than which none can be more blessed, let us
express our faith as well by deed as words (because our good Phil. 19. 10. 11
works sets forth the glory of God) 1. Pet, 2. 12.
that by our virtuous conuersations, and charitable inclinations, we may stop
the mouths of Christ's enemies and ours, and by our good example of living,
they may be allured to embrace the faith of Christ, not in variety of kind,
but in unity and concord, that love and charity may hold us all together in
band of peace, that the church militant may florishe, and the church
triumphant rejoice, that sovereign Elizabeth may joy in our obedience, and we
rejoice in her gracious government, that the cloudie pillar go not from us by
day, nor the fiery flame by night, that a sweet hermonie may be heard
amongst us, and disonnancte be utterly banished from us. That love may inflame
our hearts with desire of each others good, and envy excluded that would each
others harm. That the lion may be reconciled withthe lamb, and the wild ass
pastured with the silly kid. That the poole of grace may flow over this
realm, and the flames of our enemies furies be quite extinguished. That the
abomination of desolation may be removed from the holy temple, and the son
of man exalted in his own kingdom. That Babylon may put on Sion, and Egypt
become our own. That of wild olives we may become ye true garden plants
ofMiscreantes, Christians, of Ismael, Israel, ofheathenish Idolaters and
Antichristian Romanistes, Evangelical and sincere worshippers of God in spirit
and verity. That he may bless our Queen with a long and prosperous reign
for our sakes, and we her subjects with peace and plenty, for her sake. That
our souls may be fed with the heavenly Manna, and our bodies with the fatness
of earthly abundance. That neither cost be spared, time ouerpassed, pains
taking omitted, nor occasion neglected, to win that is withholden, to bring
home that is straied, to find that is lost, to repair that is decayed, to
refreshe that is wearied, to heal that is wounded and to restore that is
ruined. That we hereby may prevent these calamities, live without fear of
treason or treaherie, and long enjoy this thrice happy tranquillity.

O that it would please God to honor me so much, as to give power to the
persuasions in this book contained, to touch the heart but even of any one
whose conversion might be wished, and whose amendment might ensue, I should
then think the hour of my birth as happy as my self, whose hap pinesse
herein cannot be expressed. O that I had (to this end alone) the tongue of an
angel, that my words might be powerful, to bring them to knowledge, that their
greatzeale might inuiolably be coupled therewith. O that I had the spirit of
God in as great measure as had blessed Paul, that my exhortations might pearce
their breasts and altar their minds to this resolution. So should my soul be
ravished with joy, and all my veins replenished with un speakeable
consolation. But for so much as I am unlearned, my words (I know) shall be
contemned, and for my presumption I shall be condemned and for that I am young, I
am the more unfit to advise the old. And for that I am my self, beyond all
measure sinful, I doubt my persuasions will be the less powerful, because I
have here tofore shaken hands with vanity, I shall be deemed most unmeet to
deal with Divinity. But be it as pleases God, who knows the care I have
of my Sovereigns safety, the zeal I owe to my native country, the desire I
have of my brethrens conformity, has caused me to publishe this little
treaty. Which although it be not fraught with the entising words of man's
fleshly wisdom, yet is it repleat with plain persuasions, tending to good
purpose. The argument where of (being for reformation) then which nothing is
more common, yet nothing more needful ( Quia mundus totus in maligno positus
est) which although I may wish it, yet can I not procure it, but to my power I
will ever seek it, though I cannot but confess, my self do greatly need it.

But by the way, I deem it very convenient to speak (though to very small
purpose I doubt) of that wherein the devil is so much delighted, and where
withal the world at this day is so greeuouslie infected. Namely, the
impious, deadly and damnable sin of pride and vainglory, which is the
root of all unrighteousness, and the very keye that opens the gate which
leads to eternal destruction: the least jot of whose venom if it once but
touch the heart (except the pre tious oil of Gods grace be thereon speedily
powered) it will never cease swelling, till both body and soul be brought to
consusion. Howbeit the noblest hearts are herewith bewitched, and with the
poison thereof, even as it were suffocated, pride is the confounder ofmeekenes
and virtue, it subdueth the souls and bodies of many, that otherwise are
nobly minded, and causes them many times to do that, whereof ensues their
downfall and destruction. For true is the proverb prove it who shall, that at
first or at last Pride will have a fall. The first offender in a sin of this
kind as the scriptures testifies, was Lucifer; which not being contented with
the glory of the highest heavens, and the society of Archangels, Cherubins
and Seraphins, would yet presume to make himself equal with God his creator:
for which his pride and ambition (as being well worthy) he was thrown
headlonge from the height of heaven, to the depth of the bottomless pit of
hell, where now he is damned perpetually, there to abide and endure the
violent pains which God has ordained for him and his damnable associates;
and he that before shined in heaven as bright as the sun in his highest
beauty, is now through pride, transformed to a feend yea and that a most
ugly and fearful feend; whose horrible shape no mortal man can abide to
look upon. Let a man have wisdom, beauty, strength virtue, knowledge, honor
and riches, and he shall utterly obscure and eclipse the glory of them all, by
vain glorious pride and stateliness of mind. But this sin generally has
more domination in women then men, which plainly appears by their high
looks, sumptuous ornaments, and fantastical attire, that it may truly be said,
pride has so infected them, that they be even sick of the fashions; whence it
comes that men are allured to lust that else might live chaste, the blazing
beauty of women brightned by art, so dazell the eyes of their minds and
bodies, that they are thereunto subdued and unto wanton desires captiuated. As
Holofernes ye proud Assirian, with the comely shape and beauty of fair (yet
chaste) Judith, by whose feeble hands (God so preordaining) his hateful head
was divided from his shoulders, so greatly was he overcome with her beauty.

Cruel Iezabell (that Devil incarnate) which through pride painted her face,
thereby to allure and betray Iehu with her fairness (although it nothing
auailed her for God procured Iehu to abhor her) was for her pride and
tyranny, by Gods just judgment, thrown down from an high window and dogs did
devour her, as he before had promised.

Had not Bersabe in bathinge her self negligentlie discovered her beauty,
David had not committed the foul offenses of murder and adultery, and
consequently Israel had not bin plagued with such calamity.

Therefore gaze not over greedily upon the frail beauty of a woman, least
thine heart be entangled therewith, and so thou become a slave unto sin, and thy
soul a subject unto Satan, their shows are but shadows of a vain
substance, the reward of whose pride is eternal pain.

Pride is a sin of sins, fro whence (as branches from the tree) al and
every sin proceeds: it troubled the angels ofheauen, yea and Christ's deer
saints and holy disciples on earth. It offends the majesty of God, and
plungeth man in maine seas of sin and waves of wickedness. Happy is the man
or woman, whom this vnthrif ty vice of pride and vaineglorie, has not
bewitched: and happy is he, whom titles of pre-eminence has not led captive
to so odious a sin, and earthly pomp that procures pride is unstable and
subject to sudden alteration, for when it is at the highest, it will suddenly
descend, as it fared with ye proud Babylonians, at what time they purposed to
raise their tower to the top ofheauen, that so they might prevent the purpose
of the highest, who seeing their pride and ambition, brought up on them such
confusion, that the whole world to this day participateth thereof.

O pride! thou damnable and infernal fury, bred in the deepest bottom of the
lowest hell, fie on thy frailetie; that have destroyed so many kings and mighty
potentates with thy poison, for wheresoever thou go shame insueth. By thee
is Lucifer damned in hell, and perpetuallye excluded from the presence of God.
By thee al mankind endures misery, for that thou prouokedst Adam to desire
the know ledge of good and evil; and so consequently to disobay the
commandment ofhis creator, for which he and all we his unhappy offspring are
accurs sed, and (without faith in Christ) for ever damned.

By thee, Nabuchadnezer was trans formed from his former fashion, unto the
shape of a brute beast.

By thee Agar aduansing her self, for that she had conceived, and co^temning
her lady and mistress, was sharply punished as she well deserved.

By thee Moab, Holofernes, Hamon Nicanor, Pharao, Balthazar, Antiochus, Herod
and many thousands more mentioned in the old and new Testaments, were brought
to shame and utter confusion.

Thou bereauest men of their wisdoms, and women of their wits, as now (to
the great grief of the godly) is daily experienced, for this part of the
world, where Christ is and ought to be professed, seems rather to be the
local place ofhel, then a state of christianity, so great is the superfluity
used in apparel, and so monstrous are the fashions wherewith both men and
women are now commonly attyred: and where before our fathers coueted garments
only to cover their nakedness: now we rather desire such, wherein our
nakedness may be most discovered.

But no more of this, least this treatise be therefore despised, for hardly
can it come to the hands of any, whose hearts surfeit not with this sin, whose
eyes are not blinded with this vanity, and whose minds are not addicted to
this enormitie. But in a word, to shut up all: if the tavern be known by the
luy bush, and an Inn by the sign: then verily a mind unchaste, inclined to
wanto^nesse, is by no one thing better known then by the outward habit, for
they whose garments are newfangled and sumptuous: most commonly their minds
are unstaid and lascivious. Frame thou thy communication (says a wise
philosopher) according to thy garments: but if men and women in these days
should follow his advise, (being apparrelled as they are) they should speak
as if they were (as indeed too too many are) deprived of their wits, if
their speech should be as fanaticall, as their garments are fantastical,
hardly should they be understood without an interpretor: for as there is no
mean, nor measure in the one, so should there be no rhyme nor reason in the
other, but God end it or amend it, or else it will never be amended, till all be
ended. And to return where (by occasion of this vanity) I left) Call to
mind, gentle Reader, the tyrannical persecutions, and cruel martyrdomes
perpetrated in the bloody and pitilesse reign of Queen Marie, imagine
withal thou see (as then to the grief of many thousands was seen) the
tormenting furnace of Nabuchadnezer glowing hot, scorching and consuming the
flesh and bones of Christ's dear saints and blessed martirs. For professing
ye truth ofhis Gospel. Imagine thou hear and see (though to thy small
edification or profit) the administration of his blessed word and sacraments
in a tongue to thee unknown. Imagine thou see divine honor and spiritual
adoration performed to stocks and stones, and other senseless shadows, and
thou (on pain of death) compelled to perform the like. Imagine yet further
thou see thy Christ robbed and dispoiled ofhis honor to be given unto
saints and other his creatures, and thou not only to be in danger of life:
but to be excommunicated and held accursed, if thou do not participate of this
blasphemous impiety, and when thou have called to thy remembrance these, and
thousands such like extremities, then compare that time of tyranny, with this
sweet time of mercy: and thou will be constrained to say. Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised us
up a Queen, by and under whose godly and gracious government we may serve him
without fear, in true holiness and righteousness before him all the days of
our life. And therefore let all true Israelites pray for her, from whom (as
from the isntrumental cause) these manifold benefits and irrecompensible
blessings, are deuolued to us. Let us not not with Isops frogs grow wearye of
her gentleness, least Jove in requital of our great ingratitude, send the
stork to devour us. No man has managed the charge of any one private
household more duly and orderly then (since the beginning of her reign) she
has done this populous kingdom.

Therefore O England, let thy young men and maids, old men and babes, thy
beasts and cattle, thy fish and foul, thy mountains and hills, thy rivers and
wells, thy plants and trees, thy corn and grass, thy fields and meades, thy
cities and towns, thy woods and groves, thy downs and dales, each in their
kinds laud and praise the Lord; for giving us such a Queen, in and by whom we
are so happy; for and through whom we are blessed, and in whom as in a stream
of Majesty and princely magnanimity, all the gifts and graces which God
bestows upon the children of men do swim, and to his praise and her
perpetual renown (with out fault or imperfection) do superabound. O but some
will say (if so they durst) Sir you are too too extreme in her commendation:
you infringe the bounds of truth, whereby it seems you aim at her favor by
the level of flattery. She is not so endowed with gifts and graces as you
vainlie and most untruly affirm. Neither is she so faultlesse and
praiseworthie, as you make her. Indeed, did not her deserts merit my praises,
my flattery were too too palpable, but being no more then her proper right,
the repetition thereof (I know) is utterly repugnant to her pleasure, and
therefore they are deceived, which imagine, that I (poor snake and
contemptible worm) aim at so high a mark, with so gross a shaft.

But for that which first I did attribute unto her, besides her zealous
forwardness, in the execution of Gods will, and the matter of her and our
souls welfare, her exact knowledge of the toongs, her deep sight in the
sciences, her quick capacity, her swift understanding, her mercy to
offenders, her care of her subjects and her peaceable regiment, do plainly
manifest: All which and many other such like, as invincible arguments do
prove mine assertion.

To the second, be it granted, that she is not utterly faultlesse, and
therefore not utterly blameless, I reply: she is (though a most gracious
Queen as I said) a mortal creature, framed of the same substance that we be,
and therefore subject to those passions and infirmities that we are. But so was
David of whom GOD said, I have chosen a man according to mine own heart, even
David my servant, yet whether he were faultlesse or no, his own words do
manifest, when he said. The wounds in my soul do fester and stincke even
thorough my Psalm, 38, 5,
own faults, and offenses, and again. Turn thy face (O Lord,) away from my
sins, and blot out all my misdeedes, and again, My sins are more in number
than the hairs of Psalm, 51. 3,
mine head. And again I acknowledge my faults, and my sins are ever before
me, and they thrust me down even as an intolerable burden: but if thou
would know wherein he offended, the holy Ghost will resolve thee in the
second book of Samuel, and the 11. chapter. And letting pass all the holy
kings and prophets mentioned in the old Testament, yt acknowledged their
infirmities, and yet God tendered as the apple of his eye: come we to saint
Paul, who although he were no king, yet was he a blessed Apostle, and had the
spirit of God in great measure, yet said he ofhimselfe, as his own Epistle to
the Romans testifies. The good that I would do, that do I not. But the evil
that Rom, 7, 18, 19
I hate: that do I. If then it appears by these and such like undoubted
testimo nies, that mankind under heaven are sold under sin, who can then be so
malicious to entwite her maiestywith that which is proper to all in general?
Neither can she be touched with any blot of infamy, other then that which is
incident to the most vprightest livers. If this be true (as what man lives,
and finds not the same so tobe.) O then ye privy whisperers, and secret
backebiters whose toongs are as the stinges of Scorpions full of deadly poison,
cease to sting her, whom youshal never hurt, or have power to defame, though
like unnatural paracides, you seek it with all greediness, and as by her
gracious government you breath and have your being, so acknowledge it, and be
not such ungrateful monsters as to render her evil for good, but requite her
loving kindness, with thankfulness, and her princely beneficence, withal
dutiful obedience. Think reverently ofhir, for Gods sake, and in respect of
the great perils she still sustaineth for our sakes: for the pains she takes
for our only profit, and for the weighty charge, imposed upon her, and if
(as one wise man says) the cares that attends a crown were duly considered,
it is not worth the taking up if we found it in the streets: then what a
worthless jewel has she ofhir crown, in respect ofhir cares, no one can
express them, save she that has them, and for our sakes do endure them.
Therefore malign her not by word nor thought, But wish her well, and say,
Good luck have you (O gracious Queen) with your honor, according to the great
renown, wherewith the king ofkings has ennobled you. Peace and prosperity,
be unto them that love you, but confusion of face, and horror of conscience be
unto al them that hate you. For your divine gifts and graces all people do
praise you, and for the peace and plenty we enjoy by your means, we will
ever honor you. Whereby you shall highly please God, in accomplishing his will,
who has by the mouth ofhis Apostle commanded all men to pray for kings and
princes, and all that are in authority, to the end they may live a godly and
peaceable life under them. According to which commandment, let all that be
truly English fall prostrate before Gods mercy seat, with all fervent
devotion, and say.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. DIEV ET MON DROIT.


The Prayer.
COme down o Lord, come with thousa^ds of thy Saints, come down I say, O
God of Jacob, and bless Israel, yea come and bless thy chosen and dear
beloved servant Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou have set up a mighty prince
and mother over thy people and city Sion, and made the chief governor among
the nations. O let Elizabeth live and not die, neither let her Honor be any
thing diminished for our sins and offenses. Hear O Lord the voice ofhir
humble and daielie prayers, and let her continue a prince of peace and Royal
Ruler over thy people. Her hands shall be good enough for her, if thou help
her still as thou have done against her enemies. Right and light be with thy
gracious handmaide, whom thou did prove with great temptations and trial as
thou did Io seph, before thou did anoint her Queen, and whom
hitherto thou have preserved a pure and undefiled virgin to promote thy glo
rye, as thou did thy servant David. She that in all her manifold
afflictions, has more esteemed the serving of thee her God, than saving ofhir
self, and loved not her life so dear as she loved thy law: yea that
preferred thine obedience before sacrifice: O let her our gracious Queen
Elizabeth who has thus done her duty, be plentifully rewarded of thee from
heaven with the perpetual crown of glory and palm ofvictorie.

She, even she has taught Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: She
has put incense be fore thy face, and the burnt offering upon thine altar.
She, even sheO God, has with Hezechias restored thy sincere religion, and
worshippeth thee aright with eve rye one that is godly.

Bless therefore, O Lord, her substance and first fruits, and accept the
works ofhir hands. Smite through the loins of them that rise up against her,
and of them that hate her that they rise not again. O let the beloved of the
lord dwell ever in safety, yea do thou o lord, vouchsafe to be her veil and
defense all her life long, and dwell with her here in the church as her
beloved spouse, head and governor.

Lay thy left hand, O Lord, under her head, and let thy right hand embrace her,
that she may find continual comfort in thy presence

O fountain of the gardens: O well ofliuing waters: arise o north and come o
south and blow upon thy spouse, which is as a goodly and pleasant garden
enclosed, and as a fountain sealed up for thy self, and water it with the
springes of Lebanon, that it may grow great, and the sweet spices and smell
thereof may flow out into thy nostrils, and thou eat of the pleasant fruit in
her.

Kiss her with the kisses of peace and righteousness, and let her two breasts
satisfy thee, and be like two yongroes that are twins feeding upon the
lillies.

Let her be a sure wall and foundation, whereupon thou may build a golden
palace, and let her breasts be as towers vnassaultable, that she may be meet
for thee her spouse to dwell in and be in thine eyes, as she that finds
perpetual peace and quietness.

O God in whose sight her fathers did walk. Thou O GOD, which have fed her
all her life long unto this day, and delivered her hitherto from many treasons
and dangers. Bless her still even with the blessing of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the patriarchs, with all the blessings of thy mercies pro mised
unto her father David.

In her let Israel also be blessed: in her let thy graces so plentifully and
manifestly appear, that the people may thense take a pattern ofblessing thee:
and teach their posterity to bless and praise thee for thy goodness and
mercy, both toward her and them.

For she is to us thy might, thy strength, thy nobleness of dignity, and the
excellency of power. She as a Lioness is laid down and couched safely,
after the spoil Who shall stir her up? her enemies do all fear her: and do
thou still charge the daughters ofIerusalem that they stir not up thy love, nor
awake her by troubling her quietness and peace, until she please. O let not
the brethren of evil, the reuengers ofbloud, nor the instru ments of violence
and cruelty be in her court and habitation. O let not cruelty or falsehood
come into her soul: into their secrets let not her soul come, neither let
her glory be joined or stained with the assemblye or damned crew of the
wicked.

Curse them that curse her, and bless them that bless her: divide them in
Jacob and scatter them in Israel, which shamelessly in their rage dare cruelly
attempt any trecheries or treasons against her innocent and royal person: yea
let them be condingly punished, who soever go about to troble the state or
overthrow her kingdom.

The time is now come that the blessings of God showed unto her father shall
take effect, and be stronger in her than the blessings ofhir elders, unto
the vttermoste ends of the world, they shall all beblessings upon the head of
Elizabeth, and on the top of the head of her that is separate from her
birthe, and consecrated from the womb to dignity and honor, far above her
fellow virgins and made the anointed of the Lord, to bear rule and to have
dominion over men.

Her beauty and glory let it be like the first borne bullock, and her
strength as the unicorn, with the horn ofhir power let her smite the people
together, even the ten thousands of Ephraim, and the ten thousands of
Manasses.

Bless her going out and coming in, and prosper her at home and abroad, in
all her affairs both by land and sea.

Make her glad ioyefull and willing to call thy people unto thy holy hill of
Sion, and there in thy Church to offer with them together, the offeringes of
righteousness, that she and they may suck of the abundance of the sea, and
the treasures hid in the earth.

A lions whelpe let her be, to leap from Basan, and make her strong enough
to defend her self from Balaaks curse, and against all the treasons of Zimri
and Achitophel.

O satisfy her with thy favor, and fill her with thy blessings, let her
possess both the East, West, South and North parts of the earth.

Bless her with people and make her acceptable unto her brethren and sisters,
and to dip her feet in oil.

Her shoes let them be iron and brass, and her glory health, wealth and
strength to continue as long as the sun.

Who is like thee, O GOD of Israel, which though thou sit upon the heavens,
and ridest upon the Cherubins, yet art thou our help and Savior, whose glory
is in the clouds and Celestial places.

The Eternal God be still her refuge, who has established her throne
amongst the English nation, to his own glory and their unspeakable comfort.

Thou have restored again, the liberty of our country, and the sincerity of
doctrine with peace and tranquillity. Thine, thine O Lord was the benefit, the
means, the labor and service was hirs, a burden too heavy, alas, for a woe
man's shoulders, yet easy and tolerable by thy helping hand.

Assiste her therefore O Lord, neither respect her offenses, or the deserts of
her parents, or the manifold sins of us her people, but think upon thy
wonted compassion, always at hand to thy poor afflicted.

That Israel as even now at this present, may still dwell alone in safety
and the fountain of Jacob be plentiful in issue in the land of wheat and
wine, and the heavens drop the deawe of thy blessing plentifully upon her
and her country.

Happy and blessed art thou, O Israel, that have such a Queen, that is so
honorable among women.

Let not the Scepter depart out ofhir hand, nor kingdom be diminished: but let
this thy most wise lawe-giuer, our meek Moises continue amongst us with honor
to judge the people and gather them unto thee long in rest and peace, even
until Silo our savior Jesus come, to crown her in his everlasting kingdom
with honor and triumph.

Bless her still O Lord, and give power unto thy Queen, that she may bestrong
to keep the feet of thy saints within the walls of thy Church, and cause the
wicked for ever to keep silence in darkness: Amen, quoth John Dauies.

The Authors submission.
WHen I considered the variable disposition of the sons of vanity, to gither
with the cross constructions of the ouerthawart carpers of our time, I had well
near withdrawn my purpose in publishing this treaty. But when I called to
mind, the causes that made me first take in hand this thankelesse task (which
is expressed upon the forefront thereof) it emboldened me to prosecute what
erst I had intended, and pre suming upon mine innocence in that whereofI may
any way be suspected or malitiouslie misconstred, I have (un der the protection
of my prince and countries favor) published the same, to such end and purpose
as in it is men tioned. Howbeit if I have spoken any thing, unfitting so
unlearned a clarke or contrary to the truth and mine own experience (which are
the soundest auerments) I humbly submit my self, and refer my little book to
be reformed and corrected (according to the rules of perfect piety) by those
of greter learning, and more approved judge meant. But for that I cheeflie aimed
at (namely the security of my soueraign and the prosperity of my country) I
hope God stirs up (by more worthy instruments) far better means daily for
the continuance thereof. This shall be nothing prejudicial, if it in that
respect, prove not so behoouefull as God grant it may. The ch urch militant,
whereof I hope I am a silly mem ber, shall not hereby be impaired, if not
reedisied, the godly offend d if not amended, nor the il disposed made worse
if not bettered For mine own part, if the least jot of any good yt may be
imagined, proceed from my small pains herein taken, to the Church aforesaid
or to the least member thereof I shall think my self, yea though I endure (as
I know I shall) the taunts of evil toongs, and the bitter fcofs of the
scornful: and if I do endure them (as I am well contented so to do) the
world gives me no worse mesure, then it did the Savior of the world, whose
holiness and innocence oflife (which I vilde earth and ashes cannot imitate)
could not shield him from wrongs of like nature, but out it breathed all
bitterness against him, yea though he came to redeem it from the bitterness
of bondage, whereunto it was by transgression worthily fallen, and therefore
far be it from me to grudge to drink of Christ his cup, that grudged not to
drink of deaths doleful cup for my misdeedes. So commending my countries
protection to the power inscrutable, and my soueraigns safety to the deity
unutterable, I rest to her and it, the same I seem, or as I ought to be.

John Dauies.

HAIL SACRED S(...)REIGN, THE COMFORT OF ISRAEL.
Joy thee betide, O Englands Parragon,
Whose grace preserues her glory undefaced:
Whose sacred heds the royal seat whereon
Rich Conquests Crown, triu^phantly is placed,
Whose luckie life prolongs thy peerlesse peace,
which God maintain with high renowms increse
O England, England, ten times happy Isle,
Rejoice thou may in this thy iemme ofioy,
On whom the king of heaven in love does smile,
And foiles her foes that would thy peace destroy.
Then since a king and Queen thy state does stay,
O bless them both, with condign praise alwaie:
And cast thine eyes upon thy neighbors woes,
Behold the plagues, wherewith each land's oppressed,
With judgment then compare thy state with those
And thou alone wilt think thy self art blessed,
Bless him therefore, that so has blessed thee,
And thou from age to age shall blessed be.
Compel thy peers, to keep obedience bounds,
That they may love their souer aign as they ought
Pen up thy pleasures in repentance pounds,
oue that is good, abandon that is naught:
And from thy coasts expel Hypocrisy.
In steed whereof embrace synceritie.
Beware of pride, eschew the sap of sin,
How sweet so ere it seem unto thy taste,
With oil of grace, now let thy lamp begin,
To give a light to all the world at last,
That such as are in darkness may thereby
Attain the light that lasts eternally.
Unto which light, thy light thou shall extend,
If in this light, thy light be not suppressed,
Then with this light, let thy delight ascend,
Unto that light, which light alone is blessed,
Thy light a loadstone leading to that light,
Which light is light of lights, still shining bright.
More bright (without compare) the^ burnisht gold,
More glittering gloriousthen the sparkling sun,
So bright that mortal eyes cannot behold,
The light thereof, until their light be done:
Unto which light, as to our chiefest good,
Bring thou us al, that boughtst us with thy blod.
John Dauies.


