Madagascar; WITH OTHER Poems.

BY W. DAVENANT.



LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for Thomas Walkly, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Flying Horse near York house. 1638.

Imprimatur,

Feb. 26. 1637. MATTHEW. CLAY

IF THESE POEMS LIVE, MAY THEIR MEMORIES, BY WHOM THEY WERE CHERISHED, END.
PORTER, H. IARMYN, LIVE WITH THEM.

TO My worthy Friend Mr. William Davenant; upon his Poem of Madagascar, which
he writ to the most Illustrions Prince RUPERT.
I Am compelled by your commands to write
In The Frontis-peece of this, and sure I might
With quaint conceirs, here to the World set forth
The merit of the Poem, and your worth;
Had I well fancied reasons to begin*
And a choice Mould, to cast good verses in:
But wanting these, what power (alas) have I
To write of any thing? will men rely
On my opinion? which in Verse, or Prose,
Has just that credit, which we give to those
That sagely whisper, secrets of the Court,
Having but Lees, for Essence, from Report.
And that is the knowledge which belongs to me;
For by what is said, I guess at Poetry:
As when I hear them read strong-lines, I cry
They Are rare, but cannot tell you rightly why:
And now I find this quality was it,
That made some Poet eite me for a wit:
Now God forgive him for that huge mistake!
If he did know, but with what pains I make
A Verse, hee*ld pity then my wretched case;
For at the birth of each, I twist my Face,
As if I drew a Tooth; I blot, and write,
Then look as pale, as some that go to fight:
With the whole Kennell of the Alphabet,
I hunt sometimes an hour, one Rhyme to get:
What I approved of once, I straight deny,
Like an unconstant Prince, then give the lie
To my own invention, which is so poor,
As here I Would kiss your hands, and say no more;
Had I not seen a child with Si^ors cut,
A folded Paper, unto which was put
More chance, than skill, yet when you open it,
You Would think it had been done, by Art and Wit:
So I (perhaps) may light upon some strain,
Which may in this your good opinion* gain;
And howsoever, if it be a plot,
You may be certain that in this, you have got
A foil to set your Jewel off, which comes
From Madagascar, scenting of rich gummes;
Before the which, my lay conceits will smell,
Like an abortive Chick, destroyed in the shell:
Yet something I must say, may it prove fit;
I Will do the best I can; and this is it.
What lofty fancy was it possessed your brain,
And caused you soar into so high a strain!
Did all the Muses join, to make this Piece
Excel what we have had, from Romo, or Greece?
Or did you strive, to leave it as a Friend
To speak your praises, when there is an end
Of your mortality? If you did so,
En^y will then, scarce find you out a Foe:
But let me tell you (Friend) the heightning came,
From the reflection of Prince Rupert's name;
Whose glorious Genius cast into your soul,
Divine conceits, such as are fit t'inroule,
In great Apollo's court, there to remain
For future ages to transcribe again:
For such a Poem, in so sweet a style,
As yet, was never landed on this Isle:
And could I speak your praises at each Pore,
Twere little for the work; it merits more.
Endimion Porter.

TO MY FRIEND Will. Davenant; upon his Poem of Madagascar.
WHat mighty Princes Poets are? those things
The great ones stick at, and our very Kings
Lay down, they venture on; and with great ease,
Discover, conquer, what, and where they please.
Some Phlegmatic Sea-Captaine, would have staid
For money now, or Victuals; not have waid
Anchor without'em; Thou ( will) do not stay
So much as for a Wind, but go away,
Land'st, View'st the Country; fight'st, put'st all to rout,
Before another could be putting out!
And now the news in town is; Dav'nant's come
From Madagascar, Fraught with Laurel home,
And welcome ( will) for the first time, but prithee
In thy next Voyage, bring the Gold too with thee.
I. Suckling.

On his other Poems.
THou have redeemed us, will; and future Times,
Shall not account unto the Age's crimes
Dearth of pure Wit: since the great Lord of i^
( Done) parted hence, no Man has ever writ
So near him, in's own way: I would-commend
Particulars, but then, how should I end
Without a Volume? Every Line of thine
Would ask (to praise it right) Twenty of mine.
I. Suckling.

To Will. Davenant my Friend.
WHen I behold, by warrant from thy Pen,
A Prince rigging our Fleets, arming our, Men,
Conducting to remotest shores our force
(Without a Dido to retard his course)
And thence repelling in successe-full fight,
Th'usurping Foe (whose strength was all his Right)
By two brave Heroes, (whom we justly may
By Homer's Ajax or Achilles lay,)
I doubt the Author of the Tale of Troy,
With him, that makes his Fugitive enjoy
The Carthage Queen, and think thy Poem may
Impose upon Posterity, as they
Have done on us: What though Romances lie
Thus blended with more faithful History?
We, of th'adult'rate mixture not complain,
But thence more Characters of Virtue gain;
More pregnant Patterns, of transcedent Worth,
Than barren and insipid Truth brings forth:
So, often the Bastard nobler fortune meets,
Than the dull Issue of the lawful sheets.
Thomas Carew.

TO MY FRIEND, Will. Davenant.
I Crouded' among the first, to see the Stage
(Inspired by thee) strike wonder in our Age,
By thy bright fancy dazzled: Where each Scene
Wrought like a charm, and forced the Audience lean
To t'h' passion of thy Pen: Thence Ladies went
(Whose absence Lovers sighed for) to repent
Their unkind scorn; And Courtiers, who by art
Made love before, with a converted heart,
To wed those Virgins, whom they wooed to abuse;
Both renderd Hymen's pros'lits by thy Muse.
But others who were proof against Love, did sit
To learn the subtle Dictats of thy Wit;
And as each profited, took his degree,
Master, or Bachelor, in Comedy.
Who on the Stage, though since they venter'd not,
Yet on some Lord, or Lady, had their plot
Of gain, or favor: Every nimble jest
They spoke of thine, b'ing the entrance to a Feast,
Or nearer whisper: Most thought fit to be
So far concluded Wits, as they knew thee.
But here the Stage thy limit was* Kings may
Find proud ambition humbled at the sea,
Which bounds dominion: But the nobler flight
Of Poesy, has a supremer right
To Empire, and extends her large command
Where ere th'invading Sea assaults the land.
Even Madagascar (which so often has been
Like a proud Virgin tempted, yet still seen
The Enemy Court the Wind for flight) does lie
A trophie now of thy Wits Victory:
Nor yet disdaines destruction to her state,
Encompast with thy Laurel in her fate.
William Habington.

Madagascar. A Poem written to Prince RUPERT.
MY Soul, this Winter, has been twice about
To shift her narrow Mansion, and look out;
To air her yet unpracticed wings, and try
Where Souls are entertained when Bodies die:
For this intended journey was to clear
Some subtle humane doubts, that vex her here,
And for no other cause; how ere the Court
Believe (whose cruel wits turn all to sport)
'Twas not to better my philosophy
That I would mount, and travel through the Sky,
As if I went, on Natures embassy;
Whose Legate there, Religion terms a Spy.
But these sick offers to depart, they call
A weariness of life, each Spring, and Fall:
And this belief (though well resolved before)
Made me so sullen, that I Will die no more
Than old Chaldean Prophets in their sleep;
Who still some relics of their Souls, would keep,
As gage for the return of what they sent,
For visions to the starry Firmament.
Thus in a dream, I did adventure out
Just so much Soul, as Sinners given to doubt
Of after usage, dare forgo a while:
And this swift Pilot steered unto an Isle,
Between the Southern Tropic and the Line;
Which (noble Prince) my prophecy calls thine:
There on a Crystal Rock I sat, and saw
The empire of the Winds, new kept in awe,
By things, so large, and weighty as did press
Waves* to Bubbles, or what unswell'd to less:
The Sea, for shelter hastened to the shore;
Sought harbor for it self, not what it bore:
So well these Ships could rule; where every Sail,
The subdued Winds, court with so mild a gale,
As if the spacious Navy lay adrift;
Sails swelled, to make them comely more than swift:
And then I spied (as cause of this command)
Thy mighty Uncles Trident in thy hand;
By which mysterious figure I did call
Thee chief, and universal Admiral!
For well our northern Monarch knows; howere
The Sea is dully held, the proper sphere
Wherein that Trident swayes, yet, in his hand
^t turns strait to a Scepter when on land:
And soon this wise assertion proved a truth;
For when thy self, with thy adventurous Youth
Were disimbarqu'd; strait with one lib'rall mind,
That long-lost, scatter'd-parcell of mankind,
Who from the first disordered throng did stray
And then fix here, now yield unto thy sway:
On Olive trees, their Quivers empty hung,
Their Arrows were unplum'd, their Bows unstrung:
But some from far, with jealous Optics trace
Lines of thy Mothers beauty in thy face:
By which, so much thou seem the God of love,
That with tumultuous haste they strait remove,
And hide, their Magazin of Archerie;
Lest what was their defense, might now supply
Thy Godhead, which is harmless yet; but know
When thou shall head a Shaft, and draw a Bow,
Each then thou conquerst, must a Lover be;
The worst estate of their captivity.
What sound is that! whose concord makes a jarre
It Is noise in peace, though harmony in war:
The Drum; whose doubtful Music does delight
The willing ear, and the unwilling fright.
Had wet Orion chosen to lament
His griefs at Sea, on such an Instrument;
Perhaps the martial Music might incite
The Sword-fish, Thrasher, and the Whale to fight,
But not to dance; the Dolphin he should lack,
Who to delight his ear, did load his back:
And now as Thunder, calls ere Storms do rise;
Yet not forewarnes, 'till just they may surprise;
Till the assembling clouds are met, to power
Their long provided fury in one shower;
Even so this little thunder of the Drum,
Foretold a danger just when it was come:
When strait mine Eye, might ratify mine Ear;
And see that true, which heard, was but my fear:
For in a firm well ordered body stood,
Erected Pikes, like a young leavelesse Wood;
And that showed dark, they were so close combined;
And every narrow File was double lined;
But with such nimble Ministers of fire,
That could so quickly charge, so soon retire,
That shot so fast; to say it lightened were
No praise, unto a Gunners motion there;
Nor yet to say, it lightened every where;
Their number thence, not swiftness would appear;
Since so incessant swift; that in mine eye,
Lightning seemed slow, and might be taught to fly!
It Is lawful then to say, thou did appear
To wonder much, although thou could not fear:
Thy knowledge (Prince) were younger than thy time,
^f not amazed; to see in such a clime,
Where Science is so new, men so exact,
^n Tactick Arts, both to design, and act.
These from unwieldy Ships (the day before)
The weary Seas disburdned on the shore:
In envy of thy hopes they hither came;
And Envy men in war Ambition name;
Ambition, Valor; but'tis valor's shame
When Envy feeds it more than noble Fame:
Strait I discerned by what their Ensign wears,
They are of those ambitious Wanderers;
Whose avaritious thoughts would teach them run,
As long continued journeys as the Sun;
And make the title of their strength, not right,
As known, and universal as his light:
For they believe their Monarch has subdued
Already such a spacious latitude;
That sure, the good old Planet's business is
Of late, only to visit what is his:
And those fair beams, which he did think his own
Are tribute now, and he, his subject grown;
Yet not impaired in title, since they call
Him kindly, his Surveyor-Generall.
Now give me Wine! and let my fury rise,
That what my travailed Soul's immortal eyes
With joy, and wonder saw, I may rehearse
To curious Ears, in high, immortal verse!
Two of this furious Squadron did advance;
Commanded to comprise the public chance
In their peculiar fates: Their Swords they drew;
And two, whose large renown their Nation knew,
Two of thy party (Prince) they called to try
By equal duel such a victory,
As gives the Victor's side a full command
Of what possessed by both, is neithers Land.
And this to save the Peoples common blood;
By whom although no cause is understood;
Yet Princes being vexed they must take care
To do not what they ought, but what they dare:
Their reason on their courage must rely;
Though they alike the quarrel justify,
And in their Princes kind indiff'rent eye
Are dutious fools, that either kill, or die.
This safe agreement by the general voice
Was ratified with vows; then strait thy choice
For the encounter (Prince) with greedy eye
I did entirely view; and both I spy
March to the List; whilst eithers cheerful look
Foretold glad hopes, of what they undertook.
Their looks; where forc'd-state-clouds, nere strive to lowre,
As if sweet feature, business could makesowre:
Where solemn sadness of a new court face,
Nere meant to signify their power, or place.
You may esteem them Lovers by their hair;
The color warnes no Lady to despair;
And Nature seemed to prove their stature such,
As took not scantly from her, nor too much:
So tall, we cannot mis-name their stature length,
Nor think'^ less made for comeliness, than strength.
Their hearts are more, than what we noble call,
And still make Envy weary of her Gall.
So gentle soft; their valors with more ease,
Might be betrayed to suffer than displease:
Compared to Lovers, Lovers were undone;
Since still the best gain by comparison.
Of these, the God-like Sidney was a Type,
Whose fame still grows, and yet is ever ripe;
Like fruits of Paradise, which naught could blast
But ignorance; for a desire to taste,
And know, produced no curse; but neut'rall will,
When knowledge made indiff'rent, good, and ill.
So whilst our judgment keeps unmixed, and pure,
Our Sidney's full-growne Fame will still endure:
Sidney, like whom these Champions strive to grace,
The silenced remnant of poor Orpheus race.
First those, whom mighty Numbers shall inspire;
Then those, whose easier art can touch his Lyre.
And they protect, those who with wealthier fare,
Old Zeuxis lucky Pen^ill imitate,
And those, who teach Lysippus Imag'rie;
Forms, that if once alive, would never die!
Which though no offices of life they taste,
Yet, like The Elements (life's preservers) last!
An Art, that travailes much, derived to us
From pregnant Rome, to Rome from Ephesus!
But whither am I fled? A Poets Song,
When love directs his praise, is ever long.
The Challenge was aloud; whilst every where
Men strive to show their hopes; and hide their fear.
They now stood opposite, and near: awhile
Their Eyes encountered, then in scorn they smile.
Each did disguise the fury of his heart,
By safe, and temperate exercise of Art.
Seemed to invite those thrusts they most decline,
Receive and then return in one true line:
As if, all Archymedes science were
In duel both expressed, and bettered there.
Each strove the others judgment to surpass;
Stood stiff, as if their postures were in brass.
But who can keep his cold wise temper long,
When honors warmes him, and his blood is young*
Those subtle figures, they in judgment chose
As guards secure, in rage they discompose:
Now Hazard is the play, Courage the Maine*
Which if it hits at first, assur's the gain:
But Honor throws at all; and in this strife,
When Honor plays, how poor a stake is life?
Which soon (alas!) the adverse Second found;
Made wise, by the example of a wound*
But Gamsters wisdom ever comes too late;
So dear it is bought, of that false Merchant Fate:
For our bold Second by that wound had wone*
The treasure of his strength; whilst quite undone,
He shrunk from this unlucky sport: but now
More angry wrinckles on his Rivals brow
Appeared, than hunted Lions wear; and all
His strength, he ventures on our Principal:
Who entertained his stream of fury so
As Seas meet Rivers whom they force to flow:
It is repulse makes Rivers swell, and he
Forced back, got courage from our victory:
Rivers, that Seas do teach to rage, are tossed,
And troubled for their pride, then quickly lost:
So he was taught that anger, which he spent
To make the others wrath more prevalent.
For in the next assault he felt the best,
First part of Man (the Monarch of his breast)
To sicken in its warm, and narrow Throne,
His Rivals hasty Soul, to shades unknown
Was newly fled; but his made greater haste,
His fears had so much sense of sufferings past*
Such danger he discerned in's Victors eye;
Whom he believed, so skilled in victory;
As if his Soul should near his body stay,
The cruel heavens, would ^each him find a way
To kill that too; by which, no pride (we see)
Can make us so profane as misery?
This when their Camp beheld, they strait abjure
That pity in their vow; which to secure
The public blood, ventured their hopes, and fame,
On Two, cause they could dye, were censured tame:
And to exhort, such vexed, and various Minds,
Were in a storm, to reconcile the Winds,
With whispered precepts of philosophy;
Arms, and Religion, seldom can comply.
Their faith they break, and in a Body draw
Their looser strength, to give the Victors law.
Charge! charge! the battle is begun! and now
I saw, thy Uncles anger in thy brow:
Which like Heavens fire, does seldom force assume,
Or kindle till it is fit, it should consume:
Heavens slow, unwilling fire; that would not fall,
'Till Two injurious Cities seemed to call
With their loud sins; and when it was time it must
Destroy; although it was severely just
To those, so much perverted in their will;
The righteous saw the fire, yet feared no ill.
So careless safe, here all the Natives were,
Who stood, as if too innocent to fear*
As if they knew, they Uncle bred thy Fate,
And his just anger thou did imitate.
But thy proud Foes, who thought the Morn did rise,
For no chief cause, but to salute their Eyes;
Are now enform'd by Death, it may grow Night
With them, yet others still enjoy the light:
For strait (me thought) their perished Bodies lay
To soil the Ground, they conquered yesterday.
O, why is valor prized at such a rate?
Or if a Virtue, why so fooled by Fate?
That Land, achiev'd with patient toil, and might
Of emulous encounter in the fight,
They must not only yield, when they must die,
But dead, it for the Victor fructify.
And now our Drums so fill each adverse Ear,
Their fellows groans, want room to enter there;
Like Ships near Rocks, when storms are grown so high,
They cannot warn each other with their cry:
Even so, not hearing what would make them fly,
All stayed, and sunk, for sad society:
Their wounds are such, the Neighboring Rivers need
No Springs to make them flow, but what they bleed*
Where Fishes wonder at their red-dy'd flood,
And by long nourishment on humane blood,
May grow so near a kin to men, that he
who feeds on them hereafter, needs must be
Esteemed as true a Caniball, as those
Whose luscious diet is their conquered Foes.
Sure Adam when himself he first did spy
So singular, and only in his eye;
Yet knew, all to that single self pertain'd,
Which the Sun saw, or Elements sustained;
He not believed, a race from him might come
So numerous, that to make new offspring room,
Is now the best excuse of Nature, why
Men long in growth, so easily must die.
Eden, which God did this first Prince allow,
But as his Privie-garden then, is now
A spacious Country found; else we supply
With dreams, not truth, long lost Geographie:
And each high Island then (though nere so wide)
Was but his Mount, by Nature fortified;
And every Sea, wherein those Islands float,
Most aptly then, he might have called his Moat.
Parts, and divisions were computed small,
When rated by his measure that had all:
And all was Adams when the world was new;
Then strait that all, succeeded to a few;
Whilst men were in their size, not number strong;
But since, each Couple is become a Throng:
Which is the cause we busy every wind
(That studious Pilots in their compass find)
For Lands unknown: where those who first do come
Are not held strangers, but arrive at home:
Yet he that next shall make his visit there,
Is punished for a Spy and Wanderer:
Not that Man's nature is a verse from peace;
But all are wisely jealous of increase:
For Eaters grow so fast, that we must drive
Our friends away to keep our selves alive:
And War would be less needful, if to die,
Had bin as pleasant as to multiply.
Forgive me Prince, that this aspiring flame
(First kindled as a light, to show thy fame)
Consumes so fast, and is misspent so long,
Ere my chief Vision is become my Song,
Thy self I saw, quite tired with victory;
As weary grown to kill, as they to die:
Whilst some at last, thy mercy did enjoy
'Cause it was less pains, to pardon than destroy;
And thy compassion did thy Army please,
In mere belief, it gave thy Valor ease.
Here in a calm began thy regal sway;
Which with such cheerful hearts, all did obey,
As if no Law, were juster than thy word;
Thy Scepter still were safe, without a Sword.
And here Chronologers pronounce thy style;
The first true Monarch of the Golden Isle:
An Isle, so seated for predominance,
Where Navall strength, its power can so advance,
That it may tribute take, of what the East
Shall ever send in traffic to the West.
He that from cursed Mahomet derives
His sinful blood: the Sophy too, that strives
To prove, he keeps that very Chair in's Throne,
The Macedonian Youth last sat upon:
And he, whose wilder pride, makes him abhor
All but the Sun, for his Progenitor;
Whose Mother sure, was ravished in a dream,
By somes over hot, lascivious Noone-day-beame;
From whence, he calls himself, The wealth of sight,
The Morn's Executor, the Heir of Light:
And he, that thinks his rule extends so far,
He hopes, the former Three his Vassailes are:
Compared to him, in War he rates them less,
Than Corporals; than Constables in peace:
And hopes the mighty Presbiter stands bare
In^rev'rence of his name, and will not dare
To wear (though sick) his purple Turband on
Within a hundred Leagues, of his bright Throne.
These Mortal Gods, for traffic still disperse
Their envied wealth, throughout the universe;
In Caracks, built so wide, that they want room
In narrow Seas; or in a Iunck, whose womb
So swells, as could our wonder be so mad,
To think that Boats, or Ships their sexes had;
Who them beheld, would simply say; sure these
Are near their time, and big with Pinnaces:
Yet though so large, and populous, they all
Must tribute pay, unto thy Admiral.
Now Wealth (the cause, and the reward of War)
Is greedily explored: some busy are
In virgin Mines; where shining gold they spy,
That darkens the Celestial Chymicks eye*
I wished my Soul had brought my body here,
Not as a Poet, but a Pioner.
Some near the deepest shore are sent to dive;
Whilst with their long retentive breath they strive
To root up Coral Trees, where Mermaids lie,
Sighing beneath those Precious boughs, and die
For absence of their scaly Lovers lost
In midnight storms, about the Indian coast.
Some find old Oysters, that lay gapeing there
For every new, fresh flood, a hundred year;
From these they rifle Pearls whose ponderous size
Sinks weaker Divors when they strive to rise:
So big, on Carckonets were never scene,
But where some well trussed Giantesse is Queen;
For though they are Orient, and designed to deck,
Their weight would yoke a tender Ladies Neck.
Some climb, and search the Rocks, till each have found
A Saphyr, Ruby, and a Diamond:
That which the Sultan's glistrings Bride does wear,
To these would but a Glowormes eye appear:
The Tuscan Duk's compared, shows sick, and dark;
These living Stars, and his a dying spark.
And now I saw (what urged my wonder more)
Black Suds of Ambar-Greece, float to the shore:
Whilst rude'dull Mariners, who hardly can
Distinguish Buffe, or Hides, from Cordovan,
(Since gloves they never wear) this Ointment use
Not to perfume, but supple their parched Shoes.
Now others hasten to the woods, and there
Such fruits for taste and odor, every where
Are seen; that the Merabolan by some
Is slighted as a course sour winter-Plumme.
Then new temptations make them all in love
With wandering, till invited to a Grove,
They strait those silken little Weavers spy,
That work so fast on leaves of Mulberie:
The Persian worm (whose weary summer toils
So long has been the rusling Courtiers spoils)
Compared to these, lives ever lazily,
And for neat spinning is a bungling Fly!
Such hopes of wealth discerned, it is hard to say
How gladly reason did my faith obey;
As if that miracle would now appear,
Which turns a Poet to an Usurer:
But reason soon will with our faith conspire,
To make that easy which we much desire:
Nor, Prince, will I despair; though all is thine,
That Pioners now dig from every Mine;
Though all, for which on slippery Rocks they strive,
Or gather when in Seas they breathless dive;
Though Poets such unlucky Prophets are,
As still foretell more blessings than they share;
Yet when thy noble choice appeared, that by
Their Combat first prepared thy victory;
Endimion, and Arigo; who delight
In Numbers and make strong my Muses flight!
These when I saw; my hopes could not abstain,
To think it likely I might twirle a Chain
On a judicial Bench: learn to demurre,
And sleep out trials in a gown of Furre,
Then reconcile the rich, for Gold-fring'd-gloves,
The poor, for God-sake, or for Sugar-loaves!
When I perceiav'd, that cares on wealth rely;
That I was destined for authority,
And early Gowts; my Soul in a strange fright
From this rich Isle began her hasty flight;
And to my half dead Body did return,
Which new inspired, rose cheerful as the Morn.
Heroique Prince, may still thy acts, and name,
Become the wonder and discourse of Fame;
May every Laurel, every Myrtle bough,
Be stripped for Wreaths, t'adorne, and load thy brow;
Triumphant Wreaths, which cause they never fade,
Wise elder times, for Kings and Poets made:
And I deserve a little sprig of Bay,
To wear in Greece on Homers Holy Day;
Since I assume, when I thy Battles write,
That very flame, which warmed thee in the fight.
FINIS.
Elysium. To the Duchess of BVCKINGHAM.
MADAM,
SO sleeps the Anchoret on his cheap bed,
(whose sleep wants only length to prove him dead)
As I last night, whom the swift wings of Thought,
Conveyed to see what our bold faith had taught;
Elysium, where restored forms nere fade;
Where growth can need no seeds, nor light a shade;
The joys which in our flesh, through frail expense
Of strentgh, through age, were lost to our injured sense,
We there do meet again; and those we taste
Anew, which though devoured, yet ever last:
The scattered treasure of the Spring, blown by
Autumn's rude winds from our discovery;
Lillies, and Roses; all that is fair and sweet,
There reconciled to their first roots we meet:
There, only those triumphant Lovers reign,
Whose passions knew on earth so little stain,
Like Angels they nere felt what sexes meant;
Virtue, was first their nature, then intent:
There, toyling Victors safely are possessed,
With servent youth, eternity, and rest;
But they were such, who when they got the field;
To teach the conquered, victory, could yield
Themselves again; as if true glory were
To bring the foe to courage, not to fear.
There are no talking Greeks, who their blood lost,
Not for the cause, but for a theme to boast;
As if they strove enough for Fame, that sought
To have their Batailes better told, than fought.
There I a Vestal's Shadow first did spy,
Who when a live with holy huswifry,
Tricked up in lawne, and flowery Wreaths (each hand
Clean as her thoughts) did'fore the Altar stand:
So busy still, strewing her Spice, and then
Removing Coals, vexing the Fire again,
As if some queasie Goddess had professed,
To taste no smoke that day, but what she dressed:
This holy coil she living kept; but far
More busy now, with more delightful care
Than when she watched the consecrated Flame,
Sh'attends the Shade of gentle Buckingham;
Who there unenvi'd sits, with Chaplets crowned;
And with wise scorn, smiles on the Peoples wound;
He called it so; for though it touched his heart,
His Nation feels the rancour, and the smart.
TO The Lord D. L. upon his Marriage.
We that are Orpheus Sons, and can inherit
By that great title, naught but's numerous spirit;
His broaken Harp, and when we are tired with moan,
A few small Trees of Bay to hang it on.
We that successively can claim no more,
From such a poor unlucky Ancestor;
Must now (my noble Lord) take thrifty care,
To know, what modern wealth the Muses share?
Or how it is disposed? and strait we find
Great, pow'rfall Love, has bount'ously resigned
Into your happy Arms, the chief, and best,
Of all that our ambitious hopes possessed:
Your noble Bride; to whose eternal Eyes,
We daily offered Wreaths in Sacrifice:
Whose warmth gave Laurel growth, whose every beam
Was first our influence, and then our theme:
Whose breast (too narrow for her heart) was still
Her reasons Throne, and prison to her will:
And since, this is your willing faith; it is fit
What all the kind, and wiser Stars commit
Unto your charge, be with such eager love,
And soft indeerements used, as well may prove,
They meant, when first they taught you how to woo^,
She should be happy, and the Muses too*
Live still, the pleasure of each others sight;
To each, a new made wonder, and delight;
Though two, yet both so much one constant mind,
That it will be art, and mystery to find
(Your thoughts and wishes, being still the same)
From which of eithers loving heart they came.
A Journey into Worcestershire.
THree, who (if kinder Destinies shall please)
May all dye rich, though they love Wit, and ease;
And I, whom some odd hum'rous Planet bid
To register the doughty acts they did,
Took horse; leaving in the Town, ill Plays, sour Wine,
Fierce Sergeants and the plague; besides of mine
An Ethnic Tailor too, that was far worse
Than these, or what just Heaven did ever curse.
Scarce was the busy City left behind,
But from the South arose a busier Wind;
Which sent us so much rain, each man did wish,
His hands and legs, were Finnes, his Horse, a Fish.
Dull as a thick-skull'd- Justice, drunk with Sloth;
Or Alderman (far gone in Capon Broth)
We all appeared; no man gave breath to thought;
But like to silent Traitors in a Vault,
Dug on our way; or as we Traitors were
To Our selves, and jealous of each others Ear:
And as in the Worlds great Shower, some that did spy
(Horsed on the Plains) Rivers, and Seas draw nigh;
Spurred on apace; in fear all lost their time,
That could not reach a ground where they might climb;
So we did never think us safe, until
We had attained the Top o'th first high Hill:
And now it cleared: so to my travailed Eye,
Looks a round yellow Dane, when he does spy
Near to his puissant Arm, a Bowl so full,
That it may fill his Bladder, and his Skull,
As Phoebus at this moisture fallen; who laughed;
To see such plenty for his mornings draught:
But like Chamelions Colors that decay
But seemingly to give new colors way;
So our false griefs, had not themselves outworne,
But stepped aside, to vary in return.
Bear witness World! for now my tired Horse stood,
As I, a Vaulter were, and himself Wood:
As if some Student fierce, the day before
Had spurred his full half Crown from him, and more.
Endimion cries, away! What make we here?
To draw a Map, or gather Juniper?
More cruel than Shrove-Prentices, when they
(Drunk in a Brothell House) are bid to pay;
Or than the Bawd at Sessions, to that vilde
Indicted Rout, which first her house until'de,
Is now the Captain; who laughing swore; thus,
Each puny Poet rides his Pegasus.
But what is the cause my Lord spurs on amain,
As if t'outride a Tartar, not the Rain;
Some such swift Tartar as might safely say,
To an inviting friend, that tempts his stay;
Farewell; thou see the Sun declined long since,
And I Am to sup a Hundred miles from hence.
My Lord (me thought) as he had heard this same,
Rod post, to eat that supper ere he came.
And now, my Mule moves too; but with such speed,
As Prisoners to a Psalm, that cannot read:
Yet we reached Wickham, with the early Night:
Which to describe to Ears, or draw to Sight;
For situation, or for form, for height,
For strength, or magnitude, would (in good faith)
But stale the price o'th Map; small credit be
To Our Poem, less to our Geographie:
Or as your riding Academicks use,
To toil, and vex, a long fed mutton-Muse,
With taking the circumference of mine Host,
Or his Wives sumitrie, were time worse lost;
Since nor Taurentius, nor Van-dike, have yet
Command to draw them for the King in great.
He that to night ruled each delighted breast,
Gave to the pallat of each Ear a feast;
With joy of pledges made our sour wine sweet,
And nimble as the leaping juice of Creet;
Was, the brave Endimion; whose triumphs, clear,
From cruel tyranny, or too nice fear;
Having wit still ready, and no huge sin
To cause a sadness that might keep it in,
Let fly at all; the Shafts were keen; and when
They missed to pierce, he strongly drew again*
But Sleep, whom Constables obey, though they
Have twenty Bills to keep him off till day:
Sleep, whom the high tuned Cloth-worker, Weaver tall,
Nor Cobbler shrill, with Catches or his Aule,
Knows to resist, sealed up our lips, and sight;
Making us blind, and silent as the Night.
Our other Sallies, and th'adventures we
Achiev'd, deserve new brain, new History.
To Endimion Porter.
I Gave, when last I was about to die;
The Poets of this Isle a Legacy;
Each so much wealth, as a long union brings
T'industrious States, or Victory to Kings:
So much as Hope's closed Eyes, could wish to see,
Or tall Ambition reach; I gave them thee.
But as rich Men, who in their sickness mourn
That they must go, and never more return,
To be glad Heirs unto themselves, to take
Again, what they unwillingly forsake;
As these bequeath, their treasure, when they dye,
Not out of love, but sad necessity;
So I (they thought) did cunningly resign
Rather than give, what could no more be mine:
And they received thee not, from bounteous Chance,
Or me; but as their own inheritance.
This, when I heard, I cancelled my fond Will;
Tempted my faith to my Physicians skill;
To purchase health, sung praises in his Ear,
More than the Living of the Dead would hear.
For though our gifts, buy care, naught justly pays
Physicians love, but faith, their art, but praise:
Which I observed; now walk, as I should see
A death of all things, save thy memory.
But if this early Vintage shall create
New wishes in my blood, to celebrate
Thee Endimion, and thy Muse, thy large heart,
Thy wisdom that has taught the world an art
How (not enform'd by Cunning,) courtship may
Subdue the mind, and not the Man betray:
If me (thy Priest) our curled Youth assign,
To wash our Fleet Street Altars with new Wine;
I will (since it is to thee a Sacrifice)
Take care, that plenty swell not into vice:
Lest, by a fiery surfe^ I be led,
Once more to grow devout in a strange bed:
Lest through kind weakness in decay of health,
Or vanity to show my utmost wealth;
I should again bequeath thee when I die,
To haughty Poets as a Legacy.
TO THE QVEENE, entertained at night by the Countess of Anglesey.
Fair as unshaded Light; or as the Day
In its first birth, when all the Year was May;
Sweet, as the Altars smoke, or as the new
Unfolded Bud, swelled by the early Dew;
Smooth, as the face of Waters first appeared,
Ere Tides began to strive, or Winds were heard;
Kind, as the willing Saints, and calmer far,
Than in their sleeps forgiven Hermits are:
You that are more, than our discreeter fear
Dares praise, with such dull Art, what make you here?
Here, where the Summer is so little seen,
That Leaves (her cheapest wealth) scarce reach at green;
You come, as if the silver Planet were
Misled a while from her much injured Sphere,
And t'ease the travailes of her beams to night,
In this small Lanthorn would contract her light.
In remembrance of Master William Shakespeare.
ODE.
(1)
BEware (delighted Poets!) when you sing
To welcome Nature in the early Spring;
Your numerous Feet not tread
The Banks of Avon; for each Flower
(As it nere knew a Sun or Shower)
Hangs there, the pensive head.
(2)
Each Tree, whose thick, and spreading growth has made,
Rather a Night beneath the Boughs, than Shade,
(Unwilling now to grow)
Looks like the Plume a Captive wears,
Whose rifled Falls are steept in the reares
Which from his last rage flow.
(3)
The piteous River wept it self away
Long since (Alas!) to such a swift decay;
That reach the Map; and look
If you a River there can spy;
And for a River your mocked Eye,
Will find a shallow Brook.
To the Lady Bridget Kingsmill; sent with Mellons after a report of my Death.
MAdam, that Ghosts have walked; and kindly did
Convey Men heretofore to money hid;
That they wear Chains, which rattle 'till they make
More noise, than injured Ale-wives at a Wake;
All this is free to faith; but Sozomine,
Nor the Abbot Tretenheim, nor Rh^digine,
Nor the ^ew Trip^o, though they all defend
Such dreams, can urge one Ghost that Verses pend:
Therefore, be pleased to think, when these are read;
I am no Ghost, nor have been three weeks dead.
Yet Poets that so nobly vain have been,
To want so carelessly, till want prove sin;
Through avarice of late, toth' Arches sent,
To know the chief within my Testament:
And the Aldermen by Charter, title lay
('Cause writ 'ith City's Virge) to my new Play:
So if, the Proclamations, kind, nice care,
Keep you not (Madam) from our black raw Air,
Next Term, you will find it owned thus on each Wall
Writ by the Lord May'r, acted at Guild Hall.
But then I must be dead; which if you will
In courteous pity fear, and suspect still;
These Mellons shall approach your pensive Eye,
Not as a Token but a Legacy.
Would they were such, as could have reached the sense,
To know what use they had of excellence,
Since destined to be yours; such as would be
(Now yours) justly ambitious of a Tree
To grow upon; scorn a dejected birth,
Course German Tiles, low Stalks, that lace the Earth*
Such, as since gladly yours, got skill, and power,
To choose the strongest Sun, and weakest Shower*
Such, as in Groves Cecilian Lovers eat,
To cool those wishes, that their Ladies heat.
But if the Gardener make (like Adam) all
Our human hopes, bold, and apocryphal;
And that my Mellons prove no better than
Those lovely Pompe'ons, which in Barbican,
Fencers, and Vaulters Widows please to eat,
Not as a Sallad, but cheap-filling-meat;
Think then I Am dead indeed; and that they were
Early bequeathed, but paid too late in the Year:
So the just scorns, of your loved wit, no more
Can hazard me, but my Executor.
To the King on Newyeares day 1630.
ODE.
(1)
THe joys of eager Youth, of Wine, and Wealth,
Of Faith untroubled, and unphysick'd Health;
Of Lovers, when their Nuptials nie,
Of Saints forgiven when they die;
Let this year bring
To Charles our King:
To Charles, who is the example, and the Law,
By whom the good are taught, not kept in awe.
(2)
Long proffered Peace, and that not compassed by
Expensive Treaties but a Victory;
And Victories by Fame obtained,
Or prayer, and not by slaughter gained;
Let this year bring:
To Charles our King.
To Charles; who is the example, and the Law,
By whom the good are taught, not kept in awe.
(3)
A Session too, of such who can obey,
As they were gathered to consult, not sway:
Who not rebel, in hope to git
Some office to reclaim their wit;
Let this year bring
To Charles our King;
To Charles; who is the example and the law,
By whom the good are taught, not kept in awe.
(4)
Prators, who will the public cause defend,
With timely gifts, not Speeches finely pend;
So make the Northern Victors Fame
No more our envy, nor our shame;
Let this year bring
To Charles our King:
To Charles; who is the example, and the law,
By whom the good are taught, not kept in awe.
TO THE QVEENE, presented with a suit, in the behalf of F. S. directed, From
Orpheus Prince of Poets, To the Queen of Light; In favor of a young listner
to his Harp.
I Sing these Numbers in the shady Land,
Where Ayrie Princes dwell; which I command
Some Spirit, or some Wind, gently convey
To you, whose breath is Spring, whose Eie-beames Day!
Against your arrival here, which must be late;
(Such power the prayers of Mortals have with Fate)
Fields I have dressed, so rich in scent, and show;
As if your influence taught our Flowers to grow:
Where still delighted you shall nobly move;
Not like a sad Shadow, as they above
With learned falsehood most unkindly dream
Of every Ghost; but like a beauteous Beam.
The Lilly, and the Rose; which Lovers seek,
Not on their stalks, but on their Ladies Cheek;
Shall here not dare take root; nor yet the strange
And various Tulip; which so often does change
Her amorous Colors to a different hew,
That yearly Men believe the Species New.
In stead of these; on every Bank I Will show
(Blithe on his stem) the nice Adonis grow;
Who though, in's beauties warm'th beloved of old;
His transmutation only makes him cold;
For the amazed Goddess now perceives,
Him scarce so fair in's Flesh, as in his Leaves.
Then proud Narcissus; whose rare beauty had
^arre less excuse, and cause, to make him mad,
Then in his own Eyes, flourishing alive;
Than since he was become a Vegative.
With these, the jealous Crocus, and the chaste
^emone, whose blushes ever last.
^ow for a cooling Shade, what use have we
^f the delightful Lydian-Platan-Tree,
Which X^rxes so much loved, or of the Lime,
Or the tall Pine, which spreads, as it does climb?
Or Lovers Sicamore, or mine own Bay?
On which, since my Euridices sad day,
My Harp has silent hung: No Trees your Bower
Shall need; the slender stalk of every Flower,
When you arrive among us, and dispense
The lib'rall comfort of your influence,
Shall reach at Body, Rind, and Boughs; then grow
Till't yield a Shade, as well as Scent, and Show,
For your Attendants here; Tomiris, she
That taught her tender sex, the ways to victory;
The Queen of Ithaca, whose precious name
For chaste desires, is decre to us, and Fame;
And Artimesia whom Truths best Record,
Declared a living Tomb unto her Lord,
Shall ever wait upon your sway; and when
The Destinies are so much vexed with Men,
That the just God-like Monarch of your breast,
Is ripe, and fit to take eternal rest;
To court his spirit here, I will not call
The testy Pyrrhus, or malicious Hanibal;
Nor yet the fiery Youth of Macedon,
Shall have the dignity to attend his Throne:
But mighty I^lius, who had thoughts so high
They humble seemed, when th'aim'd at victory;
And owned a Soul so learned; Truth feared that she
Might stand too naked, near his Philosophy:
In anger, valiant, gently calm, in love;
He soared an Eagle, but he stooped a Dove!
Know, Queen of light; he only does appear,
Fit to embrace your Royal Lover here:
Nor think my promise is the ayrie boast
Of a dead Greek, a thinne-light-talking-Ghost:
It shall be well performed; and all I dare
For those just toils commend unto your care;
Is but a Poets humble suit; who now
With everlasting Wreaths may deck his Brow;
Since first your Poet called; and by that style
He is my Deputy throughout your Isle.
To the Lord B. in performance of a vow, that night to write to him.
MY Lord, it has been asked, why amongst those few
I singled out for Fame, I chose not you
With early speed the first? but I, that strive
My manners should preserve my Verse alive;
That read Men, and my self; would not permit
The boldness of my love, should tax my wit.
There are degrees, that to the Altar lead;
Where every rude, dull Sinner must not tread:
It Is not to bring, a swift thankes-giving Tongue,
Or prayers made as vehement as long,
Can privilege a zealous Votarie,
To come, where the High Priest should only be:
Then why should I (where some more skillful hand
May offer Gummes, and Spice) strew Dust, and Sand
And this (my chief of Lords) made me design*
Those noble flames, sprung from your nobler Wine,
To keep my spirits warm; till I could prove
My Numbers smooth, and mighty as my love:
Yet such my treacherous fate, that I this night
(Fierce with untutored heat) did vow to write:
But happy those, who undertake no more
Than what their stock of rage has ruled before!
It is a Poet's sin, that does excel
In love, or wine, not to resolve how well,
But strait how much to write; for then we think
The vast tumultuous Sea is but our Ink;
The World, our Forest too; and that we may
Believe each Tree, that in it grows, a Bay.
My Vow now kept, I Am loath (my Lord) to do
Wrong to your justice, and your mercy too;
The last, if you vouchsafe; you will excuse
A strong Religion here, though not a Must*
To Endimion Porter.
HOw safe ( Endimion) had I lived? how blessed,
In all the silent privacies of rest?
How might I lengthen sleeps, had I been wise
Unto my self, and never seen thine Eyes?
My Verse (unenvied then) had learned to move
A slow, meek pace; like sober Hymns of love
By some noch'd-Brownist sung; that would indeere
His holy itch, to some chaste Midwives Ear:
The pleasure of ambition then had bin,
To me lost in the danger, and the sin:
The Myrtle Sprig (that never can decay)
^ had not known, nor Wreaths of living Bay:
In stead of these, and the wild Ivy Twine,
(Which our wise Fathers justly did assign,
To him that in immortal Verse exceeds)
My Brow had worn, some homly Wreath of Weeds:
And such low pride is safe: for though the Bay
Lightning, nor Winds can blast, yet Envy may.
If hidden still from thee, I should have less
To answer now, for glory, and excess:
My surfets had not reached the cunning yet,
To seek an expiation from their wit:
For more than Village Ale, and drowsy Beer,
(Cawdles, and Broth to the dull Islander)
I nere had wished; now, My Man, hot, and dry,
With fierce transcriptions of my Poesy;
Cries, Sir, I thirst! then strait I bid him choose
(As Poets Prentices did surely use
Of Greece, and Rome) some clear, cheap Brook; there stay,
And drink at Natures charge his thirst away:
Though Fasts (more than are taught in the Calendar)
Had made him weak; this gave him strength to swear;
And urge, that after H^race the divine
Maecenas knew, his Slaves drunk ever Wine:
So whilst Endimion lives, he vows to pierce
Old Gascoine Caske, or not transcribe a verse.
If never known to thee, missing the skill
How to do good, I should have found my ill
Excused: Th'excessive charge of Ink, and Oil,
Expense of quiet sleeps, and the vain toil,
In which the Priest of Smyrna took delight,
(When he for knowledge changed his precious sight)
Had escaped me then; now whilst I strive to please
With tedious Art, I lose the lust of ease.
And when our Poets (enviously miss-led)
Shall find themselves out-written, and out-read;
It Will urge their sorrow too, that thou did give
To my weak Numbers, strength, and joy to live.
But O! uneasy thoughts! what will become
Of me, when thou retir'st into a Tomb?
The Cruel, and the Envious then will say,
Since now his Lord is dead; he that did sway
Our public smiles, opinion, and our praise,
Till we this Child of Poesy did raise
To Fame, and love; let us drown him in our Ink;
Where like a lost dull Plummet let him sink
From humane sight; from knowledge he was borne;
Unless Succession find him in our scorn.
Remembrance, never to Repentance shows,
The wealth we gain, but what we fear to lose;
Thou art my wealth; and more than Light ere spied,
Than Eastern Hills bring forth, or Seas can hide:
But thus when I rejoice, my fears divine,
I want the fate, still to preserve thee mine:
And Kings deposed, wish they had never known
Delight, nor sway; which erst they toiled to own.
Ieffereidos, Or the Captivity of Jeffery.
Canto the first.
A Sail! a sail! cried they, who did consent
Once more to break the eighth Commandment
For a few Coals; of which by theft ^o well
They Are stored; they have enough to furnish Hell
With penal heat; though each sad Devil there
A frozen Muscovite, or Russian were:
The chase grew swift; whilst an old weary Pinke,
Not used to fly, and somewhat loath to sink,
Did yield unto the Foe; who boards^her strait;
And having rifled all her precious Freight;
A trembling Britain kneeles, and did beseech
Each composition there, of Tar and Pitch,
That they would hear him speak: it is not (quoth he)
Our kind respect to wealth, or liberty,
Begets this fear; but lest blind Fortune may
Unto some fierce, unruly hand betray,
The truest Servant to a State, that could
Be given a Nation out of flesh and blood:
And he tall Ieff'ry height! who not much used
To fights at Sea, and loath to be abused,
Resolved to hide him, where they sooner might
Discover him, with smelling than with sight.
Each Eye was now employed; no man could think
Of any uncouth Nooke, or narrow Chinke,
But strait they ^ought him there; in holes not deep
But small, where slender Magots used to creep:
At last, they found him clo^e, beneath a spick
And almost span-new-pewter-Candlestick.
A sapient Dicgo, that had now command
Of Ships and Victory, took him in hand:
Peis'd him twice, tasted his discourse; at^ength
Believed, that he di^sembled wit, and strength:
Quoth he, Victors, and Vanqui^hed* I bid
You all give ear, to wisdom of Madrid*
This that appears to you, a walking-Thumbe,
May prove, the general Spy of Christendom:
Then calls for Chains, but such as fitting seem,
For Elephants, when managed in a Teeme.
Whilst puissant Ieff'ry 'gins to wish (in vain)
He had long since contrived a truce with Spain.
His Sinews fail him now; nor does he yield
Much trust unto his Buckler, or his Shield;
Yet threatens like a second Tamberlaine,
To bring them before the Queens Lord-Chamberlaine*
Because without the leave, of him, or her,
They keep her Houshold-Servant prisoner.
Diego, that studied wrath, more than remorse,
Commands, that they to Dunkerk steer their course:
Whilst Captive- Ieffr'y snewes to wiser sight,
Just like a melancholy Isralite,
In midst of's journey unto Babylon;
Melt marble hearts, that chance to think thereon*
The Winds are guilty too; for now behold
Already landed this our Britain bold!
The People view him round; some take their oath
He Is humane Issue, but not yet of growth:
And others (that more sub'tly did confer)
Think him a small, contracted Conjurer:
Then Diego, Bred^o names! Hemskerk! and cries,
Hans van Geulick! Derick too! place your Thighs
On this judicial Bench; that we may sit
T'undoe, this short-Embassadour with wit.
One, feign would know's descent: Thou Pirat-Dogge
(The wrathful Captive then replied) not Ogge
(The Bashan King) was my Progenitor;
Nor do I strive, to fetch my Ancestor
From Anack's Sons, nor from the Genitals
Of wrestling- Cacus, who gave many falls.
No matter for his birth, said Diego then;
Bring hither strait the Rack! for it is Ten
To one, this will enforce from out his Pate,
Some secrets, that concern the English State.
But O! true, loyal Heart! he would not one word
Reveal, that he had heard at Councell-bord.
Some asked him then, his business late in France;
What Instruments lay there concealed to advance
The Bri^tish cause? when they perceived his heart;
Was big, and whilst enforced, would naught impart;
Diego arose; and said, Sir, I beseech you,
Acquaint us if the Cardinal de Richel^eu
Intend a war, in Italy, or no?
(Most noble Ieff'ry still ^) he seems to know
Naught of that point; though diverse think, when there;
The Cardinal did whisper in his ear
The Scheame of all his plots; and sought to gain
His company along with him to Spain;
For thither he will march, if he can byth' way
Sweep a few durty Nations intoth' Sea.
A solemn Monk, that silent stood close by,
Believed this little Captive, a Church-Spie!
Quoth he, that shrivled face, has Schysme in it;
And lately there is a learned volumne writ,
Wherein Ben-^harky, and Ben-Ezra too,
And Rabin Kimky eke, a learned Jew,
Are cited all; it labors to make good,
That there were Protestants before the Flood;
And thou its Author art: Ieff'ry swore then,
He never knew those Hebrew Gentlemen!
When they perceived, nor threats, nor kindness sought
From love, could get him to discover ought;
Diego leaves the Table; swears by his Skarffe;
The thing, they doubted thus, was a mere Dwarffe.
The fleetest Izeland-Shock, they then provide;
On which they mount him strait, and bid him ride:
He weeps a tear or two, for's Jewels lost;
And so, with heavy heart, to Bruxels post.
Ieffereidos, Or the Captivity of Jeffery.
Canto the second.
SO runs the nimble Snayle, in slimy track,
Hastening with all his Tenement on's back;
And so, on goodly Cabidge-leafe, the fleet
Swift-Caterpiller moves with eager feet,
As this sad Courtier now; whose mighty Steed
May for an easy amble, or for speed,
Compare with gentle Bull in Yoke: But O!
Here now begins a Canticle of woe!
Chide cruel Fate, whose buisnesse in the Spheres,
Wise Ieff'ry notes, is but to cause our Tears:
Their rule, and power (quoth he) is understood,
More in the harm they do us, than the good:
And this he said, because he scarce had driven
Along that Coast, the length of Inches Seven,
But down his Izeland fell; some Authors say
A burly Oak, lay there disguised in's way;
Others a Rush; and some report, his Steed
Did stumble, at the splinter of a Reed;
And some (far more authentic) say agin,
'Twas at a hair, that dropped from humane Chin:
But though, the sage Historians are at strife,
How to resolve this point; his Coursers life
They hold lost in the fall; whilst the discreet
Ieff'ry was forced, to wander on his Feet.
Old wives, that saw the sorrows of this Spy,
Their withered Lips (thinner than Lids of Eye)
Strait opened wide; and tickled with his wrongs,
Did laugh, as if it were ^ech'ry to their Lungs;
And Diego too, whose grave, and solemn Brow,
Was ever knit, grew loud, and wanton now:
O for a Guard (quoth he) of Switzers here,
To heave that Giant up! but come not near;
For now enraged, he may perchance so toss us,
As you would think, you touched a live Colossus!
This Ieff'ry heard; and it did stir his gall,
More than his Coursers death, or his own fall.
Sorrows, that hasten to us, are but slow
In their departure; as the learned may know
By this sad Story; since new cause was given;
For which our deep Platonic questions Heaven.
O cruel Stars (quoth he) will you still so
Officious be, to trouble us below?
It Is said your care does govern us; do you call
That care, to let Ambassadors thus fall?
Nay, and permit worse dangers to ensue?
Though all your rule, and influence be true;
I had as leefe (since mortals thus you handle)
Be governed by the influence of a Candle.
This he had cause to say; for now behold
A Foul of spacious wing, bloody, and bold
In his aspect; haughty in gate, and stiff on
His large spread Claws he stood, as any Griffon;
Though, by kind, a Turkey; whose plot that way
Was like a subtle Scowt to watch for prey;
Such as is blown about by every wind;
But here is the dire mistake; this Foul (half blind)
At Ieff'ry pecks, and with intent to eat
Him up, in stead of a large grain of Wheat:
Ieff'ry (in duel nice) never thinks upon it,
As the Turkeys hunger, but an affront.
His sword he drew; a better none alive
E're got from Spanish Foe, for Shillings Five.
And now, the Battle does begin: sound high
Your Oaten Reeds, t'encourage Victory!
Strike up the wrathful Tabor! and the Gitthern;
The loud Jew's-trump! and Spirit-stirring-Cittherne!
Ieff'ry the bold, as if he had o'reheard
These Instruments of War, his Arm uprear'd,
Then cries St. George for England! and with that word
He mischief'd (what I pray?) naught but his sword:
Though some report, he noch'd the Foes left wing;
And Poets too, who faithfully did sing
This Battle in Low Dutch, tell of a few
Small Feathers there, which at the first charge flew
About the field; but do not strictly know
That they were shed by fury of that blow.
This they affirm; the Turkey in his look
Expressed how much, he it unkindly took,
That wanting food; our Ieff'ry would not let him,
Enjoy awhile the privilege to eat him:
His Tail he spreads, jets back; then turns again;
And fought, as if, for the honor of his Hen:
Ieff'ry retorts each stroke; and then cries; Mauger
Thy strength, I will dissect thee like an Augure!
But who of mortal race, deserves to write
The next encounter in this bloody fight?
Wisely did thou (O Poet of Anchusin;)
Stay here thy Pen, and lure thy eager Muse in;
Envoking Mars, some half an hour at least,
To help thy fury onward with the rest:
For Ieff'ry strait was thrown; whilst saint, and weak,
The cruel Foe, assaults him with his Beak.
A Lady-Midwife now, he there by chance
Espied, that came along with him from France:
A heart nours'd up in War; that never before
This time (quoth he) could bow, now does implore:
Thou that delivered have so many, be
So kind of nature, to deliver me!
But stay: for though the learned Chronologer
Of Dunkerk, does confess him freed by her;
The subt'ler Poets yet, whom we translate
In all this Epick Ode, do not relate
The manner how; and we are loath at all
To vary from the Dutch Original.
Deeds they report, of greater height than these;
Wonders, and truth; which if the Court-wits please,
A little help from Nature, less from Art,
May happily produce in a Third part.
For the Lady, Olivia Porter.
A present, upon a New-yeares day.
GO! hunt the whiter Ermine! and present
His wealthy skin, as this days Tribute sent
To my Endimion's Love; Though she be far
More gently smooth, more soft than Ermines are!
Go! climb that Rock! and when thou there have found
A Star, contracted in a Diamond,
Give it Endimion's Love; whose lasting Eyes,
Out-looke the Starry Jewels of the Skies!
Go! dive into the Southern Sea! and when
Thou Have found (to trouble the nice sight of Men)
A swelling Pearl; and such whose single worth,
Boasts all the wonders which the Seas bring forth;
Give it Endimion's Love! whose every Tear,
Would more enrich the skillfull Jeweller.
How I command? how slowly they obey?
The churlish Tartar, will no^ hunt to day:
Nor will that lazy, sallow- Indian strive
To climb the Rock, nor that dull Negro dive.
Thus Poets like to Kings* (by trust deceived)
Give oftener what is heard off, than received.
To I. C. Robbed by his Man ANDREW.
SIr, whom I now love more, than did the good
Saint Martin, that all-naked-Flesh-and-blood,
Whose Cloak (at Plimmouth spun) was Crab-Tree wood.
His own was Tammie sure; which made it tear
So soon into a gift; and thou (I fear)
Wilt beg half mine, not to bestow, but wear.
For thy Saint- Andrew sought not out the way
To keep thee warm, but make thee watch, and pray;
That is, for his return; about, Doomes-day;
Worse left, than blushing Adam, who withdrew
The nakedness he feared, more than he knew,
Not to a Mercers, but where Fig Leaves grew:
Which sewed with strings of slender Weeds, cloth Men
Cheaper than Silks, that must be paid for, when*
It pleases the chief Scribe, 'oth Chamberlen.
Though my sick Joints, cannot accompany
Thy Hue-on-cry; though Midnight parlies be
Silenced long since, 'tween Constables, and me;
Without their helps, or Suburb-Justices,
(Upon whose justice now an impost lies,
For with the price of Beef, their Warrants rise)
I Will find this Andrew strait. See, where the pale
Wretch stands: Thy guiltless Robes (never hanged for fale;)
He executes, on Sundry Brokers Nail.
In stead of him (chased thence by his wise fear)
Does the Mothers joy, a bold Youth appear;
Who swaggers up to Forty Marks a year!
Sometimes he troubles Law, at th'Inns of Court;
Now comes, to buy him Weeds of shining sort;
And feign would have thy Cloak, but'tis too short:
Too short (neat Sir) was all thy rifled store;
Which made those Brokers curse thy stature more,
Than thou, Fiend- Andrew, the sad day before.
But hark! who knocks? good troth my Muse is staid,
By an Apothecaries Bill unpaid;
Whose length, not strange-nam'd-Drugs, makes her afraid.
To the Earl of Portland, Lord Treasurer; on the marriage of his Son.
MY Lord, this Night is yours! each wandering Star
That was nnbusi'd, and irregular;
Most gravely now, his bright Companion leads,
To fix over your glad Roof, their shining Heads.
And it is said, th'exemplar King's your guest;
And that the rich-Ey'd-Darling of his Breast,
(To ripen all your Joys) will there become
The Music, Odor, Light, of every Room!
A mixture of two noble bloods, in all
Faith, and domestic nature, union call,
No trava^l'd Eyes have seen, with humbler state
Of love performed, where Princes celebrate.
This when I heard; I know not what bold Star
My Spirits urged, but it was easier far
The torn, the injured Panther, to restrain
In's hot pursuit, or stroke him cool again;
To tell the cause, why Winds do disagree,
Divide them when in Storms they mingled be;
Strait fix them single, where they breathed before;
Or fan them with a Plume, from Sea to Shore;
Than bind my raging Temples, or resist
The power that swelled me, as Apollo's Priest.
Therefore my Robe, that on his Altar lay,
My Virge, my Wreath, I took; and thus did pray:
That you (my Lord) with lasting memory,
And strength of fervent youth, may live to see,
Your name in this blessed nuptial store the Earth,
With such a masculine, and knowing birth;
As shall at factious Counsels moderate,
And force injurious Armies to their fate.
Let Time be fettered, that they never may
Increasing others, feel themselves decay.
To you (my Lord) who with wise industry,
Seek Virtue out, then give it strength to be;
Where ere you shall recide, let Plenty bring,
The pride, and expectations of the Spring;
The wealth that loads enticing Autumn grow
Within your reach; let hasty Rivers flow
'Till on your shores, they skaly Tribute pay,
Then ebb themselves in empty Waves away:
Let each pale Flower, that springs there, have power
T'invite a Sunne-beame, and command a Shower;
The dew that falls about you taste of Wine,
Each abject Weed change root, and be a Vine!
But I with this prophetic plenty grow
Already rich, and proud; 'cause then I know
The Poets of this Isle, in Vineyards may
Rejoice, whilst others thirst in groves of Bay!
Sir, let me not your wary patience move;
And sin, with too much courage of my love!
He that in strength of wishes, next shall try,
To Increase your blessings with his Poesy,
May show a fiercer Wit, and cleaner Art,
But not a more sincere, and eager Heart.
THE QVEENE, returning to London after a long absence.
HOw had you walked in Mists of Sea-coalesmoake,
Such as your ever teeming Wives would choke,
(Fa^^e Sons of thrift!) did not her beauties light,
Dispell your Clouds, and quicken your dull sight?
As when, the illustrious Officer of Day,
(First worshipped in the East) 'gins to display
The glory of his beams; then Buds unfold
Their chary Leafes; each dew-drownd Marigold
Insensibly does stir it self, and spread;
Each Violet lifts up, the pensive Head;
So when the Rays of her fair Eyes appear,
To warm, and gild your clouded Hemispheare;
Those Flowers which in your narrow Gardens grow,
(Narrow as Turfs, which you a Lark allow
In's wicker Cage) rejoice upon their stalks;
Imbellishing your summer inch-broad walks:
But she removed, what all your wearied lives,
You plant in German pots, to please your Wives,
Shall fade; scarce in your Climate shall be seen
Enough of Spring to make your Tansies green.
Nor shall your blew-Ey'd-Daughters more appear
(Though in the hopefull'st season of the Year)
In the dark street, where Tantlin's Temple stands,
With Time, and Marg'rom Posies in their hands.
We know (distrustful Bergainers!) you most
Love sacrifice, that puts you least to cost;
Give her your prayers then; that her Looks may
After long Nights, restore you unto Day.
Though Ringing be some charge, and Wood grew dear;
In troth; it will become you once a year,
To offer Bells, and Bonfires too, alltho'
You couzen't out in Silks, next public Show.
To I. W. Upon the death of his Mistress.
AS the great Sons of War, that are raised high
With eager heats, of frequent Victory,
Grow to such lazy pride; they take it ill
Men still should put them to the pains to kill;
And would, at each stern becken of the Eye,
Have the sad Foe, veil Plumes, take leave, and dye:
So thou; as if thy Sorrows had overcome
Half the wise world, and struck all reason dumb;
Cry'st, she is dead! and frown'st, because I now
Take not my Wreath (the treasure of my Brow)
Then hurl my self, and it, a Sacrifice
In hallowed flames, to her departed Eyes.
'Cause early Men, their Curtains draw, and say
Behold the Sun is risen, now'tis day;
Knowing thy Sun is set, thou swearst their sight,
Is led by business t'a miss-take of Light.
Lovers believe, if yet The Almighty could
Doabt part of his so swift creation good;
To ease him of another Fiat, they
Can with their Mistress beams, make him a day:
To rule the Night, each Glance (they think) will fit
Planets to largest Spheres, if we admit
Their silly Priests (the Poets) be but by,
That love to sooth such faith t'idolatrie.
But how have I transgressed, thus to declame
Against sorrow I should envy more than blame?
For what is he, though reverendly old,
And than a Mountain Muscovite more cold;
Though he want Wit, or nature to desire;
Though his hard heart be Ir'ne, his heart strings Wire:
Or what is he, though blind, and knows no good
Of love, but by an itching faith in's blood,
That when thy Tongue her beauty open lays
To mental view, and her soft mind displayes,
Will think thy grief was over-pay'd, or yet
Bate the world one Sigh, of so just a debt?
But she is gone! Repine now, if you dare;
Like Heavens unlicenc'd Fools, all punished are
For Nature as for crimes; yet cannot choose
But mourn for every excellence we loose;
Though still commanded to a tame content;
To think no good was given us, but lent:
And a fond ridle in Philosophy,
Persuades us too; the Virtuous never dye;
That all the ills, which we in absence find
Concern the Eyesight only, not the Mind:
But Lovers (whose wise Senses take delight
In warm contaction, and in real sight)
Are not with lean imagination fed,
Or satisfied, with thinking on the Dead.
It Is fit we seek her then; but he that finds
Her out, must enter friendship with the Winds;
Enquire their dwelling, and uncertain walks;
Whither they blow, from their forsaken Stalks
Flowers that are gone, ere they are smelt? or how
Dispose o'th sweeter Blossoms of the Bough?
For She (the Tresuresse of these) is fled,
Not having the dull leisure to be dead;
But t'hoord this Wealth; return, and this Wealth bring
Still varied, and increased in every Spring.
To Endimion Porter.
IT is (Lord of my Muse and heart) since last
Thy sight inspired me, many ages past*
In darkness thick as ill-met Clouds can make,
In sleeps wherein the last Trump scarce could wake
The guiltless dead, I lay; and hidden more
Than Truth, which testy Controverts explore.
More hid than paths of Snakes, to their deep beds,
Or walks of Mountaine-Springs from their first Heads:
And when my long forgotten Eyes, and Mind,
Awaked; I thought to see the Sun declined
Through age, to the influence of a Star, and Men
So small, that they might live in Wombes again.
But now, my strength's so giantly, that were
The great Hill-lifters once more toyling here;
They'ld choose me out, for active Back, for Bone,
To heave at ^ae^io^ first, and heave alone.
Now by the softness of thy noble care,
Reason, and Light, my loved Companions are;
I may too, ere this Moon be lost, refine
My blood, and bathe my Temples with thy Wine:
And then, know my Endimion (thou, whose name
To The World example is, Music to Fame)
I Will try if Art, and Nature, able be
From the whole strength, and stock of P^e^ie,
To pay thee my large debts; such as the poor
In open Blushes, hidden Hearts restore.
Epitaph, on I. Walker.
Envied, and loved, here lies the Prince of mirth!
Who laughed, at the grave business of the Earth.
Looked on ambitious Statesmen with such Eyes,
As might discern them guilty, could not wise.
That did the noise of War, and Battles hear,
As moved to smiling pity, not to fear:
Thought fighting Princes at their dying sad;
Believed, both Victors, and the Conquered mad:
Might have been rich, as often as he would please,
But ways to Wealth, are not the ways to Ease.
The wit, and courage of his talk, now rests,
In their impatient keeping that steal Jeasts;
His Jeasts, who e're shall Father, and repeat
Small memory needs, but let us estate be great,
Danger so seasoned them, each has Salt le^t,
Will yet undo the Poor for one small theft;
The Rich, that will own them, what e're they pay,
Shall find, it is twice a week Star Chamber day.
To Doctor Cademan, Physician to the Queen.
FOr thy Victorious cares, thy ready heart;
Thy so small tyranny to so much Art;
For visits made to my disease
And me, (Alas) not to my Fees:
For words, so often comforting with scope
^^^^arned reason, not persuasive hope:
For Medicines so benign, as seem
Cordials for Eastern Queens that teeme.
For setting now my condemned Body free,
From that no God, but Devil Mercury:
For an assurance, I never shall
A forfeit be to the Admiral;
Like those in Hospitals, who dare presume
To make French Cordage now of English Rhume;
Or slender Ropes, on which, in stead
Of Pearl, revolted Teeth they thread;
For limitting my Cheeks, that else had been
Swollen like the sign, o'th Head o'th Saracen;
For preservation from a long
Concealment of my Mother Tongue;
Whilst speechless, sowed in Hoods, I should appear,
An Antarminian, silenced Minister;
Or some Turks poisoned Mute; so fret
So foam at mouth, make signs, and spet.
Whilst all I eat, goes down, with looks to sight
More forced, than Quails t'each full-cramm'd Isralite;
Whose angry swallowing denotes
They lay at Flux, and had sore throats.
For these deliverances, and all the good
My new return of Senses, strength, and blood,
Shall bring; for all I mine can boast,
Whilst my Endimion is not lost,
Sy'th feeble influence of my Star; or turns
From me, to one whose Planet cleerer burns;
May (thou safe Lord of Arts) each Spring
Ripe plenty of Diseases bring
Unto the Rich; they still to our Surgeons be
Experiments, Patients alone to thee:
Health, to the Poor; lest pity should
(That gently stirs, and rules thy blood)
Tempt thee from wealth, to such as pay like me
A Verse; then think, they give Eternity.
To Endimion Porter, When my Comedy (called the Wits) was presented at Black*
Friars.
Hear, how for want of others grief, I mourn
My sad decay, and weep at mine own Ur^e ^
The Hou'rs (that never want Wings, when they should fly
To hasten Death, or lead on Destiny,)
Have now fulfilled the time, when I must come
Chained to the Muses Bar, to take my doom:
Where every Term, some timorous Poet stand*
Condemned by whispers, e're repriv'd by hands.
I that am told conspiracies are laid,
To have my Muse, her Arts, and life betrayed,
Hope for no easy Judge; though thou were there,
To Appease, and make their judgments less severe*
In this black day, like Men from Thunders rage,
Or drowning showers, I hasten from the stage;
And wish my self, some Spirit, hid within
Those distant, wandering Winds, that yet have bin
Unknown to the Compass, or the Pilots skill;
Or some loose Plumet, sunk so low, until
I touch where roots of Rocks deep buried be;
There mourn, beneath the leafelesse Coral Tree.
But I am grown too tame! what need I fear,
Whilst not to passion, but thy reason clear?
Should I perceive, thy knowledge were subdued,
T'unkinde consent with the harsh Multitude,
Then I had cause to weep; and at thy Gate
(Denied to enter) stand disconsolate;
Amazed, and lost to mine own Eyes; there I
(Scarce griev'd-for by my self) would wink and dye:
Olivia then, may on thy pity call
To bury me, and give me funeral.
In celebration of the yearly Preserver of the Games at COTSWALD.
Hear me you Men of strife! you that have bin,
Long time maintained by the dull Peoples sin,
At Lyon's, Furnifold's, and Cleme^t's Inn!
With huge, o're-comming Mutton, Target-Cheese,
Beef, that the queasie stomack'd Guard would please,
And limber Groats, full half a Score for Fees.
Hear you Gown'd Lackeys that on both sides plead!
Whose hollow Teeth, are stuffed with others Bread;
Whose Tongues will live (sure) when your selves are dead.
Here you Alcaldos, whose stern faces look,
Worse than your Pris'ner's that is denied his Book;
Than Pilat painted like a scalded Cook.
Lift all that toil for power to do Men wrong,
With penseve Ear, to my prophetic Song!
Whose Magic says, your Triumphs hold not long.
The time is come, you on your selves shall sit;
Whilst Children find (if they endeavor it)
Your learning, Chronicle; Clinches, your Wit.
Ere you a Year are dead, your Sons shall watch,
And rore all Night with Ale, in house of Thatch;
And spend, 'till Swords are worn in Belts of Match.
Whilst D^ver (that his knowledge not imploy's
To Increase his Neighbors Quarrels, but their Joys;)
Shall in his age; get Money, Girls, and Boys!
Money, at Cotswald Games shall yearly fly;
Whilst the Precise, and Envious shall stand by,
And see his Min'rall Fountain never dry.
His Girls, shall dowr'-lesse w^d with Heirs of birth;
His Boys, plough London Widows up like earth:
Whilst Cotswald Bards caroll their Nuptial Mirth*
^over (the Gentry's Darling) know this frame,
^s but a willing tribute to thy Fam^,
^ung by a Poet, that conceals his name.
On the Death of the Lady Marquess of WINCHESTER.
IN care, lest some adventurous Lover may
(To Increase his love) cast his own Stock away;
I (that find, the use of grief is to grow wise)
Forbid all trassique now 'tweene Hearts, and Eyes:
Our remnant-love, let us discreetly save,
Since not augment; for Love, lies in the Grave.
Lest Men; whose patience is their senses sloth,
That only live, t'expect the tedious growth
Of what the following Summer slowly yields;
Whose fair Elysium, is their furrowed Fields;
Lest these, should so much prize mortality;
They never would reach the wit, or faith to die;
Know, Summer comes no more; to the dark bed
Our Sun is gone; the hopeful Spring is dead.
And lest kind Poets, that delight to raise
^ With their just truths, not ecstasy of praise)
Beauty to Fame; should ra^hly overthrow
The credit of their Songs; I let them know
Their Theme is lost; so lost, that I have grieved,
They never more can praise, and be believed.
To Endimion Porter, upon his recovery from a long Sickness.
Just so the Sun does rise, as if last Night
He called t'accompt the Moon, for all the light
She ever owed; now looks so full of scorn,
And pride; as she had paid him all this Morn!
So clear a day, timely foretells; I now
Shall escape those Clouds, that hung upon my Bro^
Whilst I thy sickness mourned; and less did sleep
Than faithful Widows, that sincerely weep.
A true presage! My hopes no sooner tell
What they desired, but strait I find thee well.
Blessed be the Stars; whose powerful influence
Our healths, by Minerals, and Herbs dispense!
And that is their chiefest use: who thinks that Fa^^
So many Stars did purposely create,
And them so large, merely for show, and light;
Concludes, it took less care, of Day, than Night.
Since thou art safe, those Numbers will be lost,
Which I laid up, to mourn thee as a Ghost:
Unless I spend them on some Tragic Tale,
Which Lovers shall believe, and then bewail:
Next Term, prepare thee for the Theater!
And until then, reserve thy skillful Ear;
For I will sing imagined Tragedy,
'Till Fates repent their essence is so high
From passion raised; 'cause they can never obtain
To taste the griefs, which gentle Poets feign.
Upon the nuptials of Charles, Lord Herbert, and the Lady M. Villers.
ROses 'till ripe, and ready to be blown,
Their beauty hide, whilst it is yet their own;
It Is ours but in expectance, whilst they are green;
And bashfully they blush when first it is seen:
As if to spread their beauty were a crime;
A fault in them, not in all-ripening-Time.
So stands (hidden with Vayles) in all her pride
Of early flourishing, the bashful Bride!
And 'till the Priest, with words devoutly said,
Shall ripen her a Wife, that is yet a Maid,
Her Veil will never off: so modest still,
And so expressed by Nature, not by skill,
That sure she dressed her looks when she did ri^e,
Not in her Glass, but in her Mother's Eyes.
The jolly Bridegroom stands, as he had t'an^
And led, Love strongly fettered in a Chain:
Forgetting when her Vailes are laid aside,
Himself, is but a Captive to the Bride.
The Priest now joins their hands, and he does find
(By mystery divine,) in both one mind,
Mixed, and dispersed; his spirits strait begin
(As they were raped) to vex, and talk within:
His Temples swett, whilst he stood silent by,
Not as prepared to bless, but prophecy:
What nee^ded more? since they must needs posses^e,
All he fo^e-told, though he should never bless:
And blessing unto such, at most restores,
Or but repeats, what was their Ancestors.
Prologue to a revived Play of Mr Fletcher's, called The Woman-ha^er.
LAdies! take it as a secret in your Ear,
In stead of homage, and kind welcome here,
I heartily could wish, you all were gone;
For if you stay, good faith, we are undone.
Alas! you now expect, the usual ways
Of our address, which is, your Sexes praise:
But we to night, unluckily must speak,
Such things, will make your Lovers Heart Strings break;
Belly your Virtues, and your beauties stain,
With words, contrived long since, in your disdain.
It Is strange you stir not yet; not all this while
Lift up your Fannes, to hide a scornful smile:
Whisper, nor jog your Lords to steal away;
So leave us t'act, unto our selves, our Play:
Then sure, there may be hope, you can subdue,
Your patience to endure, an Act, or two:
Nay more, when you are told, our Poets rage
Pursues but one example, which that age
Wherein he lived produced; and we rely
Not on the truth, but the variety.
His Muse believed not, what she then did write;
Her Wings, were wom to make a nobler flight;
Soared high, and to the Stars, your Sex did raise;
For which, full Twenty years, he wore the Bays.
'Twas he reduced Evadne from her scorn,
And taught the sad Aspasia how to mourn;
Gave Arethusa's love, a glad relief;
And made Panthea elegant in grief.
If these great Trophies of his noble Muse,
Cannot one humor against your Sex excuse
Which we present to night; you will find a way
How to make good, the Libell in our Play:
So you are cruel to your selves; whilst he
(Safe in the fame of his integrity)
Will be a Prophet, not a Poet thought;
And this fine Web last long, though loosely wrought.
To Endimion Porter, passing to Court to him, by water.
ODE.
(1)
THe truth and wisdom of your Compass boast
(Dull Men of th'Sea!) when you the flow'rie Coast
Have reached, to which you steer;
Think then, those Clouds are shrunk again,
That swelled, as if they hoorded Rain
For all the Year.
Think then, those ruder Winds are dumb,
That would endeavor Storms to come;
And that the Rocks no more
(As they were wont) shall hide themselves,
To practice mischief on the Shelves
So near the shore.
(2)
Into the Silver Flood I launched; and fraught
My Bark with Hope, the Parasite of thought:
To Court my voyage tends;
But Hope grew sick, and wished me fear,
The Bark would split, that harbored there
To trade for Friends.
Wise Love, that sought a noble choice,
To tune my Harp, and raise my Voice,
Forbids my Pinnace rest;
'Till I had cured weak Hope agin,
By safely Anchoring within
Endimion's Breast.
(3)
Endimion! who, with Numbers sweet can move
Souls (though untuned) to such degrees of love;
That Men shall sooner see,
Th'inticed Needle disobey
The tempting Adamant, than they
His Poesy:
And I (exalted now,) never mind
Their breath, who stormed, to increase the Wind
By which they are overthrown;
Their Stock of rage, and Lyrick skill,
They boast in vain; the Poets Hill
Is all mine own.
Elegy on B. Haselrick, slain in's youth, in a Duel.
NOw in the blind, and quiet age of Night,
So dark, as if the funeral of Light
Were celebrated here; whither with slow,
Unwilling feet, sad Virgins do you go?
Where have you left your reason, and your fear?
What mean those Violets that downe-ward wear
Their heads, as grieved, since thus employed they grew?
Lilies, scared by your looks, to their pale how?
Roses, that lost their blushes on the Bough,
And Laurel stolen from some dead Poets Brow?
These, and your looser Hair, show that you come
To scatter both, on that relenting Tomb.
But stay! by this moist pavement it appears,
Some Ladies have been earli'r here with Tears
Than I, or you; and we can gue^^e no more,
Those that succeed, by these that dropped before;
Than by the Dew, fallen in a Cow^lips womb,
Heaven's Treasury of Showrs that are to come.
The Curtain's drawn! look there, and you shall spy
The faded God of your Idolatry!
Cold as the feet of Rocks, silent in shade
As Chaos lay, before the Winds were made.
Yet this was once the Flower, on whom the Day
So smiled, as if he never should decay:
Soft, as the hands of Love, smooth as her brow;
So young in show, as if he still should grow;
Yet perfected with all the pride of strength,
Equal in Limbs, and square unto his length:
And though the jealous World has understood,
Fates only Sealed, the first creation good;
This modern work (stern Fates!) rose up to prove
Your ancient skill retayn'd, but not your love:
Could you have loved, you had with careful fight
Preserved, what you did frame with such delight.
O, let me sum his crimes, let me relate
Them strictly as his Judge, not Advocate;
And yet the greatest number you shall find
Were errors of his youth, not of his mind:
For had his jealous courage bin so wise,
As to believe it self, not others Eyes;
Had he not thought his little patience tame
In suffering quiet Men, to enjoy a Fame;
He might have lived ^o so great use, that I
Had writ his Acts, and not his Elegy.
Go, gentlest of your Sex! should I relate
With bolder truth, th'unkindnesse of his Fate,
(Too strict, to flesh and blood) I might infuse
A Schism in your Religion, and my Muse:
Yet this would be excused, since all we gain
By grief, is but the license to complain.
TO THE QVEENE, upon a New-yeares day.
YOu of the Guard make way! and you that keep
The Presence warm, and quiet whilst you sleep,
Permit me pass! and then (if any where
Employed) you Angels that are busi'st here,
And are the strongest Guard, although unseene,
Conduct me near the Chamber of the Queen!
Where with such reverence as Hermits use
At richest Shrines, I may present my Muse:
Awake! salute, and satisfy thy sight,
Not with the fainting Sun's, but thine own Light!
Let this Day break from thine own Silken sphere,
This Day, the birth, and Infant of the year!
Nor is there need of Purple, or of Lawne
To vest thee in, were but thy Curtains drawn,
Men might securely say, that it is morn,
Thy Garments serve to hide, not to adorn!
Now she appears, whilst every look, and smile,
Dispences warmth, and beauty through our Isle:
Whilst from their wealthiest Caskets, Princes pay
Her gifts, as the glad tribute of this Day!
This Day; which Time shall owe to her, not Fate;
Because her early Eyes, did it create.
But O! poor Poets! Where are you? why bring
You not your Goddess now an Offering?
Who makes your Numbers Swift, when they moved slow,
And when they ebbed, her influence made them flow.
Alas! I know your wealth: The Laurel bough,
Wreathed into Circles, to adorn the Brow,
Is all you have: But go; these strew, and spread,
In sacrifice, where ever she shall tread,
And ere this day grow old, know you shall see
Each Leaf become a Sprig, each Sprig a Tree.
Elegy, On Francis, Earl of RUTLAND.
CAll not the Winds! nor bid the Rivers stay!
For though the sighs, the tears they could repay,
Which injured Lovers, Mourners for the Dead,
Captives, and Saints, have breathed away, and shed;
Yet we should want to make our sorrow fit
For such a cause, as now does silence it.
Rutland! the noble, and the just! whose name
Already is, all History, all Fame!
Whom like brave Ancestors in Battle lost,
We mention not in pity, but in boast!
How did tho^ smile, to see the solemn sport,
Which vexes busy greatness in the Court?
T'observe their laws of faction, place, and Time,
Their precepts how, and where, and when to climb?
Their rules, to know if the sage meaning lies,
In the deep Breast, in the shallow Brow, or Eyes?
Though Titles, and thy blood, made thee appear,
(Oft'gainst thy ease) where these state-Rabbins were*
Yet their philosophy thou knew'st was fit,
For thee to pity, more than study it.
Safely thou valu'dst Cunning, as 'thad bin,
Wisdom, long since, distempered into Sin:
And knew'st, the actions of The Ambitious are
But as the fal'se Al'armes in running war,
Like forlorn Scowts (that raise the coil) they keep
Themselves awake, to hinder others sleep:
And all they gain, by vexed expense of breath;
Unquietness, and guilt; is at their death,
Wonder, and mighty noise; whilst things that be
Most dear, and precious to Mortality
(Time, and thy Self) impatient here of stay,
With a grave silence, seem to steal away;
Depart from us unheard, and we still mourn
In vain (though piously) for their return.
Thy Bounties if I name; I Will not admit,
Kings, when they love, or woo, to equal ^^:
It showed like Nature's self, when she does bring
All she can promise by an early Spring;
Or when she pays that promise, where she best
Makes Summers for Mankind; in the rich East.
And as the wise Sun, silently imployes
His lib'rall Beams, and ripens without Noise;
As precious Dewes, do undiscovered fall,
And growth, insensibly does steal on all;
So what he gave, concealed, in private came,
(As in the dark) from one that had no name;
Like Fayries wealth, not given to restore,
Or if revealed, it visited no more.
If these live, and be read (as who shall dare
Suspect, Truth, and thy Fame, immortal are?)
What need thy noble Brother, or fair She,
That is thy self, in purest imagrie;
Whose breath, and Eyes, the ^un'rall-spice, and flame,
Continue still, of gentle Buckingham;
What need they send poor Pioners to groan,
In lower Quarries for Corinthian stone?
To dig in Parian Hills? since Statues must,
And Monuments, turn like our selves to dust:
Verse, to all ages can our deeds declare,
Tombs, but a while, show where our Bodies are.
To Endimion Porter.
WOuld thou were dead! so strictly dead to me,
That nor my sight, nor my vexed memory
Could reach thee more: so dead, that but to name
Thou were, might give the saucy* lie to Fame;
That the bold Sons of Honor, and the mild
Race of Lovers (both thy disciples styled)
Might ask; who could the first example be
To all their good? yet none should mention thee*
Knocking at my Breast, when this hou'r is come;
I hope, I once shall find my heart at home.
Say, thou art dead; yet whisper't but to me;
For should thy so well-spent mortality,
End to the world, and that sad end be known;
I might (perhaps) still live, but live alone:
The better world would follow thee, and all
That I should gain, by that large Funeral,
Would be, the wanton vanit^e to boast,
What they enjoy, was from my plenty lost.
To the Countess of Carlisle, on the death of the Earl her Husband.
THis Cypress folded here, in steed of Lawne,
These Tapers winking, and these Curtains drawn;
What may they mean? unless to qualify
And check the lusture of your Eyes, you will try
To honor darkness, and adorn the Night,
So strive, thus with your Lord, to bury Light.
Call back, your absent Beauties to your care,
Though clouded, and concealed, we know you are
The Morning's early'st Beam, life of the Day,
The Ev'ns last comfort, and her parting Ray!
But why these Tears, that give him no relief,
For whom you waste the virtue of your grief?
Such, as might be prescribed the Earth, to drink
For cure of her old Curse; Tears, you would think
Too rich to water (if you knew their price)
The chiefest Plant derived from Paradise.
But O! where is a Poets faith? how far
We are miss-led? how false we Lords of Numbers are?
Our Love, is passion, our Religion, rage!
Since, to secure that mighty heritage
Entailed upon the Bay, see, how I strive
To keep the glory of your looks alive;
And to persuade your gloomy Sorrows thence;
As subt'ly knowing, your kind influence
Is all the precious Stock, left us t'inspire,
And feed the flame, of our eternal fire.
But I recant: It Is fit you mourn a while,
And wink, until you darken all this Isle;
More fit, the Bay should wither too, and be
Quite lost, than he deprived your obsequie:
He that was once your Lord; who strove to get
That title, cause naught else, could make him great;
A style, by which his name he did prefer
To have a day, in the Poets Calendar.
His youth was gentle, and disposed to win,
Had so much courtship in it, 'twas his chief sin;
Yet sure, although his courtship knew the way
To conquer Beauty; it did never betray.
When wise with years, these soft affairs did cease:
He whispered War abroad, then brought home Peace.
He was supreme Ambassador, and went
To be that Prince, whom Leigers but present;
And soon with easy ceremonies got,
What they did lose with care, and a deep plot:
Cheerful his age; not tedious or severe,
Like those, who being dull, would grave appear;
Whose guilt, made them the soul of Mirth despise,
And being sullen, hope men think them wise:
Yet he that kept his Virtues from decay,
Had that about him needs must wear away:
The daily lessening of our life, shows by
A little dying, how outright to die:
Observe the Morning, Noone, and Evening Sun:
Then (Madam) you that saw his Hou'r-gla^^e run,
In wiser faith, will not be more oppressed
To see the last sand fall, than all the rest.
Epilogue, TO LOVE and HONOR, A Tragicomedy.
TRoth Gentlemen, you must vouchsafe awhile
T'excuse my Mirth; I cannot choose but smile*
And'tis to think, how like a subtle Spy,
Our Poet waits, to hear his destiny:
Just in the pay'd-Entry as you pass; the place
Where first you mention your dislike, or gra^e.
Pray whisper softly, that he may not hear;
Or else, such words, as shall not blast his Ear.
Epilogue, To a Vacation Play at the Globe.
The speaker entered with a Sword drawn.
FOr your own sakes (Poor Souls!) you had not best
Believe, my fury was so much suppressed
I'th'heat of the last Scene, as now you may
Boldly, and safely too, cry down our Play!
For if you dare, but Murmr one false Note,
Here in the House, or going to take Bot^;
By Heaven, I Will mow you off, with my long Sword;
Ye^'man, and Squire, Knight, Lady, and her Lord!
With reason too; for since my whole part lies
In The Play, to Kill the King's chief Enemies;
How can you escape? (be your own Judges) when
You lay sad plots, to beggar the Kings-Men.
TO THE QVEENE, upon a New-yeares day.
THis day, old Time, does turn his Annual Glass;
And shakes it, that the Year may swiftly pass:
This day; on which the foremost leading-sand
Falls from that Glass, shook by his hasty Hand:
That Sand's th'exemplar Seed, by which we know
How th'Hou'rs of the ensuing Year will grow.
Awake, great Queen! for as you hide, or clear
Your Eyes, we shall distrust, or like the Year.
Queens set their Dialls by your beauties light;
By your Eyes learn, to make their own move right:
Yet know, our expectation when you rise
Is not entirely furnished from your Eyes;
But wisely we provide, how to rejoice,
In the fruition of your Breath, and Voice:
Your breath, which Nature the example meant,
From whence our early Blossoms take their scent;
Teaching our Infant-Flow'rs how to excel
(Ere strong upon their stalks) in fragrant smell:
Your voice, which can allure, and charm the best
Most gawdy-feather'd Chaunter of the East,
To dwell about your Palace all the Spring,
And still preserve him silent whilst you sing.
Rise then! for I have heard Apollo swear,
By that first luster, which did fill his Sphere;
He will not mount, but make eternal Night,
Unless releev'd, and cherished by your Sight*
Your sight; which is his warmth, now he is old,
His Horses weary, and his Chariot cold.
TO EDWARD Earl of Dorcet, after his Sickness, and happy recovery.
MY LORD,
I Find the Gentry so o're-joy'd in the Town,
As if all Prisons (safely) were rac'd down:
As if, the Judges would no more resist
Wrongs with the Law, but each turn Duelist;
And not with Statutes, but with Rapiers fence,
At Mason's ward to succor Innocence.
As if some trusty Poet now had bin
Chosen with full voice City-Chamberlin;
Their Treasure kept, and might dispose of it
And th'Orphans Goods, as his free Muse thought fit.
As if grave Benchers had been seen to wear
Loud German Spurs, tall Feathers, and long Hair.
Such wild inversions, both of Men, and Laws,
Amazed my Faith, until I knew, the cause
Was your return to health; which did destroy
All grief in greater Minds, and swell their joy:
Which made me gladly vow to dedicate
Each Year, a solemn sacrifice to Fate;
Such as should please old Esculapius too,
More than dissected Cocks were wont to do,
(If there be prophecy in Wine) and then
You shall be known to Altars, as to Men.
Written, When Collonell Goring Was believed to be slain, at the siege of
BREDA.
His death lamented by ENDIMION, ARIGO.
The Scene, the Sea.
ENDIMION.
HO! Pilot^ change your Course! for know we are
Not guided by the Sea-mans usual Star^^:
Storme-frighted-Foole! dull, watery Officer!
Do thou our Voyage by thy Compass steer?
In all the Circle of thy Card, no Wind
Tame, or un^uly, thou will ever find
Can bring us where the meanest on the Coast
Immortal is, and ^ renowned Ghost
ARIGO.
Let the assembled Winds in their next war,
Blow out the light, of thy old guiding Star;
Whilst on uncertain Waves, thy Bark is tossed,
Until thy Card is rent, thy Rudder lost.
Nor Star, nor Card; though with choice Winds you fill
Your Sails (subdued by Navigators skill;)
Can teach thee rule thy Helm, 'till't waft us over
Pacifique Seas, to the Elizian Shore.
ENDIMION.
Who to that flowery Land, shall search his way,
No mortal Pilots Compass must obey;
Nor trust Columbu^ art, although he can
Boast longer toils, than he, or Magilan:
Thoug in Sea-perils, he could talk them dumb,
And prove them lazy Criples; bred at home,
By's travailes, he could make the Sun appear,
A young, and unexperienced Travailer.
ARIGO.
If thou will Steer our course, thou must rely
On some majestic, Epick-History;
(The Poet's Compass) such as the blind Priest
In fury writ, when like an Exorcist,
His Numbers charmed the Grecian Host; whose Pen,
The Scepter was, which ruled the Souls of Men.
Survey his mystic Card; learn to what Coast,
He did transport, each brave unbody'd Ghost,
New shifted from his flesh, that valiant Crew,
Which fierce Achilles, and bold Hector slew?
ENDIMION.
Enquire, where these are now? beneath what Shade,
In deare-bought rest, their weary Limbs are laid,
That trod on rugged ways? for Honor still
Leaves the smooth Plain, t'ascend the rough, steep Hill.
There seek, the Macedonian Youth; who knew
No work, so full of ease, as to subdue:
Who scarce believed his Conquests worthy fame,
Since others thought, his fortune overcame.
ARIGO.
Near him, the Epire-Quarreller does lie;
Looks, as he scorned his immortality,
Because of too much rest; seems still at strife
With Fate, for loss of troubles, not of life:
Grieved that to dye, he made such certain have,
Since being dead, the noble Danger's past.
ENDIMION.
Near these, go seek (with Myrtle over-growne)
The Carthaginian Victor's shady Throne;
Who there, with sullen thoughts, much troubled lies;
And chides, the over-carefull Destinies;
That these Ambitious Neighbors thither sent
So long before his birth; thus to prevent
Dishonor at their deaths; O fond surmise,
Of one, who when but mortal was so Wise!
As if betimes, they hastened to a Tomb,
Lest he b'ing borne, they had been overcome.
ARIGO.
Near him, the wondrous Roman does appear,
Majestic, as if made Dictator there;
Where now, the philosophic Lord, would heal
The wound, he gave him for the Public Weal:
Which he more strives to hide; as shamed his Eye
Should find, that any wound could make him die.
ENDIMION.
If thou, by the wise Poets Card, or Star,
Can bring us where these altered Monarchs are;
Shift all thy Sails, to husband every Wind;
'Till by a short, swift passage we may find,
Where Sidney's ever-blooming-Throne is spread;
For now, since one renowned as he is dead;
( Goring, the still lamented, and beloved!)
He has enlarged his Bower, and far removed
His less heroique Neighbors, that gave place
To him; the last of that soon numbered Race.
ARIGO.
Whom he must needs delight to celebrate,
Because himself, in manners, and in Fate,
Was his undoubted Type: Goring, whose name
Though early up, will stay the last with Fame:
ENDIMION.
Though Sidney was his Type, fulfilled above
What he foretaught, of Valor, Bounty, Love:
Who died like him, even there, where he mistook
The People, and the Cause he undertook:
Betrayed by Pity then, to their defense,
Whose poverty was all their innocence:
And sure, if to their help a Third could come,
Beguild by Honor, to such Martyrdom;
Susficient like these Two, in brain, as blood;
The World in time would think, their cause is good.
ARIGO.
Thus he forsook his glories being young:
The Warrior is unlucky, who lives long;
And brings his courage in suspect; for he
That aims at honor, in the supreme degree,
Permits his Valour' to be over-bold,
Which then, never keeps him safe, 'till he be old.
ENDIMION.
His Bounty, like his Valor, unconfined;
As if not borne to Treasure, but assigned
The Rents of lucky War; each Day to be
Allowed, the profits of a Victory!
Not of poor Farms, but of the World the Lord!
Heir, to intestate Nations by his Sword.
ARIGO.
In Valor thus, and bounty, raised above
The vulgar height, so in designs of Love;
For only gentle Love could him subdue;
A noble crime, which snew'd his Valor, true:
It is the Soldier's test; for just so far
He yields to Love, he overcomes in War.
ENDIMION.
But why Arigo, do we strive to raise
The Story of our l^sse, with helpless praise?
Why to this Pilot mourn; whose Ears can reach
Nothing les^^ loud, than Winds, or Waters breach?
Or think, that he can guide us to a Coast,
Where we may find, what all the World has lost?
ARIGO.
About then! Lee the Helm! Endimion ^see,
Loose Wreaths (not of the Bay, but Cypress Tree)
Our Poet wears, and on the Shore does mourn,
Fearing, to Elysium bound, we cannot return.
Steer back! his Verse may make those Sorrows last
Which here, we amongst unhallowed Seamen waste.
TO THE LORD Carry of Lepington, upon his translation of MALVEZZI.
SO swift is Thought; this Morn I took my flight
To ruined Babell, and returned to Night:
So strong, that Time (whose course no power could slack)
I have enforced some Forty ages back:
To me, that great disorder, and decay,
Was both begun, and consummate to Day:
My self, some strong Chaldean Mason there,
Still sore, with massy Stones they made me bear:
Just now (me thinks) I Am struck, for some command
Mistook, in words I could not understand.
So lasting are great Griefs, we still retain
Remembrance of them, though we lose the pain:
And that Confusion did a grief comprise,
Greatest, in that in most concerned the Wise:
For these (who best deserve the care of Fate)
The first great Curse, much less did penetrate,
Which makes us labor for our Food so long,
Than that which mixed, or cancelled every Tongue:
'Cause now we toil, and swet for knowledge more,
Than for the Body's nourishment before.
Knowledge; ere it did practice to control,
No Weapon was, but Diet of the Soul;
Which as her nourishment, she might enjoy,
Not like Controverts, others to destroy:
And this her Food (like Milk) did nourish best,
'Cause it was safe, and easy to digest:
Which Milk, that Curse on Languages turned sour,
For Men scarce taste, what they could erst devour:
Since now, we are preparing to be dead,
Ere^we can holfe interpret what we read.
Yet he, that for our Bodies took such care,
That to each Wound, there several Me^'cins are;
In nobler pity, surely has assigned
A cure, for every mischief of the Mind:
So this revenge (perhaps) was but to try
Our patience first, and then our industry.
Since he ordained, that beauteous Truth should still
Be overcast, and hid from humane skill;
Sure he affects that War, which Schoolmen wage;
When to know Truth, does make their knowledge, rage:
So Truth, is much more precious than our peace;
Though some fond Politics, esteem her less:
Lazy obedience, is to them devout;
And those rebellious, that dispute, or doubt,
But you (my Lord) must Valiantly despise
Their threats, that would keep Knowledge in disguise;
And toil with Languages to make her clear;
Which is, to be a just Interpreter.
And this selected Piece, which you translate,
Foretells, your Studies may communicate,
From darker Dialects of a strange Land,
Wisdom, that here th'unlearn'd shall understand.
What noble wonders may in time appear,
When all, that is foreign, grows domestic here?
When all the scatt^^'d World you reconcile,
Unto the Speech, and Idiom of this Isle:
How like a general Scepter rules that Pen,
Which Mankind makes, one kind of Countrymen?
To Henry Jarmin.
HOw wicked am I now? no Man can grow
More wicked, till he swears, I am not so:
Since Wealth, which does authorize Men to err,
Since Hope, (that is the lawfull'st Flatterer)
Were never mine one hour: yet I am loath
To have less pride, than Men possessed of both:
Fuller of glory, than old Victors be,
That thank themselves, not Heaven for Victory:
Prouder than Kings first Mistresses, who think
Their Eyes, gazing on Stars, would make Stars wink*
That hope, they rule not by imperial place,
But by some beauteous Charter in the Face.
Yet this my pride, and glory, I think lost
Unless declared, and heightened with a boast,
Am I not bravely wicked then? and still
Shail worse appear, in Nature, as in will;
When with my Malice (the grave Wit of Sin)
T'excuse my self, I draw the whole World in;
Prove all in pride, in trivial glory share,
Though not so harmless in it, as Poets are.
When Battles join, alas! what is it does move
('Against all Celestial harmony of Love)
The Gallant Warrior to assault his Foe?
Whose Vices, and whose Face, he never did know:
Why would he kill? or why, for Princes fight?
They quarrel more for glory, than for right:
The pride then he defends, he would punish too,
As if more Just in him, than in the Foe.
The Ambitious Statesman not himself admires
For what he has, but what his pride desires;
Does inwardly confess, he covets sway,
Because he is too haughty to obey:
Who yield to him, do not their reason pl^^se,
But hope, their patience may procure them ease.
How proudly glorious does he then appear,
Whom even the Proud* enmy, the humble, fear*
The Studious (that in Books so long have sought
What our Wise Fathers did, or what they thought)
Admit not Reason to be natural,
But forced, harsh, and uneasy unto all:
Well may it be so, when from our Soul's Eyes,
With dark Schoole-Clouds, they keep it in disguise:
They seem to know, what they are loath t'impart;
Reason (our Nature once) is now their Art:
And by sophistick, uselesse-science, try
T'ingage us still, to their false industry;
T'untie that knot, which they themselves have ry'd,
And had been loose to all, but for their pride:
Their pride; who rule as chief on Earth, because
They only can expound, their own hard Laws.
Since thus, all that direct what others do,
Are proud; why should not Poets be so too?
Although not good, it is prosperous at least
To imitate the greatest, not the best.
Know then, I must be proud! but when I tell
The cause that makes my nourished glory swell,
I shall (like lucky Pensils) have the fate
T'exceed the Patterns, which I imitate*
This not implies, to be more proud than they,
But bravely to be proud, a better way:
And thus ( Arigo) I may safely climb,
Raised with the boast, not laden with the crime:
Those, with their glorious Vices taken be,
But I (most right'ously) am proud of thee.
To Tho: Carew.
(1)
Upon my conscience whenso e'rethou dy'st (Lent)
(Though in the black, the mourning time of
There will be seen, in Kings-street (where thou lie)
More triumphs, than in days of Parl'ament.
(2)
How glad, and gaudy then will Lovers be?
For every Lover that can Verses read,
Has been so injured by thy Muse, and thee,
Ten Thousand, Thousand times, he wished thee dead.
(3)
Not but thy Verses are as smooth, and high,
As Glory, Love, or Wine, from Wit can raise;
But now the Devil take such destiny!
What should commend them, turns to their disprayse.
(4)
Thy Wit's chief Virtue, is become its Vice;
For every Beauty thou have raised so high,
That now course-Faces carry such a price,
As must undo a Lover, if he buy.
(5)
Scarce any of the Sex, admits commerce;
It shames me much to urge this in a Friend;
But more, that they should so mistake thy Verse,
Which meant to conquer, whom it did commend.
TO Doctor Duppa, Deane of Christ-Church, and Tutor to the Prince.
An acknowledgment for his collection, in Honor of Ben. Iohnson's memory.
HOw shall I sleep to night, that am to pay
By a bold vow, a mighty Debt ere Day*
Which all the Poets of this Island owe:
Like Palnea, neglected, it will greater grow.
How vainly from my single Stock of Wit,
(As small, as is my Art, to Husband it)*
I have adventured what they durst not do
With strong confed'rate Art, and Nature too.
This Debt hereditary is, and more
Than can be paid for such an Ancestor;
Who living, all the Muses Treasure spent,
As if they him, their Heir, not Steward meant.
Forests of Myrtle, he disforrested,
That near to Helicon their shades did spread;
Like Modern Lords, we are so of Rent bereft;
Poets, and they, have naught but Titles left:
He wasted all in Wreaths, for's conquering Wit;
Which was so strong, as naught could conquer it
But's Judgment's force, and that more ruled the sense
Of what he writ, than's F^^^y's vaste expense.
Of that he still was lavishly profuse;
For join the remnant-Wealth of every Muse,
And it will not pay the Debt we owe to thee,
For honors done unto his Memory*
Thus then, he brought The Estate into decay,
With which, this Debt, we as his Heirs should pay.
As sullen Heirs, when wastefull Fathers die,
Their old Debts leave for their Posterity
To clear; and the remaining Akers strive
To Enjoy, to keep them pleasant whilst alive;
So I (alas!) were to my self unkind,
If from that little Wit, he left behind,
I simply should so great a debt defray;
I Will keep it to maintain me, not to pay.
Yet, for my soul's last quiet when I die,
I will commend it to posterity:
Although it is feared ('cause they are left so poor)
They Will but acknowledge, what they should restore:
However, since I now may erne my Bays,
Without the taint of flattery in praise;
Since I Have the luck, to make my praises true.
I Will let them know, to whom this Debt is due:
Due unto you, whose learning can direct
Why Faith must trust, what Reason would suspect:
Teach Faith to rul1e, but with such temperate law,
As Reason not destroys, yet keeps't in awe:
Wise you; the living-Volume, which contains
All that industrious Art, from Nature gains;
The useful, open-Booke, to all untied;
That knows more, than halfe-Knowers seem to hide
And with an easy cheerfulness reveal,
What they, through want, not sullenness conceal.
That, to great-faithlesse-Wits, can truth dispense
'Till't turn, their witty scorn, to reverence:
Make them confess, their greatest error springs,
From curious gazing on the least of Things;
With reading smaller prints, they spoil their Sight,
Darken themselves, then rave, for want of light:
Show them, how full they are of subtle sin,
When Faith's great Cable, they would nicely spinne
To Reason's slender Threads; then (falsely bold)
When they have weakened it, cry, t'wilt not hold!
To him, that so victorious still does grow,
In knowledge, and t'enforce others to know;
Humble in's strength; not cunning, to beguile,
Nor strong, to overcome, but reconcile:
To Arts Mild Conqueror; that is, to you,
Our sadly mentioned Debt, is justly due:
And now Posterity is taught to know,
Why, and to whom, this mighty Sum they owe,
I safely may go sleep; for they will pay
It all at times, although I break my Day.
FINIS.

