MEDITATIONS UPON THE PASSION OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.

MADE By the Reverend father FVLVIVS ANDROTIVS of the Society. OF JESUS Newly
translated out of Italian into English.

An. Domini. 1606.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE PASSION AND DEATH OF OUR SAVIOVR Christ.
How profitable and necessary a thing it is, often to meditate upon the
passion and death of our Savior Jesus Christ.
CHAP. I.
THE frequent and daily consideration, and meditation of the life and passion
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is greatly necessary to a Christian man, for diverse
reasons.

1. First, because we can not know God in this life, but by his works, which
how much the greater they be, so much the more they make us know him: and it
is a thing most certain, that amongst all the works of God, the greatest,
without comparison, is the Incarnation of the eternal word, which is that the
most highest God became man for man's love. And so consequently, this woork of
the Incarnation does more manifest and declare unto us the wisdom, the
bounty, the benignity, the mercy, the charity, the providence, and other
perfections of God; and therefore it is the ladder, which the Patriarche Jacob
did see, by which the Angels ascended and descended: for that by this way
spiritual and devout men ascend to the knowledge of God, and by the same way
they desce^d to the knowledge of them selves.

2. Secondly, because it is universally profitable to all sort of persons;
as well to those that begin, as to those that be perfect for that it is the
tree of life, which stands in the midst of the paradise of the holy
Catholic Church, where are boughs high and low; the higher for such as be
great, who contemplate the divine perfections of almighty God, and the lower
for those that be little, who contemplate the pains and sorrows of Christ,
and the filthiness of their own sins, to bewail the^ and have the^ in
horror.

3. Thirdly, because a true Christian man ought always to go after Christ
and to follow the lamb whether soever he goes, which he in deed does
perform, when he does never separate him self from him, nor at any time lose
him out of sight, but does meditate all the passages and mysteries of his most
holy life; which for those that be virtuous and good, is nothing else but a
most sweet baulme powered out, that in every time and place does always cast
from it self, a most pleasant savor of holy Humility, of Charity, of
Devotion, of Compassion and of all virtues. And therefore as he that by
proffession does still handle some sweet things, always gives smell of those
things which he touches: so likewise whoesoeuer conuerseth and deals with
Christ in this manner, does many times cast forth a savor of Christ, that is
he comes to imitate him in humility, in charity, in obedience, in patience,
and in all his other virtues.

4. Fourthlie, because it is not possible to imitate and follow the virtue of
Christ, except we consider his life: for even as it is impossible that a
painter: be he never so skillful, can draw out the likeness of any thing,
unless he often look and cast his eye upon that, which he is to draw out: so
is it not possible that a Christian man can resemble, and express in him self
the virtues of Christ, if he have not oftentimes before him the life, and
think not eftsons upon the virtues of Christ. Exo. 25.40.
For this cause God said to Moises. Behold, and make according to the example
which was showed thee in the mountain. The like he says also to us, for that
the mountain is the highness of perfection, toward which every good Christian
ought to walk, seeing our Savior warns us in this manner. Matt. 5.48.
Be you perfect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect: or else this
mountain is the mount Caluarie, the example whereof is Christ, Joan. 13.15.
who said in the gospel. I have given you an example, that as I have done to
you, so you do also. And to attain to this, it is necessary to look often
upon the example.

Therefore God said. Behold and make. For even as a painter does often cast his
eye on that he is to draw, and then with his hand and pensile does form and
make his li^es: so likewise thou must first behold and view very well the life
of Christ, thinking and rethinking often therevppon, and afterward set thy
hands to work, that is thou must imitate and follow his most holy virtues.

5. Fiftlie, because (as S. Austen says) God has given us this name of
Christian, which comes of Christ, that it might be to us a continual
remembrance of him, and that thereby we might be stirred up, to think
oftentimes with our selves how much he has done, said, and suffered for our
sakes, and consequently of all his life. And as we are wont to give the names
of those, that have done us any great good, to such as be most dear unto
us, in remembrance of them, or if we forget them, we be worthy of
reprehension, how much more is that Christian man to be called ungrateful who
so seldom is mindful of Christ, that never forgets us, but to remember us
has reserved so many wounds? what reason is there, or may be, but that we
should never be unmindful of him? And if before that we were borne, he had so
sweet and so wholesome a remembrance of us, and yet keeps the same so fresh
of us continually in heaven; wherefore ought not we also to be ever mindful
of his infinite goodness, to consider always and meditate the same, and to
contemplate still his most dolorous life, and his most bitter passion.

6. Sixtlie, because as in the primitive Church, when those first Christians
had always before their eyes the life of Christ, they were replenisshed with
so many virtues, they despised the woorld, and were desirous to shed their
blood for Christ; so we, forgetting the same, are empty of all true and solid
virtues, are so much given to the woorld, and so little desirous to endure the
least thing that may be for Christ. Heerehence it is that we read of the
Prophet Jeremy, that when God woold give him to understand, whence the ruin
of the woorlde came, he said. Iere. 12.
All the earth is desolate, because there is noe man that thinks in his heart;
to wit, of that which appertainneth to his salvation. And the like may we also
say, that such great ruins of Christian commonweals do proceed of this,
because there is none that does truly and earnestly think and consider of the
life and death of our Savior and Redeemer Christ.

For even as it is impossible that one can ever learn to write well, if he
look not to the writer that teaches him: so is it impossible that we ever
become truly virtuous, if continually we do not behold our selves, as in a
glass, in the virtuous life of Christ, Matt. 11.
who said. Learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart, and you shall
find rest to your souls. As if he should say. Will you always feel peace,
repose, and contentment? be humble of heart. Will you be humble of heart? Learn
of me. Will you learn of me? Behold and view mie life, and you shall find it
always accompanied with holy humility. This same was that which S. Paul
said. Philip. 2.5.
Think this in your selves which also in Christ Jesus, who when he was in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be him self equal with God; but
he exinanited him self, taking the form of a servant, made into the
similitude of men, and in shape found as man. He humbled him self, made
obedient to death; even the death of the Cross. With which words he shows
us, that if we will be humble, as Christ was, it behooves us to behold our
selves, as in a mirror, in the life of Christ.

7. Seuenthlie; forasmuch as our Savior has said, I am the way, Io. 14.6.
the verity, and the life; how can a man walk in a way, if he never look
upon it? how shall he learn verity, who never hears what the master of
verity does say? how shall he have life, who never does remember the author
of life? And like as he vouchsafed to take man's nature upon him, and to be
conversant so long time with man, to the end that beholding him and co^uersing
with him, man should be in love with him, with his holy virtues, and godly
manners, which he came to teach men; so also it was his will, that his life
should be written for us, that by often thinking therevppon, we might be
inamoured of him, of his godly manners, and of his holy virtues.

And if he so much lamented of his disciples, Io. 14.9.
when he said to them. So long time. I am with you, and have you not known
me? what lamentation may he make of us, and will at the day of judgment, who
in so many, and so many years, have so small understanding and knowledge of
him? And whence is it that we be so impatient, and that we despair so soon in
such tribulations, as happen unto us; but of this, that we do not consider the
life of Christ? Therefore S. Heb. 12.3.
Paul says. Think diligently upon him which sustained of sinners such
contradiction against him self, that you be not wearied, fainting in your
minds; in the time of your tribulations. S. Peter also writes in this sort.
1. Pet. 3.1.
Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh, be you also armed with the same
cogitation. And in a another place. Christ also suffered for us, 1. Petr. 2.21.
leaving you an example, that you may follow his sleppes. But how can a man
follow the steps of an other, if he never look upon them? And wherefore are
we such lovers of our selves, of pleasures, of delights and of the honors of
this world, if not because we do not often and seriously think upon the
life of our Savior Christ, who contemned al these things? How shall one deny
his own will, and take up his Cross, and follow Christ, if he never as much as
remember Christ? 1. Io. 2.6.
If S. John say, that he, which pretends to abide in Christ, must walk as
Christ walked; how can he do this, that never thinks upon the life of
Christ? If S. Ephesians. 5. and 6.
Paul affirm that we ought to be folowers of Christ, appareling our selves
with the virtues of Christ, and arming our selves with Christ; how can we ever
obtain this, if we do not at any time remember Christ? for this cause, as
the same Apostle teaches us, Philip. 3.18.
many be enemies of the Cross of Christ, who have taste only of earthly
things, and be altogether and wholly unmindful of the Cross of Christ.

8. Eightlie, we may easily know how profitable, sweet, and necessary a
thing it is, to be always mindful of our Savior Christ, by that which the
spouse says in the Canticles, Canti. 1.13.
that she had made a bundle of mirrhe of her beloved, and that she would
always bear him in her breast. What else is this bundle of mirrhe, but the
odoriferous and sweet life of Christ our well-beloved, which preserves the
soul from al corruption and putrefaction of sin? and this bundle we must
bear in our breast, that is in our memory. And wherefore is our Lord Jesus
Christ called our brother, our spouse, our companion, our frind, our pastor,
our phisitio^, our advocate, our protector, our redeemer, and our life, if not
because we ought to be mindful of him, as of a dear frind, of a companion,
of a brother, of a spouse, and as of our own life! wherefore would he remain
with his real presence in the most blessed Sacrament of the altar, but to
this end, that we should always have him freshin our memory? and therefore,
in the institution of this most blessed Sacrament, Luc. 22.29.
he said. Do this for a commemoration or remembrance of me. And what thing
can be more sweet, then to remember oftentimes, that almighty God has so
much loved us, that he has made his deerebeloued son to become man, he has
made him to be conversant with men, and in the end to die for men.

9. Ninthlie because it is a rule approved by many, that the life and
mysteries of our Savior Christ do help much those that be of ripe age, if
they do apply them to them selves with a lively faith, with a devout memory,
and with humble gratefulnes. For even as the medicine or herb, which is of
any great force and virtue, helps not, if it be nor applied and laid to
the sick person; so likewise a man receives no virtue nor force from the life
and passion of our Savior Christ, if he do not apply and unite the same to
him self: which thing is done by a lively faith, and by consideration and
godly thoughts, that make a man partaker of the merits of the life and death
of Christ. The memory therefore of the life and death of Christ, is a root,
by which we receive the merit and reward of Christ: and how much greater, and
more strong this memory is, so much more merit and force receive we of our
Savior Christ.

So that every devout person ought to unite all his woorks of piety and
devotion, such as be his good desires, his intentions, his prayers, his
fastings, his watchings; yea those of nature also, as to eat, to drink, to
labor, to suffer, and all other things, together with those of Christ, and to
offer them up so united to almighty God, to whom they will be most acceptable,
as a perfume of diverse sweet savors kindled and burned together.

This remembrance and union is so grateful a thing to almighty God, that
prayer and other good works offered up to him with such union, are without
comparison more acceptable and pleasant to his divine majesty, than those good
works that be done without this union.

Moreover if we do unite and join our works with those of Christ, they
become no less noble and worthy, then does brass when it is melted with
gold, which brass is by this mean changed from his own baseness, into the
excellency and worthiness of gold. It is then a good thing to join our woorks
with those of Christ, that by the value and price of his, ours be also received
and esteemed. For as the Iuie tree can not of it self mount up on high, but
leaning to some other tree, it climmeth as high, as the same tree grows; so
likewise in a certain manner does the baseness of our works ascend and mount
up on high, if they lean upon this tree of life, which is our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And even as a drop of water, is of it self naught else but water, but cast
into a great vessel of wine, gets an other kind of being more excellent and
noble; so our works, which be in them selves but of small value, when they be
joined with the works of Christ, become more worthy and of greater price, by
reason of that grace which they receive from the same Jesus Christ.

It is therefore a thing very convenient and behofefull, that in like sort as
men ar called Christians of Christ, so in all their actions, in their words,
in their thoughts and in all other things, they procure and seek to imitate
and follow Christ. And so when they speak, converse with others, eat, pray,
or do any thing else whatsoever, they ought to do it in that sort, in which
they may think that Christ did such things. By which practice it will come to
pass, as a certain Doctor says, that their life and behavior will become
noble and renewed no otherwise the^ a noble bird when he is changed from a
filthy and ill favoring place into a good and pure air.

Whence it comes that Christians do so little remember Christ and think
upon him.
CHAP. II.
THis proceeds chiefelie of the little love we bear to Christ: because as
our Savior says; Matthew. 6.21.
where thy treasure is, that is the thing which thou do love, there is thy
heart also, to wit all thy thought and care: for the nature of true love is, to
transform and change him that loves, into the thing beloved. And therefore
S. Austen says that our soul is more where it does love then where it does
give life: in so much that with great reason Dalila said to Sampson. Iudic.
16.15.
How do thou say that thou do love me, if thy heart be not with me? which
is as much as if she had said. Thou do endeavor thy self, O Sampson, to
persuade me, that thou deest more affect and love me, then all other woomen;
but how can this be true, seeing thou do nether think of me, nor remember
me, nor trust me? For the sign of one that loves truly and sincerlie, is to
desire earnestly to become one thing with that, which he loves. And therefore
he that loves has all his powers, that is his memory, his understanding, his
will, his imagination, and whatsoever else, wholly employed in that thing which
he loves: in so much that S. Denis of Areopagus says, that love is a certain
alienatio^ of it self, which comes of this, that a man is altogether
tra^sformed into the thing beloved of him.

And as a man that is inamoured and cast away, in some vain and lascivious
love, 2. Reg. 13.
(as we read that Amnon was for his sister Thamar) does nether eat, nor
drink, nor sleep, nor repose, being always bent and occupied in this thought,
because the wound of his inward affection does not suffer him to take any
rest, nether is he fit to think of any other thing, nor does fear what
soever labor: so the love of God, which proceeds from a more noble
beginning, and tends to a more excellent end when it is true love in deed,
thinks nothing else, esteems nothing else, desires nothing else, nor seeks
nothing else but God, and so accounts of all trauail and difficulty as of
nothing, only for his love. It is then a thing most evident that it proceeds
of little love, that we think so little of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Now if any one should demand, whence it comes that Christians do so
little love our Savior Christ? the answer might be, that the reason is this,
which our Savior uttered in the ghosple, Io. 3.19.
when he said: The light is come into the world, and men have loved the darkness
rather then the light. And that which he said in another place, Math. 6.24.
that No man can serve two masters: such as is God, and the world; the spirit
and the flesh; heavenly things and earthly things. A man may likewise
answer that, which to the like purpose that learned and godly man Thaulerus
awnswered in this pretty question propounded unto him, to wit, whence it
proceeds, that almighty God being within us, and more near unto us, then we
be to our selves, we yet feel him not? To this he answers very well, and
yields the reason in this manner, saying that it proceeds of this.

Because the grace of God does not work in us.
But why does not the grace of God work, in us?
Because we desire not the same with all our heart.
Wherefore do we not desire the same with all our heart?
Because we do not love the same with all our heart.
And why do we not love the same with all our heart?
Because we know it not.
But why do we not know it?
Because we know not our selves.
And what is the reason, why we do not know our selves?
Because we are negligent in considering our own life.
Wherefore do we not consider our own life?
Because the eye of our understanding is blinded.
But wherefore is the eye of our under standing blinded?
Because it is full of dust and filthiness, that is of disordinate love and
delight of creatures, of the world, of our flesh, and and of our selves.

Behold then here the reason very manifest and evident. And therefore our
Savior said. Luc. 14.26.
If any man come to me, and hates not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life besides, he can not
be my disciple; to make us understand, that no man can truly love God, and
think of him as he ought to do, if first he do not abandone al disordinate
love of him self, of his own sensuality, and whatsoever creature. For as a
little dust is sufficient to hinder us, that with oureyes we behold not the
heavens; so a little disordinate love is sufficient to hinder us, that we have
no taste of almighty God. Luc. 14.33.
Heerehe^ce it is that our Savior said. Every one of you that forsakes not
all that he possesses (that is al disordinate love and affection) can not be my
disciple.

Certain aduises, whereby to meditate the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ
with more fruit.
CHAP. III.
1. THe first is, that the gift of prayer, and to think well upon the passion
of our Savior, and the benifit of our redemption, is a gift of God; and so it
behooves us to desire the same, and to demand it continually with all our
heart, forasmuch as it is written. Ask, Luc. 11.9.
and it shall be given you.

2. The second is, that a man ought above al other things to be exceeding
humble: for how can it be, that with a proud and lofty heart, a man should
ever meditate well the life and passion of him, who being God was made man, and
taught us to be huble with his words, with his works, and with his example,
in his birth, in his life, and in his death? These mysteries can not be
understood without supernatural light, which is not given but to such as be
humble Wherefore our Savior said in the Ghosple. Matt. 11.25.
I confess to thee, O father, Lord of beauen and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent (of this world) and have revealed them
to little ones, that is to the humble. And so for want of this humility, there
be very few that have any taste of these mysteries. He then that will meditate
these holy mysteries and profit him self by the same, must humble him self
exceedingly, and even from the bottom of his heart esteem himself altogether
unworthy.

3. The third is, that it is also necessary to have our conscience void and
clean from al sin: for how can he with sin meditate the death and passion
of Christ, who ought to understand, that Christ died, to give death to sin?
And therefore it is a very profitable thing, that a man first demand pardon at
Gods hands for all his sins, and steadfastly purpose with him self that he
will rather die, then ever any more offend his divine majesty, and this as
often as he goes to meditate these holy mysteries.

4. The fourth is, that a great impediment and let also is too much love, and
too much anxietie or carefulnes of woorldlie things the which, how little that
they be, hinder us very much from seeing God, no otherwise then whatsoever
little impediment that is put before our eyes, does let us that we can not
behold the heavens. And he that with such thoughts does make his prayer, is as
one that eats garlike, and afterward goes to negotiate with some great
Prince. It was not without great cause therefore, that our Savior did so often
make his prayer in a mountain, being solitary and alone.

5. The fifth is; that if we earnestly desire to taste the mysteries of the life
and passion of Christ, it is very expedient to exercise our selves in mental
prayer, because to pray with our mouth, and to have our heart distracted is of
small profit: and it is as if one should eat all the flesh of a capon, and
afterward send the bones to any great personage. Therefore Christ our Savior,
warns us in the ghosple saying. God is a spirit, Io. 4.24.
and they that adore him, must adore in spirit and verity.

6. The sixth is, that because mental prayer is one of the most hard and tedious
things, that we can do (which is the cause that there be many that give them
selves to the works of mercy, and to sundry mortifications, but few that
imploie them selves in mental prayer) therefore we have great necessity of
much patience, of much strength of mind, of great hope in God, and of
perseverance: for that by the help of God, and by doing what lies in us, we
may obtain all things. And for so much as this treasure is inestimable, make
account to sell all that thou have, and to buy it, and enioie it for ever.

7. The seventh is, that to make our mental prayer well, it is a very good
thing to understand, and know the impediments that may hinder us, and to
consider them oftentimes, thereby the better to avoid them, and they be these
that follow.

1. The little account that we make of venial sins, which nevertheless amongst
other things, do deprive us of that perfect purity of mind, which we ought to
have.

2. To much trouble and unquietness of conscience for venial sins.

3. Superfluous scruples which hold our mind always unquiet.

4. Bitterness or tediousnes of heart, which proceeds sometimes of anger,
sometimes also of rancour, because our heart is as it were a vessel of gall,
which we must empty and void if we will fill it with honey.

5. Sensual consolations; for many there be that desire to enioie God, but they
will not leave, nor forbear the good morsels of the world: and yet spiritual
consolation is not given but to such, as for the love of God be afflicted and
heavy, and not to those that have comfort and joy in the world. So the
ghosple teaches us, Matt. 5.5.
that Blessed ar they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

6. The disordinate care of temporal affairs and necessaires; the remedy
whereof is first, to shake of from us al disordinate affection, that we bear to
creatures. Love not, and thou shall not be afflicted. An other remedy is, to
cast al our care upon God, and to rely upon him with a steadfast faith: for
when thou have done what lies in thee to do, God will take order for the rest,
seeing he has commanded us, Matt. 6.33.
that our chiefest care be to think upon him and to serve him always

7. Overmuch diligence and tenderness in governing our own body.

8. The vice of curiosity, in desiring to know other men's doings, and to have
our things too neat and fine.

9. To leave of, and not continue our ordinary custom and time of prayer,
without just cause, for that the continuing of prayer (although the time be not
long) is of great fruit and profitte.

10. Delicious dainties and superfluity in eating and drinking, which hinder
us very much from eleuating and lifting up our mind to God.

11. Too excessive abstinence, or indisposition of body.

12. Ouergreat affection to any creature, or any thing else, because our mind
is always in that, Matt. 6.21.
which we most love: and where our treasure is, there is also our heart.

8. The eighth is, that we must well understand those things, that further us to
make our mental prayer well, to the end that we observe them with all diligence.
Such be the things that ensue.

1. A great and careful desire of mental prayer, because the love of the end,
which we seek, moves us to work, and makes al pains to seem but light:
in so much that we ought to desire mental prayer, even as one that is hungry
desires bread, and as he that is covetous, longs after treasures, and as a
man carried away with affection toward her, whom he desires for his spouse;
as the scripture says.

2. Strength and diligence to overcome the impediments and difficulties of this
exercise.

3. The guard and custody of our heart, which being the principal instrument of
this music, if it be not well in tune, it can not make good melody: we must
then keep our heart with great vigilancie, from twoe things especially, that
is from vain and idle thoughts; and from disordinate affections.

4. The continual remembrance of God, and to have him always present, as a
witness of our life, by finding him in every place, and in every thing.

5. To use oftentimes certain brief prayers, called iaculatorie or dartting,
because they be as it were darted from our heart to almighty God, like so many
amorous arrows, that conserve and maintain the feruor of devotion.

6. The reading of devout books, because our heart is as a mill, that does
grind all that is cast into it.

7. The guard and custody of our powers and senses, which be as it were the
gates of this city, which is our heart; and above al other senses, our tongue
is that, which does most empty our heart of devotion.

8. Solitarines of body and mind, which is the mother of prayer, even as
silence is the father of the same.

9. To have our times appointed for prayer, especially at morning and evening:
and whosoever cannot pray twice a day, let him pray once a day.

10. Perseverance and constancy in prayer.

11. To use austeritie and rigor toward our body, as fasting, disciplines,
hear clothes, hard bead; and such like things, which sustain devotion.

12. To frequent the woorks of mercy, which increase the fervor of devotion.

13. The time, the place, the disposition of the body, and other things like
these. The time most fit is the morning; and it furthereth us very much to
prepare matter ouernight, for the prayer which we be to make in the morning;
and when we chance to wake out of sleep in the night, it helps exceedingly
to lift up our mind to God, with some short prayer, as by saying Gloria Patri,
and Filio, etc. and that in the morning, the first thing we suffer to enter
into our heart, be the remembrance of almighty God. The place ought to be
obscure and solitary. The dispo^^ion of the body must be, that sometimes we
kneel, sometimes we lie prostrate upon the grownd, sometimes we lift up our
eyes to heaven, or that we stand, or sit, if we can not kneel.

9. The ninth is, that we must also have knowledge of the temptations, that be
contrary to prayer, to defend our selves from them. And they be these.

1. The chiefest is, when we seek no sensible devotion nor spiritual
consolation, esteeming our selves to be abandoned and utterly forsaken of God:
but it behooves us at such times, to remit our selves wholly into his hands,
and to expect consolation from him, Mat. 15.22.
perseuering always with the Chananite, which in the end was wonderfully
comforted.

2. Unclean thoughts which the devil puts into us that by them we come to
leave of prayer, which we must never do nor in any wise be discomforted at
the matter, if they proceed not of our own fault, nor we give any consent
unto them: Luc. 15.39.
but then rather ought we to pray more, as that blind man did, who the more
the people rebuked him, that he should hold his peace, Matthew. 8.25.
the more he cried. So likewise the Apostles cried more to our Savior, when
the tempest grew more in the sea. And there is no doubt but that thou shall
gain more in this sight, the^ if thou should receive great comfort Gods
hands.

3. To be afraid when we pray, chiefelie when we be alone in the night. The
remedy is, first to believe steadfastly, that the deuile can not touch one
hair of our head, without order and permissio^ of God; for if he had otherwise
pouer to hurt us, we might well assure our selves, that he would not fail to
do it, (...) as much as he is always in all places. Secondly we must persuade
our selves, that, when we be at prayer, we have with us present our Angel
keeper, and the help of al other good Angels. Thirdly that we are in the
presence of almighty God, and of all the court of heaven.

4. Sleep or drowsines, against which, a good remedy is, if it proceed of
slouthfulnes, to vsesome discipline, or some other austeritie, and to demand
help of God.

5. Diffidence and mistrust, when we mark that in long time we profit little:
but we must understand, that God is oftentimes wont to bestow his benefits
and gifts after many years, and that for the most part, how much more he
differreth to give, the greater favors he afterward bestows upon us.

6. Presumption, when we seem to have obtained the end; and yet we may truly
think, that there is no greater sign that we be far from the end, then to as
much as deem with our selves, that we be now at the end.

7. A nie disordinate appetite of whatsoever sensual thing.

8. Indiscreet zeal to help others, to whom we ought to attend in such sort,
that it be no prejudice to our selves, and that we be not therebie constrained
to forsake and leave our prayer.

10. The tenth is, that it is also expedient to know, that prayer is not the
end which we must seek for, but that it is a mean to get the end, which end
does consist in three things, that is in the love of God, in true Obedience,
which springs out of the love of God, that can not in any wise be idle, and
in mortifying of our own will, which is a thing most ne^e^^rie for obedience,
because the will of God can not be ingraffed in our soul, except we first cut
off our own will. And this is the cross, Mat. 10.38.
that Christ commands us to take and follow him, which, because it is sharp
and bitter, has need to be tempered wih the sweetenes of prayer. So that
prayer is a mean to obtain this end, and it is not our salvation, but the
principal medicine of our salvation. And therefore he deceaueth him self, who
takes great delighte to pray much, but has no care to advance him self in
mortification, nor thinks not how to ouercom him self, and subdue his euel
inclinations. He also, that in prayer seeks nothing else but gust and
pleasure, and therefore leaves such woorks of charity, as have any bodily
pain joined with them. Likewise he, that labors to save his neighbor, and
yet in the mean time remains full of passion, of anger, of disobedience, and
of gluttony. Moreover he, that for all the world will not leave certain
particular devotions of his own, being never theles full of sensuality, of
choler, of humane respects, and void of humiltie, charity and other virtues.
But much more he is deceived, that does measure others by him self, and
esteeming him self to be better the^ they, does come to contemn them. Therefore
let our chiefest eye be always bent to mortification, and to purchase other
virtues, and let the other be directed to prayer, because prayer little or
nothing avails without mortification, nether is mortification gotten and
obtained without prayer.

11. The eleventh is, that when thou do feel thy self much comforted, and
favored of almighty God at time of prayer, thou then persuade they self, that
thou art provoked to a greater war: and therefore thou must prepare thy self
to fight valiantly and manfully, or to drink ioifullie that calice that God
shall give the.

12. The twelth is that we must not desite revelations, visions, traunces and
such like things, to the end we give no occasion to the illusions and deceipts
of the diule.

13. The thirthenth is, that we must not discover to every body the favors,
that God does aford us in our prayer, but keep them secreate, and dissemble
them in the presence of others, for danger of vain glory; because sweet
things, the more that they be kept close, the better they be preserved: and
therefore in the presence of others it is good to abstain from weeping,
sobbing, sighing, and such like things

14. The fourtenth is, that albeit almighty God show us great favors, yet we
must stand before him with great fear and reverence, considering the goodness
of him, that is so delighted with so vile a creature. Of which consideration
rises love, and that we put our selves in the lowest place.

15. The fifteenth is, that at certain times, as at great solemnities and
festiual days, it is good to dilate our selves more in prayer.

16. The sixteenth is, that in the exercises of prayer and mortification, we
must use discretion, to the end we fall not into extremities. And therefore it
is expedient, to give account of our selves to our ghostly father.

17. The seventeenth is, that many, who esteem it sufficient to give them
selves to prayer, are withdrawn from other virtues: but they must understand,
that all the virtues are united and linked one with an other. And therefore in
vain he labors for one, who labors not for all.

18. The eighteenth is, that although many have laid down many rules how to
make prayer, yet when we have done all that lies in us, we must set aside all
considence of our selves, and put it all in God.

19. The nineteenth is, that a man is not bound to be always tied to one only
sort of meditation, but he may take that for his meditation, wherein he
finds more devotion, more taste, and more profit.

20. The twentieth is, that, if such things as be requisite for devotion, seem
unto us to be over many; we esteem with our selves, that God does well
recompenceour labor with the devotion it self, which, if we persevere in it,
does leave us more comforted and strengthened, then al manner of contentments and
pleasures of the world are able to do.

Fruits that come by meditating the passion of JESUS CHRIST.
CHAP. IIII.
SAint Bonauenture says, that we can not offer unto almighty God a sacrifice
more grateful; for the dead a more essectual remedy; to the Angels a greater
joy; to the most blessed Trinity, a more high sign of reverence and of thank
fulness, then to exercise our selves continually in meditating the passion of
Jesus Christ.

Wherefore on a certain time, our Savior appeared with his cross upon his
shoulders to an Hermit, who desired very much to know, what service he might
do, that might be most acceptable to almighty God, and told him, that he
could do him no greater service, then to bear co^tinuallie in his heart his
cross and passion, because the remembrance thereof does woork in us, that
which here follows.

1. Compunction and sorrow for our sins; Mat. 27.51.
and therefore in the passion of our Savior the rocks were rent.

2. It induces us to confess our sins: therefore the graves were opened.

3. It moves us to make satisfaction, when we see that Christ does suffer so
much.

4. It purges our soul from sin, as the serpent of brass did heal those,
that were bitten of the live serpents.

5. It does illuminate and lighten our understanding very much, as well to know
it self, as God.

6. It holds up our hope; in so much that S. Austen says. O Lord I can not
despair, seeing thee to die upon the cross for me.

7. It inflameth our charity; and therefore S. Bernard says. Above al other
things, the chalice, o good JESUS, which thou did drink, and the work of our
Redemption, do make thee amiable unto me.

8. It increases our virtues and merits, if it be applied so, as before has been said: In the 1. chap. the 9. reason.
for which cause Albertus the great writes, that the devout and fervent
remembrance of the passion of Christ, is more meritorious, then if without it
we should whippe our selves, even til the blood does come.

9. It gives grace and strength in tribulation, wherefore S. Austen says. In all mie adversities, I have not found any remedy more effectual, then the
wounds of Christ, in which I sleep securely, and repose without fear.

10. It is of marvelous efficacy against al temptations, and so S. Bernard
writes in this sort. When any filthy temptation does assault me, I run to
the wounds of Christ. When the flesh does molest me, with this remembrance I
rise again. When the diule does lay wait to intrappe me, I have recourse to
the sacred wounds of Christ, and he forth with flees from me. When the heat
of carnal lust does move mie me^bres, it is suddenly quenched, with calling
to mind the wounds of mie sweet Savior.

11. It comfort us in every heavy burden, to which end S. Gregoire says.
There is nothing so heavy, which we bear not willingly by remembringe the
passion of Christ, figured and signified by the wood, which made the bitter
waters to become sweet.

12. It does incite and stir us up to fight manfully, as the Elephantes do,
which, when they see their own blood become more coragious, and therefore in
the primitive church were so many martyrs.

13. It quickneth a faithful soul, and gives her life. So S. Bernard says. O
strength that lies hidden in the death of Christ, which gives life to the
dead!

14. It fills our mind with sweetenes, being as it were a honie-combe.

15. It inflameth us to praise God; and therefore the children of Israel, having
past thorough the red sea, began to sing very sweetly.

16. It makes us gain glory, because the more that one does remember the
passion of Christ, with affection of charity and love, the more glory he shall
have in heaven, as S. Thomas says. And we read of a certain Saint, that he
was seen to have a diamond in his breast, for a singular reward, because he
oftentimes did call to mind the passion of Christ.

17. It delivers from purgatory, as well those that be there, being offered as
a sacrifice for them; as also that we our selves go not thither, if this
passion be well applied unto us.

18. It does provoke us exceedingly to al kind of virtue; Io. 10.18. Mat.
26.39. Mat. 26.62.
for first, albeit Christ had in his own power to die, or not to die, yet he
falling upon his face prays his father with so great feruor. O what
humility! Being taken by those that came to lay hands on him, he reprehended
S. Peter, Io. 18.10. Luc. 22.51. Mat. 26.44. Io. 18.4. Io. 18.22.23. Mat.
26.62.63. Mat. 26.63.64. Io, 19.28. Io. 19.26.27.
that drew out his sword to defend him. O what constancy! Malcus is wounded,
and he heals his ear. O what charity! He suffered him self to be kissed of
Judas, who betrayed him, and he knew it. O what patience! He was strooken in
the face, and he very mildly admonishes the servant, that smote him. O what
bountifulnes! He is unjustly accused, and holds his peace. O what wisdom! He
is adjured by the living God, and awnswereth. O what Religion! He is condemned
to the cross, and submits him self to this wicked sentence. O what
obedience! He dies for thirst, and yet drinks not. O what abstinence! Luc.
23.39.
He commends his dear mother to John his beloved disciple. O what dutiful
affection! He is cursed and yet blesses. O what magnanimity! Luc. 23.43. Luc.
23.46.
He gives paradise to the good thief. O what magnificence! He gives up with
a loud voice the ghost, in sign that he died willingly for our sakes. O what
strength heroical, ane more then heroical! All the life of Christ was an
instruction of manners, but his death alone was a flower of al virtue, and a
pattern of al perfection; in so much that S. Paul which great reason said, 1.
Cor. 2.2.
that he would not know any other thing, but Jesus Christ, and him dead, and
crucified.

Of the great obligation, which we have to God for the benifit of the death and
passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.
CHAP. V.
AS there is no thing, that pertains more to our salvation, then the passion
of Christ, nor benifit, for which we ought to give more thanks, nor in which
we may more glory and comfort our selves, the^ is this; so there is no thing
of which we ought to be more mindful, to speak more of, to hear more
willingly, and toe think more of then of this holy passion: for which we
ought to be much more thankful then for our creation, and this for many
reasons.

1. Because if the obligation, which man has to God, be great, in respect that
with his only word he created him of nothing; it is undoubtedly much greater
that he, by the means of his death, did repair and renew man, who, through
sin, was in a certain sort brought to less then nothing: because it is in
deed a greater matter to reform a thing well, then to make it new at the first.

2. Because God did show far greater love in the reparation of man, then in the
creation of him: for that before man was made, he had done nothing yet, by
which he might deserve not to be made; but after that he was made and had
through sin offended God, he deserved to lose his first being: and therefore
this pity, bountifulnes, benignity and charity of God was infinite, when
with the death of his own only begoten son, he renewed and restored man,
who had deserved to be brought to nothing.

3. Because in this benifit God has give us lesus Christ, God and man: so that
how much more he is worth then al other creatures, so much greater is the
obligation we have for Christ, then for all other creatures.

4. Because by this means God delivered man from infinite evils causing his
son to enter into a bottomless depth of torments, of pains, and of dangers,
who with his death did purchase for us innumerable goods; so that man is bound
to God infinitely for the seven things that follow. infinite evils 2. Because
he has purchased for him infinite goods 3. rising from death, he gave him self
to man, that man might offer him to God with his merits, or with his infinite
love, as a sacrifice for his sin, and as an oblation for his benifits; and so
a man may offer unto God the Father, the infinite price of the merits of
JESUS Christ, yea and JESUS Christ him self.

The things that ought principally to be considered in the Passion of Christ.
Christ's virtues, to imitate and follow them.

Of the greatenes of Christ's sorows and pains.
WE must understand, that if we except (as S. Thomas says) the pains of
purgatory and those of hell, the pains of Christ were the greatest, that ever
have been, or shall ever be endured in this world. being naked, and in his
frinds who did forsake and deny him.

Christ suffered in all the parts of his body.
HIs head was crouned with thorns. His eyes were covered with tears and
blood. His face was beraied with spittle. His ears were environed with
injuries and reuilings. His tongue was siroped with vinagre and gall. His holy
beard was near drauen off. His hands were passed through with nails. His side
was opened with a spear. His shoulders were torn with whippes. His feet were
pierced with hard nails. All his body was wounded, stretched most miserable,
and wholly out of joint. 7. For the number of so many and so diverse torments
and calamities, as did concur together in his passion, for he was taken,
bound, accused, scorned, spitt upon, buffeted, crouned with thorns, stricken
with a reed, blinfolded, stripped naked, blasphemed, charged with his cross,
and led and haled from one judgment seat to an other, as if he had been a
public malefactor; finally he was crucified, dead, and buried.

That which we ought to gather out of these pains.


How the goodness, the charity, the mercy, and the justice of God does appear
in the Passion of Christ.
To the goodness of frindship it pertains to communicate and give a ma^s self
to his frind: but now, what greater goodness may there be found; then that of
almighty God, who arrived to make him self one thing with man, and to suffer
so much for him, as he did?

To love it pertains to do good to the thing beloved; but what love is
greater then that of God, who died for man's sake, to make him partaker of al
his good?

To mercy it pertains to take upon our selves other men's miseries: now
what greater misery could Christ take upon himself, then to die with so
great pains and shame for our sins?

To justice it pertains to punish offenses; but what justice is more great
then that of God, which punished sin in the person of his own Son?

How he that does meditate the passion becomes full of virtue.
Who is he that will not become humble, seeing the only Son of God to be
less esteemed then Barrabbas, and to be crucified betwixt two thieues? Who
will not be patient, beholding the invincible patience of Christ, his so great
contumelies and injuries, so great pains and sorows? Who will not be obedient,
seeing Christ is become obedient even to the cross? Who will live any longer
in pleasures, beholding Christ in so many torments? Who will esteem wealth,
riches, and other things of the world, seeing Christ to be naked upon the
Cross? Who will not persevere in goodness and virtue, seeing that Christ so
perseuered in his pains and torments even til death? Who will not forgive his
enemies, seeing Christ forgiueth those that took away his garments, his good
name, his life; and not only forgiueth them, but also prays for them?

Let us then give most hearty thanks to our Lord God for this so great a
benefit, to wit for all that which in it he gave us, for all that which it did
cost him, and much more for that he did so exceedingly love us, because his
love toward us was far greater then was that which he endured for us, in so
much that he would have suffered more, if more had been needful. Let us give
our selves earnestly to meditate the passion of our Savior Christ, removing
away from us whatsoever may hinder the same, and let us procure to reap
thereby that fruit which we ought, to his divine honor and glory.

Of the parts of meditation.
CHAP. VI.
THe parts of meditation be four; that is Preparation, Representation,
Consideration, and Prayer.

Preparation is a certain short elevation and lifting up of our mind which we
make in the presence of almighty God, and with which we inuoke first his
divine help, that we may make our prayer well and as we ought. Then after this
we think a little upon that which we go to do, which is the greatest thing
in the world, for so much as we go to worship, to thank, and to pray
almighty God; to worship him for his majesty which is infinite, to thank him
for his wonderful woorks of our creation, redemption, and justification, to
pray him for our own necessities and those of the holy Catholic Church.
And what thing is there more reasonable, more worthy and more necessary then
this?

Representation is nothing else but to imagine the mystery upon which we be to
meditate, as if now we did see it done before our eyes, forming to our selves
the place where it is done, the thing it self which is done, and the
persons that do it. As for example in the mystery of the crucifying of our
Savior, to set before our imagination the mount Caluarie, the Cross, and the
Crucifixe which gusheth out blood on every side.

Consideration is meditation it self, which is a work of our understanding,
with which we discourse upon the present mystery, considering duly the
circumstances of the same, and po^dering with our selves who he is that
suffers, what he suffers for whom, and in what sort; and sometimes
conferring one thing with an other, and procuring always to draw some
affections of love, sorrow, or the like as the mystery shall give us occasion.

Prayer follows last in the end of meditation, in which a man as it were now
in wardlie inflamed talks with almighty God, or with Christ crucified as if
he had him there present, praising him, thanking him, worshipping him,
discovering unto him his own defects and necessities, desiring him to pardon
them, and with obsecration to request him of his grace, of his gifts, and of
such virtues as be needful for his salvation.

Obsecration is nothing else but praying of almighty God by sacred and holy
things; as by his precious wounds, by his blessed mother, by his Saints, by
his passion, merits, and such other like things, which be of great efficacy
and force, to make us obtain that which we demand.

Certain things that we ought to consider in every mystery of the passion,
which be of exceeding great marvel and compassion.
NOte that in all the mysteries of the passion of our Savior Christ, we have
to consider four things. 1. own charity, of his own pity, and of his own
mercy.

It is also very profitable to think with our selves, that whilst Christ
suffered the pain of which we do meditate, he had a most sweet remembrance
and compassion of us, for whose sake he offered up unto his eternal father all
that which he then did endure. And therefore it is very behoueful that we also
with an humble and pitiful heart offer the same as a most sweet sacrifice to
the divine majesty.

The first mystery of the agoine of Christ in the garden.
Here we must first pray our Lord that he give us grace to meditate this
mystery so worthily as we ought. Secondly we must ponder the place, the
persons, and the fact of this mystery. Thirdly we must ponder with great
attention those fouer poincts before mentioned, to wit who suffers, what he
suffers, for whom, and to what end, and in what sort. And these three things
here noted we must also observe in all the meditations that follow.

The poincts to be considered of.
AFter we have read the history in S. Matthew chap. 26. verse. 36. and in S.
Luke chap. 22. verse. 39. and those that follow; we must consider 1. the great
love of our Lord JESUS Christ toward us, who for our sakes did sweat blood,
and to heal our infirmities vouchsafed to drink so bitter a chalice, that we
might with him drink a most sweet cup in the glory of heaven.

2. We must consider the grievous pains, and bitter angwishes, and the agony
never seen nor heard of before, which he endured.

3. The great humility and reverence, with which he did pray his eternal
father, showing him his blood, and the most wonderful and dollourous spectacle,
that ever was or shall be seen in this wide woorld.

4. The manner of his prayer, and the most perfect resignation of him self
into the hands of his father, not willing that any other thing should be done
of him, then that which was the pure and right will of God.

5. His perseverance in prayer in the like manner, and that as he found him
self in greater agony, he prayed the longer. For this he was comforted, and
strengthened by an Angel, heard of his father, and went very courageously to
meet his enemies.

Here follow five poincts, to move us to confusion and shame of our selves.
1. THat for the love of God we have not yet shed as much as one drop of
blood, no nor resisted the least temptation.

2. That we be so far of from suffering for his love, so diligent to beridde
our selves of whatsoever passion of our body, and so negligent to mortify the
passions of the soul.

3. That we have so little care of our salvation, of which Christ our Savior
was so careful.

4. That we be so slow to have recourse to God in our tribulations and
afflictions, so faint-harted, and so litel resigned to the will of God.

5. That we be so impatient in praying, and that so soon we leave of for
every little thing which causes in us distraction, pain, and vexation.

The petition that we may make to God.
WHen we have considered the foresaid poincts, and given thanks to our Lord
for his passing great love, we may request him grace to have always recourse
to his help in our tribulations, using the self same manner of praying, that
our Savior JESUS Christ did use.

The prayer.
O Mie Lord JESUS Christ, I beseech thee by that sorrow and grief which thou
did feel in the garden, by that blood which thou did sweat, by that
fervent and inflamed prayer which thou did make, and above all this, by that
infinite love which induced thee to al these things (which al I offer now for
ever to thie eternal father) that thou will vouchsafe to grant me the gift of
prayer, and that I make speed to thee in all mie afflictions: that I hope only
in thee and say always, father if it be possible, let this chalice pass from
me, if not, not mine, but thie most holy will be done.

What we must do when meditation is ended.
WE must crave pardon of God for the negligence used in prayer and meditation,
saying to this end one Pater noster, and one Aue Maria; and we must oftentimes
in the day think of those poincts and things which we have meditated.

The second mystery, how Judas one of his disciples sold and betrayed him.
THe history of this we may read in S. Matthew chap. 26. verse. 14. and 47. in
S. Mark. 14.10. in S. Luke 22.3. and in S. John 18.3. And here we must observe
diligently in the manner of our meditation, those things which are set down in
the beginning of the former meditation and may not be omitted in these that
follow.

Poincts of meditation.
1. THe only son of God is sold. Of whom? Of one of his disciples, upon
whom he had bestowed so many and great benifits, and a little before given him
to eat his own body and blood. For how little price? for thirty pieces of
silver. To whom? To his most cruel enemies. In what manner? with a kiss a
token of frindshippe. At what time? At the feast of pasche when all the Jews
were accustomed to go to Jerusalem.

2. The great love with which he so kindly embraced his traitor, and the care
he had to save him.

3. The readiness with which he went forth to encounter his enemies.

4. The mildnes with which he did speak to them; and call Judas his frind.

5. The patience in suffering him self to be bound, strooken, and illuded of
such sort of people: thinking our selves to be present.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat we seek not to kiss, but rather to bite those that do us any
displeasure, yea sometimes to do worse then bite them.

2. That so many times we have betrayed Christ for less price then Judas did.

3. That we take so grieuouslie the tribulations which God does send us.

4. That we speak so roughly, and be so hard to our neighbors.

5. That we show so great impatience in our evils, be they never so little,
and do so little accustom our soul to suffer for Christ, knowing nevertheless
how much he has suffered for us.

The petition.
TO demand grace at Gods hands that we may embrace tribulations as he did
embrace Judas, that is as a frind and not an enemy, as good and not evil, as
sent us from God, not from men.

The prayer.
O My Savior JESUS Chist, by that love which moved thee to embrace so kindly,
and to kiss so sweetly the traitor Judas, grant me grace that I, with like
alacratie and readiness of mind, embrace whatsoever cross it shall please thee
to lay upon me as thy gift, sent me for my great good with most sweet and
tender love, and that I always render good for evil to those that offend me,
for thy holy names sake. Amen. In the end do as before in the first meditation.

The third mystery.
HOw Christ was so many times bound, and lead thorough the streets of
Jerusalem as a thief, where yet he had wrought so many miracles. Nether do we
read that ever such injuries were used to such a personage. Here thou must
consider diligently this affair, the persons and that which they do, as if
thou were present at it; and think what thou would have done, if knowing
Christ to be the son of God, thou had seen him so misused with thine own
eyes.

Poincts of meditaton.
1. THe great love that only held our Savior bound.

2. The great pain that he felt, being so straightly bound.

3. The shame to be so lead like a thief in that place, where he had wrought
so many and wounderous miracles, and where the sundaie before, he was received
with so great honor.

4. His iuincible patience in so many up braidings and outrages.

5. The ingratitude of the Jews, who had received so many benifits of Christ.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat my sins did bind him more straightly then those bonds.

2. That I do not let my self be bound with so excessive love of his, that
caused him to be bound so hardly for me: and that yet I suffer my self to be
bound with the love of this world, and the vanities thereof.

3. That so oftentimss I have been ashamed to do well, against the promise that
I made when I was baptized.

4. That I cannot endure as much as the biting of a flea for his love, and yet
do suffer so much for my flesh and for the world.

5. That I am forgetful of so great a benifit, and so singular love.

The petition.
TO request grace that we may be always joined with his divine majesty by
holy love; by those his bonds pains, outrages, and above all by his most
unspeakable love.

The prayer.
MY Savior JESUS Christ, I beseech thee by those hard bonds with which thou
wast bound, by those pains which then thou did suffer in thy most holy
hands, by that grievous reproach which was done to thee in taking thee as a
thief, and above all by that inflamed love which alone did bind thee; I
beseech thee, I say, by all these things to bestow this grace upon me, that I
be so bound with thy divine majesty thorough holy and fervent love, that
nothing may separate me from thee: in so much that I may be able to say with
the Apostle S. Paul. Romans 8.
Who shall separate me from the charity of Christ? tribulation? or distress?
or famine? or nakedness? or danger? or persecution? or the sword? I am sure that
neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither
things present, nor things to come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor
other creature, shall be able to separate me from the charity of God, which is
in Christ JESUS our Lord. In the end you must conclude as before bath ben said.

The fourth mystery.
THe lasshes that our Savior had at the pillar, which were without number,
most painful, cruel and only fit for such as were infamous persons. Some say
that he received six thousand, six hundred sixty and six stripes, which
nevertheless according to the law should not have passed the number of forty.
Nether was there so great cruelty used toward the two thieues, nor is it
written that to such a man like things have been done by any people, were they
never so barbarous.

Poincts of meditation.
1. THink here that thou see thy Savior full of sorrow and shame, and that
he says to thee these words: All this do I suffer willingly for thy sake.

2. That he says to thee: behold to what point thy vanity, thy sins, and
thy pride have brought me.

3. The love that alone held him so fast bound to the pillar.

4. The shame that he had, and the pains that he suftered of those infamous
people.

5. The wounderfull patience and mildnes of Christ, and the unaccustomed
cruelty of those wicked catchpoll, and purseuants.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat we be so little aunswerable to so passing great love.

2. That we be so little sorry for the same, feeling nevertheless grief enough,
and that soon also for the lest things of this world.

3. That our sensuality and worldly pleasures, were those that did bind him
to the pillar and whippe him, and that yet we be so sensual.

4. That we be ashamed to do well, and to speak of God, where Christ was not
ashamed to be bound, and to be cruelly whipped at the pillar all naked.

5. That so many times we have scourged with our sins, him who is now so
glorious in heaven, and yet we make so little accoumpt hereof.

The petition.
TO seek for grace that we may be able to take all scourges as from Gods
hands and to stand strong in them, as our Savior Christ stood at the pillar.

The prayer.
I Humble pray thee, o my Lord JESUS Christ by those thy most cruel stripes,
by those grievous pains, by that precious blood, which then thou did shed in
so great abundance, and above all by that most inward love, which moved thee to
suffer these things, to give me grace that I take all adversities as from thy
holy hands, and bear them with that strength of mind, as thou did bear
those so many and so grievous stripes, that thy holy name be praised and
glorified forever and ever. Amen. Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The fifth mystery.
OF the invention of the Crown, a torment that at the same time caused great
pain and dishonor, which it seems the diule himself could not have found:
nether do we read that ever there was used so great cruelty. Think to be
present at this action, and consider the fowr things before named.

Poincts of meditation.
1. THe great pain that Christ felt at that time.

2. How great the love was that moved him thereunto.

3. That he was wounderfullie ashamed (it being a thing very dishonorable) as
thou thy self also would have been.

4. That all this was done by those people, upon whom he had bestowed so
many benifits.

5. With how great humility, patience, mildnes, modesty and joy of heart he
supported all this for love of us.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat our pride did crown him then, and does yet also crown him oftentimes
with thorns.

2. That we cannot endure as much as one word against our reputation and
honor, and that yet we endure so many against the honor of God.

3. That we be so much forgetful and ungrateful for so great love.

4. That we be so far of from suffering for Christ, and so little desirous
thereof, and in this point altogether unlike to him.

5. That for very trifling things and of small importance we become so
impatient, so angry, and so arrogant.

The petition.
TO demand an inflamed desire to suffer for Christ, to abhor all pride and
vanity, to esteem the pleasures of the world as thorns, and not to wish that
under a thornie head there be delicate members.

The prayer.
O My Lord JESUS Christ by that crown of thorns I pray thee, and by those thy
pains and shame I beseech thee, as also by thy most sweet love which was
cause of all this, I request thee, to give me a most inflamed desire to suffer
much for thee; to cast a way from me all sensual and vain pleasure, and to
abhor that thy precious head be crowned with thorns, and yet my members be
used to delices, that thou be scorned and I honored, thou weep and I laugh so
disorderedlie: grant me therefore, that I have always before mine eyes thy
crown of thorns, thy sorows and pains, and above all thy most hearty love
with which thou did suffer so much for me miserable sinner, that I may
continually bear thee in my heart and praise thee for ever and ever. Amen.
Pater noster. Aue Maria.

The sixth mystery.
TOuching so many sorts of calumnies, injuries and words, done and spoken at
one time, and amongst others.

1. So many filthy spittles, with which they berayed his most holy face.

2. So many bussets given him upon his face by people so miserable, infamous
and vile.

3. So many sorts of garments wherewith they did apparel him now in white,
now in redd, as if he had been a very fool.

4. The blindfolding of his sacred face, and the striking him saying, Prophecy
unto us, who is he that struck thee.

5. The apparelling him with a purple robe and a reed in his hand, striking
his head, mocking him, and calling him king.

6. Of so many false witnesses laid against him.

7. Of diuulging him so often for a seducer of the people, through all the
streets of the city, where before he had been received with so great honor.

8. To have been scorned at so many ways by diverse sorts of persons, great and
little; rich and poor; priests and laymen; jews and Gentills; yea and of
those also who not long ago had received great benifits at his hands.

Here we ought in deed to consider very well 1. who is he that suffers all
these things. 2. that which he suffers. 3. for whom he suffers. 4.
wherefore he suffers.

Poincts of meditation.
1. TO wounder that at one time the Jews could find out so diverse kinds of
pains, words, reproaches, and injuries.

2. To marvel much more at the love of Christ, the Jews not being able to
invent so many torments, as he was ready to endure.

3. The admitable silence he held in so many outrages done unto him.

4. The invincible patience, wounderfull mee^^nes, and incredible force of
heart which he had.

5. That the Jews did fight with their malice and wickedness, and Christ, with
his goodness and piety.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. O How many more great pains do we Christians now find out against him,
then the Jews did then.

2. That we for whom Christ suffered, at become companions to the Jews against
him.

3. That we do so much feel it, when we are forced to suffer a little.

4. That we poor worms will not, that as much as a word be spoken to
displease us, nor the least hair of our head touched, where so many things
have been uttered and done against Christ.

5. That we be so unlike to Christ in our life and manners, and that we will be
named his folowers.

The Petition.
TO demand grace not to esteem the judgment of the world; and to endure all
sort of injuries, and to be accou^pted as fools for the love of Christ, seeing
that he for our love was not ashamed, to be held as a fool and an infamous
person.

The prayer.
O My Lord JESUS Christ, I beseech thee by those so many injuries done to
thee at the same time, by those dishonours and torments which thou did
suffer, and by thy burning love, to bestow this grace upon me, that I also may
endure such injuries for love of thee, and hold it for a most singular favor,
to be esteemed as a fool for thee and know that true Christian wisdom is to
do good and suffer evil, and to be accoumpted as a fool for thy sake, o my
Sauiout. Pater and Aue.

The seventh mystery.
TO have left him for Barabbas a seditious fellow and public manqueller,
infamous and wicked, esteeming him more unworthy of life then an open
murderer, which was one of the greatest injuries, that the Jews could do to
our Savior.

Poincts of meditation.
1. TO be astonished that the Jews held Christ in so small accoumpt, he being
of life most holy, of doctrine most divine, and of miracles most wounderfull,
and one that in all times had done for every body most exquisite offices, and
they making less reckoning of him then of a seditious fellow, a murderer, and
a wicked man.

2. To wounder at the great humility of Christ, who suffered him self to be
compared with Barabbas, and less esteemed then he.

3. To admire his open confusion, when being naked, whipped, bloody, and so
ill used, he was showed to the people.

4. To marvel at the change of the people, that cried Crucify him, Crucify
him, having cried the Sundaie before, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
our Lord.

5. To wounder at the perverse judgment of the world, which prefers the
guilty before the guiltless, evil before good, and Barrabbas before Christ.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. HOw oftentimes have we preferred the love of the world, which is Barabbas,
before that of God? that is to say our will before his.

2. That we be so highly offended when we are not compared with men of quality.

3. That we be so much ashamed to do good for respect of others; and of whom
in the end? of the miserable world.

4. That we do so soon feel things much less then these.

5. That we do so greatly esteem the iugdment of this world, and so little
that of God: and in our doings have chiefelie regard of that which the world
will say, and not of that which God will say.

The petition.
TO request the grace not to esteem the judgment of this world, seeing he is
unwise that prefers Barabbas before Christ.

The prayer.
IF thou, o my Lord, being true God of true God, consubstantiall with the
father, and by whom all things were made, did suffer to be compared with
Barabbas, and to be esteemed less than he, wherefore should not I, who am but
dust and ashes, and for my sins unworthy to live: put my self even under
all creatures? And why shall I esteem the judgment of the world, so foolish
and without all reason, that it tells us that evil is good, that bitter is
sweet, and makes less accoumpt of eternal wisdom, then of foolishnes it
self. Alas my good Lord, deliver me from this blindness by that thine infinite
love, which moved thee to suffer so unworthy things and never heard of before,
that I may always praise and exalt thy power, wisdom, and goodness, who art
blessed world without end. Amen. Pater and Aue;

The eigth mystery.
WHen the Jews made him bear his cross so heavy and weighty, he being
weary and afflicted, that so his heart might first feel the pain of death
before he died. O cruelty never read, nor heard, nor thought of before.

Poincts of meditation.
1. TO take co^pasion of Christ, who having need of rest, was forced to bear
so painful a burden.

2. To consider how ready he was, to take upon him and bear his cross.

3. His passing great humility.

4. His love so patience, and his patience so loving.

5. The cruelty of the Jews toward one of their own nation, and who was
the honor and glory of their country.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat we so much abhor all sorts of Crosses.

2. That we be so ready to murmour in every little tribulation.

3. That we be so proud, as if God were bound unto us, and we deserved no
manner of ill.

4. That knowing the Cross to be the means, by which we must go to heaven, we
do yet so little think upon it.

5. That we be so cruel toward our selves, and so unlike to Christ and his
holy Saints.

The petition.
TO ask grace that we may bear the Cross, which he thorough his great love
did bear; and that he give us light to know, how honorable a thing it is to
suffer for his holy names sake.

The prayer.
WHen I think with my self, o my Lord, how with so great readiness of mind thou
did take that heavy cross upon thy shoulders for the love of me, thou
being yet in so pitiful and painful case, I am altogether confounded and
much ashamed, that I for thy sake can not endure as much as a fleae biting.
Alas! let thy mercy overcome my misery, and give me grace that hereafter I
may desire to suffer much for thee, and that this may be my glory to say with
the holy Apostle. Galat. 6.14.
God forbid that I should glory, saving in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world Amen. Pater and Aue.

The ninth mystery.
THe kind of this cruel death of the cross, because by it a man died not so
soon as when he is beheaded, or does dye of some such like death; and yet
nevertheless the wounds became greater through the weight of the body.

Moreover they were in the most sensible parts of the body, as in the hands and
feet, which both be full of veins and sinowes: in so much that not having
received any mortal wound at all, by force of most cruel pains he rendered up
his most holy soul. Wherefore, when Pilat understood that he was dead, he
marueled at it, as the Evangelist reports. Marc. 15.44,
And consider well here the four poincts above mentioned.

Poincts of meditation.
1. THe great pains which he then did feel, which were in deed the very
greatest that could be felt.

2. The shame he suffered, seeing him self hanging betwixt twoe thieues; in an
infamous place, and in presence of so many people.

3. That the great love held him on the cross, not the nails or any other
thing.

4. That whilst they took from him his goods, his life, and his good name, he
prayed for them.

5. That he was every way exposed to pain, without feeling any, even the
lest comfort that might be.

Poincts of meditation.
1. THat we be so far from suffering for Christ, who suffered so much for us.

2. That we mistrust to put our life in his hands, who so joyfully did give
his life for us.

3. That we be so greedy of goods, and of worldly fame, so much despised by
Christ.

4. That we be so afraid of death, knowing that Christ died, who is the gate
to go to heaven.

5. That Christ for love of us neither esteemed goods, nor honor, nor life:
and that we be not aunswerable to so great love.

The petition.
TO request grace to persevere on the cross till death, and to be always
mindful of the passion of Christ crucified.

The prayer.
Grant me grace, o most merciful Lord, that I desire for thy love to remain
on the cross which thou shall give me, even till death; and that I bear thee
crucified still engraued in my heart: by the blood which thou did shed on the
cross, by the pains which thou did feel, and by the love which did induce
thee to all this: that being made partaker of thy pains, I be also partaker of
thy eternal joys in the kingdom of heaven. Amen. Pater and Aue.

The tenth mystery.
TO have been so much despised whilst he was upon the cross in the midst of
so great pains, the Jews sometimes saying unto him, that if he were the son
of God, he should descend from the cross; some others, that he had saved
others, but could not save him self; and again that in three days he should
build again the temple. Consider well the four poincts we spoke of before.

Poincts of meditation.
1. COnsider that Christ was held infamous, suffered infamous death, in an
infamous place, of infamous persons, and with infamous words.

2. His patience, humility, love, and contempt of the world.

3. His charity in praying his father, that not only he would not throw them
headlong down to hell, but would also forgive them.

4. The cruelty of the Jews; for if such extremities had been used, to any
dog they would have moved to compassion.

5. The marvel and woundering of the Angels, who did see these things, and
what we our selves would have done, if we had been present at such enormities,
especially knowing him that suffered to be the son of God.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat Christ being glorious suffered him self to be accoumpted as infamous,
and used as such a one: and that we, being in deed infamous thorough our
sins and ungratefulness, will be esteemed glorious.

2. That when any do contradict us, we give them forthwith the lie, provoke
them to the combat, and become contentious and angry.

3. That for any the lest injury done to us, we would, if we could,
incontinent, lie ruin him that did it.

4. That we feel so little compassion of all that Christ suffered and yet have
so great compassion of our selves, and of any thing pertaining to us.

5. That some of us Christians do now no less blaspheme Christ, then the Jews
did in that time.

The petition.
TO ask grace to contemn whatsoever injurious, infamous, or dishonorable
words, to the end we may become true folowers of Christ.

The prayer.
O My soul, wherefore art thou not astonished? why art thou not confounded? why
art thou not ashamed, seeing thy Lord, thy spouse, thy lover so tormented on
the cross; and that thou wilt live in pleasures? that he is naked; and thou
wilt be vainlie apparelled? that he does pray for them, who take from him his
substance, his good name, and his life; and thou art so far from this? O
charity, never heard of! O my Lord, by this thy wounderfull charity, power, I
beseech thee, into my soul a new spiritte, renew in my bowels thy right
spirit, that I may have thee always ingraued in my heart, and may still
remaime with thee upon the cross, and still pray for them that speak or do
ill unto me, that following thee here on earth as thy child, I may after see
thee and enjoy thee in heaven. Amen. Pater and Aue.

The eleventh mystery.
OF the pain he had beholding his mother, and the torments wherewith he knew
her holy soul was replenished.

Poincts of meditation.
1. COnsider how sorrowful the blessed virgin was seeing her son so misused;
but what son? of whom? and wherefore?

2. Her patience, she not doing nor saying any thing, in the midst of so many
cruelties, which she did see were used toward her most beloved son, that was
not seemly to a most wise and grave matrone.

3. The conformity of her will with that of God, by which she would have
become the ladder (as S. Catherine of Siena writes) that by it Christ might
go up to the cross, so to save the whole world.

4. The manner of God so diverse from that of the world, that he makes even his
dearest frinds to suffer so much: as were his son, and his mother, and others
beloved of him.

5. That the affection which our Lady as mother did bear to Christ, did not
withhold him from being crucified on the Cross, nor the love which he as a
son did bear to his mother, from dying for us upon the same cross.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat we be so tied to our children and kindred, not loving them nor holding
them as things of God, and at his commandment.

2. That we be so afflicted and impatient, when they be ill at ease, or that
God does take them from us by death.

3. That we be so far of from taking all things at Gods hands, and conforming
our selves to his most holy will.

4. That we be so rude and ignorant, in understanding the means that God is
wont to use, and so contrary to the same.

5. That we be so easily addicted to the things of this world, and with such
difficulty to those of God.

The petition.
TO demand grace, that as neither the love of his dear mother, nor the many
torments and injuries of his enemies, could make Christ come down from the
cross; so likewise nor the love of any creature, nor the displeasures of the
same, may be able to withdraw us from the service of our Lord God, and to
leave of the good once begun for his sake.

The prayer.
IF thou, o my sweetest Lord, being upon the cross naked, tormented and
afflicted, neither for the love of thy dear mother, nor for any injurious
words of thine enemies, would, for the love thou did bear to me, come
down from thy painful cross: Wherefore should I, serving thee that art king
of kings, and whose service is naught else but reigning, fail in the lest point
of thy honnourable service, so full of peace, so full of pleasure, so full of
all comfort? Wherefore should I leave the same for the love of my kinsfolks,
for the displeasure of mine enemies, and for the speech of the foolish common
people? Wherefore should I cease to become thine, seeing thou art altogether
mine? and to spend my whole life for thy majesty, who have spent all thine
for so base a creature as I am? Wherefore, seeing thou did hold it for a
great favor, to suffer for my love, infamies, pains, and most cruel death;
should not I esteem it as a most great honor to be for thy love diffamed,
scorned, and ill used? O Lord grant me this grace by thy most tender love,
that with a sincere and pure heart I love thee alone, praise thee alone, and
serve thee alone even till death, that then with a joyful and quiet
countenance I may go to thee, and with loving affection utter these words. In
manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum; Into thy hands, O Lord, I do
commend my spirit. Amen. Pater and Aue.

The tweleuth mystery.
OF the gall given him, being in the midest of so great thirst of sorows and
pains.

Poincts of meditation.
1. COnsider the cruelty of those Jews who denied a litile water to him, that
was so much tormented and void of blood, which water he demanded dying.

2. That in steed of water they give him vinaigre and gall; a thing which
Abraham did not to the rich glutton that was in hell.

3 The great desire that Christ had to suffer, seeing that because of all his
members his tongue only remained without pain, he would therefore that the same
should also in the end suffer pain.

4. With this consider also his admirable patience in this case.

5. Above all consider the great love which in this he showed unto us.

Poincts of confusion for us.
1. THat he having so great thirst of our salvation, we our selves have so
little of the same, and that we think not at all how to quench it, by turning
to him

2. That he being thirsty to remain always in our souls, chiefly by means
of the blessed Sacrament, there be yet so few that seek to pleasure him.

3. That the Lord of all things would become so extreme poor, as to have need
of a little water, and yet could not obtain it: and that we notwithstanding
will abound in all things.

4. That the desire of Christ was always to suffer, and that ours is to be
still in pleasures and pastimes.

5. That we have so small desire to help our neighbor, and that we care not to
scandalize him, for whom Christ died of thirst.

The petition.
TO request the grace of God, not to render him any more gall for honey, that is
ill for so many benifits as he bestows upon us at all times, by the most
bitter passion, which then he did feel, and by that most loving love, which
induced him to take so painful and bitter a cup.

The prayer.
O How many times, my good Lord, have I given thee bitter gall, for the sweet
and continual honey thou have given me? how many sins, for so many gifts? how
many evils, for so many goods? O how many times, whilst I enjoyed thy goods,
which I have always enioied, and yet do enioie them, not having any thing
that is not thine, how often, I say, have I offended thee with the self same
things that were thine? and how often times receiving thy pay, have I fought
under the diule and under the world? Alas! give me grace that I yield thee
grapes, and no more wild grapes; good, and not evil; thankfullnes, not
unthankfulness; and that I always feel disgust when I should do, speak, or
think any thing, that may be against thy divine majesty; and that
henceforward I render thee love for love, blood for blood, life for life, that
as with my evil life I have scandalized heaven and earth: so hereafter, with
my holy and virtuous life, my neighbor may be edified, and thy divine majesty
praised, blessed and glorified for ever. Amen. Pater and Aue.

A speech which the soul does make with Christ, discoursing with him upon
his passion.
O My Lord, wherefore wast thou sold?
To redeem thee.
O Lord, wherefore did thou pray so much?
To pacify the wrath of my father against thee.
O Lord, wherefore wast thou afraid and astonished?
To make thee most assured and courageous.
O Lord wherefore were so many deceits used to intrapp thee?
To deliver thee from all deceit.
Wherefore did thou sweat blood?
To wash away the spots of thy sins.
Wherefore would thou be taken?
To the end thou might not be taken of thine enemies.
Wherefore would thou be bound?
To loosse the bonds of thy sins.
Wherefore wast thou denied by Peter?
To confess thee before my father.
Wherefore would thou be forsaken of all thy disciples?
To remain with thee even till the day of judgment.
Wherefore would thou be accused?
To absolve thee.
Wherefore would thou be spitted on?
To cleanse thy filthiness.
Wherefore would thou be scourged?
To free thee from eternal scourges.
Wherefore would thou be lifted up on the cross?
To lift thee up into heaven.
Wherefore would thou be crowned with thorns?
To crown thee in everlasting glory.
Wherefore would thou stretch out thy arms?
To embrace thee my beloved soul.
Wherefore did thou bow down thy head, o my Lord?
To kiss thee, o my dear soul.
Wherefore would thou that thy side should be opened with a spear?
To receive thee in my heart, o my soul
Wherefore would thou be placed in the midest of two thieues?
To place thee in the midst of the Angels in heaven, o my dear soul.
O what unmeasurable charity! what infinite love! what favor never heard of!
what wounderfull mercy! God to become man. The eternal to become temporal.
The impassible to become passible. The immortal to become mortal. The
glorious to become ignominious: And for whom all this at the length? for me,
for me. O most wounderfull wounder.

A prayer concerning every article of the Passion.
O God, who for the Redemption of the world would be borne, circuncised,
reproved of the Jews, betrayed with a kiss of Judas the traitor, lead as an
innocent lamb to the slaughter, and vndecentlie offered to the sight of Annas,
Caiphas, Pilate, Herod, accused of false witnesses, vexed with scourges and
reproaches, besmired with spittle, crowned with thorns, strooken with buffets,
smoten with a reed, blindfolded, stripped of thy garments, fastened to the
cross with nayls, lifted up on the cross, reputed amongst thieves, presented
with vinagre and gall to drink, and wounded with a spear. Thou o Lord, by
these thy most holy pains, which I unworthy do remember, and by thy holy
cross and death, deliver me from the pains of hell, and vouchsafe to bring me
whither thou did bring the thief crucified with thee. Who with the father
and the holy ghost, live and raignest, world without end. Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Lord JESUS Christ in whose dominion all things ar put, and there is none
that can resist thy will, who did vouchsafe to be borne, to dye, and to rise
again: by the mystery of thy most sacred body, and by the five wounds and
shedding of thy most precious blood, have mercy upon us, as thou know to
be needful to our sowles and bodies: deliver us from tentation of the diule,
and from all those things with which thou know we be straightened, and
conserve and strengthen us in thy service even till the end, and give us true
amendment and space of true penance, and after death grant us true remission
of all our sins: and make us one another to love our brothers, sisters,
frinds and enemies, and without end to rejoice with all thy Saints in thy
kingdom, who with God the father and the holy ghost live and raignest God
for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer to the wounds of Christ.
I Pray thee, o Lord JESUS, by thy most wholesome wounds, which thou did suffer
upon the cross for our salvation, from which flowed out that precious blood
where- with we were redeemed: wound this my sinful soul, for which also thou
did vouchsafe to dye: wound it with the fyrie and most strong dart of thy
exceeding charity. Strike my heart with the iaueling of thy love, that my soul
may say unto thee; with thy char^^^ I am wounded; so that out of the wound of
thy love, there may flow most abundant tears day and night. Strike o Lord,
strike I beseech thee this my most hard heart, with the merciful and strong
spear of thy love, and pearce with mighty power more deep to the inward
parts. Who live and raignest for ever and ever. Amen.

Devout petitions to our Lord JESUS Christ taken out of S. Augustine.
O Lord JESUS, let me know my self, and know thee.
Let me not desire any thing, but thee.
Let me hate my self, and love thee.
Whatsoever I do, let me do it for thee.
Let me humble my self, and exalt thee.
Let me think of nothing, but of thee.
Let me mortify myself, and live in thee.
Whatsoever things shall chance, let me take them of thee.
Let me persecute my self, and follow thee.
Let me still desire to follow thee.
Let me fly from my self, and fly to thee.
Let me be worthy to be defended of thee.
Let me take heed to my self, and fear thee.
Let me be of those that are chosen of thee.
Let me mistrust my self, and trust in thee.
Let me have desire to be obedient for thee.
Let me have affection in nothing, but in thee.
Look upon me, that I may love thee.
Call me, that I may see thee.
And let me for ever inioye thee. Amen.

