A SVRVEY OF CERTAIN DIALOGICAL DISCOURSES: WRITTEN BY JOHN DEACON, AND JOHN
WALKER, concerning the doctrine of Possession and Dispossession of Devils.

WHEREIN IS MANIFESTED THE PALPABLE IGNORANCE AND DANGEROUS errors of the
Discoursers, and what according to proportion of God his truth, every christian
is to hold in these points.

Published by John Darrell minister of the gospel.

Titus 1.10.11. There are many disobedient and vain talkers, and deceivers of
minds, teaching things, which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, whose
mouths must be stopped. IMPRINTED 1602.

TO THE READER, WITH ANSWER to the Discoursers two epistles.
It greiues me (christian reader) I assure thee, still perforce to be thus
troublesome not only to my self, but also to thee. It must needs be enough,
and more then enough for thee, to have perused so many simple treatises
already, all harpinge on one string. And as for my self, how can I after so
great vexation by the B. of London, so long imprisonment, such public
produceme^t into open courts, and lastly my pains to clear the truth from M.
Harsnets slanders, but like a tired and weather beaten bird, wish so^e quyer
corner to rest my self in, and to dry my feathers in the warm su^ne? But it
is not my lot, I think, to breath me, no not a little: For behold two new
cha^pions, that have been bucklinge on their harness these two or three
years, with a proud swelling volume like a Spanish Armada, challenge me afresh
to a new encounter. Wherein yet this comforts me, that this new on set (...) an
open declaration to the world, that in these men's Judgments at the least, the
Bishop with his home forces has been to weak. Neither this only, but even
the B. himself by entertaininge this fresh aid, does as it were plainly
confess, his victory to be as yet imperfect. Otherwise it were idle either for
them to offer, or him to embrace a needles supply, if they perceaved not their
former platforms by that poor battery, which my co^te^ned writi^gs have made,
to be tottering and falling. Blessed be God which though he suffer his truth to
be shrewdly pressed, yet not to be altogether oppressed, to be shrewdly thrust
at, yet not utterly cast down: to be laden indeed with heavy burdens, yet to
grow under them like a prevailyng palm. Great i^ the power I see of a just
cause, how simple so ever her tail be. But what? shall the matter now be put
out of all doubt? Must it needs in these Dialogues be convinced by Logike, and
persuaded by Rhetorike, that all this brute of Possession and Dispossession is
but a mere deceit? O foolish and unadvised men, which think to overthrow that
by fond Sophistical words, which by sad words and deeds has not hitherto
been vanquished. No doubt men of judgment will herein deem the Bishop to
have failed in a great point of circumspection, in committing the brunt and
execution of a battle to these the weakest and cowardliest companies he has.
For if himself could not be satisfied to have wounded the cause to his power,
with the sword of his authority, but that he must needs race the memory of it
with consuminge fire, he should not for performance thereof have sent us this
Ignis fatuus, as every one may easily discern this to be.

I pray thee Christian Reader, have patience with me. I will spare thy pains,
and mine own, as much as I can. My purpose is not to man out an other Galeasse
like this Discoursers gallant, but to set upon it with my poor fisher boat,
and yet I hope by God his assistance to make her lay her top sail in the
broth. Neither think thou, I endeavor hereby a defense more for my self, then
for thee. I could have contemned their frivelous reproaches, had it not been
thou were greatly endangered by the manifold gross errors wherewith they would
poison thee. And therefore intending thy good, more then mine own credit, I
will take a breife view of their Dialogicall Discourses, before I come to them
which properly concern me.

These Discourses be fronted with a double epistle, one to the Right H. the L.
Keeper, and chief Judges of the land, to which we will answer anon: the other
to the Reader: wherein omitting their earnest care to find out the truth in this
doctrine, proceeding even to dissension between thee two, otherwise sworn
brethren in matters of fact, first we have a large rehearsal of sundry reasons
for the edition of this treatise, both wherefore it has been hitherto
suppressed, and also for what causes now at last it is published. For
suppresing the regard of your own imperfectio^s were not to be misliked, if
you had not repented of this humility so soon. But I can hardly believe you
conceived so meanly of your own faculty, as to fear the censure of any for
scholasticall form, your whole discourse is so Analyticall, and your
Phisiologus and Othodoxus such ripe and pregna^t concluders, besides your
continual vpbrayding me with my Hotchpotch and us all which have dealt in this
cause with our intricate riddles. Neither can I think you distrust your
eloquence as you pretend, wherein you brave it so every where. Whether it be
Ciceronian vernish or no, I cannot tell, my skill is not great. In my poor
judgment, to give you your right, the sentences are well stuffed with good
rattling words, able to still the babes crying, and replenisht eftsoons with
many Timely epithites, sweetly buzzing in every corner like a swarm of flies.
I grant you that therebe many buysy controlers of other men's labors. But why
should you fear a quippe for a point of learning, which have inured your faces
not to blush at greater matters? No doubt your compassion and care of me was
great: least by publishing this work, you shoud increase my afliction, such is
the charitable regard you carry toward me in this you have published, in every
page imbracinge me no less tenderly then the Ape her young ones. Lastly you
hoped, Authority might have caused silence: for which purpose you remember the
obeydience of the prophet to Amaziah his command, after he had done his
message though not so fully as he would, yet sufficiently: such is your great
skile, or at least your fidelity in reasoninge, that by your rule, the hungry
man must patiently fast, because he does so which has his belly full. Withal
you would feign charge our stirringe in this cause, with want of respect to her
Majesty's Princely prerogative, but in answer to your Queres this imputation
shall appear to be no less absurd, then malicious, and your selves rather
pernicious Sycophants, then we in the smallest allegyance undutiful. And thus
have we these worthy reasons for suppressing as forcible to this end, as if
one should suppress water with a ^iue.

Now what great motives thrusted forward the publishing? forsooth, for that
some Ma^^ contents undermined the authority of the high commis^ion: when as
only the bad dealing of some in the commission was justly reproved, the
Commission it self not once either touched, or meant. But here your eyes
daseled, and could not discern the wood for the trees: the Person, and the
office with you must be all one, you know no difference between M^ses chair,
and a pharisaicall life. But Busy say you must needs have a band: Well M.
Deacon, and M. Walker, make much of this band^ y^u that might have re^ted
q^ietly in forgetfulness, if you take not good heed, may hau^ mo^e use of ^t
ere long your selves, then you would. These are great motives, y^a this case is
so weighty, that we must have a just half^ score reas^ns more to satisfy the
world ^or send^ng this treatise abroad. Should we run over these seue^ally?
It were but mispendinge the time, to hunt the wyld goose cha^e with you.
Therefore to gloane here and there one. Your second and third allegations, to
cross the opinion of a Necessary perpetuity of Miracles, is to be frighted
with your own shadows, and as be^em^th men of you^ quality to f^are, where
no fear is, who v^geth Perpetuity of Miracles? Have I any where affirmed it?
Nay, have not I earnestly opp^sed my self against it? Either prove me untrue
if you can, or confess your selves t^ be past all shame, who will needs
father that upon me. I never affirmed, but the contrary, which your selves also
testify co^tradictio^ 15. Your ^ourth reason has some more substance in it,
then all the rest. You feared my credit would be too great. To free you from
this fear: I have learned by God his goodness not to glory in this, or the like
things, and to my poor abillitie I have always enform^d my auditors
accordingly^. And surely you, if there be any glory in such like actions, and
your selves sound members of that body you make show of, would rather have
rejoiced in the fellowship of it, then have greiued through envy, and disgraced
the same by all the means you can, Fastly you doubted least the conscience of
some might be trouble^ with scruple, if justifying faith be the instrument of
such works, since all endewed with that faith bring not the like to pass. But
I pray your great learning tell me, by what faith obtain w^e daily bread? Was
Lazarus to doubt of his faith b cause he was not sat sfied with the trummes of
the Rich man's tabl^? Has the Lord bou d himself to bestow all corporal
blessings upon ea^h of the faithful, and in the same measure also? Or are you
only ignorant in this A B C, which every common Christian knows? I will not
dispvte this matter further with you for shame. Whereas you say eighthly, we have
been co^vinced for gross malefactors, I should marvel at your impvdency,
but that I know with what mett^l your forheads besteeled. If we were co^victed
for such as you say, what was the sentence of our condemnation? what was the
punishment? what be came of the execvtion? As for our deprivation from the
mynistery, was this an inflict^d pain for teaching to counterfeite, wherewith
M. More was never charged, and yet depryued as well as I? or rather the Bb. only
pleasure, who least they should seem to make all this styr for nothing, and
not finding such cause as they desired, chose rather by layinge this upon us
to maintain the repvtation of their own wisdom, then to punish us for the
defers of such a cri^e. If they had found our fact worthy thus to be he
censured, I hope they would not be so partial, as to suffer all the rest of
the practisers, in the same rank of guiltynesse with us, either not to be
called to account at all, or being examyned to be dismissed again without any
correction. I would desire you (if any honest request may prevail with men of
your stamp,) that if you mvst n^edes be lying, you would lie with more
probability least all the world cry shame of you. Tenthly your Scorpions sting
is ever wagging, in obiecting disobedience to the Maiestrate, and printinge
without pryuilege: you shall receave answer in your Queres where you urge this
matter more importunatly. And thus mvch for the wind that moved the Aspen
tree, of whose leaves it seems, for all your reasons yet alleged, your
tongues are made.

The rest of the Epistle is spent in preventinge lavish tongues, against whom
you fence both your Persons, and your Cause. For your Persons, and first for
your learning, It is joy that men of your skyll can be so humble. Howsoever you
in modesty deem your selves Minimi Apostolorum, the least of ten thousand: yet
for my part when I consider the multitude of good Authors prefixed before your
Dialogues, and scattered sentences in them, and how little you are behoulding
to any of them in the cheifest points you handle, having through the quicknes
of your own conceit found out that, which they never once dreamed of.

When I say, I consider these things, I am forced to yield this praise unto
you: that you are profound Rh^psodistes, and men expert in Tablatine, which by
the help of an Index are able in some few years to marshall a troop of
sentences and Authors to some terrible show. Besides who can but commend, as
your multiplicity of reading, so your faithfulness in alleging, which would not
use the phrase of Dare manus, but cite your Author M. Tullius Cicero for it?
which phrase only, has put Cicero in the list of Authors to make up the
number: and the like diligence has afforded us the names of diverse others. Nay
me thinks I see in you the skill of prudent Captains, which to terrify their
enemies, can make an handful of men show like a great multitude, some one
seeming two, yea sometimes three. This stratageme has placed Aristotle in A,
and Philosophus for the self same author in the letter P. So Johannes Darrell
being a great learned man, first makes one in the rank of I, and the
Narration of Darrell an other in the troops of N. But Gregorius in G keeps a
terrible styrr: for first he is part down simply Gregorius, then again
Gregorius Magnus, and the third time Gregorius 1. Romans and yet all these are
but one. You must needs overcome, which are so full of policy, not
inferior to Cyrus, that by certain Idols made for the nonce, and men of straw,
took Cresus at Sardis. Fear not therefore ye learned Discoursers, howsoever
the ignorant may lightly pass over your Table, painted marge^t, and many
autho^ityes without due regard, yet the Judicial Reader (able to distinguish
between a counterfeyt, and a grounded knowledge,) will give you such
commendation as you deserve.

For the carriage of your lives precedent and present, we have a whole page
persumed with many slonenly terms. And herein you lay about you mightily,
bragging your selves like butchers mastiues with their collers of iron pykes,
and daring any to set upon you. If your horns peep out of the bushes whether
you are fled for covert, you may thank your selves which have eaten away the
leaves. Yet I will pass by you, as though I saw you not: not for any fear of
your vrchins skyn, wherewith you think you are sufficiently armed, but for
that I think it better to pass by you in silence, then to utter that which
you deserve to hear, and to lay you open in your colors. I will only demand
this of you, how you durst dedicate your treatise to the Right Honorable Lord
Keeper, to the Lord Chief Justice of England, and other the chief Judges of
the land, by this means to occasion them to inquire of your person? I say no
more, let this suffice for answer of that Epistle of yours to their Honors, as
I promised you. Yet I must needs tell you, that where you say, we sport our
selves in bra^ding our brethren, with the odious name of Formalists, you say
untruly. We account them Formalists, which form and fa^shion themselves like
unto this world: and not they which are crucified unto the world, and the world
unto them, albeit in some things they dissent from us in opinion. And instead
of brandinge such with this or any other odious name: if they be of the
ancient, we call and reverence them as fathers: if others, we term and love
them as brethren. From these and the cause they speak of, it being holy and
good, if this couple be with D^mas quite fallen, to the embracinge of this
pre^ent w^rld, and become Apostates, reuolters and back-slyders, whereof they
say they look every hour to hear, let the^ know that this Apostasy of
theirs, is not the least of their sins, nor easyest repented of. But to let
all this pass^, con^erninge your cause, if you will as you say, be content that
it be tried by the fire of God his truth, you shall d^e well. For your form by
Dialogue and other order in followinge the cause it is as your pleasure, I know
none ready to except against it. If you bring truth, it shall be acceptable in
what form so ever.

For your Queres, whether her Majesty has authority to establish in her
dominions an order for printing with privilege, belike you were at lea^ure
when you mo^ued this Quere to spend words in a need less question, never
denied, or d^ubted of. All Princes have authority in their several kingdoms
to constitute some conv^nient order in this behalf, and this care is both holy
and good. How can the whole lump possibly not be sowred, if every man might
thru^t in his leav^n at his pleasure? But then you demand furthe^, whether
every one be not stri^tlie bound to observe this order? I answer every one is
strictly bound to observe the meaning of the law, wh ch is, to suppress
falsehood and wickedness: But when such officer^ shall come in place to be set
over this ^harge (as no Prince to the world can always avoid it) which
insteade of suppressing error and sin, will according to their ow^e deceived
hum^rs supp^esse truth and v^rtue: here the meaning of the law is to be looked
in to, and practiced, and the letter is not precisely to be stood vp^n, which
is abused by unworthy persons to a wrong purpose. Is not the end of all laws
the good of the common wealth? Should one, ^r some few men's abused authority
spoil all the subjects, yea and the Prince herself of the clear
understanding of any necessary profit? If nothing may come to the governors
ears, but what it privileged by the high Priests, the soldiers may say Christ
was stol^n away by his disciples, or what they will else. Therefore when m^n
fa^le in care to examine before printing, it is requisite such books should be
examined after printing, that the meaning of the law may be observed, and the
people with ^rrour not seduced. You see in the c^urts there is a writ of
error, and the honorable Judges suffer willingly a sentence wrung from them
by any deceit, upon better proceeding to be reversed. Yea there is an appeal
to the high court of Chauncery, though law has established a determination in
the several Courts. Neither does her Majesty her self (of her gracious
go^dn^ss^) disdain to receive the supplications of her poor subjects, tha^
think themselves injured elsewhere. And yet strict course of law does not allow
such proceedings, but rather inhibiteth it: commanding us to stand to the
definitive sentence of the Judges. Now what else is a truth published in print
without priu^ledge, but a supplication to the Prince and people for re^^^sse of
her That is truths
iniu ies? nay rather for redress of their ow^e iniuryes, which are
endaungered by allowance of trumpery to abandon truth, and so ^o cast
themselves into those manifould mischeifs which proceed from error. Good men
and wise and most obedient to their governors, have in all ages, and do at
this day in all places of Christendom, practice acc^rding to this rule, or else
God his truth would be in pitiful case. Are not you then egregious Sycophants
which do vehemently con^emn all the godly upon so foolish a c^nceyt? Are not
such as you a flattering poison to Princes, which would transform them from
gracious gouern^urs, into ^atefull Tyrants? It were not amiss that such
skillful workm^n, which ca^ m^ke a Bull for Phalaris, should ta^t of their
cunning first themselue. What Tirant when he has done one iniu y, will not
suffer him so much a to greiue for his wrong? would you have truth wounded, and
not allow her to complain? Indeed Tereus when he had deflowred ^hylome^a, cut
out her tongue: and this earnestnes of these Discoursers in this b^half give
shrewd suspicion, there is something in the wind, where fore it should be
beho^vefull for them, that not only men's hands might be kept from printing, but
also the mouths of all that know them might be surely lo^ked up, and that them
selves might keep the keys.

The remainder of your Epistle shows the order of the Discourse. Your
Alphabeticall table, with the Several names of the Several Aut^ors, and their
Several authorities we have touched b fore. Yet further take this with you,
that as Iehu caused the heads of the 70. sons of Ahab to be laid on two
heaps in the gates of Iezrehel, so these names you produce be no bands of
friends, ready to stand in your def^nce: but a^ h ape to show how many you have
expressly slain in this cause, infinite others being also wounded in them. Your
arguments will save me a labor: for I shall need no other collection of your
absurdities, just s^ many in gr^sse, (your first dialogue excepted) as your
arguments be. Your Analisis is hansomly checkered one part within an other,
like a motley cloak h g. For first you say, the devil his power, is either a
power of possession or obsession: when possession and Obsession in such men's
writings as treat these points a^e used for all one. Then Possession in your
discourses you make only to be outward, and yet Mental Possession must grow
from it, as figgs upon thorns. If you say you m^an^ possession vulgarly,
neither is that true, for vulgarly it is applied to that vexation which
appears in the torture of the body: But your Mental affliction is sev^rally
and solely by it self a Possession. The next diuis^on is either Real, or
Actual. What? have we now a Real possession, wherein is no action? This
indeed is a gentle possession. Again, Corporal possession is either by
assuming true bodies, or transforming: whereby good angels shalb^ made
possess^rs and tormenters of men, as shall be showed more in due place. You
have presented us here therefore with an analyticall babble, instead of a table:
laboring to stop our mouths with one gallimawfry served up in diverse dishes,
as if any two words under a pare of gemmall lines were suffice^ for such a
purpose. For your Speakers in the Dialogues Philologus tattles prittily and
answers his name well, but Physiologus might better be termed Phisialogus, for
he is but a Dun^e in Phil^s^phy, and your Orthodoxus is as rightly so called,
as John Deacon was sometimes A. Walker. Your Tables in the end might well have
been spared. I think he which has once read your treatise, will not be
greatly desirous to find out a^y point to read it again. And thus at last we
have an end of the Epistle, to be commended chiefly in t^is, that not ^nlie by
the length it with-houldeth sometime the Reader from the treatise it self, but
also by the fondnes might justly bring him in distaste with the rest, and so
cause him to spare his pains fr m proceeding any futth^r, which perha^p^ he
shall perceive to be no small benefit.

I. D.

A SVRVEY OF THE FIRST DIALOGVE
Though concerning those great works of God in freeing diverse from vexation
of dyuels, at the hartye prayers of his people, wherein M. More and my self
have joined with them, these Dyallogues contain stuff little to the purpose,
considering the question is of matter of fact, whether any be freed from such
vexation, or no, and not of the manner, how such vexation is wrought, which is
hard for any mortal understanding exactly to define: yet because Errors in
doctrine be exceeding dangerous, and of admyrable increase, every seed
bringing forth a thousand: I have thought it not amiss to admonish thee Good
Reader, in as brief manner as I can, what trumpery lies hid in each several
dyalogue: and the rather for that they were intended to disgrace that fact:
which indeed they do as much a the rage of man usually does the mighty
operations of God: that is, they more increase the glory of it. For your first
dialogue therefore, It is true that there are devils that Devils are no bare
motions or affections, but natures spiritual, substantial, and of personal
being: which be called Angels: page 1.
yet you speak dangerously when you say there be Essential Devils as
appears by their creation, as if by creation they had been ma^e such: you
disclayme this wicked opynion afterward I confess, and reason against it by
some arguments: but every one reads not all: and it beehoues us, least
occasion of error be ministered to any, to use words of soundness in every
place.

Your Mahgnitton for Nottingham, M. Deacon you now what I mean^
Eirtwab for Bawtrie and Eibrad for Da^bie: seems to be some pedlers french,
such as upright men once practiced when they ranged the country with their
queanes: It is small credit for you to be expert in this language.

For the substance of that which follows in prou^ng Spirits to be subsisting
natures: It is generally to be allowed and embraced. And it had been to be
wished, you had kept the same moderation in the rest that you could have been
content to have trodden in the stepps of other godly and learned, as in this
you have in some sort done: rather then have run new courses: both hurtful
to others and pernicious to your selves.

A Survey of the Second Dialogue.
The second Dialogue dryueth to three cheifheads. page, 40
The first treatinge of possession generally, and making it common to all
afflictinge (by the devil) tormenting, and tempting both inwardly and
outwardly, whereas the affliction of the mind is only called the trouble of
conscience, and Satan his tempting of man, temptation or suggestion, but
neither of them termed by the name of possession any where. This word is
proper to them, whose bodies be extraordinarily racked or rent by Satan, as
the boy was Mark. 9, 20.

De Idoloru^ vanitate. in Mat 8:28 C^em Harmon, lib 3: c^p 37 page 70: in M^r
1, 23 De open ibus creation^s p^rte 1. lib. 4. cap 10: in Mat 8 28 A^^elog 1.
page 606 page, 126.
Besides you distinguish between possession and obsession, contrary to the
custom of all which deal in this argument. Cipryan says, Devils adjured by
us, are compelled to go out of the bodies obsess d. And Dionisyus
Carthus^anus, In one obsessed there was a legion of devils Chemnicus treating
of this argument, uses ordinarily the word ^bs ssi^n. And in like manner do
other both of ancient and latter time. Yea I da^e be bold to say that where
once in this argument writers use the words p^ss^ssio, poss^ssus, possidere,
they have obsessio, obsessus, and obsidere ten times. So that where you make
obsession c^mmon to all men in the world in the language of the learned, All
men should be Demoniacks* which though your pallat be so gross that you cannot
discern how vnsauo^i it is, yet others can feel with their fingers to be
most absurd. But this was your ignorance, The e^istle to the Reader page 1
which either knew not, or did not well consider what Obsession means, as we
shall show more afterward. And therefore as beseems men of private opinion,
you bring us significations forged in your own mynt.

After you tell us, that possessi^n is nowhere any real inherency: Indeed we
know, Possession signifies to have a thing in ones power by any means
howsoever, as a man may possess an horse, although he be not in his belly.
Neither do they which argue a r^all inh rencie reason from the word
Possession, as you fondly and childishly imagine, but ftom other most plain
terms, of necessitye enforcing so much, as shall be declared in convenient
place. If now P^ssessi^n import no real inherencie, page 34, 40.
then you commit a double notable folly first that you blame the English
Translator for thrusting this word into the text, whereby the whole world has
bin vniversalli poss^ssed, as you say, with ma^y gr sse errors concerning the
Devil his supposed p ssession in man. I am gladd our English translation is
received vniuer^allye through the whole world: for otherwise, I hope the whole
world would not universally be deceived by it But I pray you Sirs, (if your
wits be your own) if Possession carry no meaning of inherency, what hurt
could the English translator do, to the breedinge of this opinion in any, by
using this word in the text? your fingers itched until you were scratching the
English translation: page 34, 3 Answer page 24.
How else should we have known you to be great linguists? Secondly, if
possession signifye no substantial in being, to what end is your tedyous
discourse that the word Possession is no where found in thy argument, either in
the old S^r^pture or in the new. you would make us believe in your first
dyalogue against me, it might probably be disputed, that til a little before
the coming of Christ there were no essential poss^ssions at all i^ Isra^ll. In
Christ his time then it should seem that there were essential possessions.
Thus unawares you destroy that you build. But to let this go. Would you then
find possession there descrybed, where was no use of any such thing? Surely
you were sick of a superfluity of Hebrewe, and except you had Timely vented it
in this place, you had certainly dyed for it.

Where you say, No true Interpretour did ever translate Daemonizomenos, men
essentially possessed with devils inherently in them, page: 38
Indeed men usually are loath in translation to render so many words for one.
But neither say you is it so understood of the most judicial and soundest
divines. You might have done well to have produced the authorities of some,
and to have spared your former idle and unsavory flourish, with your greek and
hebrew. Calvin says, in Luc: 4:33, in Math: 12:43
When Demoniacks do speak the devils speak in them, and by them. Again, It
follows that the devil has an habitation in men, because he is thence driven
out of the son of God. Beza terms the dispossession of devils, A casting of
them out of the bodies of men. Now then whether these words, in Mat 12:26.
To have dyuells speak in them and by them, the devil to have an habitation
in men, to have devils cast out of the bodies of men, sound rather a real
inherency, or the contrary, Let any indifferent man judge. Peter Martyr speaks
thus: Christ and the Apostles commanded the devils, that they should go out of
the bodies possessed. Piscator affirms, Loc: com: class, 1: cap. 10. sect.
30: math, 8, 28, mar 9,
that god sometime permits unclean spirits to dwell in man. He says further:
The misery of the child is set forth, by the inhabiting of the devil. And
Zanchius proves this inherency by sundry reasons. It were long to allege all:
and we shall have more occasion afterward. Therefore either show us the words
of the most Judicial Divines, by which it may either expressly appear, or at
least be soundly gathered, that there is no substantial inbeing of devils in
Demoniacks, or else be ashamed to face out an untruth thus impudently in the
open view of the world.

The second general point disputes, whether it be necessary Satan should
first enter essentially into the possessed man's mind, page, 42
before he ca^ possibly bring the body into his slavish subjection: which point
you determine negatiuely, making to your self an adversary of straw to fight
withal, I never having affirmed any such thing. For my part I know the body
may most violently be tormented by Satan, when the mind the mean while
vphelden by the grace of god, does not yealde unto him. yet you proceed in
this needelesse business, and frame an objection out of these words, And after
the sopp Satan entered into him. John 13:27,
This entrance say you is only an effectual thrusting of the intended treason
into Judas his heart. de consens^ Evang: lib 3: cap. 3
I will not dispute whether this entrance was substantial, or no: ( Augustine
is of opinion it was not, but only a further degree of efficacy moving Judas,
whereto I consent) for this makes little to the matter in hand. Judas is no
where termed a Demoniack, of whom only our question is, neither in truth may
be counted one. For Judas betrayed not his master ignorantly, or vp^n mere
compulsion but through the voluntary mailice of his own heart inflamed by the
power of Satan. acts 5^3,
So concerning Ananias, of whom it is said, the div^l had fill^d his heart,
Though this entrance were not real, yet this cause is never the worse*
considering the question is not, how the devil does enter by suggestion, but by
possession, in which state Ananias was not. Therefore cease to encomber your
Reader with unnecessary talk, and either bring something to purpose, or houlde
your peace. Next comes Physialogus in, and reasons very properly, but that he
beats the anvile, not once striking the hot iron. The conclusion is, The body
may be in slavish subjection to Satan, page: 43
before the mind it self be subdued: which if it be understood of violent
subjection, I have already granted: but Phisialogus will needs also have it
true in voluntary subjection, as if there could be a willing obedience without
the command of the will. But what is his reason? The body may be tempted
externally, before the mind be subdued. And this point because we doubted not
of it, is proved by two whole pages. But what? Is all temptation before the
mind be subdued a slavish subjection? Here Phisialogus is altogether mute: he
spent all his goats wool in making his other web, and has not left himself
one lock, to work up this piece with.

page: 45
The third general point is, whether the devil does essentially enter into any
man's mind: which question I might well let pass, as little perteyning to this
cause of ours. We only have witnessed Gods great goodness toward certain his
servants in deliueringe them from the grievous rage of satan: but whether this
vexation proceeded from his real dwelling in the mind, or no, we have not
taken upon us to discuss. It was enough for us to behold the flame, and the
Lord in mercy quenching it, although we be not privy from what furnace yt
arose. Yet because you have propounded it, and that it is worthy consideration,
(so we contain our selves within the bounds of christian sobriety,) I will
say somthinge in regard both of the Reader, and my self, desirous rather to
learn, and to find out the truth, then presuminge to conclude any thing
peremptorily: for what need we, says Augustine define any such thing with
danger, Aug. enchi: ad Laurent: cap. 59
whereof we may be ignorant without blame? I answer therefore, the devil does
not enter essentially into the mind, that reasonable faculty of the soul,
which comprehends the understanding and will. The Lord only knows the hearts
of all the children of men. 1 kings 8:39
Neither yet do I affirm that spirits do really enter into the souls
inferior powers and operations, as Quickening, Sense, Affection: only this I
say, that after an hydden and vn^erchable manner they do apply and join
themselves to these her inferior works. Gennad^us c^nsentinge with Bernard
Augustine and Beda that the devil does not essentially enter into the mind,
yet affirms that by an effectual application, Bernard. Ser. 5. super Can Aug,
de SP, et Anima cap. 27 Beda in Act: 5, 3, Gennad. in definit: ecclesie dogmat.
Bernard Ser: 5, Super cantic. Aug: de divinat: doemon^ cap, 5,
and a violent oppression he is nerely united unto it. What else is this
application, and near union unto the mind, but the joining of himself to the
phantasy and affections, the next neighbors to the understanding and will? So
Bernard requires the intercourse of some instrument, whereby created Spirits
might be applied to the mind, that is, the Imagynations and affections, which
be isntrumental, and by which they do exceedingly work upon the highest
powers in our nature.

And Augustine is most plain avouchinge, that Devils persuade by marvelous
and invisible means, by their subtilty pearcing into the bodies of men, not at
all perceaving the^, and mingling themselves with their cogitations by certain
imaginary sights, whether they be waking, or sleeping. But this is principally
confirmed by the scriptures themselves, for that angels making their
apparitions in sleep, perform their operatio^s immediately. The outward senses
at such time are all bound, so that by them they cannot convey any thing from
without, to the powers within. Example we have in Joseph, Math, 1, 20.
to whom an angel appeared in sleep, bidding him not fear to take Mary his
wife. And as this Angel did speak in Joseph, Zach: 1, 9 and 2, 3, Zach: 1, 8
so it might seem the Angel which talked with Zachary, did speak in Zachary,
as the natural force of the word does signify. And the Angel, says he, which
talked in me.

This visyon made to Zachary was in the night, for so he says, I saw by night.
And this manner of speech, to see by night, Dan. 7.13 Dan, 7, 1,
or to see night visions, is all one to see a dream. For so Daniell speaks,
I saw, says he, by night visions, when as before he had declared it was by
dream, Daniell saw a dream, and there were visions in his head, he lying
upon his bed. Therefore Augustine had good reason to dispute of this place of
Zachary as he did, considering Night apparitions, the force of the original
word, and the greek interpretors so care fully expressing it, page, 59,
notwithstanding whatsoever these men say to the contrary. Besides, experience
also gives no small light to this matter. It must needs be that wicked and
horrible cogitations, such as make a man even to tremble for fear, should
either arise from the corruption of the flesh, or from some outward cause, or
else from the real presence of some wicked spirit moving the phantasy. But the
flesh is no author of such horror, which by all means it escheweth affording
rather all flattering and intising allurements to persuade the mind by:
neither is there any outward cause or occasion, whereby the thoughts should be
so grievously assaulted, as is apparent in diverse so afflicted: It remains
then they be stirred up by the personal presence only of him, which if he be
manfully withstood by faith will fly away. Iam: 5
This I take to be the truth in this point: warranted both from the scriptures,
and from consent of chiefest interpretors. If these things now be so, though
you should demonstrate the devil does not enter really into the mind, yet if
he be so nere the fantasy and other inferior parts, he will be found to be
within a mile of him whom he does possess, and you to have powered forth a
great company of big words to small purpose.

If I desired to show, how when you have a good cause you handle it full ill, I
might fitly do it here. That there is no mental possession, you prove thus,
The devils, as also man's mind, are created of god for other more special
ends. page 46, 47,
As if things destinated to some principal end, may not in mean season be
used to other inferior purposes. Mat, 25:34 Romans 8:36,
The elect are appointed to be heirs of the kingdom, yet in this world they
be as the sheep of the slaughter. Indeed if you had showed that god never
purposed any such thing, you had said somewhat. Again say you, The real
entrance into the spirits of men, does obscure the peculiar office of the holy
ghost, which is (repl^tiuely) to inhabit in our hearts for ever. If any should
affirm such entrance he would not be so mad as to say, that spirits were there
repletiuly. Seeing then there is no equality of their inbeing, (supposing such
a thing) it does no more obscure his office, then the light of a candle the
clear sunshine. Further you say, whereas there be three manners only of
inbeeing essentially, none of all these does agree to the inbeing of wicked
spirits. I answer, (to admit this inherency for this present dispute) they be
there definitiuely. Then, say you, they are only there in conceit. what say
you? are devils in the Aer but only in conceyt? are they any other ways there
then definitiuely? This conceyt of yours makes devils but a mere fancy. I
thought you had meant good footh in your first dialogue: but such counterbuffs
as this would make one believe, you are privately of other judgment, whatsoever
there you pretend. Notwithstanding these and other such like reasons of yours,
(which for breuity I omit) the devil may possess the soul of man, as well as
his body. Such acute disputers are ye. It is no marvel though you maintain
your bad cause as you do, when you manage a good no better.

A Survey of the third Dialogue.
The third Dialogue handles two conclusions: The first, That spirits and devils
do not enter essentially into the possessed man's body. The second, That they
have no true natural bodies for this purpose culiar to themselves: importing a
necessity of natural bodies for a real entrance: A thing most absurd.

That spirits do enter really into men's bodies, we have partly heard, but it
is more evident by that which follows. Math. 1, 20, Heb. 1, 14.
They present themselves to the phantasy without mediation of any outward
sense: not by way of influence, themselves being absent, as the sune abidinge
in the heavens pearceth with his beams to the earth: by personal presence
therefore, which is required in their actions: For which cause they be Angels,
that is, R^porters, sent forth to the ministry, as the example of Gabriel
sent to Daniel and Mary declare.

Again they which dealt with familiar spirits, are termed by the 70.
Interpretours Engastrimythi, that is, such as speak after an extraordinary
manner out of their bellies: not as if they had a drum by their sides, but from
a real being of a spirit in them. For so it is said concerning them, in Levi^:
19, 21 Engastrumeni, Aristoph. in uespis,
If a man or a woman have a spirit of divination, or southsayinge in them etc.
Of whom Theodoret speaks thus: Some by certain devils being swollen in th
ir bellies deceived many of the simple, as f^retelling (forsooth) things to
come, which the Grecians term Bowel-prophets, f^r that the devil seemed to
speak from with in them. Unto whom Aristophanes alludeth. But imitating
(says he) the soothsaying and wisdom of Euricles, by entering into other men's
bellyes, I hau^ poured forth many pretty comicall things. Upon which words the
Scholiast writes thus. This Euricles was a Belly-speaker, mar: 5:5, 13, and 9,
22,
and was reported at Athens to have prophesied many true things by a devil
that was within him. Afterward this manner of spirit was called Python, as Th.
Beza witnesses upon the 16. Chapter of the Acts ve. 16. where you may see
more to this purpose. Besides, it is plain, that they which be possessed, are
carried by an inward moouer, and not by a thing forcing them outwardly. All
outward violence, as if one be drawn, or thrust forward, has a resistance in
the body. but men possessed cut themselves with stones, cast thems^^ues into
the fire, and into the water, and run to their own destruction most
greedeely, as also the swine did having received these guests: w^erevppon the
Primitive Church fitly called them Energumeni, as having the very real
fountain of this operation within them. But cheeflie it is to be remembered,
that in the Gospel the devil is said to Luke 11, 26:
enter into men: to be act: 19 16:
in them, to Mat, 12, 45:
dwell in them, and when these men (whom we call Demoniacks) were healed, to
Math: 12 43, and 17, 2^ Lu^e 4, 5 4^
come or go out of them, to be Math, 7 22 and 10, 1 8
cast or thrown out, and to be Mark 3 23.
driven out Mark ^ 25
Go out of him (says Christ) and enter no more into him: Then the spirit came
out. Again mar. 1, 25:
Hold thy peace, and come out ^f him: then the Devil came out of him. And
again, ^ mar. 5:13, math. 8, 31:
Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit Heerevpon the devils besought Jesus,
saying: If thou cast us out, suffer us etc Then the vnclean^ spirit went out,
and e^^r^d in to the swine. page, 3 4 38.
Where therefore the Discoursers say, there be no proper w^rds or terms in
any of the places ^f Scripture concerning Demoniacks exp^essing an essential
p^ss^ssion, the falsehood thereof is so manifest, that it may be seen with ones
forhead. For what words or te^rms can possibly be more proper, direct, and
plain, to express the inherency of spirits in Demoniacks then these used by
the holy ghost? Mat. 27, 52:
It is written that after Christ's resurrection many dead bodies arose, and ca^e
out of the graves, and appeared unto many. Is it not hereby manifest, that
those dead bodies had been buried, and laid in graves? In the 10. of Luke we
read that the Samaritane having carried the man that was robbed between
Jerusalem and Jericho to an Inn, took out (viz. of his purse) two pence and
gave them to the host, saying that whatsoever he should spend more, he would
recompense. I would know now of M. Deacon and M. Walker, whether these two
pence were not once in the Samaritans purse. And whether if they were never in
his purse, it is possible he should take them out of his purse. In like sort S.
Mark speaking of Mary Magdalen, says, that out of her Jesus cast seven
devils. And Luke that out of her went seven devils. I demand now whether
seven devils were not first in her, before they went out of her. Mark. 16.9:
Luke, 8.2
This egresse of the spirit (so often mentioned in the gospel) does evidently
prove the ingresse and inherency of the spirit. Yet the holy ghost rests not
here, but does in as plain and express words affirm the ingr^sse, and the
inherencie of the spirit, as the egresse thereof. The ingresse is set down in
these words, enter no more into him. Also he comes with seven worse then
himself, and they enter in. mark. 9.25, mat. 12.45. Luk 4:33: and 8.27.
The inherencie in the words following, and they dwell there. Likewise in that
Demoniacks are said, to have a diu^ll. But chiefly and most plainly this
appears by the 19. of the Acts where Luke mentioning the wounding of the
seven sons of Sceua, says, And the man in whom the evil spirit was, ran on
them, and overcame them. These things must now needs be Real, except we will
have a man to enter into an house, which comes no nearer then the door: to
dwell and be in it, and yet never come under the roof: and to be thrown out,
though he was never within. If one should charge you M. Deacon that you were
thrown out of Ireland, how would you defend your self? were it not sufficient
to show you were never in Ir^lan^* So if the devil could truly affirm he was
never in any man's b^^ie, he would think he had no sn all aduanttage against
the Gospel, that proves him so often to be thrown out. I beseech you let him be
his own Proctor, and do not you help him with a shift, whereby he might
inueigle any.

As this inherencie of spirits in Demoniacks is cleared by the holy scriptures,
so has the same in all ages been received for a truth, Tertul in Apol, cap. 3^
CyPria^: de Idol. uanitate Aug. lib. de ciuit. Dei 8, in f^ne ca^itis 26, A^g
de d ^^ doem: cap. 5. in Man, 5:7: Th Aqui. 2 2 q. 165. art. 2 arg. 4,
as appears by the testimonies of learned writers here followinge. Tertullian
says, It is not hard for the devils to pierce into our bodies. Again. We
expel devils out of men, as is known to many. These spirits says Cyprian,
disquiet our sleep, and secretly also creeping into the b^dies terrify the
mind, distort the members, etc. Augustine affirms, that the devils are
tormented, and cast out of the bodies of men possessed. Again, that through
their subtlety they can pierce into the bodies of men when they perceive them
not. Theophilact writes thus: The Lord does ask him his name, not that he
himself but others should learn the multitude of devils that were in him. Men
know not says Aquinas, Io com^cl^ 4: cap 9, ^ect 16,
when the devil speaks in them, what they speak. Peter Martyr reasoninge
against the papists exorcysing in baptism, has these words: Seeing these
Exorcists be not able to drive unclean spirits out of them in who^ it is not
doubted but that they are: why babble they, in Mar. 5, 9, in Mat: 12 26
that they cast them out of them, in whom they show no sign of their
presence? Calvin says, why a legyon dwelt in one man, is not for us to
enquire. Beza thus: Not of every eiection of diuell^ out of the bodies of men
may this be affirmed which Christ here concludes: Chem. Har. li: 3 cap, 37.
page 70 in Ma, 9:29, quest: 38:
seeing by covenant satan may easily suffer himself to be cast forth of the
bodies, that he might the more easily reign in the souls of men. Sometimes
(says Chemnicius) wicked spirits god permitting them, homines ingrediuntur,
do enter into men, and do so possess them, that they dwell in them, Dan. de
sortiariis, Chy in Math. 8.28
abusinge their members after their will. Danaeus says, fasting I refer to
prayer, but not to the man poss^ssed, as though by the scarcity of victuals
and want of meat, sibi inhereutem Daemonem expellat, he should ezpell the
devil inherent in him. For devils in Demoniacks are not fed with meat Again,
the devils in the bodies of men have spoken. Chitreus gives this definition of
possession, that it is an affliction of the body delivered into the power of
Satan, where by both the body is Out of the fits the actions of Demoniaks be
g^uerned of the mi^d, in their fits by ^^e Devil.
rent, and of Satan inhabited, and the actions of the memb^rs governed not ^f
the mind only, but partly also by the unclean spirit. Again says he: As
spirits be in a place definitiuely, so a devil, or more, occupy the body
delivered up to their power: meaning that they are definitiuely in those
bodies that is, they be in them, so that they be not any where else. De
opertib. cre. part 1 lib 4 cap 10
See further in Chytrius. Zanchius has these words. Satan does so invade us,
vt in nostra etiam peni^ret et ingrediatur corpora, that he does pierce and
enter into our bodies, and does diversely affect the same within. I see not why
we should not say substantia sua illos ingredi, that they do in their
substance enter into them. And after some arguments to prove this, that they
do substantia suae manner in hominibus, in their substance or essence abide in
men: he concludes thus. These things show that devils have been with in in
such kind of men: and moved them hither and thither, as agents internal, not
external. Piscator upon these words Luke 8.2. and c^rtaine weomen which he
had healed of evil spirits, says: a, hic n^tat adiunctum inherens. This
preposition of, notes here the adiunct inhere^t. Whereby it is evident that
he houldeth the inherency of spirits in de moniacks Otho Casman makes his
entrance to his treatise of possession thus. Angelograp page 606 what possession
is,
There remains to be treated of, the entering of devils into the bodies of men
and possession. He proceeds. Possession is an action of the devil, wherein
the devil entering into the body of man does poss^sse it, and exercise upon it
the power received, to hurt and torment it. The parts of possession be two:
the ingresse of the spirit, the exercising of the power that is granted. The
ingresse is, whereby the devil first enters into the body, and having entered
does possess it. and is in it. And handlinge this question how or after what
manner devils be in men: he resolves it thus we say that they be in them
indeed even personally. For further confirmation of this inherencie you have
Centuria 1. lib. 2. page 502. Socrat. 7. Cap. 8. Minutius in Octavio. Dionisius
Carthusianus in Luc. 4.35. et in Math.. 8.28. Sculietus in Medulla theolog.
patru^. page 55. Luther. in Math. 8.28. Erasm. annot. in Act. Apo: 19.16.
Gualther in Mar. 5.1. Brentius in Mar. 5.9. Bucer in Mat. 17.21. Ph. Melanchton
lib. Epistolaru^. Bullinger: Decad. 5. Ser. 3. Marlorat* in Marc. 5.15. Musc.
in Math. 12.27.43. D. Fulke his answer to the Rhem. Test. Math. 17.21.

By the premises, not only the falsehood, but the blasphemy of these men does
manifestly appear: who fear not to call this said doctrine of inherencie of
Satan in Demoniacks, page 17, 18 and 341,
an absurd and senseless opinion, and to reject it, as fond and frivolous.
Hereby also does appear their notorious impudency, in that notwithstanding
the premises (whereof they cannot be altogether ignorant, Dialog. Disc epistle
to the Reader page, 2: page 39,
specially if they have ransact so many libraries as they affirm they have)
they stick not to say, that if the several writings of the most judicial and
soundest Divines be exactly considered, we shall find, that not any one of
them all d^e understand by Demoniacks, any such persons as are essentially
possessed with a devil inherently in them. page, 55. 56, 57, 58
Why I my self have heretofore ^^ewed the contrary, out of Tertullian, Ciprian,
Chrisost^me Peter Ma^tyr, Philip Melanchton, Beza Vogellius, and Danaeus, as
appears by the Doctrine. You might well therefore have ommitted these words,
until you had returned answer to those testimonies, page, 33
and likewise have restrained to say that the ^ssentia^l possession of deuels
is only a devise and dream of my own. Bu^ it may in no ca^e be-forgotten,
that whiles you tell us all sound Divines are on your side, and not so much as
one with us, you pro^uce not a sentence out of sound or unsound Divine: so as
if we will believe what you say, prou. 14:15,
we must take it of your word: which no wise man will do. Whereupon it
comes that ye are so barren here ^n the allegations o^ ^athers and new
writers, who so abound therein else where: we may easily co^^ecture. How Bucer,
Calvin, Marlo^a^^, Gua^ter and Beza, whom you coat in the margent as Divines
on your side, be not with you but against you, it is plain by that is
aforesaid. Wherein we may be somewhat confirmed by their silence, but more by
go^g to the places ye your selves have quoted.

Lastly, if devils have no such in being in the poss^ssed, surely some writer
of account considering the letter of the scripture is so plain for it, and the
general mistake of all former ages, would in his exposition have admonished
the Reader least he should stumble at these words in taking them literally.
But I find no such caution in an^, tha^ (searching) I have seen, till M.
Deacon and M Walker now af^e^ sixtee^e ^undreth years have T^m^ly put us in
mind thereof. ^nly Peter Lumbard says, Sent. lib: 2 did, 8. q, 4
It is not so pe^spicuous whether they e^tred really, or no. But this was his
school fashion: to find a kno^n a bulrush. Yet he does not resolve of the
matter. But it may be these smart disputers have found out that, wherein the
skill and ^earning of all other have fa^led. Let us therefore weigh their
reasons, when first we have heard their answer to our foresaid ma^e reason
taken from the gospel.

Whereas the letter of entri^g in, of dwelling, of casting out is urged these
men shift of these places thus, They are not to be construed according to the
letter. why so? Because the Lord says, Reu. 3.20. Ioh 14.2^
And I will enter in unto him. And again, and we will come unto him and dwell
with him: which are not to be understood of an essential entrance.

I answer, your bouldnes is exceeding great, who upon so slender a foundation
durst presume to depart from the evident words of the scripture, so frequently
used without any change. Because the Lord says I will enter, a d yet does not
enter essentially, does it thereupon follow, that al^o devils where it is said
they do enter, should not enter essentially? Is there the like reason of the
infinite an^ of fin^e spirits? God being every where cannot be sai^e to enter
but figuratively, but in the creature, which enters by changing p^ace it is
always proper: except we can show necessary reason to the contrary. By as good
consequence you might prove that Aar^n the high priest never entered into the
tabernacle of the congregation essentia^y. The Lord commanded the Israelites
to make a tab r^acle for him, Exodus 2^:5, p^al ^.7.9
that he might dwell amongst them. And David wills the everlasting d ores to
lift up their heads, that the king of glory might ^ter in but ^ay you, the King
of glory did never enter in essentially, and therefore where it it is said that
A^ron went into the tabernacle, it is by your leaden rule, to be taken that he
went not in corporally. Such foolery if it might be suffered would make the
scripture a nose of wax, if men might reject the letter upon every such absurd
fancy. It irkes me to spend time in reproouinge such dotage.

But you say, Satan's entering into Judas, (Ioh. 13.27) which is the same manner
of speech, is nothing else but that Satan did darte or thrust the treason into
his heart.

I reply as before, Judas was not a Demoniack, and therefore this example
fittes not the purpose. It is not necessary the same speech in suggestion, and
possession should import the same thing, it being proper to the one and
figurative to the other. But if you can show us a possession which was effected
by darting only cogitations into the heart, we will yeald unto you that these
words of entering and dwelling imply no real inbeeing. This is in effect that
you say. These words, entering into Ioh. 13.27. ^e not to be understood
literally, therefore in the Scriptures concerning Demoniacks, the said words
are not to be understood literally. By this reason, Christ entered not into
Capernaum, as it is said he did Math. 8.5. Neither entered he in to a ship, as
it is said Math. 8.13. Neither entered Mary into the house of Zacharias, as it
is writtten Luke 1.40. But some spiritual and mistical thing is in these places
to be understood by the words, entered into: for to make this an argument you
must have this for your proposition: These words entering into whersoeuer they
be found in Scripture, are not to be construed according to the letter. Now
this proposition. I will be so bold as to deny, and put you to the proof
thereof in your next learned Discourse.

You go on further in your answer thus. Wheresoever the Scriptures speak of
the devil his e^tring in, page 15. and 21.
and going out of the parties possessed, they speak it only by Metaph^re. And
this you prove by Mark. 1.23. which place you show at large cannot be taken in
the li^erall sense. pa. 17 How Mark 123 is to be expounded, it is evident by
comparing it with Lu^e 4, ^3 and with acts 19:16. As also by conferring Mark 5
2. with Luke 8.27 Ioh. 10 and 15 Luke 13:32, 2 Timothy 4.17,


After this manner (indeed) you argue. One place of Scripture concerning
Demoniacks, viz. Mark. 1.23. can not be taken in the literal sense, but
metaph^ricallie: therefore no scripture concerning Demoniacks Shall I instead
of further reply proceed to reason after your manner? Thus then will I reason.
Diverse places of Scripture concerning Christ, can not be understood literally,
but metaphorically: therefore none. Or thus, Christ is said to be a door, a
vine, ergo Christ was not borne of a virgin, crucified etc. H rod was a * fox,
therefore not a king. Nero a * lion: therefore not a man. But supposing these
words of entering in, and going out, wheresoever in holy scripture they have
relation to the devil, were not to be understood literally, are they therefore
to be taken metaphoricallie, as every where you tell us? No verily. There were
a plain^ metonymie of the effect, and not a metaphore. And considering you use
the word effectiuely so often, and that you say often, that this going out, page
^6
and entering in of the devil, must be understood of an effectual and powerful
operation: me thinks if you were so great clerks, as you seem to your
selves, and to some poor souls in the world: you should one time or other
have be thought you of this error, which a scholar at the gra^mer schole would
quickly correct. If you will needs have here a metaphore, I pray you let it
hereafter be made to appear, with his protasis and apodosis: that so we may
conceive this hidden metaphor. But Orthod xus leaves not here. And this I say
further, Aut. page 15
(quoth he) that you can not possibly alleadg throughout the whole Scriptures,
any one text, wherein either Angels or Spirits, or devils are otherwise spoken
of then only by metaph re. What? Is every Scripture of this kind
metaphorical? why you your selves do tell us, that where in Luke 4.35. a man
is said to have a spirit of an unclean devil, that by spirit we must
understand the impulsion, motion, or inspiration of the spirit. page 20, 21
According to which sense, say you, the word spirit is vsualy observed both in
the old and new testament. And for confirmation thereof you alleadg Dan.
4.5.6. and 5.11, 12. Reu. 16.24. In these places then there is a metonymie, as
every boy can tell you, and not a metaphor. Ioh 15, 2^.
Again, where Satan is said to enter into Judas, that is, suggest or thrust
the intended treason into him, another text alleged and expounded by your
selfs: who ^e^th not that this is spoken metonimice, and not metaphoric. In
the fifth of the Acts it is said of ^annias, that satan filled his heart This
filling, say you, in page 48, was effectiuely. Here then likewise is a
m^tonymie, well metonymie or metaphore, or whatsoever ^t is, this they are very
sure of, that it is not possible to show any one place of scripture, wherein
that which is spoken of Angels or devils, is to be interpreted literallie. No?
What say you to Heb. 1, 14? where it is said, they are ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister for their sake, which shall be heirs of salvation? And
concerning devils, these places must needs be understood according to the
letter. Satan pr^uoked David to number Isra^ll. The devil has been a murderer
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in
him when h^ sp^ak th a li^, 1 Chro. 21.1 Ioh 8.44, James 2 19, mar: 5:12, Luc.
4, 2 Pet, 2.4 Ivde 6,
then speaks be of his own, for he is a liar. The devils believe and
tremble. All the devils besought Jesus. Jesus was 40. days tempted of the
devil. The devil said, if thou be the son of God etc. The devil set him on a
pynna^e of the temple. The Angels sinned^ are cast down into hell, to be kept
unto damnation. The angel k pt not their first estate. They are reserved unto
he judgment of the great day. Hereunto many more places might be added, but
these suffice to show that many things spoken of sp^^t^ are to be understood
acc^rding to the very lat r. And so ar^ without con^rouers^ in particular the
places to be interpreted concerning the devils entering into Demoniacks, and
go^ng out of them no^^it^standing whatsoever these vain ^anglers, which would
be ^o^tors and yet understand not what they speak neither whe^eo^^ affirm)
prattle to the contrary. Which iangling of the^s is very ca^e, to be reselled,
by the rules which a^l men deliver, when the ^^^tures are figuratively to be
understood, Zanchius de o^e^b, ^ede page 66
and when not figura^^uely, but properly. Then namely are they t^ be understood
figu^a^^ue^y, when the since, which the very words taken according to (...)
p^^per ^^g^i^^cati n sounds, agrees not with other scr^tu^e, and with the
a^al^gy of faith: but is rather repugnant to the holy scriptu^es. On the other
de^ pro^erly, when it does not repugne. Now to what testimonies of the
scripture, is this entering in, and g^einge out r^pug^a^^, being literallie
vn^erstood? Ad Genesis li 11, caP 1.
what scripture is there that contrarieth this ingr^sse, inb^inge, and goeing
out of the spirit we speak of? To the former rule let us add this other of
Au^ustine. Wh n any thing (says he) is f und in the Scripture, which cannot
without an ab^urdity be possbly interpreted literally that thing without doubt
is spoken figuratively, and must receive some other signification, then the
bare letter does seem to import: and otherwi^e according to the letter, for
that is to be understood. But from this said literal interpretation, there can
arise no absurdity, therefore not a figurative, but the litterall
interpretation is here to be received.

But you proceed in your answer saying: that we must not so strictly tie our
selves to the observation of words: else, page 67 1 Sa. 16, 14:
how will we understand this Scripture? The good spirit of the Lord departed
from Saul: and an evil spirit of the lord came upon him. And so ye go on
^umbling the second time about an equal manner of entering by the holy spirit,
and the bad. If Saul was possessed with an evil spirit (say you) when the evil
spirit of the Lord came upon him, then also was he really possessed with the
good spirit of god when he was anointed King, because it was so promised, That
the spirit of the Lord should come upon him. 1, Sam 10, 6 10:


I answer first, that Saul was no Demoniack. Secondly, I have sufficiently
showed your grossenes in attributinge a like manner of entering to God the
infinite spirit, and to the wicked angel a finite creature. The good spirit
being every where, comes upon a man, by causing his graces more to appear,
and to sprout forth in him: the evil spirit being of a limited nature, and
therefore absent from one place, when he is in an other, comes upon and into a
man, not by influence and instigation properly, but by personal and real
presence This considered your hebrew is to no purpose, page 68. as also that,
which you no less falsely then tediously avouch in the next page, wherein you
match the good and evil spirit together in a self same manner of entering into
men. Thus much for reply to the answer you give to the aforesaid maine
argument proving a real possession. Let us now examine your reasons, whereby
you go about to overthrow the same, and to prove, that the devil did never
reallie enter into, and inherently dwell in the possessed man's body. page 65,
and answer page 65, 68. Their firct argument against real possession. page 34:
35.


First you say, That there be no proper words or terms in any of the places
of Scripture concerning Demoniacks, expressing an essential possession: which
the holy ghost wanted not if he had ever purposed to express such a matter.
For neither the hebrew word achuzzah, nor iereshah, nor ierushah, morashah, n^r
the grecke word etema, which is ordinarily observed in the new testament to set
forth poss^ss^on by, as the other be in the old, are used in any of the places
of Scripture concerning Demoniacks: therefore there be no proper words or
terms in any of the places of scripture concerning Demoniacks expressing an
essential possession.

inh^rency of the spirit in Dem^nia^ks: which these words, signifying
possession, nor any of the same signification do not, had the sa^e been used
by the holy ghost. Do I any where, ye Discoursers, or yet any man else, go
about to prove the inherency of spirits in Demoniacks, from our English
translation, and from the terms of possession and possessed? Surely neither
my self, nor yet any other of mean understanding ever doted so much. For
first I know very well, that the word in the Original signifies neither
possession, nor possessed. Secondly, admit it did, it were very absurd from
thence to conclude this inbeing of the spirit. A man may be possessed of an
house, though he be not in it. So might the devil be possessed of a man, albeit
he were not in him if there were nothing else to prove the inbeeing of Satan
in men possessed. Whereby the vanity of this Prosyllogisme does notably
appear: and that these men keep much ado about mooneshine in the water:
Their leaves consumed about the terms of possession and poss ss^d, serving to
no other purpose, but to proclayme their great skill (forsooth) in the hebrew
and greek tongues. As for our English translators, they in translating the word
Daemonizomenoi, in latin Daemoniaci, possessed with devils, did not respect so
much the propriety of the word, as the condition of Demoniackes, and to explane
that word, by showing (in part) what a Demoniacke is. Cypri: ad Domiti: tract.
1, Chrysostom Tom: 5 de in compre, Dei natu: hom, 4. Aug. lib. 8 de Ciua^: D^i
cap. 26
And from hence it is that the words possession and possessed have been used by
Cyprian, Cheysostome, Augustine, and generally all ancient and latter writers
until this day. Not to note the inbeing of the spirits in Demoniacks, (which
need not) as these Ianglers fond lie pretend, but to show that the devil
houldeth in his dominion or power the bodies of Demoniackes, as a man does that
which he possesses.

From this argument they proceed further to argue against real possession
under certain foolish and unlearned questions: and Orthodoxus being out of
breath, Phisial^gus starts up in his place, and proves it by good senseless
reason. Do you imagine (says he) that the Lord ever propounded any such end
to himself in the creation of bodies? page. 70: 75. 76. and 341. Answ.


Thus might one reason against that saving of the Apostle 1. Cor. 6.15. Also
against the torment the bodies of the damned shall endure in hell. Do you
imagine, the Lord ever propounded to himself any such end in the creation of
bodies? They will answer, the Lord did not propound any such end, but man
brought them upon him by sin. Even so do I* Man by his sin brings
(sometimes) that body of his to be a receptacle and habitation for the unclean
spirit, which otherwise should be the habitation of God, and temple for the
holy ghost to dwell in.

But go to, (says he) What becomes of the soul, Page 70:
all the while the devil is in the body? Romans the soul still in that body,
or is it utterly expelled, and thrust out of the same?

It remains still in the body.

This naturalist goes on thus. If there be a real possession, page 73, 74 and
341.
then the soul during the time of the possession, shall not be accomptable for
any those peculiar actions of the body, which it never directed the body
unto, nor gave consent unto.

This is cunningly done of you, Gen: 3:14.
that the devils instrument in deceauing Euah, received therefore punishment
from the Lord. If you had weighed these things, you had brideled your selves
from much idle talk.

Their fyft argument follows. page, 55
The devil needs no real possession in any man's body, therefore he does not
really possess any man's body.

I answer your frivolous argument with the like. actual possession, therefore
he never possessed any actually, which you say sometimes he did. The devil
needs not to tempt men: therefore he does not tempt any.

But you say, page, 75
The devil never received larger commission against any man's body, then
against Jobs, and yet was not he essentially poss^ssed, therefore there was
never any possessed essentiallie

This argument halteth on the right leg, and is like to this: Job had not (that
we read) the pal^y, the stone, the colic, therefore ther^ are no such
diseases. If you will have this an argument, let this be your proposition, and
hereafter prove it All the diseases and infirmities the body of man is
subi^ct unto by Satan, th^se had Job.

Job. 2.6.
God permitted the devil to asslict Job in his body, which before he had denied
him: does it thereupon follow that he might d^e to the body of Job what he
would? The kilinge of him e^cepted which he was expresslye for bid to do. Mat.
4.5.8
To the devil great power likewise was granted over the blessed body of our
Savior. He took and carried it (in the air) out of the wilderness unto
Jerusalem, and set it on a pynacle of the temple, and from thence he had it to
an exceeding high mountain. Had Satan because of this leave and permission,
absolute and full power over Christ's and Jobs bodies, and not a limyted power?
Again, were this so, yet it may well be that though the devil could, yet he
would not enter into Job. Because the mark the devil aimed at, was to draw
Job from his fearing of God, and eschewing of evil, to the committing of
evil, and blaspheminge of God to his face: Job. 2.3:5
whereunto possession served not so much, as other kind of afflictions.

Physialogus goes on, and powers out other arguments of like liquor. page 76,
What possession (says he) the devil has in any, the same has be in all the
posterity of Adam, yea in Adam himself. This proposition it were fit the
Masters of Bedlam might resolve you in. Yet go on, what then? But there is no
real possession in all the posterity of Ada^ Though I will not strive with you
in this point, but willingly yeilde it, Yet the reason you render of it is
very si^ly, to wit, for that the image of God is yet essentially in man. As if
the Lord could not and does not preserve that little rubbish of his image left
in his creature though he suffer Satan to enter really into it. The Devil
entered in to paradise before man's transgression: yea the aer carries a stamp
of Gods wisdom and power, yet the devil has an essential being in it. But
to come to the argument it self. Adam was not essentiallie possessed, and with
him all his posterity: therefore there is no essential possession. Such an
argument for all the world is this. All men have not the gowt, therefore none
have the gowt. I marvel how Physialogus could make it without the help of
Orthodoxus. Although this argument deserve rather to be hissed at, then
answered, yet I return that the consequence is faulty. Adams posterity be
really possessed if all be not: because Adam and every one of his posterity are
not by the appointment of god, to taste of every infirmity that they by their
sins have brought themselves in danger of, and made themselves subject unto.
Adam and every son of his are subject to the leprosy, palsy, stone, gowt
etc. yet is not every one a leper, every one has not the palsy, stone, etc.

But go to Physialogus, open your pack to the bottom. Then take this with
you. page 77.
If an humane body be capable only of an humane soul, then is it incapable
of an essential devil: but the first is true: therefore also the latter.

If this proposition of yours Physialogus be undoubtedly true, Orthodoxus do
live: and whether you two breath and draw air, whether also you receive any
sustenance. For if you breath, or receive sustea^nce into your bodies, then
seeing aer, meat, drink, be not an humane soul, but other substances: either
you two have no humane souls, or your two bodies be capable of other
substances beesides your souls.

You proceed, Satan so possesses, as Christ inuadeth his house, Physialogus
page, 78:
will make it good by a distribution of inbeing: of all the kinds whereof he
sees not which may be given to this real possession.

I answer, The wicked spirit is in the body, Physialogus? Are you struck dead
with this answer, that you have not one word to say? Take hold then of an
other argument if you can go no further in this. Thus then you reason. If the
devil be really in the body, he is there either hipostatically, Si dicimus eos
reuera, (say they) in the margin) atque a deo, autopro sopos ad esse et in
esse: esset hoc, vel hypostatice, vel formaliter, quod est absurdum Ans:
making one person with the body, or else essentially, to give an essential
form to the intended operations. But he is in the body neither of those ways.
I grant it, and yet you never a whit the nearer. I cannot but marvel at your
proposition, which though it be lame, is yet of admirable force. It is able to
prove that the devil is no where. For whersoeuet he is, he is there either
hypostatically, or formally, but he is in no place either of both ways, and so
no where. Nay your selves selves may be proved not to be in your houses, nor in
any other place, because you make not one hypostasis with it, nor give unto it
an essential form. Make much of this proposition, as of a rare jewel. It is
as good as Gyges his ring, by which you may go invisible: which faculty would
serve you especially M. Deacon for many strange feats.

In the twelueth place they argue thus. page 78: and 97.
If devils have an essential being in men, then their said being there may be
perceived by corporal sense: but the latter is false, therefore the first.

Psa. 34.1:
By this reason the Angels of the Lord pitch not their tents about them that
fear him, neither do they minister to the heirs of salvation: for this
cannot be perceived by corporal sense. There be many things which we know and
perceive only by faith.

Their last argument is this, The devils violent rending and tearing with other
the unnatural actions, page 79.
may effectually be wrought in the man poss^ss^d, though the devil never
essentially enter into his body: this entrance therefore to such purp^se is
needelesse, and so by consequence there is none.

The Antecedent or first part of this argument is false, Narration page 21. But
supposing it were true, we must know that it is a judgment, or an increase of
this said judgment, when besides the vexation of Satan, our bodies shall be a
receptacle and place of abode for the unclean spirit to dwell in, which were
made to be a temple for the holy ghost. And in this respect (were the
antecedent true) there is sufficient to move the Lord to permit Satan to enter
into the body, and Satan to desire this entrance. And thus much for your
first conclusion, no less absurdly handled by you, then propounded. Wherein I
have been the larger, because it is the maine point controuerted: and as it
were the foundation or corner stone, whereon our whole buildinge does stand.

Your second assertion is, That Devils have no true natural bodies peculiar to
themselves: which makes as much for his not being really in men's bodies, as it
does for his not being really in the Aer. But I will not follow you at every
turn, least I should too much distrust the Readers judgment: Besides I am
more then half weary already with your sense-lesse disputes. Many famously
learned in the Church both of ancient time, and this present, attribute a
kind of body to Spirits, not gross and palpable, as these inferior bodies
be, but of an incomprehensible subtilty: of which number are Tertullian,
Augustine, Bernard, the Schoolmen, Zanchius with many others. These
Discoursers take upon them first to refell the arguments which make for bodies,
and then propound some of their own against them. In refelling Celestial
bodies they show themselves turn sick Every thing wheles so about with them,
page 81:
that they know not where they are. If devils (say they) have celestial bodies
and enter into men whose bodies are Elementarie, then we should have a compound
supernatural motion both in respect of the devils, whose proper motion should
be Circuler, and of the man whose motion is down right. As if intelligible
^atures had a simple, and not a compound motion But it were tedious to unfold
all the fooleries of this argument. I will therefore pass over this, and the
rest of their wise refutation, and come to their own confirmation of it. How
do you prove Spirits have no bodies? First out of these words, page 94 Luke
24:39,
Spirits and devils have no flesh and bones, as you see me have. This place
proves no more but that they have not naturally palpable and solid bodies like
men's. For otherwise you might conclude the Aer to be also void of body, because
it has no flesh and bones. Again say you. Hebrew 1:7:
The Lord has made his spirits his messengers, and his ministers a flame of
fire. From hence you must conclude thus, They which be as fire have no bodies:
which is true if fire it self have no body: you see then how wisely you
reason. Thirdly, which has most force in it, and for which cause I take this
pains to repeat these reasons, They which can be in the body of a man to the
number of a Legyon, that is six thousand, six hundred, sixty and six cannot
possibly be any corporal substa^ces: Mark 5:9.
But the devils may be in the body of a man to the nomb^r of a Legion, that is
6666. and therefore they cannot p^ssibly be any corporal substances. To let
pass the proposition, though the moates in the sun beams be bodily things,
and yet it may be as many as a Legion in as narrow room as a man's body: did
you dream you Discoursers, when you put down this assumption? Or has the
truth wrunge from you a true confession whether you would or no? By this one
argument, all the first part of this Dialogue, wherein you oppugn the real
inherency of spirits in p^ss^ssed bodies is overthrown. It can not be but
liars should be taken tripping at one time or other. Now then if you please, we
will proceed to your fourth Dialogue.

A Survey of the Fourth Dialogue
In the fourth Dialogue you contend, page 101:
That Devils cannot assu^e bodies unto them. Where first it is to be observed
that this disputation springes from the former, as the special from the
general. For bodily possession, say you, is either by assuming of a body, or
by transforming. Whereby it must needs be, that all assuming of bodies, is
bodily possession: but only good Angels (according to the divinity of this
dialogue) assume true bodies, and therefore they only possess: and so be the
only tormenters of the possessed. Yet our Savior in freeing men from such
molestours, does usually term them unclean spirits. Such is the dotage which
unawares you run into, whilst with more confidence then with either wit or
learning, you maintain these absurd positions. Again, this distribution of
bodily possession, into assumption of bodies, or transformation, would tie all
bodily possession to one of these two, (for the general must of force be
comprehended in all the specials) whereas corporal possession requires
neither of both, the spirits in their own substance, without taking any
foreign body, entering into such as be permitted ynto them. But so you be
talkinge you care not greatly what you say, be it never so absurd.

In Math. 4. ver: 3, 5, 8, Angelogra. page, 556,
To prove the affirmative part, I mean, That Devils can putt upon them bodies,
that so they may visibly appear unto men, and familiarly converse with them, I
will not use many words, nor authorityes, since the matter is so evident by
daily experience.

August: super Gen 11 Aquinas 2, 2 q. 165, art. 2 A^g. 4: Mercer. in Gene. 3,
1: Bvlling. Decad. 4: ser. 11 Calvin in Gen: 3, Danei Isag: part 2, cap: 34,
Hunnius disput. 4 propo- 14, 15, Zanch. de operibus cre. part, 1 lib. 4, cap.
10: Szeged, lo com, page, 400 P: Martyr lo com. class, 1, sect. 15. et cap. 10,
sect, 25,
Piscator says to this purpose thus. It must not seem incredible, that the
devil having taken upon him the shape of man, should come unto men and have
speech with them. For that we see he did when he tempted Christ. Neither must
this seem less credible of evil angels, then of good, by whom it is certain
this was often done: as the examples in Scripture do testify. Otho Casman a
late approved writer (who is very often quoted by these men, they thereby
pretending that he consents with them, when he is as contrary to them, as
light is to darkness) says after this manner: It is so certain that the devils
assume and move diverse kinds of bodies, diversely formed, that it cannot be
denied. I ommit here to produce the testimonies of other learned writers, as
() Augustine, The Aquinas, Mercer, Bullinger, Calvin, Danaeus, Hunnius,
Zanchius, Szegedinus, with sundry others. Only I will add a few lines out of
Peter Martyr that great learned man, that it may the better appear unto us,
that this is both possible and easy, and that this said assuming may the
better be conceived and under stood of the unlearned. The devils (says he) can
in very deed enter into a body made before, and formerly existing. (meaning
into created or true natural bodies) Sometimes the devil puts on an aerie
body: but that he does not form or quicken as the soul does our body: neither
does he make it to pass into one substance with himself, as did the word of
god with an humane body: for devils can put of those bodies, when they please.
The devil, as says Augustine, fitteth unto himself some body as it were a
garment. Again, These bodies which the spirits do apply unto themselves, be
aerie: ibidem sect. 2^
for even as water is congealed into ice, and sometime hardens til it become
crystal, even so the aer wherewith spirits do cloth themselves, is
thickened, so that it becomes a visible body. But if it may seem that the aer
alone is not sufficient, they can also mingle some vapor or water withal,
whereof colors may be made, for this we see to be done in the raynebow. The
spirits do thicken and engrosse these bodies, by straight trussing those
parts together, for otherwise they might not be seen or touched. And yet we
say not here, sect. 22^
that the devil does either create or make such things, but only that he is a
minister serving unto nature. Even so the husbandman, when he tilleth and
sows his ground, and the gardener when he pruneth and delueth a vine, do not
create the corn or wine, but only do help nature. So Augustine says, that
Jacob did not bring forth the color upon the sheep, but did only rightly
apply the forms and shapes. But it seems wonderful how they can so speedely
bring these things to pass. A skillful artificer will work any thing both
handsomely and speedely. But give the same instruments unto an ignorant and
vnskilfullman, and he will do it neither readily, nor yet very handsomely.
Even so any spirit, as a skillful artificer will bring more to pass in a
mynute, then by the accustomed order of nature can be wrought in a long time.
Thus far goes Peter Martyr.

The general consent of writers as it should seem, did wring from you this
modesty, page: 100.
that you would undertake no absolute denial hereof, but only make a question
of it. As if it were a small matter to make Question of things substantially
true in themselves, and universally received. VVoulde you have Christians
be^^me Academicks? or has not the world had enough of Peter Lumbards divinity?
It seems you have little regard of troublinge the Church. I wish they may have
more which have the allowance of such books to the press, yet seeing such
lavish Discourses must come abroad, least any should be deceived by your vain
gloss, I will proceed to examine your doing. The argument upon which you
ground, is after this manner. If the Devil assume to himself a body, page 100.
101 102, 103: and 104, 105.
it is either a true body, or a fantastical body, one created some time
before, or then newly, either the body of a living man, or of a dead man: But
none of all these, and therefore no body. I answer first, that he assumeth both
a true body, and a fantastical body: sometimes the one, and sometimes the
other. Secondly that he takes a created body. If you demand by whom? I
answer by himself. You reply, that creation is proper to God alone: and I
reioyne, that creation is twofould. One when a thing is made of nothing, as all
things were in the first begininge, in which power no creature may challenge
any part: the other when bodies are framed of some matter already being: In
this kind the Lord does use the ministry of his Angels. If it seem hard to
give the name of creation to this latter kind: then I answer, that the body
the devil usually assumeth, is an uncreated body. The matter of his body is
from god and from his creation, it being made of aer thickened or of some such
like matter. But the () form and in that it is a body, having the bigness,
proportion, color, voice and motion of a body, is merely from the devil. Here
by I say it is plain, that it is an uncreated body I do not mean that the
devil does form or quicken an airie body, as the soul does our body: but
that from him it has the form, fashion, and shape of a body.
formed by the devil, but not created by him. For then he should make it of
nothing. Neither is it created by god, the alone creator: because it has not
the I do not mean that the devil does form or quicken an airie body, as
the soul does our body: but that from him it has the form, fashion, and
shape of a body.
form, nor that it is a body from him. And yet notwithstanding it is a thing
existing in nature, before the devil assume it, as every child may perceive.
And that this spirits be able to perform we cannot but acknowledge, except we
suppose them to be of weaker strength then other creatures. Does not the sun
by his heat frame in the dunghill the body of a mouse, and give unto it also
life and sense? Philosophy and experyence does teach thus much. It were
absurd to imagine Angelical natures to be of less abillity then the sun,
especially in a matter of less difficulty by so much, as it is more easy to
frame and assume a body one lie, then to quicken and endue it with sencible
form. And why should it not be as possible and easy for the devil thus to
compact and frame a body, for height, length, breadth, with all the parts and
due proportions thereof of any kind whatsoever, like to man, dog, catt, toade,
etc. and enter into it, as to cause a tempest, and those other accidents
whereof we read in the history of Job? Thirdly I answer that in apparitions,
Ioh. 1.
which are not properly called possessions, he neither takes a living man's
body, nor a dead man's, but only such a one as is made specially for that
purpose, which when the errand is done, is dissolved into the same nature it
was of before. And whereas you tell us concerning the dead man's body, that if
the devil should assume the carkas of a man lately deceased, he should appear
in a white winding sheet: I see no reason of this windinge sheet, except it
be for you M. Deacon, to do your penance in. But you add, men's bodies were
created for the Lord, and not for infernal spirits. True. page, 10^
To this end man's body was not created. But hereunto has man made his body
subject by his own transgression. You say further. If the devil can assume to
him self a dead body, then we must needs imagine a resurrection of bodies
before the general judgment, and that performed by the devil, whereas that
power is proper to god. This proposition is false. In the resurrection the
soul and body shall be united together, and by this conjunction the body
again quickened. Now this can only Jehovah do. And after this manner many dead
bodies arose and came out of the graves, and appeared to many at the
resurrection of Christ. But here is no such conjunction: Math. 27.5^
neither does the spirit assuming, quicken the body assumed. The devil is too
weak to perform either of those. So that for any thing you say, he may take
living or dead body, which he please. Thus we see there is no truth nor
soundnes in this argument, but a mere trifling and abusing of the Reader, as
well concluding that neither good angels can possibly take bodies upon them
(contrary to the express truth in the scripture) as that the wicked cannot.
Which ki^de of affirmations would rather be confuted by good sound correction,
then by disputation of any man of learning, though as mean as my self: And
this is all the wise proof you bring. The rest of the dialogue is spent in
refelling the reasons for the contrary, which be chiefly five.

The first, Good Angels have appeared in assumed bodies, and therefore wicked
Angels may do likewise. page 10: 5 Zanch. de operibus r^de^ part, 1 lib. 4,
cap. 10: Piscator in Math, 4.3.


This argument you would shift of by diverse foolish untruths, first, for that
it consists not of things essentially alike in every respect. Why Sirs? Have
you found out a difference in the essence of good and wicked Angels? All sound
deuines hitherto have made their difference only in their quality. But you are
nothing dainty of such novelties. Well to let this pass: How show you there is
a diverse reason of them in this point? In this sort: The priuiledg of
celestial Angels, is not incident to the infernal. To grant you this, what
do you build from hence? But to assume a body is the privilege of celestial
angels. This is a second untruth. You were ashamed it may be, to express it
plainly (I would be glad to hear you were grown so bashful) but it must
necessarily be understood. If to assume bodies were the celestial angels
priuiledg, the Lord which is the maintainer of their privileges, would never
have suffered Satan to have entered into the body of the serpent. You are to
understand therefore, that this assuming is not done or permitted by god for
the benefit of the spirits, but for the comfort or discomfort of man. You add.
Neither yet are they equal with the celestial Angels in knowledge and power.
It is enough if the evil angels have knowledge and power to compact and frame a
body of the air and such like matter, and as a garment to put it on. And this
knowledge and power they have.

Fourthly, say you, the bodies wherein good Angels appeared, were not created
by themselves, page, 106:
but by god. I answer, if they were such as were imediatly made of nothing, the
Lord was the only workman of them: but if of some forebeeinge matter, their
ministry might have a place. But admit they were immediately made, may not the
Lord also create bodies for wicked spirits to use in their special services?
You imply he will not. It is presumption to search further i^to God his will,
then his word and actions do warrant us: and it is blindness not to
acknowledge so much, as they lead us unto. Seeing then the Lord in just
judgment permits Satan to be a lying spirit in the mouths of all Ahabs
prophets, 2 Thessalonians, 2, 9.
and to come in all deceiuablenes by Antichrist to beguile the reprobate: is it
any thing contrary to his holy justice and will, to allow him such means,
whereby he may accomplish the vengeance determined? Even so in this case.

Fifthly you say, that howsoever good Angels have appeared, ye^ of evil Angels
no example can be given.

The examples be more then the hairs of your head. But you dare avouch any
thing against the testimony of the whole world, christian and heathen. To omit
ancient examples (least perhapps you say they be past date, the like being
ceased in our times, as you do say of possession) the apparition near Augusta
about the year 1503. under Maximilius the first Emperor is famous, which
carried the resemblance of Margarite a Roth Abbatesse of Etestetten, Tho.
Erastus de Lami^s, page 17.
and could not only be seen and handled, but also speak most significantly.
George Sabin, a man honored for his learning with the dignity of knighthood by
Charles the 5. and son in law to Phil. Melancthon, Sabin, Elg: 1. Eleg. 3
Eleg. lib, 4 Eleg. 4
writes of three apparitions in his time, one of six spirits in the form of
moncks, ferried over the Rhene by a fisherman of Spire: The second of a whole
chariot full of monks: the third of a maid wooed by a spirit in the similitude
of a man. And it is known what of late has happened at Bertin, and other
places of Saxony. At Spandaw in Germany in the year 1594. Sep. 13. the devil
appeared in the shape of a man, Gallob^lg. lib. 11:
to a young youth Gabriell Cru^mer, offering him great riches if he would
promise to be at his pleasure, and this not once, but the second time. To him
also appeared Gabriel a spirit in show of a good angel, four several times.
In the sa^e town the devil did walk visibly in the view of diverse. It were
end less to insist upon rehersall of the manifould examples of this ki^de. Yea
something to this purpose may be said out of holy Scripture. Chrysostom
writing upon the patience of Job says, that he which brought tidings of the
house, and destruction of his famely and cattle, was not a man, but a spirit.
For if thou were a man (says he) how did thou know that this wind came from
the wilderness? or if thou were there, how happens it that thou wast not
destroyed with the rest? Some thing also it makes (as I think) for
confirmation hereof, that four several messengers use not only the same
speech, but the very same words: I only am escaped to tell thee. Also that
they come so patt one after the other, before the former had ended his speech,
Job. 1. v: 15 16.17.19:
and that one of them says The fire of god is fallen from heaven, and has
burnt up etc. Piscator says, in Math. 4 3.
that when the devil came to Christ in the wilderness to tempt him, he came in
specie viri etc. in the shape of a man, as angels are wont to do when they
appear unto men. And this we shall the rather believe, if we remember that the
devil is said to come unto Christ, to have speech with Christ: that the tempted
him in communication, Hither also apperteineth, 1 Samuel 28:7:8:
that witches are said to have their familiar spirits. Except the devils did
put upon them bodies, and in them were familiarly conversant with these wicked
weomen, how could there be any familiarity between a devil and a woman? Did not
also the angels thus as often as they did familiarly converse with men? Besides
who knows not this to be verrified in daily experience? de operibus red:
part, 1 lib. 4, cap. 16
Zanchius having affirmed that (in his judgment) devils can assume bodies, and
in them appear, speak etc. uses these words. More over there be very many,
and those very grave writers, who affirm that this has fallen out often.
Augustine writes so of this matter, that he says it is impude^cie to deny
it. And a little after Zanchius says as much himself. Without the note of
impudency this cannot be denied. And who is there living that doubts of the
devils appearing to some here and there in visible forms and shapes at this
day? Or that witches and devils in bodies assumed, have familiar speech and
communication together? Do we not daily hear of such occurrents? Do not
witches in all countries, make thus much known by their confessions? with many
circumstances thereunto apperteyninge, which all tend to the confirmation
hereof. Verily the devil his assuming of bodies and appearing in them unto men,
is so manifest by experience in all ages, past and present, that we may well say
with Augustine and Zanchius, It is impudency to deny it. Thus impudent are
none, but those who either deny that there are diue^s, or witches. The lesser
of which is horrible impiety. This then is an other untruth.

And here (by the way) we may assure our selves that the Discoursers deny this
latter, and are of opinion there a^e no witches, n r any bewitched. For if
devils cann^t assu^ bodies, without which they cannot appear, nor have any
familiarity with men: if ^econdly Satan have no power to to^ment, vex or any
way t^ afflict the b^d^ of man as these men also tell us, in affirming that
there is no a^tuall possession in these days of the gospel how are there any
who have familyar spirits, whom the scripture calls witches? Or that be
afflicted in their bodies by the ministry of Satan and malice of a witch,
which is that we call bewitching? This is something confirmed by their often
quoting of M. Sk^t his Discou^ry of witchcraft, and their commending of that
his exposition of 1. Sam. 28.8. etc. Hereby it is manifest that together with
M. Sk^t they hold that there are no witches, nor any at this day bewitched.
They do not indede deliver this in plain terms, least happily they should
thereby irritate the reverend Judges of the land, by making them guilty of
shedding much innocent blood: but you see that from some of their public
assertions it is to be gathered by necessary colle^tion: and how they approve
of that book which denies witches and witchraft, yea do commend it: saying:
that if without prejudice, and with a single respect to the truth, we would but
d^liberately ^^ruse that privileged discourse, etc. then should we without
doubt see a diabolical discourse published with privilege.

Lastly you say that the aforesaid argument is a deceiuable Ele^ch, from may
be, to being indeed. I pray you Discours^rs is not the question of may be? Is
not your position in the begi^ning of this dialogue, whether spirits and devils
can assume etc. We use then no El^n^h in the matter, but you a mere dotage,
which like the butcher have forgotten the knife in your mouth. Besides, this
and such like arguments be rather ab posse, ad posse, then a posse ad ^ss^: as
a child that has learned but Sum and P ssum, may (helped a little) be able to
tell you.

page, 107. Psalm. 78 49.
The second reason for assuming of b^dies, are the words of the psalm: He cast
upon them the fierceness of his anger, indignation, and wrath, by sending
angels of evil. Here you afford a double answer. First, that Angels of evil,
be angels that were denouncers of evil, that is, Moses and Aaron, as Trem^lius
interprets it, with whom you accord. Secondly that whatsoever these Angels be,
yet they are said only to be sent among them, not into them, and therefore no
proof can be had from hence for assuming of bodies.

I reverence the authority of ^eme^ius, and dare not take upon me to censure
his doing: yet against it I might al^eadg the consent of many interpretors. ^ut
instead of them all the book of wisdo^e shall alone serve, which alluding, to
this place expounds those Angel, ^f evil, to be horrible and fearful
sights. Th y were scattered, chap: 17:3.4.14:
(says he) s^ar^ng b^ ^ibly, and were ^^^bled with ap^^^ritions. Again,
terrible vi^^ons and s^rrowfull ^ ghts did appear unto them. Again, S^^times
they were troubled with monstrous apparitions. Hereby it is apparent that these
ang^ls ^f evil were co^strued by the learned Jews in ancient time, not to be
Moses and Aaron, but wicked spirits. Secon^ly, that though they were not sent
into the Egyptians, (for then they should ^aue possessed them, which never any
affirmed) yet they were sent amongst them in terrible forms, which could not
be but by assuming some sen^^ble bodies, which is sufficient against you: and
as much as is enforced from this scripture. And now let the Reader choose,
whether he will rather follow the book of wisdom, or your book of folly.
page 108.


The third argument is: The devil assumed the body of the Serpent when he
tempted Evah.

You oppose hereunto a threefould reply: First, If the devil entered
essentially into the Serpent, then either he became an essential Serpent, or
the serpent an essential devil. Surely you are bereft of common understanding
which so confidently blatter out such palpable ignorance. Does not god
essentially dwell in all things? But is the creature thereby made god, or God
the creature? Secondly, you say that the serpent in this place is not a
natural serpent, page 109. 110 111: 112: 113
but metaphorically the diu ll. It were tedious to refute particularly your
childish proofs. If all the circumstances in G^nesis 3. could not induce you
to acknowledge a natural serpent, as the instrument of satan in that
temptation, yet the Analogy of the ^econd Adam (which wrought our salvation by
vntwisting that thread, which the devil had spun to our destruction) ought to
have prevailed something with you. Mat. 3.16:17
Our Savior being baptized the spirit of god descended upon him like a dove:
and a voice from heaven proclaimed him withal to be the beloved son of god.
By which it is plain that as in overthrowing the first Adam there was a wicked
spirit, so in establishing the second Adam there was the holy spirit: as to
deceive the first there was used a serpent, so to confirm the second Adam
there was used a dove: as the first by the devils fraud in the serpent, was
quite stripped of all saving graces, and disherited from being the son of
god, so the second by the spirit of truth in the dove, was as it were visibly
replenished with the fullness of all grace, and not only himself then solemnly
anointed to be the son of god, but also by whom all the Elect should be
made partakers of the same dignity. From whence then I reason by Analogy thus.
That if at the second Adam his installing into his office there was visibly and
substantially apparent a Dove, wherein was repletiuely the holy ghost: then at
the deceauing of the first Adam, there was visibly and substantially a serpent,
wherein was definitiuely the wicked spirit. The nature of Opposites require
that where one is real, the other should be also real. And the serpent and
the dove be usually in the scriptures set one against the other. And thus much
for your second reply which you shut up with a Probatum est, because Reignald
Skot houlding the same opinion, his book and the opinion it self, is very
authentically privileged in our English Church by public authority. page 115.
As for M. Skot there is none of any sound understanding, but he allows his
judgment better in a Hopground, then in a case of divinity. And as for his and
your Priuiledg whereon you brag your self so much, take heed least you
strayning your M. his countenance too far, to bear out your absurdityes, he
plvck not his cloth over your ears. page, 116,
Your third reply yealds, that Satan was there together with the serpent, but
not in the serpent, and you would feign prove, The devil could apply the
serpents tongue to his purpose, though he entered not in essentially into him,
no less then a Minstrell can make his pipes sound what he please, albeit he
enter not essentially into the baggs. And in this merry conceyt you fling about
your arms like wind mill sails in a morryce dance, thinking your selves some
jolly fellows. But if the pride of your iollity be past, let me demand of you
this question, what is the true efficient of the sound of the pipe? The
minstrell, or the motion of the aer by his breath? You must needs answer it is
the motion of the aer: for the pipe will sound as well by a pair of bellows
tied at his arm, as by the breath of his mouth: as is apparent in Organes and
other wind instruments. Arist. Phys. lib. 8. cap: 2.
Beesides it is a rule in nature, That the mouer and the thing moved, must
needs touch one an other without intercourse of any thing coming between. Now
then if the piper be not the true efficient, it is no marvel if no necessity
force him to creep into the bag: but if the breath and the moving of the aer
be the true worker indeed, that must both enter into the bagg, and into the
pipe too, or else nothing at all will be done. But you will reply, that the
spirit may be likewise not the principal efficient, but remaining with out as
the Minstrell does, might send something into the serpent to cause such a
workinge. I answer, the spirit is the principal efficient. For in
supernatural works it must needs be the principal mouer should be
supernatural in regard of that work. And therefore seeing the wicked spirit
is chief agent, it is necessary he should be joined immediately to that which is
moved by him, without interposition of any other thing. If then you can count
your game, you shall see you have got nothing by this reckoning, but only a
vain hope to make your selves merry withal for a time.

The fourth argument for assuming bodies is drawn from the Angels sp^aking in
Baalams ass, Number. 22:2^ page: 117. 118
which you labor to infringe two ways: first for that it was not an angel,
but Ichouah himself which caused that speaking: secondly if it were an angel,
yet he speaks no otherwise then the former similitude of a Minstrel did
declare. For the first, I answer you argue deceiptfully in opposinge Jehovah
and an angel in this action, as if they could not be joint workers, Iehoua
principally, the angel ministerially: especially seeing it is the manner of
the scripture to attribute that to the Lord without mention of any other, which
notwithstanding he administreth by means. Iehova (salth Moses) talked with you
face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire. Deu. 5.4.22.
And again after he has repeated the ten commandments, he says: These words
Iehova spoke unto all your multitude in the mount etc In which he teaches that
Iehova was a Lawgiver, and names no other whose office was used therein: Yet
Stephen says, They received the law by the ministry of angels. And S. Paul:
It was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. Act. 7, 53: Galat. 3.19.
You see then how trifeling this argument is. But you will say: In the giving
of the law, the scripture does warrant a ministry of angels, but in the
matter of Balaam no such thing is any where taught. I answer, It is a good rule
observed by some for interpreting the scriptures Aequalis est doctrina, quae
venit a phrasi aequali. Equal manner of speech does afforde equal doctrine.
Beesides shall we think the greatest works of all other, as the giving of the
law, Luke 22, 43:
and the comfortinge of Christ himself were performed by angels, and that the
Lord reserueth the basest and meanest actions to be done immediately by himself.

Great cause therefore had those famous learned men Lyra, Martyr, Zanchius,
etc. to acknowledge an angel in this business, whose judgments if you had
wayed and followed, it had been more commendation for you, then thus to roue at
random with your bolts. Further you urge, It could not be an angel that opened
the asses mouth, because the Angel stood before Balaam with a drawn sword in
his hand to have slain him, and Angels can not be in sundry places at the same
instant. I answer, Seeing the Lord did open the mouth of the ass, and Baalams
eyes by angels as has been proved, that not one angel alone, but diverse were
used in this business. He which has so many thousand of thousands waiting
upon his throne for all deseignes, should he for defect of seruitors be feign
to work in his own person? Whereas you say secondly, Admitting it was an
Angel, yet he spoke no otherwise then the similitude of a Minstrell declares.
I answer, If he spoke in such sort, he must needs then really be in the ass,
considering the true efficient of the pipes sound, is the mouinge of the aer
(which is essentially in the pipe) and not the Minstrel. Besides in all things
which are moved, the Mouer is immediately applied and joined unto the thing
moved. And why should Angels necessarily be sent in person to those several
places where business lie, if they were able to accomplish them being absent?
I pass over your ridiculous conceit, page 119.
of the Angels essential conversion into the ass, and how he was ridden, and
galloped, and spurred, and stricken etc. which things no doubt, and more the
ass had suffered, if either of you had been in Balaams stead: For set a fool
on horsback, and he will gallop.

page, 120, 1 Samuel, 28:
The fifth argument for assuming of bodies, is from the apparition in the
likeness of Samuel: which example, if you bound your question with strict
terms of a true natural body, we use not in proof of this matter. For the
sounder judgment is, That apparition was a mere fantasy and illusion of
Satan. But if you intend (as indeed you do) that evil spirits take upon them
neither true nor fantastical bodies, that is, which be truly material and
visible, though not compacted of flesh and bone, in which sense only we oppose
it to a true body in this place, then this example is of force to press you.
You incline to Reig. Skott his opinion who would have it but a mere cosening
trick of the witch at Endor, without any apparition at all either to the king,
page 125.
or to the witch. But this fancy wants sufficient foundation to stand on. M.
Skott would prove that Saul saw nothing, because he asked the witch what she
saw, and what was his form? It is true that Saul saw nothing at first, 1 Samuel:
28:13 14.
for things were done by degrees, as the text plainly shows. Before the
resemblance of Samuel came up, the witch saw other spirits like Gods
ascending, then when they were vanished she beheld the form of Samuel, yet
not fully ascended: at which time she cried out and answered Saul his demand.
After the Image was now perfectly come up, Saul also himself saw him, as may be
gathered by his bowing himself and falling down: for otherwise Saul, was of
that temper both in regard of his regal dignity, and his own natural courage,
that it was not his manner to stoop to nothing. If one then shall reason thus,
Saul saw nothing when he asked the question, therefore neither afterward when
he bowed himself, there is no validity in such a consequence. Therefore M.
Skott fails much in his proof: he has not sufficiently showed that nothing
appeared unto Saul. And admitting he had cleared that, yet this was but one
part of his task. He should also have made it plain that neither the witch
saw any thing, before he had grown to this general conclusion of no
apparition at all. The devil at this day visibly appears to many of our
wisemen and wise weomen, when they which come to ask counsel of them,
neither see nor hear any thing, but have their answer at the second hand from
their mouth. Were it so then that Saul neither saw nor heard any thing, but
what he received from the witch, this notwithstanding, there might well be an
apparition: and without controversy there was so. Otherwise how could the
witch have known Saul? and foretold those things which afterward fell out
accordingly? Page 125:
To the former of these you answer (and what ye will say to the latter we shall
know hereafter) that she of herself might and did know him very well,
howsoever she dissembled the same for the present. This is incredible.. That a
silly woman dwellinge far from the court, should so well know the King, that
though he changed himself, put on other raiment, and went by night,
accompanied only with two men, and thus did what he could to be unknown,
(because being known he could not bring his purpose to pass) yet she should
know him. Especially if withal we remember, that she was a witch, or at least
reputed so to be, and that Saul had destroyed the witches, and sorcerers out of
the land: page 126.
and therefore she could have small heart to look the king so often in the
face, whereby to attain to this perfect knowledge of him. And where you say
that the conference performed to Saul, was cuningly delivered by the witch
alone in her cell, she being a cunni^g Ventriloquist, as all Pythonists are:
who can very hydeouslie speak in the bottom of their bellies, with an hollow
counterfeyt voice, and therein by practice she was very expert. I answer: you
may tell us also that the moon is made of a green cheese, but we may choose
whether we will believe you. Yea, I for my part will as soon beeleue this, as
that For how could this silly woman (with all her cunning and craft) foretell,
first the overthrow of the Israelites. 2. that it shoude be on the morrow. 3.
that in that overthrow Saul and his sons should be slain. Neither is it
credible that she was able to make known to Saul the true cause of this feirce
wrath of the Lord, ready to be executed upon him, and that his kingdom being
rent from him, should be given to David: all which be mentioned in this
conference. Moreover, if the witch did use a mere cosinage, and that she
herself did see nothing, it should seem this art of sorcery, consists only
in the opinion of men, and that in very deed witches can do no more by
Spirits, neither have any greater familiarity with the^, then all others have.
But then wherefore does the scripture condemn them for counselling with
spirits? Deuteronomy: 18, 11, 1 Samuel 28, 7, 8.
and mention their having of familiar spirits? For these reasons I think it
stands better with reason to ioyn with the universal consent of all the
learned, then to follow M. Skott his singular opinion, though the discourse be
privileged. Hitherto for your refutation.

The shutting up of this Dialogue alleges some authorities for Not assuming
bodies, none of all which make to the purpose. Peter Lumbard propounds a
double question, page 127, 128. Mag. sent, lib 2, distinct: 8.
first whether devils do substantially enter into the bodies of men: the second
whether they essentially slip into their minds. To the first he answers
doubtfully, but does not deny it as these Discoursers do. To the second
negatiuely. Then you produce the testimony of Gennadius, Beda, and Augustine:
which likewise deny an essential entrance into the mind. But what is this to
essential entering into the body? These are two things distinct, and if you had
not purposed fraud, you would not have alleged authorityes denying an
essential entrance into the minds, to disprooue essential entrance into the
body. Touching the rest of your testimonies, I am ashamed to spend time in
rehearsing them. I grant with Chrysostom, the devil cannot compel to sin,
but suggest: with Lyra, that he is not formally in any, as the form of that
body wherein he is: with Musculus, That he has no absolute authority, but a
subjected servitude: with Gregory, that the power of Satan is never v^iust,
though his will be always w^ck^d: with T^ls^egistus, that a^ human^ soul
cannot receau^ any other to mak^ one pe^s^n with i^ (excepted only the son of
god) then an humane b^^^^. I grant you a l which the^e testimonies ^u^u^n, but
what game you thereby for strengthening your cause? It is great folly to trouble
your Reader with such impertinent words in the last place comes Reig: Sk^t to
make all ^ure. In^eede ^is testimony is pregnant for you. page. 129.
But in the words you cite out of him be contained two infamous sentences,
That the Diu^ls cann^t by any means make them selves seen: that to assume a
bo^y for appea^ance, o^ other service, is all one a^ if the spirit leaving the
^ssence of a spir^t, sh uld become co^porall. For so is the meaning of his
words. And what is his reason? why (forsooth) the devil by his nature is a
spirit, and therefore inv^^ible and insensible, and so this is contrary to his
nature. By this reason there was never apparition of holy angels: for they be
likewise spirits, invi^^ble, insensible etc. Surely they which made trees in
times past to call parliaments, spoke with as great probabillity, as M. Skot
has a^^irmed this, as is apparent by that already set down.

A Survey of the Fifth Dial^gue.
The fifth Dialogue treats of Transformation, the second special of Corporal
poss ssio. As if either by assumptio^ of bodies, or change of form, a^l
corporal possession were wrought, as the nature of generals does require to be
fully comprehended in the whole sum of their specials: And as if all
transformation were bodily possession, which is as untrue, as the former
distribution unskillful. The conclusion propounded is, That Spirits and devils
cannot essentially transf^rm them selves into any true natural b^die. In which
sentence these Discours^rs understand Transformation to be a perfect change of
one ^ssence into an other, as if a spirit utterly changing his nature, and
cea^^ng to be a spirit should be made in very essence a man, or some such
other thing: or else that he not transforming himself but transforming an
other, should change the essence of a man into the essence of a wo^fe, or some
like nature In which is to be n^ted a double absurdity. First that they di^pute
as a ^oubt, which never entered into any man, for an^ thing I can find, to ma^e
any questi^n of to wit, wh^t h r s^irits might p^rf^ctly leave their ^wn^
nature, and thoroughly change th^mselu^s into an oth^^ being. Indeed this were
a happy Transformation for them, if they could cease to be devils, and so
escape their condemnation. But neither wiseman nor fool I think, ever
dreamed of such a thing. Secondly, that they conf^und all apparitions and
appea^ances with their transformation: as if the devil could not cast sensible
shows of things before us, yea and true bodies themselves, without either
transforming himself, or some other thing into them. And thus by this occasion
they run i^to their former question again, sometimes making their
Transformation to be nothing else but an assuminge of bodies, either in truth,
or in show. Concerning which sufficient has been said in survey of the former
dialogue: And what the spirits power is in this behalf, is apparent by the
Egiptian sorcerers rods, turned (at least in show) into serpents: by the
froggs, and the waters turned into blood: by the apparition of Samuels body,
Wisd 17 Math. 14.26
by those fearful sights which troubled the Egiptians, yea by the disciples
of our Savior Christ the^ selves, which fearing they had seen a spirit, when
they beheld our Savior walking on the waters, declare what the judgment of the
Church was then concerning apparition of spirits in sensible forms: neither
does our Savior reprove that opinion, but only shows there was no cause of
fear, he being no such as they imagined.

Therefore I need not trouble the Reader with discussing, How the devil is
transformed into an angel of light, or how Nebuchadnezzar became an ox, or in
ripping up any of that discourse following, only let us consider that which is
alleged from our Savior Christ's speech, page 156. 157 Luke 24, 38.
A spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. Which words seem to
make against this assuming of bodies by spirits. humane, that is like, to man's.
For if they do take upon them sensible humane bodies, how is the argument of
our Savior firm? The disciples might have replied, that howsoever spirits
have not flesh and bones naturally, yet they assume humane bodies for a time,
visible and palpable, and therefore the judgment of sense could not be
sufficient warrant to put away their fear. For answer hereunto, Thomas
Aquinas and other of the School men think, our Saviors argument to be of
small strength, except some other addition be made unto it. But herein the
scholemen were deceived, as also many others, in that they frame the argument
from part only of our Saviors words, and not from the whole Our Savior does
not (merely) reason thus, A Spirit has not flesh and bones, But I have flesh
and bones, and therefore am no spirit, as I see the argument is vulgarly taken,
but more fully in this sort, A Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me
have, which words afford this syllogism. A Spirit has not in a true humane
body pierced hands and pierced feet, as mine were lately on the cross: But I
here present have in a true humane body ^earced hands and peirced fee^e, as
they were a few days since upon the cross (whereof be your selves witnesses
in seeing and feeling me) and therefore I here present am no spirit, but verily
your Lord and Master, who was lately crucified.

And this is strengthened by the words precedent to the aforesaid Scripture,
and subsequent. Behold (says Christ) my hands and my feet, for it is I my
self: handle me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and b^^es, as ye see me
have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. As
if the Lord had said. You suppose this body that stands thus on the sudden
before you, is not mine, but the fantastical body of a spirit. But you are
deceived, for it is I my self. And that you may be cut of doubt, look upon
me, and handle me. A spirit has not a true natural body, consistinge of
flesh, blood, and bone etc. but only the similitude of these things, and
therefore this my true humane body you may easily discern from such, if care
and circumspection be used by you: View me therefore well, and handle me. The
softness of my flesh, the hardness, of my bones, that vital and sweet
warmness that is perceived in a living body, and is proper unto it, which you
may feel, do witness that it is my body you do behold, and not a spirit.
But certain may you be hereof, if you look upon my hands and feet, which you
know (according to the scripture) were lately peirced. Here I show you them.
Do you not see the marks there of? and the hoales which the nails have made
in them? we may add hereunto the exceeding great joy which did heerevpon arise
in the disciples. For it follows, And while they believed not for joy, that
the Lord was risen, and wondered thereat etc. This excessive joy nothing caused
so much, as the behoulding and handling of the visible and palpable marks of
his peircing. Had not Christ showed and they beheld and handled these bloody
marks, and certain marks of Christ's own body, they had not undoubtedly so
abounded in joy, but rather continewed still troubled, and in their former
doubt, at least in part, and some of them, if not all. Hereby it is plain,
that this scripture makes for apparitions, and not against them.

If the reason drawn from this scripture were of any validity aga^^st
apparitions, then could not the holy angels assume bodies, neither had there
ever been apparition of them, which we know is over thrown by many places of
scripture.

For the rest of the Dialogue we are behoulding to Lycanthropus, which has
kept so good D^^^rum in all the former Di^courses, that he never how^ed f^^th
like a wo^^e ti^^ now. Your ^a^^^ty is merueilous in speedy curing his ^^^ease.
If you procee^e with ^^^e success in this kind, you will quickly surpa^se the
Ex^rc^i at Ma^gn^tton. Lyca^th^^pus was but a ^o^le, that he complaine^ not
himself at your first meeting It seems he might have had present he pe. But
take heed M. Ha^s^^^t be not sent from his Lord with Co^ission to exam ne the
matter of so^e Legerdemaine. And thus having run the race of this Dialogue, you
make a passage to the next coming now to Actual P^ss ssion, which is the
opposite member to Real. Whereby it will that neither the ^iuell has any
real power without. For whatsoever he does exer^is^ outwardly, it is actua^ly
only says your goodly division, and so by your account he shall be reall^ no
where.

A Survey of the Sixth Dialogue.
page 166.
The sixth Dialogue handles Actual poss ssion, which they describe to be an
extraordinary affliction, vexation, or to^ment, that Satan does effectiuely
inflict v^on m^n f^r a time. And this actual affliction and to^ment very
vnf^^ifully they oppose to that is generally called poss^ss^^n. Whereas
whosoever is possessed according to that we define possession, the same i^
actually, and eff^ctiu ly (as they spea^) afflicted, vexed, or torm^nted by
Satan. Where therefore either the spirit of god in the sacred Scriptures
speaking of Demon^acks mentions only their vexation by the spirit, M^th.
15.2^. Act^^ ^.^:
or any learned writer, that makes not at all against us, or for you, as you
very ^illily pretend. The question and controversy is, (whereof we have spoken
alred^) whether the devil thus v^xing a Demoniack, be within him (definitiuely)
as we affirm: or without him, as you avouch: and not whether Demoniacks be
eff^ctiuely vexed by Satan which v^xati^n you opposing to that we call p^ss
ssi n, see page 38 3^, and ^^3.
and by it going about to disprove real possessi^n, do therein like unto him,
that should deny a man to have a soul, because he has a body: and that by
proving he has a body, will prove that he has no soul. There be 2. parts of
possession. 1. The devil his inherencie in the body of man. 2. the devil his
vexing of that body.

This p^ss^ssion of diu^ls y^u acknowledging to have b^ne in the days of
Christ: page 168.
do flatly deny any further continuance thereof now, in t^is time of the
gospel. In the doctrine, page 27, 28. Doctrine page 31:


The contrary hereunto, to wit, the perpetuity of possession, I have heretofore
proved by Scripture, and by reason, and na^ely thus.

All the diseases that sin made the body of man subject unto, do or may
remain so long as sin remains in man:

But possession is a disease that sin made the body of man subject unto.

Therefore possession does or may remain so long as sin remains in man.
And so at this day nay, until the end of the world.

This argument has as yet received no answer from you, page 174,
nor I trust never shall. Instead thereof you have fathered as absurd an
argument upon me, as ever I read: sending the Reader to the 31. page of the
Doctrine, to secure him it is mine: and thereunto forsooth have you returned an
answer. A very easy matter: even as it is for one in straits to help himself
with a lie. If at once (Gentle Reader) thou would see clearly as in a
glass, how corruptly these men deal with my poor writings, and shamefully
abuse both thee, and me, but most of all themselves then compare pages 174,
175. of their Dialogicall Discourses, with the 31. of the Doctrine.

But for the further pursuit and enlarging of the aforesaid argument, we are
to understand that all punishment due to the breach of god his law, is so long
perpetual, as the breach of gods law does continue. Cursed is every one which
abides not in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do
them. Galat. 3:10
This sentence is perpetually true to the end of the world. And albeit they
which have put on Christ, and be dead and risen again with him, are freed from
this curse, yet all that be called, be not chosen: nor every one that says
Lord, Lord, shall have him to bear their burden, but shall feel the weight
of their own transgressions. Beesides the faithful are not exempted from the
temporal chasticement. Neither are the written plagues only the stipend of
sin, but all other evils whatsoever not mentioned, are scourges prepared of
the Lord for sinners. If thou will not keep and do all the words of this Law,
the Lord will bring upon thee every sickness, Deuteronomy. 28.58, 61
and every plague which is not written in the book of this law. And that
possession is a curse or plague of god, it needs no proof. Yea a grievous one
it is, that he which was framed the temple of the holy spirit, should become a
most horrible Cave and Den of Satan. From hence it must needs follow, that
possession must have a perpetual being in the world, so long as men shall
continue disobedient to god his most holy commandments. Moreover, howsoever
Satan's kingdom is abolished for the behalf of the elect, yet in respect of
the wicked he is a god of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4 Ephe. 2, 2: Ep^^ 6, 12
a prince of the aer, and a principallity, a power, a worldly governor of the
darkness of this world. Does the scriptures give him these titles as if he was
a god without a people, a king without a kingdom a principallity without all
sway and authority in his subjects? Therefore except you can show us, that none
of the wicked now a days be of satan's kingdom or that he does rule his
kingdom without tyranny, or that his tyranny has not waiting upon it
possession, or that possession is now no punishment or chasticement for sin:
you shall deserve that as your book goes now abroad under priuiledg, so
hereafter your selves should have a priuiledg for ever setting forth any more
books.

As the perpetuity of poss ssi^n is and has been proved by the holy
scriptures, and by reason, so accordingly there have been Demoniacks from
Christ's time in the successiue ages until this day. That such there were for
the space of 13. hundred years from Christ, appears by the ecclesiastical
histories called the Centuaries, as witnesses Cent. 2. page 110. Cent. 3. page
136. Cent. 4. page 439 440 Cent. 5. page 684 685. Cent. 6 page 341. Cent. 7.
158. 159. Cent. 8. 341. et 375. Cent. 9. 265. Cent. 10. 320. et. 337. Cent. 11
286 et 310. Cent. 12. 909. 910. et 932. Cent. 13. 631. This perpetuity is
further confirmed by the testimony and judgment of these writers following:
who for the most part make mention of Demoniacks in their times. Apol. 1, Page:
146.
Iustine Martyr, says, that the christians over all the world healed very many
that were p ssessed with evil spirits: which other inchaunters, In Apolog.
coniurers, and sacrificers could not perform: and as yet (says he) those m^n
of ours proceed in their purpose. See also Iustine Martyr in Tryphone We are a
customed (says Tertullian) to assail devils and to drive them away from men.
And again: We drive out ill spirits with out reward or hire. See Tertullian in
lib. de Corona militis. For breuity (especially in so plain a case) I will
omit the other testimonies, and only name the several writers with the book
and page. Cyprian ad Demetrianu^ tract. 1. et Sermon d^ lapsis: et de Idolorum
vanitate: et lib. 4. epistolarum, epistola 7. ad Magnu^. Soz^m. lib. 4. cap.
16. Idem lib. 6. cap. 28. Canon. 90 Theodoret lib. 4, cap. 21. Chrysostom in
Tom. 5. de i^ comprehensibili dei natura, hom. 4. Augustine lib 8. de ciuitate
dei. cap. 26, ^useb^us Caesariensis lib. 6. cap. 43. Bullinger in Math. 8.28.
Pet. Martyr loc. com. Sess. 4. Cap. 9. Sect. 16: Chytreus in Math. 8.28.
Hunnius in Math. 17.15. Philip Melan^thon lib. Epistolarum. Chemnicius de
Sacramento Ordinis. Beza hom. 26. in historiam passionis, aedit: 2. page 656.
V^gellius in Thesauro Theologico. page 980. Danaeus in Marcu^ quest 38.
Chassanion loc. com. lib. 1. cap. 17. Piscator in Math: 8.28. But what need
these testimonies specially of the ancient writers, since the Discoursers
themselves acknowledge a general consent among the learned writers, as touching
the continuance of possession for about eight hundred years after Christ and
that in these words. Howsoever Iustine, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, the
counsel of Brachia, page: 172.
and eccles^asti^all histories do all jointly avouch the continuance of p ss
ss on in those t m^s and places wherein they conuersed: yet no one of them all
do challenge extraordinary power to disp^sse Satan. But all these (say our
Discoursers) were deceived, either by the cunning ^f the counterfeit, or by
mistaking ^^me disease, not much unlike poss ssion, for p^ss^ssion it self.
Thus fell these good Fat^ers into a strange imagination of some actual
possession: there being indeed no such thing at all. Is it not strange that
these two petty fellows, that a^e every foot stumbling, and have as many lies
almost in their mouths as they have propositions, should so boldly control
these famous Doctors, and writers of Ecclesiastical story, and condemn them
as men simple, deceived, and not able to di^cerne of this matter. It seems
your Priuiledg has so inspired you, that the certain knowledge of these things
is to be drawn only out of your breasts. Let us hear therefore the profound
re^sons which these great Clerks have, against possession in these days of
the gospel. The first argument against the perpetuity of possession: page
168. Ans: 1.


The first is this G^d has not avouched the perpetuity of possession in any
part of his word, therefore it was temporary, and no way perpetual.

Your proposition is false, For though it be not set down in express words:
yet thence it is to be proved by necessary collection, as is evident by the
premises. Secondly, were it true: It makes sufficiently for the perpetuity of
possession, that by holy scripture it can be proved, that sometimes there was
possession, and that were possessed: except some scripture may be showed for
the abolishing of it, Otherwise I say, it remains still, so as it either is,
or may be at this day. page 170. A^gu: 2.


In the second place you reason thus. If no extraordinary power or means for
expelling of devils remains perpetual, then neither possession it self
remains perpetual: But the first (say you) is true, therf^re the second.

1. Math: 17.11 Mark: 9, 29
The proposition is false. Because there was not only an extraordinary means
for the expelling of devils, which being temporary, ceased with miracles, but
besi^es an ordinary means particulerly and by name appointed for the
dispossessing of devils, which remains until this day, and is perpetual. Yea
had we no such particular ordinance, yet notwithstanding we might at this day
have remedy against this extraordinary evil. Call upon me, (says God) in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Whatsoever you shall ask my father
(says our Savior) in my name, that he will give unto you. Pray always, says
S. Paul. what? only in ordinary necessities? or else in extraordinary too, but
yet without comfort of obtaining? has the Lord bound himself from all
extraordinary visitation till the end of the world? Or if any unwonted thing
shall happen, is the church destitute of all remedy? Again, we have no
extraordinary power remaining wherewith to cure palsyes, feauers, and other
diseases sometimes so cured, and yet notwithstanding the said diseases at this
day remain. And why may not as well this disease be now, notwithstanding we
have no extraordinary power wherewith to heal it? who would vouchsafe to spend
time with such disputers? Then to come to your second proposition, let us hear
your proof. Because say you extraordinary power of casting out devils was
peculiarly appropriated to Christ and his own Disciples, which is a loud
untruth, Mark 16, 17.
understanding Disciples as you do, only for the Apostles. Does not our Lord
say, These signs shall follow those that believe? in my name, they shall cast
out devils etc. Of whom speaks he this? Of his own disciples? Or of the
seauentie? It is most manifest he speaks of those which should believe by
their preaching. We stand not upon an extraordinary power for expelling of
Satan, and therefore I might well have let this proposition pass, but that I
would let you see your not extraordinary but ordinary blindness.

page: 176 Arg. 3:
But to let this pass, your third argument concludes thus. Things in
themselves perpetually existing, have in themselves an ordinary and continual
working: But possession of devils (in these days of the gospel) is in it self
neither ordinary, nor continually working, and therefore in these days there
is no poss ssion existing.

I answer that perpetual existing is twofould: Natural, and Positive. Things
natural which have an inseparable operation accompanying them, so long as they
have an existing, must needs also have a continual working, as the fire must
needs heat, the water moysten, etc. In this sense I do not say that
possession is perpetually existing, for then evermore some should be possessed,
which is far from my thought: but that men now and hereafter even to the worlds
end may be possessed, when and as often as the Lord shall please in such manner
(that is with this kind of correction) to chastise men: as appears by that
here follows. Things Positive be such as not by nature but by ordinance have
their power and efficacy. Of which sort be Laws and Constitutions, which once
inacted have presently existing, yet notwithstanding for want of Execution that
sleeps perhaps upon diverse occasions for many years, have not their
continual working Now possession being a punishment of sin, and an ordinance
of God, is of the second kind, wherein if one shall exa^t one usual course
to be pra^tised every moment without ceasing, it is as much as to prescribe the
Lord and appoint him when and how he shall inflict his judgments. What was to
have a more perpetual existing amongst the people of t e Jews then the
religion of God in those holy rites and ceremonies which himself had given
from heaven? Of what were they to expect a more constant and continual
succession, then of their prophets, Deuteronomy. 18.15.16.
the Lord having promised he would rais^ them up a prophet like to Moses, in
whose mouth he would put hi^ w^rdes? yet we know what long interruption often was
made by the Idolatry of the people, the wickedness of t^eir kings, and at the
last their deserved captivity. Insomuch that the Prophet complayneth We see not
our signs, there is not one Prophet m re, nor any with us that kn^weth h^w
long. psalm. 74.9.
Yea from Malachy til John Bapt st, what long and deep silence was the^e, as
if the Lords promises had been fa len to the ground? So in the Christian
Church during all the reign of Antichrist, has not the truth lain hidden in
the wilderness, as if it had been utterly extinct and departed from the earth?
The Papists cry out upon us to show the visible tra^t of our Church, and you
would help them with armor, if this might be granted: That things
perpetually ex^sting by ordinance should also have a c^nti^uall working. I hope
nothing ought to be more perpetual then faith, ^et our Savior demands
whether at his coming h^ shall find it on the earth. Luke 18.^.
The second proposition also is worthily proved. For whereas you should show
that poss^ssi^n has no rdinary working, ^ou tell us. It is now adai^s so
vnwont^d and so ra^e ^n exp^rience, as very hardly it is heard of in twenty
y^^res space. page, 17^.


Ad^it this, I hope if it be heard of in twenty ^eares it is not a matter so
strange for the days of the Gospel, as ^ou would make it. Neither is twenty
years space such a discontinuance, but that you might as well conclude the
Leprosy, the Cancer, the Apoplexy, and s me other rare diseases did all
likewise determine with the Apostles time.

The fourth argument follows. The manifestation of Christ his Deity, pa^ 179
and Ans 5 5.
a ^ the confirmation of his glorious gospel, were the maine causes of poss ss
^n in Christ his time: these causes being c ased long since, how should the
effect it self be still continued?

Doctrine page 30 31. 32 where I show that except these two were the only
^auses of p^ss ss^on notw thstanding the ceasing of these causes, p ss^ss on
may remain, s^ lo g as an other cause thereof ^emayneth, to wit, sin. That
these were not the sole causes, you you selves d^^i esse confess, in calling
them the main^ causes, and the ma^n^ e^^s ^f p^ss ss^on: and in affirming, that
the p^ss ssion of devils were especially for th^se two ends. Indeed in your
Answer page 67. (contradicting your selves) you say these were the two only
end^s of ^oss ss o^. But how prove you that b^ the Scriptures? Or who made ^ou
of counsel with the Lord, that you do so peremptorily and precisely put
down these for the s^le causes of this judgment? It is not possible that this
which you thus presumptuously affirm, page 31. 32:
should be true. Since (as heretofore I have declared) there were possessions
before either the gospel was preached unto the Gentiles, or the Lord manifested
in the flesh. Moreover the sine of Demoniacks, without which they could never
have been vexed by ^athan, was a cause of possession, how then were the two
aforesaid, the only causes of possession? To the former of these reasons you
answer, there were no p^ss ssions at all (for a y l ng time espec ally before
the coming of Christ. page 68.
A childish answer, s ing in m^ said reason I have made the c^ntrarie evident.
Instead of answering m^ latter reason we have a slander. You charge me to say,
page: 56
that ^oss ss^ n was esp cially and pu posely inflicted upon men f^r sin* and
this l^^^ ^f ^our own making you lab^r to overthrow. Whereas I onel^ a firm
that besides the aforesaid causes, sin wa^ a cause, doctrine Page 32
which is th c^us^ of all judgments, th u^^ (...) alwa^e^ respect not tha^ ^e^t
after his own g orie. page 179, Ioh. 12.31.
principally bu^ s^ t^mes some (...) best kn^w (...) to hi^s ^^.

But cheifel^ you ground ^he f nall determination log since o Satan's power of
p ss ssio^, upon a blind ^nde^sta^dig of these words of the Gospel. Now is the
judgment of this world: now shall the prince o^ this world be cast out Co^ce
ning which when I consi^er how many vain wor^s and leaves be spent, I call to
mind the great pains the Smith takes in framing his Idolatrous Image How he
works in the coals, and fashion, that with hammers, and works it with the
strength of his a^mes: Isa: 44:12.
yet he is an hungered, and his strength fails, he drinks no water, and ^s
fame* For these Disc^ursers having framed an Idol interpretation in their own
brains, weary themselves to adorn it all that ever they may, though when they
have done what they can it is nothing else but an abominable frenzy, I give
it no ha^^er term t^en it deserves. For to come to the matter, ^hese not
Ex^^anours but Prophanours of God his truth would have the casting forth of the
Prince of this world by the death of Christ, to be nothing else but a final
d^termination of Satan's actual poss ssion, that is, That the benefit of
Christ his death should only pertain to Demoniacks, men extraordinarylie
tormented with the devil. For the fruit of deliverance from Actua l possession
bel^n eth only to such kind of men But by these men's divinity, The casting
forth ^f the Prince of this world, is nothing else but a del ueranc from
actual poss ssi^n, and so this benefit of Christ his death shall be
appropriated to men extraordinarily vexed by Satan. Are ^our consciences so
seated that ^ou could be content to spoil Christians of their chiefest
comfort? But I need not spend time in expostulating with you There is n^ne
which loves the truth, but of himself will easily acknowledge what such
deprauours deserve. It shall be enough for me, least any be deceived by you, ^o
convince your ^alshood Our Savior shows by his own express words, that the
casting forth of the Pri c^ of this world, should be the drawing of all nations
unto him for so he speaks in the next verse. And I, i^ I were lift up from
the earth, ver: 3 2:
will d aw all men unto me: which I hope is a more ample fruit of Satan's
expulsion, then can be restra^ned onl^ to men in unwonted manner afflicted by
him. Likewise the Grecia ^s d si^e to s e^ur Savior, which occasion did move
this speech, does ma^ifestl^ declare th calli^g fo^th o^ Satan should ^e the
admitti^g of the G^ntiles into the kingdom^ of G^^. This also was that which
the voice from heaven pronounced, wherein the nam of God sh uld h^ glorified,
and not the deliverance of ^me few special men, from this one part of ^athans
t^rannie. Besides our Sauiou here ^elleth us that a ^ession and a most
sollemne iu^gment should be holden, where in the might^ Jehovah s^^ts Iu^ge
Jesus Christ is plaintiefe and Satan defendant. ^al^^e think all this
sollemnity ha^ no other e^de but only that Actual poss^ss^o^ might b^
condemned? Or rather that the Almi^hty God judging the cause between his Elect
and Satan, did now in regard of his Son his merrite fully satisfying his
justice, give sentence against Satan with his chosen, and thereby expel him
from that kingdom which heretofore he had generally holden, that in all nations
by the preaching of the word, children might be begotten to the Lord. This were
sufficient to control your wicked error, yet because the matter is weighty,
we will consider a place or two more. S. Paul to the Collossia^s explaineth
this p^int most fully. chap: 2:13
And y e (says he which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespass^^,
and putting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, etc. And
has spoiled the principa lityes and p wers, and has made a show of them
openly, and has triumphed ou r them in the same cr^ss^. In which words, he
does as it were comment upon this speech of our Savior decla^ ng How Satan is
cast forth: what is the benefit, and to whom it belongs. The manner of
Sathan^ casting so th is, by satisfyi^g the justice of god, signified by
can^elli g the hand writing, and by spoiling principallityes and po^ers etc. Is
the handw^iting^ cancelled only for Demoniacks? That benefit is A qu ckning
together with Jesus Christ and the forgiveness of all tresp^ss s. Are the
sins of demoniacks only forgiven, and they only quickened? Nay many which
are dispossessed a^e not quickened with Christ, not have their trespass
forgiven, but being empty, swept, and garnished, are repossessed with seven
worse devils then they were at the first. Except perhaps the sentence was only
terrible in the time of our Savior, but now after his death is no more to be
feared, possession by your wise interpre^ation being fully determined. To whom
this benefit belongs, are they which were dead in sins, and in the
uncircumcision of the flesh. Are only Demoniacks such? Is not this the estate
of all the Elect before they be called? Thus much S Paul. In the Epistle to the
Hebrews likewise the same is most plain, where it is affirmed, Heb, 2, 14:15
that Christ took humane nature upon him, that in the same he might destroy
through death, him that ^ad the power of death, that is the devil And that he
might deleuer all them which for fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage where also it is plain how Satan was thrown out, and that
the fruit redownds to all that were oppressed with fear of death, which number
is infinite, besides Demoniacks. Where it is to be observed, how these
Discoursers alleadginge this text, ever when they come to the fiftenth verse,
which they s^e does utterly overthrow them, shrinck back again, not daring to
touch it, as if some scorpyon lay under this stone. which makes me think, they
do not so much ignorantly, as of purpose pervert the scripture. But let us (by
the way) see how they do urge this Scripture to their purpose. This word
destruction (say you) cannot fitly be applied to Satan his power of obsession,
page, 185.
but must necessarily be appropriated to his power of possession, which was not
only much maimed, but utterly destroyed by the death of our Savior, so as non
can be possessed now in these days of the gospel. If this here said of the devil
is to be appropriated to the power of possession, the^ has Christ destroyed
the devil only for Demoniacks. By this your interpretation also of the word
destroy, none can now do the works of the devil, none can at this day lie,
slander, commit murder, whoredom etc. For 1. Ioh. 3.8. it is said that
Christ has appeared to destroy the works of the devil, and thus you your
selves translate the word. Briefly none of the regenerate can sin, page 186.
Rom: 6, 6,
since it is said the old man (of such) is crucified with Christ, that the body
of sin might be destroyed. But to return thither whence I have digressed.

Lastly from the interpretation which you do give of Ioh. 12.31. it must
necessarily follow, which you also boldly deliver for truth, that by Christ the
power of possession was finally determined, and utterly annihillated, that an
end was made of this business. And again, that our Savior Christ put a final
end to the possession of devils by his death and resurrection. Now how can this
possibly be true, page, 66:
since after Christ his death and resurrection many were possessed with devils,
as is plain by the Acts of the Apostles? Beesides after our Lord was risen,
he foretells that some believers should in his name cast out devils. Hereunto
you answering, Mark: 16:17. page: 197:
grant that there were indeed possessions and dispossessions, a time (that is
a little time) after Christ his death and resurrection, for confirmation of his
glorious gospel, but none at all for the declaration of Christ his Deity. But
how is it proved? why M. Deacon and M. Walker say it. That we may plainly see
that this is an absurd shift, we must remember that the miracles wrought by the
Apostles or others as well after as before Christ's death, served for
confirmation of Christ his Deity. First in that Christ is the subject or
matter of the gospel. That therefore which makes for the confirmation of the
truth of the gospel, (which the miracles wrought by the Apostles after Christ's
death did, by their own confession) must needs make for confirmation of this
Christ, that he is the true Messiah, and Savior of the world. And if of
Christ, then both of his Deity and humanity. For Christ is a person consisting
of these two natures. Again, the gospel teaches the Deity of Christ,
whatsoever miracles then confirm the gospel, the same confirm Christ's Deity.
Moreover, the miracles, and namely the dispossessions of the Apostles, or of
any other wrought after Christ's resurrection, were wrought in the name of
Christ, and therefore confirmed Christ his Deity. Mark. 16.17
In my name (says Christ) they shall cast out devils. And this they should do
after his resurrection. I command thee (says Paul) in the name of Jesus
Christ, Acts: 16:18:
that thou come out of her, and he came out. Tell me now ye Discours^rs,
whether this dispossession of S. Paul and such like dispossessions, Acts 8.7.
and 19.23,
performed after Christ his resurrection, whereof we read in the Act^s, made
not for the confirmation of Christ his deity. Behoulde the palpable darkness
that has covered you: which notwithstanding you ^eele not, nor in respect
thereon keep your selves still and quiet without stirring in your places, as
the Egiptians did: but you strout it out, and wa^k b^l^lie, as in the clearest
sunn shine, by so much more miserable then the ^giptians were But if you will
be so hardy, you must thank your selves, if you break your shinnes, for you
can hardly break your faces, and it may be this does make you so venterous.

page 182
You prosecute your absurd interpretation of John 12. further by conference of
some scriptures, which either you do not, or will not understand; by a
Resolution making little to the purpose, and lastly by the testimonies of
diverse: wherein you have a notable grace, to abuse men's names and words
contrary to their meanings. Bring one approved author i^ you can, that
restrayneth the castinge out of the Prince of the world, to the deliverance of
demoniackes, and to the ending or final determination of possession: which if
you cannot, what a shame is it, or rather a wickedness not to be borne, to foyst
in the names of good Authors, and some scattered patches of sentences sounding
contrary to their judgments, to deceive the simple, and to draw them into
error? Are you men appointed to be leaders of the blind, and do you willingly
dig pitts for them? The Lord deliver his people from such pastors which stop
their mouths with grauel instead of bread, and kill them with the poison of
their own erroneous conceits, instead of feeding them with the wholesome
food of God his truth. My purpose is not to enter any particular examination
of your allegations. For even as one when he was enjoined to carry away a
dunghill, after he considered how huge and foul it was, never put to his
shoulders, but opened a passage to a river not far of, by the flowing whereof he
swept it away: So I, when I perceive how wearisome and unprofitable it would be
to ransack to the bottom this heap of trumpery, think it better, rather then
to remove all this baggage, in^tead of water to put her to it, which happily
might make some speedy riddance or such stuff^ and thus much for this Dialogue.

A Survey of the Seventh Dialogue.
In this Dialogue of common experience, Whether Actual Possession of Spirits
may b^ or no, I expected some proo^e that the possessions mentioned by
Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and so till our own times, were all but
counterfeyt, and therefore no reason to think any other of Som^ers at
Nottingham. But as Apothecaryes boxes carry titles of A^^oes, Styrax, Benjoin,
and within have nothing but black lead, copporas, Ockar, and such trash: so
here we have a title of common experienc^, without any experience at all, not
any one approved example once sifted and convicted. Yet to examine such as you
bring: First you will prove Actual Possession cannot be, because as great or
greater works are done by nature, Art, page: 202.
and Sickness. Surely this cannon makes a foul battery, not only
overthrowing this possession at N^ttingham, but all other elsewhere in the
world, yea those that are mentioned in the scripture. It behooues us therefore
to fortefy what we can against so dangerous a shot, or else all is like to go
to ruin. What then are the works of nature? Diverse are reckoned out of Pliny,
Strabo, and others, whereby you would conclude, that if the boy at Ma^gnitton
had breathed out flames of fire, it had been no work of actual possession,
because Aetna does so: If he had been able to draw iron unto him, in so much
that if your selves had come in place, because your faces are of this metal
you should have sowled foreheads with him: yet this had been no wonder, because
the Magnes does so: If by his embracing one A. Walk^r he should so violently
have detayned him, that he could not possibly make one step forward toward
Ireland, this had been no marvel at all, because the little fish Ech^cis is
able to stay a ship of great burden never so fleet under sail. Why, you
Discoursers, things are not marvelous, except to the ignorant, when they work
according to kind: but when they go beyond their natural abillity, though
the actions be not comparable to others in nature, they are wonderful. It is
no strange thing for the Sun to lighten the whole opposite face of the earth,
and yet if Moses face shine, the people are afraid. page 205: Aug (...) ^^ui.
(...) 24, ca ^3
You remember out of Augustine other works of nature very strange done by men.
But what of them I pray you? Were Summers actions also natural? Natural
actions show themselves from the cradle, to the grave: whereas Summers before
the time of his first vexation by Satan could never do any of the^. But you
will say, that which is done naturally by one, by art and practice may be done
by an other. It would be hard for you to prove that those works which
Augustine mentions, could be imitated by any art. though I confess strange
things may be done by cosening and practice, Eusebius: de pr. Euang. lib. 4: caP:
1 Chry. ad popul: Antioch. hom: 20
as Eusebius and Chrysostom do both teach: notwithstanding they both
acknowledge Actual possession, which easily may be discerned from artificial
workinges. for in these be teachers, long exercise, some end of glory or gain,
with diverse other circumstances, whereas the possessed respect neither profit
nor credit, but fall into strange passions in a moment without schoolemaisters,
or any former exercise. The Pharisees were wiser then to use this silly shift to
discredit our Savior his miracles by: which was ready at hand, if it had been
of any force. Further say you, stanger actions often arise from mere natural
diseases. page, 206.
It is true, but because you show not these things in Summers to have proceeded
from natural disease, you abuse your Reader with idle words. It might be
apparent to you they came not from disease, for that he was delivered from his
vexation in a moment, without any ordinary means of physic, as likewise
Darling of Burton was, and the seven in Lancashire. Moreover, if their strange
effects came from some natural disease, then did they not counterfeyt. If they
counterfeited, then had they no disease, but were in good health I trust.
Reconcile these together I pray you: and if you will contend still for
counterfeiting, give over your prating of natural diseases for shame.

Secondly you reason from the natural power of the Devil, that he cannot
effect such things as are reported to be done by Summers, and therefore there
was no actual possession. And wherefore could he not effect such things?
page, 208,
Because say you the devil cannot do works impossible in nature. Here we
must demand of you what you mean by works impossible in nature: whether
impossible to the nature of a devil, and nature generally, or impossible to
the nature of the man, in whom he works. In the former sense, we know the
Devil has a restraint: Mark 5, 4
in the second, he may enable a man to break chains, which by his own
natural strength he cannot possibly do, and that is as impossible to be done
by man, as any of the things we report by Summers. Now whether of these two
meanings do you follow? forsooth both: In the Mayor the first, and in the
Minor the second. Therefore I answer you, because you shoot in a bow with two
strings, I will stand out of your way, as most perrilous archers, able to kill
the man in the moon. Again, say you, in all sound Divinity there is an
impossibillity of such actions, because the Devil is no Creat^r of substances,
no transf^rm^r of natures, no worker of miracles. If you would have
distinguished your terms, and then have spent some words to make plain,
that in these actions there was such a creati^n, such a transformation, such a
miraculous working, as could not be incident to the power of the devil, I
would have shaped you an answer if I could: but because you make a confused
noise, as if you were ringing of bees, you shall swarm them upon what bough
you will for all me. Nay but say you, if the devil did such things once; page
209.
he can d^e them again. It may be he can, and would too, if he were at any
man's command like an ape to show tricks. It may be also that sometimes he does
them, though all the world hear not thereof. That which you bring of his being
too weak an Agent, page: 210
for that he is not Omnipote^t, as if an Omnipotency were required in these
actions, is miserable beggary, still craving that which will not be granted
you. If you will not be answered, you would like importunate beggars be set in
the stocks. page: 211
Touching the apt^esse you deny to be in the yo^g man at Mahgnitton to those
supernatural actions, I answer, There is little aptness in a stone, or in a
man to fly aloft in the ^er, yet violence does make them do that, unto which
they be not naturally fit. But what are those actions which could not and have
not been wrought by spirits in men's bodies? Have you forgotten how you would
make us believe, that greater works then any was done in Summers, are usually
done by nature, by art, by sickness? Are men's bodies not capable of such works
of Satan, as practice, disease, or nature effects in them? For your
application of matter and form we have spoken sufficiently in the question of
assuming bodies. Surely your faculty in logic is exceeding great, which
contrary to the judgment of sense in proper objects, and other things requisite
rightly disposed, will force reason to a Non plus. O that you had lived in
those days, when they disputed whether Snow is white. No doubt by your good
help the Academicks had prevailed, page, 211. and 212.
whatsoever sense says. But still you urge the matter further by Divinity,
Philosophy, Physic, Law, Conscience. If Divinity the Mistres condemn these
actions, you might well have spared the other five her handmaides. But you are
like new wine tunned up in vessels, you must either vent, or burst. What then
says Divinity? working of miracles is ceased long since: But the things
wrought in Summers by the devil were miracles, or else you say untruly. If you
be such unreasonable beggars, that no answer will serve you, you would be
cudgelled from the door. For the handmaids I will not talk with them: their
Mistress has received answer for all. Lastly to avoid needelesse speech, I
will not grant you, neither shall you ever be able to wri^g from me, That
devils can bring to pass such things at their pleasure, o^ if they wrought
these actions in Summers, page, 213,
that therefore they can stop the ordinary course of all other natural
actions, and ordinances appointed by God. You were sick of a fever, when you
tied these consequences together. The Devils power is a limyted power. He can
not touch one hair of our heads further then his commission serves him. Thus
much for the devils power.

page: 214.
Thirdly you reason from the distribution of actions, and causes of right
judgment. If (say you) these actions in Summers were true actions, then were
they either natural, or not natural: and then either against nature, or
besides nature, or above nature, to be discerned also by some rule of truth,
which either nature affords (by inbred principles Theoricall, and practical,
or got by experience of sense, of History, of Induction, or of our own Trial)
or else at least is supernaturally given us: but none of all these were to be
seen in Summers actions, and therefore no true actions. I answer, there was to
be seen in him Actions against nature, as when he went about to hang himself,
though you fondly imagine it was no such action, because it was not effected:
there were actions in him besides nature, when his face and mouth were
monstrously distorted, one lip toward one ear, and the other toward the
other: there were actions above nature, in his strength, in his knowledge, in
his sundry passions, as of a lump about as big as an egg moving along his
leg, belly, throat, and other parts so that this portion of your proof is
patched up altogether with untruths. Now for your rule of judgment, page 21^.
you affirm, these actions of Summers couldnot be judged by any Theoricall and
Practical principles. Your reason is, because Theoricall and Practical
principles be only natural, and Summers actions were supernatural. Surely this
might be the reason also of mere Naturalls. As if Rectum is not Iudex sui et
obliqui. If natural principles judge what is according to nature, the same
principles shall also judge what is above nature. Do you think heathen
Philosophers were not able to discern what work was supernatural? Was
Aristotle a fool in writing Metaphisicks? But what of Experience? It is not
universal (say you) because diverse amongst you where the thing was done, page,
2^0.
did not acknowledge such experimented trials of an actual possession. Indeed
the Pharisees if it could have been brought to pass, by no means would have
had the blind man's eyes opened by our Savior Christ. And in Nottingham it was
apparent that Papisme, profane life, and anger for having some of their
friends touched, caused some to oppose themselves. Then for the several
degrees of experience, It could not (say you) be determined by sense, because
the obiests of sense were deceaueable. I answer, you say untruly: The objects
of sense were true objects. For sense apprehends but the outward appearance,
which semblance is true, though the inward substance be not that, which outward
likeness shows to be. Has not the Lord set his bow in the clouds, though
it be but an appearance only to sense through the repercussion of the sun
beams, in a subject fitly disposed, and that there is no such thing existing
really indeed. Do not spirits appear to men, though the bodies they seem to
have, often be no true bodies, but only carry the similitude and image of them?
your other parts of experience be idle, for History and Induction could have
no place in one present Individuum, and Trial which consists in proof of
action, might happily be in Summers himself, but not in the behoulders. These
actions then have store of natural proof, howsoever your eyes dimmed through
envy or covetousness and desire of preferment, cannot behold it.

After you come to your Supernatural rule, from whence you would conclude,
There is at this day no actual possession, page. 223. Acts: 20.27.
because S. Paul having showed the Ephesians the whole counsel of God, gives
neither Canon nor Counsel of Actual Possessions. It is untrue that you say.
For as in visiting of the sick, and diverse other such christian duties, there
is nothing expressly set down, but is only to be gathered by implication and
sound deduction, so likewise in this of p^ssession: Concerning which he has
generally admonished us, Ephe. 6:11
To put on the whole armor of God. In which words be comprehends all
vexation of Satan whatsoever, and shows also in the words following the
remedy. Except you can make good unto us, that possession is none of the
Engines to overthrow man withal. Whereas you require some precept of this
matter to Timotheus and Titus, you are to understand that the ordinary gift is
not peculiar to the Minister, but common to all believers. And therefore no
marvel if there be no special precept of this, more then of visiting the
sick, redeming captives, releeuing decayed persons, and such like: in which
duties all Christians have interest, and not only the Ministers. Again you
say, that if perpetuity of Actual possession be either expressly, or
implicatiuely contained in the word, then also the miraculrous faith is either
expressly or implicatiuely contained in the word: page, 225:
which is stark false, as you and your fellows have been told an hundred
times, considering miraculous faith is not necessarily required for
dispossession, as (God willing) shall be showed more at ^arge in the ninth
dialogue. Thus then have these men reasoned against experience, and have
afforded us three general arguments to disprove all Possessions by, and as
well all as that of Nottingham.

But seeing they have talked to no purpose of Experience, I will in one word
commend to the Christian Reader these Experiences following, doctrine page 28.
Inter Ep. Cypria. Ep: 75
beesides those mentioned in the Doctrine, for his better satisfaction in this
point. And first of the possessed woman of who^e Firmitianus does treat at
large in his Epistle to Cyprian: an example out of the compass of that time,
wherewith these Discoursers would bound all Actual possession. But what nee^e I
stand upon former times? If possession be apparent in these our days, it must
needs be that neither has it ceased in ages past. To come then to our own
times, and with one bush to stop two gapp^* Examples we have In our own
country, aa in Margaret H rrison of Burnham Vlpe within the county of Norfolk,
in Kath. Wright, in M. Throckmortons children Th. Darling of Burton, the ^eauen
in Lancashire, I^ne I^rden the servant of Simon Fox of Shadbrook in Suffolk,
whose cause was heard before the Right Ho: the L. Chief Justice of England at
S. Edmonde bury the 12. of July 1599. Ioane Nayler as was proved before the
Right Ho: the L. Anderson Novem. 30 the same year. Susan B^yton of Saffron
Walden in Essex, as is plain by the evidence given against Alice Bentley at
the Quarter Sessions holden at the aforesaid Walden the 13. day of April 1602.
which Susan was lately dispossessed, the means being ved which God has to
that end appointed. Also in Tho. Harison of North Wych in Ches shire, and in
Clemens Charles a maid of Woolroytch commonly called Wullage in Kent: both
which be at this present very grievously vexed by Satan, so as he that will may
be an eye witness thereof. Gallobelg. lib: 11:
Out of our own country, as at Spandaw a town six miles from Brandenburgh
in Germany in the ^eare (as I take it) 1594. the devil did walk visibly, and
possessed more then twenty men, uexing them in miserable sort. Yea he scattered
in the public streets money, boxes, gold and silver buttons, and such like:
and he that gathered any of these things was presently vexed by the devil.
Whereupon it was forbidden both in the schools and churches, that none should
take up any such scattered things. The like were done by wicked spirits at
Berlin in the same Marqueship of Brandenburgh: And at Fridberge a town of the
new Marchia, there were more then an hundredth and fifty men, of either lex,
condition, and age, which were possessed with wicked spirits. These things are
testified by D. James Coler Provost in Berlin, and M. Robert Coler, and M.
James Pret^r Pastors of the Church in Spandavia. To whose Narration Balthazar
Westphalus, and John Muller Consuls of Spandaw have subscribed. de Abdit: ^er:
cause. lib: 2 ca. 16:
John Fernelius aman worthy to be credited for his famous learning, place, and
deserved authority, throughout all Christendom: reports of two possessed,
one taken in the night, when as by occasion of immoderate thirst he rising out
of his sleep, and finding no drink, bit of an apple that he hit on by chance,
wherewit^ presently he perceived his jaws to be shut, and as it were strangled
with ones hand, and with all, he being now possessed of a devil entering into
him, did seem to behold himself in the dark to be devoured by a mighty black
dog which things says he, afterward when he was restored to his perfect
mind, he reported to us in order. The other was a Knight his son, taken in
such sort, that sometimes his left arm, sometimes his right, sometimes one
finger, one whiles one thigh, one other^hile both, sometimes the whole body was
grievously vexed: which torment passed with so great swiftnes, and shaked him so
vehement ^, that hardl^ four servants could hold him in his bed. The most
skillful physicians judged it a conuulsion, having next affinity with the
Epileps^, and so accordingly directed their practice, but without an^ success
at all. The reason was (says he) for that we were all deceived in the true
judgment of the Cause. For in the third month a wicked spirit was found to be
the author of all the evil, bewraying himself by a voice, and unwonted words
and sentences both Latin and Greek, although the sick party was ignorant of
the Greek tongue. He discovered many secrets of them that sat b^, and
especially of the Physicians, laughing that he had deceived them in a matter of
so great perrill, and that they had almost killed that poor body with their
unprofitable medecynes. These examples alleged give us evident proof of
possessions in these days. Now let the Reader choose whether he will believe
these testimonies and experiences, or the unsavory and unlearned disputations
of these Discoursers.

page: 22.^.
Hitherto of Possession, now they turn themselves to Obsession, unskillfully
opposed, as has been partly showed, to Possession. For they which treat of
these matters use these words indifferently. Cyprian says, And by the
torments of words they are cast forth of Obsessed bodies. So Fernelius in the
place before cited, And withal he being now obsessed by the devil entering into
him. Cyprr. ad Demetri. De oper. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Likewise Zanchius (as before we hear) speaking of devils substantially
entering into bodies, calls it by the name of being Obsessed by devils. And
indeed Obsidere does not only signify to beseige, and to compass about, but
also Tene^e, Occupare, Opprimere, to Hold, Poss^sse, and Oppress^, as when
Tully says, Cum is qui audit ab Oratore jam obsessus est ac tenetur: When the
bearer is now p^ss^ssed and held by the Orator. And it seems that writers
rather use the word Obsessed then Possessed partly for comfort of the
afflicted, teaching them they are not absolutely in the devils power, howsoever
he thus furiously rages in their bodies, but rather that he now seeks to
vanquish them, then that without all hope they be vanquished already: partly
also for the better sound. These Discoursers in a private understanding make
Obs^ssion nothing else but an outward assault of Satan, which only power they
leave unto him now. And where it is objected, This does open a door to
Athiesme, they return this imputation very wisely upon the doctrine of
possession: as if to teach both inward and outward vexation were a doctrine of
more security, then theirs of outward temptation only. It had wont to be an
old said saw in Geomitry, the part is l^sse then the whole: but these men will
refine all Arts, and teach us a new, That the part is more then the whole.
And so let this memorable Axiom shut up this dialogue.

A Survey of the Eight Dialogue.
Having bewrayed your great ignorance concerning the power of Satan, you come
to talk how this power is to be subdued: wherein you show your selves as
blind, if not also obstinate and perverse, as you have in that already passed.
Much lavish speech is in the beginning, wherewith I will neither trouble my
self, nor the Reader. Only we may noate by the way, page 234.
how untruly you require for the subduing of astuall possession an
extraordinary power: concerning which we shall see in that which follows.
Then you fling out, as your custom is, against the work at Nottingham,
because (say you) Crying aloud, rending sore, page, 24^.
and leaving as dead be made undoubted true signs of that dispossession:
whereas the same things are seen in Mania, (and sometimes a Mania without them
as in your selves) in Phrensies, in the Mother, in Convulsions etc. I answer, I
neither make these the only, nor the necessary signs of dispossession: for I
know diverse have been wrought without them: but I frame my reason thus. Where
these signs be, and a present deliverance does follow from those and former
vexations by Satan, upon the request of God his people, that there is a
disposs ssion. I confess these signs particulerly may be in diverse diseases,
but they are not from the devil: neither is there a present restoring of the
parties diseased in natural sickness upon the using of earnest prayer.

Those means for dispossession which you stand upon, page, 244 et^.
I allow not. They be not Rings, Roots, nor Herbs, that be of any avail in
this work. Neither do we urge the fishes liver nor David's harp, nor the
music wherewith Elishas spirit was calmed: and therefore all this as
supe^fluous talk, nothing perteyninge to this cause I omit. But we cleave
only to God his own ordinance of prayer, helped forward by the Exercise of
fasting, which according to his gracious promise and mercy we have proved to be
effectual. Against which, before you encounter with your full strength, you
sport your selves with a profane scoffing in the end of this dialogue. in
page, 26^.
And first, you will needs wring from me whether I will or no, that the work
done at Nottingham, was done only by fasting. You are able to wring Hercules
his club out of his fist. You have proved your selves such exceeding sharp
Logicians in the former Discourses, that I stand in great fear of you: yet now
I must endure the brunt of it, come what will. Go to then, bring forth your
wringer. This then is it, That which made the prayer more forcible, and the
spirit more apt, page 257. 258
was the only efficient cause of the supposed action: But your fasting made
your prayer more forcible etc. and therefore was the efficient cause of the
action. This is a wringer indeed. If Cardane were alive he would register this
Practical Theoreme in the book of his Subtiltyes. What a profit would this
proposition well understood, bring to many artificers? It would ease them of
great expense in providing many tools. The Carpenter might spare his axe and
chisels, and go to fell timber, square loggs, and do his other works with
his only whetstone. For that which makes the axe and chisell more forcible is
the only efficient of the work. And so by this unanswerable reason I am made
a Montanist, a Papist, page, 257: and^
and one that makes fasting a sufficient means in it self, for suppressing of
all suggested actual sins whatsoever: which opinion though I am far from,
yet if you will follow my counsel M. Deacon, for some things that I know, you
should fast more then you do. page 259,
Again you are instant to know, If prayer be a means, in what order of means
I would place it. Not in that sure which you foolishly fancy to your selves,
For what child would esteem of prayer as a mere natural action? page, 260
But this is suitable to your other blind ignorances. Further you argue, that
prayer can be no means, whether we respect the Sound, the Voice, or the
words: wherein you show your selves no less void of piety, then you have been
hither to of wit and learning. Can you not be content to reproach me, but you
must needs open your movthes against the holy worship of God? Can you find no
other causes wherefore prayer should be effectual, but only for a noise that
is made, or for some distinct voice, or else for certain charming words? In
which of these respects consists the power of ordinary prayer? you must
needs answer, It consists in none of them: Conclude then, that ordinary
prayer is but lip labor. Your audatiousnes is in tolerable: In this 260. page
you carry your selves more like Athiests, then Preachers. It is a sha^e your
book was not better examined before it was allowed to the press. But thus
having brandished your sword about your ears, you make an end of this foolish
talk, and prepare your selves to other as good.

A Survey of the Ninth Dialogue.
This Dialogue aims at two points, That Prayer and fasting be not established
by Christ, page: 263
as a perpetual ordinary means for powerful expelling of devils: That
Justifying faith apprehending some supernatural power of God, does not effect
that work. For the first, the Reader must take heed, he understand not prayer
and fasting, as I mean it, and we all usually do, for an effectual
ordinance of God to quicken faith by, which is our only apprehender of God
his mercies, in these and all other actions, but for a bare and mere naked
performance of these works of Fasting and Prayer: For so these Trifelers
expound themselves, page: 292.
some fifteen leaves after.

Which disputation might have had some use against Papists, that maintain
their Opus operatum, an efficacy of the work done, for the only works sake:
but in what stead can it serve against me? It may be they intended it against
Papists, these Discoursers propounding to themselves the general doctrine of
Spirits: but neither do their arguments press them at all, and besides they
apply their who^e cou^^e of speech against that done at Nottingham. So then
they dispute against me in word, but not indeed, thereby laboring to deceive
the Reader, not able, as they thought, to di tinguish between these two. If
you had meant plainly, you would have showed in what sense you had dealt in this
place: but it was shame^ull to express it, for so you should have appeared to
all worthy to be hissed at. And therefore you deferd your explication til some
thirty pages after, where no man would look for it, that in the mean sea son
you might seem to be talking, and yet at last have a runninge knot on your
iugling stick to pray fast and loo^e with at your pleasure. Should any man
bestow time against persons of such perverse trade, that are corrupted in their
minds, 1 Timothy 6.5
and are deprived of the truth? I assure thee good Reader, every line seems a
page unto me, yet least thou should be deceived by these Hu^sters dealing, I
put my self to these pains. Well then to com^ to the first point, If you can
say any thing, wherefore fasti^g a d prayer accompa^yed with ^r^e t stifying
faith is not a perpetual means ordained by Christ for expelling ^f devils let
us hear what it is.

There is no commaundment (ay you) or cannon any where exsta^t in all the
Scriptures for the appr^bation of it. page. 264.


Because it seems you have been seeking and can find none, I will show you
some. Our Savior teaching us to pray, And lead v^ not into temptation but
d^liuer us fr m evil, does therein teach us to pray against actual possession.
It was an evil you confess, where with many in his time and after were
troubled. Neither may we think the form given by our ^auiour, is any thing
defective, as if some part of our necessity were omitted. If then prayer be a
means to defend and preserve from a^tuall possession, it is also a means to
deliver from the ^ame, if at any time we be overtaken with it.

And seeing also possession is still remaining in the church, as has been
proved b^ unanswerable arguments, it must needs be also, the remedy of prayer
is still remaining, and warranted from hence. Again, Math. 17.21.
This k^nde goes ^ot forth (says he) but by fasting and prayer To this place
you answer, That our Savior only makes known the impediment in that action,
but puts down no commandment. page 264:
And here you condemn me of gross ignorance that could not see this. I
contrari^ise admire your superaboundant skill, that is able to make two things
iustle out one an other without any opposition. I pray your great learning
teach me (for of my self I can not conceive) How the presence of that thing
should not be a means, an help, a furtherance, the absence whereof is a let,
an hindrance, an impediment. Or how a defect can be reproved, but that a supply
of the same defect should withal be commanded. And how an evil can be
perpetual, as I have showed a^tuall possession is, and that the remedy should
not also be perpetual, considering the Lord is mor ample in mercy toward us,
then in justice. Beesides, if neither we are to have an^ use of fasting and
prayer in the^e a tions, nor the Apostles ever vse^ them in casting out devils
(at least we never read that they did) how might the Church reap profit of
this instruction? Did our Savior give precepts, that were vain and
superfluous? Or was this instru^^ion proper to that one a^tion and never to
come in use afterwar^s; I beseech you make not dainty of your skill, but
lighten my ignorance in these points.

page 265
Moreover, whereas you require some testimony for this ordinance in Paul his
epistles, and for want of such do thereupon concl^de that there is no such
ordinance. I answer, it is not necessary we should prove this ordinance out of
the epistles of S. Paul. May not warrant for it out of the gospel suffice? And
cannons and rul^s thence for our direction therein? If you can prove that all
the ordinances of God whatsoever, be contained in Paul's epistles: I will
either from thence prove this ordinance, or confess that there is no such
ordinance. Yet notwithstanding know ye, that where the Apostle speaking of the
complete armor of Christians against the devil, requires that we pray with
all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit, Ephe. 6:18.
that from thence this ordinance has confirmation. Let this then be a third
place. And where you add that the Ap^stle in the epistles to Timothy and Titus
handles at large all Church offices and officers, I have already showed that
expelling of devils is no peculyar duty of any Church officer: and therefore
you have no reason to look for this precept amongst the aduertisements of
their charge.

Again you object S. Peter that laying op^n the perpetual va^aries of Satan
to kill and devour, he makes n^ mention of prayer and fasting, but only of a
strong faith. I answer, The reason of this was, because S. Peter was not aware
of that variance between faith and prayer, which your Eagle eyes have espied:
who as it seems can have a faith without prayer, and prayer without faith. He
thought symply as he had learned, that where ^e spoke of faith, men would also
have understood all the helps and furtherances of faith, and not by the name
of faith destroy whatsoever might give maintenance to it. But because you stand
so strictly upon the word prayer, take this for a fourth place, Is any among
you affl^cted? let him pray. Shall we think that possession is no affliction?
James 5, 13
Or that in this affliction only we are barred from prayer? Or if we do pray,
that it shall be to no effect. Now then you may see, that you casting your net,
and for all your dragginge findinge nothing in all the canonical scripture for
this ordinance, it was not for want of stoare, whereof I have given you but a
taste that you drew up empty to land, but because you had so man^ floters in the
top, and wanted lead to sink it a convenient depth.

Whereas therefore you challenge me for proofs of this institution, these
places may suffice for authority of scriptures. And might not those testimonies
of antiquity, and of present pra^tise with the godly now a^aies content you,
which I have alleged in the Doctrine, but that you must blazon me for a Braver
in words, page, 265,
which neither had brought any thing to purpose, nor possibly could bring Say
you^ w^ wonder y^u blush not to brave out the matter, by pretending the
authority of Scriptures, the testimony of fathers old and n^w, the practice of
the church, and the good success thereof, to manage the matter it self. I
beesech thee good Reader let me by thy patience remember some part of that
already set down in the Doctrine, page: 55.
whereby thou may better behold these men's dishonest dealings, and whether I
merely pretend these things as they tell thee. First therefore I have cited
Origin, speaking to this effect: Orig. in mat. 17, 21. Tertul. in apolog: and
ad Scapul. cap: 3. Cyp^ian ad Demetri. Chrysostom: tom 50. de incompre. Dei
natura homil 3.
If at any time we shall deal about the curing of the p^ss^ssed, we
(continuing in prayer and fasting) may obtain help from God for them: and
shall drive forth the wicked spirit by fasting and prayer. Next Tertullian, who
says, We expel devils out of men, as is known to many. Then Cyprian, saying,
devils are b^ us cast out of bodies possessed. Fourthly Chrysostom, out of
whose testimony there cited at large, these words be part: So the fathers have
appointed, that men vex^d by the devil should be brought forth, that the
people and all the city being present, public prayers might be made for
them, that all with one accord might entreat the Lord in their behalf, and
might striu^ with strong cry, that the Lord would have mercy upon them etc
Fifthly Peter Martyr, concerning men possessed, using these words We will use
for them faithful prayer^, I say, Peter Matter p^^t 4, cap. 9: sect 13.
chemnis de sacra ordini^
prayers most vehement, and supplications for their recovery: In a w rd, this
should be the m st laud^ble and wise course, that exorcismes at this day be
turned into prayers. Sixthly, Chemnisius, who says, That in the tim^ of
Chrysostom and Prosper the possessed were brought into the Church, and were
often delivered by the common supplications of the assembly. Seauenthly, Philip
Melancthon making mention of diverse which were possessed, and namely of a
damsel in Mantua, Phil. Melanct lib. epistol
that had been healed of that disease by the prayers of the godly, of whom he
says, Et adhuc viuite sana, and yet she lives and continues sound: which was
17. years after the cu^e Using further these words, Neither indeed do I
doubt but that evil may be taken away, and the devils expelled by the prayer of
the godly. And a few lines after, I know many examples a herein it is certain
the prayers of the godly prevailed. Beza homil. 26, In histor. pass edit 2.
page 656.
Eighthly Theod. Beza, writing thus, I know a certain houshoulder in France
endued with the kn^wledg of the gospel, and which had embraced the same: who
when in anger he had given one of his children to the diu^l, ha^ his son^e
presently p^ssessed of the devil: Vogell in the^aur then log. ^ag. 980
out of whom after he was cast by the fervent and incessant prayers of the
church. Nynthly Vogellius affirming that for casting out of devils, there is
not a better and more godly way at this day, then that Christ sitting at the
r^ght hand of the father, be called v^on, not only by the kinsfolk of the
poss^ssed, but also of the wh^le church, with a fervent heart and be put in
mind of his omnipotency and mercy, whereby only at this day, the unclean
spirits are cast forth ^enthly Danaeus saying, w^erefore by fasting and prayer
(which he that prays does) d^uels may be cast forth that is: Dan^quest 38 in
Marc.
with the long, continual, and fervent prayers of the posessed man, Chass in
loc, com, lib. 1 cap. 17
and also the church, as are th^se which are joined with ^asting etc. Lastly
Chassanion auouching thus, This only remedy remains to us, whereby we ought
to help these ki^de of me (viz. possess^d) worthy of commiseration, to wit
that with fervent prayers we ^ray for their deliueranc^. S^ I heard that a
D^m^niack was delivered in a certain town within the Dolphyns province. These
testimonies have I alleged in the Doctrine: and unto t^ese can adioyne more.
But to what purpose, these remaining unanswered? Now then you Di^coursers,
whereas I affirmed, that both the ancient Doctors, and the lights of our own
time did witness with me in this po^nt, was this nothing but a Thrasonicall
vaunt, as you term it? Or hug^ bravi^g barrels, that would n^uer be set on
broach? and proofs that did hae^ere in calam^, cleave so clo^e to the pen,
that they could pr^cure no public passage? page, 166:
Are most plain and evident testimonies of truth to be shifted of in this
manner? you are like the malefa^tors which knowing themselves sure to be cast
by the Jury, refuse the ordinarye trial by God and the country, and will be
tried by no other means but by God and the Queen: So you in a desperate case
would gain some time and daily of the verdict ready to condemn you, by
requiring some other course, which you think is not present.

To the end therefore your notorious impudency may be had in remembrance, let
there be a public instrument drawn to this effect.

Be it known unto all men by these presents, that John Deacon and John Walker,
unworthily reputed Ministers, having had the c^eare evidence of truth passed
against them, and being neither able to answer one word, nor enduring to submit
themselves thereunto, as they ought, are two shameless beasts, which with
branded consciences, and whorish forheades, have soulde them selves to face out
a lie, to deceive the simple with. In witness whereof all the learned of this
land, which shall consider the allegations against you, and your paltry
answers, will in consent of minds subscribe to these presents, that they are
true. Let this then suffice for the proof of that I have brought, and so I
will proceed to examine yours.

You cite M. Calvin against actual fasting alone, page: 226
as an effectual counterpoyson for the expelling of Satan, as it is
mainteyned by the Papists. What is this to me you Discoursers? Have I any where
said it, or showed it by practice, that the very work of fasting and prayer
without faith is sufficient in this business? Or does M. Calvin speak against
fasting and prayer being joined with faith? What impudent men are these that
dare offer such a thing so palpable to the view of the world? The hare is near
driven that is feign for refuge to run between the hunters legs, and your case
is desperate, that seeks releife at such a testimony. Then you cite M.
Bullinger as if he also should say, that prayer and fasting is not here
prescribed as a perpetual canon. I grant as M. Bullinger understands it,
that is, It is not prescribed as a perpetual cannon to exorcists. Our savior
does not here instistute a new office in the Church, but this makes nothing
against the common duty of christians, that they in their assemblies whether
greater or less, should use prayer and fasting in this behalf. So likewise D.
Fulke is to be understood, Rhem. t^^^. Math. 17.11.
out of whom you cannot show one syllable against these holy exercises of the
congregation, but as they are appropriated to the persons of Exorcists.

After this dispute you fall a jangling against me, condemning me as a busy
b^die for intermedling in this action at Nottingham. page, 26^.
But you might understand if malice would let you, that I pressed not into this
business, but was drawn into it. I took upon me no faculty above others,
but was willinge after much entreaty to join with my brethren in so
charitable a work: I disordered no ecclesiastical government of our Church,
but being allowed a Minister of the Gospel, I did no more then my place would
warrant. What mean you then upon this occasion to let fly at Christ his
sacred discipline? See page 270.
Is the disgracing of his ordinance that which must win you your spurs? I know
the shadow of discipline is terrible unto you.

But it were happy for you, if you might taste of her severity, that you might
escape his, which accounts not man's negligence, and his winking at our crimes
for payment. I will not press you further this way. The Lord give you hearts of
flesh, that the works of flesh being destroyed in you, your souls and bodies
may be safe in the day of his judgment.

Whereas you cavil against prayer and fasting, that it is no means to expel
Satan, page 271
because the effect does not presently follow: what ignorance or proud
presumption is this, when the Lord himself prays, Not my will, but thine be
done, the servant should absolutely and presently exact the thing he craves,
without respect of the lord his pleasure at all? When thou ask (says Basil)
that which is meet to ask at the Lord his hands, de vita solit. cap. 2
cease not till thou have received it: perhaps for that cause be gives thee not
presently, that he may teach thee perseverance, and that thou may learn what
the gift of God is, and when it is given thee thou may keep it with fear.
Hither to goes the proof of the first general argument against prayer and
fasting.

The second is, That prayer and fasting have no power proceedinge from them,
page, 274:
as prayer is either vocal, or personal, and that whether we respect the
natural gift, or supernatural, this being also either principal or
isntrumental, and therefore prayer and fasting have no power at all. For
proof of the assumption we have a long discourse of six or seven leaves to no
purpose, but only to spend time, of the cause of miraculous operations, a
thing known to all, but entered into Divinity, and I thank the lord not
doubted of by me. To let go therefore all your needelesse talk, I answer
briefly, that the power proceeding from our prayers was personal, (if you take
personal as you ought, and as learned men do for an acceptance of our
persons, and not for the principal inherency of this power in our persons) not
of my self only, but of all his faithful people then assembled together,
accepted by god the father in the person of Jesus Christ. Secondly that this
personal power was supernatural, depending only upon god his institution,
and promise made to prayer, not upon any natural efficacy whatsoever. Thirdly
that this power was isntrumental, not principal. Fourthly that you most
absurdly conclude of the premises. That because this power is instrumental,
therefore it is not personal: which both may stand together, and do in all the
children of god. But if you will take personal according to a peculiar fancy
of your own brain, for a primary being of this power in our persons, then is
your first distribution childi^h, not comprehending all the kinds of power,
and so what soever is built thereupon not worth a rush. But is not this a
worthy argument think you, which would as well overthrow all efficacy of
prayer whatsoever as that action at Nottingham? Surely you dispute as if you
were Atheists. For admit all power of prayer should be either vocal or
personal, and that it is effectual by neither means, it must needs be it
should have no effect at all. O intolerable impiety

Like stuff it is when you oppose the power of God, and the means, whereas
both usually concur in all actions. You go on, page 288:
and will disprove, that prayer and fasting is not a means of apprehending the
supernatural power of God. But spare your labor: who has affirmed it? I know
no means of apprehending either his power, or other his graces, but only
faith. If you can disprove that this hand lays not hold upon the power of
God, strengthened by his promise, whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, that
he will give unto you, proceed on I pray you. Thus then you say, page 289.
That this promise contains not an absolute warrant for every extraordinary
enterprise: And herein I accord with you, That only those things are asked in
the name of Christ, which are asked according to the will of God, for his sons
sake. But it is according to his will, that in all vexations of Satan we
should call upon him for help in the mediation of his son. Call upon me,
says he, in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee. Psalm. 50, 16,
And our Savior teaches us to pray, But deliver us from evil. Whereupon, if
it had pleased you, you might have easily seen we did nothing in this
business this way, but for which we have apparent warrant from the word. Yea
further, we have the plain words of Christ for confirmation, where he tells
us, page: 291 Math: 17, 21.
That this kind goes not forth but by prayer and fasting. But because these
words are often alleged, and being truly understood, make much for this cause, I
will open the meaning of them, as I now upon more deliberation conceive them.
Something I differ from that which hitherto I have followed, but I take it,
this which I shall now remember, is most agreeable to our Saviors meaning: And
I will never be ashamed to reform my judgment. where I see truth does ouersway
me. Thus then I do interpret them. Whereas the Disciples demanded why they
could not cast forth that devil, Our Savior does answer to this effect:
Because (says he) you are destitute of that faith and confidence which once
you had, Math. 10.
when I sent you forth to preach by two and by two, unto the lost sheep of the
house of Is^ael. At that time I gave you power over unclean spirits to cast
them out, and you proved the authority I gave you not to be in vain: but after
that embassage was ended, as if your commission had expired with that charge,
you now doubted, whether you might exercise the sa^e power sti^l or no and
whether I would be assistant unto you in the like work: James 1.6.7.
by which wavering you could not receive this thing at my hands, but deprived
your selves of that confidence which you should have had in this cause: which
if it had remained firm and stable in you, though in quantity no more then a
grain of mustard leede, there should have been nothing impossible unto you,
and this devil should have gone forth at your first command. This then was
your first error. Secondly you failed in this, that whereas your extraordinary
gift wanted, notwithstanding you set upon this work extraordinarily: whereas
in this case, you should only have betaken your selves to the ordinary course,
which is fasting and prayer: for this kind of devil wherewith the child is
possessed goes forth by no other means then the usual and common way of
humbling your selves, and entreating the same with all earnestnes at the Lords
hands: understanding me of the ordinary means. This interpretation arises
most properly out of the words without any violence: wherein the failing of
faith in the disciples, is an utter defect of miraculous faith: the use of
fasting and prayer is not an help to weak miraculous faith, which now in the
disciples was none at all, but the ordinary means where miraculous faith
fails.

These be the frivolous arguments, whereby you would disprove the efficacy of
Gods ordinance for the castinge forth of Satan by fasting and prayer as the
means of wakening and strengthening of faith, to which the Lord grants all
behouefull requests to his children. Now follows the second part, whether
Iustifyinge faith does effect that work. To which I answer. It does, if you
mea^e, It effects by obteyning. For what shall we not receive by Justifying
faith, so long as it craves nothing: but that is waranted by the word? It is
our faith that overcomes the w^rld, 1 John 5:4 and 2.14. Romans 8:32.
yea by which we overcome that wicked one, that is, the devil. He that spared
not his own son but gave him for us all, how shall he not with him give us
all things also? Does not our Savior ascribe many of his great works he did,
to the parties faith upon whom they were done? Be of good cheer daughter,
(says he) thy faith has saved thee. Math. 9.22
And that we may know this faith receiving his great works, was in some a
justifying faith, to some he said before he did the work, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. Now what do you object against this doctrine? Math. 9.2^
Whereas the words of our Savior All things are possible to him that
believes, make for confirmation thereof: you reply, Mark 9.23 page: 294.
This faith was not the Exorcist faith, but of the parties possess^d. I answer,
we know no such difference, as it some one or two were Exorcists amongst us,
and all the rest of the people of other condition, but the whole congregation
is of one office, and one faith in this business, we be all joint Exorcists,
as I may so say, and by way of obteyning throwers out of Satan. Again you
object, That if iustifyi^g faith has this power, page 295
then it b^longeth indifferently to all the elect of God, which I yealde you.
But then say you, They which cannot effect this work, may doubt of their
justification. I answer, this objection sauors of very gross ignorance. You
should be able to teach others, that the Lord has not tied himself to one
uniform order in bestowing of corporal blessings, as if all his children
should obtain all at all times. He has not definitiuely set down in his
word, what, and when he will give us in this kind, but has only promised
them upon this condition, So far as the good of his children, and his own
glory shall require. Therefore though he grant these outward things to some,
and deny them being requested to other some, this difference is no cause we
should stagger in our justification. Beesides say you, If Justifying faith were
of this force, it would have been mentio^ed in such places where the effects of
says are purposely registered. Prove that all the effects of justifying faith
are there mentioned particulerly and by name, else you trifle. Albeit S. James
says, If we resist the devil ^e shall fly: noting generally our victory
against him, James 4, 7, page 296 etc. Man 16:17:18
not only in his assaults, but also in his possessions Expelling of devils
mentioned in S. Mark, belonged to a miraculous faith which was peculiarly
given to some of the Christians of that age, page ^3 Detection in the epistle;
such as were hearers of the Apostles, and believers by their preachinge: as
heretofore I have showed more then once. And therefore you might have saved
that labor in using so many words, and citing so many testimonies to prove
the Sun shines in a clear heaven at midday.

A Survey of the Tenth Dialogue.
The tenth Dialogue treats of Miracles, and laboreth to overthrow
dispossession of devils in these times, because such dispossession is a
miracle, and miracles be expired long since. In prosecuting of which argument,
it is strange to see how the Discoursers beat themselves with their own rod.
They would prove unto us that miracles are ceased, and yet afford us no small
miracle in their own persons. For is it not wonderful, that men thinking
themselves to have some sharpness of wit, to be furnished with sufficient copy
of words, to have perused many books, and to have gathered great variety of
learning, after some long time spent in deliberation and conference, and then
advisedly committing to writing what they had conceived. Should notwithstanding
all this, like men skarred out of their wits, and utterly bereft of all power
of discerning, take shadows for bodies, bushes for men, chalk for cheese, and
grope in the sun light, as in the darkness. They have showed incredible
blindenes in their former discourses, but in this book of Miracles, it is
Miraculous to behold the palpable errors they run into. It may be they did
of purpose herein observe a decorum, that the strange handling of the matter,
might be suitable to the title. But that I do not seem to charge them
wrongfully, I will betake my self to the Survey, first for more plainness
setting down the truth in this point, and after rifle up their pedlers pack of
devices.

A true miracle therefore briefly may be defined thus, That it is an hard and
vn-vsuall work, surpassing all faculty of created nature, done by the devine
power to that end, it may move the behoulders with admiration, and confirm
their faith in the word of God. These true Miracles be of two sorts, for
either they be wrought by the Lord himself without any apparent means to us,
or else are effected by the ministry of man. Of the former kind was the bush
that burned, Exodus: 3.2. Exodus, 13, 21. 2 Kings 19.35:
and consumed not in the sight of Moses: the pyllar of a cloud by day, and the
pyllar of fire by night conducting the children of Israel out of Aegipt: the
slaughter in Senacheribs host of an hundred fourscore and five thousand in one
night: the star that directed the wise men out of the East, Math. 2 2:
to the place of our Saviors birth, and such like. Concerning miracles of this
nature, if one shall demand whether they be ceased or no, it is to be
answered, they are not. For the Lord has reserved this liberty to himself,
by extraordinary power to reveal his judgments to the world, when and where it
shall seem best unto him. And therefore our Savior speakinge of his coming
says, There shall be signs in the sun, and in the Moon, Luke, 21, 25, 26.
and in the stars, and the power of heaven shall be shaken. Shall we think
these are no miracles? or that they be past, and not to come? Experience also
confirms the same. It were infi^nite to gather what has happened in all ages
since the publishing of the Gospel. I will remember only one or two for
example in our own times. Was it not the admiration of all Christendom to
behold that bright and clear new star which appeared in the year 1572,
continuing almost six months? But to come to our own home, was it not a
great miracle that at a place called Kynnastone near Marcleech hill in the
county of Heref rd certain rookes with a piece of ground of twenty six acres,
removed and went forward the space of four days, removing forty paces in
twelve hours, and carrying great trees and sheep coats, some with threescore
sheep in them, overthrowing Kennastone chapel, altering two high ways nigh
an hundred yardes, and where tillage ground was, leaving pasture, and where
pasture, there tillage? yet all this was seen amongst us the 17. of Feb. in
the year 1571. Therefore to speak in confused terms that miracles are ceased
without distinction of their nature, is the part of ignorante men, and of such
as neither would find out the truth, nor teach it: but only deceive themselves
and other with general words.

That second sort of miracles, which is done by the ministry of men, are all
of them wrought by a miraculous faith, apprehending the extraordinary revealed
will of God concerning some strange work, what, when and how it is to be
performed. All which Peter Martyr distinguishes by their natures, by their
effects, loc. com, clas: 1: cap: 8, sect, 4:
and by the special manner how they are done. By their natures, for that some
of them are admirable for the very thing done, being so strange and great as
the like is not to be found in all nature. Such was the staying of the Sun in
the time of Joshua, and the turning back of the shadow to confirm Ezekiah, and
such others. Some are not marvelous for the greatness of the thing done, but
for the manner used in doing, as was the cloud and rain of Elyas, the
thundering of Samuel, and of the like sort. For such things are done
naturally, but at that time were miracles in regard of the manner by which they
were effected, that is, not by natural causes, but at the command and will of
the Saints. In respect of the effects, some only cause admiration and fear,
as the burning lamps and thunders in mount Sinai etc. some have a deeper
impression, partly for benefit, as the sick that were healed by Christ and his
Apostles, partly in punishment, as when Annanias and Saphyra were struck dead
at the words of Peter. In regard of special manner of workinge, some were
done by prayer, as the dead child restored to life by Elisha: Some by
command, as Peter bid the lame man in the name of Ie^us Christ arise and walk.
Some neither by prayer, nor command, but of their own accord, the Saints
themselves occupied in some other matter, as when the shadow of Peter as he
walked by did heal the sick: and the kerche^s and handkercheifs carried from
S. Paul his body. All these done by the ministry of men are now ceased, for
that the miraculous faith by which they were done neither is at this present,
nor has been these many ages imparted to any. Thus then we see what a true
miracle is, what be the diverse kinds, and which be remaining in the Church and
shall continue to the end of the world: and which at this time are cealed.

Now to come to the other point? whether casting forth of devils in these times
by fasting and prayer be a miracl^ or no To this I answer, Chrysostom: in epist,
1. ad cor. cap, 2, hom: 6 Aug. de ver. relig cap. 25
it is not. Chris^stome ^aith, That Miracles were not done in his time. And
Augustine affirms, That Miracles were not permitted to continue to his days,
least the mind should always l oak after vi^^ble things, and mankind should
gr^w cold through the custom (...) these matters: by the nouelty wh reof
informs time they d^d bur^e. But what need I cite authors for this, when as
your selves mainte^ne strong lie that Miracles ceased together with the
Apostles? Well then ^e^ us ^oyne hereunto, That ca^ting forth of devils by
fasti^g and prayer we^e used in the times of Chris^stom and August^ne, as we
have showed before by their own words, which have taught us that their
p^ss^ss^d were brought to the public assemblies, and delivered by the prayers
of the congregation. Whereupon it must needs follow, that this manner of
deliverance in Chrisostomes and Augustines judgments, and so of the Church in
their time, was no miracle. And the reas^n of this may be apparent by that
description of miracles already set down. First because dispossession of devils
was very frequent and common in their days. But things common are no miracles.
For a Miracle says Augustine, August de vtilitate cred. ^d Honorat, cap, 16
is an unwonted thing: And therefore (^aith he) they are not done in these
days, Because they w^lde not move, except they were marvelous, neither would
they be marvelous, if they were usual Secondly, for that the work it self
does not make a miracle in respect of man's ministry, but the manner of doing,
as has been showed in the second distinction of Miracles. As for example, The
cloud and the rain sent at Elyas prayer was a miracle, because the Lord had
revealed it unto him, and he had embraced the same by faith knowing when and
how it should be sent. Yet when the Church of God in the time of drought and
famyne, shall by public prayer obtain clouds and rain, this is no miracle.
As when Solomon says, 1 Kings 8:35:
when heaven shall be shut up, and there shall be no rain, because they have
sinned against thee, and shall pray in this place, and confess thy name, and
turn from their sin, when thou do afflict them, Then hear thou in heaven,
and give rain upon the earth etc. Does he here pray they might be relieved by
miracle? Nay, but shows what the ordinary course of the Church is in this
case. So when the Disciples cast forth devils by their myraculous faith, and
the Church now a days by fasting and prayer, the same work in substance is
done by both, but the manner of doing is much differing, S. Doctrine page 35
which makes a difference also in the Action, and causes that their work was
miraculous, and the same done by the Church in these times not to be
miraculous. This little may suffice for distinct understanding of this
doctrine: which diligently observed will preserve us from those horrible
down-fals into which these blind Discoursers tvmble themselves. Now then to
examine theirs.

First we have a definition of a Miracle in general, to be an extraordinary
work of God, page 306. etc.
highly surmounting the whole faculty of every created nature, to work
admiration in the beholders, and to confirm their faith in the truth of Gods
word. Next we have it divided into the several kinds, whereof the one is a
True miracle, the other a false From whence it must needs follow that the
general definition must also agree to a false miracle. And that therefore a
false miracle is an extraordinary work of God, highly surmounting the whole
faculty of every created nature, to confirm the says of the beholders in the
truth of the word. But this is a thing most absurd once to dream of. Seeing
then to make a General whose definition can not agree to the Specialls, is a
work above nature: and that M. Deacon and M. Walker have created such a
General, page 309. etc.
I do demonstratiuely thereupon conclude, That miracles are not yet ceased.

Again, whereas I affirm, That casting forth of devils in these times by
fasting and prayer is no miracle because it is done by ordinary means without
the miraculous faith, (in which sense only I understand means, the use
whereof makes a work to be no miracle) you keep a foolish iangling about
this, in three pages together without either head or foot. page. 311,
Only when in one place you began to conclude, according to your absurd manner
you oppose the supernatural power of God, to his appointed means, as if there
were deadly feude between them, so that they must needs kill and destroy one
an other. May it not be said, that Moses by his miraculous faith and his rod
divided the sea, as by the means, because the Lord in truth wrought the thing
by his own mighty arm?

Moreover to stop your brawling mouths you have been told, page 312. etc.
that Casting forth of diuils in this sort, is a thing marvelous, but not
miraculous. Which difference, if you were not miraculously deprived of common
sense, you might easily perceive to be no less then is between the General
and the Special. Every Miraculous thing is marvelous, but not every
Marvelous thing miraculous. genes: 43:36.
Except it was a miracle that Joseph placed his brethren according to their
auncyentie, because the Aegiptians marueiled at it. Cato marueyled that one
wysard, when he saw an other, could forbear laughing, was this forbearance of
laughing in the wisardes a miracle? If this might pass for current, we should
have as many miracles as we have fools, and so the world full of miracles. But
you will prove it by Hebrew that Marueyles and Miracles are all one, because
Oath and Mopheth are the same. But first you should have proved that all
marueyles are either Oath or Mopheth: which you never go about: and it were but
lost labor you should. So then the whole discourse for nine pages together, is
an evident reasoning from the affirmation of the General, to the Special: as
if one should say thus, That which is a living creature is M. Deacon and M.
Walker: But an Ox is a living creature, and diverse others his coosen germans
besides: Therefore an Ox by this Logike should be as wise as your selves.
Surely you have found the Philosophers stone which is able to turn lead into
gould: you can do more then the spirits can: for you have proved and I also
believe it, they cannot transform one nature into an other, which I see is
within the compass of your Omnipotency.

You return a fresh to Miracles wrought by means. Concerning which I tell you
again (for such importunate beggars will not rest with one answer) that
whatsoever is wrought by ordinary means only, page: 321. etc
without miraculous faith, is no miracle. Now if you ca^ show that Moses,
Elijah, Elisha, Peter and the rest wrought their admirable works in such
manner, then I will esteem you for great wise men. page: 322. page. 323
You affirm that Dispossession of devils were always reputed true miracles in
the Church of God: which I have manifested to be false by the testimonies of
Chrysostom and Augustine, whereas you are pressed by Exorcistes that If signs
and wonders be true miracles indeed, then Antichrist must also needs work
true miracles, to shift of this (which you can never avoid) you distinguish
clarkly of that which is not in the sillogisme, to wit of Miracles in general.
The syllogism mentions only true Miracles, and therefore your distinction
must needs be, That true miracles are of two sorts, either true or false,
(which is your former miraculous division) or else you leave the matter where
it was, page, 306: page: 324.
yealding that Antichrist does work true miracles. But forsooth you will go
strictly to work, and after some nipping disiunctiues, at last you descend to
this, that If I wrought a wonder at Mahgnition, then I wrought an undoubted
true miracle. must you needs still infer a Special from the affirmation of
the General? You abound in such admirable conclusions. Where you say, that
Expelling of Spirits, is no less marvelous now, then it was in the primitive
Church. If you mean the Church in the Apostles time, you say untruly: It was
done by miraculous faith then, it is not so now, which makes a difference in
the work, as has been showed in Elyah his cloud, and that which is
ordinarily obtained by prayer. And this is all you can say to prove that
Exp^lling of devils is now a miracle: for which you have not afforded the least
color of any reason.

The rest of this Dialogue is spent in proving that Miracles are ceased,
wherein I might be silent, both considering Dispossession in these times is no
miracle, and therefore nothing at all impeached by this discourse, and also
for that I grant the cealinge of miracles according to such distinction: as
has been before set down, that is, as they be wrought by the ministry of
man. Neither does any thing you bring weaken this truth, but rather much
confirm it. Yet in handling this point you have diverse unsound positions. As
if there were no other end of miracles, but the testification of Christ his
Deity, and the confirmation of the Gospel, whereas Miracles do as well
confirm the Law, as the Gospel, Judgment, as well as Mercy. And the Lord
always has and will testify his wrath from heaven against sinners, page 325.
which will not believe the threatenings of his word to forsake their wicked
ways. Again, say you, Christ's resurrection was the last Miracle for
confirmation of his Deity. Then what was his Ascension into heaven? Is it
nothing with you? It being also confirmed that in these days of Athiesme the
Lord may and does reveal his extraordinary power, for the terrifyinge of men's
stony hearts. You answer It is an irreligious insinuation, and a gap for all
knaueryes. but if you were able to weigh all things aright, you would see it
were irreligious to sew pillowes under men's elbowes. And as for the gap to
knavery, what window can be opened, when the ministry of man is wholly
excluded, and these wondrous works left immediately to the Lord himself? you
are mad when you see not the difference between the Papists dealing in this
business, page 327.
and that of the Church of God. D. Fulke does worthily reprove their lying
miracles, but bring forth one word out of him, wherein he gives the least check
to this manner of work done by God his faithful people: against which you have
no less ignorantly, then proudly vaunted your selves like two mighty Goliahs.
gage. 329.
As for those Learned men which you challenge to maintain this cause against
you, would you have them to strayn themselves with such tr^elers? It is enough
for them to leave such as my self, page 330. etc.
unworthy to carry their books, to lash such bayards. All your reasons against
Miracles conclude on lie against such as are done by the ministry of man: and
so likewise your testimonies unto which I willingly subscribe. Only, good
Reader, mark that D. Fulke (who is the fourteenth in order) speaking against
an ordinary function in the Church to cast forth devils, page 333
mea^eth a peculyar office of Exorcists, as it is in the popish Church,
appointed to this purpose. There is no such office left by Christ: but that a
faithful congregation making suite to the Lord in the mediation of his Son,
has no promise to obtain the deliverance of their brethren from the vexation
of devils, it never came into his heart (for any thing I could ever see by his
writings) to think. But these men according to their manner, alleadg one thing
for an other: every clod in the fallow, is an hare with them, and they can
follow it with as full cry, as if the best game that is were on foot before
them. Well now, Christian Reader, that I have laid open there dealing unto thee,
be thou thy self Judge, whether in the beginning my speech exceeded any thing
or no. I doubt not, but thou thy self wilt be amassed to see men so bereft of
all judgment: and that thou will behold in them a manifest example of that
bewitching, wherewith S. Paul did charge the foolish Galathians. gal. 3.1.
I hope also thou will rather be a means to free these men from the snares,
wherewith thou see them entangled, then suffer thy self to be intrapped
with them. And therefore relying upon thy Christian wisdom in this behalf, I
proceed to the last Dialogue.

A Survey of the Eleventh Dialogue.
The first part of this Dialogue is the sink of all the former, being nothing
else but a Recapitulation of them: page: 339:
we have proved the several channels unsavory enough: I mean not here to
styr the^ afresh. The second part is a Patheticall persuasion: Patheticall
indede both to him that would rejoice at the infirmity of others, for it would
make him to laugh: and also to him that greeveth at their harms, for it would
make him to pity you. page. 347.
It is no discredit you Discoursers, that I am afraid of, No scandal to
zealous professors, No suspicion of Conspiracy, No confirmation of the B. nor
any other such fo^d respects, that causes me to be fliff in opinion. I hope
the Lord will assist me (it is my prayer that he will) that I shall tread all
these under my feet, and greater matters then these if need be, for his
truths sake. But if any can disprove the actions that have been done for
matter of fact, or any thing that I have delivered or taught, by sound doctrine
out of the truth of God his word, I will give glory to the Lord, and confess
my self to have erred and been deceived, although for deceauing, the God of
heaven and earth is witness it never came into my heart. As for loss of
mayntenance, and deprivation from Ecclesiastical dignity, neither do these
move me one whit. This is your silly cunning under pretense of alleging for
me, to write your own Apology. You comfort your selves with a Discourse, That
no man is able to make a flat nullitie in any man's ministry. page 349. 350
Deceive not your selves M. Deacon and M. Walker: The Church may deprive of
their ministry such as by erroneous crimes deserve it. ^ay not the Church make
a Minister that has grievously offended the congregation, and continues
obstinate, as one that is a Publicane and an heathen? Math: 18.17.
Do you think an Heathen may houlde the place of a Minister over the Church
of God? Again, such as making shipwreck of a good conscience are delivered to
Satan, can they during their subjection be fit captains against him, 1 Timothy:
1:10:
to the people of God? The salt that has lost his savor, with what shall it
be seasoned? It is good for nothing but to be cast forth, Math: 5, 15:
and to be trodden under foot by men. How shall he reprove others, that is
reproved by all? How shall he which teaches not himself, teach an other?
Romans 2, 21.22
How shall the known Adulterer command others not to commit Adultery? Let a
Bishop be unblameable, says the Apostle: 1 Timothy: 5.2.
which charge has not only place in his first Election, but also the whole
time he contynueth in his office. Psalm. 50, 16
Unto the wicked (says God) what have thou to do to declare mine ordinances,
that thou should take my covenant into thy mouth, Seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? For when thou see a thief
thou ru^nest with him, and thou art partaker with the Adulterers. Therefore this
consolation of yours will deceive you. page: 340
But you say, where God does continue his gracious gifts in any, there ought
to be also continued the execution of the gifts. This also is a rotten
foundation. I doubt not but the false Apostles retained still their gift of
speech, wherein they seemed to surpass S. Paul. Beesides a man may fasly judge
of his own gifts. When went the Spirit of the Lord from me, 1 King: 22, 24
Mica, 3, 6
to speak unto thee, said Zidkyah unto Michaiah? Indeed the Lord does
threaten that night shall be to false prophets for a vision, and darkness for a
divination: that the Sun shall go down over them, and that the day shall be
dark. And I beseech you weigh but with indifferency (if it be possible in your
own case) if in these discourses, The sword of the Lord has not been upon
your right eye. Zacha: 11.17.
All these things considered, stand not (I beseech you) in defense of error
and wickedness. Regard I have stricken you, rather upon the garments, then upon
the bare skin. Indignation sometimes has wrung from me sharp speech, yet such
as has wounded no further, then for School matters, except your selves will.

Receive therefore the word of exhortation. Let your defense be confession:
your reply, tears: your inueighing against others, I have sinned: your suite
for preferment, to be in the number of Gods children. What if the Church
sleep in doing her duty? He that keeps Israel neither slumbreth, nor
sleeps. What if the Lord also for a time keep silence? Indeed, says he, I
held my tongue: and thou thoughtest I was like thee: Psalm. 50, 21
but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of God. Who shall plead for us, when all
shall stand at the same bar with us? The Lord grant my words may have due
place with you, that insteade of proving me a counterfeyt (which your
discourses intend) you may gain your selves true Christians, whereby your
loss in failing of your purpose may turn to your advantage, and my grief in
sustayning so many reproaches, may in the end yield me and all the angels of
God, great matter of joy.

In the mean season, I humbly thank the Lord which yet at last has opened
your mouths to acknowledge the truth in some part. For proccedinge in your
course, and coming to speak of a precompacted confederacy, toward the end
you give evident testimony of mine innocence, page 352.
affirming that Howsoever others esteem of any compact, for your own parts
(you assure me) you are very far from such a suspicion, yea and this also you
dare say for so many besides, as have been acquai^ted with my former sincerity,
and upright carriage, they are every of them free from such a persuasion. And
this only, say you, is that which we entertain, and very confidently hold
for a truth, Namely that the graceless boy, did gracelesly counterfeyt, and
knavishly bear the world in hand, he was really possessed of Satan, when
there was no such matter at all. But as concerning your self, we do
undoubtedly think, that the same was simply your error in judgment, but no
purposed error in your practice at all. This is your testimony. Seeing
therefore you are so persuaded of me in your consciences, how co^es it to
pass, that through your whole discourses you have traduced me as a deceauer?
And namely in your Answer, page: 39. 40. where speaking of Summers his
supernatural knowledge, you shift that of, by ascribing his predictions etc: to
some cunning confederacyes with me. Why should we wonder at all (say you) that
two cunning companyons consederate together before, should conclude such a
course between themselves, as the one (by the help of the other) should
prognosticate such strange and incredible events, etc. Have you there striuen
against conscience? Or has the truth here prevailed against your wills?
Surely it is wonderful that men seeking favor by soothing, and hoping for
some great advantage by justifying other men's indirect courses, should
notwithstanding the B. his violent dealing, whether by imprisonment, or by
pretense of law whatsoever, notwithstanding also M. Harsnets authentical
book, written for confirmation of the said proceedings, yea notwithstanding
their own ends, and long tedious pains to compass them, should I say,
notwithstanding all these, after many discourses clear me altogether of the
pretended cri^e and thereby withal show that the Bishop has dealt unjustly,
M. Harsnet falsely, 1 Cor. 3, 19.
and they themselves wickedly in joining hands to oppress the guiltless. It
is the Lord which catches the wise in their own craftynesse. Neither do I
only in this your confession behold the victory of truth over your selves, but
am forced to praise the Lord for his great goodness, which has made the
BISHOPE himself (the greatest Adversary to this cause) to subscribe to my
uprightness in it. Your book comes forth by his privilege. No doubt it was
perused, and perused again. It lay a long time in his hands. And who can tell
whether this testimony be not his own words set down under your names? It
may be the Lord has touched his heart for that he did against me. And howbeit
public confession were requisite in public wrongs, yet it is some ease to
so^e men's consciences to make confession covertly. whatsoever therefore other
men may think, That he would be far from such acknowledgment, yet I wlll
hope the best, as knowing there is nothing impossible unto the Lord. Neither
skills it greatly whether he writ these very words or no, considering he has
allowed and approved them at least, in giving them public passage and
priuiledg to the^. And therefore though S. Paul, when the Serieants were sent
unto him, refused to depart secretly out of prison, but as by public
authority he was cast in, so by the same authority he would be brought forth:
yet I being beyond comparison inferior to him, will rest my self content in
having my open injuries satisfied, though but in this secret manner. How good
and gracious is the Lord which brings forth the righteousness of his
servants as the light, and their judgment as the noone day. As he dealt with
our head Christ in causing Pilat to pronounce him a just man, so he deals
with his poor members according to their several degrees. He made Saul
acknowledge David more righteous then him self, and Agrippa and Festus to say
of Paul, He had done nothing worthy of bonds. To this therefore only wise,
and gracious, and Mighty Lord God, the father, the Son, and the holy spirit,
be all honor and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

