A ROYAL EDICT FOR MILITARY EXERCISES: Published in a Sermon preached to the
Captains, and Gentlemen that exercise Arms in the Artillery Garden at their
general meeting.

In Saint Andrews Undershaft, in London, June 23. 1629.

By JOHN DAVENPORTE, B. of Divinity, and P. of Saint Stephans in
Cole-man-street in London.

ISA. 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nurses.

LONDON. Printed by ELIZABETH ALLDE for RALPH MAB, and are to be sold by
NICHOLAS BOVRNE, at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1629.

To The Right worshipful St. Hugh Hammersly Knight, Justice of Peace, and
Alderman, and one of the Colonels of the City of London, and President of the
Martial Company exercising Arms, in the Artillery Garden: AND To all the rest
of the famous Society, Captains, Assistants, and Gentlemen, professing, and
exercising Arms.
Worthy President, Captains, and Gentlemen,
THe same Persons, and the same Argument, that induced me to preach this Sermon
in your ears, have prevailed with me to present it, in this manner to your
eyes; not to submit it to your judgments, (...). James 3.1. cap. 4.11.
as our masterly-censorious hearers expect, who make themselves Judges of that,
which should teach them to judge themselves, and shall one day judge them: 1.
Cor. 11.31. Romans 2.16. Heb. 4.12. Jude 11. Psalm. 91.4. 2. These. 2 10.
nor to crave your patronage or protection of it: for it is the Word of God,
mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged sword, to cut off all that
gainsay it, and so, able to defend it self; yea, it is the truth of God, a
shield and Buckler to those that receive the love of it, and so, able to defend
them. For my self; who am I, that I should hope to be exempted from the common
condition of Preachers and Writers, Ier. 18.18.
that is, to be smitten with the tongues of those, who account nothing worthy
acceptance, but the fruit of their own brain? There are principally, three
sorts of men, Luke 22.50.
that (like Malchus, having his right ear cut off) hear all things
sinisterly. First, Ambitious persons. Secondly, 3. sorts of persons injurious
in their censur s of Preach s and Sermons.
Malicious persons. Thirdly, Vicious persons: if this Sermon come into any of
these persons hands, I must expect, that (as men looking upon any thing through
a colored glass, judge that thing to be of the same color with the glass,
through which they look so) their opinions of the Preacher, and of the Sermon,
will be conformed to the inward distemper of their own hearts. First,
Maleuoli, velut Momi aruedut nos magis animi morbo, qua^ iudicio. Melanth. Gul.
Epis. Hausmano. 4to. 1. Ambitious persons. Nihil est quod Ecclesiam ita
diuellere qucat atque ambitio dominandi. Christ. Hom 11. in cap. 4. ad Ephesians. 3.
Ioh. 9. James 4.6.
the Ambitious person seeks to raise himself in the fall, and to honor
himself in the disgrace of those who seem to outshine him in true worth. Thus
Corah, out of a desire of esteem, resisted Moses; Diotrephes, out of a Love of
Preeminence, withstood John the Divine; and those false Apostles, that they
might exault themselves, vilified, and traduced Saint Paul. Those we have more
cause to pity (because God resists them) and to pray for them, that God
would make them more humble, and lowly-minded, then to be disquieted at their
insolences, which is a sure sign of their folly, and emptiness. For we see,
the boughs, the more laden with fruit, they are the more lowly, but in a
fan, we see, the chafe is above the Corn, not because its better, but
because its lighter. Secondly, 2. Malicious persons.
the Malicious person, out of an inward hatred against the person of another,
misiudgeth all his actions and intentions. This you may see in the carriage of
the Priests and Prophets against Jeremy, Ier 26.11. Amos 7.10.
of Amaziah against Amos, and of those cruel, and scornful men, concerning
whom the Prophet Isay speaks, that would make a man an offendour for a word.
Isa. 29.21.
For these my prayer is, that the Lord would destroy the works of Satan, that
envious man in their hearts, and fill them with the fruits of the spirit,
especially, love, Gal. 5.22. 3. Vicious persons. Isa. 5.29.
peace, gentleness, goodness, faith. Thirdly, Vicious persons, speak good of
evil, and evil of good, these put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, these put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour. David out of much
experience of such, says, They are licentious, and speak wickedly: they talk
presumptuously: they set their mouth against Heaven, Psalm. 73.8, 9. Male de me
loqu^tur, sed mali. Mouerer, si de me M. Cato. Si Lelius sapie^s, si duo
Sci^iones ista loquerentur, nunc malis displicere, laudari est. Soen. de rem.
fort.
and their tongue walks through the earth. To be dispraysed of such, is a
praise; as when an Enemy reuiles a General, or Captain, or common Soldier
for his faithfulness to his King, and Country: But J must not make a Book of an
Epistle.

To you (right worthy Citizens) with all due respect, I dedicate these
Meditations, such as they are, as belonging to you by right. For your sakes
they were preached; at your request, they are now published. If herein you
shall find any mo^iues to encourage you, any rules to direct you in this
laudable Exercise, let God have the Glory, and J am abundantly satisfied, whom
nothing could have drawn to this task, but my unfeigned love to your persons,
and my hearty desire of your encouragement in so worthy designs.

Yours in all Christian duties and services, J. D.

A ROYAL EDICT FOR MILITARY EXERCISES.
2. SAM. 1.18. Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the
Bow. Behold it is written in the Book of Iasher.


THe occasion of these words (as you may see in the last Chapter of the former
Book) was the death of Saul and Jonathan, 1. Sam. 31.
with the flight, and discomfiture of Israel, before the Philistims, reported
to David by a man, who (in the former part of this Chapter) received condign
punishment, 2. Sam. 1.2. to 16.
for that which he pretended to have done. From the 17. verse to the end of
this Chapter, Verse. 17. ad finem.
you have David's lamentation for Saul, and Jonathan, and the state of Israel,
which, as it respected Saul, was asorrow arising from the sense of humane
calamities, and charges, whereunto even the greatest Princes are subject: as it
respected Jonathan, it arose from his dear love to so true a friend; as it
respected the state of Israel, it arose from the apprehension of Gods
dishonor, in the triumphs of the Philistims, and seems to answer that
mournful expression of Joshua, Josh. 7.8.
Oh Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turn their backs before their
enemies? yet he is not so swallowed up with too much grief, 2. Cor. 2.7.
that he forgets the care of his people, which you may see employed in the
copulative particle, Also.

Also] God has planted more affections then one in the soul of man: as there
is grief, to humble us, so there is fear to quicken us. David knows how to
mourn for evils past, so, as to take a course for prevention of the like for
time to come: not to be afflicted after such a loss in Israel, had been
Stoicall apathy; to have been so afflicted for the loss of Saul and Jonathan,
as to neglect the peoples good, had been base pusillanimity: Therefore David
at once acts diverse parts, of a good subject, and patriot, in lamenting the
loss of his King and Country, and of a gracious Sovereign, in providing for
the safety of his subjects. For as he mourned, with this lamentation, over
Saul, and over Jonathan his son, So also he bade them, etc.

He bade them] Not by way of Counsel only, but by way of Command also. So
that these words seem to contain an Edict, or a law of David, inioyning the
people the use of the Bow. History of the world. 2. book 4. c. 15. Sex. 244. p.
For (not to trouble you with the difference observed by some, betwixt a Law,
and an Edict) you may observe in these words, all those things, which are
required in a Law. 1. It must have a right end, which is the Common-good: so
had this: Lex est quae dam rationis ordinatio ad bonu commune, ab eo qui curam
co^munitatis habet, promu^gata. T. Aq. 12. q. 90. Art 4. Conc.
for this exercise conduced much to the common peace, and safety. 2. Right
means, to attain that end warranted by reason: so had this. For the people
might be co^uinced of the equity of this injunction, by reasoning from
natural principles, thus: That which tends to the Common peace and safety,
must be practiced by all: but the use of the Bow tends to the Common peace, and
safety: Ergo. The use of the Bow must be practiced by all. 3. A right of
authority in him, who imposes it: so had this. For David, whose command this
was, was before this time, by a special command from God, 1. Sam. 16.12, 13.
anointed to be their King. 4. It must be enacted, and published: so was this:
for he not only bade them, but it is recorded in the Book of Iasher.

Teach] Or instruct, which is done by rules, exercise, and examples, as the
manner is in your military School, The Artillery Garden.

The Children of Iudah] Its an Hebraisme signifying that Tribe, 2. Sam. 2.4.
over which David was anointed King, in Hebron, called so from Judah, the
fourth son of Jacob, who was the root, Gen 29.35.
and father of that Tribe. By the Children] are meant all the people of that
Tribe, without exception of age, or condition. 1. Without exception of age;
Numb. 1.20.
after 20. or sooner, it may be (for, at that age) they went forth to war:
and other Nations, as for instance, Corn. Tacit. lib. 5. cap. 7.
the Germans, were wont to train up their sons (even from 14. years old,
till they grew by age, or weakness, unfit for service. 2. Without exception
of condition; Saul the King, Jonathan the Prince, Vriah a Noble man; all sorts
went to war, as in Rome, none were excused from service, when Hannibal was at
the gate.

The use of the Bow] By a Synechdoche, the Bow is mentioned. Israelites. Psalm.
78.9.
Therefore, the Children of Ephraim are described, Armed, and shooting with the
Bow.

Parthyans are described by drawing the Bow, and the Lidians, Esa. 66.19. Ier.
46.9.
by handling and bending the Bow, and its said of Saul now slain by the
Philistims, that the Archers and Bow-men hit him, and he was sore wounded of
the Archers. 1. Sam. 31.3.


Zach. 10 4. Ier. 51.3.
therefore its called The Bow of battle, and the bender that bends the Bow,
is the Periphrasis of a Soldier. About the usefulness of this weapon, about
those Muskets, and Caliuers, S.I.S his discourses with the preface thereunto.
now in use, it becomes not me to dispute, others have handled this Argument
largely, to whose discourses I refer you.

Behold, it is written in the Book of Iasher] What Book this was is
questioned. 3. opin^ons ab^ut the book of Iasher.
The word Iasher signifies just. Some by this understand the Pentateuch,
which, say they, is called the Book of the just, Moses, that just man, or
because it treats about just things.

Genesis is meant, and that David intended to encourage them to those Martial
exercises, by what they find recorded in that Book, concerning the Tribe of
Judah, that, The Scepter should not depart from him, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet, Genesis 49.10.
until Silo come.

Pet. Mart. in locum.
who think it to be some History, containing, after the manner of Annals, or
Chronicles, the most remarkable passages in the State of Israel: because this
Book is mentioned as the Register, wherein that famous success of the Suns
standing still at Iosuahs prayer, Josh. 10.12, 13.
for the space of a whole day, is recorded, whereof no mention is made in any
of the five Books of Moses: yet this no whit aduantageth the Papists, who
would from hence, and such like places, prove the defect of the Canonical
Books of the Old Testament. For (not to insist upon the ambiguity of the word
here used, which signifies any discourse about a thing, as well as a Book)
what if we grant, (...)
it was a written Book? must it necessarily follow, that this Book was
Canonical? Its true, that some ascribe it to Nathan, and Gad, Genesis 5.1. Nehem.
7.5. Mat. 1.1.
who were Prophets: yet all things which the Prophets wrote, were not written
by them as Prophets. It cannot be denied that the Prophets were Gods public
Notaries: Alia, sicut hom nes, historica diligent^a; alia, sicut Prophetae i^sp
ratione diuina scripseru^t, atque haec ita ^uer^nt distincta, vt illa, tanqua^
ipsis, ista vero tanquam Deoper i^sos loque^ti iudicarentur esse tribuenda: ac
sic illa pertinerent ad vbertatem co^nitionis haec ad religionis authoritatem.
Aug de Ciuit. Dei. li. 18. ca^. 38.
yet all the writings of a Notary are not authentical, unless he do them as
a Notary. David the Prophet wrote a letter to Ioab, concerning Vriah: yet that
was not penned by him as a Prophet.

The Prophets wrote some things as Prophets, other things as Historians. These
serve to increase our knowledge; those to increase our faith. Thus we have
opened and cleared the sense of the words. In them you may observe two things:

First, an Act or Edict of David, for the training up of the Children of Judah
in Martial exercises: He bade them teach the Children of Judah the use of the
Bow.

Secondly, a Record; or Register of that Act. Behold, it is written in the
Book of Iasher. Out of the words thus opened, the conclusion which naturally
offreth it self, is this, that,



The Scriptures fully clear this in examples: of Abraham, Genesis 14.14.
having at least 318. men in his house, fitted for war upon a short warning:
of Moses, instructing the people how to camp by their standards, Number. 2.2, 3.
and under the Ensigns of their fathers house: of Joshua, and the Judges, 1.
Chro. 12.1, 2.
under whom, of Ruben, and Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, 1. Chro. 21.5.
2 Chro. 1.8.7, ^, 9. 2. Chron. 17.13, etc. 2. Chr. 14 8. 2. Chron. 26.11, 12,
13, 14.
were four hundred, forty thousand, seven hundred and three score exercised in
wars. The time would fail me, if I should speak largely of David, of
Solomon, of Iehosophat, of Asa, of Vzziah, whose care in this particular is
plentifully declared in holy Writ.

This practice was grounded upon good reason, as we shall euince, thus:

Vicus of (...) or v.a.

joined their Cottages into one common field, and so made up that, which we
call a Village; diverse Villages joined together, Pagus of (...), because they
drank of our common Spring. Vrbs, ab orb. Ciuitas, ab eo quod multitudo
coiuit.
grew into that which is called an Hundred: but as pride and emulation
increased, with the increase of mankind, they environed diverse of these
Villages thus joined; at first with banks and ditches; afterward with walls:
which being so compassed and fortified, were called Towns, and Cities.

People thus conjoined, that they might live honestly and peaceably together,
(...). Arist.
must be ordered amongst themselves. Hence came the invention of Laws, which
are not only the rule, and leuill, and square of the foundation, and building,
but the very spirit, and sinews of any Commonwealth, and State, whereby it
lives and moves. The end of these is the good of that Community, Salus populi
suprema lex. (...). Romans 13.1. (...). Romans 13.4. Iam. 4.12.
where they are in force. The makers or preseruers of these Laws, are called
Kings, Governors, Magistrates, Higher powers: their end is the Common welfare,
he is the Minister of God for thy good: for which purpose the great Lawgiver,
who is able to save and destroy, has by express rules in his Word, ordered
the carriage of Rulers toward the people Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20, 21.
and of people toward their Rulers. Romans 13.1, to 9.
This government, according to the diversity of subjects, wherein it rested,
had diverse names: as it rested in one person, it was called, A Monarchy: As it
rested in few of the chief, it was called. An Aristocraty: as it rested in
many, it was called a Democraty. The Commonwealth being thus settled with
Laws, and Governors, for the honest conuersing of people amongst themselves;
it was necessary to provide for their peace, and security from the injuries
of others: for men naturally are as Lions, Leopards Wolves, Asps, Isa. 11.6. to
9. Romans 8.7. 1. Pet. 2.11. James 4.1.
and Cockatrices, by reason of those inward lusts, which maintain Enmity
against God, fight against the soul, and raise wars and contentions amongst
men; which sinful disposition, Satan, out of his ancient malice against
mankind, acts, and exciteth, enticing men to battle, that they may fall. 1
King. 22.20.
This being the common danger of all men, every man bethought himself of some
course for prevention: and hence came the invention of Arms, and Military
discipline.

Thus you see, we may truly say of these four, Sovereign power,
Commonwealths, Laws, and Arms, as it was said of Hippocrates his Twins,
They laugh and weep together, they live and dye together. For, as without
Laws the Sovereign power, and Commonwealth cannot subsist, by reason of
disorders within; so without Arms, and the exercise of them, they cannot be
safe, by reason of dangers without.

Pro. 14.28.
In the multitude of people is the honor of a King, and for want of people
comes the destruction of a Prince. But what safety is in a multitude of men
without weapons, and skill to manage them? Counsel and strength are for war.
Isa. 36.5.
But how shall Counsel and strength be established, without education and
instruction to service? or how shall men be instructed, without such Military
exercises? Add hereunto the disaduantages that sometimes happen in wars,
partly, by reason of the suddenness of the war; as in the rebellion of Sheba
the son of Bichri, 2. Sam. 20.4.
an Army was to be raised in three days warning; and in the case of Iabesh
Gilead, in the space of four or five days, 1. Sam. 11.8, 9.
Ioab raised three hundred thousand men of Israel, and thirty thousand of
Judah, to fight against the Ammonites; Partly, by reason of the inequality and
odds betwixt parties, as between David and Goliath; 1. Sam. 17.33.
The one a Boy, the other, a Man of war from his youth: and between the
Ammonites, and Israel, 2. Sam. 10.9.
when the front of their battle was against the Israelites before and behind.
In such straights, how sha^eful and fearful would the loss, and the
overthrow of an Army and Kingdom be, if by frequent exercise, the Soldiers
had not gained dexterity and skill, to extricate themselves out of such
difficulties? To conclude: Herein Kings imitate God, whose providence is seen,
as well in defending, as in feeding his creatures. For amongst them, some are
fortified with horns, some with hoofes, some with tushes, some with teeth;
others that have not these, have burrowes; some have strength to help
themselves; others, that want that, have swiftness of feet to run away; those
that have neither of these, have dens and secret places to hide themselves
in; and those that have none of these, go by herds and multitudes: but unto
man, God has given reason and understanding, which is in stead of all these,
whereby he is able, not only to epsy means of escape from dangers, but he can
take from every creature upon earth, yea from within the bowels of the earth,
what may serve for his use, and benefit.

light to the world without the Sun, and nourished Moses, and Eliah 40.
days, without food) nor so, as always to work with them; only, we are bound
to use the means, with submission to his providence who, as a free Agent,
works with them, or without them, according to his good pleasure. Excellent,
to this purpose, was that resolution of Ioab, Be strong, and let us be valiant
for our people, 2. Sam. 10.12.
and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his
eyes.

For neither Gods purpose, nor his power, nor his promise secures any man in
the neglect of means.

1. Not his purpose; for in the greatest matter, that concerns man, 2. Tim.
2.19. 2. Pet. 1.10.
though The foundation of God remains sure, in himself, yet men must give
all diligence to make their calling and election sure to themselves.

Josh. 5.12.
2. Nor his power; he could feed Israel in Canaan, as he had done in the
wilderness: but Manna ceased, when they came to a land, that would yield
corn: upon men's ordinary labors, at this day he can feed men, Mat. 6.26, 28.
as he clothed Lillies, which neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into their
barnes; but it is his will, that man should labor with his hands the thing
that is good, Ephesians. 4.28.
if he would have wherewith to feed himself, or give to others without theft.

Judge. 6.14. Judge 7.^, 8. Mat. 4.7, 8.
3. Not his promise; Gideon had a promise of victory, yet he used means. Our
Lord Christ had a promise of protection, yet he would not cast himself down
from the pinnacle. Paul had a promise of safety, Act. 27.22.31.
yet he says, Except these abide in the ship, we cannot be safe.

We conclude then, that since Sovereign power, Commonwealths, Laws, and
Arms, had the same original, the same end; and since the common safety of
King and people is procured by Military exercises; and since Religion, and
obedience to God binds all men to use all lawful, and possible means for
their own safety, and good; we conclude, that it is a care well beseeming
Kings to provide, that their subjects may, by such means, be trained up to
wars. And so we have, as briefly as we could, dispatched the Doctrinall part:
we now come to application wherein, after we have laid down some consectaries,
which shall be clearly deduced from the Text, we shall endeavor to speak to
the present occasion. 1 Use, or consectary


1. Use or consectary is upon this ground, to justify wars lawfully
undertaken, now in the times of the Gospel, against the Manichees, and
Marcionites of old, with the Anabaptists, and Familists of latter times: for
how can it be said, that the care of preparation for wars beseemes Kings, if
wars themselves be unlawful? or how shall that be recorded to David's praise,
which beseemes not other Kings?

David's time, which is unlawful now. For, of these times of the Gospel, its
said: They shall break their swords into Mattockes, Isa. 2.4.
their spears into fithes: Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn to fight any more.

For Answer of this, Lord calls upon the people to break their plow-shares
into swords, Joel 3.10.
and their fithes into spears. That it may appear there is no contradiction
in the Spirit speaking by Isay, to it self speaking by Joel, we must
distinguish between the purpose, and intent of Christ in coming into the
world, and in publishing the Gospel, whereat Isay aims, and the success, or
event, which was accidental, in respect of man's malice, which Joel intends.
Respectively to the first, Christ said to Peter, Put up thy sword: Mat. 26.51,
52
for he that strikes with the sword, shall perish with the sword. As if he had
said, I came not to send the sword, but peace. Repectiuely to the second, he
says to his Disciples, He that has no sword, let him sell his coat, Luke.
21.36.
and buy him a sword. As if he had said, My coming sends not peace, but a
sword. So that, though the end of Christ his coming was, to reconcile things
in heaven, and things on earth, which end he now attaineth between God and us,
in our Justification, and will accomplish between man and man in the day of
Redemption, yet so long as Satan works in the children of disobedience, and so
long as any remnant of sin is in the heart of any, there will be a necessity,
and lawfulness of war, and of this care to prepare for it.

2 Use or Consectary. 2. These. 2.
2. Use or Consectary, Is this care well beseeming Kings, as that which belongs
to them by right? Then it ill beseemes that Man of sin to usurp upon this
right of Kings. God committed the Magisteriall power of appointing the times of
sounding the silver Trumpets, Numb. 10.
unto Moses: But the ministerial power of sounding the^, upon command to Aaron.
See the pride of this Usurper, who will snatch the Trumpets out of Moses hands,
and not the Trumpets only, but the swords also; nor the swords only, but the
Crowns and Scepters also. I doubt not, that in due time, God will unite the
ten horns against his pride, who exalts himself above all that is called God,
1. These. 2.

3. Use. It remains, that a word or two of encouragement, 3 Use.
Inc^uragements and Cautions.
and caution be added for the Justification, and Direction of your Noble
designs, in these Military exercises, which are of so great consequence for
the Common good, as has been formerly declared. If it be a course
vvell-beseeming Kings to provide, that by these means, their subjects be
trained up, and fitted to vvarres, certainly it well becomes subjects to
offer themselves willingly to such exercises. 1. Encouragements to 2. sorts.

1. Such as are already members of this Society.


Those to whom I am to address this part of my speech, are of two sorts. 1.
Such as are already exercized members of this society. 2. Such as may hereafter
be added thereunto.

For the former: I need not seek far for encouragements: your works praise
you; and the abundant fruit, Who are encouraged from former success. In
respect. Judges 5.8. 1 Samuel 13.18, 19. 1. Of Arms.
and success of them may encourage you. It was ill with Israel, when there was
not a shield or a spear to be found amongst forty thousand in Israel. There
was want of Arms. And no less miserable was their estate, when there was no
Smith in the Land. There was want of Armourers. Little better was the condition
of this Land, when these exercises first began: for, either there were no
Arms, or, not so many, and those few that were, not so serviceable as these,
nor made after the modern fashion. 2. Of Armourers.
The like defect here was of Armourers, till you set them on work, whereby
their number and skill has greatly increased, not only in the City, but
throughout the Kingdom also. But what are Arms without skill to manage them?
It was much to the praise of Martial Discipline in Israel, that One hundred
and twenty thousand, every one of them able to lead an Army, or at least to
keep rank, 1. Chro. 12.38.
came to anoint David King in Hebron. According to the proportion of your
number, and time, the like may be said of your Society: That, whereas before
the happy beginning of this Exercize, scarce one in the City knew the use of
Arms, and what did belong to Martial Discipline; now, many educated in this
School, are able to exercise a Company: in so much that all the Officers of
the trained Bands of the City, from the greatest to the least, are taken
hence; and that which adds luster to all that has been said, is, 1. The
consideration of the persons. 2. Of the time. 3. Of the place. 4. Amplified 4.
ways. 1. By the persons. Ex colluuie omnium gentium.
The manner of engaging your selves in so worthy a project.

1. The persons, a Company not like Hannibals Army, gathered of riff-raff, the
reffuse, and dregs of the people, but a Company of worthy Citizens, men whose
persons, places, parts, challenge respect, and reverence.

2. The time.
2. The circumstance of time] In a time of peace, when the foolish inhabitants
of Laish would have been without fear, Judge. 18.
yea in a time of fears, (as the case now stands) wherein men should be like
Ants, providing for that Winter which they foresee not, like Mice running away
from that house, which they fear will fall in such times men should be like
the Romans Triarij, that would choose to dye in the sight, rather then to
preserve their lives by flight: not like those Roman Murci, who chose rather
to cut off their thumbs, then to handle their swords.

3. The place. 1. Generally the Land.
3. The circumstance of place] In this plentiful Land: for we see that usually
like unto seeds and plants, so are the lives of men made conformable to the
Regions where they abide. Thus Sodom, which was like the Garden of Eden,
fruitful and delightful, Ezekiel. 16.
was addicted to pride, idleness, fullness of bread, and contempt of the
poor. Histories tell us how the delights of Capua did weaken and eneruate
Hannibal, and all his Army, whom the rough Alps, and freezing snow had
formerly made unconquerable. Therefore Caesar speaks it to the praise of his
Soldiers, that no delights disabled them to service in the war. 2. In this
famous Citty] which is to England, Mi^ites suos etiam ^nguentatos, been pugnare
dicebat. Suct. in Jul. cap. 67. 2. particularly this City.
as Jerusalem was to Judea, the Metropolis of the Land, where, bv your actions,
are examples to other places; and for this particular, I may say as Paul
speaks to the Romans, Your zeal has provoked many: as may be seen in
Couentry, Chester, Bristow, Norwich, besides other places, who not only have
yours, raised up like Companies, in imitation of yours, but also have been
guided therein by some of your followers, and instructed by some of your
Scholars.

4. The manner] 4 The manner.
That it is done, not by constraint, but of a ready mind. It Is true: every
Family is commanded the use of Bow and Arrows, under a penalty: (...) 3^. of
(...).
and masters are bound to teach children, and servants, from seven to
seventeen therein. Here Masters are instructed, not in the use of the Bow
only, but in all weapons, postures, actions necessary or useful in war, and
not for fear of a penalty, but for love of their Country. I conclude with the
speech of Deborah, My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, Judges 5.
that offered themselves willingly, amongst the people: bless you the Lord.

2. For others that are to come in; 2. Sort encouraged, are such as may
hereafter be added to this society. Of 2. sorts. 1 Incouragers.
those are of two sorts. 1. Such as should encourage. 2. Such as should
exercise. For the first, I would have directed my speech to the Right
Honorable, the Lord Mayor, in whose absence, let me speak but a word to the
Senators, his brethren, so many as are present. That which is in the Text
commanded in David is practiced by our dread Sovereign, whose Royal pleasure
for the ordering, and encouraging of this Company, has been plentifully and
openly declared. In conformity to which pattern, would it not well beseem his
Majesty's Lieutenant, and Deputy in this City, sometimes to visit this
School, to observe their proficiencie, and at such solemn meetings, to honor
them with his presence, yea, and if need should require it, to allow out of the
Chamber, the Treasury of the City, something toward their encouragement and
maintenance? This motion may be thought the more reasonable, if you reflect
upon times past, wherein, for want of able men amongst your selves, the City
was constrained to entertain Strangers, upon such occasions, to their great
charge; besides the danger of having Strangers to be Officers in a City. It
is reported of Switzerland, that whereas in other places, some are for Arms,
some Artizans, some Laborers, there, all are Soldiers. Would you know whence
it came? From the liberality of the Government, in propounding rewards in
public, for such as could exercise, and dexterously handle the Harquebuz, or
Caliuer: yea, there was a price, or reward appointed for the children that
could draw the Bow. A worthy pattern: but I must hasten.

2. Those that should exercise.
2. For those that should exercise] If such be the public good that redounds
to King and people by these designs, as has been showed, it should encourage
many to come in, and those who have entered themselves into this Society, to
apply themselves to those opportunities, which they have, by times appointed
for exercise in the Garden: and here, what shall I say to quicken you?

1. The necessities of other Churches] Were there no danger at home, yet the
distresses of our brethren abroad should quicken us to the use of all means,
(...). Hesiod.
whereby we may be enabled to succor them. If a neighbors Ox, or Horse be
in a ditch, we will even run to help it out, says our Savior: much more,
if his house be on fire; most of all, if the danger be of the loss of their
Country, of Religion, Families, lives and all. Judges 5.
Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel, when in such a case, she comes not out to
help the Lord.

2. Our own dangers] What though for the present we seem to dwell safely, 1.
King. 4.25.
every man under his Vine, and under his Fig tree? So long as our sins, our
crying sins remain, so long as the abominations that provoke God, are not
taken from the midst of us, we can have no security, no assured peace.

3. But suppose all clouds were dispersed, none to be seen in the firmament of
all the Churches, yet the laudablenesse of such Martial exercises should
persuade men to the love, and use of them. Former presidents justify this
course, in Ionathans shooting for sport, 1. Sam. 20.20.
that he might be thereby fitted to war. And questionless, the Beniamites
attained that dexterity in casting stones out of a sling, at an hairs breadth,
by frequent exercise for recreation.

The ancient Gauls are said to be the most warlike, and valiant of all
Nations. (...) per (...). Julian. in Misopog. Caesar Commen. lib. 5. and 7.
Tit. Live. l. 31. Decad. 6.
But how became they such? By continual exercise and use of Arms: for it was
their custom to come armed to their Councels. Their applause of an Oration was
signified by clattering with their Arms. The oath they took was upon their
Arms. The Germans also were wont to go armed about their daily negotiations,
and came in the same manner to their banquets. Thus the most warlike Nations
have accounted it a maine policy, to be very frequent in the use of Arms. And
in Religious respects, since every man will have recreations: if that be best,
which is freest from sin; that best, that most strengthens a man; that which
inables a man most, to be of use for the public good, be best; then abandon
your carding, dicing, chambring, wantonness, dalliance, scurrillous
discoursing, and vain rauelling out of time, to frequent those exercises,
which are special helps fitting you to be serviceable, and instruments of
public welfare: only take in the cautions, with the encouragements, which are
these.

Caution] Have respect to your particular callings. You have heard how Gods
wisdom declares it self in feeding, as well as in defending his people: let
it be so with you. If any man under pretense of this exercise, shall waste his
time and means, to the apparent damage, and undoing of his family; such an
one will bring a scandal, an ill report upon this worthy design. He that
would be a builder, not a destroyer of the City, must be careful to imitate
those builders under Nehemiah, who held their sword in one hand, and their
trowell in the other. So mind the exercises in the field, that you forget not
necessary business in your shop.

Caution] Preserve unity in the bond of peace amongst your selves. This will be
your safety and the strength of your City. Thus we shall be able to say of
you, as Agesilaus answered one who asked him, Why Sparta had no walls? Said he
^^ointing to the Citizens) Behold Spartaes (...) ^artaes Citizens were
Spartaes walls, ^n Spartae muros.
by (...) their concord, and unity amongst (...) so will it be with this
City, you w^ (...) of walls to London, if it should wa^ (...) ^ping unity
amongst your selves.

the public good. St^ (...) ^enerate spirits, as are altogether inte^^ (...)
^r own private and particular conc^ (...) unfit for employments of such
publi^^ (...) ^ce as this is. Da mihi Scutum, tu vero tibi cau^onum eme in qua
viuas. Epamin.
God seldom honors (...) service, nor himself by their skill (...) or
wealth, who make themselves (...) in what they do.

Caution] Beware (...) ^onfidence in your Arms, skill, pre^ (...) For though
your Martial provision were (...) ^fest, like Zenophons, of whom it is sa^
(...) ^an Argolican Target, an Athenian B^^^^-plate, and a Boetian Head-peece;
though your men were, for stature like the Anakims, for multitude, like the
Aramites, for dexterity, like the Beniamites, for success, like Saul, and
Jonathan, of whom it is said, 2. Sam. 1.21.
that the Bow of Jonathan never returned back; neither did the sword of Saul
return empty from the blood of the slain, and from the fall of the mighty,
yet carnal confidence, self confidence will betray you, undo you, as it has
ruined many States before you. They of Ierico, trusted in their walls: but how
soon, and by how despicable means did God lay them flat? The Philistims
trusted in Goliath, and he in his strength: 1. Sam. 17.45, etc.
but how soon is his head cut off with his own sword? Men rise up early, but
God builds the City. The horse and chariot is prepared, but victory is from
the Lord. It is Solomon's observation, and we may conclude with it, Eccle. 9.11.
The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.

Caution] Labor for such preparations as will certainly interest you in a
blessing. What are those? Something must be done for the qualifying of your
persons; something for furniture, and provision of Armor; something for the
use and managing of that Armor. Of these severally.

1. For the qualifying of your persons] This in general know, Psalm. 39.5. Re^.
1.13.
that as holiness becomes Gods House for ever, because He walks in the
midst of the golden Candlestickes; so, holiness becomes the Lords Camp for
ever; because he walks in the midst of the Camp: Deuteronomy. 23.12, 13 14.
and if he see any unclean thing in it, will turn away from it. Sin not
only causes wars (They chose new gods, then was war in their gates.) but
also ruin, Josh. 7.10.
and desolation. Israel could not stand before the enemy, because there was an
execrable thing in the Camp. Therefore it is Gods charge to his people: Deuteronomy.
23.9.
When thou go out with the Host against thine enemies, keep thee from all
wickedness. So may I say, When thou go to prepare and fit thy self to
fight (as you do in your Martial exercises) keep thee from all wickedness.
For, what will it avail you, if you could be Conquerours of men, whilst you
remain captives to Satan, slaves to your own lusts? But how can you hope to
prevail against men, when God himself is become your enemy? This is that
which has brought so much misery upon your brethren, and threatens our
destruction, even the sin of Rulers, and subjects, Ministers, and people,
Captains and Soldiers; and yet the Lord may renew his complaint, No man
speaks aright, Ier. 8.12.
no man says, What have I done? Whilst our sins continue, flatter not your
selves, neither trust in lying words, saying, Ier. 7.
The Temple of the Lord (much less the Artillery Garden, etc.) for your sakes
Sion shall be laid waste, Jeremy 7. and the Lord will do unto us, as he has
done to our brethren round about us. Wherefore (Beloved in the Lord) as you
desire the continuance of the Gospel, and of our peace; as you tender the
welfare of Church and Commonwealth; as you affect the safety of your selves,
and families; search out, purge out the sins that provoke God to wrath, from
your families, from your selves, profaneness, covetousness, pride,
hypocrisy, corrupt self-love, security, luke-warmenesse, and whatsoever else
in your persons, places, callings, companies, recreations, is contrary to Gods
revealed will, and in stead of those, consecrate your families, Deuteronomy. 20. Romans
12.
your selves to God; be more holy, heauenly-minded, humble, upright, zealous,
fruitful, watchful in all your ways: so shall ten of you be able to chase
away a hundred, and an hundred a thousand, and a thousand ten thousand.

2. For furniture and provision of Armes]. The Apostle commends six Pieces to
you, out of Gods Armory: Christ's Soldiers may not want any one of them.

Truth] The first is that which was engraven in a Sapphire stone, and hanged
about the neck of the Egyptian Judges in a collar. (...), Truth. This is the
ground of all constancy; and therefore the Hebrews by one word express both.
(...)
This the Apostle calls a Girdle, and it far excels those studded bells,
wherein Soldiers pride themselves, both in comeliness to adorn, and in
sufficiency to strengthen a Christian Soldier against all assaults of Satan,
and discouragements in the world.

Righteousness, a Brest-plate] The second is that, whereunto we labored to
persuade you in the first direction, for the qualifying of your persons, 1.
John. 3.7. 2. Cor. 1.12. Acts 11.23.
Righteousness of conversation, which consists in a pure or purified
conscience for the time past, and in a resolution of proceeding in a righteous
course, Reu. 1.6.
for the time to come. We are Priests unto God our Father: let us present our
selves before him, and the Congregation of his Israel, with this Breast Plate,
Exodus 23.
wherein is the true Vrim and Thummim, and wherewith the soul is more
gloriously adorned, then Solomon was in all his Royalty: yea, the Soul is not
only beautified, but also fortified by it, Isa. 38. 2. Cor. 1.12.
as you see in Hezekias case, against the fear of death; and in Paul's case,
against the smiting of the tongue.

3. The preparation of the Gospel of peace, the leg-harnesse. 1. Cor. 3.21, 22.
The third, is the piece of furniture, which the Gospel does help us unto, by
revealing to us, 1. That God is reconciled to us, in Christ. 2. That every
thing that can befall us, is made for us, yea, death it self; and all
tribulations are for our good: This is in stead of Greaues, or Leg-harnesse,
whereby we are enabled to pass through the roughest ways to heaven, without
discouragement, yea, in a spiritual sense, to tread upon the Adder, and the
Basiliske, without hurt. Christ seeing his Church walking toward him thus
shod, breaks forth into an admiration of her: Cant. 5.1.
How beautiful is thy going with shoes, oh Virgin, daughter!

The fourth is Faith, 4. Faith the Shield.
laying hold on Christ for Justification, and on the rest of Gods Word, and
special promises, for passing this present life. This is a Shield defending
the soul, not only from foynes and blows, but also from the fiery Darts of
the Devil. By this those Worthies of the Lord subdued Kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched
the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weak, Heb. 11.33, 34.
1. Ioh. 5.4.
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the
aliens. To conclude; It is the victory, whereby we overcome the world.

The fifth is Hope, which arises from Faith, 5. Hope an Helmet.
and is the expectation of good things to come, grounded upon the promises.
This like an Helmet will stand the Christian Soldier in much stead, which
keeps off many blows and wounds from him, which else, as a violent stroke on
the head, would amaze him, if not quite cast him to the around. Thus Steven
having his Helmet on, Acts 7.
could with courage look his enemies in the face, and lift up his eyes to
heaven, with an undaunted mind, in the midst of a shower of stones cast at him.
And blessed Paul rejoices in tribulation, Romans 5.3, 4.
under the hope of glory.

The sixth Piece, 6. The word a sword.
is that whereby Gods mind is revealed unto us, in such things as concern us
to know, as a man's mind is by his speech, which is therefore called the Word of
God. This is contained in the Scriptures, and is called a Sword, because of its
singular use, both for ^ffence, and defense, as you may see in that single
combat of the Captain of the Lords Army, Math. 4.
our Lord Jesus Christ, with the Devil. I may say of this, as David said of
Goliahs sword, Sam.
Give me that, there is none to that. A Christian Soldier should have this
sword always in readiness, not as swords are in most houses and hands, Sam.
hung up by the walls, or kept rusty in the scabberd: but it should be like the
sword of Ioab, ready to drop out of its sheath suddenly, and he should use it
against spiritual wickedness, as Eliazer used his against the Philistims. 2.
Sam 23 10.
The Text says, He smote the Philistims, until his hands was weary, and
husband claue unto the sword. One thing more must be added, and so I Will conclude.

3. For the use and managing of this spiritual Armour] I will propound only
one thing to be done, that is, Prayer, whereby Hezekiah clothed with
sacke-cloth, in stead of a Coat of maile, and having ashes upon hie head, in
stead of an Helmet, and using prayers in stead of spears, and swords and
arrows, 2. Chron. 32.9.10, Isa. 37.15.36,
he obtained the slaughter of one hundred foure-score and five thousand of the
Assyrians in one night. Asa by prayer, slew and put to flight an Army of ten
hundred thousand, 2. Chron 14.9. to 14.
and three hundred Chariots of Ethiopians.

In Ecclesiastical Histories we read of an Army of Christians, Eusebius. lib. 5.
Tertul. in Apollog.
which was called Legio fulminans, because by prayer they obtained, that God
scattered their enemies with thundering and lightning, and refreshed the
Christians with showers from above.

Our own times afford many instances to the same purpose, especially, that
Mirabilis annus, in 88. when the prayers of Gods people prevailed to raise the
winds, which scattered that Invincible Armado, whereof we may say, as Moses
sang of Pharaohs Host: The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will
divide the spoil, Exodus 15.9, 10.
my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall
destroy them. Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sunk
as Lead in the mighty waters. Prayer is to every piece of spiritual Armor,
the same, that exercise is to Arms, and weapons, that whereby Christian
Soldiers are fitted for service. It holds alike true in both; the more
exercise, the more skill; the more courage, the better success. Wherefore be
much in prayer, in public, in private, in secret, be assiduous in this duty,
be frequent in eiuculations, that your houses and hearts may be purified, that
your fore-fellowship, callings, recreations may be sanctified; that by you and
all your endeavors, God may be glorified, let it be your ambition to be so
qualified, armed, and prepared to manage those spiritual weapons with a
prayer-full spirit, as men by long custom exercised therein. What will it
avail you to know the whole Discipline of war? Do not the heathen as much?
There is more required in you then in other men, in respect of your Christian
profession: for you have vowed your selves to Christ in Baptism, to fight
under his Banners, against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and to
continue his faithful Soldiers to your lives end. Perform your vow now, and
ever, in the sight of this great City, that every one may say, These are the
Lords Worthies, Christian Soldiers indeed. So shall you be valiant in fight,
victorious in battle, and in these Military Exercises, the Head and Glory of
all the Artillery Gardens in the whole World.

FINIS.

