DAVID'S TROUBLES REMEMBERED

IN
1. Absolons Sheep-shearing. 2. Ioab projecting. 3. Bathsheba bathing. 4.
Israel rebelling. 5. Ahithophel hanging. 6. David returning.
(...).

PSALM. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been in trouble, that I may
learn thy Statutes.

LONDON: Printed by Richard Hodgkinsonne, and are to be sold by Daniel Friar,
at the sign of the Bull in Little-Britan. 1638.

To the Author.
THe Poem which shall live, and often be read,
With four fair Ornaments, is garnished.
It must describe to life, fitly compare,
Abound with Sentences, and Fictions rare:
All these are met in thine, and do conspire,
To dress thy Lines in durable attire.
Thy chosen Subject of a sacred strain,
Is Index of thy sanctified Brain,
Prophaner Muses vent your idle dreams,
While thine discourses of diviner Theames.
It shall be written on thy mournful Hearse,
He turned all sacred Story into Verse.
TO. WILLAN.

Ad Authorem.
Quiddam ex Virgilii Ecloga sexta inflexum, and huic penso pretextum per G. H.
HAs oh! Laete, fides tibi dant (en accipe) Musae,
Psalmicini quas ante duci: quibus ille solebat
Cantando sacros deducere coelitus hymnos.
His tibi suavifluo currit scaturigine vena,
Ne quis sit vates, quo se plus jactet Apollo.
Omnis te pia Musa canit; nec gratior ulla est,
Quam quae Davidis praescribit pagina nomen;
Quae canit aerumnas regis, curasque sequaces
Saepius obsessi latrantibus undique monstris.
To the worthy Author of this Divine Poem.
ORder and Number set the World in frame,
Tuned the harmonious Spheres, made memory
A Cabinet, to eternize Man's fame,
And to Record the eternal Deity,
All Verses relish not of Levitie.
Who says, true Poesy is not Divine,
Knows not the Hebrew Hymn, nor has read thine.
Should I believe a Metempsychosis,
Isha's sons soul silenced by his last fate,
I Would swear informed thy body, and made this
Use of thy Peace, to draw his trouble's State,
That others might take heed, ere it is too late.
Church and State Hypocrites, in their own trap,
To catch, though maskt and lul'd in fortunes lap
Follow thy Prophet, Poets follow thee,
Till they have learned to leave Venerian Rimes,
And thou have taught religious History,
Affords the proper Sonnets of our times,
Best Organs Canzons, true celestial Chimes;
So having penned Odes for David's Lyre,
Go, help to chaunt them in the Angels Quire.
ROB. SYBTHORP.

Idem ad Lectorem.
INcestus poenae, fraterni sanguinis ultor;
Principis aerumnae, Proditionis opus;
Contemptus Cleri, rabies temeraria vulgi;
Peccantis planctus, contritionis amor;
Si tibi sint curae: pandit mysteria mira
A^-laetus vates, alite digna Jovis.
R. S.

DAVID'S TROUBLES.
The first Book.
Absolons Sheep-shearing.
I Tell the diverse trials of the King,
Who hevenly hymns did to his Maker sing:
Blessed Spirit that infused on him such skill,
Dispose aright thine humble servants quill
Now lived the King at home in happy peace
Free from all Wars and dangerous disease
Of civil broiles: For all Saul's house was slain,
None but the lame Mephibosheth, remain:
The Philistines are all brought down so low,
They dare no other Lord than David know:
The Syrians in two battles overthrown,
Now make their peace and serve him as his own:
The Heral^ violating Ammonite,
Is strong enough to serve, but not to fight.
Two year are past since Thamars ravishment,
The Peers and people free from discontent:
When thus becalmed with peace, and newly rose
From meat, news comes (thus fame by going grows)
That all his sons by Absolon were slain,
Not one amongst the living did remain;
This made him from his Cloth of state descend,
And tear his clothes, and doleful cries out send,
Lie on the earth whilst all his servants cry,
And with their clothes all rent, stand mourning by:
Till Ionadab begins thus to the King;
Take not, my Lord, so grievously this thing,
As if that all thy sons at once were dead,
Thine Amnon's only slain who ravished
His sister Thamar; Absolon this thing
E're since has vowed, and now to pass does bring;
By fair pretense of making him a feast,
Thus has he slain his Brothe^ and his Guest.
By this the Watchman, looking up, descride
Much people coming on the Mountains side,
When Ionadab; Lo, as thy servant said,
The Kings sons come, my Lord, be not dismayed;
They all are safe, scarce had he made an end,
When down the hill they saw them all descend,
Who as they nearer came still more lamented,
The King and all his servants hearts relented,
As when from Egypt with full sacks of grain,
Old Jacobs sons came to him home again,
Because with Joseph, Simeon was left bound,
The Sons and Father make the valleys sound
With plaints and groans; and cause at home more mourning
For Simeons miss, than joy at their returning:
So was it here, King David and his Sons
Make all the Court to sound with plaints and groans:
Mean while the guilty murderer Absolon,
Not daring stay to answer what was done,
In have to avoid the Laws revenging hand,
To Geshur posts, his Mothers native land.
Geshur a City is in Syrias Fields
On Iudahs borders, where old Talmaie wields
The Scepter, who for some respects of state,
When David yet over Hebron only sat,
To him had given his Daughter, from whose bed
Came Absolon and Thamar ravished.
It was no little pleasure to the King,
To see his goodly Nephew: but this thing
Amazed him much, great David's Son to see
Attended with so small a company:
But his sweet Beauty and brave personage,
Commended by the flower of his age,
So takes the good old King, his salutation
Was all composed of joy and admiration;
The hidden vigor of his lightning eye,
His rosy cheeks, his fronts sweet Majesty,
His Nose like Gnomon of a Dial fair,
His Lips pure scarlet Ribbands, whereon hair
Arose like finest Down, his Mouth not wide,
But opened, did discover on each side,
An Ivorie range of Teeth, as even and sound
As twinned Lambs which on the Mountains bound;
His Locks were like to twist of burnish^ Gold,
Which did outweigh, so often as he was pol'd,
The Ramm's fair Fleece, and to the Sunbeams turned,
Did seem a flaming Bush that never burned:
In all the Kingdoms of the East not one
Was found, for Beauty like to Absolon;
From his foots sole up to his curled crown,
No blemish could in Absolon be shown:
This made th'idolatrous vain Syrian
Think him a God in likeness of a man,
Believing Sol had left his Chariot bright
In Geshurs Court, one night to take delight;
Or warlike Mars resigned his Sphere above,
To solace there in pleasing arms of Love:
The Priests themselves that were, or should be, wise,
Were ready even to offer Sacrifice:
When Talmai thus: my fairest Absolon,
Art thou my Nephew royal David's Son?
Or do thou from amongst the Gods descend,
Me to admonish of my latter end?
Worship there is due unto a power divine,
And not Embracements; If that thou art mine,
Declare the cause that does thee hither bring.
Then Absolon: My Parent and my King,
I duly here do give upon my knee
The worship, which thou offerest to me:
I am thy son and servant: But the King
Lets him not kneel, but whilst from's eyes do spring
Tears mixed with joy, to's chair of State does guide,
Who thus begins, down sitting by his side.
It has, too often, been proved to be denied,
That all things which on earth to men betide,
By heavenly Powers are guided to their end,
What ever Mortals vainly may intend:
So as Church Policies, and Rules of State,
Are always subject to eternal Fate.
When thou thy Daughter borne of Royal Seed
To David gav'st, he of thine aid had need,
Against Saul's house, his Hebron to maintain,
And other parts of Isreal's Land to gain:
Who thought then that thy Daughters Progeny,
Should be subjected to strange sovereignty?
This baser Israelite to bear a Son
To disinherit Maachas Absolon.
But when I found my Fathers mind and fate
In this agree, contented with my state,
My life I in a Country Village led,
And like a Farmer Sheep and Bullocks fed.
In Court I saw no safety to remain,
Where Envy and Ambition ever reign,
With diverse jealousies and strains of state,
To thrust down virtue, not to emulate:
Yet feeling Royal Blood boil in a vein,
Which me assured that I was borne to reign,
And that to be commanded was too base
For one descended of so Royal Race,
I rather chose to be the first in place,
Than second in the highest Monarchs grace;
My Sheep-hooke therefore I a Scepter feign,
My Garland green, a Crown, and that small train
Of Gallants that did on my person tend,
I called my Peers. The Judges I did send,
To judge my subjects, which were flocks of sheep,
Were shepherds, who them did protect and keep,
And not as now we see some Judges do,
Their Fleeces pull, and take their Bodies too.
The Law I ruled by, was my will and word,
A frowning look my executing sword,
Nor did I less esteem my fragrant Bowers,
Then Kings their high guilt, princely costly Towers:
My fields and flocks did yield as wholesome meat,
I ay a better stomach had to eat;
And when I pleased to hunt, the little Hare
More pleasure yielded than Roe Bucke or Bear.
I often, walking in my shady Groves,
Heard more sweet dainty Lays of heavenly Loves,
Than could be tuned by David's choicest Quire,
What more than I enjoyed could one desire?
A Country life is too too full of bless,
If country men knew their own happiness,
But ah! poor wretches, all admire gay shows
Of Court and City, but alas who knows
Their base dissemblings, jealousies and cares?
Forswearing, lying, flattering and fears:
Whereas their clothes, they seek to change the bed,
And to account the stolen for sweetest bread,
That dying, few do know for whom they toild,
If for their own or for another child:
The while the Countryman, at home alone,
Enjoyes his wife his own dear flesh and bone,
And sees even in his sons and Nephews faces,
Their parents native features, looks and graces.
And though such shows they make not on their table,
Yet is their cheer as good and acceptable;
Yea even their Offerings and Sacrifice,
As Soon to Heaven may from these Cells arise,
As those that Kings on statelie^ Altars lay,
And send their Hecatombs up night and day.
Thus as a King I lived amongst my Peers,
And wanted nothing but their cares and f^ares,
Free from the envy of the Prince and Court,
Who never did regard my meaner port,
Until the Heavens or some malicious fate,
Who better knew, than they, my happy state,
Even in the swimming fullness of my gladness,
Me interrupted with this cause of sadness.
Besides her son, thy servant Absolon,
Maacha had a daughter, and but one
By David, of such comely modest grace,
She was the light and glory of our race,
Surmounting common beauties of the Court,
As Suns bright beams the Stars of meaner sort;
With which some Courtiers playing, as the Flies
With flaming Lamps, burnt both their wings and eyes:
Of which was Amnon, whom experience tried,
That he indeed was not true Eagle-ey'd,
For dazzled with her beams, most pure and bright,
Against Gods Laws and Natures common light,
He lusted after his own Sisters bed,
A wickedness not to be uttered.
But as the more concealed, the more the fire
Consumes, so this unnatural desire
Most fearing it should be to mor^alls shown,
(Nere dreading God, to whom it all was known)
Consumes his marrow, and his body dryes,
So as on bed all languishing he lies,
No means he saw his lawless lust to gain,
For she a Virgin lived, pure, free from stain.
When Ionadab my fathers brothers son,
(As subtle ones who fairest rising Sun
Ay worship, and think nothing vil'e or base,
That may possess them of a Princes grace)
Observing Amnons pulse, does plainly find
His sickness not of body, but of mind:
And says, my Lord, Art thou not David's son,
The kingdoms heir? thou know their breaths, not one
From Sihors Flood to great Euphrates sands,
That cheerfully observes not thy commands.
Thou art the life and comfort of our State,
Why do thy self and us then macerate?
Let but thy servants know what thou desir'st,
And they will more effect than thou requir'st.
Ah! Cousin Ionadab says Amnon, I
Think better my desires with me should dye:
To make them known it is as bootlesse vain,
As wicked to affect: I will not feign,
Nor hide the secrets of my heart from thee,
I love my Sister Thamar: but what he
Advised the lustful Prince was never known,
Till thus the cause was by the issue shown.
One Summers evening walking, when Sols light
was giving way unto the Queen of night:
I, on a Mule by Moonlight, did descry
A Lady, with small train, who coming nigh,
Falls to the ground, and with a piteous groan,
With sighs and sobs does testify her moan:
Her hand, alas, she laid upon her head,
Which was with ashes all besprinkeled,
Her partie-colour'd garments all were rent,
That I her piteous case did even lament,
Before I her discovered by the face,
To be our Thamar: Ah! says she, alas!
Most miserable wight, yet why should I
Make known my grief, and see no remedy?
Had any so done me this foul despite,
I could have over-past my grief more light,
But my near friend has me dishonored,
My elder Brother Amnon ravished.
You can but wonder, noble Absolon,
How he a Virgin Maid could find alone:
Ah! dearest Brother, by a subtle wile,
Me and my Father both he did beguile;
Himself he feigning sick upon his bed,
Soon as he by the King was visited,
Most humbly of him does entreat the grace,
That I (ah me) might come before his face,
And in his Chamber make some dainty meat,
Which of my hand it might be he could eat:
The King commanded, I forthwith was sent,
Without the least suspecting his intent,
Me to dishonor, and my family,
And violate my chaste virginity.
But he, alas! when I had baked him meat,
Two dainty cakes, which he desired to eat,
Commanded all his men out of the room,
And bade me into his bedchamber come;
Where he would be refreshed at my hand,
I that did simply all things understand,
Brought in the Cakes, and offered him to eat,
But found my honor was his longed-for meat.
For holding fast my hand, he does begin,
With these fair words me to his lust to win.
Pure heavenly Star of my Nativity!
By whose benign aspect, I live or dye,
Sweet Sovereign leech! of my souls long diseasc,
No Physic but thy self my grief can ease:
Thy only heat can quench my hot desire,
As Suns bright shining beams extinguish fire.
I care not for these Cakes, thy candid hand
Has more enriched, than Pearls calcined to sand,
Were it my pleasure only to obtain,
And that thou should more honor loose, than gain,
Thou might deny: But Amnon seeks thy grace,
And humbly supplicates thy sweet embrace;
Ask half my birthright, only with me lie,
My dearest Sister, else for love I dye.
When I, dear Brother! let not Gods choice nation,
Be guilty of so foul abomination;
By strength a Sister to base lust compel,
Such sin was never known in Israel:
Lo! all thy people thee for this will blame,
And where shall I ah hide my head for shame?
If thou do love me, as thou do pretend,
(Such foul beginnings never well can end)
Before thou force me, ask me of the King,
Not that I foul incestuous guilt would bring
Upon my Land, or had the lest intent
To move the King to give us his consent,
(For what can be a louder crying sin
Than blood to join to blood and kin to kin)
I only sought to win him to forbear,
But I my charms tuned to deaf Adders ear.
As when a Wolf has seized for his prey
A little Lamb, that went aside to play,
The Lamb does bleat and struggle all in vain,
So I as little by my striving gain,
For by his strength and power he me oppressed.
Oh shame forbids me to reveal the rest.
But as if malice more than raging lust,
Had him invited to this fact unjust,
Soon as his pleasure thus was satisfide
He could not in his presence me abide,
But as a Strumpet vile or common Whore,
Commands me straight to get me out of door,
And when I, lo^h to publish this disgrace,
By my foul usage, and my blubbered face;
Him on my knees besought he would forbear
To do this second wrong, he would not hear:
But with a furious hatred, far above
The raging passion of his lustful love,
Calls he his servant in, and storming more,
Commands him put me out and shut the door.
Talmai at this amazed straight up does stand,
And cries, are these your fruits of holy Land?
What other King yet ever gave consent
To such a base incestuous Ravishment?
Where he the King his father did defraud,
And made him to incestuous lust a Bawd:
Oh had it been mine only Son and heir,
I would have hanged the wretch up by the hair,
Or with wild horses torn his joints in sunder,
Had God forborne to strike him down with Thunder.
But what said David when he heard this thing?
Did he the offender punish? No, O King,
Says Absolon, he only seemed displeased
At first with Amnon, but was soon appeased;
For neither good nor bad to him was said,
As if he to displease him were afraid.
The offense he hated, and the offender loved,
But love it seems for more than anger moved.
The Sun has finished twice his annual course,
Since Thamar thus was ravished by force,
Whilst in my house she lived disconsolate,
For lorn of all, for fear of Amnons hate,
But never any word thereof durst mutter,
For fear we should but our disgraces utter,
We knew the King unwilling to repair
His daughters loss, with hazarding his heir;
Nor did I show at all my discontent,
Lest his distrust should my revenge prevent,
But covertly my hate dissembeled,
Till opportune Revenge were offered.
And now approached the season of the year,
That I my Sheep on Hazors plains did sheare,
Where I prepared a sumptuous Royal Feast,
And did invite the King to be my Guest;
But he unwilling me to over-charge,
Said, Nay my Son, we will not so much charge
Thee, at thy house, us all to entertain,
Nor would he go, although I urged again.
Then said I, yet let Amnon go with me,
Ah, says the King, why should he go with thee?
More than thy presence nothing mighty King,
Would to thy servant grace and honor bring;
But since thou art not pleased with me to go,
That honor thou deny'st, let Amnon do.
So I him urged, he promised in the end,
That he with Amnon all his Sons would send.
Was never Wood-man gladder, when at hand
He spies the Stag come fair upon his stand,
Than I, at coming of my wis^ed guest,
For whom indeed I did provide the Feast:
In coolest vault, whose sweeter Northern light,
Was freed from hotter gleams of Sunshine bright,
My servants had the Table covered,
For David's sons, whilst Thamar ravished,
In covert close for shame her head did hide,
Whom Amnon could not in his sight abide.
When all were come, and at the Table set,
And, as their stomachs liked, fell to their meat,
Two of my servants, as I did command,
Who closely waiting did by Amnon stand,
So soon as I gave them a secret sign,
And that his heart was merry grown with wine,
Down smote him dead, which service bravely done,
Shall never be forgot by Absolon:
The Kings sons all with sudden horror scared,
As if like cheer had been for them prepared,
Haste to their Mules; to thee forthwith I fled
On swiftest coursers ready sadeled,
I nothing of the truth from thee conceal,
And now my King and Father I appeal
Unto thy Justice, where if guilty I
Be judged of Amnons blood, then let me dye.
I would not put my life upon the rude
And violence of furious multitude,
Nor on the Justice of an angry King,
Time may again me into favor bring:
I then shall plainly prove that Absolon
Has done no more than David should have done:
And when Kings suffer such sins in their Land,
God will revenge them by another hand.
Lo thus he ends: When Talmai; valiant son
I do commend this act so bravely done,
In answering this foul base indignity,
Thou have revenged thy Sister, self and me:
No generous brave spirit could have born
So great dishonor, and so foul a scorn:
Be confident in this, my son, that I
Will in this quarrel, live with thee and dye.
The rather for that thou thy self have showed,
As just in punishing a crime so lewd;
So also politic in cutting down
That Tree, which stopped thy way unto the Crown.
O grand exploit! which fairly both ways tends
To public Justice, and to private ends.
Some reach at Crowns by shedding guiltless blood
But thou by being great, and seeming good.
Thus shall my Absolon get thanks and praise,
As popular in that which must him raise.
Then Talmai rose, and looking round about,
Perceived that all his servants were gone out,
For well-bred Courtiers thought it no fit thing,
Uncalled, to hear the secrets of a King:
But soon as they their Master walking hear,
All in his presence readily appear,
Where he commands them all, they do their best,
To entertain his son, so goes to rest.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Ioab projecting.
OLd Israel did never so lament
For Joseph's colored coat, all bloody rent,
As David for his murdered first born Son,
And absence of his loved Absolon.
As when great Ioab trecherosly had slain
Brave Abner by a false and subtle train,
So to revenge the blood of Asahel,
The King and all the Lords of Israel,
With garments torn, and ashes on their head,
Lament and mourn for Abner lying dead:
So loud did David weep, that all might hear,
And followed unto the Grave the Beer.
So now the King, and all his servants mourn
For Amnons loss, who never will return:
Yea Passions David's reason so confound,
He all the day lies sorrowing on the ground,
And though the Elders of his house and Peers,
Persuade him to repress his grief and tears,
By all their prayers they cannot him entreat,
To rise up or refresh himself with meat:
Till Bathsheba out-leading Solomon
Upon her hand, bespeaks him thus alone.
Let thy great wisdom, Gracious Sovereign Lord,
Descend to hear thy handmaid in a word;
Nor think, O King, as his Stepmother, I
Too lightly think of thy calamity,
Be sure I could a full proportion hold
With thee in sorrow, if that mourning could,
Thy firstborn Son to thee bring back again,
But ah, alas! such tears are spent in vain;
We may to him, he cannot to us come:
Remember, when thy firstborn of my womb,
Was with the sickness struck, whereof it dyed,
How you besought the Lord, and to him cried,
If for our sin he would be reconciled,
And by thee be entreated for the child:
Thou all the night on earth laist without meat,
Nor could the Elders of thy house entreat
Thee to sit up, but when thou heardst 'twas gone,
Thou did arise and wash thy self, and soon
As thou with thine Gods house had visited,
Did cheerfully refresh thy self with bread.
This was our pattern then, let it be now
The same to thee: thou mourned have enough,
Then cease more to bewail thy firstborn Son,
And cheer thy self with little Solomon,
To whom, yet in my womb, God gave a name,
To show that he should be a man of fame.
Then said the King; My dearest Queen, the light
Sent from my God, to guide me in the right,
Which seeing I allow, yet go astray,
So Passion does my Reason oversway,
Yet with good reason I may this lament,
Not as a loss, but as a punishment
Of Rape and Incest suffered in my Land,
For God is just, and has no partial hand.
Affections divert Administration
Of Justice, which is free from acceptance
Of persons, and does at the head begin,
Greatness is no protection for sin.
To Amnon now as he deserved is done,
To save one, I have lost another Son,
God us both justly to his Bar does bring,
Him for the rape, me for not punishing.
Not as if I the Murderer excused,
Whose malice as an instrument God used,
Us unto judgment for our sins to call,
For God is just, and we offenders all.
The Suns pure beams draw up from filthy soil
The lees, yet does it self no whit defile,
So of our sins pure God often makes good use,
Yet's without sin, as we without excuse.
Oh God, how wondrous are thy works throughout
The world, thy judgments all past finding out.
Shame unto us, all praise to God is due,
For he is righteous, and his judgments true.
Thus lauds he God, whilst little Solomon,
Who newly able was to run alone,
And like a Pie or Parrat 'gan to chatter,
All sounds he heard, though nothing to the matter,
More cheered the King with prattling nonsense,
Then all his Courtiers studied eloquence,
And as young David's Harp often dispossessed
Saul of his evil spirit, and him refresht;
So did this Parrats pretty melody,
Dispell the clouds of his melancholy,
And passions of grief to joy convert,
Naught more than children cheer an old man's heart.
Oh blessed Child, says David! in thy face
I see a model of all heavenly grace,
Thou shall in wisdom, wealth, and power increase,
And be a King of happiness and peace.
A Type of that great Prince of peace and rest,
In whom all Nations of the world are blessed.
The God that always dwelt with us in Tents,
Since Sinai thundered his Commandments,
Will be content to abide within the frame,
Thou shall erect to praise his holy Name.
Type of the Heaven of Heavens, which we live under,
The Nations glory and the earths great wonder:
To thee shall all the Nations Presents bring,
As to the highest and the wisest King.
As stones shall Silver in thy streets remain,
And Cedars as wild Fig Trees on the Plain:
All Kings to hear and see thee shall desire,
But they that nearest come, shall most admire,
To hear thy heavenly Wisdom plain expound,
The hardest Questions that they can propound.
Oh happy, could thou keep upright thy heart,
But ah! strange women do the best pervert.
^o! thus is David's sad melancholy
^urn'd, like Saul's hatred, into prophecy,
^s torrent swift which long his course has held,
^n sudden by immoderate showers filled,
^reaks down the Bank, and bears the ground away,
And finding new his former course does stay.
But all these goodly hopes of Solomon,
Could not divert his love from Absolon,
Wherefore since Amnon could no more return,
He now takes comfort and begins to burn
With such affection to Absolon,
That even to fetch him home he could have gone,
Which Ioab by some signs discovering,
A woman wise from Tekoa did bring
In mourning-clothes, with ashes on her head,
As if she had long mourned for the dead:
Who being well instructed in her part
By Ioab, thus begins to show her Art.
She meeting David at set time and place,
Low to the ground falls down upon her face,
And cries out, help O King! thy servant save,
Ah woman, said the King, what would thou have?
I am, says she, a woman widowed,
And live alone, thy handmaids husband's dead,
Who leaving me two sons, whilst in the field
Each strove with other, both too stout to yield,
And there not being any nigh to part,
He that struck first was stricken to the heart:
So now he only does to me remain,
Who in his fury has his brother slain:
Happy yet were thy servant, if I might
Enjoy this only Son, my souls delight,
But all the kindred of my family,
In just revenge for brothers blood, do cry,
Give us the heir to slay: So they my light,
In Israel would, ah me! extinguish quite,
Not suffering this one man on earth alive,
Thine handmaids husbands name here to revive.
The King, by nature most affectionate,
With her in sorrow does participate,
And says, go home, good woman, be content,
Concerning thee, I Will give commandment.
But she replied again, my Lord and King!
The guilt of this iniquity, God bring
Upon my Fathers family and me.
Thou and thy Throne of justice shall be free.
Good woman fear thou nothing, said the King,
The man that speaks against thee, hither bring,
And I will give him an express command,
Against thee never more to lift his hand.
Oh King, says she, remember God thy Lord,
Nor suffer more the sharp revenging sword,
To forage as it formerly has done,
Lest as my first, it slay my second son.
Now as the Lord does live, by whom we all
Do live, from's head this day no hair shall fall.
Yet, said the woman, I thine handmaid pray,
Let me speak one word more, the King said, say:
Then said the woman: Oh why should the King,
On us, Gods chosen people, evil bring,
For by the words the King has uttered,
Thou plainly have to us discovered,
That thou indeed art faulty, oh my King,
That home thy banished thou do not bring.
^y Liege and Lord! consider this thing well,
What danger it is for David's heir to dwell,
^ut of the Kingdom, and live banished,
^ea with an Heathen King his life to lead;
^or as pure water spilt upon the ground,
(...) soon dried up, and can no more be found,
^or is the scent and purity retained,
^ut whilst in some pure glass it is contained:
^o people perish all without a head,
Or like so many Sheep are scattered,
But God who till this time has him preserved
Unto this people, has for good reserved,
And moved their hearts to wish at home again,
Thy son, that yet does banished remain.
And now I to the King these things have said,
Because I of the people was afraid;
Thus thought I, let me speak unto my Lord,
(...) may be he will hear his handmaids word,
And be as gentle unto Absolon
^s to thine handmaid and mine only Son,
Whom thou have saved from revenging hand,
That me and him would pluck out of the Land.
I thought, if to preserve a family,
Thou would not let the sword my son destroy,
Thou might do much more for the Kingdoms peace,
And for Religions wealth and strength's increase.
For as an Angel, God has given thee skill
To hear and judge aright of good and ill:
And therefore, since the Act of this my Son,
Is one with thine, God make thy judgment one.
The King replied, good woman, I desire,
Hide not from me the thing which I require,
Tell, Is not Ioabs band with thee in this?
Ah, good my Lord the King, said she, it is:
I will not leave the truth on either hand,
For thou, O King, wilt soon it understand.
Thy servant Ioab to my mouth convei'd,
Even all the words which I thine handmaid said;
That by their circumstance my Sovereign might,
Without affection see and judge aright,
And not the peoples and our wishes cross,
For Absolons offense or Amnons loss.
Therefore, oh King, as now thou have been wise
For to discover all we could devise,
And as Gods Angel here do all things know,
So, by that wisdom, all things wisely do.
Thus ends the woman, when to Ioab so
The King begins, as thou will all must go;
This thou projected have, it shall be done,
Go haste, and fetch the young man, Absolon:
Then Ioab falling down upon his face,
Gave humble thanks for this so high a grace,
Oh King, says he, what grace have thou expressed,
In yielding to thy servants bold request?
And now thought Ioab, with this simulation,
To make at once an utter supplantation,
Of Bathshebes projecting for her Son,
By bringing back from Geshur, Absolon.
Such is man's nature ay with envious eye,
To view our equals, raised to dignity,
And would more willingly, though with more danger,
Than to their own, be subject to a stranger:
But Bathshebe perceiving his design,
As prudently did work her counter mine,
And to the Prophet straight her self applies,
They best direct that first with God advise,
And thus begins: Good Prophet! see thou not
How cruel Ioab cunningly does plot,
To bring in grace again proud Absolon,
And ruin utterly my Solomon?
What then shall all those prophesies betide,
Which have by thee of him been propheside,
If Ioabs craft against us may prevail,
Ah help! Gods promises do never fail.
Madame, says Nathan, they shall ay endure,
And like the Mountains, stable stand and sure;
The Goat shall easelier dive into the deep,
And Dolphin up to top of Mountains creep,
Than earthly powers Gods promises with-stand,
What Is arm of flesh against his mighty hand?
Men's subtle windings, close dissimulations,
Are even as vain as their imaginations,
Turned by his power and wisdom to those ends
And purposes, his goodness here intends:
God works not here by likely means, as man,
What he is pleased to will, he always can:
By causes he sometimes, often times without,
Against all causes brings he things about;
All things are wrought according to his will,
They happy who it cheerfully fulfill,
And voluntary Agents do their best,
Upon his goodness faithfully to rest:
Experience forbids us to distrust
The Almighty, as unable or unjust.
All Saul's projectings, David to keep down,
Were but as steps to raise him to the Crown,
The more deliverances, the more his praise,
No keeping down whom God intends to raise.
Good Nathan, says the Queen, no eloquence
Instructs us like our own experience;
(I now delight not to recount my story,
Mine be the shame, I give to God the glory:)
From bed of sin, which did me wel-nigh smother,
He raised me up to be the happy mother
Of such a child, whose wise and potent hand,
Should sway the Scepter of this holy Land,
And be to all succeeding generations,
Our glory, and the astonishment of Nations.
Lo! Nathan I have bred him in my womb,
And suckel'd at my breasts, till he is become
Of Learning capable: Now I him bring,
To thee to be instructed like a King.
Madame, says Nathan, it is the best of Arts,
To give right rules to children, for their parts:
For as of other things, so of mankind,
In youth the time is to instruct the mind.
What liquor they be seasoned with, they hold,
To middle age, yea even when they are old:
Then as the yielding tender twigs in field,
Contented are to husbands hand to yield,
And, as it gently them directs, do grow
Up toward Heaven, or to the ground below,
So Tutors may their minds depresse or raise
To base desires, or thoughts deserving praise:
Sweet Manna only did with morning last,
Soon as the Sun grew hot, the time was past:
This is the time true virtues seeds to sow,
That they with them in strength may thrive and grow,
And not discern, grown up to middle stature,
^f they be thus by precept, or by nature.
First be they taught their Parents to revere,
Distemper, lying and deceit to fear,
To have Gods dreadful Name in reverence,
For hope of good, and fear of punishments.
On them yet this enforce not, but instill
It gently, with good liking to their will,
For what is so enforced on us then,
We fall into dislike of, growing men,
And being free and at full liberty,
More pleasing ways unto our natures try.
Acquaint their growing minds with pleasing Stories,
Of virtues sweet rewards, and highest glories,
But never vices in their presence name,
Without eternal infamy and blame:
Nor let them know how commonly they reign,
Lest they to them a liking entertain:
This will their minds to virtue elevate,
And make them vices loath detest and hate,
And if you find their Natures do intend
To any errors, them to the adverse bend,
As often we bow young twigs clean opposite,
Of purpose only, for to set them right.
When you have sweetend thus their inclination,
Nothing improves it more than emulation,
Be it at School, or play, they exercise,
Allure them with the glory of the prize:
Best minds have all this inbred quality,
To set their chief delight on victory.
Thus Prophets should good rules and precepts give,
By which they after do intend to live;
For so did Nathan with his blessed charge,
Who now conceiving he was set at large,
Removed from his awful parents eye,
And freely left to his own liberty,
Begins like Colt to run his full careare,
But Nathan him restraines with modest fear,
Yet not abridging him those sweet delights,
To which his tender pupillage invites:
He by the gentlest means him first inclined,
To sports that better Body might and mind,
And told and taught him all brave martial Story,
To fill his limbs with strength, and heart with glory.
An error it is in those that youth up train,
Them from sweet lively pleasures to restrain,
Licentious looseness is a foul extreme,
Between these two does lie the golden mean.
They that our best and noblest horses breed,
Do let them run at liberty and feed,
Till they unto their height of strength be grown,
Then gently tamed for services and shown.
Who to their Books too hardly youths constrain,
The heat draw from their stomach to the brain,
Them making heavy, lumpish, dull, and slow,
And dry that moisture up should make them grow.
As Colts which at the first be over-toil'd,
Turn jades, and are in every journey foiled.
As fruit ripe in the morning rots ere noon,
Such is the fate of all that ripe too soon.
But such is not the fate of Solomon,
Though all his equals are by him out-gone:
In learning, riding, any recreation,
He all transcends beyond all emulation.
These soon are past, and now he sets his mind,
The highest wisdom only out to find,
Which Nathan finding shows his utmost Art,
To season with Gods holy fear his heart,
The holiest heavenly precepts to instill,
Both to his understanding and his will,
Wherein this child not only does outgo
His equals, but even his great Master too,
"So do we often see great God imparts
"To his Vicegerents, large and ample hearts,
"By which they may more able be to lead,
"And guide the people in their Makers stead.
You great ones that do subtilely project,
By means unjust, and cruel, to effect
The things you aim at, and oft-times in blood
Of friends and allies, make your actions good;
That make no conscience, by dissimulations,
To ruin Cities, Families and Nations.
Though often you pass unseen by mortal eyes,
He sits in heaven that all your works descryes,
Conducing all your projects to those ends,
His goodness, not your malice, here intends.
Yea those pure spirits, which are waiting still
On earth, his heavenly pleasure to fulfill;
See all your windings, and with grief behold
Proud mortals here, so desperately bold,
Upon these frail and brittle habitations,
To perpetrate so foul abominations
In sight of God, of Angels, and the Devil,
Who takes delight to see them work all evil:
Oh do but make a true just estimation,
Of them that use such close dissimulation:
Survey their lives, and you shall plainly see,
The best men have been open fair and free.
Deep Politics fair virtues forms commend,
As most conducing to their aims and end,
But hold the practice is an hinderance,
To all that great affayers would advance,
They Grace and Holiness it self would seem,
Not to be so in deed, but in esteem,
By false pretense of Goodness to do evil,
A Principle for Lucifer the Devil.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Bathsheba bathing.
OH what a happy thing it is to be bred
Of godly Parents, and well tutored;
Especially for Kings, whose education
Brings happiness or ruin to a Nation;
Yea Subjects children, bred too tenderly,
Infect a City, Town or Family,
With lewd examples, quickly followed.
By Pr^cepts we are dragged, by Patter^s led.
Now David by too good experience,
Had proved what mischief comes by indulgence,
In breeding children; Amnon grown so bold,
He might not by his Father be controlled
For foulest incest, Maachas Absolon,
Has killed the Prince his brother and is gone.
Fair Thamar now remains more desolate
By Amnons murder, than his rape or hate;
Revenge that is private, lawless shedding blood
Without the Magistrate, does no man good;
The Murderer in exile must remain,
Till Ioab comes to bring him home again,
Who taking for's Companion Abishai,
Lo thus begins discoursing on the way.
Many that are indeed, or would seem wise,
And by the past, of things to come, surmise,
Do hold that in all bodies politic,
Diseases are, as men, are well or sick,
That rising Kingdoms periods have, which past,
They like our bodies here, decline and waste,
Till their last ruin; and, as bodies, states
Beginnings, risings, fallings have and dutes:
And sure it is no hard matter to observe,
How states are healthful, thrive, decline and sterve.
But he is the Statist profitably wise,
That knows their sicknesses and remedies,
Be their disease in body, feet, or head,
By Prudence they may be recovered,
But he indeed is Master of his Art,
That keeps the infection from the head and heart,
The King and Army, for by these, lo all
Monarchs and Kingdoms flourish, rise and fall;
And sure we seldom see a remedy
Of such infection, but Phlebotomy.
Naught more (says Abishai) foments the rude
Seditions of the giddy multitude,
Than those our wandering Levites, discontent
At Churches, or the Kingdoms government;
Their reason why they are so disaffected,
Is, that they think their gifts too much neglected,
That they are not assumed, yet able are
The weight of government alone to bear;
And therefore new Church Orders will devise,
To make the people all the old despise,
And thus would bring into the peoples hate,
All ancient governors of Church and State.
Lo! this disease, now good experience finds,
Like plague of Leprosy, infects the minds
Of people, and instilling close dislike
Of Governors, at Church and State does strike.
These seem, at first, low on the ground to creep,
But soon they into Counsel Chambers peep;
Where, though they dare not reach up at the Crown,
They all that are above them would pull down;
And if our Rulers negligence give way,
Whereby they may but seem to bear the sway,
They such strange Church-disorders will propound,
As quickly would both Church and State confound,
Agreeing all to cross what Law commands,
Yet differing in their several demands.
Some Statists think that this distemper grows
The more, that Rulers strive it to oppose:
But our too late experience has found,
How dangerous it is, to give these humors ground,
Though scarce a great man meddles in these actions,
Except some few to strengthen more their factions;
I wish such to some newfound Land would go,
That we the sound might from the the infected know.
Alas! says Ioab, these vain idle rude
Distempers of the brainlesse multitude,
Are by a purge or vomit quickly spent,
Or turned into the bodies nourishment:
They most, in times of wanton peace, do breed,
Begot at first of Humor, and do feed
On Air, popular applause, I mean,
No Policy can them extirpate clean,
So long as there is moisture to supply
Juice to the root, if that once fail, they dye.
Many divine of changes in our state,
Because our King has been unhappy late,
Since his last marriage, his Child is dead,
His firstborn slain, his daughter ravished,
And Chileab is lost, his second Son,
So now his heir is M^^ch as Absolon.
Few but my self, our States disease do know,
Whereby so many troubles on us grow,
Our sickness is of sin even in the head,
Which (as diseases most by ease are bred)
Grew in the King, when he too much did yield
To pleasure, whilst his Army lay in field.
For whereas in all Battles he was wont
To be most valiant, and the first in front;
When we last went against the Ammonit^,
He in his Palace had another fight,
Till plainly I discovered, past all doubt,
The City Rabbab could not long hold out,
I sent for him to the taking of the same,
Lest it were called after by my name.
Not to delay thee long, although the King
Did sin in secret, God would have the thing
To all be known: vain hope it is to conceal
Our sins from men, which we to God reveal.
^weet Bathsheba, Jude as fairest Maid,
By diverse Princes courted, wooed and prayed,
At last was carried by the bravest Lord,
That ere in Monarchs quarrel drew a Sword;
A Hittite, but the noblest of his house,
Wise, modest, valiant and religious,
Who amongst King David's Worthies had a name,
And second was to none in worth and fame.
Nor was she fair without, and inly base,
But like Gold Picture in a Silver case,
Was by this Lord beloved, and liked again,
Thus fairest Dames make choice of bravest men.
A happy union and a blessed pair,
As truly virtuous as seeming fair,
In true affection tide, and linked in love,
As Spheres which by one mutual motion move;
So she him honors, and he is so kind,
They seemed two bodies governed by one mind:
Yet were not their affections more combind,
Than Love and Honor in them both conjoind.
Was ever Virgin to the Temple led,
More chaste than she into Vriahs bed?
To revelling she seldom would resort,
But was most part a stranger at the Court,
Whose strange and new attyres, she did not know,
Where Ladies naked breasts, and shoulders show,
Like Chapmen, who their wares show to the eye,
And bid you like for love, for money buy:
Love never friends more closely fastened,
No Turtles truer to each others bed.
There Love and Honor arm in arm did stand,
But ever Honor had the upper hand:
Whereof a proof to thee I Will briefly tell.
When Hanun had reproached Israel,
In violating with imprudent hands,
Our Kings Ambassadors, the sacred bands
Of mutual Amity 'twixt State and State,
By David sent, him to congratulate,
Their beards and garments shaving to the thighs,
In foulest scorn, as if they had been spies;
And that he saw, he stank in David's sight,
He hired the Syrian and the Aramite
Against our King, which when he understands,
He me commands to muster all his bands,
And men of might: of which not one did I
Wish more, than brave Vriahs company.
And therefore where my Officers I sent
To others, at his house, to him I went,
Where I them found inchain'd in Lovers charms,
Delighting sweetly each in others arms;
When I made known to them the Kings command,
Amazed they gazing each on other stand:
A while with dear affection, honor strove,
But Honor got the victory of Love.
And she begins; my Lords, I must confess,
I like my husband, know no earthly bless.
But not for beauty, wealth, or wanton love,
Did I desire to make him mine, above
All other Princes, that to me did sue,
But for his valor, worth, and honor true:
But since he cannot serve to my content,
Without his worths and honors detriment,
Go chearly forth, let it be never said,
With thee thy courage in mine arms is laid.
should you want men, these woman's arms should fight,
To be revenged on the Ammonite,
Who on Gods people put so foul a scorn,
^s never any Nation could have born.
These Sweet expressions of her loyal love,
(...) heart of flint, or sullen brass might move
To pity her: I must confess my heart,
Till then did never act a yielding part.
Thou know in what fierce battails I have been,
What cruelties in Conquests I have seen,
When we the hated City Rabbah sacked,
How diversely the common soldier rackt,
All of both sexes, were they young or old,
To make them show where they had hid their gold.
The streets on all sides echoed plaints and groans,
And childrens brains were dashed against the stones,
^ere babes hang sprawling on a Soldiers spear,
(...) Lady fair, one drags out by the hair,
Whilst other from her tear her rich attire,
^hen throw her naked body in the mire:
Lo here a child and mother, loath to part,
Are nailed fast together with a Dart:
Here little babes not knowing ill from good,
Do play and paddle in their parents blood:
All Captives which we took, thou sawst put under,
The Tile-kils, or with Sawes cut quite asunder:
^ome we with iron Axes hew and pare,
And some we under iron Harrowes tare.
All these fierce Hostile furies did not move
Mine heart, so much as these effects of Love.
So as indeed I was content to yield,
^athshebas breasts should be Vriahs field.
But she replied, Lord Ioab, I do hate
To purchase pleasure at so high a rate,
And therefore wished her husband to prepare
Himself for Arms, the rest should be her care.
A tender Mother that has only one,
Most careful is in breeding up that Son,
Soon as he for some place in School is fit,
Where are best helps for to enrich his wit,
When time's at hand, that he should thither ride,
And be disjoined from his Mothers side,
Although his absence grieves her at the heart,
Yet for his good, she is willing he should part,
She trusts some friend a Chamber to prepare
At School, whilst she for needful things takes care;
So Bathsheba commends her only one
To me, to care for, as my dearest Son:
Nor ever would omit, what might advance
Her husbands honor, worth and valiance:
Thus were we by our King sent out to fight
Against Ammon, Ishtob and the Aramite.
Where, as we near approached the City Gate,
We Arams host behind us spide, though late,
When as before us, lo! the Ammonite,
In Battle ready set, came out to fight.
When I the Battle thus in front did find,
Ammon before, the Aramite behind,
I put the choice of Israel in array
Against Aram, and the rest, my Abishai,
I did commit to thee, that thou should fight
Most valiantly, against the Ammonite.
Whom, if thou were unable to resist,
I promised thee mine aid, and if I mist
Thy help against Aram, thou should help again,
^ever, said I, play the valiant men.
We for our Cities, and Gods people fight,
^et him do what it seems good in his sight.
against proud Aram soon I got the day,
Which Ammon seeing, turned and run away
unto their Town, we to Jerusalem,
^eturn'd with honor, having beaten them.
^ut hauty Sirians, scorning one should tell,
That they were vanquished thus by Israel,
^reat Hadadezar, that same potent King,
To whom the petty Kings did presents bring,
^ends for the Aramites beyond the Flood,
and came again to make their quarrel good.
Which David hearing, them at Helam met.
^here both in battle each against other set,
^e all his Chariots and Footmen lost,
With Shoha that great Captain of his Host.
^ut when the Kings saw Hadadezer fell,
Their greatest King, before the host of Israel,
They made their peace, and being weak and poor,
^esolv'd to help the Ammonite no more.
Thou me about have with long stories led,
But what is this to the sickness of the head;
All this, says Abishai, I saw and know,
^ will forthwith, says Ioab, briefly show,
But we old men, ('it is held a fault in all)
Are in our Tales too circumstantiall.
But this that to my purpose was so fit,
^ could not without prejudice omit.
These were the special reasons moved the King
To root out Ammon, for the following Spring,
About the time that Kings go forth to war,
His Soldiers David mustered near and far,
And me against strong Rabbah with them sent,
Whilst he at home in ease lived, and content;
Where as one evening from his Couch he rose,
Which he did often use for his repose,
And walking on his houses Battlement,
To view the glorious Stars in Firmament,
(Which now the Sun had new withdrawn his sight,
Began to shimmer with their borrowed light)
Lo he from thence a glorious object spies,
Which makes his heart do homage to his eyes,
Out of the water he discerns a light
Arise, more glorious than the Queen of night,
And yet he thought it could not be the Moon,
Her beauty borrowed is, this was her own.
Yet 'twas a woman, but of such a feature,
As in her frame, all Arts conjoined with Nature,
Who sat all naked in a velvet chair,
Broad-spreading with white Comb her golden hai^*
Which as thin clouds do, often in Summers night,
Obscure the beams of fairest Cynthias light,
So shadowed her hair from David's eyes,
Her singular admired rarities.
But soon she leaps into the water light,
Where lo, she shines like to a Lilly white,
In purest glass, or as we see a Grace
Idea'd sweetly in a Crystal Case.
To make the way seem short, I to the life
Describe the beauty of this Worthyes wife.
One while with arms as if with oars she drives
Her swimming body, and anon she dives;
One while upright, she in the water stands,
Above her head it pa^hing with her hands,
Whose drops upon her hair like pearls did leap,
Which falling down do seem to mourn and weep.
But best might the particulars appear
Of her sweet counten^nce and beauty rare,
When like fair Roach (which on a Summers day,
Bove water leaps, as Fishes use to play.)
She leaves the Bath, and on a chair set higher,
Her Maidens haste with warmed clothes to dry her.
Then lo, her soft silk hair with curled folds,
Out-braves the brightness of sweet Marygolds,
Her Ovall from, her nimble vigorous eye,
Where Is sweetness, humbleness and mijesty,
Her brows thin hair, as silver fri^ge adorns,
Like Cynthias beams, when first she shows her horns:
Her cheeks sweet beds of Lillies and of Roses,
Betwixt which, like a rising hill, her nose is,
Beneath that lo her lips like Rubies show,
Or Red-rose bud that new begins to blow:
Below which, lo a valley dimpled in,
Us leads to flowery hillock of her chin,
Her Ivory neck, which does her head uphold,
Like silver handle to a cup of Gold,
On her fair shoulders is by joints so placed,
It turns like golden fane, yet stands as fast.
Beneath which rise her either si^ken breast,
Like pair of milk-white Pigeons in a nest;
Or like the first forbidden fruits of sin,
Whereof first Eve to Adam did begin,
Or like two bunches of a fruitful Vine.
And when she blushes like to sops in wine;
Her either hand as richest Cabinet,
Had on each finger Pearls and Diamonds set,
Each lim of her beseem'd even Beauties Queen,
I only now describe what may be seen.
But when her warmed clothes had sucked in
The water, loath to leave so fair a skin,
She from her chair leaps nimbly to her bed,
And from his sight with clothes was covered:
Which more amazed the King, than all the sight
Before could yield him comfort and delight:
So have I seen in clearest Summer night,
Dart from the skies a Lamp of shining light,
Whereat rude people stand amazed all,
And swear they saw a Star from Heaven to fall,
Which does portend, say they, great alterations
Of State, Sword, Famine, Plague or Inundations.
But how, says Abishai, at even-tide
Were these sweet Beauties by the King descri'd?
Quoth Ioab, brother 'twas not so late night,
Where Sun was set, but by the Heavens pure light,
The King might easily look down from his Tower,
And see a Lady bathing in her Bower:
Yea Abishai thou know in darkest night,
Where such a Sun does shine, there needs no light.
Thus he that late ascends the Battlement,
To view the glorious Stars, and Firmament,
And in them to admire Gods grace and glory,
With too much gazing, sings another story:
Lo he whose soul was like a weaned Child,
Pure, simple, abstinent, and undefiled,
Becomes impure, thus is base slime and dust
From heavenly thoughts proclive to fleshly lust.
He first looks to inquire, then with delight,
Next with consent, last with sharp appetite.
Thus Achan looked, liked and coveted
The cursed Gold, and thing prohibited.
Base lust of the eye, that sets our mind on fire,
And burns us with inordinate desire:
Vncircumoised boasting Philistin,
Who, if in single fight, he gets within,
Does conquer all, and therefore David chose
To fight with him at distance, never close.
But now that he is called to single fight
With spiritual Philistin, of greater might,
Contrary clean to that he did before,
Than closing, he desires nothing more;
And therefore soon as he could well inquire,
And find 'twas Bathsheba, he did desire,
He sends one of his Chamber, to invite
Her to the Court, sometimes to take delight,
Till her beloved Vriah did return,
And not to sit all day at home and mourn:
Glad was the woman, that her Lord and King,
Did so much for her Husbands honoring,
And says, though for Vriahs safe retire,
To pray and mourn I only do desire,
I will my self and him this thing denay,
Ere I my gracious King will disobey.
Soon as the King her in the Court does see,
Amongst the Ladies, like fair Cypress Tree,
Amongst the Shrubs, or Cynthia shining bright,
Amid the twinkling Stars in frosty night,
He first begins her beauty to commend,
And blushing kissed her cheek, and calls her friend,
And said that if he might a servant be
To such a beauteous Mistress: his degree
Of State should bow, her humbly to observe,
And do his best her favor to deserve.
Thus though her Husbands Honor first did bring,
This Dame to Court, yet proud now, that a King
Should there confess, he did such service owe,
(For few fair Ladies but their beauty know)
As ready was to take as he to offer,
All Complements of Court, the King would proffer,
Not once suspecting such a godly King
Would offer her the least dishonouring:
Nor could all Satan's cunning him have brought.
At first, to entertain so foul a thought,
But as a simple Lamb on flowrie banks
Of Jordan bounds, and leaps, and pla^es his pranks,
Till his fair shadow in the watery glass,
He spies, which seems the substance to surpass,
Whereon he nigher comes, and comes to look,
Till unawares he falls into the brook,
Whence he may strive to get out, but in vain,
The streams by force him carry to the Main:
Even so the King at first begins to play
With her pure hand, as on his Couch he lay,
Then gazing on her eyes and modest face,
Reflecting beauties, like a Looking-glass,
He unawares in Beauties snare is took,
Even as the Lamb was drowned in the Brook.
Oh lothsomnesse, deceitfulness of sin?
The sweetness, bitterness we find therein,
Beginnings, fawnings, growing, terror, smart,
Our weakness, Satan's envy, man's false heart!
Thus Mortals (which to Heaven should seek the way)
As Fishes, which in fresher water play,
Swim in delights, and lustful pleasures all,
Till unawares they in the dead-sea fall:
But as you evermore shall see one sin
Beget another, to lie hidden in,
So David, his Adultery to hide,
Commits first drunkenness, then homicide,
For she perceiving that she had conceived,
And fearing lest (for being so deceived)
The Lords and all the people would her blame,
Because her Lord could not beget the same,
Who had been three full months to battle gone,
Before her bathing, and the act was done,
She hereof closely certifies the King,
Who seeks thus to provide a covering,
He sends to me a Letter, which required
Vriah home, as if he had desired,
To know by him, how all things did succeed,
But 'twas to father what his wife did breed.
In brief Vriah comes, and does relate
To David mine, and all the peoples state,
And how the wars went on, and prospered,
Then David wished him get him home to bed,
Refresh thy self, thy journey has been great,
And after him he sends a mess of meat.
But brave Vriah, hating all delight,
Or pleasure, which disabled him to fight;
Among the Guard did all that night attend,
Nor would to his own house, and wife descend.
Which when the King, next morrow, understands,
He of Vriah thus the cause demands.
Brave Hittite, may thy King the reason know?
Why this last night, when thou did from me go,
You went not home, but tarryed with my Guard,
As of thy journey thou had no regard?
Who said, the Arc with Judah, Israel,
And my Lord Ioab in their Tents do dwell,
Abroad in the field: What then, shall I alone
Lie with my wife, and eat and drink at home?
As thy soul lives, and as thou liv'st, O King,
I am resolved not to do this thing.
The King yet caused him in the City stay
All that, and afterward another day,
In hope at last he to his wife would go,
But when he found that this way would not do,
He makes him in his presence sup that night,
And drink down healths, until his head was light,
Yet he his wife regarded nere the more,
But with the Guard all night lay as before.
Oh such brave Spirits, says Abishai, would raise
Unto themselves and us immortal praise,
Were they but, as they due deserve, regarded,
But see, says Ioab, how this was rewarded?
He brings a Letter signed with David's hand
To me, which did to this effect command:
"Of thee, and of thy host I did inquire
"By this, and find all things as I desire,
"This only now to thee, I do not find
"This Hittite answerable to my mind,
"And therefore set him foremost in the fight,
"Where thou discern'st the men of greatest might,
"And when he is in danger, soon retire,
"And let him dye: No other cause inquire,
"Of thy King David. Having this command,
My part was to obey, and not to stand
In disputation, were it wrong or right,
And therefore where I saw most men of might
Defend the walls, I brave Vriah sent,
Where all succeeded just to mine intent,
Of David's servants many likewise fell,
Both of Judea, and of Israel.
Whereof, when first I certifi'd the King,
He seemed much displeased with the thing,
But when he heard Vriah also di'd,
His wrath appeased, he thus again replied.
Salute thou Ioab, tell him after-care
Or grief avails not against the chance of War,
For thus the sword does usually devour,
All that do come within his reach or power:
Be not discouraged, make thine Army strong,
To be revenged of this and all our wrong.
What said his wife, says Abishai hereto?
Even mourned for fashion, as ^ich widows do,
Says Ioab, but as soon as that was done,
The King her makes his wife, and takes her home.
The joy to be a Queen soon dryes her eyes,
And with her husbands murderer she lies.
Wondrous iniquity, says Abishai,
I never heard the like, until this day,
A head distempered thus cannot but ache,
And make the heart and all the members shake.
He were a man of wondrous wisdom sure,
That could to this disease apply a cure:
Is not one Prophet left in Israel,
That dares the King of these offenses tell?
Yes sure, says Ioab, there is a skillful one,
Has searched this sore unto the very bone,
Good Nathan, yet with such a gentle hand,
He made the King his faults to understand,
By telling others, so the sore did press,
With prudent, gentle, pious tenderness.
For Prophets that reprove such faults in Kings,
Must strike at one, to sound out other strings,
And not reproach their errors to their faces,
Nor publish to the people their disgraces.
Since Bathsheb as conception did begin,
The King slept in this Lethargy of sin,
They both had like beginning, life and growth,
And have like bringing forth, and birth of both.
As skillful Leech to cure his Patients ills,
With gold often covers bi^ter wholesome pills:
So Nathan does this Parable apply,
A seeming-sweet but bitter remedy.
Pardon my Liege, says he, if Justice I
Desire, when sins to Heaven for vengeance cry,
Lo in a City were, nay which is more,
Still are two men, one rich, the other poor,
The rich had mighty Herds and Flocks, the poor
A little Lamb had only for his store,
Dear bought, which he at home with him did cherish,
And even amongst his sons and daughters nourish,
Drank of his cup, eat of his bread, and ay
As his own daughter in his bosom lay.
But lo, a stranger to the rich man came,
Who secretly purloins the poor man's Lamb,
Whereof he for the stranger does prepare,
And his own Heard and all his Lambs did spare.
Now as the Lord lives, David does reply,
The man that did the thing deserves to dye;
Besides he fourfold shall the Lamb restore,
Because he was so cruel to the poor.
As he that does besiege a mighty Tower,
Does use at first more policy than power:
But when the breach is made, and he got in,
To show his strength and courage does begin:
And as we see Ambassadors of Kings,
In forms are courteous, but advance the things,
Which unto them their master does command
With resolution, so does Nathan stand,
The breach with as much courage to maintain,
As he the same by subtle means did gain:
Thou art the man, says Nathan, thou alone
This vile abominable thing have done;
Thou art the rich, Vriah was the poor,
Thou have thy choice of wives, he one, no more,
Which thou have ravished, and her husband slain,
The wicked stranger, lust to entertain.
This is the thing I must make plainly known,
The words I speak are Gods, and not mine own.
I have anointed thee the King of all
My people, and thee freed from hand of Saul,
I gave to thee thy Masters house and wives,
And to thy hand committed all the lives
Of Israel and Judah, and would more
To thee have given, if thou had wanted store:
Oh! why should thou my Precepts thus despise!
And do this wicked evil in mine eyes?
The stout Vriah by thy sword is dead,
And thou his wife have taken to thy bed.
This Worthy often escaped more dangerous fights,
Thy sword has killed him, not the Ammonites.
The sword shall never from thine house depart,
Because thou have despised me, and art
Defiled with ravishing Vriahs wife,
And for thy pleasure took'st away his life.
Thus, says the Lord, against thee I will raise
Up evil in thine house, even in thy days,
Thy fruit begotten in Adultery,
Shall only breed thee sorrow, and so dye,
Thy Son with incest shall defile the bed,
Of thine own daughter, by him ravished:
Thy Sons shall rise up one against another,
And Brothers hands imbrew with blood of Brother:
Thy Wives shall be defiled in open light,
The Sun shall blush to see so foul a sight:
Thou sin'dst in secret, but this shall be done
In sight of all the people and the Sun.
As tender Oaks shak'd with fierce blasts of wind,
B^ yielding do the faster rooting find,
When stouter Oaks, which give no way at all,
Are thrown quite down, and ruin in their fall,
So it with David fares, whose heart relents,
And shakes and trembles at Gods menacements,
His sin confessing, but his Faith holds fast,
And sings this Peni^entiall Psalm at last.
PSALM. 51.
OF thy great goodness, Lord, some pity take
On me whom sin
Does now awake,
If thou in loving kindness wilt begin,
All mine offenses easily may,
Be by thy mercies done away.
^hen wash me thoroughly from this stain
Of sinful guilt,
Till none remain.
^ow I confess, O Lord, thou can and wilt,
Cause sin, which now me lies before,
Never to rise against me more.
against thee I, O Lord, have sinned alone,
And in thy sight
This evil done,
that judged, thou might be found most pure and right,
I full of sin, of good bereaved,
Just as my mother me conceived.
Thou truth do in the inward parts require,
Which to discern
Lord, me inspire,
So I of thee may secret wisdom learn:
With Hyssope purge me, I shall grow
More clean and pure than whitest snow.
Of joy and gladness make thou me to hear,
My broken bones
Thus shall thou cheer,
And into joyful Ditties change my groans,
Thy face turn from my sins foul hew,
My heart make clean, my spirit renew.
Cast me not out from thee for my demerit,
Nor take from me
Thy holy Spirit;
Recomfort, Lord! my will conform to thee,
So shall I sinners teach thy way,
And them convert that go astray.
From guilt of blood, O Lord, deliver me,
Oh help or never
Shall I be free,
So of thy goodness I shall sing for ever,
Open thou my lips, mine Organs raise,
Then shall my mouth set forth thy praise.
Thou sacrifice desir'st not, else would I
With all my might
Thereto comply,
Nor do thou in bur^t-offerings delight,
A troubled spirit's best sacrifice,
Broak contrite hearts thou wilt not despise.
Let thy protecting arms like walls embrace
Jerusalem,
And Sion grace;
Then our burnt offerings thee shall please again,
We will upon thine Altar lay,
Gifts and oblations every day.
Here Ioab ends, when noble Abishai;
^o thy discourse has shortened much the way,
Beyond the River I discern the plain,
That Iair, Manasses son, by sword did gain,
Upon which bordereth the Geshurite,
Ride on, we may see Talmai's Court to night,
And bring most welcome news to Absolon.
I know says Ioab well, what I have done:
This is a project of mine own devising,
To please the setting Sun, as well as rising;
Nothing more pleasing is to David's mind,
No service more the Princes heart can bind,
Nor to King Talmai be more acceptable,
Who will us gratify as he is able.
What Is he? says Abishai, a petty King,
Says Ioab, here on Gilead bordering:
Great Hadadezar was Lord Paramount,
And here did but as Tributaries count
These lesser Kings, till we at Helam slew
His Captain, and his Army overthrew.
Since that they all are servants to our King,
(Except old Talmai) and him Presens bring.
But night encroacheth now so on the day,
They leave their talk and look unto their way,
By which that night to Geshurs Court they come,
Most welcome to the King and Absalom:
For this was their Embassage from the King,
The young man to Jerusalem to bring.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
Israel rebelling.
SOL had no sooner ha^nessed his horse,
Rejoicing, Giant-like, to run his course,
His longest journey from the East to West,
When Talmai, who that nig^t took little rest,
(So were his thoughts ^a'ne up, and filled with care,
For's Grandchild Isreal's apparent heir,
And plotting both their powers to combine,
To subject to one head all Palestine)
To his Bedside did send for Absolon,
And as a Father counsels thus his son.
Besides thy royal birth, and riper age,
Thy strength of wit and goodly personage,
With virtues all, which fit a man to reign,
And with the people love and favor gain,
Thou have in highest Courts of Kings been bred,
And learned how subjects should be governed:
And howsoever thou now liv'st banished from
Thy Fathers presence, and thy royal home,
Yet lo, the peoples votes thee all design,
Great Iudahs King and Lord of Palestine:
The chiefest Arts we have in Courts to rise,
Is silence and dissembling injuries,
Acknowledging for savours all disgraces,
And giving for them thanks with smiling faces,
Yea, Kings must often. (I know to whom I speak thus)
Give way and smile at wrongs, or they will break us.
They that will curb their Peers and peoples factions,
Must look especially to their first actions,
For naught so sure establishes a Crown,
As then to merit honor and ^enown:
For such is ay the peoples waywardness,
They measure Princes virtues by success.
Of all we most obnoxious are to hate,
Such multitudes for us insidiate,
Our nearest kindred, servants, wives and friends
Pretending service but to have their ends,
Amongst all none so base pernicious are,
As th'impudent dissembling flatterer,
A close infection in a royal house,
And to the King and State most dangerous,
Beginning soon as they begin their days,
For all are taken with immoderate praise,
Yea in their crad^e they are rocked together,
No King but on this Lime-bush leaves a feather.
Oh! 'tls at Court a gainful occupation,
To pry into their Princes inclination,
And what they find them cover and desire,
That always to commend most and admire;
To have their words and actions ever lined,
^ust by the square they find their King inclined,
Be it to lust, excess, or cove ise,
These Brokers will new tricks for them devise:
Most infamous foul greediness of gain
They style good thrift, and earing for the main:
The infectious presidents of filthy lust
Sweet gentle Courtship, and the tolls unjust
Kings raise for fuel to their prodigality,
Are gloriously inti^led Liberality.
They take all lets out of the ways that lead,
To base desires, by shame prohibited.
Thus they all seeds of virtue seek to choke,
And cover over vice with virtues cloak;
So as should heavens to Kings no larger heart
Than to the common people here impart,
How should they quite themselves of these diseases,
Which now by custom common grown, so pleases:
For deep wise prudent Counselors of state,
That find reproofs procure them only hate,
Distinguish private vices of a King,
From public errors in administering,
And looking to the Kingdoms government,
Avoid all private means of discontent.
He that will m^n in due subjection bind,
Must, as the body, so command the mind.
The King and Priest here acts his several part,
One guides the hand, the other rules the heart,
Do never such sharp penal Laws compose,
If you their consciences leave free and loose,
The people will them desperately pervert,
Religion is the only ruling Art,
And holds upon the mind for better ^ye,
Than fear of any pain or penalty:
See it but in our meats of flesh and fish,
No Law makes them one day forbear a dish,
But let devotion bid a yearly Fast,
All will abstain, though forty days it last;
No humane Edict but a Law divine,
Could make your Jews abstain from flesh of Swine:
You see how here I my disccur'e apply
To yours, not to my own Church policy.
Wisely advised, says Absolon, to reign,
But how, my Lord, shall I the Kingdom gain,
For Isreal's Crown not as thy Geshur goes
To th'eldest son, but's at the Kings dispose,
And I have many causes just to fear,
This last born son is to the King so dear,
I of my birthright shall be dispossessed,
Except I in the peoples favor rest.
The peoples grace, says Talmai's but a blast,
A vapor that does like a bubble last,
Up suddenly of wind and water blown,
And with another blast as quickly flown,
Thou by such breath may rise up, but can stand
No longer than thou serve to their command;
They follow headlong after novelty,
By pride seduced or simplicity,
The proud are heads and authors of the faction,
The simpler but the hands and feet of action:
They both alike ambitiously dissent,
From Rules of Church and civil Government:
And always will applaud a new deviser,
To seem than all their Pred^cessors, wiser:
And thus by innovation of things,
They would enforce new Laws on Gods and Kings,
Admitting unto them no other measure
Of worship and obedience, than their pleasure:
Serve but their turn, thou shall their minion be,
Cross them, their s^vour as their censur's free,
Adventure not to fly upon these wings,
These are not made to raise but pull down Kings.
Oh but, my Lord, says Absolon, a Crown
Cannot be taken up, till it be down,
And therefore I affect, to learn the Art
Of drawing factious spirits to my part,
Of whom, against the King, I may have need,
If he design another to succeed.
The way, says Talmai, civil wars to breed,
Let Heavens, not I, appoint one to succeed,
But if they so on thy high fortunes frown,
The people must be courted for a Crown,
Thou art to strive with all dexterity,
To act thy part as in a Comedy,
For few of them the truth from error knows,
And nothing takes them more than glittering shows,
Congies, embracements, visits, salutations,
Large promises, fair speeches, commendations;
If you with real blessings them would please,
Provide free traffic, plenty, peace, and ease,
They war abroad than peace will rather choose,
May they sit free at home and hear good news:
But most of all the people to content,
Be always blaming present government,
To gain a Crown, thou early must and late,
Observe all suitors standing at the gate,
And where thou see a discontented brow,
Embrace him, ask the causes, why and how?
Approve his cause, however good or bad,
A factious spirit nothing more will glad.
Oh say, thy matter's good, thou needst not fear,
If that the King would take the pains to hear:
But he does solace with the Queen at home,
And never thinks to depute one in his room:
I must confess, my friend, it is not well,
Were I but made a Judge in Israel,
Your causes should be heard without delay,
And not as now put off from day to day,
That thou were better suffer injury,
Than take such pains to buy a remedy.
Since I with David first joined in Affinity,
I often have observed how your Divinity,
Prepares the people first to reverence,
And next them seasons with obedience;
Yea nothing more them right or wrong inclines,
Than as their Guides are sound or rash Divines:
Kings may command men's bodies as their head,
But peoples hearts are by their Prophets led.
And therefore as to civil Government,
So against Church-orders show thy discontent;
No Music is so sweet to peoples ear,
As evil of Church Governors to hear:
And if thou findst a Levite hot and young,
Of which but few, thou know, can hold their tongue
Of custom give him countenance and grace,
And mention thy dislikes when he is in place:
What then he hears thee and thy servants mutter,
He in the assemblies openly will utter:
For which if he be silenced as his due,
At Court soon for his restitution sue,
Where want of years, and indiscretion blame,
Thou of a zealous Prince shall get the name:
It skils not if his cause be good or bad,
His sufferings will to his credit add.
For all the people after him will run,
Commending highly all that thou have done,
And say, O had our Prince the Judges place,
None but such zealous men should be in grace.
As when a Company desire to bring
Renown and credit to some newfound Spring,
They give it our the water is most sure
And medecineable for every cure,
Then women, children, men, and all that hear,
To drink that water travel far and near,
In some it such a strong conceit does breed,
They of Diseases cured are indeed:
And as when we erect an Image new
Of any Deity, lo all the crew
We speak of, with their offerings thither flock,
And do their homage to a stone or stock,
Till daily use satiety does bring
To men, both of the Image and the Spring
So when the parents and near kinsfolk bring
A Levite that at the Altar scarce can sing,
With wondrous wit and gravity to preach,
Oh then, they all admire to hear him teach,
Yea giddy people run from far and nigh,
Whilst other neighbor Temples empty lie,
And by their violence and strong conceit,
Sublime his spirits to the very height,
Where he no longer can retain that grace,
Than till a new one, like him comes in place,
Then does their famous Prophets honor fall,
And like the spring and Idol is in all.
Let a great man, run riot, swagger, swear,
And for his lust and pleasure nothing spare,
If he familiarly himself acquaint
With such, they will publish him to be a Saint.
These are good means, but I advise that thou
Invent unto thy self some newfound vow,
Be it the vainest thing thou can devise,
They Will follow thee by droves to sacrifice:
As now you see them run most greedily,
To fasts maintained without authority,
Or t'heare a rattling shallow L^vite prate,
Whose tongue is interdicted by the State:
Do but disgrace old rules, and fashion new,
Thou shall their hearts^o thee for ever glue,
For nothing does the people so possess,
As humouring, their spiritual wantonness;
Nor can a Prince a project better cloak,
Than underneath a Sacrifice of smoke.
But now one tells the King, that Ioab staid
For Absolon, and therefore humbly prayed
Him haste to horse: So Talmai with a kiss,
And many blessings, does his son dismiss
To David, who consigned him to his place,
Nor might he come at Court to see his face:
And now that private life which wont him bring
Delight and solace, fitting for a King,
Is even of discontent become the nest,
His head can only on Court pillowes rest:
His three years sojourning in Geshurs Courts,
Have made him loath all wonted Country sports,
He therefore sends for Ioab him to bring,
Unto the Court, and presence of the King:
But David knowing well, that men in place
Encourage vice, if they offenders grace,
For twice twelve months would not endure to hear,
That Absolon should in his sight appear,
It Is well the mutherer may save his head,
And not be countenanced, though pardoned.
In this so strict was David to his son,
That Ioab dares not visit Absolon,
Until he set on fire his field of grain,
So what love could not, anger did constrain,
And now was Ioab more for fear than love
Compelled, thus for his son the King to move:
Thou know two years are past since I, O King!
Thy son unto Jerusalem did bring,
When thou consind'st him to his wonted place,
Nor ever since would let him see thy face,
I well perceiving 'twas against thy mind,
He should be graced and honored in this kind,
All visits have forborne, though often required,
Till now lo! he my Barley field has fired,
Lo, thus your Grace may see, I am compelled
By fire unto his just requests to yield:
And yet indeed I find thy sons desire,
To see his Father, hotter than the fire.
When I approacht his solitary gate,
I found him walking all disconsolate,
But soon as unto him my face appears,
His heart powers from his eyes a flood of tears,
And he begins, when thou me home did bring,
I surely thought it would have pleased the King,
To have accepted me to former grace,
And that I should have served before his face,
Else why should I from Geshurs Court have gone,
To live here solitary all alone?
Alas, what do I by my coming gain,
If in this prison I confined remain?
The Sun has full five times fulfilled his race,
Since I beheld my fathers cheerful face:
O bring me once again into his sight,
And let him hear my cause and judge upright,
Then if I seem unrighteous in his eye,
I willing am for my offense to dye:
Lo banishment and death is much more light,
Than live disgraced out of my Fathers sight.
Thus Ioab ^ubtly warms the melting heart
Of lon^ing David, whilst he does impart
This fi^all affection of his son,
And finds this parley has the fortress won.
As when an enemy besieges round
A Castle, which the Captain knows unsound,
Though at the first he valiantly pretend,
To hold the Fort out to the sieges end,
Yet if his foe him good conditions tenders,
He them accep's, and soon the Fort up renders:
So here the King, although for president,
He would not show his heart once to relent
For Absolon, yet thinking he did find,
By Ioab, how the young man was inclined,
Lo his affections yield, and grow more strong,
Because he them dissembled had so long,
And therefore for him sends, and with a kiss
His pardon seals, for all that was amiss.
And now is Absolon as great as fair,
In hope now Isreal's apparent heir,
But as we evermore proud mortals see,
In greater danger, in prosperity;
Then when adversity their sails do scant,
And prudence more appears in store than want:
So is it with Absolon more surfeiting
Of Grace, than with displeasure of a King,
Or of his former foreign banishment,
Great spirits loath all moderate content:
For though in humane judgment none indeed,
So likely was his Father to succeed,
If his ambition could it self contain,
Till age a period gave to David's reign,
And that the Crown had fallen to him by course,
Which now he sought to seize upon by force,
Yet his aspiring mind, impatient,
That time should thrust 'twixt him and his content,
Begins even now to travel with ambition,
That never finds lest stay or intermission
Of pains and throws, till like the vipers seed,
In coming forth it leaves the mother dead.
And now the rules of State old Talmai read,
By him in Iudahs Court are practiced,
And (like lusts stinking flame that all perverts)
He first takes peoples eyes and next their hearts.
Unwonted pomp and shows of splendor bright,
That used to take the peoples favor light,
Are with all State-magnificence prepared,
Lo, fifty foot attend him for his Guard,
His Charrets thunder, and his horses feet,
Most proudly trample up and down the street,
And all Jerusalem and Judah ring,
With daily triumphs of their hopeful King,
Their eyes and tongues entangled thus in snares,
He likewise fetters for their hearts prepares.
He rising early stands by the gate,
And for each suter is an Advocate,
His ear all causes hears, his tongue does flatter,
Could thou be heard my friend good is thy matter,
His hand even like his tongue still courting is,
His lips salute the meanest with a kiss,
And nothing gives him cause of discontent,
But this the present state and government,
That is by him as deeply censured,
As all his Clients causes flattered.
Thus as a Thief that breaks in by night,
(For these heart-s^ealers always shun the light)
Lays hold on every thing that he can get,
(And all is fish to them that comes to net)
Never pondering the weighty from the light,
No more had he respect to wrong or right,
For being crept at that by-window in,
Their hearts he seeks to steal away, not win.
Alas how little silly people knows,
Right to distinguish truth from glossing shows,
All is not gold, good friends, that glisters bright,
No natural color shows like painted white;
And now naught wants but some religious Cloak,
To keep the fire covered, lest it smoke,
The treachery of an ungracious son,
Must have his warrant from Religion:
The vow he made in Syria must be paid,
And (...) shall, for there the plot was laid,
How he the peoples hearts should steal away,
And, by pretended vow, the King betray.
Thus Hypocrites mock God to have their ends,
And foulest fact the fairest means pretends.
But nothing more could please the Fathers mind,
Than so devout a ^oly son to find
Returned from Geshur, that idolatrous Court,
Where they of true Religion make a sport:
Yet whilst he bows his knees, and humbly prays
God to accept that sacrifice of praise
At Hebron, where he first began to reign,
When Saul and's sons on Gilboa were slain,
His son is there projecting to cast down
^rom's Fathers royal head, the imperial Crown:
His doub^e guilt of feigned piety,
Such grace and favor wan in every eye,
That lo, two hundred honest meaning men,
Go with the Traitor from Jerusalem.
True hearted Israelites, whose just intents
Are sound and good, as is your conscience,
^oore silly Sheep, you right go, crastray,
^ust as your Guides direct you in the way.
Beware of them that holy vows pretend,
But have, like Absolon, a wicked end,
That under promise of reforming things,
Do reach at Crowns and dethronizing Kings,
Naught better than their fruits to you will show them,
Yet take these special marks whereby to know them;
They always with the times are discontent,
Still blaming States and Churches government,
Kings, Nobles, Judges, Priests and Rulers all,
Without respect within their censure fall;
Whose faults are greater in perspective shown,
But all must covered be that are their own.
They have an open greedy itching ear,
No time nor hands to practice what they hear:
Oh! prophesying is the only thing,
No duty else they know to God or King.
Well-minded people, heed well what you do!
Beware how you with such to Hebron go,
To offer sacrifice, which they often season
With high contempts, rebellion and treason.
And now the Prophet's tuning sweetest Lays,
Unto his God and Saviors endless praise;
When lo! a Messenger comes trembeling,
And thus begins, God save my Lord the King,
The hearts of all the men of Judah are
Turned after Absolon, these ears did hear
The Trumpets sound, the people cry amain,
In Hebron, Absolon as King does reign:
And further he has sent out spies to tell
The same to all the Tribes of Israel.
In fine, the Politician subtly wise,
Whilst he in Giloh offered sacrifice,
A wicked sacrifice as did thy son,
Is sent to, for to come to Absolon.
Oh my L^ege Lord! this has been plotting long,
Achitophels conspiracies are strong:
For still the people more and more increase,
With Absolon, the enemy of peace.
Ah, says the King, then all of us must fly,
^f we within the City stay, we dye:
For lo, the people ignorant and rude,
^he violent unbridled multitude,
^ike waves of raging seas do ebb and flow,
When neither we nor they the causes know:
^esist their fury, it will hotter burn,
Give way, it like the tide will back return,
They that cry loudest, Absolon does reign,
May be the first will bring us home again:
^ire popular ay like a shadow flies,
from them that follow her, and as fast hy's
To them that shun her, who speed best of all,
^atch but an empty shadow with a fall.
Thus was the King out of the City sent,
and all the Country mourned as he went,
^he Ark and Priests and all accompanied
^he King with tears unto the Rivers side:
^hen thus the King to Ittai; Ancient friend,
^he son of mine own bowels seeks mine end,
^hy should thou me from Ga^h accompany,
and so partake of my calamity?
^ow must wander out, and God does know,
^ere I shall return again or no.
^he greatest gift I to my friends can give,
(...) license to depart from me and live:
^hen Ittai thus: My dearest Lord and King,
(...) force not on me such dishonouring;
^o leave a King in danger merits blame,
(...) to forsake a friend, eternal shame,
^ith thee I am resolved to live and dye,
^o suffer thus is no calamity.
Thus Ittai past the ford, when to the King
The Priests and Levites the Ark of God did bring,
To whom he thus. Reduce into his place
This holy Arc, if after I find grace
With God A mighty, he again will bring
Me hither to behold this holy thing,
But if in me he cannot take delight,
Do he with me as seems in his sight:
This he to all: To Zadock then alone,
He thus begins with tears to make his moan,
Most reverend Priest, grave, wise, religious,
The Mediator 'twixt our God and us,
Yet art thou but a Type, though Arons son,
The true high Priest and Substance is to come:
I know the Arks presence, and thy gracious sight,
Would better us encourage to the fight,
And all our wars have been most prosperous,
Where Levites carried the Ark with us.
But I resolve now not to trouble them,
You shall return all to Jerusalem,
These holy things to thee committed are,
That thou of Gods true worship should have care,
Serve him, ye show thy duty to the King,
Which thou may best do, by discovering
The plots of wicked-wise Achitophel,
Which knowing, I the better may refell.
Thou see these Politicians devise,
To cloak their treasons under sacrifice.
Lo, both their vows religiously must pay,
At Hebron and at Giloh on a day.
For both the things, which they have vowed, are one,
To put down Gods anointed from his Throne.
Thou that the secrets of man's heart do sound,
Their hypocritical device confound,
And as they do thy holy Rites profane,
So make their worldly wisdom foolish, vain,
^he holy Bishop whose pure crystal tears,
^hine in his eyes like Diamonds on his ears,
Makes no reply, but to the City tends,
Whilst David, weeping up the Mount ascends
Bare footed, with his head all covered,
^ea all the people wept, and hid their head:
Where soon as David had done worshipping,
Hushai the Archite comes unto the King,
With garments torn, and earth upon his head:
To whom the King, should I thee with me lead,
Thou will be but a burden on the way,
But if thou go to Absolon, and say,
^s to thy Father I have been, O King!
(...) faithful Senator in counselling,
^o will I be a servant to his son,
^hou thus may me advertise how to shun
^he cunning projects of Achitophel,
Who, noble Hushai, thou remembrest well,
Has by his tongue and practices unjust,
Raised up himself to honor from the dust.
^hou know I made him for his eloquence,
Or rather his unskilful impudence,
The Steward of my private state and Crown,
Where he so close all under his long gown
Conveyed, and's fingers lickt by tricks unknown,
He purchases a City for his own,
(...) raised him to my highest judgment Seat,
Where finding him for me too potent-great,
And his proceedings hollow and unsound,
Projeeting cross to all I did propound,
I thought it fit to ease him of his place,
Which taking for an undeserved disgrace,
He ever since to cross my best intents,
My people humors in their discontents;
And as he at the first had learned the Arts,
To take their purses, now he catches hearts:
And winds their suffrages as in a string,
^hey please the people best, that cross the King.
None e're was more for my prerogative,
So long as by it he eould rise or thrive;
But soon as he to his high pitch was flown,
None ever labored more to beat it down:
Not that I would for gain, by flatteries,
Trench on my meanest subjects liberties,
Who never duly will our Laws observe,
Except Kings by example them preserve,
In making them our subjects rule and measure,
And not our own, or Judges will and pleasure,
For Laws come all from purest Justice stream,
And peoples safety is the Law supreme,
But this must shadowed be from peoples eyes,
Who if they fear not Kings them soon despise.
My dearest, honest Counselor of State,
Thou see they make Religion but a hait
To catch my people, and betray their King,
Oh! therefore help me in discovering
Their most flagitious tr^asons, and confound
Achitophels devises most profound.
With thee is Zadock and Abiathar,
To whom discover all that thou can hear,
They by their sons to me the truth will send,
That I may shun the evil they intend.
Thus by thy Counsel wise thou shall defend
All these my people, and thy faithful friend.
When Hushai thus, the Laws of every Nation,
^o chiefly tend to common preservation
Of peoples health and safety, which depend
All on the King their head, whom to defend
We are obliged in this political,
As members in the body natural,
And to their counsel wise submit as they,
(...) therefore shall thy just commands obey.
Now up was Israel in Arms and Laws,
Became as tame as sleeping Lions paws,
For where wars rage, Laws execution cease,
Especially when Princes break the peace.
And as the Plague that is in a City bred,
Does over all the Country soon dispread,
So spreads the infectious Leprosy of sin,
^f it amongst the Princes first begin,
The people fuel to the fire bring
Of any vice, ensampled by the King.
Thus Absolons profound conspiracy,
Has turned plain-dealing all to policy,
Now faith and loyalty are out of fashion,
And treason's grown the only occupation:
When Ziba with two Asses sadeled,
Laden with Raisons, Wine, ripe fruits, and bread,
Which he for David and his men did bring,
Blames lame Mephibosheth thus to the King.
Let me find grace and favor in thy sight,
My gracious Lord, whilst thou prepares to fight
For Sovereignty with trai^rous Absalom,
Mephibosheth as neuter sits at home,
In hope when both have spent your strength and store,
The people will his right to him restore.
Then Ziba, said the King, thine be his lands,
God me deliver from these Traitors hands:
This like a cunning curre could closely bite
Yet never bark, and like a Thief by night
Purloin his Masters living and good name,
But Shimei dares thus openly defame
The King himself: Thou man of Belial,
Thou bloody murderer of the house of Saul,
God justly now shall bring upon thy head,
Even all the guiltless blood which thou have shed,
And give thy Kingdom to thy rebel son,
Which thou by wicked means from Saul have won:
And more than words, he throws stones, even then
When David had about him all his men:
Yet would he not let Abishai go take
From him his head, though he did offer make,
But (...) humble sinner, free from passion,
Deserving rather pity and compassion,
Than now to be insulted over so,
When God for sin had humbled him so low,
Replies thus gently, it to us belongs
Not to revenge, but meekly suffer wrongs,
Let us not punish him, but humbled be,
With mo^rning, anger cannot well agree:
Alas who knows, but that the Lord has sent
Him here, to curse us for our chastisement?
Not that I Shemei's malice will excuse,
For that is his own, and though God does it use
To punish past, or sins to come prevent,
It frees him not from guilt or punishment;
But I acknowledge all these strokes from God,
And therefore now will kiss, not burn the Rod:
The son of mine own bowels seeks my right,
And life; Then much more may this Benjamite,
With false reproaching scandals me defame,
It may be God will bliss me for this shame.
I that the Spear took from Saul's sleeping head,
And would not suffer thee to smite him dead,
And cut his garments lap off in the cave,
Am now reproached for blood, where life I gave;
Did not I cause the Amalakite to fall,
Who brought me word that he had killed Saul,
And Banaahs and R^^habs blood he shed,
When unto me they brought their Masters head?
Yea lame Mephibosheth, to rule unable,
Sits like a Prince, and eats at mine own Table.
I do confess my guiltiness of blood,
But for Saul's house, I ever did them good,
But David's gentleness and patience,
Emboldneth Shimei in his insolence,
So as he rails on, and for more disgrace,
Takes stones and dust to throw in David's face.
Oh most incomparable patience!
A King to bear this Subjects insolence,
But wrongs are never so easily overcome,
As when we notice take from whence they come.
But now Ahimaaz and Jonathan,
To David and the host all posting ran,
And wished them all to pass the flood that night,
Before they were constrained to the fight,
So all are past over Iordane ere the day,
When Jonathan begins thus on the way,
No sooner did the Priests our Fathers bring,
The holy Arc, by the command, O King,
From Kedrons Book up to Jerusalem,
When thy son Absolon and all his men,
The men of Judah and of Israel,
The City entered with A^hi ophel.
Oh how did knees then bow and voices ring,
God save King Ahsolon, God save the King,
So fond of new, so made their old to leave,
As if all failed, they would themselves deceive.
But oh! I cannot but with horror tell,
The bellish counsel of Achitophel,
Who strongly to secure his part and faction,
Before he ran too far into the action,
And lest upon a filial submission,
Thou should be reconciled, and grant remission:
Besides the usurpation of thy State,
He counsels him thy bed to violate,
That if high Treason could not make all sure,
Most horrid incest should his part secure;
For when they thy ten Concubines did find,
Which thou to keep thy house had left behind,
He counsel gave to spread an open Tent,
Upon thy houses highest B^ttlem^nt:
Where Absolon with every of them lies,
Before the Sun and all the peoples eyes:
Which damned counsel, and most beastly spectac^e,
They all approve even as an heavenly Oracle.
Most divellish plot, says David, now I see
The danger of Hells deepest policy,
Where wickedness and wisdom both combine,
None can defend us, but a power divine.
In this deep plot see how Achitophel,
Does imitate the Counselor of Hell,
Who gives like counsel unto every son
Of God, as here he puts on Absolon,
To bring's past hope of reconciliation,
He thus in^idiates each man's inclination:
Can he but make us Traitors to Heavens King,
What sin's so foul but he on us will bring?
From ease to sloth, from sloth to foul excess,
From thence to lust, from lust to wantonness,
Incest, Adultery, and Homicide,
Which at the first we seek to cloak and hide,
But grown in time, by custom, past all shame,
Upon our houses tops the same proclaim.
O subtle Politician, wicked fool
Achitophel! taught in an Atheists School:
Can one that thinks of God, that judges right,
Hope by such crimes to prosper in his sight?
Thou either think there is no God of might,
Or else resolv'st with Satan his despite;
But he that in the heaven above does reign,
Thee scorns, and thine imaginations vain:
Thy hellish counsel, and this filthy lust,
Serve but to execute his judgments just:
I closely did by lust my God offend,
He pays me openly what I did lend.
I privily my Subject did betray,
My son acts treason in the open day:
Profoundest depth; the Almighties sapience,
Thus turns our sins into just punishments,
Yet leaves the offenders without all excuse,
Their malice is their own, his but the use.
Oh that my Absolon, my son would yet
Return, I all offenses would forget,
For I have many more than these committed
Against my God, yet has he all remitted,
And though the Divill like Achitophel,
Had almost plunged me in the jaws of Hell,
And so provoked my Fathers indignation,
There was small hope of reconciliation,
Yet I no sooner did repent and pray,
But God replied, thy sins are done away.
Oh high exceeding riches of his Grace,
Which all his works in heaven and earth surpass!
As Absolon this wickedness has done,
In sight of men, of Angels, and the Sun,
So add we sin to sin, till past all shame,
On houses highest tops we them proclaim:
Should each man's secret sins be seen to other,
Alas! who would endure to see his Brother.
But all of them are open in his eye,
Yet he, to save us, is content to dye,
And at the time appointed will be slain,
Mean while the innocent Lamb endures the pain.
Oh who can mind that Lambs sweet patience,
And not remit all wrongs without offense.
Then David poured out such a flood of tears,
His servants all lament, not one forbeares,
For as a stone in midst of water thrown,
Makes circle after circle till it is grown
So large, it opens even from side to side:
Even so did David's lamentations slide
Through all the Camp, that Jonathan forbeares
His farther speech, and joins with David's tears.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
Ahithophel hanging.
OH that so impious an Achitophel,
Should counsel in the Court of Israel!
So wise a Senator to such a King,
Should end his days so fondly in a string.
See what becomes of wisdom without grace,
And compassing bad ends by vices base,
They through the ways of blindest error tend,
And like to their beginning have an end.
And now the King repressed had his tears,
When Jonathan begins thus to his ears:
Soon as the villain had by this devise,
Made Absolon thus odious in thine eyes,
Lo he invents a second policy,
Thus to secure a sudden victory.
Choose me, says he, twelve thousand men to fight,
And I will set upon the King this night,
All wearied now, he with so weak a hand,
Cannot our unexpected force withstand:
I will amaze his host, and smite the King,
And home in peace to thee thy people bring.
Pernicious counsel! who did this prevent?
Says David, had my son twelve thousand sent
Against us, when we lay on the other side
Of Jordan, I and all my host had di'd:
We then were unprepared, faint, wearied,
Our courage danted, and our spirits dead.
Thy Son and Elders all of Israel,
Says Jonathan, did like t^is Counsel well,
But Hushai thy old favorite and friend,
Came unto Absolon, and did pretend
To do him service, and thus bowing prays,
God grant the King long life and happy days.
Is this thy kindness, says he, thou do show
Unto thy friend, why did not with him go?
My Lord, says Hushai, thou this day shall prove,
That I the King did more than David love,
For with the man, God and the people give,
By voice this Kingdom, I resolve to live,
And be his servant, if thou please to grace
Me so, that I may stand before thy face,
The service I with David have begun,
Shall be continued to the King his son.
Thus to such trust he with the King is grown,
He makes his secret counsel to him known,
Amongst the rest this of Achitophel,
Which he as politiquely did refell.
My gracious Lord, says Hushai, it is a thing
Of highest wisdom to advise a King,
But now so deep a Counselor of State
Has gone before, it does me more amate.
Achitophels advise is always prime,
Yet not to be allowed at this time.
Thou know thy Father and his men be strong,
And have in wars been exercised long,
Who neither weary nor weak-handed are,
But chaufed like a fierce and angry Bear
Robbed of her whelps: Besides thy Father's wise,
Most expert in all warlike exercise,
And will not with his men lodge in the plain,
Lo, many caves and holes do yet remain,
Which were his haunts, when in the wilderness
Saul sought him and his Army to oppress.
From whence he on a sudden will affright
Thy men, some killing, putting some to flight:
So shall a rumor straight abroad be blown,
That thou and all thy host be overthrown.
The King has often been proved too strong to yield,
Thou never trid'st thy fortune in the field,
Be well prepared in thy first enterprise,
For thereby does thy credit fall or rise;
The people ebb and flow even like the tide,
And ever fall unto the stronger side,
Like drunken men they to and fro do reel,
And change as often as Fortune turns her wheel.
I therefore do advise, whilst thou do stand
In Grace, with all the people of the Land;
(For who is he, that if thou do but say,
Come to mine aid, but will thy word obey)
Thou muster all the people in the Land,
From Dan even to Bersheba, like the sand,
And that thou forth in person go to fight,
Thus will we come against him, with such might,
And multitudes: we will set upon him all,
Thick as the dew upon the grass does fall:
And if he get within a walled Town,
We will with ropes pull all the City down,
Not ^uffering a stone upon a stone,
Of all his men we will not leave him one:
By these devices Hushai did refell
The dangerous counsel of Achi^ophel:
Which though for best the Elders do approve,
Yet Hushai's more the King and people move.
Oh sure, says David, God would th^s confound,
By weak, the Counsels politic, profound,
He will me re-establish in my Throne,
And overthrow the plots of Absolon.
Lo Hushai showed himself a faithful friend,
And brought to pass the thing we did intend;
But how did you these counsels understand?
Hushai, says Jonathan, them out of hand,
Unto the Priests our fathers close convai'd,
Who gave us notice of them by a Maid.
I and Ahimaaz lay in a Well,
Near to the City, called En-Rogell,
To which a Maid (as if she went for water)
Comes and enformeth us of all the matter:
Into the City durst we not adventure,
For no man might come out, that in did enter:
Yet could we not this thing so closely hide,
But we were by a young man both descri'd,
Who telling it to Absolon the King,
He servants sent us back again to bring:
But as we had before at En-Rogell,
So at Bahurim lay we in a Well,
Upon whose mouth a good old woman spread
Ground Corn, that so we might be covered:
And when the servants of King Absalom,
Inquired of her, what was of us become,
Like that good Rahab, which did hide the spies,
To save us, she excuses did devise,
When therefore they had searched and nothing found,
They back returned, we came out safe and sound,
And hasted hither thee this news to bring,
That thou might know the danger of the King:
For who does know but wise Achitophel,
May win thy son and men of Israel,
To take his counsel, and thee follow fast,
Before that thou had over Jordan past?
Whilst Jonathan yet speaks, one comes to tell
Another project of Achitophel,
Who seeing Hushai's counsel highly prized,
And that his own, though better, was despised,
Rides hom on's sadled Ass, and in despite,
The King such Oracles profound should slight,
His house and family first ordered,
His days even with a halter finished,
And was interred in his fathers grave;
Such end, says David, wicked Traitors have,
Their worldly wisdom is to folly brought,
And, with their breath, their thoughts all com to naught:
This man that able was to rule a State,
His furious passions cannot moderate,
And he that for the public was so wise,
Now like a wicked fool turns mad and dies.
Thus whilst he strives for wisdoms highest room,
He falls into extremest follies doom:
This is the life of all, and this their end,
That here on worldly wisdom do depend:
Wisdom and folly ay their life attend,
And them accompany even in their end,
They Cities can in peace and wealth maintain,
But let there hearts be irreligious vain;
Their worldly states, they like Achitophel
Can order, but their souls let hang in hell.
Vain wisdom! that does so our thoughts molest
Abroad, not caring what is in our breast,
Fond fool, in order thus his house to set,
And both his soul and body to forget.
But Hushai's counsel now is followed,
And all the men of Israel mustered
By Absolon, in number like Sea-sands,
The foulest Treasons want no helping hands:
For as at first a little ball of snow,
By turning often; does great and greater grow,
Till it unto so huge a heap does rise,
There many days it after melting lies:
Even so this Traitor, who at first began
With those two hundred men, who with him ran
To Hebrons sacrifice, in time is grown
To mighty heaps, and multitudes unknown,
Who over Jordan now do pass with him,
Even as the King comes to Mehanaim:
And now lo, both these mighty armies lie
In Gileads Plains, resolved the day to try,
Where Amasa by Absolon is made
The Captain of the host, in Ioabs stead;
But he that was expelled from house and home
By his own people, and son Absolon,
Now finds abroad all duty and respect,
God never his does finally neglect:
For as Gods Angels at Mehanaim met,
Good Jacob with his enemies beset,
Esau before his face, Laban behind,
And ministered sweet comforts to his mind,
So there an host of men come to the King,
And earthen vessels, Beds, and Basins bring,
Beans, Barley, Lentiles, Flower, parcht Corn and Wheat,
Cheese, Honey, Butter, Sheep, and Beeves to eat:
The son of that discourteous Ammonite,
That David's Legates did so foul despite,
And Machir of Lodebar, who was all,
Till lately, to advance the house of Saul,
(For there was lame Mephibosheth maintained,
Who sole of Jonathan alive remained)
With old Barzillai that rich Gileadite,
Where Ishbosheth so long maintained his right,
Did all these things abundantly supply,
To Princely David and his company.
For they were weary in the wilderness,
Faint, hungry, thirsty, and in great distress.
Oh who does know the happiness of Rest
And Peace, but they whom civil wars infest!
Where beating of the Drums, and Trumpets sounds,
Are like the dreadful callings of the hounds,
When in the morning they the fearful hear,
In open field, do summon to appear:
Who thinks each bush she sees, stands to belay her,
And every one she meets, comes to betray her.
Most direful are the effects of civil wars,
Where son of his own loins no father spares,
Brother embrewes his hands in blood of Brother,
And dearest friends do butcher one another.
One by an Engine bullets casts and stones,
Wherewith he breaks his wives and childrens bones:
Whilst they cast stones down from the City wall,
Which on their husbands head or parents fall:
Here servants for the duty, which they owe
Their masters, pay them with a mortal blow;
And they are paid for wages, from their master,
With broken pates, which never need a plaster.
Here Kings whom duty binds to defend
Their subjects, seek their ruin and their end:
And subjects count it honor, law, and right,
Against their Sovereigns dreaded face to fight,
All is with horrible confusion filled,
Farms uninhabited, their Lands untilled,
Their Kine, whose Milk does yield abundant food,
Suckle the hungry Soldiers with their blood:
And Shepherds that the plains all over stock,
Are glad to save their lives, and lose their flock.
All Laws are silent, Arms do all in all,
And strongest put the weakest to the wall:
Like savage beasts their fellows each assail,
Where strength and fury against all right prevail:
Like Pikes in pond the most of might and power,
Do all the other underlings devour.
Here heaps of bodies lie unburied,
Here Infants slain, and Virgins ravished,
Nor is the peril of the enemy
More dangerous than privy treachery:
Where great ones seem to take their Sovereigns parts,
Yet cleave unto the Rebels with their hearts:
And therefore him unfaithfully advise,
Disclosing's secrets to his Enemies,
Amongst such Traitors good and loyal held,
More peril is at home, than in the field.
These and a thousand more calamities
Of civil wars, now the Hebrews miseries,
And bred at first on this side Iordanes flood,
Are forded over now to Ephraims wood:
Which though ambition them at first begins,
God sends for scourges of the peoples sins.
But Absolon that might no longer reign,
Than he the peoples madness could maintain,
(Besides he many of their hearts did find
From him unto the better part inclined)
Marched on, till both the Armies were in sight,
On purpose to provoke the King to fight:
And David, who was stronger now become,
By many friends, that to his aid were come,
(It thinking foul dishonor for a Crown,
To be besieged in a walled Town,
Caused Ioab draw his men out of the gate,
That he might view them all, there as he sat:
Where he appoints some Captains over ten,
Someover hundreds, some a thousand men:
For all, or most part, of his old Commanders,
To follow Absolon had left his standards.
When Ittai, David's prudent faithful friend
Begins, my Lord, stay here, thy servants send
Against these Rebels, for our King to fight,
Why should we hazard putting out our light?
What though ten thousand of thy people fall?
Thy life is of more value than us all,
True-hearted Subjects more will every day,
Turn after thee, and fall from him away,
With which we will battle after battle try,
Till God and our good cause give victory.
When thus the King: Ioab and Abishai,
And Ittai you are men, on whom this day,
My life, my Kingdom, and my State relies,
And therefore I will do as you advise:
The Army order as you shall think fit,
To each of you a third part I commit,
Let Ioabs might for our main ^attail stand,
I^tai and Abishai, the wings command.
But good my friends, remember Absolon,
Forget not that he is your Sovereigns son,
Entreat the young man gently for my sake,
On's youth and my gray hairs some pity take;
This charge he in the gate, with many tears,
Gave all the Captains in the peoples ears.
But Absolon, who found the people totter,
And waver like the Seas unstable water,
And that the Tribeson this side Iordans flood,
(Who for the King more than the Rebels stood)
Resolved to dye, all in the Kings defense,
Against his sons rebellious insolence,
Raised on his Mule, and armed in warlike fashion,
To all his Army utters this Oration:
My friends and fellow soldiers, not mine own
Content, or private coveting the Crown,
Me caused these Arms and Weapons up to take,
But for the public profit and your sake:
Alas! you know, how bra^e and plenteously,
I might have lived, in all prosperity,
Grace, honor, credit, glory, and renown,
Naught wanting, but the dangers of a Crown;
Of which, succession made me not so sure,
As all your votes and wishes did secure.
But this your favor to the rising Sun,
Which by my love and care of you I won,
Was made high treason by these, to the King,
Who of the State have all the managing,
Whose tirannous oppressions should I name,
I should la^ open mine own, and Fathers shame.
For such do rule the King, that are not able
To rule themselves, a thing intolerable.
This must be righted: I you hither bring
To fight against these Tyrants, not the King;
It Is yours, and not my cause, for which we fight,
I only lend my counsel, strength, and might.
My friends and kinsmen, I you all leave free,
Go on which side you most desire to be,
Some tyranny account a benefit,
So they at home in peace may quiet sit,
And rather had the heaviest burdens bear,
Than noise of Drums and Trumpets sounding hear:
Such wish I to their Cities soon return:
But you brave friends, whose hearts do inly burn
With zeal and hate, against public tyrannies,
And seek to vindicate these injuries,
Whom by your faces brave alacrity,
I easily from base Cowards can descry:
As with brave courage you with me remain,
With me as victors you shall ever reign:
Whilst they whose hearts them fail for cowardice,
Shall lie and groan still under tyrannies.
As Moses led you by a mighty hand,
From bondage of a cruel Lord and Land,
So come I up, resolved to set you free,
From all oppressions, wrongs and tyranny.
The justness of our cause shall us acquit,
But you that are so miserably light,
Again for Aegypts fleshpots to return,
Though you their Brick and Lime for ever burn,
Return, I say, and live in your own City,
Your lightness merits not such blame as pity.
Since I returned from Geshur to this C^urt,
I viewed your grievances of every sort;
Tell me to which of all your causes here,
I have not lent an understanding ear,
Your suits were good, but either none there were
Deputed of the King your plaints to hear,
Or else the Judges wanted time and leisure,
All must attend from Term to Term their pleasure.
Oh! there is no more gainful occupation
Than Law, in practice with the Jewish Nation:
Clerks, Patrons, Proctors, Lictors, more abound,
Than Merchants, Farmours, Soldiers, can be found,
And whence live these, but on the injuries
Of you, my people, and your miseries?
As Winds by Conjurers are often up blown,
That Conjurers again may get them down:
So do these Lawyers, suits and questions raise,
Not for their Clyents profit, but their praise.
Nor will they them dismiss with little gain,
For many suits eternally remain,
With so great costs, as they that overcome,
Had better been condemned when they begun,
And even as Soldiers, by continual jarres,
Grow senseless of the cruelty of wars:
So Lawyers used to wrongs and injuries,
Compassionate no Clyents miseries.
I cannot find that all the civil broiles,
So much oppress the subject, as the toiles
Men take, when they for justice sue and right,
More safe in field, than at the bar to fight.
Have not some Courts yet in your memories,
Doubled against all equity their fees,
As if they had no table, law, nor task,
But you were bound to pay what they will ask:
Which the unlearned deskmen to such states does raise,
And leaves Professors only place and praise.
These and more grievances I will redress,
And make the number of your Lawyers less,
Which, when they have no place to act their parts,
Will study other profitable Arts:
I will appoint for pleadings certain days,
And Judges to do right without delays.
Yea many other wrongs I will reform,
The Levites, which your consciences inform,
Shall take the tenths of all the souls they teach,
Where now dumb Priests have all, that never preach:
Your great ones now do only stand for show,
And them that bear the burdens keep full low.
(Thus peoples itching ears the Rebel feasts,
By railing on their Governors and Priests)
A trite and common way to palliate
Rebellion, to traduce the present State,
That makes the people against their Rulers rise,
The rude and ignorant against the wise,
This makes the commons side against the Peers,
The worst of ills, the utmost of our fears.
But now the more to encourage you to fight,
We war against the broken Ammonite,
Whom late you did with Sawes and Harrows tear,
And now aids David not for love, but fear.
Barzillai that rich ancient Gileadite.
Who comes with wealth, not power to the ^ight,
And Machir of Manasses, who do bring
Great store of wealth and victuals to the King,
Will add but little honor to the day,
But they will wondrously increase the prey.
For since the Tribes on Iordans other side,
Stand for our right, and these from us divide,
Well may we all their goods and Cattels take,
And preys of all their Towns and Cities make.
This oily speech of his did frame the heart,
Of most of all his Soldiers, to his part:
^ut most those that by wars hoped for increase,
And more than death did fear a needy peace.
But the Armies now on both sides draw so near,
They each to other terrible appear.
Near to Mehanaim there is a Wood
Ignobled, for much loss of Hebrews blood,
Where when as Ammon war proclaimed had,
Against the Inhabitants of Gilead,
And nothing his ambition would suffice,
But all the Land that over Jordan lies.
Lo, valiant Ieptha comes to their aid,
And all their foes in open field dismayed,
Which Ephraim bold (taking in foul despite,
That Ieptha without them should go to fight)
Him challenged openly upon the plain,
Where all are put to flight, that were not slain,
And taking Iordans passages beneath,
Slew all, that could not utter Shiboleth:
In this Wood, Ioab rather chose to train,
And rank his men, than on the open plain,
For seeing's foes did two to one abound,
He took the advantage of a narrow ground.
But Absolon most eager of the fight,
Presuming on his number, force, and might,
Calls out, My friends, brave courage on our side,
The Cowards in the Woods themselves do hide,
Should they our numbers see in open field,
Their courages and hearts would fail and yield:
You fight not now with men, but chase the Hind,
Which we in bushes, woods, and thickets find.
This said, the Trumpets sound, they give the sign,
The Armies meet, and both in battle join,
The Rebels Host over all the plain are spread,
The Kings was close, compact, well ordered,
Both meet so close, they leave no little space,
Men's bodies against bodies fill the place,
Swords against swords, a Spear against a Spear,
Some kill, and some are killed, no sparing there.
In such close ranks there is no choice at all,
They victors are that stand, they dye that fall.
The ecchoing woods rebound with shouts and cries,
Of wounded men, and shriekes of such as dies.
Yet clashing of men's Arms yield such a sound,
That it does all the other noise confound.
No man his help lends to his nearest friend,
To save his life, or haste his wished end,
In heat of Battails ay the gentlest breast
Is as remorslesse, as the cruellest.
But now the Kings two wings give back to train
Their foes, in compass of the Battle main,
And other close ambushments in the Wood,
By Ioab laid to make his party good.
Where stakes, pits, thickets, trees, wild beasts conspire,
To pay rebellious Traitors duest hire:
Lo here a company unwares do fall,
Into some covered pit, are drowned all;
Here one does seek the enemies sword to shun,
And to the paws of cruel Beasts does run;
Here one puts on his ^ourser fresh and free,
And his own brains knocks out against a Tree:
One seeking to avoid the cruel push
Of sharper Pike, is hanged in a bush:
All had ill footing, but who ere did fall,
Was certain to be trodden down of all:
Here is a quagmire, where some sticking fast,
Their fellows following tread them in for have;
One leanes against a Tree to take his breath,
And lo a Serpent stin^s him to the death:
Here is a Ditch, in which so many fall,
It now is filled, the rest pass over all.
Thus by the Wood more perish than the Sword,
Such help the Heavens to Traitors ay afford!
But whilst before his Host the Rebels fall,
The King falls to his Arms spiritual:
(For like to Children then we come to God,
When we lie underneath our Masters Rod.)
"Oh God, judge thou my cause, says he, do right
"Against my foes, with whom I now do fight,
"I never them offended to this hour,
"And yet they all my soul seek to devour,
"Shall they escape thus with their wickedness?
"Nay, thou, O Lord, shall bring them to distress:
"But now I pray against him, whom most I love,
"Oh therefore had I wings even like a Dove,
"Then would I fly away, and be at rest,
Until these stormy winds and tempests ceast.
When lo, the watchman lifting up his eyes,
One running to the City-ward espies,
Which he as suddenly tells to the King,
Oh sure, says David, he does tidings bring,
Ah, says the watchman, I a second see
Come running, but know not who it should be.
But lo, the first, oh King, does seem to run
Like to Ahimaaz, old Zadocks son.
Ah! says the King, he ay good news does bring,
Who lo, then comes and says: All Is well, O King,
God blessed be, who now has set thee free,
And given unto thy hands, thine enemy.
But oh! says David, is the young man well?
My Lord, says he, Ioab and Israel,
Prevailed in the field against ^hy son,
Before I came away, the field was won;
But when he me and Cushai to thee sent,
I tumults saw, but knew not what they meant:
Then turn aside, says David, stand by here,
Till Cushai with his tidings does appear;
Then Cushai comes, and tidings cries, O King,
God on thy foes does all their mischief bring,
He has avenged thee on thine enemies,
And all that up against my Lord do rise.
But ah, says David, how is it with my son?
So be it, says Cushai, unto every one,
That up against my Lord the King does rise,
As Absolon, be all thine enemies.
When as the Rebels first before us fled,
And Ioab and thy servants followed,
The young man post upon a Mule did ride,
Under an Oak whose arms dispreaded wide.
When lo, his hair, which he wears somewhat long,
Was so entangled in the boughs among,
The Mule not staying, but still putting forth,
There left him hanging 'twixt the heaven and earth;
Which when a Soldier saw, he Ioab told:
Who thus replied, could thou him there behold,
And yet forbear to smite him to the ground?
For which thou should no small reward have found.
Ah, says the man, though thou to me should give
A thousand silver sh^ckles, as I live,
I would not for this great reward be won,
To lift my hand against my Sovereigns son:
I heard the charge the King gave in the gate,
To us and all his Captains as he sat:
I sure against my life had done this thing,
Thou would have first accused me to the King.
But Ioab hasts to him, and with a Dart,
The young man smites even through to the heart:
And his ten Squires round compassing about,
Him smote quite through to put all out of doubt.
Then Ioab sounds the Trumpet to repeal,
The people from pursuing Israel.
Cushai would have gone on, the King to tell,
How they did with the young-mans body deal,
Who cast into a pit his flesh and bones,
And laid on him a mighty heap of stones,
Which heap, says Ioab, shall for ay defame
A sons rebellion, and this traitors name,
More than the stately pillar he did frame
In Kings fair Dale and called it by his name,
In this for ever his reproach shall sleep,
And live, when is Monument becomes a heap.
But even as Ioab with his cruel Dart,
Smote Absolon into the very heart;
So Cushai's speech so strikes the King, he cried,
Oh Absolon my son, would I had di'd
For thee my Absolon, my son, my son.
Ah David, why make thou such grievous moan?
Thy words would move a Tigers heart and ears,
What then to see thy piteous face and tears?
What shall thy life, at thousands valued,
Be now exchanged for a Traitors head?
Would thou thy life, for such a son, lay down,
That sought his Fathers death to get his Crown?
Can thou not live without that Absolon,
That could not live in peace, till thou art gone?
Never was known a King more passionate,
Nor any Father more affectionate:
Herein me thinks, oh Singer sweet! thou art
A man affected after Gods own heart:
A heart of melting wax, not like a stone,
Thy Honey, buttered words, and heart be one.
As thou would for thy traytrous son have di'd,
So will he be for Traitors crucified:
Thou seekst to save him who would thee betray,
He does for's persecuting murderers pray,
And cries, whilst they scourge, scorn, and kill him too,
Father forgive, they know not what they do.
Though we be sons, rebellious and ungrate,
Our heavenly Father is compassionate:
And Angels sends to bear in their Arms,
Whilst we against him breath wars and sound Alarms:
Oh love incomprehensible, infinite!
Angels amazement, holy Saints delight,
My soul is ravished with thy brighter beams,
As eyes are dazeled with Suns purer gleames:
This love was never livelier set forth,
Than by this Type, thy Deputy on Earth.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
David returning.
ALas! what virtue, goodness, or deserts,
Can to a King assure the peoples hearts?
When such a Prince, so gentle, gracious, kind,
Does more revolters, than good subjects find.
Thus some few great men waxing strong in factions,
Begin the people in rebellious actions,
Till led on by opinion without reason,
They fall to flat Rebellion and Treason,
Whom God repayes in justice for such deed,
Achitophels or Absolons due meed,
But God of hosts, to whom it is all one,
To save with many, or with few or none,
Takes part with Justice, and lets Israel feel,
What it is against Gods Kings to life their heel,
Sure this Re^ellion must be general,
When twenty thousand in a battle fall,
Yet of this numberless rebellious power,
The Wood does more than all the swords devour:
And yet the King does more lament and plain
For Absolon, than all his subjects slain;
Thus pious Fathers by their indulgence,
And gentleness to children, give offense,
Thus did old Eli, thus good Samuel,
Isaac loves Esau more than Israel,
And this bewails the death of Absolon,
As Amnons his incestuous wicked son;
Whereof when tidings came to Ioabs ear,
(For all the people of the Town might hear,
The King cry Absolon, oh Absolon,
Would I had died for thee, my son, my son!)
That day which should have bin for mirth and gladness
Was turned to a night of dole and sadness;
The people which should triumph in that day,
All blushed for shame, as they had ran away,
And as they had deserved less praise than blame,
Into the City at the Posterns came.
For lo, the King had covered his head,
And cried, Ah Absolon! my son is dead.
When Ioab coming in unto the King,
Begins, Thou shame do and confusion bring,
This day on all thy faithful servants faces,
Which saved thy life and thee from all disgraces,
And have preserved thy sons and daughters lives,
The Honors of thy Concubines and wives.
For which thou make them this fair amends,
Thou love thine enemies, and hat'st thy friends.
This day thou piainly have thy self declared,
Thou neither Prince nor servant do regard:
Lo! had thy son lived, though all Israel,
And we had died, it would have pleased thee well.
Ah but, says David, ^hou might well have take
The youth alive, and saved him for my sake;
Alas, O King! says Ioab, for whose sake
Did all we Arms against the Rebel take?
For whose sake should thy servants with him fight?
But to defend our Kings, his Fathers right.
To all thy servants he was courteous,
To suitors aff^ble and gracious,
And to all Israel plausible and free,
The Young Man only cruel was to thee.
Most wretched Traitor, vile unnatural son,
Of sons and Traitors none like Absolon:
Base graceless Darling of a holy Sire,
Whose blood he hunts for, seeking to aspire
By all base means, unto thy State and Crown,
Who, if he could, would God from Heaven pull down.
What other Prince of Israel has done
Such services as I for Absolon?
I by the Tekoite got thy consent,
To call him from his three years banishment,
Who was so glad as I thy grace to gain,
To bring him home from Geshurs Court again?
I brought him to thy presence, and in grace,
After two years confinement to his place,
All this I did as to my Lieges son,
But now he is unnatural become,
The heavens, to keep thy servants free from blame,
Bring him, even as Achitophel, to shame.
His Mule resignes her load unto the Tree
Of Justice, thus should Traitors hanged be.
His bush of hair, which never might be shorn,
Till it were grown too heavy to be born,
There bare his burden: Lo thus God does smite
Him in the part, he sinning took delight;
Thus Heaven, the Mule, his hair, and Oak conspire,
To give this Rebel his deserved hire.
I only lent the Oak a Dart or twain,
To put the Traitor sooner out of pain;
Yet we must use him gently for thy sake,
Such gentleness will many Traitors make:
So long as gentleness in Governing,
Is held to be a virtue in a King,
No Treason nor Rebellion shall be said
To prosper by their faults, all will be laid
Upon the Heavens, or man's maliciousness,
That thus abuse a Princes gentleness:
A most pernicious Pest's such lenity,
In Governors of State or family.
Did thou thou not seem by mildness to consent,
Unto thy daughter Thamars ravishment?
Of which never Amnon heard least good or ill,
Till Absolon it punished, against thy will:
And now thy gentleness and indulgence,
By yielding to the vain profuse expense,
And costly bravery of Absolon,
More ^itting for a Monarch than thy son,
Who could not up and down the City ride,
With less than fifty footmen by his side,
Has raised his high ambition to thy Crown,
And thus, lo, thou art vexed by thine own.
The ^reasures of thy Kingdom must supply
Him means, for managing this treachery.
Sure had he lived this day to see thy face,
Thou had received him to thy former grace,
But we that have adventured goods and lives,
To save the King, his daughters, sons, and wives,
Secluded from thy face and presence be,
As if we all were Traitors, and not he:
Now therefore, here I swear before the Lord,
Except thou hearken to thy servants word,
And come and stand in some fair open place,
To show thy servants comfort in thy face,
Of all the men, that thus for thee did fight,
There will not one remain with thee by night,
Which will be worser far, oh King, than all
The evils, that ever did thee befall.
Alas, says David, I could not allow
In other men, the things which I do now,
But Parents love is strong and natural,
And violently down the hill does fall:
Floods falling from precipite hills you may,
As well as Parents loves to children stay.
But if mine errors only you relate,
You do not me advise, but exprobrate:
It Is easy others faults to reprehend,
True wisdom others, and his own to mend.
But Ioab seeing speeches-liberty,
Did only rub, not heal the malady,
Begins with modesty to blame the time,
And some of those offenders that were prime:
When David thus, what must we here abide,
Or shall we go on Iordans other side?
What think thou* must we try another field?
Or will the people and the Cities yield?
No doubt, says Ioab, all the Towns will yield,
None of the faction can maintain the field;
Nor do I know a man, now he is gone,
They will accept to be their minion.
Now that the stream is turned, behold the tide
Will flow as fast unto the other side;
Men's fancies like an optique glass make all
The eye is fixed on, seem fair, great and fall:
Where people love, they shows for truth will take,
And where they hate, of virtues vices make,
What made them else so vain fantastical,
To follow Traitors, and from thee to fall?
For as we in Prospective glasses see,
Things farthest off, far fairer than they be;
So people by their fancy do approve
Kings vice or virtues, as they hate or love.
Be but at first of these thy friends secured,
Who now much danger have for thee endured,
And thou, as of one man, shall draw the hearts,
Even of all Palestina to thy parts.
The Tribes which now beyond the flood remain,
Will strive, which first shall bring thee back again:
Yea Judah, who was first to put thee down,
Will come first to restore thee to thy Crown.
Thus came the King into the City gate,
Which when the people heard, they that of late,
For grief and sorrow fled unto their Tent,
Do thither come, for joy incontinent,
Who them with comfortable words so pleases,
He all their former griefs and sorrows eases.
The King was scarce descended from his Throne,
When Rumors over all the Camp are blown,
That all the Tribes do strive about the King,
Which first of them him back again should bring:
Oh, say the people, he is just and wise,
And sa^ed us from all our enemies,
And from the Philistines delivered,
Yet now out of the Land from us is fled,
For Absolon, late in the Battle slain,
Whom we anointed over us to reign.
Ah, says the King, then will it be a shame,
For Judah of my kindred, tribe and name,
If when as all the Tribes of Israel haste,
To bring me home again, they be the last.
And therefore sends he to the Priests, that they
Should in this manner to the Elders say.
Why should you be the last that seek to bring
Again unto his house with you the King?
Now seeing all the other Tribes conspire
To that, the King of you does most desire,
You are my brethren, mine own flesh and bone,
Then be not last, but rather come alone
To fetch me home to you, and I will grace
Your Captain Amasa with Ioabs place.
Is he not also of my flesh and bone?
What though he fought against me for my son?
This was and is a politic wise fashion,
To sway the people by the Priests Oration;
For they have at command the peoples ear,
And what they teach, we all are bound to hear.
In Iebus City is a spacious Court,
Where Elders and the people ay resort,
To hear the Prophets and the Law expounded,
And Rules of good and holy life propounded;
Where God, whom heaven of heavens cannot contain,
Does with his Ark in Tents of skins remain.
Here reverend Zadock, to the Congregation,
Out of his Pulpit, utters this Oration,
By which he wisely did the hearts command
Of Elders all, and people of the Land.
Men, Brethren, Fathers, whom I see this day
Assembled here, in great concourse, to pray,
For the health and safety of our holy King,
Whom God in peace and honor to us bring.
I will not exprobrate your least omission
Of any duty, in his last dismission:
I only of his merits make narration,
And leave all to your loyal application.
Will you be pleased to hear me first begin,
Where first he your and Isreal's hearts did win,
The uncircumcised Giant he did quell,
Defying all the host of Israel.
(To count his strength and valor I forbear,
In killing of the Lion and the Bear)
For this was his first signal act of fame,
Whereby he honor wan to Ishai's name,
By which he was made known to Saul, and wan
Such grace and favor, with sweet Jonathan,
Who as his soul most dearly David loved,
From which he would by no means be removed.
And though Saul would persuade his son to hate
Him, as the assured ruin of his State;
Against his violence he firmly stood,
And never ceast to do King David good.
After Goliath slain, he for his hire,
Became to be Saul's servant and Esquire;
And on his Harp so cunningly did play,
He often drove Saul's evil spirit away.
From whence he was advanced, to have command
Amongst the men of war, when with his hand,
The jealous Tyrant sought to strike him dead,
As on his Harp he played and solaced.
To ^ide his hate, yet to betray his li^e,
Saul proffers him his daughter unto wife,
So with twice fifty fore skins he endow her,
In hope his foes and him thus to devower:
But this hope failing, David's victories,
Began in Saul such fears and ielousies,
That diverse ways his death he practiced,
But God by Michol him delivered.
Whence he to Samuel in Ramoth fled,
Saul thither him pursuing, prophesi'd.
Then saved he Keilah by the Philistine
Besieged, and took great store of Sheep and Kine:
Thence flies he to Ahimelech the Priest,
Who paid too dear for such a Royal Guest;
For spiteful Doeg did to Saul complain,
And near a hundred Priests by him were slain.
From thence to Achish Prince of Gath, where he,
Pretends madness and simplicity:
From thence he hunted to Adullams Cave,
Like to a Partridge flies, his life to save,
To Ziph, Eugaddy, Maons Deserts, where
He cut off Saul's coat-lap but's life did spare;
And after took his Sreare from's sleeping head;
Then he the second time to Achish fled,
Of whom he was most kindly entertained.
For hate of Saul, and Ziglags Town obtained.
Whence he to war on Iudahs Coasts pretended,
But so against Amalek his forces bended,
And other foes of ours, that to complain,
He never let one man alive remain.
By which he, fallen now into the indignation,
As Achish thought, of his own King and Nation,
Was brought to field against Saul his King to fight,
But these Philistine Lords that knew his might,
And fearing he to the other side should turn,
Made him again to Ziglag back return.
Which burnt he found, their women captive led,
With all their children that him followed;
For which all were so grieved and offended,
His Soldiers there to stone him had intended.
Amid all troubles God did him sustain,
And helped to win his own, and more again:
For he so close pursued the Amalekite,
And them unwares so furiously did smite,
He all the Host left dead upon the plain,
And losses all recovered again:
Enriching them with spoils that with him went,
And many presents to our Elders sent,
In all his troubles, which of you can say,
He did me wrong, or made of mine a prey?
Was he not rather unto you, for all
Your Goods, against your enemies a wall?
Ask foolish Nabals servants, they will say,
He was a wall to us by night and day,
No sheep were lost, no Lambs of ours were slain,
Whilst David near to Carmel did rema^n.
And though the churl did evil him requite,
Yet God, who is the Judge of wrong and right,
Revenged his churlishness with loss of life,
Rewarding David's goodness with his wife.
By this Saul and his sons were overthrown
At Gilboa, which soon as it was known
To David, how did he compassionate
Their deaths, and those afflictions of the State,
Which were so great, they over Jordan fled,
And many of their Towns abandoned.
So as by this so great an overthrow,
Were Israel and Judah brought so low,
They to the son of Ishai presents bring,
And him acknowledge their anointed King.
For what was closely done by Samuel,
Was known to all the Tribes of Israel.
Had he not been a valiant man of war,
The Philistines prevailed had so far,
We surely had long since their servants been,
And not these days of liberty have seen.
Abner long at Mehanaim maintained
The son of Saul, whilst he at Hebron reigned,
Till Traitors did his head to David bring,
Then all the Tribes acknowledge him their King.
Oh with what wondrous joy and acclamation,
Was he accepted then of all this Nation!
He went before us in and out, in all
The wars, in times of Samuel and Saul:
He saved us from all our enemies,
And honored us with glorious victories.
Oh! then he was of our own flesh and bone,
And fit to govern all the Tribes alone.
Sure his deserts were infinite before,
But has he not to these still added more?
Witness this place, where now God's Ark is pight
In the heart of Judah, which the Iebusite
Against Iosuab, Judges, Samuel, Saul, maintained,
By David's might and prowess now obtained,
This holy place, where now you meet to pray,
And offer sacrifices night and day,
For Sions Mount, your Kings brave habitation,
Worlds wonder, and the Glory of this Nation,
Whilome of thieves, and murderers a den,
Whence they did steal your goods and spoil your men,
And sacrifice to Rimnon, morn and even,
And worshipped daily all the host of Heaven,
Yea often to appease the infernal Ire,
Did drive your sons and daughters through the fire,
This fort, defended by the blind and lame,
He builded, and Jerusalem did name.
Did not all Palestine their forces bring,
Against David soon as he was crowned King?
Whom all to weak his valor to withstand,
God twice delivered into David's hand:
Yea even the God of Hosts, to show his right,
Led him forth from the Mulberry trees to fight:
Soon as his enemies subdued are,
He wholly on Religion sets his care,
Gods Ark into your City home to bring,
That God might dwell with you, as did the King.
Why should I here sad Vzzahs breach recite?
Whom God, for his presumption, dead did smite.
For staying but the Arc up with his hand,
Meddling with sacred thing, against Gods command.
For which it was to Obe^ Edoms led,
Where whilst it staid, all things well prospered.
But ah, how did our Prophet dance and sing,
More like a holy Levite than a King,
When the Ark was brought up hither to be reared,
And set up in the place for it prepared,
Who though he then was scorned in Mich^ls sight,
God never did in him take more delight.
What has he not for this your City done?
Besides his many Royal works begun,
And finished, whereby he changed this hold
Of earth and stone, to streets of brass and gold.
'Twas in his mind a Temple here to raise,
To Gods eternal Worship laud and praise.
Till God by Nathan otherwise declared;
Yet he for it materials has prepared,
The which his son that Prince of peace shall raise,
And bless with peace and honor all his days.
For all such as have had their hands in blood,
As David, though their wars are just and good,
From meddling with Gods Altar ought abstain,
The stones whereof should all in peace be lain.
For what are all our Rites and offerings,
Arc, Incense, and all other holy things,
But figures of eternal peace and rest:
No bloudied hands may minister this feast.
( Irregularity for second wives
Is vain, as you shall see by both their lives.)
And therefore David leaves it to his son,
He after all his former battails won,
Has taken Gath, the key of all your Land,
The Bridle thus wringing out of the hand
Of Philistines, who now (...) brought so low,
They all their knees to Iudahs Monarch bow.
Ittai one of their Lords of greatest might,
Served under David in this civil fight:
Moab you know with lines was measured,
Two lines to save alive, another dead.
And Hadadezar, Syrians King of Kings,
With all his Viceroys, presents to us brings:
Now Aram and Damascus ours remain,
Twenty two thousand of them being slain.
He hither all the Shields of gold did bring,
Which he had taken from the Syrian King.
We quite through Edom all our Armies led,
And of them eighteen thousand slaughtered.
So as in all these Cities and walled Towns,
The King has put strong men in Garrisons:
Yea even Damascus, though as Queen she reigns,
Above the rest, a Garrison maintains.
What Presents did the son of Tohu bring,
Of Gold and Silver Vessels to the King?
Which all together, with a mighty mass
Of Gold and Silver Vessels, and of brass;
The spoils of all these Nations related,
Are to our Temples structure dedicated.
And as he did abroad a victor reign,
At home he right and judgment did maintain.
Israel was never better kept in order,
Seraiah Scribe, and Iosaphat Recorder,
The Kings own sons, your chiefest Rulers are,
The chiefest Priests, I and Abiathar.
God and the King unto this place did choose us,
Which of you for wrong dealing can accuse us?
But seeing you are not of Judah all,
But some of Benjamin and house of Saul,
Which Tribes are so near neighbors, and allide,
We hardly one from the other can divide,
Give me but leave to render an account,
How he in benefits does you surmount.
When Saul and's sons on Gilboas Mount were slain,
How did he for their deaths lament and plain?
Especially for Jonathan his brother,
Was ever any friend more kind to other?
How were the men of Iabesh honored,
Who Saul and his sons bones had buried?
Did ever any of Saul's kindred dye
By David, for revenge or jealousy?
How did he Abners loss lament and plain?
The Traitors that slew Ishbosheth were slain.
And lame Mephibosheth, who here now stands,
Has he not given thee all thy Fathers Lands?
Were thou not, like a Prince, served with his meat,
Drank of his cup, and at his Table eat?
Though Ziba did thee trecherously disgrace,
The King will sure restore thee to thy place.
Could ever any Prince do more to win,
His Subjects hearts? yet should I now begin,
His merits all not mentioned to recite,
I could not reckon up them all by night:
But these are all but favors temporal:
Ah! what are his sweet Hymns spiritual,
Whose every letter, tittle, point, and line,
Have each their sense, sweet, mystical, divine,
Even as our souls desire, like to the past
Of heavenly Manna to the spiritual taste;
By which the soul^s with ^at and marrow fed,
As bodies were by Manna cherished,
They over all your Tents like Quails dispread,
That weakest stomachs might be comforted.
But ah! no tongue but his can rightly sing,
The heavenly praises of this holy King,
Show me his like in all Antiquity,
For valor, wisdom, justice, piety,
Yet won by shows and gross dissembling,
You, for a Traitor, have dismissed this King.
What Nation is so barbarous and rude,
But will condemn such base ingratitude?
If in these errors you shall still remain,
And do not haste to bring him back again.
Thus does this grave high Priest to them divine,
Like winged, heavenly, holy Seraphine,
And bows the hearts (this elocution can)
Of all the men of Judah as one man,
When suddenly arose a murmuring,
And all cry out aloud, the King, the King.
All inly moved, each looks upon his brother,
And ready are to follow one another:
When one breaks forth, and him they follow all,
And leave good Zadock preaching to the wall.
So have I seen a goodly heard of Steeres,
Deep stung in Autumns heat by flies and breers,
With tails erect, all follow after one,
None knowing whither, nor for what they run;
Scarce from Mahanaim passed was the King,
When Legates this Embassage to him bring;
The men of Judah coming are amain,
Their King home to his house to bring again:
Lo, they are all, say they, upon the way,
And therefore he makes haste, that very day,
To Gilgall, where they all in order stood,
All pressed to ford him over Iordans flood.
Shimei, that cursed the King, going out mourning,
A thousand helps now brings to his returning;
And Ziba servant of Saul's family,
With twenty servants him accompany.
All these with readiness attend the King,
And all things needful to his passage bring,
When Shimei thus, let not my Lord begin,
Now to impute or call to mind the sin,
I did commit against my Lord the King,
When thou wentst forth, I now abhor the thing;
Thy servant does acknowledge his offense,
And to redeem his former insolence,
Does hither first of Joseph's house descend.
Thee homeward to thy City to attend.
Feign Abish^i would have his neck disjoynted,
Because that he had cursed Gods anointed,
But David, much offended, does reply;
Shall any man this day in Israel dye?
This day I Isreal's King am made again,
And therefore swear, no Shimei shall be slain.
And now Mephibosheth the King does meet,
That never cut his beard, nor washed his feet,
Nor changed his raiment, from the day the King
Went out, till they him home in peace did bring.
To whom the King, Mephibosheth, ah! why
I^ exile had I not thy company?
Who thus replies: Ziba, oh King, deceav'd
Thy servant, and me of mine Ass bereaved.
For soon as he did understand, that I
Resolved was thee to accompany,
And therefore him commanded to provide
Mine Ass in readiness, whereon to ride:
He led the Beast away that should me bear,
And me accused of treason in thine ear.
But thou, my Lord, well know thy servant's lame,
And never merited so foul a blame.
Lo, as Gods Angel thou art just and wise,
Do therefore what good seems in thine eyes:
For I and all my Fathers family,
Were but as dead, when thy benignity,
Thy servant did at thine own Table place.
I ask no more, but still to see thy face.
No more, says David, I all understand,
With Ziba, as before, divide the land:
Let him, his sons, and servants, till the ground,
The profits to Mephibosheth redound.
Let him, says he, both land take and increase,
Now I do see my Lord returned in peace.
Barzillai had the King accompanied,
From Rogelim to Iordans other side,
And sent the King provision every day,
Whilst with his Host he at Mahanaim lay:
For he was wondrous rich, and very old,
But comely and most gracious to behold.
Feign would the King this good old man have led
To his own house, and at his Table fed.
But he replies, Alas! how long have I,
My Lord, to live? let me go home and dye.
Thy servant now full four score years has past,
And in his meat and drink discernes no taste;
I cannot hear the voice of (...)
Why should I be a burden to the (...)
Now thou art over Jordan, God (...) guard,
Why should thou me requite with such reward?
Let me return to mine own quiet bed,
And in my parents grave be buried.
My son thy servant Chimham, he shall go
With thee, to whom, even what thou please^, do.
Well, said the King, I do accept thy son,
What thou desire for him shall be done,
And for thy self, what ever thou require,
I shall be glad to answer thy desire.
Thus did the King with many thanks dismiss
The good old man, and parted with a kiss.
Barzillai home returns, to take his ease,
The King comes to Jerusalem in peace.
FINIS.
Imprimatur:

THO. WEEKS, R. P. Land. Cap. domest.

Errata.
FOl. 3. l. 9. read Jesraelite. fol. 18. l. 5. b. read l. 12. b. read mad. fol.
52. l. 10. b. read fair (...)


