A brief and most easy Introduction to the Astrologicall judgment of the
Stars.

Whereby every man may with small labor, give answer to any question
demanded.

Written by Claudius Dariot Physician, and translated by Fabian Wither.

Hereunto is annexed a most necessary, ready, and brief table, for the
speedy finding out of the Planetary and unequal hours of every day through
the year, exactly calculated by the said Fabian Wither.

Optime Virtus seipsam nouit and quam amabilis sit intelligit.

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop without
Newgate, over against Saint Sepulchers Church.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MASTER EDWARD DODGE ESQVIRE, FABIAN WITHER
WISHES LONG LIFE, WITH PROSPEROVS SVCCESSE AND INCREASE OF GODS GRACES. etc.
WHen as I do often times reuolue with my self (Right Worshipful) the great
labors, continual pains, and incessaunt diligence, which the foreign
Nations use for the advancement of their country and people, to bring them
unto the understanding and knoweledge of all, and all manner Arts and sciences:
in so much there is not any Author that has written in any tongue or
language, or of any Art or Science, which they have not translated into their
own proper and vulgar tongue, for the common commodity of their country: as
daily experience without further proof does sufficiently approve and testify.
I cannot a little marvel at the slacknesse, or rather contemptuous negligence
of our countrymen in these our days, upon whom, although God has bestowed
his gifts most plenteously, so that I suppose them not to be inferior unto
any Nation in learning and knowledge: yet as though they were borne only for
themselves and to their own uses, have altogether neglected to publish or set
forth any thing for the common commodity of their country, or rather seem to
have enuyed that any man should be partaker of the fruits and benefits of
their labors and studies. The which their dealinges how far off it is from
Christianity, they themselves can easily judge. But how far different it is
from a mind endowed with wisdom, let this one sentence of Cicero in h^^
offices declare and show, he says, Non nobis silum nati su^^^ sed partem
patris, partem parentibus partem amicis debemus. That is, we are not borne
only for our selves, but partly for our country partly for our parents and
partly for our friends, where as he atiributeth the first and principal
point and duty of our being in this life to the use and commodity of our
country, the other parts as by destribution does appear the last and least
part unto our selves. But now by a preposterous conversion, as in all other
human actions and affairs so likewise in knowledge and learning, every man
seeks to profit and advance himself that he may seem to furmount and
excel others, but none for the common commodity of his country, which
shows the great abuse of God his good gifts and argues the horrible
ingratitude and contempt of natural duties, which even the heathen men which
knew not God did acknowledge to be requisite in a good man, but me thinks I
hear one object and say: Sir in no age or time has there been so many famous
learned men which have written of and upon the sacred Scriptures both by way of
controversy as otherwise, as are in these our days, but for your astrology
it is thought of many better unknown then known. Whereunto I answer thus,
most true it is that the sacred scriptures are to be preferred before al other
knowledge, learning arts, or sciences, whatsoever, and such as have traueled in
them for the commodity of their country worthy to reap their due reward and
commendation, but notwithstanding as God has revealed himself in his word, so
has he also opened himself in his creatures, neither is it to be accounted
the least or smallest point of Divinity to know God truly in his works and
creatures. The Psalmist says. The heavens declare the glory of god and the
firmament show forth his handie work, now I suppose there is none so ignorant
and wilful that will affirm or say, the declaration of his glory or the
setting forth of his handie work to be wholly included and contained in the
frame beauty or motion of the same, wherefore we must proceed further and
with diligente minds enter into the contemplation of their natures seeking out
their secret and hidden quallities, for as it profits us little to know
that GOD has adorned and decked the earth with all kind of Corn and Cattle,
with herbs, fruits, Plants, and trees, except he had also taught us to
know the natural quallities and use of the^, how some serve for food and
sustenance* some for the help and cure of sundry diseases greefes and
maladies, some for other necessarte purpose, etc. Whereby he does not all
only teach us to know him to be the Creator of these things, but also his
fatherly lyberalitie in the bountiful bestowing of these his gifts, and
careful providence in providing for us all things necessary for the
maintenance and relief of man's nature whereby we might be continually
provoked to acknowledge him to be our God and to praise and glorify his name
for his great benefits. So in like manner when we duly consider the natures
and influences of the caelestiall bodies beholding and marking diligently thelr
force and effects in the inferior bodies, we shall straightway be brought to
the understanding and knowledge how that God has planted and placed in them a
law of reigment, or rule, by whom as by his instruments and second causes, he
will rule and govern this inferior Orb making it subject unto diverse and
sundry mutations and chaunges at his will and decree. The which mutations and
chaunges, notwithstanding he has not secretly closed up unto himself but
most plainly set forth as in a table in his celestial creatures to behold,
and also to forewarne us to foresee and take heed, that when any evil is
threatened, to fly unto him, who alone can turn the same away, and likewise
to stir us up unto thankfulness, when as he shows his favorable
countenance and promises all goodness. The like that is spoken here in
general, may also be said and applied unto every particular man in
himself, whose nature with the disposition and inclination of the same either
unto good or evil with his sundry mutations and changes prosperity and good
success, as also adversity, sickness, or other mishappes is easily foreseen
and soreshewed by the course and disposition of the caelestiall bodies, as by
immovable examples set down by sundry learned men, is most evidently
approved that it needs no further demonstration. If then the whole course of
man's life be thus ordered and guided, it is not to be doubted but all the
actions of the same are in like sort ruled and governed, so that consequently
the disposition of them is likewise to be foreseen, and therefore by wisdom
most lightly borne if they be evil, or more thankfully received being good,
the judgments of both which parts are most plainly set down upon several
questions for example sake in this small Treatise. Then let us duly consider
what Art or Science is there that draws nearer unto divinity then this
iuditial part of Astrology discretely used (the abuse which happens as well
in this as in all other Arts, I do not excuse, neither allow, but except)
which teaches us not only to know GOD in his creatures, but also his
absolute power and governance, his Fatherly care and providence, his will and
pleasure toward us, if we seek to know it with reverence, do altogether move
us to obedience, thansgiuing, and to the praise of his holy name. Let no man
therefore contemn or despise it causeless, for as the proverb is, Learning
has no greater enemy then ignorance, and it is the greatest mishap that may
be, when an unskillful man shall take in hand to judge any Art. I therefore,
Right Worshipful, fearing the like censure upon me that has happened unto
others, have presumed to dedicate these my labors unto you, trusting that as
you have always been not only a favorer, but a supporter and mayntainer of
learning and learned men, so you will accept in good worth this rude,
compendious, yet learned treatise, defending it as a Patron, receiving with
good will, as from a well willing Friend, Thus with increase of Worship,
prosperous health, and Gods graces, I commend you to the Almighty.

Your worships to command Fabian Wither.

AN INTRODVCTION to the judgment of the Stars. WRITTEN BY CLAUDIUS DARIOT
Physician of Beaume.
Of the Zodiac, and the division of the Signs. CAP. 1.
BEFORE that we enter to speak or entreat of the principal points and
judgments, to the end that al things may be the better understand, I will
entreat orderly of the principles, beginning with the Zodiac and signs. First
therefore we will speak of the Zodiac, one of the greatest cyrcles of the
celestial Sphere, the which is divided into two equal parts, having in breadth
12 degrees, and 360 degrees in length, as shall be more at large declared. This
Zodiac is divided into 12 equal parts, the which are called Signs, and have
taken their names of certain properties which they have, or of the disposition
of the stars: The names are such as here follow. Aries,. Taurus,. Gemini,.
Cancer,. Leo,. Virgo,. Libra,. Scorpio,. Sagittarius,. Capricornus.. Aquarius,.
Pisces,. And these signs are marked with these proper figures and characters
here before annexed after every name, as does plainly appear. Every one of
these signs again is divided into 30 degrees, and so the Zodiac does
contain in length 360 degrees, for 12 multiplied by 30, does product so much
in number. Each degree again is divided into 60 minutes, and every minute into
60 seconds, and every second into 60 thyrdes, and every third into 60 fourthes:
and so proceeding by multiplying by 60 unto an infinite number, or at least
unto tennes. These signs also are divided into many sorts and kinds. First
they are called Northern and Southern, according to that part of the heaven
whereunto they do declyne from the equinoctial.

The Northern signs. The Southern Signs.

Secondly they are divided into such as have a right ascension, and into such
as have a crooked ascension, as follows.

The signs which have a right ascension, These are said to have right ascension
or rising, because that with every one of these there rises more the^ 30
degrees of the equinoctial, and with the whole 6 signs more the^ the moitie
or the one half of the equinoctial line. The six which have the oblique or
crooked asce^tion, are obedient to them that have the rights ascension, as for
example of the two Signs equally distant in the beginning of or of that
which has crooked ascension is obediente to that which has the right
ascension. The signs which have a crooked ascension. These ar said to have an
oblique or crooked ascension or rising, because that with every of the^ there
rises less the^ 30 degrees of the equinoctial, and with all six less then
the moytie or half of the equinoctial Circle.

Thirdly they are divided into four triplicities, that is to say, into Fyrye,
Earthly, Ayrie and Watrie triplicitie.

The signs of the fiery triplicitie. These are hot and dry, choleric,
bitter, masculine, oriental, and of the day. The signs of the earthlye
triplicitie. These are cold and dry, melancholic, sower, feminine,
meridionall, and of the night. The signs of the airie triplicitie. These are
hot and moist like the air, of quality sanguine, sweet, masculine,
occidentall, and of the day. The signs of the watrie triplicitie. These are
cold and moist, like the water, phlegmatic, unsavory, feminine, of the night,
and septentrionall.

Fourthly, some of them are called moveable, othersome fixed, and the third
sort mean or common, so termed or called because that when the sun is in any
of them, he bears and holds the qualities which is attributed unto them, as
also because that such as have them in the ascendent at the time of their
nativity, do for the most part participate with their qualities in all
their affairs.

The moveable signs. The fixed signs. The common signs.

Again, some of them as is beforesayd are Oriental, some Meridionall, some
Occidentall, and some Septentrionall, which are so called, because they have
respect unto that part of the world. And further, some be called of the day,
because it makes such as have them in the ascendent of their nativity, more
beautiful and pleasant. The other are called Nocturnall or of the night,
because they work the contrary. Likewise the Masculines are so named because
they make ye man the more strong and valyaunte, and the woman more manlye. And
the other which are called feminine, make the man more effeminate and weak,
and the woman more amiable, delicate and natural.

Finally the signs are divided into four quarters, that is to say, into the
Spring time, the Somer, the Autumn or harvest, and the Winter: the which
contain the signs which make those parts of the year, as follows.

The spring time which is called sanguine, and is attributed to childhood, has
these signs, The Somer time, which is choleric, and compared to youth,
contains these signs, The Autumn or harvest compared to the 3 age, and to
melancholy, consists of these signs, The Winter which is attributed unto
Flewme and to the last old age, has these signs,

Of the Planets together with their mouinges and qualities. CAP. 2.
NOw that there is sufficiently entreated of the Signs of the Zodiac and of
their divisions, it rests to speak of the Planets, and afterward as briefly
as may be, to declare the dignities they have in the same signs. It is
therefore to be understand, that under the zodiac there be seven Planets,
which move continually of their own proper and continual motion, and finishe
their courses in diverse spaces and times, according to the swiftness or
slownesse of their motion, and according to the greatness or smalnesse of
their Orb or circle. For Saturn which is the highest of them all, and has
greatest circle, finisheth not his course or revolution but in 30 years,
Jupiter in 12 years, Mars in 2 years, the Son in 365 days, and about 6
hours, Venus and Mercury keep their course like the Sun: the Moon makes
her revolution in 27 days, and about eight hours: Then according to the
diversity of the qualities of the signs, and the diverse and sundry motions
and aspects of the Planets in them, they work their diverse effects here below
on earth, the which who so will perfitly understand, he must first know the
qualities of the Planets, the which I will here prsently declare, beginning
first with Saturn because he is the highest above all the other, and so
orderlye proceed with the rest as they stand.

Saturn is cold and dry, Melancholic, an enemy and destroyer of the nature
and life of man, of the day, Masculine, evil, and the greatest misfortune.

Jupiter is hot and moist, sanguine, a friend and preserver of the life and
nature of man, masculine, of the day, and is called the greatest fortune.

Mars is immoderately hot and dry, cholerike, masculine, and of the night
evil, and the less misfortune.

The Sun is moderately hot and dry, masculine, and of the day fortunate, by
aspect unfortunate by corporal conjunction.

Venus is cold and moist, temperate, phlegmatic, feminine, of the night, of
good nature, and is called the less fortune.

Mercury in all things is common and mutable, he is good with the good, and
evil with the evil, with the Masculine masculine, with the Feminines
feminine, hot with the hot, and moist with the moist, unfortunate with the
misfortunes, and fortunate with the fortunes, especially when he is joined or
corporally applying unto the^, or beholds them with some good aspect.

The Moon is likewise cold and moist: and albeit she do heat a little, yet
she does moysten more, she does change her nature and quality according to
the quarters, like as the Sun does thorowout the signs of the Zodiac, and
the quarters and parts of the year. She is also feminine, of the night, and
fleugmatick, and sends unto us the virtue and impression of all the other
Planets: For all the influences of the higher bodies passing through her Circle,
come finally unto us. And this may suffice for the nature of the Planets,
howbeit I think it necessary also in this place to declare the nature of the
head and tail of the Dragon.

The head of the Dragon is in all points like to Mercury, good with the good
Planets, and evil with the evil: for being joined with the good Planets, he
does increase their goodness, and with the evil their malice.

The tail of the Dragon is contrary to the head, for he is evil with the
good, and good with the evil, so that he does diminish the malice of the evil
Planets, and in like manner does hinder and let the goodness of the good.

All these Planets together with the head and tail of the Dragon, are noted
and marked by their certain characters as appears: Saturn,. Jupiter,.
Mars,. Sun,. Venus,. Mercury,. Moan,. the tail of the dragon,. the head,.

Of the essential dignities of the Planets. CAP. 3.
THe ancient Astronomers have found out and tried by experience, that the
Planets do show and utter their force and strength, much more in some
certain places of the Zodiac then in othersome, and therefore are said to
be more strong and better fortuned in those places then in other, the which
thing happens because the nature of those places, and of the stars which
are in those places, do accord and agree better with the nature of the
planets, in so much that there is a certain sympathy or agreement between
the nature of the one and the other. And for this place also they are called
the essential dignities of the planets. These be in number five, that is to
wete: the House, the Exaltation: the Triplicitie: the Term, and the Face: of
the which we will speak in order.

Of the first essential dignity, that is to say, of the House.
THe Sun and the Moon which are created of God to be the two great lights
amongst the other planets, the one for the day, the other for the night, and
having the principal dominion and government in the generation and corruption
of bodies and things here below upon earth, are allotted for that cause for
their houses two signs agreeable to their natures and qualities, that is to
say, the Lion for the Sun, and the Crabbe for the Moon: which two signs are
most near unto our Zenith or point over our heads, and have their course the
greatest part of the summer. They do also accord and agree to their nature and
qualities, as is already said: for the Crabbe is cold and moist, nocturne or of
the night, feminine and moveable as the Moon. And the Lion is hot and dry,
diurne or of the day, masculine and fixed as the Sun. These two planets or
lights, have each of them but one sign for their house, but the other five have
every one two signs, whereof the one is called the diurne or day house,
because it is in such a sign, the other nocturne, or of the night, which
shall be in such a sign. That is to say, the day house shall be in a diurne
sign, and the night house in a nocturne sign.

Then Saturn being the highest of the other five, like as he is contrary unto
the two great Lights, being enemy unto nature, and a corrupter of her works,
so has he obtained for his houses, the two signs which do behold the Crabbe
and the Lion with perfect enmity, that is to say, with an opposition or
contrary aspect, as Capricorn and Aquarius, of the which Capricorn is the
night house, and Aquarius the day house. Contrariwise, Jupiter which is the
father and friend of Nature, has for his houses Sagittarius and Pisces,
which behold the Lion and the Crabbe with a trine aspect, which is the aspect
of perfect amity, of the which Sagittarius is the day house, and Pisces the
night. And because Jupiter does follow next after Saturn, the one of his
houses are before the houses of Saturn, and the other after. Mars following
after has for his houses Aries, and the Scorpion, whereof Aries is the day
house, and the scorpion the night house. These two signs do behold the Crabbe
and the Lion with a quartile aspect, which is the aspect of imperfect enmity,
because that Mars is not friend unto Nature, neither so great an enemy as
Saturn. Then follows Venus, which being no enemy unto Nature, neither so
great a friend as Jupiter, has for her houses two signs, which behold the
houses of the sun and Moon with an aspect of imperfect amity, that is with
a sextile aspect, as Taurus and Lybra: of the which, Taurus is the night house,
and Lybra the day house. Mercury being the last of all, has for his day house
Gemini, and Virgo for his night house, the which do not behold the houses of
the Lights with any aspect, because that Mercury being always mutable, he
does always accord and agree with those Planets with whom he is corporally
joined. This dignity is called the dignity of the house, because that when a
Planet is in any one of them, he is like a Prince in his palace, commanding and
is obeyed. Always it is to be noted, that one diurnall or day planet, is of
greater force in his diurnal or day house, then in his nocturnal or night
house. In like manner must you judge of the nocturnall or night planet. Unto
this dignity because it is the first and chiefest is attributed the number of
five, and as this dignity is the greatest amongst them, even so when any
planet is in the opposite or contrary sign, he is most unfortunate, in so
much that when he is in the opposite of his house, he is said to be in his
detriment or decay.

Of the second essential dignity, that is of the Exaltation.
THe second Essential dignity is called the Exaltation, the which is a
certain place of the Zodiac, in the which, the virtue and force of any planet
is by a certain natural excellency advanced as it comes to pass in the
sun, who according to the judgment of Ptolomey is exalted in Aries, but
chiefly according to the opinion of others, in the xix degree of the same. And
in that place he is exalted, because then he begins to come toward the
North, and then the days begin to increase and to exceed the night. But he
is abased and in his detriment or decay in the place where his enemy is
exalted, that is in the xix degree of Libra, in the which place Saturn is
exalted, as likewise Saturn thrown down and abased in the xix degree of
Aries: For as the sun is the preserver of Nature, and Saturn the ruin and
decay: so are their eleuations and decays clean contrary. In like sort does
it happen between Jupiter and Mars, for Jupiter is exalted in the xv. degree
of the Crabbe, and abased in the like degree of Capricorn, and Mars is exalted
in the 28 degree of Capricorn, and abased in the like degree of the Crabbe.
Venus has her exaltation in the xxvii. degree of Pisces, and in the like
degree of Virgo her fall. Mercury has his fall in the xv. degree of Pisces,
and his exaltation in the like degree of Virgo. Finally, the Moon is exalted
in the third degree of Taurus, and abased in the like degree of Scorpio. The
head and tail of the Dragon are likewise exalted in certain places, and abased
in the contrary: For as the head is exalted in the third degree of Geminy, and
the tail in the third of Sagittary, so is the head there abased, and the
tail in Geminy. Thus it is to be seen, that the Planets have their
exaltations in such signs as do behold the signs of some one of their
houses with an aspect of amity, which is partlye the cause that they are
fortunate in those places, as shall be hereafter declared. And albeit the
ancient Arabians have placed the exaltation of the Planets in certain
particular degrees, of the signs, yet nevertheless following the mind of
Ptolemey, we will take the whole signs for the exaltation. The Planets then
being in those signs and degrees, do show their force in so much that if
any be borne they being in the like degrees, they make him happy and fortunate,
working the contrary when they are in their fall and decay. This essential
dignity succeeding and following the house has given unto him the number of
four.

Of the third essential dignity, that is of the Triplicitie.
Amongst the essential dignities of the Planets, the Triplicitye has the
third place, of the which, as touching the division of the signs, we have
already spoken where we entreated of their deuisions. Now therefore we will
speak of the planets, and of their dominyon and government which they have
over the triplicities, as well by day as by night. Every triplicitie therefore
is governed by three Planets, whereof one governs the day, the other the
night, the third is common ayding and assisting both day and night.

The first, which is called the fiery Triplicitie, is ruled and governed by the
sun by day, by Jupiter by night, and both day and night by Saturn, and
therefore is saturn called the common Dominator of that Triplicitie.

The second, which is the earthly Triplicitie, is likewise ruled by Venus in
the day, by the Moon in the night, and both by day and night by Mars.

Saturn, Mercury, and Jupiter, and Lords of the third Triplicitie, which is
of the Air, but the day is subject unto Saturn, the night to Mercury, and
both day and night to Jupiter.

Finally, the Watery Triplicitie, which is the fourth, has for their Lords,
Venus, Mars, and the Moon: Venus governor for the day, Mars for the night,
and the Moon both for day and night. This dignity has for his value, three
in number.

Of the fourth essential dignity, the terms or bounds of the Planets.
ALbeit that by a certain orderly division every sign is attributed unto a
proper house of some one Planet. Nevertheless their parts and degrees are
divided again for the terms or bounds of the same Planets, in the which
division the Eg^ptians have proceeded in this manner, that is to say the first
six degrees of Aries they give unto Jupiter for his term or bounds the six
degrees next following of the same sign unto Venus, and the eight degrees next
ensuing unto Mercury, the other ten which remain they divide into two equal
parts, giving the first five unto Mars and the other five unto saturn, and in
like manner the planets in all the other signs possess certain degree for
their terms or bounds, but for so much as it were too tedious to recite them
presentlye, they are drawn into a table heereunto anexed wherein is contained
the other dignities also, this may not be let pass to be noted that the two
Lights have no certain degrees for their terms or bounds, but each of them
has the one moytie or half of the Zodiac, the which does serve them in
place or steed of their terms or bounds, the Sun has for his moytie or
half that part which begins at the first degree of the Lion, unto the last
degree of Capricorn. The other moytie which begins at the first degree of
Aquarius, and continues to the end of the Crabbe, is appointed for the terms
and bounds of the Moon. The two Lights therefore being in that part of the
zodiac which is attributed unto them, are also in like dignity as the other
five Planets when they are in their proper terms or bounds. And unto this
dignity is attributed and given the number of two.

Of the fifth essential dignity, of the faces of the signs.
BEfore we have divided the Zodiac into xii. signs and every sign into xxx.
degrees. Now we will divide those xxx degrees into three equal parts, which
we call faces, so that every face shall contain ten degrees, and in every
of those faces some one Planet shall have his place or dignity: As Mars has
the first face of Aries, the Sun the second, and Venus the third. The first
face of Taurus is subject to Mercurye, the second to the Moon, the third to
Saturn. The first face of Geminy to Jupiter, the second to Mars, the third
to the Sun: and so consequently proceeding according to the order of the
faces and of the Planets, as more plainly shall be declared in the Table
hereafter placed. This dignity is the least of all, and has given unto it the
unity or number of one.

Here follows the Table co^taining all the places and dignities of the
Planets.


A declaration of the Table here before placed.
THis table here before placed, is framed of many circles, which also do make
diverse spaces and distanses: Whereof the first space contains the degrees of
the signs, the second the number of ye degrees, marked with charactars of
Arithmeticke, in the third is noted the names of the signs, with their
charactars. In the fourth the faces with their Lords and governors, in the
fifth is discribed the terms of the planets divided by lines, and between
every two lines is placed the character of the planet which has the ominio^
in that place, the sixth space contains the lords of the triplicities, in the
seventh is set their exaltations, in the eight their houses, in the ninth there
detriment fall or decay, the tenth finally comprehends the joys of the
Planets. In the Center or middle of the table, there is an Index or Volnel,
upon the which is discribed the names of the dignities of the Planets, If any
man then will know if any Planet be in his dignity, or would find the Lord of
any house, by setting the Index upon the degree of that sign, he shall find
directly downward under the same sign all the dignities which that Planet or
any other may have in that place. There is also under the same Index another
rundle or Voluell, containing the creticall days, the demonstratiue or judging
days, as also the killing or mortal days: By the which if any man will
know what day the crysis or extreme force of any malady shall happen (I
speak of those sickness which follow the force of the Moon) Let him mark in
what sign and degree the Moon was, when the patient fell sick, then set the
index of that Voluel upon the place when the Moon was and the uppermost little
index upon the first angle cretike, it will straight show the degree of the
sign, unto the which when the Moon comes, you shall judge of the sickness,
so that the Moon be there fortunate. For the contrary will happen, if she be
unfortunate, or rather to be enclyned to evil then to good. The like must be
done to find out the other cryticall, iudicatyfes or mortal days, in marking
diligently when the Moon shall touch any degree, which is correspondent to
any of the 16 Angels of the figure or voluell, which judgment is drawn out of
the 60 Aphorism of Ptolomey in his Centiloqui^: who says, that for to know
the critical days of any sickness, we must behold the motion of the Moon
through the sixteen Angels of the figure, for if the Moon be in them
fortunate, it shall fall out well, if she be unfortunate, contrariwise.

Of the degrees masculine and feminine, bright, smoke and dark, vacant or
void, deep, augmenting Fortune, and diminishing fortune, and of those which
bring imbecilitie or weakness to the body, which are called Azimenes. CAP. 4.
NOw we have already spoken how the Zodiac is divided into signs and
degrees, and that some of them are masenlyne and some feminine. Now we must
speak likewise of their parts and degrees, which are separate into many
sorts: for one sort are called masculine, for so much as when a masculyne
Planet is in any of the^, he is the more strong and fortunate, the other are
called feminine, because they work the like with the feminine Planets. Again
some are called light or bright, some dark, some smoky, and some void, (and
that because of the stars which are in those places) and some are called
deep, and amongst these, the Light make these Planets which are in them
fortunate: the smoky, dark, and deep degrees work the contrary, the void
make them neither fortunate neither unfortunate. Those which do augment
fortune, are in place where there be stars of the nature of the fortunate
Planets, or be in the place of the exaltation or terms of the good planets,
or in the place where the terms of the good Planetes nets gather together.
Finally, there are some degrees which are said to bring detriment,
imbecillitie, or diminution unto our bodies, which comes to pass by the
evil nature of the fixed stars which are in that place, or for some other
cause. Therefore when it shall happen that in the nativity of any, or in any
question, the Moon or the principal significator shall be found in any of
those degrees, if they be not in one of the angles, or in his house or
exaltation and oriental, it shall bring unto him that is borne, the loss or
decay of some one member, or at the least the loss of the thing that he
demands or seeks. All these degrees are contained in a Table following,
with an Index or Voluel, wherein is also described the names of them, wherefore
setting the Index upon any part of the signs directly by the line of the
said Index you shall know the nature of the degree, whereupon it is set. For
the masculine degrees are all black, the feminine white, the light, the dark,
the smoky, and the void degrees are distinguished by small lines, between the
which they are marked with the first letter of their names, as the light
degrees with the letter L, the dark with D, and so the other, the rest of the
degrees as the Azinienes, the deep, and those which augment fortune they are
marked with a figure of Arithmetic in their proper circles, as the 6. 11. 16.
23. and the 29 degree of Aries ar called deep, and so likewise the other as
well that augment fortune, as the Azimenes, are noted as it appears by the
table following after the fifth chapter.

Of the unequal hours called the hours of the Planets. CAP. 5.
Having deliberated how to entreat of things in order or with the least
confusion that may be, I will speak of the unequal hours which are
attributed unto the dominion or rule of the Planets, for that the dominion of
the hour serves to the Planet as for a dignity. Then to return to our
purpose we will show how the ancient astronomers have divided their
artificial day, and likewise the night into 12 equal parts, which they call
unequal hours, because the artificial days are unequal by means of the
obliquitie of the Zodiac, the ascension of the signs, the hours must also be
unequal for the hours of one day are greater or lesser then of ye day
following, or of ye night of the same day, always the hours of the clock or
of the equinoctial and the unequal hours, are like and equal when the sun
is in any of the equinoctial points, for then the artificial day and nights
are like. The Babilonians and their followers have given the dominion and rule
of these hours unto the two lights, and the other Planets, giving unto
Saturn which is highest above the rest, the rule and dominion of the first
temporal hour of the Saturday, the second to Jupiter, the third to Mars, the
fourth to the Sun, the fifth to Venus, the sixth to Mercury, the seventh to
the Moon, the eight to Saturn again, and so in order according to the Circle
of the Planets, until you come to 24 hours, that is 12 by day, and 12 by
night, the 25 hour which is the first hour of the day following is governed
by the fourth Planet, (following the order which we have spoken) which is the
Sun being the fourth from Saturn, and he is Lord of the first hour of the
Sunday, Venus of the second, Mercury the third, the Moon the fourth, Saturn
the fifth, Jupiter the sixth, and so likewise of the rest. By the which order he
that does proceed shall easily find out what Planet does govern every hour
of the day, but for the better understanding we have hereafter affixed a table
co^ceining the 12 hours of ye day, and as much by night with the Planets which
have the rule of them, so that having found out the unequal hour, you shall by
the chapter prefixed before the Table, easily find out the Planet, with the
quantity of the hour.

Here follows the Table co^taining the degrees Masculine and Feminine,
bright, smokie, and dark, vacant or void, deep, augmenting Fortune, and
diminishing Fortune, and of those which bring imbecilitie or weakness to the
body, which are called Azemenes.


Of the Radiations or aspects of the Planets. CAP. 6.
NOW we will entreat orderly of the Radiations or aspectes of the Planets, and
their accidents, but we will begin with the aspects, and show that there is
five sorts of them, that is to say, a conjunction, a sextill, trine, quadrat
or quartill, and opposition, and albeit that the conjunction is not properly an
aspect, notwithstanding we will place it in the number amongst them, some of
them are aspects of amity, or love, as the trine and sextill: others of
enmity and hatred, as the quadrat and opposition, the conjunction is doubtful,
for with the good Planet she is good, and with the evil contrary: the
conjunction is when the senters or points of two Planets are distant one from
the other, as well by longitude as latitude, one only degree, or at the least
16 minutes, when he approaches nearest unto a perfect conjunction, and that is
when the Centers of the bodies of both the Planets are in one point of the
Zodiac. The sextill aspect is when the senters of two Planettes are distant
one from another by the 60 part of the Zodiac, which is in valor two signs
or 60 degrees, wherefore this sextill is called aspect of imperfect friendship,
because the Planets do behold one another in that sort, and do only agree by
a certain quality. The quadrat or quartill aspect (also called a tetragon)
comprehends between the senters of two Planets or celestial bodies, the
fourth part of the crooked circle, which is in value 3 signs or 90 degrees,
the which, because the signs beholding one another by this aspect are most
commonly of two qualities, therefore it is the aspect of imperfect enmity.
The trine aspect co^tayning the third part of the said circle, which is 120
degrees, is called the aspecte of perfect amity and love, for that the signs
beholding one another by the same, do agree in all qualities. The opposition
happens when the moytie or half of the Zodiac containing 6 signs, or 180
degrees, is between the centures of the bodies of the two Planets: the which
is called the aspect of perfect emnitie or hatred, for so much as those parts
of the Zodiac which behold one another with that aspect, like unto the
disposition of the heaven, they are directly contrary. Amongst these aspects as
Julius Firmicus witnesses in the second book of his Mathematics the 25
chapter: the sextill, quadrat, and tryne aspects are double, that is to say, a
right and a left, taking the right for the hinder part, and the left for the
fore part: as if we would say, that Aries has a right sextill unto Aquarius,
and a left unto Geminy. Likewise Aries has a right tryne unto Sagittarius,
and a left unto Leo. In like sort you must judge of all the other aspects.
These continue so long as the beams of the Planets do endure, of the which
aspects there is also made applications and separations, which are many times
taken for true aspects. And these aspects are described by certain proper
Characters and fygures geometrical, as follows.

The Conjunction is thus noted, Sextill, the Quadrat, the Trine, the Opposition.

Hereafter ye shall have described a figure of all the aspects of the Zodiac.

Gemini Taurus Aries Pis es Aquarius Capricornus Sagitarius Scorpius Libra
Virgo Leo Cancer


Of the applications and separations of the Planets. CAP. 7.
THe application happens when as the Circles or beams of the Planettes come
to join together by a corporal Conjunction, or by aspecte of the one half
of their Deamiters.

or when one Planet is distant six degrees from a true aspect to another, or
that he do join unto another by the half of his beams. These circles or
Radiations are diverse and different one from another, because the one is great,
and the other little. For Saturn casts his beams circularlye, 9 degrees
forward, and so much backward, wherefore the half deamiter of his radiall
circle contains nine degrees, and the whole deamiter 18. The Radial circle of
Jupiter is of the same quantity and bigness. But the circle of Mars
contains in his Deamiter only 16 degrees, which is 8 for his half. The Sun
casts his beams in compass 15 degrees upon every part which makes the
whole deamitur of his Circle to contain 30 degrees, and the one half 15.
Venus and Mercury casts their circuler beams 7 degrees every way in
length, so their whole Deamitur is 14. Finally the Moon sends forth her
beams on every side 12 degrees, for the half of her deamiter, and the whole
contains 24 degrees. Then the right application of the Moon unto Saturn by
a sextill aspect, shall be when as between the centure of their two bodies
there is contained 49 degrees and 30 minutes, or at the most 54 degrees. The
left application is, when as between the 2 centers is contained 70 degrees 30
minutes, or at the least 66 degrees, for so much as the moytie of the half
deamiter of the Circle radyant of Saturn is 4 degrees 30 mynutes, and the
half of the Circle of the Moon is six degrees, if then these parts be
joined together, which mount unto 10 degrees and 30 minutes, and taken from 60
degrees for the right application are added unto the same number, for the left,
the application will be easily found. Likewise must you judge of all other
aspects of the Planets.

And now to come to the separation it is to be understand, that it is when one
planet does leave or depart from the aspect of another, or from his conjunction
by the space of one only degree, and always he is still said to be separated
until that he has wholly left and is departed from the beams of the other
Also we do say that the Moon does separate herself from the conjunction of
Jupiter, when she has left him one degree, and when she is from him 10
degrees and 30 minutes, then is she said to be fully separated. Here must it
also be noted, that the inferior Planets, do apply unto the superior or
higher, and likewise separate themselves from them, and not contrariwise, that
the higher Planet should apply to the inferior, or separate themselves from
them, because their motion is more slow, and they more weighty and heavy then
the inferior planets are.

Of the accidents which happen unto the Planets, as well among themselves as in
themselves, and first of all of their defense or let. CAP. 8.
BEsides those things which are already spoken of, there happens unto the
Planets diverse accidents, as well among themselves as in themselves: among the
which, the first that comes in place, is called the prohibition, let or
defense: which is that, which does let and hinder the conjunctions and
aspects of the planets: the which happens after three sorts or ways, by the
body, by aspect, or by retrogradatio^ or going backwards. the body of one
Planet does hinder the aspect of another, when he is nearer to the conjunction
of that planet which is beholden, then is the other planet, that does or would
behold him: as you shall plainly see in the Table following, for the Sun
being in the first degree of Taurus does let the tryne aspecte that Mars would
cast unto Venus, or Venus unto Mars. Thus does the body let the aspect, when as
the planet and he that does behold, are in like degrees, as by the example
before showed the Sun being in the first degree of Taurus, and Mars in the
first of Capricorn.

A prohibition or let is also wrought by aspect, when as the beams of him that
does let are nearer unto the third planet, then the beams of him that does
behold him, or corporallye apply unto him: as the Moon being in the second
degree of Cancer, by a sextill aspecte does let the conjunction of the Sun
and Venus, for the Moon is nearer unto Venus then the Sun, he being in the
first degree of Taurus, and Venus in the third. Fynallye, prohibition or let
is done by retrogradation or going backward, when one planet applying to
another, be comes retrograde before he perfitelye beholds the other Planet,
or be corporallye joined with him. As if Mercurye were corporallye applying to
the Sun, should become retrograde, befoore he were joined to him: and this
let is properlye called a Refreynation, or holding back.

Of the Translation of the light and nature of the Planets.
THe Translation of the Light and nature of the Planettes, happens in two
sorts. First, when a light Planet does separate himself from the
Conjunction or aspecte of another heauyer then he, and afterward applies
himself again to another that is more heauyer, or more light then the
second: for then the first does transport or carry away the light or virtue of
the second unto the third: As Mercurye separating himself from the Sun,
and applying unto Venus, does transporte the light and virtue of the sun
unto her.

The superior or highest Planets are more waightye then the inferior or
lower. For Saturn is more waightye then Jupiter, Jupiter then Mars, Mars then
the Sun, the Sun then Venus, Venus then Mercurye, and fynallye, Mercury is
more heavier then the Moon. And they are called more weighty and heavy
because their motions are slower then of those which are underneath them.

Secondly, this translation does also happen, when a light planet does join
himself corporallye or by aspecte, unto one that is more heavy then he, and
the same again, to one that is more heavier. For then the second does
transporte the light or nature of the first unto the third. As if the sun
should apply unto Mars, and Mars unto Saturn, then should Mars transporte
the light or nature of the sun unto saturn.

Of the Reception or receiving of Planets.
REception is of two sorts, strong and weak. The strong reception is, when a
Planet does apply to the Lord of a house, or Exaltation, or Triplicitie from
the place where he is, and that likewise he has some dignity in the place
where the Lord is placed, and if both two be in dignities one of another,
having also dignity in the plate where they are, and that their application
be by a trine or sextill aspect, the reception shall be the better and the more
perfect. For example, the Moon being in Cancer and beholding Venus in Taurus,
with a sextill aspecte, does receive Venus in her exaltation, and Venus the
Moon in her Triplicitie, but when this application is, the planets being in
their lesser dignities as in their terms or faces then their reception is
weak and impotent.

Of the rendering up or giving back of the light or virtue of the Planets.
Rendering up or giving back is double, that is to say, of the virtue and of
the light. The rendering up of the one virtue, is when a Planet being in his
own house, or in any other of his dignities, beholds another which is
combuct or retrograde: for that Planet because of his imbestlitie which comes
by his Retrogradation or combustion, cannot hold or keep the virtue which the
other does communicate or give unto him by his aspect. As in the figure
following is showed, where Venus being combuste in Taurus, renders up to the
Moon her virtue which she did give unto her by a sextill aspect. Such yielding
up is good and profitable, if both the planets be in angles or succeeding
houses being fortunate, likewise if the Planet that does apply unto the other
be in an angle, although the other be in a falling house (so that there be
some reception between them) is indifferent. Finally, it will be profitable if
he which yields up his virtue be in an angle: otherwise it is altogether
unprofitable. The yielding or rendering up of the Light is, when two planets
which do not behold one another with any aspect, yet both of them do behold
some other planet: for that planet does gather their Lights and does cast it
back again, either to themselves or to some other place of the Zodiac, as
appears by the figure hereafter placed. Mars gathering the light of Saturn
and the Sun, does yield it back again unto them. If it happen the third
planet to be more waightye then the other two, that shall be called a
collection or gathering together of the lights.

Of the Contrariety of the Planets.
THis Contrariety happens, when a weightye planet is placed in the midst,
between two light planets, the first applying unto the weighty planet, and
the third being retrograde, joins himself to the second, and after to the
first. For not only the conjunction of the first and second is let, but
also the third is joined with the second, and the first: as it appears in the
figure, by Venus, the Sun, and Mercury: for there Venus being retrograde,
joins her self to the Sun first, and after to Mercury, and lets the
corporal or bodily conjunction of the Sun and Mercury.

Of the cutting off, or frustrating the light of the Planets.
THis cutting of the light does but little differ from the contrariety
before spoken of, and it happens after two sorts: First, when a third planet
going forward by certain degrees into another sign, where the first and
second planets are by retrogradation, joins himself to the second, and not
to the first, as in the figure following, Venus retrograde joins her self to
the Sun. The second sort is, when as a planet going to the Conjunction of
another more weighty then he, and the same do behold another planet that is
more weighty, before the first be joined unto him. In this case the third
planet by his aspect, does let the conjunction of the first and second, as for
Example: Mercury going to the conjunction of the Sun, and the Sun beholding
Jupiter with a quartill aspect, Jupiter by his said aspect, does let the
conjunction of Mercury and the Sun, and because this happens at the time
when the second planet enters into another sign to go to the aspect of
another planet more weighty and heavy then he, it is called the frustrating
or cutting of the light.

Here follows the Table co^taining all the foresaid accidents.


Of the accidents which happens unto Planets, as well among themselves as
also with the Sun and Moon, and first of all the combustion or burning of
any planet. CAP. 9.
NOw to return to the accidents which happens the Planets, as well among
themselves as with the lights We will first speak of those which are the
last, beginning with the Combustion or burning of any Planet, when any Planet
is hidden under the beams of the Sun, so that we cannot see it, then it is
said to be combust or burnt and so is still called until it has left the body
of the Sun, by the space of 15 degrees or at the least 12.

The Almugea of the Planets is no other thing but a vision or beholding of face
to face in respect of the two lights, For it happens, when as between a
planet and the Sun or the Moon there is so many signs, as there is between
the house of the Planet and the house of the Sun or of the Moon: so that the
said Planet be occidentall from the Sun or oriental from the Moon, like as
when the Sun is in Virgo and Venus in sagittary, then there should be
almugea, for between Taurus and Leo there be two signs and as much between
Virgo and Sagittarie, or if Venus were in Leo, and the Moon in Libra, there
should be almugea, for Venus being Oriental from the Moon, there is on sign
between Cancer and Taurus, like as there is between Leo and Libra. The
Planets are called Oriental, when as they do rise in the night before the
Sun, and set in the day time before him, and likewise they are called
occidentall, when as they rise in the day time after him, and likewise set
after him in the night.

Of the accidents which happens unto the Planets among themselves.
AMong the accidents which do happen unto the Planets among themselves, the
first is when any of them is void or without course or motion which is said
to be when one Planet separating himself from another does not apply to any
other during the time that he tarrieth in that sign, and then he is said to
have his course and motion void. That Planet which is placed out of all his
dignities is called perigrine or strange.

When a Planet is in a sign alone by himself, and that no other Planet does
behold the same sign, that Planet is called wild or savage.

The Planets are also said to be in their haine, which is as much to say, as in
their similitude or like, when the masculine planets are in masculine signs,
and the diurnall or day Planets are by day above the earth, and in masculine
signs and degrees, the contrary is likewise to be considered of the feminine
nocturnall, or night Planets.

Of the accidental forces, strengths, and fortunes of the Planets. Cap. 10.
Having sufficiently spoken of the qualities and natures of the signs of the
Zodiac, and of the Planets with all their dignities and forces which they
have in the same, and their accidents which may happen unto them, whereby a man
may generally understand and know when they be fortunate or unfortunate. Now to
make it more easier and plain, I will breefely and particularly speak of
their fortunes and infortunes. The Planets then are most strong and fortunate,
when they are in the angles or succeeding houses, or when they behold the
ascendent, or else when they are in their essential dignities, or in signs of
their own natures, or in the houses wherein they do rejoice. As when Mercury
is in the first house, the Moon in the third, Venus in the fifth, Mars in the
sixth, the Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in the eleventh, and Saturn in the
twelfth. Likewise when they are in the part of their excenters furthest
distante from the earth, the which is called their Aux or increase: and also
when they are septentrionall ascendent.

The masculine planets are also fortunate in the masculine degrees, and quarter
of the heaven. Like as when they are oriental from the Sun, judging the like
of the feminine planets, when they are occidentall from the sun, and in a
feminine quarter or degree of the heavens.

The force of the deurnall Planets is aduansed when they are by day above the
earth, and by night under, but the nocturnal planets rejoice to be by day under
the earth, and by night above.

Likewise when their motion is increased, or that they be direct, or at the
least in their second station, then are they fortunate.

The like again is, when they are in a sextill trine, or at the least in a
quartill aspect of good planets, as also when they are in the same degree and
minute that the sun is, without any difference of longitude or latitude, or
in a sextill or tryne aspect with the sun, and when they depart from
combustion or from under the beams of the sun.

Finally, they are strong and fortunate when they are free and without any
aspect of the malygn planets, or when they are in reception with the good.

The particular fortunes of the Moon.
WHen the Moon is increasing in her light, or number, or motion, or that her
course be not void or empty, she is strong and fortunate.

Of the misfortunes of the Planets. CAP. 9.
THe Planets are called unfortunate when they are in falling houses, or that
they do not behold the ascendent, and that they are out of their own
essential dignities, or being in the dignities of the malygne planets as in
the terms of Mars or Saturn, or that they be in their falls, or in
contrary signs to their own houses, or else be retrograde or in their first
station or meridionall specially ascendent. The force and strength of the
masculines is deminished in feminine degrees, and in a feminine quarter of the
heaven, and when they are occidental of the sun. The force of the feminines
is likewise diminished, when they are in masculine quarters and degrees of the
heaven, and be oriental from the Sun. Likewise when the deurnall planets are
by day under the earth and by night above, and the nocturnall by night under
the earth and by day above, or that they be slow in their mouinges, or joined
to the thyle of the Dragon, their force and strength is diminished. Like
misfortune happens unto them when they are besieged, that is to say, when a
good planet is placed between two evil, so that when he separateth himself
from one evil, he applies to the other.

So long also as they are combust, that is, under the beams of the sun as
before already appears, or that they have their course in via combusta, that
is, in the burnt way, which is from the 13 degree of Libra, unto the ninth
degree of scorpio, they are likewise unfortunate. They also receive great
misfortune and hurt by the quadrat aspect of the evil planets, but specially by
the Conjunction and opposition. Likewise their strength is much weakened by the
quadrat and oppisition of the sun. They suffer in like manner detriment and
hurt when as the evil planets are exalted above the good, or that the good
do apply unto the evil being retrograde.

The particular impediments of the Moon.
The Moon being void of course and she deminished in her motion and light is
unfortunate. When as also she has her course through the sign of Geminy,
which is the 12 sign from Cancer which is her house, or that she does not
behold Cancer, or is in the first or twelfe houses, she is likewise afflicted
and hurt.

Also when she suffers an Eclipse, or being in her increase has her course
with Mars, or in her decrease with Saturn, or does not behold the place of
her conjunction or opposition, immediately going before from the place that she
is in, she is likewise unfortunate.

Of the twelve houses of the heavens. Cap. 12.
THe aunciente Astronomers which have written of Astrology, have in diverse
manners and sorts divided the 12 houses: notwithstanding for breuities sake, we
will leave the variety of their opinions, and following only John
Regiomontanus, will divide the houses by four circles, which shall pass by
intersexions, or cuttings asunder of the Meridian and Horison, and divide the
heaven into 12 unequal parts, which are called houses. First of all the whole
Sphere of the heaven is divided into four parts by the Meridian and Horison,
the beginning of the which parts are called the angles or chief points of
the heaven. By these chief points are understood the four degrees of the
ecliptic line, the which does touch the Meridian as well at mid day, as at
midnight, and the horison as well at the rising as setting. These principal
degrees are ye cusps or beginnings of the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth
houses. The other houses are had and found by the four foresaid circles,
which do pass by two divisions through the Meridian and Horison the distance
of all which houses are equal in the quarter, the beginning therefore of those
houses are taken from those circles. For the first house begins with the
east or rising horison and ends according to the order of the signs, with
the succeeding circle, where the second house begins, and so going
forward, the residue of the houses are had and found out. Among these, four
of them are called angles, the four next, succeeding: and the last four
cadent or falling houses as in the figure following shall appear. The 1 house
is called the joy of, the 3 of the, the 5 of the 6 of the 9 of the the 11 of
the 12 of.

The Figure of the 12 caelestiall houses, and what Planets joy in them, as is
declared in the chapter before.


Of the signification of the houses. CAP. 13.
NOw that we have showed the division of the houses, we will also entreat of
the significations of the fame, for every house has his own proper
signification, as there be also proper Lords of the triplicitie of the houses.
By the Lords of the triplicitie of the houses is understand the Lord of the
Triplicitie of the sign which makes the house whereof we have spoken before
in the third chapter.

Of the first house which is called life.
The first house which is the angle of the east and called the Horoscope
signifies the life and body of him that is borne or that does are the
Question, and is the beginning of al things, as of elections, life and birth,
and is therefore called life. The first Lord of the triplicitie shows the
life and nature of him that is borne, or that demands the Question. By the
same is known also what he does love or hate in the beginning of his life.

By the second Lord we do judge the force and strength of his body, and the
middle age of his life. The third has the same significations which the two
first Lords and governs the old age.

Of the second house called hope.
The second is the house of substance, riches or servant, and therefore is
called hope. The first or the second Lords of the triplicitie, which of them
is the strongest shall be judged the author or giver of the stubstance or
riches, notwithstanding the first Lord gives at the beginning of man's life,
the second in middle age, and the third in the end.

Of the third house, which is called the Goddess or the house of brethren.
The third house shows us all things touching brethren sisters, cousines,
changes, small iourneys, Kindred, faith and religion. Wherefore it is called
the Goddess. And the Lords of this triplicitie have the same signification,
the first Lord signifies the greater or elder brethren, the second the
middle: the third, the least or youngest.

Of the fourth called the house of parents.
By the fourth which is called the house of parents, we judge of fathers,
houses, lands, and ancient heritages (but not always of those that are dead)
and of all things immovable as of Castles, and other like things, by the
same also we do gather a certain and true judgments of hidden treasures and
all things hidden in the earth, and finally of the end of all things. By the
Lords of this triplicitie one shall know what will follow. The first Lord
gives judgment of the fathers. By the second we know all things touching
Castles and cities. By the third, the end of all things is determined.

Of the fifth house named the house of children.
The fyfth is named the house of children has his signification of them, of
love, of Ambassadors and messengers, and of gifts. The first Lord of that
triplicity signifies the children or their life. The second love. The third
Ambassadors, messengers or gifts.

Of the sixth house, called the house of health or sickness.
The sixth house does signify infirmities, and sickness, servants and
maids: by the same also may be judged all that shall happen before old age,
also chaungings and remouings from place to place, and all small beasts and
cattle are signified. By the first Lord of the triplicitie, you shall know
the maladies, diseases and greefes that shall happen by them. By the second you
shall judge of servant. And by the third of the profit and commodity that
shall come by them, and of the small cattle with their multitude and store.

Of the seventh house named Marriage or a Wife.
The seventh house is the house of marriage, women, concentions, wars,
public enemies, banishments, robberies, and it is the end of middle age. It
is also the house of buying and selling, and of runawayes.

The first Lord of the Triplicitie gives judgment of marriage and women,
the second of contentions, the third of the lawful or unlawful joining or
coupling.

Of the eyghth called the house of death.
This house is the signifier of death, labors, sadness and heaviness,
heritage of dead men, and the end of the life. For which cause it is called the
house of death. The first Lord of that triplicitie is Lord of the death, the
second teaches precepes and did ancient things: and the third, the
heritages of the dea^.

Of the ninth called the house of Religion or God.
By the nynth house, religion, faith, visions, wisdom, the deity, the true
worshipping, rumors, and tales, dreams, declarations of things to come.
Ambassadors, long iourneyes, and the half of man's life is foreknowne, and it
is called the house of Religion or God. The first Lord of the triplicitye
shows the peregrinations or long iourneys, with the accidents which shall
happen in them. The second Lord is the ruler of faith and religion with their
accidents. The third is the interpreter of dreams, and the governor of
wisdom.

Of the tenth house, called the middle of the Heaven.
This tenth is a ryall house: for by this we learn to judge of empire and
rule, dignities, offices, arts, mothers, and of al things that are stolen, and
this is called the middle or angle of the heaven, the first Lord of the
triplicitie is moderator of the works and aduauncements, the second gives
dignity and boldness, the third signifies the stabilitie or continuance of
the dignities or aduauncements.

Of the eleventh house which is called the good spirit.
The eleventh house is the house of hope, trust and confidence, of footmen, of
the aid and help of the King, and of him which is most in favor with the
king. Of this house also is judgment taken for praise and commendation. The
first Lord of the triplicitie is the giver of confidence and boldness. The
second of labors. The third is the foundation of all the commodities and
profits that comes of the labors.

Of the twelfth house which is called the ill spirit.
This twelfth house which is called the evil spirit, gives a true and
determinate judgment of privy and secret enenimies. Deceyuers, envious
persons, imprisonmentes, evil thoughts, whisperinges, great beasts and
cattle, and of all things good and evil, which happen in the travel of
women and of harlots. The first Lord of the triplicitie is Lord of the secret
enemies. The second of the labors and sorrows, and the third of the bease
and Cattle, and these are the chief points breefely touched, diligently to
be committed to memory touching the significations of the twelve houses.

By what means the other signification of the houses may be found out, CAP. 14.
NOW having thoroughly considered and wayed the first and principal
significations of the houses: it is easy to find the rest, numbering them
successively, according to the natural order and progression of the signs, the
second house does always give certain judgments of the substance or riches
of the house that goes before him. The third house of the brethren, the fourth
of the father and heritage, and other significations pertinent unto the fourth
house, The fifte house of Children, the sixte of infirmities and servants,
the seventh of wives and women, the eight of death, the ninth of religion, the
tenth of rule and dominion, the eleventh of friends, the twelfth gives
judgment of secret enemies, whereupon they are named with these names, life,
hope, goods, or brethren, parents, children, health, wife, death, religion,
or God. The middle of the heaven, the good spirit, and the evil spirit, by
these names and places as Julius Firmicus affirms, judgment is given upon
the whole birth of man, the which if they be diligently looked upon and marked
what dominion the Planets have in them, there is nothing whereof you shall not
be able to give true judgment. These significations are not only gathered
beginning at the assendent, but also take their beginning at every house,
whereby it comes to pass that the other houses have more diverse and almost
infinite significations, wherefore that this doctrine may the better be
understood, we will give you an example of the first and second house.

Of the first house.
For so much as the first house is the second from the twelfth it gives
judgment of the substance riches and servants of the secret enemies, and
for so much as it is the third house from the eleventh, it signifies the
brethren of friends and other things which the third house does signify.

And because it is the fourth from the tenth house it rules the fathers of
Kings and their heritages and castles, it signifies also the children of
religious parsons, because it is the fifth from the ninth house, it has also
rule over servants and sickness, of familiars and open enemies, and of women
that do not dwell with their husbands, because it is the sixte house from the
eight, and because it is the seventh from the seventh house, it signifies the
wifes of open enemies. Touching the death of servants, also it gives judgment
because it is in the eight place from the sixth house, it shows also the
religion and long iourneys of children, being the ninth house from the fifth,
likewise, being the fourth house from the tenth, it shows the dignities and
aduauncements of the fathers, it declares also the friends of brethren being
the eleventh from the third house, and finally it shows the secret enemies of
the ministers or servants, because it is the twelfth from the second house.

Of the second house.
By like reason and order the second house gives judgment of the brethren
and sistern of the open enemies, also it represents the fathers of friends,
because it is the fourth house from the eleventh, it governs likewise the
children of Kings being the fifth from the centh, it gives judgment also
of servants and sickness of religious persons as that which by natural
order has the sixth place from the ninth, by this the wifes of our famylyars
and enemies are known as being the house of marriage, and the seventh from the
eight, but the eight house has not this signification of his own proper
nature, but because it is the second succeeding, the seventh house which does
principally signify wifes and enemies, by the second the cause of the death of
the wifes is known, because it possesses the eight place from the seventh
house, also the religion of servants and their long iourneys are known by the
second house, because it is the nynth from sixth.

The dignity or advancement of the children is gathered from it because it is
the tenth from the fifth house, it signifies also the friends and estate of
fathers being the eleventh from the fourth house. Finally, it signifies the
secret enemies of brethren, because it is the twelfth house from the third,
and in this sort we must judge of the other houses, notwithstanding these
significations do stretch it further: as if any man would axe in what house
the substance or riches of the Uncles is to be placed. First it is to be
considered what house has the dominyon or rule of Uncles. That it may be the
better known you must look which of the 12 houses is the third to the
fourth house, because the fourth house does signify the father, and the third
house from any other house does signify the brethren. Therefore the sixth
house, which is the third house from the fourth, does signify the Uncles on
the fathers behalf, and the substance and riches of the Uncles is contained
in the seventh house, because it is the second house to the sixth. There may
many other and diverse significations be found in every house, the which who
so does understand rightlye that which already is spoken, shall easily find it
out. Wherefore for breuities sake, we will go in hand to speak of other
matters briefly.

How to find out the Lord of any house, which of the Arabians is called
Almuten. Cap. 15.
Having declared as breefely as may be the signification of the 12 houses, we
will also according to the doctrine of the ancient astronomers, show you the
mean and ways to find out that Planet which shall rule in every of them: the
which of the Arabians is called the Almuten, in Latin Dominum, and in English
the Lord, beginning therefore with the diffinition of the name, this ^lmuten is
as much to say, as vanquishing or surmounting, and therefore is called the
Lord. The Lord therefore of the ascendent or of another house, is the planet
which has most dignities, or greatest strength in that place. If then thou
desire to know what planet is Lord of the ascendent, look what sign and what
degree of the sign is in the beginning of the first house. If with that sign
and that degree you do enter into the table of the dignities of the planets,
and place your Index upon the degree of the sign found out, by and by under
the index, directlye under the line of the same shall appear all the dignities
of the planets, as for example, if a question be opposed whose ascendent is the
fifte degree of Aries, and you would know the Lord thereof, placing your index
upon the fifth degree of Aries in the table of the dignities of the Planets, I
do see the Sun to be exalted in Aries and therefore to have four virtues.
Then you see that although the exaltation of the Sun be in the 19 degree of
Aries yet it stretches throughout the whole sign as the exaltations of the
other Planetes do, he has also a dignity of a triplicitie because the
question is by day, and therefore has three virtues, but Mars because Aries is
his house, he has there five dignities and one by a face, Jupiter also Lord
of a term, has there two dignities, the Sun therefore is Lord or almuten
of the ascendent because he does excel with most dignities, for he does
surmount by the dignities of the exaltation and triplicitie, having four given
him for his exaltation, and three for the triplicitie, which are seven, Mars
has six dignities, five for his house and one for his face, Jupiter has
only two for his term, but if that two Planets be found having like dignity
in the same place, then must it be marked if any of them be in the ascendent
within 2. 3. or 4. degrees near to the beginning of the first house, for ye
planet although it had but two degrees shall be Lord, and the other although he
had all the dignities that he might have in the same place, yet because of his
absence he shall not be Lord, if none of them be in the ascendent then look if
they do behold the ascendent, for he which beholds it with the better or
stronger aspect shall be Lord, if none of them do behold ye ascendent or be
equal in aspects, then which of them is strongest in the heaven, that is, if
one of them be in an angle and the other in a succeeding house, or one in a
succeeding, and the other in a falling house, that which is in the angle or
succeding house, shall be adjudged the Almuten or Lord. If it still happen that
they be equal in dignities, then look which of them is in degree most
agreeable to his nature, as if it should be a masculine planet in a masculine
degree, a feminine in a feminine, or in a light, dark, deep, void, azemene,
or degrees that does increase fortune, then which of them shall appear
strongest, shall be the Lord: Finally, if they be in all points alike, then the
house is preferred before the other dignities, and the exaltation before the
triplicitie, the Triplicitie before the term, and the term before the face,
as for example: A question being preposed for the day time: Whose ascendent is
the two and twentieth degree of Aries, the Lord whereof you would know:
therefore setting your index upon the 22 degree of Aries, in the Table of
dignities aforesaid, straight ways it will appear that Aries is the house of
Mars, and has also his term in the same degrees, whereby he possesses in
the same place 7 dignities, five by his house, and two by his term. Likewise
the sun has 7 dignities, 4 by his exaltation, and 3 for his deurnall
triplicitie. Venus has only one for a face. Now it is doubtful which of
these two shall be adjudged Lord. But because the sun is found in the beginning
of the tenth house beholding the ascendent with a quadrat aspect, and Mars in
the sixth house having no participation with the ascendent, the sun shall be the
lord of the ascendent: notwithstanding Mars shall be partaker with the sun,
because of his dignity which he has in Aries, and bears rule with the sun
in the ascendent, although the sun be the chief Lord. In like sort are the
Lords and rulers of the other houses to be searched and found out.

By what means by the help of the tables placed in the Ephemerides, the Figures
or houses of the heaven are to be erected in every hour of the day. Cap. 16.
ALbeit there be diverse and sundry times of the day, in the which the celestial
figures or houses may be erected, notwithstansting we have reduced them only
to 2 times, yt is the noone time, and the afternoon time. This afternoon time
is reckoned from the noone of the one day, till noone of the day following,
reckoning from 1 of ye clock, unto the end of 24 hours, but first we will
speak of the erection of the houses for the noone time, because it is most
easy, and afterward for the afternoon. If you will then erect a celestial
figure for the hour of the noone: first frame your figure after the manner
astronomical, then you must seek out the true place of the Sun in your
tables of the ephemerides, the which you shall find directly over against your
determined day, in the table that serves for your year. This degree being
found with the minutes, if there be any, place it in the Cuspe or beginning of
the tenth house together with the Caractor of the sign, wherein the Sun is
the same day, this being done, you must search amongst the tables of the
houses, for that table which is calculate for the altitude of the poule of your
region or place, in the which table you must seek out the Collumne of the
houses, under the which is placed the sign, wherein you found the Sun that
day, and under the title of the tenth house adding or leaving certain minutes,
you shall find the whole degrees, amongst the which having found the degree of
the sun in the right line, leading to the right hand, you shall find the
degrees with the signs, which shall be let in the eleventh 12 first, 2 and 3
houses, as the title set over them does teach you: and so have you six houses
of the figure erected, the other six houses are found out by the contrary
signs, with their contrary degrees, but if your time of your figure be spoken
for the after noone, after the same manner you must seek out the degree of the
Sun for your hour appointed, leaving as it is aforesaid, the minutes if
they be under 30, or putting too one degree if they be above 30, you must
enter as before into your table, which serves for your place, and in the
column, under the which is placed the sign where you found the Sun that
day and hour, under the title of the 10 house, goeing directly to the left
hand in a little column; whose inscription is Tempus a miridiae, that is to
say, the time after noone or midde day, you shall see the hours and minutes of
the noone tide, unto the which the hours and minutes of the time supposed are
to be added, also because the Sun in six hours space does run 15 minutes of
a degree of the Zodiac, by his proper motion, and to those 15 minutes does
answer one quarter of a degree, of the equinoctial, the which quarter is in
value one minute of time. Therefore for every six hours in the afternoon
add one minute of time unto the number that is gathered together. But if the
number of hours and minutes gathered together, do surmount 24, then take
away those 24, and the residue which remains so gathered together, and seek
it out in the table of the houses, in the little columbe entitled Tempus a
meridiae, and if you find not the same number take the next less before, and
so shall you commit the less error, and directly toward the right hand in the
right line overthwart shall appear the signs and degrees of the six houses,
that is, of the 10. 11. 12. 1. 2. and 3 houses. The other six houses are
easily found by the opposite signs and degrees, I will not hear strive, if
any man being skillful in arithmetic will erect his houses after a more exact
manner, for me I leave it to his own discretion. In this place I only go about
to teach those that are ignorant and would learn the art, prescribing unto
them whole degrees, least by the difficulty and hardness in redusing of them
into minutes and seconds, I might ouerburden and surcharge their wits and
capacities.

Of the manner how to place the Planets in the Figure. Cap. 17.
THe figure being erected, all the planets together with the head and tail of
the Dragon, are fitlye to be placed in it, which is done by this means. The
place of the Planet being found out in the Ephemerides for the hour proposed,
must likewise be sought out in the houses, which being found, you shall place
your planet there. But it happens many times, and that very often, that the
character of the sign of the place of the planet is marked in some house, in
the which the Planet is not to be placed, because the degree of his place is
in another house, in the which (as by the example following shall appear) the
Planet with the degree, minute, and character of the sign is to be placed:
For the charecter of the sign is written again when as there is another sign
marked in the beginning of any house.

Hereafter follows the Figure.
The year of our lord.1555. the.26. day of march.41. minutes in the afternone:


In this Figure the sun is found in the 15 degree of Aries wherefore he is to
be placed in that house whereas the 15 degree of that sign shall be found, but
that degree is not in the tenth house, although the character of Aries be there
marked but in the ninth house, because that house has his beginning with the
25 degree of Pisces, and does end with the 26 of Aries. Therefore in the same
ninth house the sun must be placed with his degrees, minutes, and character
of the sign of Aries, as apeareth in the example before placed, in ye same
house ar likewise placed Saturn and Mercury with their degrees and minutes
wherein they are found. Venus is likewise placed in the eight house being found
in the 17. degree and 31 minutes of Pisces, because the eyghte house has his
beginning with the first degree of Pisces, in like order the other planets are
to be placed with the head and tail of the dragon, but in the ephemerides the
head of the dragon is only marked, and not the tail, because the tail is
always in the contrary or opposition of the head.

Of certain parts, and the way and mean how to find them out. Cap. 18.
THe part of fortune is likewise to be placed in the figure, like as also the
part of life and death, and of the planette which is cause of the death. which
is called the interficiente or killing planet: if the question be^ touching any
sick body, the finding out of the which we will now presentlye teach. The
part of life in in the day time is gathered from Jupiter to Saturn, and in
the night contrariwise, and both times are proiected from the ascendent.

The part of fortune in the day time is taken from the sun unto the Moon,
and in the night from the Moon unto the Sun, and has day and night, like
the part of life is added to the ascendent.

The part of death as well by night as by day is gathered from the Moon to
the degree of the 8 house, and is proiected from the sign wherein Saturn is.

The part of the interficient or killing planet is reckned in the day time from
the Lord of the ascendent to the moon, contrariwise from the Moon to the Lord
of the ascendent, and is proiected from the Lord of the ascendent.

Therefore when you will find out or ferche the place of any of these parts,
first bring your signs into number in order, so that Aries may be in the first
place, Taurus in the second, and so orderlye that Pisces may be found the
twelfth as follows.

Aries, 1 Taurus, 2 Gemini, 3 Cancer, 4 Leo, 5 Virgo, 6 Lybra, 7 Scorpius, 8
Sagittarius, 9 Capricornus, 10 Aquarius, 11 Pisces. 12

Then take away the place of the Planet from the which ye begin to reckon unto
the other, from the place of that whereunto you do reckon, and put the
differences that remains, unto the degree ascendent, or to some other sign or
place of the zodiac, as in the exposition of that part is before said. But if
there can no substraction be made, then put 12 signs unto the signs and degrees
from whence the substractio^ should be made.

Then accounting from the beginning of Aries, whereas the number shall end,
there shall that part be placed, as for example: if you would find out the
place of the part of fortune in the figure before placed because it is a day
figure, the place of the sun is to be subtracted from the place of the Moon.

The place of the Moon is two signs, 3 degrees, and 11 minutes, the place of
the sun is only 15 degrees and 5 mynutes from the first minute of Aries. If
then you do substract 15 degrees and 5 minutes, which is the place of the
Sun, by astronomical substraction from 2 signs, 3 degrees, and 11 minutes,
there will remain 1 sign, 18 degrees, and 6 minutes, which being added unto
the degree ascendent, makes 5 signs, 28 degrees and 6 minutes, because the
ascendent is of 4 signs and 10 degrees: then taking your beginning from Aries,
the part of fortune shall be placed in the 28 degree and 6 minutes of Virgo. In
this order must you proceed in the finding out the true places of ye other
parts before mentioned. Alwais this is not to be forgotten, that in all of them
the difference is not to be added to the ascendent, as in the part of fortune,
whereas the difference is to be added to the place of Saturn, notwithstanding
in every part ye must take your beginning from Aries.

Of such things as are to be observed before you give judgment of any
question. Cap. 19.
NOw having erected your figure, and placed your planets with the parts in the
same, as is before showed, before that you do give judgment upon any
question, certain things are diligently to be considered, least error he
committed in the same. First therefore the 7 house and the Lord thereof, are to
be considered, for if the 7 house be let by the aspect or presences of
malygne planets, or that his Lord be let, that is, if he be in his fall or
retrograde, or combust, or otherwise hindered by misfortunes aforesaid, you may
not safely give judgment, fearing to commit error. For Ptolomei in the 14
Aphorism of his Centiloquium says: In how great error shall the Astronomer be
wrapped, when the 7 house and the Lord thereof are afflicted. Furthermore it is
diligently to be marked whether the question be radical or no, which is known
if the Lord of the ascendent and Lord of the hour be one, or of one
triplicity or nature. For this constellation rising, the question is radical,
contrariwise it is not, and therefore absolute judgment is not to be given.
Here note that the first evil extends no further then when the question
demanded does not appertain to the 7 house, for then it takes no place, but
rather shows that the question demanded shall have ill success or effect.
Likewise neither the first nor second rules do not hold in natiuities, neither
in any question where the certain hour of the thing done is known and given.

Of the significators, and how for to find them. CAP. 20.
BEfore that we come to give judgment, we must learn to know what the
significators are, and who they are, and how to find them out. The significator
then is both the house that signifies the thing demanded, and the Planet
which has most dignities in the same house, which is called the Lord of the
house, of ye finding out whereof we have already spoken. When as therefore any
question is preposed, the ascendent and his Lord is to be attributed unto the
querent, or mouer of the question, and the house that signifies the thing that
is demanded, and his Lord is attributed unto the question or thing demanded,
the Moon which in every question is common, is attributed always with the
ascendent and his Lord, unto him that moves the questyon, as for example, if
a man should move a question to enquire of the state of his brother, the
ascendente and the Lord thereof, and the Moon, are given unto the querent.

But the third house and his Lord is given unto the brother, or if that any man
should enquire of the diseases and sickness of another, the ascendent, his
Lord, and the Moon are significators of the patient, but the sixte house and
the Lord thereof does signify the diseases. And in this manner is to be dealt
in all other questions. Notwithstanding it is to be known that many times
you must take many significators, as in those things which are done be
personages are Ambassadors coming between, as in bargeninges, treaties of
peace, marriages, and such other like: for in these things with the asce^dent
and his Lord and the Moon, the planet from the which the moon is separate,
is to be joined. And the Planet whereunto the Moon does apply, with the house
that signifies the thing demanded, with the Lord of the same is to be given
to the question. Also they do join to the significators any planet which has
any community or fellowship with the signification of the thing. As for
example, a man preposeth a question of a future marriage. Here the ascendent
with his Lord, and the Moon with the Planet from which she is separate, is
given unto the querent, but the seventh house and the Lord thereof, and the
Planet whereunto the Moon does apply you shall give unto the thing that is
demanded. But if it be a man that is the querent, you shall join the Sun
unto the other significators, because the sun does signify a man. But
contrariwise, if it be a woman, Venus is joined unto the significators, because
she rules the woman, and the Sun to the thing that is demanded: and thus
must you do in all other questions. For their disposition either one to
another, or to the fortunate or unfortunate Planets does show what shall come
to pass of the thing demanded. Thus we have sufficiently spoken of the
significators, and now we will happily hasten to the judgments.

How many ways things are brought to perfestion and end. CAP. 21.
Having finished our treatise sufficiently touching the principles of this
science and observations necessary. Now the right order calls us to the
setting down of the right Method and way to bring things to their perfect end
and scope. Therefore we will now show how many ways things may be perfitted, the
which happens by four means and ways, that is to say, by conjunction, by
translation of light and nature, by collection of light, and by being in
houses: when as therefore the Lord of the ascende^t, the significator of the
thing demanded, be either corporally joined or by aspect, the thing demanded
without all doubt shall come to pass, specially if the conjunction be in the
ascendente. Notwithstanding it shall come to pass but with some difficulty, if
it happen the conjunction to be in the house that fignifieth the thing that is
demanded.

Secondly it is brought to perfection by translation of light and nature, that
is when as the said significators are joined by conjunction or aspect, and
that some other planet do separate himself from one of the significators, of
whom he has been received, and applies to the other significator before
that he does behold or apply unto any other planet, for then he transporteth
the force and nature which he took of the one unto the other, and he which
receives the light, is the author of the perfection of the thing. But when it
comes to pass in this sort, he that does demand or axe the question does
agree with him for whom it is demanded, for the ching that is demanded by
means of some man, messenger, or judge, sent or coming between them.

Thirdly, things are brought to pass when as there is collection of their
light by a planet more weighty then the Lord of the ascendent or significator
of the thing demanded, that is, when the Lord of the ascendent and the
significator, or the thing demanded do both behold a planet waightier then
themselves, and specially by receptions, for that Planet is as it were judge
that causes the things to come unto entire perfeccion.

Fourthly, and finally, things are finished by the dwelling of Planets in
houses, for if the significators of any thing be in the first house, specially
if they be received it does argue the thing shall come to pass without any
labor. But if the Lord of the horoscope or the Moon, or any of the
significators of the querent be in the house of the thing demanded, it shows
that it shall come to pass, but with much labor and travel. These things by
example shall be made playner, let this therefore be the example. In the year of
our Lord 1555, the 6 day of June, hour 12, minutes 56, there was a question
proposed by one, whether he should get or obtain any of his brothers goods: at
the which hour the figure of the heaven was erected in such sort as follows.



Mercury is here Lord of the ascendent, and Mars significator of the thing
demanded, because he being Lord of the fourth house, wherein is contained the
substaunces of brethren, because it is the second house to the third, he
shall iustlye signify the thing desired. Now therefore we must look if by any
means the querent shall obtain or get that which he desires. Which thing
being considered, there appears no conjunction between the Lord of the
ascendent or the Moon with the significators of the thing demanded. Wherefore
by this means the querent shall not have his desire.

But I do see further a translation of the light and nature of the
significator of the thing to be wrought by the moon unto the Lord of the the
horoscope, for the moon being separate from the trine aspecte of Mars whom
Mars had received in his exhaltation, it does show that the querent shall
obtain his desire more easily then if the translation had been done
contrariwise. By the third mean which is by the collection or gathering of
the light it cannot come to pass because there is no waightier planet then
they that does behold them both.

Fourthlye it is like that the thing shall come to pass because the
significator of the thing desired is placed in the ascendent, therefore we do
also judge that he shall have that which he desires, because the significator
of the thing does possess the ascendent, and his light is translated to the
Lord of the horoscope, in this sort you shall judge of al manner of questions
propounded, always taking heed unto the disposition of the significators, and
marking the good or evil aspectes, with the fortunate or unfortunate planets,
their applications or seperations, For their disposition with the good shows
good, and with the evil the contrary, for their application does signify
inclination, and their separation their privation. Further their applications
which are by a trine or sextill aspecte do easily bring the thing to pass,
but those which happens by a quadrat or opposition, do cause many
difficulties. And this shall suffice to resolve sundry questions,
notwithstanding to make this doctrine more easy, we will show an example upon
every one of the houses beginning with a question referred unto the first
house, and so prosecute the rest in order.

The first Question to know whether any man that is absent, be dead or alive.
Cap. 22.
MAny and sundry questions are moved, which are referred to some of the 12
houses because of their sundry significations. But because every house has
almost innumerable significations, if we would touch them all, or bring them
into one volume our labor would be tedious and very great. Wherefore
setting down one only question upon every house, easy judgment may be
given of the rest, so that which is spoken before, be well understood and
perceived. The first house gives judgment of the life, and therefore the
question proposed of one that is absent whether he be dead or alive is
referred unto the first house. When you will therefore resolve such a
question, look whether the Lord of the ascendent, the Moon, or the Lord of
the 8 house be joined together, for that shows that the man is departed this
life. Look also if there be any translation of the light of the Lord of the
ascendent unto the Lord of the eyghth house, or contrarywyse: or whether the
Lord of the 8 house be in the ascendent, or the Lord of the ascendent be
placed in the angle of the earth, for all these do declare that the man has
ended his life. Furthermore, the dispositions of the Lord of the ascendent is
to be marked whether it be with fortunate or unfortunate planets for the
applications with the good planets shows life, but with the evil it brings
hurt and death. The like is to be judged of the ascendent and part of fortune,
for the good planets being in the ascendent, or with the part of fortune, or
beholding them with good aspect signifies life, as contrariwise the malygne or
evil Planets being so placed, does threaten mischief and death.

The second question whether any man shall have or possess riches and
substance, and at what time. Cap. 23.
THe dispositions also of the significator with the Lord of the ascendent, and
the Moon whereof we have often spoken does show the life, if the almuten of the
ascendent or significator do behold any Planet being in an angle it does
declare conseption, contrariwise if they being in an angle do behold a planet
in a falling house, or that there be a moveable sign in the ascendent, or any
malygne Planet, it shows that there is no conseption, or if there were, it
shows abortion, but a fixed sign in the ascendent with a fortunate Planet in
the same, foresheweth true consception, also a Planet having many dignities in
the fifth house and placed in the same and beholden of the Moon does show true
consception, likewise the Lord of the fifth house being strong in the ascendent
or tenth house does show yt like, now if that you desire to know when a woman
is conceived, whether she shall bring forth a man child or a woman, behold
whether the Lord of the ascendent the Moon and the Lord of the fifth house
be in masculine signs or the most of them, for that does signify the woman
shall bear a man child, if they be in femenine signs it shows a woman
child, likewise mark if the Lord of the hour and the Lord of the house of
children and the Moon or two of them be in masculine signs, for then it
shows a man child: in feminine signs, it signifies a woman, I would also
have set down some question upon the sixth house, but minding hereafter to add
another treatise unto this work the scope whereof shall be almost wholly referred
to the nature of the sixte house, now we will only touch a short question of
the same house as follows.

To know whether a man shall keep or leave his servant. CAP. 27.
Servants oftentimes being in good credit with their masters, do fear least
their master will give them over unto some other or that they shall not be in
so good state as they are, as it happens in those countries where they sell or
give their servants, wherefore if any man will know if he shall be in better
case with another then with him that he serves, he may put forth his question
to know if the master will keep his servant or leave him, for answer
whereunto we will first set down the first house and the Lord thereof, and
the Moon, for the interrogant, and the sixth house and his Lord for the
servant, and the tenth house and his Lord, for the master of the servant.
Then we must consider the disposition of these significatours as well among
themselves as the angles, for if the Lord of the ascendent or the Moon be
corporallye joined with the Lord of the tenth house, by conjunction or
aspecte, and that the same be in one degree or minute, it signifies that he
shall be delivered by his master: and if they be already separated or that
they do separate themselves, the servant has had already leave to depart,
but if the Lord of the first or sixth house or the moon do separate themselves
from the Lord of the tenth house, and do apply to some other planet of whom
they are received either in his house, exaltation, term or triplicitie, it
does show that his master shall give him to some other, and that he shall be
better then with the first master, but if they separate them selves from the
Lord of the tenth house, and do not apply to some other Planet, his master
shall not keep him although he give him unto another: if they separate
themselves from the Lord of the tenth house and do apply unto a malygn
Planet without reception, he shall be given unto another master with whom he
shall not be so well as with the first, and if there be no conjunction or
separation found between the lord of the ascendant the moon and the lord of
the sixth house, with the Lord of the tenth, then look if there be any such
thing between them and the sun, for then you must judge as you would do
between them and the Lord of the tenth house, if none of these constellations
be found, the servant shall dwell still with his master, specially if the
ascendant or sixth house be fixed signs, or that the Lord of them or the moon
or the most part of them be in stable or fixed signs.

How to know whether a man shall obtain that woman in marriage which he
desires. Cap. 25.
THis question being preposed by a man will also serve to answer the like
demanded by a woman, giving unto each their proper significators, as is before
showed, it may be resolved in this sort. First give unto the querent the
ascendent and his lord, and the moon with the planet from the which the Moon
does separate her self, and the Sun for his significator. But to the woman,
the seventh house and his lord, the Planet unto whom the Moon does apply,
and Venus. Then mark diligently what disposition there is between the lord
of the ascendente, and the Moon, with the lord of the seventh house, and with
the Planet from whom the Moon is separate, with the Planet to whom she does
apply, and with the Sun and Venus: for a trine or sextill aspect or
application between them does show the matter shall be easily brought to
pass, but the quadrat and apposition shows it hardlye, and the separation
declares that it shall come to no effect or purpose. If the lord of the
ascendent or the Moon be in the seventh house, and the Planet from whom the
Moon is separate, does behold or apply unto the Planet whereunto the Moon
does apply, or the Sun do behold or apply unto Venus, it signifies that the
marriage shall come to pass but with much labor and difficulty, and
specially if the application or aspects be of enmity, for these aspectes
breed hatred and displeasure, and destroy the work, except some other better
significations come between.

But if the Lord of the seventh house be placed in the first, or be corporally
joined unto him, or that the Planet unto whom the Moon does apply, does be
hold the planet from whom she is separate, by a trine or sextill aspect, or
does apply unto him by like aspect, or that Venus does the like unto the
Sun, the querent shall easily obtain his wife. Notwithstanding if this be
oone by a quadrat or opposition without any reception, it shall hardly come to
pass. But if the Lord of the ascendente be received or any Planet, it
signifies that it shall come to pass if the Planet which receives him, have
any dignities in the seventh house, but if you find none of these things
before spoken of, then mark whether there be any translation or collection of
light between them, for they do likewise promise unto the querent his wife,
as the other aspectes before mentioned, notwithstanding it shall be brought
to pass by messengers or others that shall deal between. Fynallye, the Moon
free from misfortune and received, promises the like, but if it happen that
there fall out none of these foresaid constellations, then the querent is not
to have any hope to obtain his demand.

Whether a man shall enjoy the goods and dowry of his Wife. Cap. 26.
SOmetimes it happens this question to be moved: whether any man may have and
enjoy the goods or dowrye of his wife, which question is answered according
to the disposition of the ascende^t and his Almuten, and the Moon with the
eyghte house and his lord because the eight house being the second and
succeeding to the seventh, the house of the substance of women. If then the
lord of the first house and the Moon be joined with the lord of the eight
house by aspecte, conjunction, or application, the querent shall obtain the
woman's goods or substance: or if there be any application between them with
reception, or translation, or collection of light, the querent shall have that
he seeks, if none of these be found, look if the lord of the eight house be
in the first, or the Lord of the first, or the Moon be in the eight house,
then the querent shall have the goods of the woman, but with much labor and
entreaty. But the lord of the eight house in the ascendente brings the
matter easilye to pass. But if none of these aspects does appear, then that
he seeks, is frustrate and void.

Of the speedye or slack return of him that takes in hand any journey, and
of such things as shall happen in the journey. CAP. 27.
BEing demanded of any man which would take in hand any journey, what shall
or may happen unto him in the same, and of his short or slack return, take
diligente heed to the significator of the journey, and to the Lord of the
ascendent, and the Moon, for if the significator of the journey which is the
Almute^ of the ninth house, and the lord of the ascendent, or the Moon, be
joined together, or that one of the significators do apply unto another, or
that there be between them translation or collection of light, or the greater
part of them be in moveable signs, the journey shall soon be ended, and the
return short: but if they be in fixed signs, it will be a long journey, and
long return, but if it be in common signs, his journey shall be indifferente,
and his return like, but by the way he shall take in hand another journey. But
the lords of the ascendente and the ninth house, being unfortunate,
retrograde, or combust, do hinder the journey and bring great danger. But if
the Lord of the ascendent and of the ninth house be efortunate, or do apply
to the lord of the eleventh house, or the Lord of the eleventh house be
fortunate in the ninth, it signifies a prosperous journey, and that the
querent shall obtain that he trauayleth for. But if the Moon be in the sixth
or twelfth house, or joined with the Lord of the sixth, and be unfortunate, or
that the Lord of the ascendent or of the ninth house be afflicted by the lord
of the sixth, it signifies that the trauayler shall be sick in his journey,
but if the affliction be by the Lord of the 12, it shows imprisonment. And
by this means you may judge of the fortunes or misfortunes, by the disposition
of the Lords of the houses, with fortunate or unfortunate planets.

To understand whether a man shall obtain that dignity or office that he
desires, or seeks for. CAP. 28.
IF any man move a question of an Office or dignity which he hops to
obtain, to understand or know whether he shall have it or no: Behold if the
Lord of the tenth house which is significator of the office, be joined with
the Lord of the first house, or if one of them do apply unto the other, by a
tryne or sextill aspecte, with reception, then judge boldly that he shall have
the office. The like you shall judge also if you find the Lord of the
ascendent and the lord of the tenth house placed in angles, so that there be no
misfortune between them. But if the Lord of the ascendent be cadent or falling
from the lord of the tenth house and do not behold him: or the Lord of the
tenth house be falling from the tenth house, and does not behold the same,
except some fortunate planet do come between, and translate the light of the
one to the other, the querent shall not have the office he seeks, for it
signifies that it is already given to another. If the Almuten of the first
house, or the Moon, be received in the tenth, or the Lord of the tenth be
received in the ascendent, they do promise the office unto the querent. If any
planet heavier then the Lords of the ascendent or tenth house, do gather their
light, he places the querent in the office, as the other Constellations do:
But if the lord of the house of Hope, be an unfortunate Planet, and behold the
Moon being unfortunate, or that the Moon be in the eleventh house
unfortunate, the office shall not be granted unto the Querent. But if the Lord
of the eleventh house be fortunate, and behold the Moon being also fortunate,
or the Lord of the ascendente or of the tenth house with a good aspect, or
apply unto any of them, or be placed in the tenth house, he does promise and
give the office and dignity to the querent. But if a fortunate Planet be Lord
of the eleventh house, and be placed in a very good place, and the Moon being
unfortunate be found falling from the fortunes, and the eleventh house, the
querent shall obtain but a part of his suit, and if that misfortune of the
Moon do come by Mars, and that Mars be strong in the heaven beholding the
Lords of the eleventh house, and ascendent it shows that the querent shall
be murdered or slain after he has gotten the Office, except some fortunate
Planet coming between do let or hinder that mischief. The Lords of the tenth
and eleventh house being fortunate and beholding one another with reception,
although the Moon be afflicted by Saturn, they promise the Office unto the
querent: who notwithstanding by means of the misfortune of the Moon, wroughte
by Saturn, shall in his office be of ill behavior, and thereby get no love or
friendship, but hatred and displeasure.

To know whether a man shall have the thing he hops or looks for. CAP. 29.
A Question being moved by any man of any matter, whether it be dignity,
office, or any other thing, whether he shall obtain it or no, and yet will
not tell what it is that he hops for, nor at whose hands he looks for
it. Take your significator from the eleventh house for if the Lord of the
eleventh do apply to the Lord of the ascendent, or the Lord of the ascendent,
unto the Lord of the eleventh, or do behold him, the querent shall obtain
that he looks for, and that very easily, if the application be by a tryne or
sextill aspect. The like shall come to pass when the Lord of the eleventh
house is received into any angle. Also when the receyuer of the disposition of
the Moon is received, and his Receiver again received, the querente shall
obtain lightly and easily.

In like manner you shall judge of the Lord of the ascendent if the receyuer of
the disposition of the Moon be in a common or moveable sign, he shall
obtain but a small or the least part of the thing he seeks, but if he be in a
fixed sign he shall have it wholly. The like also shall come to pass when there
is any applications, translations, or collections of light, whereof we have
spoken oftentimes before.

In like manner a man may judge when any man does demand whether he shall
obtain the good will or friendship of him that he seeks or desires. If you
find the Lord of the ascendent, the Moon, and the Lord of the eleventh
house, joined together, or any of them applying to any other, judge that he
shall have his desire, and so much the rather if it be by friendly aspectes.
But if the aspectes or applications be unfriendly, hardly shall be obtain his
desire, but if it happen he do obtain, the friendship shall not continue
long, but there shall rise discord and contention between them, and hardlye
shall they be made friends again.

Of a man's secret Enemies. CAP. 30.
A Question being moved of the state or condition of a secret enemy,
consider well who is the Almuten of the 12 house, and his disposition with the
other houses and Planets. For according to his disposition, shall give
judgment of the secret enemy. If the Almuten of the 12 house be in the sixth,
or joined with the Lord of the sixth, it shows that the enemy is sick, or
the like, if the Lord of the sixth house he in the twelfth, but if the
significator of the secret enemy be found joined with the Lord of the 10
house, it shows that the enemy is either at the Court or talking with the
King, to have or obtain some thing of him which shall be hurtful unto the
Querent. If the significator aforesaid do behold the ascendent or his Lord
with a quadrat or opposicion, and so you shall judge. But if the Lord of the
12 house be found placed in the fourth house, or in the house of death, or
joined to the Lord of the eight house, which is the house of death, you shall
affirm that he is either already dead or else that he will dye very shortly.
In this sort a man may judge of the state of his secret enemy by the
disposition of the significator, with the Lords of the houses and the
Planettes good or bad. But if the querent will tell you the name of his enemy,
or that he be not a privy, but rather an open enemy, you must seek out his
condition and state by the seventh house and the Lord thereof, for because the
seventh house does behold the ascendent with an envious aspect, worthily
therefore the state of open enemies is drawn from it. By this means, and in
this sort, a man may give judgment of every question proposed, and answer
unto them.

Whether any man shall have or possess riches and substance and at what
time. CAP. 30.
WHen any man preposeth a question, whether he shall have any substance or
riches, and if it shall come to pass, at what time and when it shall be, and
yet he will not tell from or of whom he hops to have or receive any
riches. They that shall give answer in this point, must diligently foresee if
there be any application between the Lord of the second house, the Moon, and
the lord of the first house or not, also you must look if there be any
translation of light and nature between them, or that their light be gathered
by any higher Planet. Or if the Lord of the second house be fortunate in the
ascendent, or if the part of fortune or Lord of the ascendente be
fortunatelye placed in the second house: For if these or any of these, or the
most part of them do happen, it does signify that the Querente shall have
substance and riches. But if none of these be found it shows the contrary,
if the Moon be not placed in the second house.

But to know when it shall happen if unto every degree that is between their
co^iunctio^ or aspect to Jupiter, or ye part of fortune or one significator to
another, you do give a day a week, month or year, according to the
quallities of the signs, you shall understand the time. The mooueable signs
do determine hours or days, the common signs months or weeks, the fixed
signs months or years, by this means also a man shall know when any thing
that is demanded shall come to pass.

Of the inquisition or searching out of brethren. Cap. 31.
ALL things are in nature according to the variable and diverse quallities and
complections of men, for some men do continually travel and pass from City
to City, from country to country, othersome very seldom or never travel
out of their own country, or remove from their own habitations, but unto
such as be wanderers or trauelers sundry accidents are woonte to happen
whereupon also diverse questions are preposed, as some do inquire for their
brother, some for their father, others for their cosine, and one for another.
Therefore when any man moves a question to understand the state of his
brother being absent, the third house is dilligently to be considered, for it
gives judgment of brethren, also the Lord thereof, and the Lord of the
triplicitie are to be marked, for their fortunate or unfortunate disposition
shows in what estate the brother is, if the Lord of the third house be in
the sixth, or the Lord of the sixth in the third, or one of them have
application or aspect to the other, it shows that he is sick, if the
significators of the brother be in the seventh house or the Moon, or Lord of
the seventh house be in the third, or that there be any applycation between
them, it shows that he has or shall marrye a wife: but if these
dispositions be found with the Lord of the eyghte house, or in the same
house, or that the Lord of the third, be in the fourth house, it shows
that he is dead. Likewise the application aspect or conjunction of the
significators of the brother, with fortunate Planets shows his good estate
and condition, but with the unfortunate, it shows the contrary.

After this sort may you judge of the disposition of the significators of the
brother, with the Lords of the other houses and of other questions preposed,
whether it be of father mother wife or children, or any other thing whereof
diverse and sundry judgments may be given.

To know whether any man shall possess and inioye the house or land that
he desires to buy. Cap. 32.
IF any man demand a question for the buying of a house, whether he shall
obtain it or not, give the ascendent and his Lord and the Planet from whom
the Moon is separated unto the querent, and the fourth house and his Lord and
the Moon unto the house or ground desired, and the 10 house with his lord unto
the price or value of the same, but if he will not tell you who it is, that
does sell it, then attribute the seventh house and the lord thereof and the
Planet to whom the moon does apply unto the sellar, but if he will tell you
his name then another significator must be given unto him as if he did desire
to buy his brothers land, then the third house and his Lord is to be given
unto the sellar, but if he will not tell the name of the sellar either because
he knows him not or otherwise then as is aforesaid the seventh house with
his lord and the Planet whereunto the Moon does apply shall be the
significator, but now to know what shall come to pass in this matter, we must
look what the disposition or habit of these significators is, for if the
Lord of the ascendent and the Lord of the seventh house be in conjunction, or
there be any applycation between them or translation of light the querent
shall easily obtain, specially if there be a reception or that the aspect or
application be friendlye.

If these things happen not, then must you look if the lord of the seventh
house be in the first, or the Lord of the first in ye seventh, for that would
cause the querent to obtain his request. The like is to be judged, if there be
any applycation or conjunction, or translation of light between the Planet
from whom the moon is separate and that to whom she does apply so that the
translation be not wrought by the Moon, or the Planet from whom the Moon is
separate, be in the seventh house or that whereunto she does apply be placed in
the first house, the querent shall obtain the thing he seeks, but if none of
these be found, then mark if the Lord of the ascendent and the Lord of the
fourth house and the moon be joined together, or whether there be any
applycation or translation of light between them, or if the Lord of the fourth
house, or the moon be in the ascendent or the Lord of the ascendent in the
fourth house these shall bring the matter to pass like the other
constellations before said, in like manner may you judge by the disposition
of the lord of the tenth house with the lord of the ascendent, if any of these
constellations be found the^ shall the querent have his desire otherwise not.

Wherefore this shall be suficiently spoken of those questions according to our
compendious institution and purpose, for many other writers have written more
at large of every question as Guydo, Bonatus, Haly, Aben-Ragell and others,
unto whom I refer them that desire to know more herein, notwithstanding
whosoever shall dilligently read and perfitlye understand that which we
have before declared, he shall be able to give a certain and determinate
judgment of all questions that shall be proposed or demanded.

This ends the introduction to the Judgment of the Stars.
A brief Treatise of the proper Elections for the enterprising or beginning of
any thing: written by Claudius Dariot Physician, and translated, corrected and
augmented by Fabian Wither.
FOllowing my purpose and deliberation, after that I have now sufficientlye
entreated and showed the principles and elements of the whole art, and by what
means and ways a man may attain unto it: and how al questions demanded may
be referred and reduced unto the 12 houses that their significator may be found
out. Now to the end that I will leave nothing untouched, I will breefely and
with a short phrase or style set down a certain Treatise containing the
general principles for choosing of fit times to begin or take in hand any manner
of action. Therefore I will show you how in the beginning of any matter the
constitution and due disposition of the heavens and heavenly bodies is to be
observed and marked, for every hour of the day is not apt or fit for the
beginning of every work, but the constellation of one hour is meet for one
work, and another for another. Therefore in great and weighty matters, as
also in those things which are ruled by the natural course and
constitutitution of the elements and stars, the due constellation of the
heavens is to be elect and chosen. Wherefore in this Treatise following, we will
show such things as are to be observed in every election, and first we will
speak of the roots and foundations of elections.

Of the roots or grounds of Elections. CAP. 1.
FIrst it is to be remembered, that an election is not to be made for him whose
nativity or revolution of that year is unknown, or of any question whereof
the hour or ascendent is not likewise known. For peradventure thereby might
be chosen an ascendent contrary to the ascendent in the root of his nativity:
for peradventure there should be set down for the ascendent that sign: which
in the nativity was in the sixth 8 are 12 houses whereby the election supposed
to be made for commodity or profit may turn to hurt or damage. For we see
often times some one that begins his work under a good constellation
whereof notwithstanding he reapeth nothing but hurt and misfortune.
Contrariwise another attempteth a matter under an evil constellation and yet
notwithstanding reapeeth commodity and profit by the same, yea and it often
times happens that two more together even at one and in the self same hour,
do take their journey or enter into a ship, whereof some of them return
home with gain and good fortune, othersome be in great danger and hazard, and
others return with loss and misfortune: the which thing happens upon no
other cause but through the diversity of the ascendents in their natiuities.
For a good election cannot turn away the evil that the planets has threatened
at the time of the nativity. Some therefore will say that elections then does
profit nothing: truly a good election does help when the significators of
the thing in the nativity do help the goodness of the election, for if they
be good or indifferent good, and not altogether evil, then the election shall
profit. But if the significators in the nativity do promise in any matter
some good or some ill, a good election shall help the good and let the evil,
or at the least diminish or make the evil the less. For Ptolomey in his fifte
Aphorism of his Centiloquium says: The wise man may turn away or put of
many effects of the stars when as he knows their natures, and prepares
himself before they work their effect, and Solomon says: a wise man shall
rule the stars. He therefore that does foresee things that shall happen,
is accounted wise, for he will either withstand or let the evil that shall
happen, or else diminish or make it less, otherwise elections takes no place:
for if any man would make election of a time fit or meet for begetting of
children, and has the significators of children unfortunate in his nativity,
and therefore signify the privation of children, an election will help or
profit him nothing at all, for it cannot take away the damage which the
significators brought in the nativity, except the election be very good, and
the goodness thereof equal to the evil of the nativity.

What is to be observed in the signs at the time of an Election. CAP. 2.
THe signs as has been already spoken, are divided into many sorts, some be
moveable, some fixed, some mean or common, and therefore every sign cannot be
apt or fit for every work, for the fixed signs bring stabilitie and
continuance unto things. Those things therefore that are done to continue
long, as building of houses and Castles, planting of trees, marriages, and such
like, they should take their beginning when fixed signs are in the ascendent.
For the moveable signs work altogether the contrary, in so much that
whatsoever is begun they being ascending, it comes swiftly and in short time
to an end, wherefore whilst they be in the horoscope it is good to sow seeds,
to buy and sell, and to plight faith and troth with a woman, and to take in
hand such other like things, that require sudden or hasty accomplishment. The
common or mean signs have a mixed or indifferent quality betwixt both and
therefore under them it is good to begin such things as be common to two or
more, as for to enter into society with any man, or to do any thing for lucre
or gain sake, it is very good, for those things that are done under them, are
subject to mutation as if a disease be cured under them, it returns again
often times, or if any man take a journey from one, he straight way enters
into another journey. By this reason we see that sign agreeable to the
qualities of the things you will take in hand are always to be chosen. And
this is not alonly to be observed in the moveable, fixed or common signs, but
also in all the other qualities: for amongst the fixed signs, the earthly
signs are most convenient, and amongst the moveable the ayrie or fiery signs.
If any man therefore would work any thing by fire which he would have quickly
brought to effect, let him choose common signs fiery, or at the least ayrie.
When any man would plant or build a house or such like, let him choose fixed
signs, but specially earthy. Or if any man will take a iourny by water, he
must choose a moveable and watery sign. And so in all other things he must
make his elections of the signs according to the qualities of the work. Now
follow certain canons touching the elections of works.

Rules or Canons for the Elections of works. Cap. 3.
Having the nativity of any man his revolution or question, the house and
significator of the nativity or question of the thing you would take in hand
are to be framed, but if these be unknown, then the house that signifies the
thing and his Lord are to be framed and made fortunate in the hour of the
beginning of the thing, which hour must be diligently sought out. As if any
man would take in hand a journey to the King, the 9 house and his Lord are to
be made fortunate, and if it may be the 10 house of the nativity, revolution or
question are to be set in the asce^de^t, and the Lord thereof to be fortified in
the asce^dent or 10 house, also the ascendent and the Lord thereof, and the
Lord of ye house where the ascendent is placed, are diligently to be fortifyed
and framed, and let the sign of the ascendent be in nature and quality
agreeable unto the thing to be taken in hand, as in taking in hand of war,
the signs of Mars are to be chosen, and so of other things as aforesaid. But
if the Lord of the ascendent be unfortunate, frame him to behold the
ascendente with a trine or sextill aspecte. Likewise the Moon because she is
common unto all things, she and her Lord, that is, the Lord of the sign or
house where she is placed, are to be fortified and framed. Notwithstanding let
not the Moon be in the ascendent, for there she is unfortunate. You shall
also place the Sun in the Horoscope, or in the house that signifies the
thing you will take in hand, or else in Aries, or Leo, for otherwise he is
thought to be unfortunate. Also the planet which naturally signifies the thing
is to be fortified, as if any man would marry, Venus is to be fortified. Mars
if any man would begin a skirmish or battle, but in election for substance
or riches, Jupiter is to be fortifyed, for these Planets do naturally govern
such things. Furthermore you must take great heed to fortify and stre^^then
the place of the conjunction or opposition of the lights, and the Lord thereof
immediately going before: likewise the house of Hope, and the lord thereof, the
tenth house and his Lord, and the Planet that signifies the end of things are
stronglye to be placed. But the planet which shows the end of things, is
the lord of the fourth house, if he be in the fourth house or behold the
same, otherwise it shall be the Lord of the house of the Moon, if he do behold
the Moon, or the Moon him, else it is the Planet unto whom the Moon shall
be first corporallye joined, or else the Lord of the part of fortune, if he
do behold the part, otherwise the signification thereof remains unto the
Moon and her Lord, or to the fourth sign from that wherein the Moon is, or
as some judge, the Lord of the fourth sign from the part of fortune.

These are the chief points that are to be observed in all elections: if all
these cannot be framed, you must indeauoure to observe and keep as many of
them as you may, for the significator of the thing, the ascendent, and his
Lord, and the Moon at the least are to be fortified. But if the Moon be
unfortunate, you shall place her falling from the ascendent, and shall choose
the Planet that does afflict the Moon, to be the Lord of the ascendente, so
that the Horoscope being under his rule and power, he will not hurt himself,
so that he be otherwise free from other unfortunate aspects, but if he cannot
be lord of the ascendent, at the least let him rule the tenth, or the eleventh,
or the fifte house, and if the Moon be received of that planet, she will do
little hurt or none, for her malice shall be abated. Also the fortunate
planets, as Jupiter and Venus are to be placed in the ascendent or tenth house,
or else if you can make fortunate the lord of the hour, it will help very
much in the matter. Thus we have briefelye showed what things are to be wished
and observed in all elections, now I will as breefely in few words touch what
things are to be avoided and taken heed of.

The things that are to be avoided and taken heed of in all elections. Cap. 4.
BY nature all things are subject to lets and hinderaunces, wherefore in the
beginning of any work it is diligently to be taken heed of, that the lord of
the ascendent be not retrograde, for when he is so disposed, all that he does
he turns rather to evil then to good, and works all things utterly to the
contrary, for albeit that all the other significators be well disposed, yet
the matter shall not take effect, or else with great pain and labor, for the
retrogradation does hinder and let the operasions of all things, also you must
diligently mark and take heed that the evil and unfortunate Planets do not
possess the ascendent, the midst of the heaven, or any other angle,
specially if they be lords of any evil house, as of the fixed, eyghte, or
twelfth house. Also that no fixed star of the nature of the evil planets be
placed in those places, specially in the ascende^t or tenth house, also the
sixth, eight or twelfth house of any nativity or question, are not to be
ascendente at the taking in hand of any enterprise, for those houses have no
fellowship or aspect with the ascendent, and therefore be evil and perverse
and bring great hurt, and therefore are justly to be eschued and avoided. Also
you must not begin or take in hand any work in the time of the conjunction
or opposition of the two lights, that is at the new or full Moon, specially if
it happen with the head or tail of the Dragon, you must take heed that neither
the head or tail of the Dragon be in the ascendente, or in the house of the
thing that is demanded, or with the part of the thing, for the tail of the
dragon is worse then the head. The Moon also is to be eschewed when she is
placed in the second, sixth, eight or twelfth house, for then in those places
she is evil and unfortunate. Finally, the part of Fortune must not be separate
from the conjunction of the Moon, or some aspect, neither cadent from any
angle in the beginning of any work. But if you join him with the lord of the
ascendent, or place him in any aspect within, it will bring great commodity
unto the work. This therefore shall suffice to be breefely spoken touching
elections.

FINIS.


Here follows the table of the unequal hours, wherein the Planets have
their dominion every day and night through the whole year.
FOr so much as the hours of the days and nights in the whole year wherein the
Planets have their reign and dominion are altogether unequal, by reason of the
sun his rising up toward the north, and his goeing back or declination
toward the South, which causes the day to be longer or shorter according to
the course thereof, the day being accounted from the rising of the Sun, unto
the setting of the Sun, and from thencefoorth the night unto the rising
again, and the hour which is the twelfth part of the day and likewise of the
night, is thereby very unequal and hard to be decerned, and yet most
necessary to be known, as well for elections as also for avoiding of sundry
actions and doeings, I have reduced into a compendious table the unequal
hours as well of the nights and days of the whole year which for breuities
sake, and because the difference is so small that it may hardly he discerned I
have divided by 3 in this manner, 3, 6, 9, 12, etc. whereby you may very
easily find out the unequal hours of every day and night, by this rule and
method following, first in the top of the table is set down for a title the
hours before noone, then over the first colomne which conteyneth the caracters
of the signs with the degrees divided as is aforesaid by 3 is set the place of
the Sun, over the second column the Sun rising, which shows the
beginning of the first hour, and over the other columns orderly toward the
right hand, these numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, which shows the end of every
hour, and ends always at 12 of the clock at noone, and so likewise by the
tytles you shall see the hours in the afternoon unto the Sun setting in
like number, and from thence to mydnight and so to the Sun rising again in
the morning. Now to proceed by example to teach you to find out what hour
you desire I will set down the 2 day of October, with which I enter into the
alminake or Ephemerides and seek in what sign and what degree of the sign
the same is in, which I find to be the 8 degree of Libra, with that I enter
into my table, and under the title of the Suns place I find the same degree,
then in the (...) column I find the Sun to rise at 6 of the clock 38
minutes. which is the beginning of the first hour. Then I proceed to the next
column which I find to be 7 and 32 minutes which is the end of the first hour
and the beginning of the second, and so you shall proceed throughout the
columns does of the day and night. Further note that whereas you find but 3
signs directly under the place of the Sun, and other 3 on the other side
under the like title, understand that these signe^ make like unequal hours
according to the declination of the Sun, so that if the Sun be in any of
those signs you shall seek the degree in the column under the title of the
place of the Sun on the right hand of the page, and begin your hour on the
lefts side of the page under the title of the Suns rising, and so proceed
orderly a^ before. Now to know also the order of the Planets, I return to my
example of the of october, being wednesday, and therefore I give to the 1 hour
to the 2, to the 3 to the 4 to the 5 to the 6 which ends at high noone, to
the 1 after noone, to the 2, and so forth orderly; as here ensues beginning
with every Planet appropriate to the day at the ^^st hour,

Saturday, Thursday, Tuesday, Sunday, Friday, Wednisday, Monday.

Then having given the Planet appropriate to the day unto the first hour then
follow the order set down in the example according to the order of the Planets
which is thus.

and so begin again.

Thus have I breefely finished the Method and order of this Table, the use and
commodity whereof may in practice be found such as will bring no small
pleasure unto the diligent practitioner.

FINIS.
The Table of the vnequa^l hours of the artificial day
Place of the Sun. The suns rising. The hours before noone. Place of the Sun.
1 2 3 4 5 6 S. D. H. M H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D. 0 6 0 7 0 8 0
9 0 10 0 11 0 12 0 30 3 5 54 6 55 7 56 8 57 9 58 10. 59 0 27 6 47 47 51 54 56
58 0 24 5 41 44 47 51 54 57 0 21 12 35 39 43 48 52 56 0 18 15 5 28 6 33 7 39 8
44 9 49 10. 55 12 0 15 18 2^ 28 35 41 47 54 (...) 12 21 16 23 31 38 45 5^ 0 9
24 10 18 27 35 48 52 0 6 27 3 1^ 22 3^ 41 51 0 3 0 4 57 6 8 7 18 8 29 9 39 10.
50 12 0 0 3 51 3 14 26 37 49 0 27 6 45 5 58 10 23 35 48 0 24 9 40 5^ 7 20 33 47
0 21 12 34 48 8 17 31 46 0 18 15 4 28 5 43 6 59 8 14 9 29 10. 45 12 0 15 18 23
39 55 12 28 44 0 12 21 18 35 52 9 26 4^ 0 9 24 12 30 48 6 24 42 0 6 27 8 27 45
4 23 41 0 3 0 4 3 5 2^ 6 42 8 2 9 21 10. 41 12 0 0 2 3 59 19 39 0 20 40 0 27 6
55 16 37 7 58 18 39 0 24 9 51 13 34 56 17 39 0 21 12 48 10 32 54 16 38 0 18 15
3 45 5 8 6 30 7 53 9 15 10. 38 12 0 15 18 4^ 6 29 52 14 37 0 12 21 41 4 27 51
14 37 0 9 24 40 3 27 50 1^ 37 0 6 27 9 2 26 50 1^ 36 0 3 30 ^ 38 5 1 6 25 7 49
9 13 10. 36 12 0 0

For the elevation of the Pole 52 degrees 30 minutes.
Place of the Sun. The hours after noone. The place of the Sun. 7 8 9 10 11
12 S. D. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D. 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 30
3 1 2 3 4 5 6 27 6 2 4 6 9 11 13 24 9 ^ 6 10 1 16 19 21 12 4 8 1^ 17 21 25 18
15 1 5 2 11 3 16 4 21 5 27 6 31 15 18 6 13 19 25 3 38 1^ 21 7 15 22 29 37 44 9
24 8 17 25 33 42 50 6 27 10 19 2^ 38 48 57 3 0 1 11 2 21 3 32 4 42 6 53 7 3 0 3
12 23 35 46 58 9 27 6 13 25 38 50 6 3 15 24 9 13 27 40 53 7 20 21 12 14 29 43
57 12 26 18 15 1 15 2 31 3 46 5 1 6 17 7 31 15 1 18 16 32 49 5 21 37 12 21 17
34 51 8 25 41 9 24 18 36 54 12 30 48 6 27 19 37 56 15 33 52 3 0 1 20 2 39 3 59
5 18 6 38 7 57 0 3 20 40 4 1 21 41 8 1 27 6 21 42 3 23 44 5 24 9 22 43 5 26 48
9 21 12 22 44 6 28 50 12 18 15 1 23 2 45 4 8 5 30 6 53 8 15 15 18 23 46 9 31 54
17 13 21 23 46 10 32 56 19 9 24 23 47 10 3 57 20 6 27 24 4^ 11 3^ 58 21 (...)
30 1 24 2 47 4 11 5 35 6 58 8 22 0

The Table of the unequal hours of the artificial day
Place of ^he Sun. Sons sing. Hours before noone. Place of the Sun 1 2 3 4 5
6 S. D H. M. H. M. H. M H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 0 11
0 12 0 30 3 ^ 0 ^ 5 4 3 2 1 0 27 0 13 11 9 7 4 2 0 24 9 19 16 13 10 6 3 0 21 12
25 21 17 13 8 4 0 18 15 6 32 7 27 8 21 9 10 10. 11 11 5 12 0 15 18 38 30 25 19
13 6 0 12 21 44 37 29 22 15 7 0 9 24 50 42 33 25 17 8 0 ^ 27 57 48 38 29 19 9 0
3 0 7 3 7 53 8 42 9 32 10. 21 11. 10 12 0 0 3 9 58 46 35 23 11 0 27 ^ 15 3 50
38 25 12 0 24 9 20 7 53 40 27 13 0 21 12 26 12 57 4^ 29 14 0 18 15 7 32 8 17 9
1 9 46 10. 31 11. 15 0 15 18 37 21 5 49 32 16 0 12 21 42 25 8 51 34 17 0 9 24
48 30 12 54 36 18 0 6 27 52 33 15 56 37 19 0 3 0 7 57 8 3^ 9 18 9 59 10. 39 11.
20 0 0 3 8 1 4^ 21 10 1 40 20 0 27 6 5 44 23 2 41 21 0 24 9 9 48 26 4 43 22 0
21 12 12 50 28 6 44 22 0 18 15 8 15 8 53 9 30 10 8 10. 45 11. 23 12 0 15 18 17
54 31 9 45 23 0 12 21 19 5^ 33 10 4^ 23 0 9 24 20 57 3 10 47 23 0 6 27 21 5^ 34
11 47 24 0 3 30 8 22 8 5^ ^ 35 ^0. 1^ 10. 47 11. 24 12 0 0

For the elevation of the Pole 52 degrees 30 minutes.
Place of the Sun. The hours after noone. The place of the Sun. 7 8 9 10 11
12 S. D. H. M H. M H. M H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D. 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 30 3
0 59 1 58 2 57 3 56 4 55 5 54 27 6 58 56 54 51 49 47 24 9 57 54 5^ 47 44 41 21
12 56 5 4^ 4^ 3^ 35 18 15 0 55 1 49 2^ 44 ^ 39 ^ 33 5 28 15 18 54 47 4^ 35 28
21 1^ 21 53 4 38 31 23 16 9 24 5^ 43 35 27 18 10 6 27 51 41 3^ 22 13 3 ^ 0 0 50
1 39 2 29 3 18 4 8 4 57 0 3 49 37 26 14 3 51 27 6 48 35 22 10 58 45 24 9 47 33
20 7 5 40 21 12 46 31 17 3 48 34 18 15 0 45 1 29 2 14 2 59 3 43 4 28 15 18 44
28 12 55 39 2^ 12 21 44 26 9 52 35 18 9 24 4^ 24 6 48 30 13 6 27 41 23 4 45 27
8 3 0 0 41 1 21 2 2 2 42 3 23 4 3 0 3 40 20 0 39 19 59 27 6 39 18 1 57 3^ 15 55
24 9 39 17 56 34 1^ 51 21 12 38 16 54 31 10 48 18 1^ 0 38 1 15 1 53 2 30 3 8 3
45 15 18 37 14 51 28 5 42 1^ 21 37 14 51 27 4 41 9 24 37 1^ 50 2 40 6 27 37 13
50 2^ ^9 30 0 36 1 1^ 1 49 2 2^ ^8 0

The Table of the unequal hours of the artificial night
Place of the Sun. Sons setting. Hours before midnight. Place of the Sun. 1
2 3 4 5 6 S. D. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D. 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9
0 10 0 11 0 12 0 30 3 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 27 6 13 11 9 7 4 2 0 24 9 19 16 13 10 6 3 0
21 12 25 21 17 13 8 4 0 18 15 6 32 7 27 8 21 9 16 10. 11 11 5 12 0 15 18 38 30
25 19 13 6 0 12 21 44 37 29 22 15 7 0 9 24 50 42 33 25 17 8 0 6 27 57 48 38 29
19 9 0 3 0 7 3 7 53 8 42 9 32 10. 21 11. 10 12 0 0 3 9 58 46 35 23 11 0 27 6 15
8 3 50 38 25 12 0 24 9 20 7 53 40 27 13 0 21 12 26 12 57 4^ 29 14 0 18 15 7 32
8 17 9 1 9 46 10. 31 11. 15 0 15 18 37 21 5 49 32 16 0 12 21 42 25 8 51 34 17 0
9 24 48 30 0 12 54 36 18 0 6 27 52 33 15 56 37 19 0 3 0 7 57 8 38 9 18 9 59 10.
39 11. 20 0 0 3 8 1 41 21 10 1 40 20 0 27 6 5 44 23 ^ 2 41 21 0 24 9 9 48 26 4
43 22 0 21 12 12 50 28 6 44 22 0 18 15 8 15 8 53 9 30 10 8 10. 45 11. 23 12 0
15 18 17 54 31 9 45 23 0 12 21 19 56 33 10 46 23 0 9 24 20 57 3^ 10 47 23 0 6
27 21 58 34 11 47 24 0 3 30 8 22 8 58 9 35 10. 11 10. 47 11. 24 12 0 0

For the elevation of the Pole 52 degrees 30 minutes.
Place of the Sun. Hours after midnight. The Place of the Sun. 7 8 9 10 11
12 S. D. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D. 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 30
3 59 1 58 2 57 3 56 4 55 5 54 27 6 58 56 54 51 49 47 24 9 57 54 51 47 44 41 21
12 56 52 48 4^ 39 35 18 15 0 55 1 49 2 44 3 39 4 33 5 28 15 18 54 47 41 35 28
22 12 21 53 45 38 31 23 16 9 24 52 43 35 27 18 10 0 27 51 41 32 22 13 3 3 0 0
50 1 39 2 29 3 18 4 8 4 57 0 3 49 37 26 1^ 3 51 27 6 48 35 23 10 3 58 45 24 9
47 33 20 7 53 40 21 12 46 31 17 ^ 48 34 18 15 0 45 1 29 2 14 2 59 3 43 4 28 15
18 44 28 12 55 39 23 12 21 43 26 9 52 35 18 9 24 42 24 6 48 30 13 6 27 41 23 4
45 27 8 3 0 0 41 1 21 2 2 2 41 3 23 4 3 0 3 40 20 0 39 19 3 9 27 6 39 18 1 57
36 15 55 24 9 39 17 56 34 13 51 21 12 3^ 16 54 32 10 48 18 15 0 3^ 1 15 1 53 2
30 3 8 3 45 15 18 37 15 51 28 5 43 1^ 21 37 14 51 27 4 4^ 9 24 3^ 1^ 5^ 27 3 40
6 27 37 1^ 50 26 3 39 30 0 36 1 1 1 49 ^ 2^ 3 2 3 38 ^

The Table of the unequal hours of the artificial night
Place of the Sun. The sun^ setting. The hours before midnight. Place of the
Sun. 1 2 3 4 5 6 S. D. H. M H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M H. M. S. D. 0 6 0 7 0
8 0 9 0 10 0 11 0 12 0 30 3 5 54 6 55 7 56 8 57 9 58 10. 59 0 27 6 47 47 51 54
56 58 0 24 9 41 44 47 51 54 57 0 21 12 35 39 4^ 48 52 56 0 18 15 5 28 6 33 7 39
8 44 9 49 10. 55 12 0 15 18 22 28 35 41 47 54 0 12 21 16 23 31 38 45 5^ 0 9 24
10 18 27 35 43 52 0 6 27 3 13 22 32 41 51 0 3 0 4 57 6 8 7 18 8 29 9 39 10. 50
12 0 0 3 51 3 14 26 37 49 0 27 6 45 5 58 10 23 35 48 0 24 9 40 5^ 7 20 33 47 0
21 12 34 48 3 17 31 46 0 18 15 4 28 5 4^ 6 59 8 14 9 29 10. 45 12 0 15 18 23 39
55 12 28 44 0 12 21 18 35 52 9 26 43 0 9 24 12 30 48 6 24 42 0 6 27 8 27 45 4
23 41 0 3 0 4 3 5 23 6 4^ 8 2 9 21 10. 41 12 0 0 3 3 59 19 39 0 20 40 0 27 6 55
16 37 7 58 18 39 0 24 9 51 13 34 56 17 39 0 21 12 48 10 32 54 16 38 0 18 15 3
45 5 8 6 30 7 53 9 15 10. 38 12 0 15 18 4 6 29 52 14 37 0 12 21 41 4 27 51 14
37 0 9 24 40 3 27 50 13 37 0 6 27 9 2 26 50 1^ 36 0 3 ^0 38 5 2 6 2^ 7 49 9 1^
10. 36 12 0 0

For the elevation of the Pole 52 degrees 30 minutes.
Place of the Sun. The hours after midnight. The place of the Sun. 7 8 9 10
11 12 S. D. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. S. D. 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0
30 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 27 6 2 4 7 9 11 13 24 9 3 6 10 1 16 19 21 12 4 8 12 17 21 25
18 15 1 5 2 11 3 1^ 4 21 5 27 6 31 15 18 6 13 19 25 3 38 1^ 21 7 15 22 29 37 44
9 24 8 17 25 33 42 50 6 27 10 19 29 38 48 57 3 0 1 11 2 21 3 32 4 43 6 53 7 3 0
3 12 23 35 46 58 9 27 6 13 25 38 50 6 3 15 24 9 13 27 40 53 7 20 21 12 14 29 43
57 12 26 18 15 1 15 2 31 ^ 46 5 1 6 17 7 31 15 18 16 32 49 5 21 37 12 21 17 34
51 8 25 41 9 24 18 36 54 12 30 48 6 27 19 37 56 15 33 52 3 0 1 20 2 39 3 59 5
18 6 38 7 57 0 3 20 40 4 1 21 41 8 1 27 6 21 42 ^ 23 44 5 24 9 22 43 5 26 48 9
21 12 22 44 6 28 50 12 18 15 1 23 2 45 4 8 5 30 6 53 8 15 15 18 23 46 9 31 54
17 12 21 23 46 10 32 56 19 9 24 23 47 10 3 57 20 6 27 24 47 11 34 58 21 ^ 30 1
24 2 47 4 11 5 35 6 58 8 22 0


