THE REPLY OF JOHN DARRELL, TO THE ANSWER OF JOHN DEACON, AND John Walker,
concerning the doctrine of the Possession and Dispossession of Demoniakes.

Ecclesiastes 4. 1. I turned, and considered all the oppressions that are
wrought under the sun, and behold, the tears of the oppressed, and none
comfort them: and lo the strength is of the hand of them that oppress
them, and none comfort them.

Imprinted 1602.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHERS AND BRETHREN, the Pastors and Teachers in the
Church of England, Grace and peace be multiplied in our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT had been to be wished (right Reverend and beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ)
that some question arising of late, as you know, concerning Dispossession of
devils in these times by fasting and prayer, the same might have been
propounded, examined, and decided in your lawful assembly. For your senses
being exercised in the knowledge of God his truth, and your minds enlightened
with continual practice of the Church, would easily have discerned the stamp
of the Sanctuary: and this judicial determination of yours, would (no doubt)
either have prevented, or stayed at least much violent proceeding, many
impious assertions, and great distractions among the people, which not able to
judge of the substance of things, stand amazed at the vain sound and multitude
of words. But as this happiness has bin much wished in like case heretofore,
so never could it be less hoped for then now, when our sins have breathed
new life into the dead carkesse of Antichrist, whereby he startles up on his
feet afresh, and begins to strout amongst us again in terrible sort. yet
notwithstanding your joint consents cannot be had, I thought it meet to offer
this Reioynder to your considerations severally, holding it most requisite that
you the same parties should also hear Truth speak in her just defense, before
whom, and to whom, she has been slaundered most shamefully. But what Truth
is able to plead for her self shall more fully appear in the Treatise
following: now only she craves, that as Gregory Nazianzen judged of Julian
by the wagging of his head, so by these two Epistles of theirs, one to your
selves, the other to the Reader, it would please you to regard of what
disposition these Answerers be.

In their Epistle to you (reverend brethren) you shall behold them false in
pretense, untrue in their words* and ridiculously arrogant. For pretense, they
make show of great promptness with all humility to submit their opinions to
your grave and learned censures. And who would not esteem this lowliness, as
if the men were lately descended from heaven? But alas, they know your public
censure is not to be feared: more weighty occasions have not hitherto procured
it: and what any of you shall pronounce privately, will be but one Doctors
opinion with them. Their practice makes this plain in their Discourses, where
testimony as clear as the sun light alleged, how the Church both ancient,
and present has demeaned her self in like actions, they not having one word
of probability to reply, would shift off the matter with shameless outfacing.
Is it likely now (worthy Fathers and Brethren) these men would reverence your
authority, who reject without blushing the authority of them, whom all the
learned deservedly reverence? This profession then is but a mere abuse,
serving only for a mask to hide the deformity of their natural countenance.
And as they would carry a fair color of that, they never purpose to do, so
also they be no less untrue in reporting things already past. They tell you,
How insolently we denied the Christian conference they prefered us: whereas
they never proffered me any: and as for M. Moore, they coming to him, promising
to confer the next morning, never came to him afterward: thinking it better to
crack their credit in breaking that promise, then to stand to their word, and
receive a foil in the bickering. So they talk of a new conference with me,
offered to my special friends: when neither friend not foe kuew where I was:
when also had they known, and signified unto me this proffered conference, I
might with small security to my person have conferred with them,
notwithstanding their proffered bond. Whereby you may see that occasion was
rather sought to blind the world with, then that any conference was soundly
intended. In like manner they affirming, that dispossession in these times by
fasting and prayer be miracles: that they be urged as necessary to support our
Relgion: that there is no difference between them wrought in the church of god
amongst us, and these done in Antichrists kingdom: that the dealers, in these
actions are to be matched with Brownists and Hackets: are assertions of such
nature as might with good reason, were they true, enrage your meek and patient
spirits with indignation: specially when you hear their principal end in
publishing these Counsels of God lately revealed unto them concerning these
incricate questions (for so they Answer. page 95
speak of these fancies or rather frensies of theirs in the Treatise following)
was forsooth to accomplish the peace of Jerusalem. Are novelties peaceable?
Innouations fit for quiet? Doctrines never heard of before, procurers of
concord? O blessed peacemakers, which would soulder up the breaches and
disagreements of Jerusalem with lately reucaled counsels. Thus they dare
toyour faces pour forth their untruths, not only in matter of faith, wherein
none but some special persons could convict them: but also in doctrines, whose
falsehood your selves are best able of all other to descry as soon as you hear
them. And is not their arrogance worthy to be laughed at (but that your manner
is rather to bewail men's folly) when they would be Magistri sententiarum, and
have their Discourses Dictates for young students in divinity? It were hansom
sure to behold a Sow sit with a distaffe teaching the fine Ladies to spin: that
the Crow should instruct the young Nighttingales to sing* and that the
Conduites in Cheap should be fed from the public draynes and sinkes of the
city. But could they be content to be directours only to the younger
students? These mysteries of theirs are an infallible truth, as they say, and
Counsels of god lately revealed unto them, as you heard even now. And therefore
your selves, learned Fathers, though much traveled in the sacred sciptures,
greatly read in ancient writers, and acquainted with later monuments of
knowledge and experience of all kind, yet hitherto in these points you know
nothing: and if you purpose hereafter to understand any thing, you must suck
it only from the breasts of these late Revelations. In which regard it may
very well be, these Answerers could greatly rejoice (as also they profess) if
it might please any of you to confute them, because they think themselves on so
sure a ground, and are tickled, as it seems with an imagination of that
glory, which they suppose they should gain by your foil and discredit.
Whether they will accept such a labor in good part or no, you shall have
experience by this I have performed. Their former pretenses make me to fear
this outside of theirs is but ouercast with their wonted perietting.

In the Epistle to the Reader they say that I have very uncharitably endeavored
to wound S. H. (whom else where they call S. Harsnet unto death for his dutiful
Discovery. I marvel they are not ashamed to call it a dutiful discorerie,
seeing the drift of it is, to prove, that I taught Summers to counterfeit,
whereof themselves acquit me, as ye shall hear forthwith. What duty performed
he to God or man, in slaundering the rare works of god, and his neightbour? Or
do they in commending such a Discovery. It is true that by my Detection I
endeavored to wound S. H. mortally, so as he should never be able to rise up
any more for counterseiting and my teaching to counterfeit: but not with sword,
nor spear, only with the dart of Truth. And I think it is as true that I
have wounded him to death. Had not his wounds been mortal, or at leastwise
incurable, they had been healed by this, and we had seen him the second time
in the field. Otherwise we must deem him for a coward, that encountreth not his
enemy being often challenged. This is the excellency and power of truth that
she subdueth all those that rise up in arms against her, and they that take
part with her, do at length triu^ph gloriously, as being more the^ conquerors.
They blame my ^a^phlets as full of unsound and absurd positions. I will not
confirm in this place, what is else where set down, but refer to your Judgment
whether by the former Suruery, and the following Reply it does not appear that
many such positions have issued from their own heads, and that this charge may
be turned upon their own pates. For matter, they charge my writings with want
of Method: to be also schismatic and Enigmaticall. Touching the Method, I
hope your patience has been contented with the order of the Doctrine, divided
into three several branches and each part prosecuted first with reasons
confirming it: and after by remoouing such doubts as might seem to weaken it.
And as for Schism, I teach no Lately revealed counsels, nor my Dialog.
Discourse. Epist. to the Reader in the beginning.
private opinion concerning the possession and dispossession of devils. Both
which these men confess they do, but what has been revealed and held from the
beginning and confirmed ever since by continual consent: whereas if their
doctrines be their own private opinions, and Lately revealed, they be New.
If New, not established by agreement of Scriptures and the Church* and if not
established, it is schism at the least, for any thing I can conceive, to
publish and maintein them. Concerning Enigmatiall handling, your own profiting
by reading may best be Judge. It was not my purpose, neither, is it my skill to
write ridles: Yet because they complain of darkness I have now so endeavored my
self, that I hope they may spell my meaning, if they put on their spectacles
Moreover they accuse the spirit wherewith my pamphlets are indicted, to be
sensual and deuilish, as given to Railing, Contradiction, and Disobedience.
Horrible, indeed is the sin of Railing. But just and plain reproving with
these men is railing: Curing is killing, and whatsoever smarteth in the sore,
is deadly Job. 24. 17.
poison. The morning to the adulterer, is as the shadow of death. The vlcerous
patient crveth out on every touch of the Surgeon, as Tit. 1. 12.
at most rough and unadvised handling. It is no meruail if the Cretians can not
endure to be told, they are liars, eu^l beasts and s^^w bellies and that sharp
reproof be reviled by such, as altogether in tolerable, barbarous, and
inhumane. Yet further behold I beseech you in themselves, how destitute they
are of Gods fear in this behalf: how void of the common wisdom of men: and
how strongly possessed with that self same itching disease they charge me
withal. It is great want of reverence toward god to defame others falsely,
and that against their own conscience, as they do me most opprobriously
throughout their whole treatises. It is exceeding solly to provoke him by
forged crimes, which can repay them again with most true crimes, with public
crimes, with hainons crimes. And is it not an incurable itching which must
needs be clawing, till their own flesh be rent from their bones? These men's
desire of scratching was so hot, that possibly they could not hold their
fingers, though they were guilty to them selves, how dear it might cost them:
wherein notwithstanding I have spared them, being ashamed in plain terms to
utter that which they have not been ashamed to do. Concerning the
Contradictions they would thrust upon me, you will easily perceive in the
Reply, how partly they spring from their own ignorance, as if I cal*a*thing
Ordinary and supernatural, then must there needs be a Contradiction: partly
from their adding, detracting, and changing my words at the^ir pleasure, which
they have done advisedly and purposely, whereby their sin is increased. And as
for Disobedience by my striring against the sentence of the High Commission: is
it a rebellious and unruly proceeding according to the commandment and example
of Christ Jesus to justify the works of Matt. 12. 25. 30*
god being slaundered, or yet for one-to complain of wrong. For mark I beseech
you how in this place they affirming, that by due order of law we were
conuented, convicted, apprehended, imprisoned, by sentence of Justice
defintiuely condemned for gross malefactors, and adjudged to prison: yet in
their Discourses have given this testimony of me, that they did not so much as
suspect any precompacted co^sederacy Diale. Dis. page 352.
between me and the boy, that all acquainted with my former synceritie and
upright carriage are free from such a perswasion^ that the graceles boy did
gracelesly counterfeit, and my self did only erre^ judgment, and not of any
purpose in practice at all. By the witness therefore of these me^ if the high
Commission passed any such seutence against us they did us open iniurv: and I
trust oppressed inuocents may have this liberty at least to bewail their
grief. But neither has the Commission awarded any such sentence, and these
men have done a double notable wrong in^slauncering both the Commistion, and us.

To shut up all, they would boodwink the reader with their godly jealousy over
him, pretending they labor to prepaire him for one husband, and to present him
as a pure virgin to Christ. But this office 1. Tim. 3.
belongs to the Bishop that is biameles, and is the husband of one wife, etc.
as S. Paul says. And therefore if the Christian Reader should look for grapes
from these thomes, he should be deceived* this Epistle then to the Reader is
fraught with the same virtues of Cloking, of forging, of pride (though with
some larger addition) wherewith the former, reverend Fathers and brethren, was
to you. And therefore howsoever they think, I will answer them as Hildebrand
did, Abbas Cassinensis, frater nimtum tardasti: Dear brethren, you have been
somewhat too slow in publishing your Dialogicall Discourses: yet I doubt not,
but both you, and I, will with one consent, rather return the contrary to
them, Et vos Disputatores nimium festinastis: And you, O Discoursers, have made
too much haste. For had you traveled as long, as the Elephant in bringing
forth her young, yet the birth of such monstrous devises, so ignorant, so
erroneous, so slaunderons, so impious, had been abortiue, untimely, and too
soon. For this cause I have dealt more roundly and freely with them, then
otherwise I would have done with ordinary men. They could not possibly be
wakened out of so strong an Apoplexy, but by burning feathers and shoo-soles
under their noses: neither would the Reader have been sufficiently warned to
eschew their fraud, except the trumpet had sounded shrill in his ears.

And whereas some of you, reverend and beloved brethren, affirming, and very
truly, that their books were unworthy the answering, did thereupon earnestly
dissuade me from writing: I answer, Tit. 1. 10.
So also was the doctrine of those vain talkers, Paul mentions to Titus,
unworthy to be confuted, yet the Apostle says, Their mouths must be stopped.
And how? by conuin^ing, as there follows. Matt. 12. 24
What could be more palpablie false, then that of the Pharisees, He casts out
devils, through Beelzebub the Prince of devils* Notwithstansting our Savior
did convince the^. Even so did S. Peter those who Act. 2. 13
mocked, and said the Apostles were full of new wine, when the holy Ghost in
that wonderful manner fell upon them. In private communication, A fool is to be
answered according to his folly: but if in pub like among the press, in the
highest places of the city, or entrings of the gates, where wisdoms voice
should be heard, a fool chance to babble, and utter that is dangerous to the
simple, which these Discoursers have done, then is the folly of a fool to be
thoroughly discovered, and laid open to the view of all men. The foolish (of
Pro. 14, 15
which number are the most) will believe every thing, be it never so false, be
it never so absurd, never so sottish and ridiculous, specially if it be
countenanced with Authority, as are the Dialog call Discourses. For this
reason, even to keep the simple from error, who are so easily seduced,
notwithstanding the unworthiness of these Discourses, there is cause something
should be said in answer unto them, by my self or other. Neither do I doubt
but these my rude lines will (by the blessing of God) be effectual to recover
those which through their verbal writings be fallen from the truth, to
strengthen such as be wavering, and to stablish them which more firmly hold
the truth. If this success follow, I shall have no cause to repent me of my
pains, nor any other to account the same superfluous.

Now therefore, brethren, I beleech you know these disturbers, be not deceived
by their ouercasting and smoothing. Examine what they say, before ye believe
them. Anb albeit your authority is not able to bridle them (the more is our
grief, and the misery of our Church) yet avoid their doctrines in your
selves, and in your people. I beseech you also, as your occasions may serve,
admonish them: that yet in want of a public degree, they may gather by you
severally what is the judgment of all, and be thereby ashamed and reclaimed, if
so the Lord in mercy please. Little needs such conflict in these times wherein
that antichrist of Rome extremely rages, as now entering his last trial. But
we must have fightings 2. Cor. 7. 5.
without and fears within: open wars with the priests and lesuites, the
servants of Antichirist, and many private grieuances by such as would be
counted of the household of faith. It behooues us therefore brethren, to put on
the armor of righteousness on the right 2. Cor. 6. 7
hand, and on the left, that we may manfully defend and maintain the holy
truth in all her bounds and limits unviolated sincere where by the purity of
Religion may still be continued, and all error abandoned from anoying either
us or our posterity after us. The god of mercy, peace and truth confirm and
establish our hearts, that we may fight the good fight, like good soldiers of
Jesus Christ, and quit our selves like men: holding faith and a good
conscience, to the glory of his name, and everlasting comfort of our own
souls, through Jesus our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Your fellow servant in the work of the Gospel. John Darrell.

THE REPLY TO THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
Page 3, 9. 10.
IT is a cunning slight to beguile the simple with, in propounding to satisfy
the world for any thing that has been said concerning the points and parties
controuerted, wholly to omit the books calledthe Trial, the Detection, the
Narration of seven possessed in Lancashire, containing in them matters of fact,
and only to bend your forces against one Treatise called The Doctrine, etc.
The reason of which omission, Christian Reader, is this. To disprove things
done, so evidently known to so many eyewitnesses, were all one as to persuade
that white is black, that fire is Ice, that it is dark night in the clear
sunshine, which whosoever should endeavor would rather be esteemed of all a mad man,
the^ gain any credit to his cause. But in points and controversies of doctrine
there was more hope to deceive. For here through multitude of words, ambiguous
terms, fraudulent courses of reasoning, false colored sentences, wrested and
mistconstrued scriptures, abused authorities of famous men, and such other
devises, not only the ignorant and unable to search the truth should be
blinded, but also many learned, which before had not welghed these things,
neither perhaps would take the pains to sift and try them to the proof, might
be stricken with some amase and doubt. Only they whose judgments are seasoned
with sound understanding, which at first sight are able to discern the cro
oked writings of peenish and foolish sophisters, and know without book the
scope of most men's writings in account amongst the learned, would give true
sentence of the cause, and condemn the se opinions of ignorance and error.
But the number of such is small, and therefore by these Answerers was less
regarded. This, whatsoever they pretend, was the true ground of their choice,
yet though they will not Page 3.
meddle with the Trial, and Detection, they must bicker a blow or two with the
Epistles of both. To let pass the disgraces, wherewith they lade them: for the
Trial I may say (for thereof am not I author) I doubt not but judicial men will
acknowledge more sound learning in some few lines of it, then is in the whole
bundle of your foolish Discourses. To come to that which is material, you
charge the Trial but with two things, and in this charge make four lies, such
is your compendious faculty. First, say you, it matcheth your pretended
miracle, with the true miracles of Christ. The words of the Epistle speaking to
the L. Popham, be these, And concerning Epist. page 4.
as highly the glory of Christ our Savior, as it does the credit of a
faithful minister* Is here any comparison of miracles? Is here any mention of
miracles at all? Does it say any more, but this cause being about a work done
in the name of Christ, does as highly concern Page 4. Da^r^ls trial in the
Epist. pa. 8
his glory, as my credit? Again, say you, the prelates are charged with the sin
against the Holy Ghost. Thus speaks the Epistle, that the prelates (which now
set themselves against dispossession) be guilty of this vnpardo nable sin, I
will not say. If I will not say, be I do say, the^ the prelates are charged with
this sin. Out of this branch spring two other, That you report the Epistle to
labor the L. Chief Justice to recover himself with speed from that fearful
sin, whereunto it seems he is fearfully falling: and that he would reuerse
judgment passed against me. He which writ the Epistle did not dote, as you do,
to entitle his Honor, an upright, and worthy, and a righteous judge, to desire
and urge his Lordship, to releeu^ the oppressed innocent, specially, to take to
heart the slanders given out of the works of God: and within a few lines after
to place him in the very brinke of reprobation. Neither does he persuade to a
Reuersing of judgment (for there was none passed, as the Author knew well
enough) but to a second hearing, as Felix heard Paul the second time. Now then
let the Reader tell me, if you be not pithie liars, that can comprehend so
many in so little room.

For my Detection you charge the Title as undutiful against her Majesty's
judicial proceedings, for that it is so sharp against M. Harsnets book. It
is more then I know, or can believe, that her Majesty commanded M. Harsnet to
write: or that her Right Hono. Counsel inioined him so much, or that the high
Commission laid this upon him. It may be, if his own vainglorious humor, which
ever took pleasure to be biting of others, did not prick him forward to this
business, yet that the B. his master, of his private authority, did set him his
task, tosalue this own credit, and of such as had joined in disgracing the
truth. But I hope one may reprehe^d some private actions of the B. without any
vndtifulnes to her majesty's proceedings. You then are malicious pikthanks,
which have nothing in your mouths, but Ad leones, ad leones, He is not Cesars
friend.

Page 5.
For the Epistle, you charge me with reviling the B. I answer, It was not any
contempt or malice toward his person, or forgetfulness of any duty to
authority, that moved me to such severity, as I used, but only fear least
otherwise I should have failed in duty toward God. Those which sin, says
the Apostle, reprove openly: And 1. Tim. 5. 20 Tit. 2. 15. Matthew. 3. Matthew. 23.
reprove with all authority. And when I hear Iobn Baptist calling the
Phari^ees Deceivers, and Generations of vipers: when I hear our Savior most
sharply reproving them by the names of Persecutors, serpents, generation of
vipers, the children of hell, painted sepulchers, and such like: And S. Paul
speaking to Elymas, O full of all subtilty, and Act. 13. 9. 10. Philip. 3. 2.
Tit. 1, 12. 1. King. 18 Act. 23. 2. Tim. 4. 17
all mischief, the child of the devil, and enemy of all righteousness:
calling also false prophets Dogs, and the Cretians beasts: yea when I hear
Eliiah call Ahab, the troubler of Israel: our Savior term Herod a fox, Paul
entituling Ananias a painted wall, and Nero by the name of a Lion: I hese and
many such other places of practice, give me some light for understanding the
precept, and teach me, that albeit in my private cause I am to use all
mildness and gentleness, yet when the Lords truth is interessed and
slaundered, his great mercy obscured, and that of purpose and wilfully,
neither one Sergius by Elymas hindered, but many thousands turned back from
believing his works, from praising him for them, and profiting by them, in this
case the man of authority is no less to be stricken with the edge of reproof,
then he that is in inferior place. Nay, rather the public person, then the
private man, by how much his example is more dangerous, either forcing or
alluring great multitudes to embrace his error. And this does not hinder but
with David, page 6.
and Stephen, and our Savior himself, and all the holy martyrs of God, we
should pray for our persecuters, and bless them which curse us: for reproof
and hatred be not necessarily linked together, but Reproof is a notable
remedy to preserve from hatred, according to that the Lord says, Thou shall
not hate thy brother in thy beart, but Louit. 19. 1
thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. But this
is your manner, to huddle up all things in a confused heap together, and that
which is spoken with certain prouisoes and limitations, to allege it as a
bare and simple command. Thus much for the Epistles.

page 7.
Yet before you come to the Treatise, you will admonish the Reader of two
cunning sleights of legerdemainc, practiced by me, throughout that my Pamphlet:
whereof the first is, That I have slily ou^rslipped what is material in M.
Harsnets Discovery, as, to make good that distinction of Mirandum and
Miraculum, which he has dashed to nothing. I answer, that as becomes true
natural Leopards, you cannot change your skin, but you must needs be lying
here, as almost every where else: for I have replied to M. Harsnet out of
Augustine and Danaeus, Detection, page 6.
showing an apparent difference between a Wonder, and a Miracle. And further
have I answered in survey of your tenth Dialogue: from whence I pray you tell
M. Harsnet, that if he remember the difference between Genus and Species, he
may feel with his finger that a Wonder and a Miracle be not all one. And if
this will not suffice him, demand of him, whether Antichrist by the power of
Satan works not wonders: and whether he esteem all those wonders to be true
miracles. And as touching your selves who accord with M. Harsnet herein, what
say you to these words of your own? The Dialog. page 209. and 310.
devil may work wonders, as Simon Magus has done: but he can effect no
miracles. And in another place. A thing effected by essential means,
howsoever it may be a wonder, yet no miracle in any respect. How can you
possibly free your selves here from a contradiction? And this is my reply to
your first instance. Again, say you, M. Harsnet accusing very orderly by
Summers testimony, mine own answers, and several depositions: this his
material proceeding is pretermitted with silence. What? have I written a
Detection of his lying Discovery, and have touched nothing concerning Summers
testimonic, mine own answers, and the several depositions? Then have I
written nothing at all: For there be scarce any lines in it, which concern
not one of these three. But thereof let the world Judge. I can say no more. I
hope I have showed how indirect a course it is, that Summers by threats,
flatterings, and promises of maintenance should first he brought to accuse
himself, after me, and then to witness against me: that mine own answers
should be curtalled, and stretched after the Discouerers pleasures: that the
depositions which were against their likings should be suppressed, and others
published, so far forth, as might give occasion of doubt to the Reader. What
dare not you avouch, which are so bold to affrme that, whereof the contrary
appears in every man's hand? If your meaning were that in some particular I
have pretermitted this, which your words will not bear, then you should have
done well to have named that Particular, as the nature of an Instance
requires, which seeing you have not done, it is thereby plain, your selves be
rather guilty of legerdemaine, then L Those pages which you quote in the
margin, I grant I passed over, for that they concern others, and S. Hars.
Disc. 28. 29.
not my self, as also because the matter was frivolous and unworthy answer, as
may there appear, urging the being of a thing by no other reason, but because
such a thing might be. But mark what a fair thread these men have spun, and
how seeking to discredit my Detection, they have brought not a little credit
unto it. For I will hence prove, that in my Detection I have not let pass one
material point of M. Harsnets Discovery unanswered: and namely thus. If
Darrell have in his Detection let go any material point of the Discovery
unanswered, then would the Discoursers have given some instances of such
omission, where they endeavor to prove the same by instances: But the
Discoursers instancing to that end, have given not so much as one instance of
such omission: Ergo Darrell in his Detection has not let go any one material
point in the Discovery unanswered.

page 8. 9.
My second cunning slight by your saying is, that I disgrace by all means
Summers testimony, produced against me but extol it for me, upholding by it
the signs of Possession and Dispossession. That no credit is to be given to
his lying testimony, I avouch it indeed in the place by you cited: but where do
I uphold the signs of possession and dispossession by Summers his testimony,
wherewith you charge me? why do not you also cite some place for this? You
thought if one part of your assertion were true, the Reader would pardon you
for the rest. It is such nouelty for you to speak truth, that any little is to
be accepted at your hands.

From the Epistle of the Detection you come to the Narration, the proof whereof
you will not have to depend upon report of the fact page 10. 11.
but upon continuance of Essential Possessions and Dispossessions in these
times. A ridiculous thing, and to be hissed at. The reason why you eschew to
deal against matter of fact, I have sufficently declared in the beginning. Well
I will follow you in your course, and come to your Answer to the Doctrine.
Which treatise, to admit such an hotchpotch as you say, (though sober men will
judge it, set down in such order as is convenient) it is not for every one to
cook his matters so artificially as your Discoursing gallimaufrey is: but the
more skill it wantes, the more credit for truth it ought to have, seeing it
rasteth simply as bare nature gives, without commendation of any slibbersauce.
First for Essential possession you reprove me or at least Exorcistes, for
arguing from the word Possession out of the Geneuah translation, page 12. 13.
whereas I no where, nor any man else, infer essential inherencie from the
word Possession, as I have showed in the Survey of your Dialog. Discourse: yet
is the same confuted by the Original, by Erasmus, Beza, Castalio, and
Montanus. But this was your voluntary perhaps, before you came to your
music, now let us bear your set and meditated song. Whereas I argue a
possession thus: The page 13. 14.
actions or pasrions which the parties endured were supernatural, and
therefore proceeded from supernatural causes. You deny the actions were
supernatural, and that for three reasons. First, Natural causes have had more
wonderful effects: which I think I have sufficiently answered in the beginning
of your seventh Dialogue. Now therefore in one word, Is nothing supernatural
in any creature, which is exceeded by any other work in nature? Then the
foming, wallowing, the breaking of chains asunder, reported of Demoniakes in
the Gospel were not supernatural, because something more wonderful Dialog.
Dis. 204.
may come from a natural cause: as that mentioned by you of the little fish
Echneis, which (being but half a foot long) if she but once cleave to the
side of a ship, will compel it perforce to stand still, notwithstanding the
violence of the wind or oar. I am ashamed to hear men thus absurd. You might
have considered, had your wits been your own, that these actions or passions
are not therefore supernatural, and so called, because they are more
wonderful then any thing issuing from nature, which a natural would scarce
affirm* but partly because they are (for the most part) above that, and more
wonderful then the nature of man can send forth: and partly in respect of the
supernatural cause from which they did proceed, namely, the devil. Secondly,
say you, One cause may bring forth sundry effects, and one effect may proceed:
from sundry causes. Doubtless happy might that man be, that could apply either
this One cause, or these sundry causes, to this cause we have in hand. Is this
your proposition, If one cause may bring forth sundry effects, and one effect
proceed from sundry causes, then the Actions or Passions reported by me in
the Demoniakes were not supernatural? It is wonderful what a man shall gain
by disputing with you. For now have I learned by your privileged proposition*
Not only these actions of our Demoniakes not to be supernatural, but also
neither any action of any Demoniake that either the Apostles, or Christ
himself delivered. Thirdly, The like effects issue from diverse diseases. I
answer, If your skill in physic be so great, tell us, I beseech you, from
what disease so many and strange effects might arise, as are witnessed to have
been in these parties: and what disease it was they had? Whether had they the
Lunacie, or the frenzy, or the Epilepsie, or the Mother, or it was some
Convulsions, or Crampe that they had? Name the disease. And if so many effects
do not proceed from one disease, as it is very likely, declare how many
diseases they had, and what they were. And whether they had all the diseases
you mention: their swelling arising from the Mother: their foming from the
Epilepsie, their extraordinary strength from mania, etc. and so had a
compounded disease, percase of as many several diseases, as they had several
effects. Tell us also whether you have seen one party afflicted at the same
time with Melancholy, Lunacie, Phrensy, Epilepsy, Mother, Convulsion, and the
Crampe? Besides, whether you have known such an one, diseased with all these
grievous maladies, restored again naturally to his health in one day? When you
have resolved these doubts, we will hold our selves satisfied for this argument.
In the mean season it remains for all your answer, in as full force as ever
it did. And here we may observe, how all that they prattle both here and else
where of diseases (whereby they would persuade, that the passions of the
Demoniaks were not supernatutural, but might well proceed from some natural
disease) themselves do overthrow, in affirming they are Counterseits.

Again, I showing that The toys and fooleries, and blasphemous speeches
uttered by the parties in their supernatural passions, could not come
immediately from God, and good Angels, and therefore no doubt from the devil:
You answer first, They were not supernatural effects: but this is your Cuckoo
song, often avouched, never proved with any reason that might so much as beseem
William Summers, one too renowned in his time. Secondly, that this supposed
impossibility page 15.
for either God, or good Angels to effect any such fantastical, vain, and
filthy effects, is too gross and absurd. Indeed you are the Masters of
absurdities, you may bestow one where you will, as this is a notable one and not
to be named, that one should imagine the most Holy Lord, and his holy Angels
should immediately by themselves work filthy effects. The blasphemies which
arise from hence are not to be remembered. There is never any filthiness
committed, but either by the filthiness of our corrupt flesh, or by the
working of unclean spirits: far be it from us, we should once let it enter
into our thoughts, that it did first issue, either from the fountain, or from
the streams of purity. The Lord his judgments are tied to a seemly manner of
effecting, rightly understood, which you deny: that is, that all his
judgments should be effected by means best beseeming their nature: as
judgments of committing sin are wrought by sinful means, the Devil, and
wicked men, and such like, and not immediately by holy means: for this was to
confound light and darkness, holiness and sin together. It is lamentable
that any carrying the name of Ministers amongst us, should be so impiously
blind: and yet more lamentable, that they which will sit at the helm, will
suffer such impieties to be offered with their authority, to the world.
Thirdly you answer, That these unclean effects do no more argue an unclean
spirit, then those holy effects, as Confessing of Cor. 11. 4.
Christ, and Expounding the Creed argue an holy spirit. As if you had clean
forgotten, The devil can transform himself into an Angel of light. If you
had remembered this, and your old crosse-row, That there is no reasoning from
contraries in common attributes, you would never have bewrayed such intolerable
babishnesse. Lastly, say you, All this inferres noreall inherency, because the
devil can work greater matters then these remaining without: concerning which,
we Page 15. 16.
will see (God willing) in that which follows.

Again, whereas is urged, the Devils entering in, and going out of the party
possessed, you answer, All these speeches, and whatsoever text can possibly be
alleged throughout the whole Scriptures, concerning either Angels, or Spirits,
or Devils are to be taken metaphorically: and for ^ob. 1. 7. Matt. 12. 43 P^t.
5. 8.
this purpose you bring the devils compassing the earth: his walking through
dry places: and his roaring like a Lion. As if because in these places there
is some Metaphor, therefore all other must be metaphorical too. Nay then let
us conclude, because these texts of Scripture be metaphorical, therefore all
the Scripture is metaphorical, and not only those mentioning Angels and
Devils. And so we shall revive the wickedness of the Libertines, of the Family
of love, and of the Suenckefeldians, acknowledging no literal sense of the
Scripture, but a figurative meaning inspired into themselves, which only with
them is the word of God. When you disputed of the Serpent in Euahs tentation,
you contended indeed The Serpent was only meant figuratively, yet seemed after
to reject this opinion, and I liked well of it. But I cry you mercy: now I
understand you more fully. Well then, the Angel Gabriel came to Marie, and
brought tidings of her Luc. 1. 30. Luc. 1. 12. etc. Luc. 21. 43.
conceiving the Son of God, was this done Metaphorically? Was there also no
such thing literally done, as is reported the same Angel spoke to Zachary,
concerning John the Baptist, whom he should beget? Was that in figure too,
that the Angels comforted our Savior Mar. 9. 22.
before his passion? Belike when the Devil cast the child some time into the
fire, sometimes into the water, there was no such matter Mar. 5. 7.
indeed, but only by way of Metapher. And when the Devil cried, What have I to
do with thee O Jesus the Son of the most high God, this voice was
Metaphorical. Howsoever these and many like Scriptures are canonized by you to
be Metaphorical, yet your selves Metaphor, are most properly a couple of the
absurdest Dunses that ever put pen to paper. You go on, and labor to
overthrow the literal entering of the Devil, because in Mark it is said, There
was a page 17. 1 19. Mar. 1. 23.
man in the Synagogue in an unclean spirit. If the words (say you be taken
literally, then the man was essentially inherent within the devil. I answer,
Neither are these words taken literally, neither for this cause is the entering
of Satan, mentioned else where, to be understood figuratively. The same thing
may be, and is uttered sometimes by figure, and sometimes by proper speech.
One while our Savior Christ calls himself The way, and a Door: In another
place he says, That they which believe in him shall not perish, expounding in
plain terms that which is spoken by similitude else where. As for this
Scripture, To be in an unclean spirit, is not, as a thing contained in a thing
containing, as water in a vessel, and such like, but to be in the power of an
unclean spirit, as our vulgar tongue expresses fitly, when we say, Such an
one is in a Fever. M. Beza, in opening the meaning of this speech, uses this
self same example: and you your selves call it, A very apt resemblance. Seeing
therefore it fitteth so well, let me demand of you, when we say, A man is in a
Fever, whether you think the fever is within, or without him? You had thought
to have played you with this fever, but it shakes you a little better then you
were aware of. For it plainly declares, that the natural meaning of the
words, notwithstanding they be figurative, does note unto us an inbeing of
the spirit. But you add out page 20. Luc. 4. 33.
of Saint Luke: There was a man in the Synagogues which had a spirit of an
unclean devil. This translations say you, is tolerable, if by the word Spirit
we understand not the simple essence, but only the impulsion, motion, or
inspiration of the spirit. I answer, we may, I grant understand by the word
spirits an impulsions motion, or inspiration, so we do not separate this
Impulsion and motion from the real presence of the Spirit. As when we talk of
the understanding of a man, we know that understanding is one thing, and the
Man another, yet do not separate between the real presence of these two, but
join them together. And to this effect Calvin writes on this place: This
speech (says he) is as much as if Luke had said, This man was moved by the
inspiration of the devil: for by God his permission Satan had possessed the
powers of his soul, that he might enforce him at his pleasure, as well to
speak, as to other motions. And therefore when Demomakes speak, those very
devils, to whose rule they are permitted, both speak in them, and by them.
Calvin then graunts an Inspiration, but joined with the devils presence: These
men make a divorce between Inspiration and presence, as if these two could not
abide within sight one of another. The inspiration of the devil is within,
therefore his Essence is not: which is as much to say, Because a man's brains
be in his head, therefore his wit is in his heels. But to let this pass, this
only I say to you, which by Spirit here understand only the motion,
inspiration, or instigation of the spirit, and affirm, it is gross to
understand spirit Essentially, that by this your goodly exposition, this man
must be dispossessed of a motion, and not of a devil.

page 21.
Further I alleging, The Devil cannot possibly so move the mem bers of a man
as he does commonly of demoniaks being only without him, you oppose the
captiuating of the wicked, his transporting of Christ, his disposing of the
tongues of Shimei and Rabshakeh, his filling of Ananias his heart, and such
like. None of al which makes to any purpose. The members of demoniakes are in
their supernatural motions moved by the nerves, by the muscles, by the
Tendons, the usual mouers of the body: and yet without command either of
Will, or Imagination, these faculties at that instant being disabled to make
choice of things according to their nature: yea sometimes there is a moving in
the body, without the service of the moving instruments at all. But in the
motions by you alleged, there is no such matter. For in Suggestions the d^uell
by deceiving the fantasy, and blinding the understanding, prevails against
the will, and this seduced commanundeth all the inferior parts, which he may
perform outwardly* And as for transporting of bodies, here the whole body is
carried violently, not by ordinary stirring of those inward moouers appointed
to this duty, but at the pleasure of an outward causes as when a man is
carried in a ship, in a charret* on horseback, or after such other manner. By
which it is apparent, the motions which be usually in Demoniakes, cannot be by
outward suggestion, but only by inward operation, as disposing of the several
members of the body without the Imagination and Will, sometimes by the
instruments of motion, and sometimes (which is more page 22. Matthew. 8. 3 and
12. 43. Mar. 5. 12.
strange) without. Moreover, I showing some argument for his inherencie, from
his earnest desire to enter into the bodies of men, and to dwell there: which
appears by this, that he is unwilling to be cast out: and being thrown out;
finds no rest till he recover his lost habitation: yea he rather desires to
enter into swine then to want a dwelling. You answer, It is an idle conceit to
dream of such a desire: because, The Lord never granted him, nor he ever
desired any such thing against Job, and yet no doubt he craved as much against
him, and had as much yielded, as ever against any. I reply: Whilst we are
disputing of the quality of the Devils vexation, you tell us a tale of the
quantity. We are not now weighing whether Job or Demoniaks are more grievously
afflicted, but whether they be molested after the same manner. Albeit this is
great ignorance in you, to think the torments of the body to proceed from
greater tyranny, then his malice that he powers upon the soul. Was not his
power greater in Judas, though no Demoniake, the^ in the man, whom he had
possessed a long time? Mar. 5. 3. etc.
But to return to Job: we never heard till this day that he was a Demoniake:
and by your rule, if Job was not one (as his book shows he was not) there was
never any: because as much power was granted against him, as against any* and
so all those Demoniakes mentioned in the Gospel* by your reckening shall prove
but tales. Let the same answer suffice you for Ahabs prophets, until we may
hear you are either of a better mind, or of more learning. That which you
dispute of Saul being possessed, is an idle excursion Page 29. 30.
of your own* I no where maintain it. ^et where you contend that there were no
possessions at all in Israel* till a little before the coming of Christ, one
might ^ustly demand of you, which profess so great insight in this matter,
how the Jews became so cunning to judge of their possessed? And why Eleazarus
in the days of Vespasian and Josephus, boasted of Salomons Exorcismes? I doubt
not but it was most false to attribute any such wickedness to that wise king:
yet these men being but a little after our Savior Christ, might have been
convicted by the testimony of many living, but especially by their own
histories, if they should have fathered such practices upon Solomon, which had
been evident did begin but yesterday. It seems then by opinion of those
ancient Jews, that Possessions and Dispossessions were before Salomons time,
otherwise they would not have made him an author of a thing that sprung up
after him. But you will prove by argument, that none were possessed till a little
before the coming of Christ. The first of your reasons are contained in these
words* Thus then it is evident that Saul was never possessed, and so
consequently, that (till a little before the coming of Christ) there were no
possessions at all in Israel. This argument I answer by the like. It is
evident that Saul had not the whiles ^ee was king.
leprosy, Ergo, there were no Lepers in Israel, till a little before the
coming of Christ. The other reason you render hereof is, because this
judgment is not foretold and threatened the Jews by some of the Prophets at
least. As though every judgment of God were specified by some of the
Prophets. But I ag. 31.
will leave you to sport a while with Saul, as also with that of the
brasen-Serpent, which is a devise of your own in this matter, nothing
pertaining to me.

Concerning supernatural effects in Summers, as that having pins ag. 34. etc.
thrust very deep into his legs and other parts of his body without sense, or
feeling thereof Physialogus answers, that Summers has since deposed, he felt
the ^imes, but dissembled the pa^^es. I answer, his deposition no doubt is a
thing much to be regarded, which has sold himself to be at the Bishops
pleasure, whereby there was nothing so apparently false, which he would not
dare to affirm, or deny, as he perceived his liking. But Physialogus tells us
further out of Gal^n, that the common sense being earnestly employed in some
matter, the outward senses per^^i^^ not their own object whereby Summers in
like manner might be senseless then, as Physialogus is now. But to waken him a
little, I would he would try the pinnes himself. No doubt his own meditations
being far more serious and weighty, then could be in that paltrie boy, he
should receive no pain at al: of which if we were once assured by his
experience then were we through for this point. For his foming, Physialogus
answers, that parties affected with page 36.
the Epile^^sie, foame, and that Scoulds do frame: unto which add these two
Answerers: That foame out also their own shame. Concerning their violent
motions and stirrings, extraordinary strength, and knowledge, you object
nothing, but what M. Harsnet has done before: unto whom I have answered. It
had been more be^eeming to have replied to that, then thus to roll over the
same stone again. You call for Knapping of iron chains asunder, and then you
would believe: as if the Lord must give power to Satan to feed our vain
humors. But you remember who promised to believe too, if their curious desires
might have been satisfied, who ever scorned the present works they saw, and
still desired greater, but obtained not. If there had been chains broken, M.
Harsne^ would have charged the Smith with confederacy, and would have
required they had been Discovery page 29.
so fastened, as the Keeper of Nemgate could have fastened them. And yet suppose
he had fastened them* it would have been said he had combined, with us. If
this could be cleared, then Darrell should have bewitched him, or Summers
himself should be a witch. If this would not serve yet some by argument
would maintain, that none can be possessed in these days: nay, that there
were never any possessed. So be the matter never so true and impossible to be
counterfeited some thing would ever be excepted, as long as we have to deal
with men Lords over their own tongues, and have no Lord on earth to control
them. Considering then I have to meddle with men of this kind, who, so they be
saying something, spare not to say any thing be it never so false* incredible,
and absurd* it shall be folly in me to spend words about them.

page 41.
You affirm: The Deponents themselves have since more adu^sedly reformed their
oaths and d^posed the contrary. I answer: They have done nothing less. Nay
their reexaminations make more for the confirming, then weakening of that they
formerly deposed. And this I have made evident in my former answer to the
Chapter of Reexaminations: Detect lib. 3 cap. 8.
where M. Harsnet obiecteth the very same you do here. Whereunto you should
have returned a reply, or else for shame never mentioned that, which is already
answered. But you may be ashamed (if you be not past all shame) to say* that
they reexamined deposed thus: namely, that now by their better enlightened
judgments, they plainly perceive all those the former supposed supernatural
actions or passions, to be but mere counterfeit toys, and plain cosoning
practices. O palpable flaunder! What will you stick to affirm, who spare not
to publish this for truth? I refer thee good Reader, to my Detection, page 4^.
the place before quoted, where thou shall see this to be most untrue Whereas, I
say, they would have punished the witnesses, if these things had been found
counterfeit: you answer, as if they were dismissed upon compassion, being
silly poor persons: and yet of about thirty that have testified the things
impossible to be counterfeited, upon their corporali oaths, seven of them be
preachers.

page 43. etc.
After you come to the signs of Possessions which you deny to be* set down
as rules to discern Essential Possessions by. They be rules of such
possessions as were in the Scriptures and we have showed them to be
Essential, whatsoever yet you either have, or can prate to the contrary. How
foolish and beggarly the words be, you further multiply to this end, I have
manifested in your Discourses, I need not repeat them. For the number of
signs I stand not strictly upon them. Where they are all* I say there is a
Possession: I do not say, where there be fewer, or diverse others, there is no
Possession. For this is free to the Lord to afflict in what measure it pleases
him. Neither do I cross my self, as you untruly charge me, making page 45.
the Scripture signs the only means to discern of Possessions: and then in
the 16. and 17. page every way equal my experimented signs with any of them. I
only in the pages mentioned name some ^ewe super natural effects, which in
experience I have observed in Domoniakes. But in what place I set them, and how
I account of them, is evident in the 37. page, where speaking of experimented
signs, I use these words: But the Scripture making no mention of these signs,
they are to be regarded accordingly. And ^o likewise in the 22. page. In the
applicaion of the signs, you impute unto me diverse contrarieties ^g 46.
after your lying and slanderous manner. As if I should say: Sometimes they
have supernatural strength and knowledge, yet sometimes ^ctr. page 6. 17.
again, they only seem to have. Sometime Satan hurtes, but hurtes not
indeed, etc. Touching the first of these, I having spoken of the supernatural
strength and knowledge of the parties controuerted, in the conclusion thereof
show, that I am not so to be understood, as though I meant that they had
supernatural strength and knowledge: but therefore is this ascribed unto them
by me, because they seem to have such knowledge and strength. And thus often in
scripture is that attributed to Demoniakes, which was indeed performed by the
devil, and done only by them in a seeming show. So the Demoniake, Mark 5. is
said to break chains and fetters asunder, whereas not he, but the devil
brake them. And this is one of your worthy contradictions. Concerning the
latter, I say thus, that Howsoever they are so miserably vexed by Satan, as the
behold ^s would judge them in most extreme and intolerable pains, yet they
feel no pains at all. Yet I doubt not but that Satan can jo order the matter,
as that the Possessed shall have pain, when he shall see it serve for his
purpose, etc. By which I show there is ^ag. 48.
not one uniform order to be expected in these cases: which variety of
affliction, these men would draw to inconstancy of opinion. You condemn me
also for thinking, The Scripture signs are not recorded only as matter of
fact, but partly to help us in discorning of possessions. Mar. 9. 21.
I ground my reason on the question of our Savior: How long time is it he has
been thus? You answer, Christ respects in this question only the first
time of that accident. And I reply, you respect in this answer how to trifle
off any thing ob^ected against you, with foolish words without any substance at
all. Does not our Savior loyne together with the time, the manner and form of
his handling? Does he not enquire as well of the one, as of the other? We must
have a question of time without any subject matter, or reference to any thing.
Miraculous Answerers, which can measure time without any standard laid unto it!
You charge me with foisting in words into the text for advantage: but it is
your own mouths which run page 49.
over with the word Essentially, and not any addition of mine. I content my
self with the phrase of the holy Ghost, rejecting these terms as needless
and superfluous. Though wheresoever the devil is, this speech properly
understood (as it is usually in the matter of Possession) there must also his
spiritual essence be. That which you think is more then the text, is only
added to paraphrase it: and though these words In him, be not in this
Scripture, yet are they else where used in like case: you are very hungry,
which would leap Act. 19, 1
at so small a morsel.

Whether there be a medicine or no for curing Essential possession, you yay,
we shall see after in handl ng that joint. and I am content to refer page 50. 51
52.
it thither. As for speedy deliver a^^ee of the afflicted, I acknowledge it is
no argument of possession: and I thank you for reproving it, though of my
self I would be ready to retract any thing dissonant from the truth. It is
not my desire, any my stubble should be laid upon the foundation, but I am
content the fire of Gods word should consume it.

I alleging those words of the law, That the Lord will bring upon Deuteronomy. 28. 6
page 53. R^uel. 22. 1
transgr^ss^^^ eu^ry ^^ckn^sse, and every plague which is not written in the
book of the Law, until they be destroyed. And also that of Saint John: He
that shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book, to prove that men may now be possessed: you answer, I
abuse the Scripture, making Possession sametimes written, sometimes unwritten.
But you abuse your selves, and your Reader to iangle about that, which every
child might teach you. For who knows not that some things might be
unwritten in the Law, that be very frequent in the Gospel, as indeed Possession
is? But to answer my argument out of these places, you deny page 53.
Essential possession to be decrced in God his eternal counsel for a
judgment. That Possession is essential, we have sufficiently proved in survey
of your Discourses. That it is decreed for a judgment, may appear to any not
wilfully blind, by those manifold examples of men possessed in the Scriptures:
Except those things happened beside the decree of God, or else those possessions
were rewards and benefits, not judgments and afflictions It may be your
impudent vain will not stick to admit either* though none can avouch the
first but Atheists, nor the second but only men that are mad. I have showed in
your Discourses, how the Lords judgments are perpetual, though not inflicted
every moment, but after such intermission as pleases him. Is it not then
excellent stuff you bring, That the judgments of this life (for we speak
only of them) cannot perpetually page 54.
be inflicted, but salvation must needs be barred from all in Christ? In like
manner, because I say, Possession is but a conditional and temporal judgment,
you therefore interre, It is not perpetual. W^ere you play with the word^
meaning perpetual, a continued connection, such as nothing may be put between,
when as that is usually said to be perpetual, which is common to all ages,
though it appear but now (...)ag. 55.
and then. You charge me with disputing from May be, to a being in deed. May not
I well dispute, It may be, when you would every where maintain It cannot be?
How can a being indeed be concluded, before it be manifest the same thing May
be? If the heavens therefore fall, we shall not only catch Larks, as you say,
but by catching also of you two, we shall catch something that wants brains.

I affirming, There is as great cause of this judgment now, as at any time
heretofore: you answer, It is v^t^rly untrue: The manifestation of Christ's
Deity, and the confirmation of his glorious Gospel being the maine causes of
possession in Christ's time. My meaning is as appears by my words, there is as
great cause in respect of sin, as much abounding now as ever. For I do not
compare this cause of punishment, with the manifestation of Christ his Deity.
And therefore besides the ceasing of the two maine causes, you should also have
showed that sin was ceased, or else sin to be no cause: which you purpose to
do in the page 56.
pages following. But in the mean season, how do you flourish it, as if I
should proudly limit the Lord his times and seasons for inflicting his
judgments? I limit no times, but leave it free to the Lord: yet knowing the
reward of sin, and the ample kingdom it now has, according to the manner of
all the Prophets, I can do no less then expect his fearful judgments of
what kind so ever. But you will page 57. 58.
prove Possession is no punishment for sin, and that out of the Depth of
Divinity. Your reason is, Afflictions of this life, laid upon the Elect, be not
properly punishments. It is true* but what do you lay to this? possession of
Devils is an affliction of this life. We grant this too: yet so, that not
only Possession is an affliction of this life, but that there be infinite
other miseries and calamities besides. What then? Shall we now conclude, That
no misery or calamity whatsoever, as well as this of Possession, is any
punishment for sin? O deep Divinity, and such as has not been raised from
the bottomless pit till now! I deny not but the Lord may impose it upon a man
for trial, and for other ends, as he knows best, but may he not also therefore
inflict it as a chastisement for sin, or castigatorie punishment? But your
assumption contains more in it, vz. that Possession is an affliction of this
life laid upon the elect. This also I consesse is true: but it will not
advantage you, except ye add, that it is laid only upon the elect, and then
shall we have Possession a note of our election, and so a blessed thing to be
possessed with devils, which is such divinity, as never Divine, deep or
shallow, once dreamed of. It is a shame to rehearse your fooleries. Then you
will urge it more strongly, for that our Savior curing the possessed has
given them no watchword of Ioh. 5. 14.
sinning no more. I his watchw^^d was given but in one cure, as I remember Was
all other diseases therefore no chastisements for sin? Whether our Savior
speak, or whether be silent, you are men that can take occasion for your
absurdities upon either. I will not waste paper with rehearsing more of this
stuff. Consider with your selves Leuit. 26. 1* 18. Deuteronomy. 28. 2^. Romans 6. 23
Ephesians. 2, 12 1. Cor. 5. 5.
that lesser affli^tions be punishments for sin, as we speak vulgarly, if
your profunditie will give us leave: That all death is the stipend of sin,
and that Possession is a kind of death. Besides, Offenders are delivered to
Satan by the Church, not for reward, but for Chastisement. And if to be in the
power of Satan howsoever, be a chastisement, what is it to be in his
possession? Is not he the Executioner appointed over the wicked? Has not he
the Heb. 2. 14 1. 2. 44
power of death? How can any one be in his hands, and be not in death? Or how
in death, and not in punishment? Our Savior teaches that Repossession happens
upon negligence and security, whereby it may be apparent, that the first
possession is not for a man's virtues. It it needless to use many prooffes in a
plain case, if I had not to deal with men to whom Sunshine is darkness.

The testimonies of the Doctors, which I allege in the Margin, you page 59.
blame, for that they be not ^ully set down. You have examined them in your
Discourses, and confess they speak as I report them. I omitted Dialog. Disc.
page 171.
in this place to put down their words, being after to use them in proof of
Dispossession by prayer and fasting since miracles ceased. Which position you
see includes the former, and to what purpose should I clogge the Reader with
unnecessary repetition? Nay what should I be burdensome to you? For in that
place where they do speak, they speak so plainly, as you could wish their
tongues were out, as we shall see in the next dialogue. If you would discredit
VVierus, reporting seventy damsels in Rome possessed with spirits in one
night, it had been meet you should have done it with some probability: It is
not enough, for that it was at Rome. Will you credit nothing done in that
kingdom? No marvel, you will not credit things done at home, though never so
substantially certain, It is likely, if it had been but a practice of Roman
Ex^rcists, they would have dispatched it in less then two years. None of the^
was recovered within this time. To have so many possessed, and for so long
time, and not one of them to be dispossessed, made little for the credit of the
Exorcists, and of the Popish Church, if Dispossession be a mark of the true
Church, as the Papists teach. And so of Anno 1566
the thirty children possessed at Amsterdam, the same year they broke down
their images, and reformed the Religion, as if the Devil the^ more raged,
considering his short time there, as he usually does at his farewell. Thyreus
his report may be allowed at least, in things ag. 60.
that are witnessed by others. Neither did D. Fulke not inveigh against Possessi
n, because it had no ^^intainers to his time, but because it was gainsaid by
none. M. F^x^, M La^e, M. Robinson, with sundry other Divines living in D.
Fulk^ his time were of opinion there were possessions, as appeared by their pra
tise, and some of their writings. But what needed any should with earnestnes
defend that, which no man of any reckening oppagned? This controversy is new
sprung up, first hatched, and brought into light by envy, and still nourished
by flattery and Ambition, and expertation to get something from his good
Lordship. For your argument from Micacles, I hope I have quashed it in your
tenth Dialogue. Is it not wonderful that you acknowledging Pass^ssion to be
asure natural dis^as^^an l a thing page 62.
hidden in the secret counsel of G^^^, to execute and effect when and where he
will, and therefore may neu r by any man living be avouched for certain, that
you dare so presumptuously conclude, that now there can be nop ss ssion? If it
be so secret as you say, it is no less danger for you to deny it* then for
me to affirm it. But you are like the prudent topper of trees, that strikes in
sunder the very bough he stands on.

For prayer and fasting how it is a means to expel Sa^an, we shall page 62.
63.
see more, God willing in the next Dialogue, if any thing be needful to be
added to that already spoken. Whereas I put a difference between the curing of
possessions now, and those done by the Apostles for that now it is done by an
entreating word* then by a base commanding word. you answer as beseems your
ab^urd fashion, that Miraculous curing of possessions in Christ's time was at n^
hand effected by a bare c mmaunding word, but by a supernatural power
concurring therewith. O deep Clerks, and men that have diued to the very
bottom of Divinity! When we make comparison of means v* sed by men, what
have we to do with supernatural power? Does either the entreating word or
Commanding word exclude that? Would any men in their wits deny the work of
the instrument, because it is moved by the principal cause? Meat does not
nourish, because the Lord gives strength, and the staff to bread: Faith is
not by hearing, because it is the giftof God. Such are the demonstrations
wherewith these Discoursers think they have put all the world to silence: which
happily they have done, except it be for laughing. I do no where affirm that
Possession is a natural disease, and therefore page 64. Matt. 8. 16. 17. Luc.
8. 21.
do not go about by Matthew. 4. 24. and Luke 8. 21. to prove it, because in those
places it is jointly recorded with natural diseases, wherewith you charge me,
and by diverse arguments very soberly confute me: but saying that Possession
with Devils is in the Gospel often brought in among other plagues of God, for
proof thereof, I do produce the aforesaid Scriptures. Indeed I say, that
Possossion is a disease, but add, to wit, supernatural: and a little after
call it an unnatural discase: Whereby I make it plain, what manner of
disease I account it to be. If you would now have confuted me, you should have
bent your force against these things I say, and not against that I no where do
affirm. But this is with you an usual thing. You add, that I deeming
possession to be but a mere natural malady, do directly cross my former
speech, where I make it a supernatural malady. And this forsooth is one of
your Contradictions. But you must first prove better then you have done yet,
that I do not only deem, but say, that Possession is a natural malady,
before it be so indeed that I cross mine own speech. If I were given as much
to cross my body* as you say I am to cross my self in my speech, I were a
very fit man to make a Papist, who love of life to cross themselves. To make
up your sum, you foist us in a counterfeit, That all supernatural page 65.
works are miracles, as if faith, hope, and charity, peace of conscience and
such like were all miracles: which if it be true, we must needs still have
miracles, or else have no Church. The Papists would be glad to hear of these
tidings, but no body else, except such as would reio^ce at your folly. For your
second, third, fourth, and fist Dialogues, wherein, you think, you have
overthrown Essential possession, by that time you have weighed in a just
balance, what has been answered thereunto, you shall perceive to have
prevailed as much, as if you had labored to overthrow your Peake hills. You
page 66. 67.
say, You have showed Passession is not inflicted for sin, but I say, you must
show it better, before any man of wisdom can believe you. I have branded your
absurdity in your Discourses, for that you conclude, Job. 12. 31.
a final end of possession from the casting forth of the prince of this world.
Here you increase it a thousand fold in making your own singular, foolish,
and impious wresting of this Scripture, to contain a matter of no less
certainty, then is the express word of God, Genes. 9. 14. 15.
for an utter end of any the like flood to that, which was in Noabs time. I do
not tie the Lord to the punishment of Gomorrah, or of the children deriding the
prophet, or of Cehazi, and such others: but where the like sins reign, there
may be the like punishment, which you will not grant in actual Possession,
having put a necessary end unto it* But you will not be pressed with May be.
Much a do you keep with this page* 68.
Sophisme, a posse ad esse. Wherfoeuer you meet with may or can in the
conclusion, then eftsoons you tell us of this fallacy. ^s in your Discourses
your skill in Rhetorike, and in discerning of Tropes did fail you: so here it
does in Logic, and in discerning Elenchs. To avouch Poss ssion of d uels to
b^e inflicted also for sin is Cu^kolike melody in your ears, but you have
sung us a Jack Dawes song in limitting it with page 67.
two only ends, that is, of confirmation of Chaists Deity, and of the Gospel,
as I have abundantly proved.

Whereas I affirm the judgment of our senses for the truth of Summers
vexation by Satan, you reply, Our senses could not comprehend page 69.
such supernatural matters: besides, they might be deluded, and devils can do
things in show. For comprehension, seeing you deprive us of all judgment of
sense, blame us not if we be something dull in conce^uing this, How that
seeing, we do not see: feeling, we do not feel: smelling, we do not smell: and
hearing, we do not hear: and that we require you would make it plain unto
us. Which when you have once done, and beaten into our heads, I will never
trust mine eyes again, though I should see M. Deacon in form of an Angel of
light. But if our senses were deluded, and things done in show, that were not
in deed, surely it was Satan that deluded us and no counterfeiting in Summers,
as you would feign have it. This is the sum of your first dialogue against
me, to which Lycanthropus subscribeth as able to suffice any reasonable man:
but this, is but a small thing, says Pueumatomachus, and therefore he
stretches the matter to an higher pitch, That neither any unreasonable man
(which is much more) shall be ever able to answer it. So that now we are much
beholding to M. Deacon, and M. Walker, that have put all fools and mad men to
a perpetual non plus, whose tongues would otherwise continually be tampring.

Concerning the strange and present affliction of the boy of Northwitch, I
will say nothing: I never saw him: howsoever you descant on the matter after
your lying and pal^ry manner. Yet I think page 71.
it not amiss to offer to thy view (good Reader) the judgment of the Bishop of
Chester in his direction to his parents, and of three other Commissioners for
causes Ecclesiaflicall, according with him therein.

FIrst we think it fit, and do require the parents of the said child, that
they suffer not any to repair to their house to visit him* saving such as are
in authority, and other persons of special regard and known discretion, and
to have special care that the number always be very small. Further having
seen the bodily affliction of the said child, and observed in sundry fits v ry
strange effects and operations, either proceeding of natural unknown causes,
or of some diabolical practice: we think it convenient and fit for the ease
and deliverance of the said child from his grievous afflictions, that prayer
be made for him publicly by the minister of the parish, or any other preacher
repairing thither, before the congregation so often as the same assembleth. And
that certain preachers, namely, M. Garrad, M. Massey, M. Collar, M. Haruey, M.
Eaton, M. Pierson and M. Brownhill* these only and none other to repair unto
the said child by turns, as their leisures will serve, and to use their
discretions by private prayer and fasting, for the ease and comfort of the
afflicted* with all requiring them to abstain from all solemn meetings,
because the calamity is particular, and the authority of the allowing and
prescribing such meetings rests neither in them nor in us, but in our
Superiors, whose pleasure it is fit we should expect. Moreover, because it is
by some held that the child is really possessed of an unclean spirit, for that
there appears to us no certainty, nor yet any great probability thereof, we
think it also convenient, and require the preachers asoresaid to forbear all
forms of Exorcisme, which always imply and presuppose a real and actual
possession.

Rich. Cestriensis. David Yale. Chancel. Griff. Vaughan. Hugh Burghes.



Hereunto I will add a few lines, which M. Haruey aforesaid, a man of great
learning and godliness, writ in his life time to a friend of his.

Grace and mercy from our only Savior. There is such a boy as your report
signifies, whose estate from the beginning of February till this present, has
been so strange and extraordinary, in regard of his passions, behavior, and
speeches, as I for my part never heard, no^ read of the like. Few that have
seen the variety of his fits, but they think the devil has the disposing of
his body. My self have diverse times seen him, and such things in him as are
impossible to proceed from any humane creature. The matter has affected our
whole country. The Di^ines with us generally hold, that the child is really
possessed. And so much for him.

We see what the Bishop and Preachers of Chesse-shire their judgment is
touching this child. What say now the Discoursers concerning him? They after
they have for three leaves together scofted at his grievous affliction (for so
the Bishop before terms it) in most profane, childish, and scurrulous
manner, do in the end page 76.
affirm, that he counterfeiteth, and that this would soon apeare, if be were
well coni^^ed a while with a three corded whip. Is this the fruit of your
visiting the child? you had better have kept you at home. Was this all the
comfort the distressed boy and parents received from you? Miserable comforters
then are you. Is this the mercy, and all the bowels of compassion that is in
you, toward him that is Romans 12. 15.
in misery? O merciless men, and void of all pi^ie! It appears you have not
learned to weep, with them that weep. Well, I can tell you of a couple of
such merry or merciless companions as your selfs, that coming of late to
one M. tames Charles of Wolroych in Kent, to see his daughter Clemens Charles,
who is reputed to be possessed with the devil, and not without cause, they
scarce went so merrily home, as they were at M. Charles, and yet but a small
thing befell them by the way. Returning home, they went by one M. Hook his
house of Darlton, master not long before to this maid, at whose house she
began to be afflicted. Now as they were on horseback before M. Hook his
door, and sporting themselves with him about the counterfeiting of this new
vpstart counterfeit. behold, one of their horses staled blood, and as they were
talking thereof, lo. the other did the like: whereat they were somewhat
appaulled. How it fared with their horses after I know not, but the day
following they carried themselves at M. Charles more soberly, whether they went
on other horses. But hereof enough: I will now proceed to your second
Dialogue.

A REPLY TO THE SECOND DIALOGVE.
THe second part of my Doctrine treats, That those eight before mentioned
were verily dispossessed, and that by fasting and prayer, the means appointed
by God. For confirmation whereof, I knew no better rule then the example of men
dispossessed in holy Scripture, which is the only true and vnsallible
touchstone to examine both this, and all other actions by. These Answerers
scorn these notes, calling page 8^*
them falsely pretended signs of dispossession from sacred Scripture, and
therefore pretermitting them, require my arguments, as if the Signs from
Scripture were no arguments at all. It seems you have found a vein of better
metal then the Scriptures, from whence your whole book is so full stuffed
with your own shining dross, and is so utterly destitute of this purified
gold. Yet you cannot beat me from them, but I urge them thus: There were in our
Demoniakes the self same signs or notes of dispossession, precedent and
subsequent, which we rea^e of in the Scripture Demoniakes, and therefore the
same dispossession* you answer, There were not the same signs in our
demoniakes: and first, because they were mere cosonages, as is confessed
freely by the parties themselves upon their own oaths. I reply, the parties
we speak of, be eight in number, whereof only Summers has made this cursed
confession: which was not free and voluntaries, Detect. page 127.
as you untruly affirm, but extorted by Satan, and his instruments, as in my
Detection I have made manifest. But what say you to the seven in Lancashire? It
may be Summers has sworn for the^ all: for they as yet, were never examined:
yet because we doubt of Summers general oath, I pray you prove unto us, who
taught the children to counterfeit? when, and where, and by what means they
were taught? what end might induce them to embrace such teaching? whether the
parents were privy to it? and what they propounded in practicing such
wickedness? Yea, put Summers too into the roll, and show us what man is able
by practice to do the things that either Summers or they did? And one would
think a man of mean agility might quickly perform that, which cofoning young
boys and girls could. Show us, I beseech you, these and such like things, or
otherwise if you cannot show the^, and yet tell us of cos^nage, you show us
nothing but your long ears, and brazen faces. Secondly, ^g. 83.
say you, The signs in the Scripture Demoniakes were sensibly perc^iued by the
beholders: but these in your pretended Demoniakes were not so, by your own
confession. Belike all we that were spectators of our Demoniakes, being (at
sundry times) a great multitude, were all stricken with blindness, with
deafness, and with a benummednes, and yet we all thought we used our senses,
and I am sure, we were no sooner out of the place, but we were able, the Lord
be thanked, to see, hear and feel. But you confirm this by mine own
confession, ^ct. page 37
which says, that the spirit could not possibly be felt or seen. I said so,
and say so again, that Spirits cannot be felt or seen in their own bare
essence, but as they make themselves known unto us by their effects. I angling
Sophisters will dispute, That the nose of a man's face cannot be seen, because
that which we see is but color or form, and the nose it self is neither of
both. Your ears ring it may be with their noise, which has made you borrow
an argument from them. Thirdly, you say, The Signs we report are false: which
I would grant you if your selves had learned to speak truth. We must remember
there are above two hundred witnesses hereof living at this day, of which some
have deposed the same we report of Summers. Fourthly, say you, Scripture
Signs can argue no Dispossession now, because like effects may arise from
natural causes, and coporall diseases. By this your good help Atheists might
overthrow all Possessions and Dispossessions in the scripture. But howsoever
you may be friendly to such vile wretches, yet have they no foothold from
hence. For neither those effects in those ancient Demoniakes, nor in these of
our time jointly and wholly considered can proceed from natural disease.
Natural causes can bring forth no supernatural effects, as we have
demo^strated these to be in spite of your seventh Dialogue, and what other
treaty so ever you oppose against it. Lastly, say you, A dispossession may be
without such apparent signs, and therefore your signs precedent and
subsequent do not necessarily conclude a dispossession. What? Because it is
sometimes without these signs, therefore where these signs are, shall it not
be? It is sometime day light without the clear sunshine, therefore when the
Sun shines clear shall it not be day? Sometimes the murderer slayes a man
and is not taken with the manner, therefore if he be taken with the manner,
shall he not necessarily be concluded a murderer? These are good rules to
make a man impudent in sin: for by them the bold offender shall speed
better, then he that does it minchingly* You have spoken then pretily against
these signs, but without any sign of truth or wit.

From Scripture signs I descend to some experimented by my self in dealing
with Demoniakes, which have reported certain visible shapes, in which the
devils seemed to depart from them. But here I am taken up for halting, in that
I call it My experience, which was proved in the persons of other. I confess I
spoke rudely, as all other men do, which call a physician a man of good
experience, though he has not proved all the diseases, he has dealt with, in
his own body. page 84.
As for visible shapes, you utterly deny, that Spirits could procure the^: yet
they did before Pharaoh, and infinite others since, as we have showed by
better arguments in my survey of your fourth and fifth Dialogues, then you ever
have, or can for the contrary. Some also I show did vomit, or strain to vomit
when the devil departed. With page 85.
this you make good sport, perhaps ticled with remembrance, that you have
returned to your own vomit.

Further, I concluding a dispossession, from the present effect of our prayers
(whereof the like is not in natural diseases.) You charge me with proper
terms, as with certain charming words to conjure the Lord with, for so it
pleases your profane mouths to speak. And yet I do not use the word proper.
Only I say, And God heard our prayer vit^red in such terms* that is, made to
that effect, as before I have showed in brief. I never dreamed that such*
Argooses would come after me with so many eyes, to find an hole in my coat
for these words more the^ in all other men's. But to let words pass, you would
disprove the effect of our prayers, for that we could not page 86.
make the parties the Temples of the holy Ghost, as we had prayed. We challenge
no such power, but we might well hope of the mercy of the Lord to sanctify
them, which did plainly behold his great good nesse in delivering them from
Satan's great rage. Howsoever me thinks you should not be offended with us for
putting up this request to God. And what if the Lord does not always yield
present success to the prayers of his servants? Could we not therefore be
assured he had now heard us, when we saw the thing performed before our eyes*
It is true the Devil sometime seems to depart, when he does not but when it
is at the requests of Gods people* when it is after such grievous vexation as
was in the Demoniakes in the Gospel, when it is with the health of the
parties, and present freedom from all former vexations die Satan, we need not
doubt of it in any sort. For the visible departure of Satan, I answered you
even very now.

^ag. 87. 88* ^9. Matt. 12. 43
Besides, I allege for Dispossession, Satan's desire of repossession, which is
never but after he is thrown out. You return a double answer, first, that
these words, I will return to the house from whence I came, etc. be
metaphorical. We remember indeed your monstrous absurdity in making all
things whatsouer, spoken of Angels, and devils in the scripture* to be
Meaphoricall. But as I have showed you, many are not Metaphorical, so neither
is this repecting the sentence of Matt. 12. 45
it. The words be part of a similitude, as is plain by the reddition, So shall
it be to this wicked generation. The whole stands thus. As when an unclean
spirit goes forth of a man, passes through dry places seeking rest, and
finds none: then faith, I will return to my house, etc. entering again in,
the last estate of that man is worse the^ the first* so shall it be to this
wicked generation. Now to find what past of this sentence is Metaphorical, we
are to know that a similitude is twofold. One which is contracted and shut up
in one word, properly called a Metaphor* the other displaid and spread open,
consisting of all the parts at large, and is termed by the name of the
general, a Similitude. For the figurative part in either, the reason is one in
both. Therefore as in a contracted similitude, the Metaphor lies in the word
that is borrowed, and not in that from* whence it is borrowed, so in the larger
similitude, the metaphorical part of it rests in the Reddition, not in the
Proposition. For example* Honor nourishes Arts: the word Nourishes being
borrowed from meats nourishing the body, is a Metaphor as it is applied to
Honor, and Arts, but attributed to his proper terms, it is no Metaphor, as
to say thus, Meat nourishes the body. In like manner (to make a full
Similitude of it, in this sort) As meat nourishes the body, so Honor
nourishes Arts, the Metaphorical part of the whole, lies in the latter
member, not in the first. So likewise when our Savior says, As a man
delivered from the possession of Satan, and receiving him in again, is in
worse case after, then before: So the nation of the Jews, once delivered from
the kingdom of Satan, so long as the church of God was amongst them, and
coming into his subjection again by refusing Christ, should be in more
miserable condition then in any former time: the Metaphorical sentence of this
Similitude, is in the last branch of it, not in the first. Not because there be
no Metaphorical words in the first, as Dry places, house empty, swept,
garnished. etc. but for that we now speak of Metaphorical sentences, not of
words. I frame my argument from the Proposition of the Similitude, the sentence
whereof is literal and historical, not from the Reddition, whose sense is
allegorical. Now then i^ a man should reason thus: The Reddition of the
Similitude is Metaphorical, therefore the whole is metaphocall, it is all one
as if one should say, The black Moore bath white teeth, therefore he is all
white. Which kind of argument every chimney-sweeper would deride: and yet
thus you reason from this place, and make it one of your chiefest props to
uphold your absurd conclusions with. But unto this place I added another,
where our Savior says to the unclean spirit, Come out of him, and enter Mat.
9. 25.
no more into him. Was our Saviors prohibition here in vain? was this caution
altogether needless and supers^uo us? How chance you pass over this place,
withoutansweri^g one word unto it* It was too plain: and you two could not
agree where the Metaphor should lie, and therefore thought better to slip it
over, then by handling it, and bewraying your own absurdities to mar all.
The reentrie therefore of Satan is plain by the Scriptures: so that we need not
the testimony of any experience: yet I have adjoined in the Doctrine the
report of the children dispossessed, and the evidence of many godly then
present, which perceived by their agony, and the words of their resistance,
what Satan attempted. You trifle over this with greater childishness then
appeared in the children, though but nine or ten years old, and therefore I
disdain to answer it* Again for proof of dispossession, I allege the^
continuance of the parties health since: you answer: Their former fittes were
but counterterfeit, page 90.
a^ themselves have confessed. A stale proof of their counterfeiting, and
answered before. The seven in Lancashire never confessed any counterfeiting.

page 91. 92. 93.
Thus having confirmed Dispossession, I remove that usual objection, showing
it is now no miracle, for that it is not done by absolute power of Christ in
bodily presence, as he sometimes did it when he was here conversant on earth*
nor by any committed extraordinary power to men but by ^asting an^ pra^er as
the means* you answer first: as if I affirmed Christ's absolute power to be
ceas^d: which I affirm not, but account such affirmation blasphemy* He is not
now present in body on earth, but works by his absolute authority still.
Secondly, If Christ's absolute author^ty be th^o^ly ^fficient* then the work is
a^ miraculous, as ever. Which is a flat untruth, as I have proved at large in
^our tenth Dialogue. For works done by men as instruments are distinguished by
the manner of working, and not by the principal cause. you say my Similitude
from the Queen, and Lord Chauncelour is too absurd: for first, it is a case
which never shall be, and so cannot illustrate. I had thought that
fictasimilitudo might have had some force. But surely as you are full of new
Divinity, so I think you have swallowed Margaritam Philosophiae, you break
out on every occasion with such wonderful new axioms of Logic. I intended
that Similitude to the manner only of Christ's working, and you would extend it
to the like glory of his works now, clean beyond my purpose, and any good
probability. For are not Christ's works more glorious, when together with him
self his servants work extraordinarily, as they did in the time of miracles,
then now, when his servants working is only ordinary. But you will make the
same similitude overthrow all miracles now, which I will yield for any, but for
your selves: for you have a privilege to do miracles, as is apparent in your
tenth Dialogue.

^ag. 94.
Hitherto for Dispossession, now for the means: which I affirm with many
godly and learned of ancient and our own times, Matt. 17. 21
to be fasting and prayer, out of the words of our Savior, This kind go^th not
out but by fasting and prayer. Where I calling it a Secret ordinance, oppose it
to more evident places: you catch at the word, and Deuteronomy. 29, 29
come upon me with Secret things belong only to God. He that should deal with
you had need, as the Lawyers in writing their instruments, rather have twenty
words to spare, then to want one. You would prove, these words did only belong
to the Disciples, because the ^ag. 95. 96.
question was made by them, and the answer to them. The Iayler in the 16. of
the Acts said to Paul and Silas, What must I do to be saved? They answer him:
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, etc. Does this
Scripture now only belong to the Iaylor, because this question was made by him,
and the answer unto him? Of Matt. 17. 21
this kind be infinite other places. For interpretation of these words of Saint
Matthew, I have showed you how I conceive of them in your ninth Dialogue. Which
exposition varieth somewhat from my former, not because I cannot maintain it
against any thing you object, but because I seek after truth, and not after
vain iangling. If you can show me any better, I will be ready also to change
this. In mean season understand how I reason from hence for the perpetual
means of Fasting and prayer, which are mentioned by our Savior in this place,
either as helps to the extraordinary and miraculous faith of the Apostles, or
else of the ordinary. But they are not Math. 7. 17.
mentioned as helps to the extraordinary: for miraculous faith in the least
quantity, though no more then a grain of mustard seed was able without these
helps to expel any devil. Besides they could not be helps to that, which in
it self had no being. For the Disciples had utterly lost their miraculous
faith, else they had elected the spirit. This also the word Apistia, incrdulity
does note un to us. And an help is a conjoined force, which conjunction cannot
be, where there is nothing to join withal* and therefore they be propo unded
in this place as helps to the ordinary faith, and so to have a perpetual
ordinary use, when like occasion is ministered to us. Again, every Exception
is a compendious speech, comprehending in it two propositions, as, Except a man
be borne again, he cannot Ioh. 33. Ioh. 6. 44. Act. ^7. 31
see the kingdom of God* wherein is concluded also this, If f a man be borne
again he can se the kingdom of God. So, None can come unto me except the
Father draw him. Every one can come unto me, whom my Father draws. Again,
Except these abide in the ship, you cannot be saved. If these abide in the
ship, you can be saved. And so in all other. In like manner, This kind does not
go forth, but by prayer and fasting. This kind does go forth by prayer and
fasting. Now the^ let men o^ judgment determine whether here be not an evident
confirmation of the ordinary course of the Church in dealing after this manner*
and whether it be not exceeding boldness, our Savior affirming in such sort
as is declared* That this kind does go forth by prayer and fasting, for any to
open his mouth licenciously against it, and to disgrace it by all opprobrious
terms he can. From hence too you may see, the similitude drawn from the
Physician saying to his patient, daungerously sick of the Pleurisy, You cannot
live, except you bleed, was to good purpose, if you could judge what is to
purpose.

It is too tedious to repeat all your untruths, your absurd Non sequiturs, and
idle profes. As if I thought it unreasonable for Christ to page 99
reprove his Disciples negligence: if Christ's answer were not proper to the
Disciples, it was no answer: if he directed not his speech to the Disciples
only, he spoke to no body present. This metal craves no touchstonne, it
shows it self by the eye what it is: therefore a knock with an hammer is
sufficient So, If this answer of Christ propounded an ordinance for all ages to
come, there is an ordinance without an appointed subject to vnde^go the same.
Indeed this would be strange for Accidents to walk alone without subjects. It
is a difficult matter to find who should be the subject of fasting and praver:
so likewise too of the Matt. 6.
kingdom of God, which our Savior ordains to be sought in the first place,
and food and raiment in the second, if we could tell who g. 100.
(...) do it* ^esides succeeding ages that could expel this cumbersom^ (...)
should have more power the eu^r the A^^stles bad, which is false: for the
Apostles, their*saith not failing, could expel any devil. Further, The
Apo^^les should ^aile in not d^cla^ing this ordinance unto us: concerning which
enough has been sai^e in the ninth Dialogue. I ast^y, it (...) establ^shed
ordi^ance in this place, because M Darr^ll af^^^^th it has b^ene a ^ ordinance
from the beginning. I answer, I do not refe^^e the original to this place,
but only the Confirmation, Iath. 19 99 (...) 12. 27 Act. 16. 13.
no otherwise then I make Matrimony an established ordinance by our Savior
Christ, he rene^ing the institution of it.

Again* I argue the means of fasting and prayer from the example of the Jews
Church in our Saviors time: wherein some did cast forth devils* and yet were
not in the number of our Saviors Disciples, neither did it in his name. You
answer, I contrary my self, affirming ^l^e where, they did it by the ^inger
of God: I reply, ^ou ^
do not contrary your self* but are ever li^e your selves, most absur^ly
concluding the self same working of the instrument, from the same manner of the
principal agent: whereas the chief doer being the same, may and does work by
the instrument diversely. Again, say you by mine ^wne consession, this
ordinance as then was not established* I answer, is was not so plainly, as
when our ^auiour confirmed it by these words, yet in general it was, and
practiced in the Church before. Moreover, say you, Those in our Saviors time
besides ^th. 7* 22
his Disciples* cast out devils by miraculous faith only, for which you allege
the seventh of Matth^w I reply, this scripture speaks only of the e^ection
of Satan but shows not in what manner the same was performed, nor when* We do
not lean upon any doubtful uncertainties, as you would Rhetorically declare,
if ye knew how* neither do we take the Lords holy name in vain^, nor pray
without faith* as you prate both without wit and conscience. I pass over your
fooleries concerning K. Wright, and your six lies at one clap* contained (...)
103. (...) 104.
in seven lines, as I can prove to your shame. But what speak I of six, when I
dare say there be six hundred leasings in ^our two volumes? We need not take
things of whole sal^ men by retale: it ^s ^n ea^y matter to know b^ ^our l^ing
whose children ve are

That Christ's speech ought not t^ be a^propriated to the Disciples, has bee^e
declared. Neither ^o I say and unsay as ^ou falsely charge me. page 105. 106.
The communication was between our Savior and his Disciples, b^t the ordinance
there mentioned is common to all* ^et Phys^alogus sit these variable answers,
as he miscals them, does tell us a tale of an H^rmit* which coming to a
Farmers house, and blowing his fingers to warm them, and his ^ottage to cool
them, was s^nt packing by the Farmer* as a diss^mbling c^mpanion. But, to
requite you tale, what if the like Hermit had come to some good man's house, and
having on his face a fair shining visarce with A. W. written upon it, should
upon occasion have his visard shaken off, and under it show another face,
signed with I. De. Might not the good man justly abhor this double fa^ed
guest, and a^monish all honest company to beware of him? I will pard^n you
your sport at fast and page 107.
loose for a shilling, though I might justly make it s^t ^aster unto you, then
you would unloose again in haste. Put where is the contrariety, I pray you,
in making th^se words to ^ee spoken to the Disciples, and yet not only to be
understood of them? You would collect it after this manner, Because that
weakness of faith, and the kind of (...) were the two in (...) wherefore the
child was not delivered. And that which is an impediment to any, is also
proper to the same party, if we will believe your Metaphysi^kes. For you must
needs derive your Assumption H^b 3. 1^ and 4. 1. 2.
f^^m hence. As if the Is^aelites being shut ^ut of the land of promise for
their v^beleefe, this impediment should be so proper to them, that n^re but
themselves should be excluded for the same: which absurdity is of that nature,
that if your stick of fast and loose were ^ good sound cudgel, you deserve to
be well labored about the shoulders with it* ^ut what should I pursue your
several absurdities? To ^ake after such scatterers were to fill a cart, rather
then ones lap. In brief for your whole dispute, to pr^ue these words only to
belong to the Disciples: I^ incredulity and ^mission of Matt. 17.
prayer and fasting were impediments only to the nine Disciples, (for Peter,
James and John were not of this number) then they can be impediments to no body
else. And so Peter, James and John should cast out any kind of spirit
notwithstanding the like incredulity, and omission of ^asting and prayer. Yea
all other Christians whatsoever should also in like manner. For what should
hinder them, if they have no impediment? And what impediment can they have,
these two being only proper to the nine Disciples? See now how prouidently you
tie these words to the Disciples only, permitting larger power to all other
Christians then to them. The contradiction you here charge me with is lame. It
is palpably false, that 1 page 49. of the Doctrine au^u^h, there are some kind
of spirits, which the Apostles (with all their power) could not possibly
expel, but by prayer and fasting. Of this very error I do by sundry reasons
from page 44. of the Doctrine* unto page 48. confute Stapleton and Thyrcus,
which notwithstanding you charge upon me, and again stick not to say, that
Stapleton, Thyrcus, and my self agree herein, so shameless are you. But
specially you make your selves merry with a co^tradiction, page 111. 112. I
answer, The Disciples their not expelling the devil out of the Lunatike, when
they were destitute of miraculous faith, lets not but that by miraculous
faith they could expel any devil. These I trust may agree together, without
cutting the throat one of another.

That which you talk of helping their weak miraculous faith by pa. 113, etc.
fasting and prayer, is already answered. Further, I showing that fasting and
prayer were not required as helps in this place to miraculous faith, say, that
Miraculous faith is of that kind, which is given without means to certain men:
whereupon it must needs follow, that there being an Apistia, an utter defect of
miraculous faith in these Disciples, it was not to be recovered by fasting and
prayer. You answer, It was not 1. Cor. 12, 9.
begotton without means, because it was given by inspiration of God. By which
you make the holy Spirit to be a means: whereas a means is but an
instrument: And the holy Ghost together with the other two persons of holy
Trinity is always a principal efficient. Thus you confound heaven and earth
together, and make nothing in the world to be done without means: neither any
thing in the world to be more then ordinary: for whatsoever is done by the
same usual and never ceasing means, must needs be reputed ordinary. There
be few places in the field more replenished in the spring with stinking
nettles and weeds, then your whole book with such poison full Hemlockes as
these. But with all we have a Discourse of an Habitual and Actual miraculous
faith: page 114.
whereof the habitual is begotten by the Spirit and the word. Seeing therefore
these causes cannot always be effectlesse, and that they be ever working in
the Church till the end of the world, it cannot be avoided but that Miraculous
faith should be in the Church for ever: And the rather if we consider, what by
your saying miraculous faith is: which you define to be nothing else, but an
vnd^uted persuasion, by which we firmly believe, that there is nothing
impossible to God: But all the faithful do undoubtedly believe this, and
therefore we have still Miraculous faith remaining amongst us, and shall have so
long as the Church soiornes on earth: yea the very devils believe this and so
having miraculous faith, by your leaden rule shall be workers of true
miracles* I add, they which were endued with the miraculous faith, had besides
the persuasion of Gods omnipotency, an undoubted persuasion of the will of
God, for the effecting of the wonderful matters, which besides or contrary to
nature they attempted for the good of the Church. Now for as much as the
knowledge and assurance of the said will of God is not to be had from the
word, therefore the written word is not the only ground*worke of miraculous
faith, neither does it come by the hearing thereof, as you affirm. For Actual
faith, you will have it a special motion from the spirit of God, raised up
extraordinarily, whereby the action of faith shall not proceed from the Habit
as from the next cause, as the action of justice comes from the habit of
justice, and so in all other qualities of that kind, but there shall be
something in Actual faith extraordinarily more then was in the Habitual. If a
man had your sharpnes he might quickly go beyond Actius* Nauius, that cut the
whetstone in pieces with his rasor. For the increase of miraculous faith by
means, it is but needles to stand upon it, considering we affirm an utter
defect thereof at this time in the disciples, not some covered sparks remaining
in them, to be raised into flames by fasting and prayer. For true miraculous
faith how little soever, is able with out these helps, to atchiue her desined
work. But then you will say, yea in effect do say, that the Apostles did
superfluously join prayer page 116.
with it. I answer, no more superfluously, then the Church does join
Sacraments with the word. Faith of it self is sufficient, to apprehend Christ
unto salvation, and this faith is begotten by the word: Yet Sacraments have
their necessary use, not to enable faith to that, which it could not with out
them, but to confirm and strengthen it to do her work more cherfully, and
with fuller assurance. Prayer is the general instrument to be used in all holy
works what soever: and therefore the Apostles had warrant for their prayer, and
were free from all will worship therein. I omit here page 117. 118
for brevity five of your slanders, and two contradictions wherewith you charge
me, my self being not author of any one of the contradictory proposions.

I proving that these words in S. Mathewe (this kind goes not Matt. 17. 21
out, etc. belong not peculiarly to the Disciples, say, that if our Savior had
rebuked them for not fasting and praying, they might have excused page 119 120.
121.
their want of time, you trifle exceedinglye about this: at last you afford us
this worthy answer, that considering our Saviors staying in the mount (which
for all the circumstances you can allege can not be long) they had time
enough to pray. Antiquum obtinct Crito, you must run your old byas, and
impudently flap us in the mouth with time for prayer, when the question is of
time for fasting and prayer. Again, you will have these words, This kind goes
not forth but by fasting and prayer, to be no sever all reason rendered by our
Savior, why his Disciples failed in their purpose: whereas we have showed, it
is a distinct thing from Miraculous faith, and not necessarily joined with it:
and therefore not to concur in making one reason with the ^ag. 122. ^g. 123.
124
same* Moreover say I, ^f the Apostles in each weakness of this faith, must of
necessity have betaken themselves to fasting and prayer, they should have been
a whole day about a miracles the exercise of fasting requiring this space,
which would have been great hinderance to their speedy travel over the whole
earth. You answer, This is Iudaisme. Belike also it is Iudaisme for Christians
to pray* because the Jews did so. But understand, good Reader, that the
practice only of such cereremonies as the Lord appointed to be a difference
between the Jews, and other people, is Iudaisme, not the exercise of such
duties, as be common to both. That which you doubt what should become of the
other part of the day, if the devil should be cast forth before noone,
beseems men which acknowledge no other service of God, but for their own
turns. Is there no duty of thanksgiving? no request for strength to the party
dispossessed? no desire that the eyewitnesses might profit by it? you would
have Christians serve God, as the dog his master for a bone. The rest is
unworthy to be repeated, and so was this, but that I would give the Reader a
taste. But what say you, that will not have a fast to continue for a day* to A
Walker, alias ^^g. 5.
Io. Deacon? who in a book of his called the Footpath to fasting, says* that
in the day of our fast, we must be exercised in hearing, applying, and praying
for the rem^uing of God his judgments, even from morning to night? Do I (you
false tongues) in page 48. and 49. of the Doctrine page 125.
say, that the Apostles should have stirred up their weak faith by fasting and
prayer, when I spend those whole pages to prove the contrary* O palpable
slander, and extreme impudency! Likewise you say, I affirm else where, The
Apostles faith was so strong as it needed no means to stir up the same. And
I would tell you, you say untruly, but that your skore is so full that now you
be desperate. Of these two bastardly propositions, conceived and brought forth
by your selves, and not by me, you frame a Contradiction: saying thereupon, that
I will turn, ^re I burn, yea with the turning of an hand, turn the cat in
the pan: and then you tell my pupils, they may be pestilent proud of such a
turne-about tutor. Here we may behold, as your honest dealing with me, so
your eloquence and modesty.

Besides, I auouching the Apostles strong faith after Pentecost, able for
miracles whatsoever, and therefore unlikely the Lord should appoint a peculiar
course for them, for so short a time as from his transfiguration till then: you
collect from hence the weakness of their faith till Penticost: which I grant
you, and more then that, namely, that their miraculous faith was utterly
extinct at this time* And therefore no use of fasting and prayer for the
extraordinary work, but only as it served to the usual manner of the Church in
this case. But you will prove the apostles miraculous faith might fail after
Pentecost, because their faith failed sometimes in doctrine and (...) That we
may understand your meaning, what do y^ (...) by Doctrine? what by judgment?
Doctrine usual* is public teaching and instruction* Judgment private thinking
and opinion. Did the Apostles err in public teaching? You say, The Apostles
and brethren which were in Iud^a, thought the word of God was not to be
preached to the Gentiles. Act. 11. 2.
You ground this ou^ of these words* And when Peter was asc^nded to H^erusalem,
they of the circumcision contended against him. Who contended with him? The
Apostles, say you, but without any warrant from the text. It seems S. Luke
having mentioned the Apostles in the first verse, does of purpose in the second
use these general terms, They of the circumcision, to distinguish these
contenders with Peter, from the Apostles. It may be the Apostles did not yet ^o
clearly understand this mystery, yet it is not likely they were in this ca^e
no more but equal to the weak brethren, whereby the^ should join in
contention with them. Grant we also an error here, it was only in judgment,
not in doctrine. And as for Peter's not going rightly to the truth of the
Gospel, it was not error Gat. 2. 13. 14
either in doctrine or judgment, but a timorous dissimulation for the time.
John his falling down before an Angel, was error through R^ue. 19. 10
sudden passion, not proceeding from settled judgment, much less avouched in
public teaching. Considering therefore these places prove not that the
Apostles erred in doctrine and judgment, and that the Lord does principall^
promise that the Spirit of truth should l^ad Ioh. 16. 13 and 14. 26. 1. Cor. 3.
10. Ephesians. 2. ^0.
them into all truth: and bring all things to their remembrance which Christ
had told them, whereupon they be called Skillful Maister-builders, and the
Church is said to be built upon the foundation of the prophets and apostles. It
is admirable you dare so considently avouch such an assertion, upon so little
or rather no warrant* and of so dangerous consequence. You childishly cavil at
my speech, where I say, Their faith did not fail them, after they received the
holy Ghost in ^ag. 127. etc
That f^^nesse: as if I had attributed such a fullness to the^, as is not
incident to a creature: and yet I expressly distinguish it by note of restraint
Act. 7. 55. and 13. 9. Luc. 1. 41. Act. 2. 2. 4
That fullness, that is, such a plentiful measure as I had spoken of before.
Such an one, as was said of Stephen, that he was full of the holy Ghost: and of
Paul: and of Elizabeth, when she brake forth into that heavenly salutation of
the blessed virgin, that she was filled with the holy ghost. The same is said
of Zacha^y when he prophesied, and of the Apostles, that they were filled* with
the holy ghost. And all these in the Concret* but in the Abstract without all
limitation to have the fullness ^f the Spirit, belongs only to a divine
person, the Father* the Son, and the holy Ghost* So that whatsoever person
has the simple fullness of the Spirit, the same is God, as well as he who
has the fullness of the Godhead. Of Christ his fullness (to whom the Father
has not given his Spirit by measure) do all the elect receive, not the fulness
it self, but grace for grace, that is, graces or gifts of the Spirit heaped
upon graces: every one according to the measure of the gift of Christ, some
eue^ until their cup run over. All which discourse when at last you page 133.
conclude, that howsoever the Apostles were subject to error, yet they could
not pos^iblie err s^ long as they heard the voice of Christ* and but followed
the only directions of the spirit of truth: And that they did never
universally err: Moreover, that they did never ^^cline from the foundation it
self: and lastly, that they were recalled from their e^r^urs^ what singular
thing do you ascribe to the Apostles, that is not common to all believers? Are
not the Apostles to be preferred above all other Ministers of the Gospel, and
believers since their days? Yet you seem to put them in the very same ra^ke*
Nay, you say in the top of the same page, that there ^e some F^st^noni^s of the
Apostles, which only but slipped from humane infirmities, and that these (^ow
glorious soever in show) are not the testimony of Jesus, and therefore not the
spirit of proph^cie. you speak here very daungerously, that I say no worse.

You argue the defect of the Apostles miraculous ^aith, from their page 135.
Act. 4. 29 30. and 9. 40 and (...) 8. 8
praying in working miracles, which rather is an argument for the continuance
of it. For if it had ^in utterly extin^ it had not been to ^e obtained by
prayer* but if you say Prayer declares the ^eaknes of it, and that you mean
such weakness, as without prayer ha^ not been able to effect the work, it is
false (...) has been often ^emembred unto you* but if you take weakness for
some less measure of Matt. 17.
cheerfulness, which had need be stirred by invocation of Gods holy name, I
grant you such a weakness, but this is too weak to strengthen any whit your
cause. you charge me falsely in saying, I deny that the apostles faith might
and did fail before they were filled with Doct. page 46, 48 Doct. 49 page 136
the holy Spirit. I know not how often I affirm this, which you say is the very
point I deny* Neither do I say* it was but forty days between Christ his
transfigi^ation, and Pentecost. I do writtingly let pass many of your lies*
it is a trouble to repeat them. you see no inconvenience to approper these
words, This kind goes not forth but by fasting and prayer, to the Disciples
themselves: whereas if fasting and prayer had been necessary as helps to
their weak faith, that could not stand which our Savior has immediately
before affirmed, that so much ^aith as a grain of Mustard seed should be able
to do the greatest miracles. How this distinction of devils is to be
understood, we have sufficiently declared in the Doctrine. you make a
wonderful Doct. p. 51*
partition, when you interpret This kind, only to distinguish diuets from other
creatures. The nature of a partition is, that the thing which is parted should
be common to all the members. as in this place, creatures going out is the
General agreeing to both the Specials, in this sort. Of creatures that go out
of man some are devils, and they go not out but by fasting and prayer: some are
of other kind, and these of what nature soever go out of a man without
fasting and prayer Wha^* is man now become a cage for all creatures* Indeed the
old Philosophers had wont to say, that Man is a little world: but ^ou will
give us a sensible understanding o^ it, if horses, be ar^^ and lions, fowls,
and creeping things of all kind, may have an habitation in him. You have been
so careful all this while to free man from possession of devils, that in the
mean season you have made ^im a fo^^est to contain all savage beasts in. I
pray you what kind of creature does lodge in your own breasts? But you say*
page 137.
The kind cannot be referred to the diu^ls amongst themselves, because they be*
all of one kind as angels be* and also men. Profoundly sure* as if kind did
only note essence, an^ not sometimes quality and condition* you brought us
even now an example of threwes, The best of this kind is sh^^mish enough whereby
you said, wom^n were severed from men by the^ fore or kind* Is difference of
sex difference of Essen^^d So (...) speak of doceitfull men, This kind of men
is not to be trusted* of fl^tterers and ambitious persons This kind of men
speak^ all to please those in authority* of such as have made ship wrack o^ a
good conscience, This kind of men grows worse and worse. Now tell me, you
Answerers, whether Kind will carry no other sense but that, wherewith you
cavil as beseems fresh Sophisters. Again, it is admirable, you could find
no other similitude to declare the distinction (...)ag. 138.
of devils by, but only the whole state of this kingdom of England, comparing
our most gracious Sovereign, Gods Lieutenant amongst us (I tremble to speak
it) to the Prince of darkness, and all the inferior honorable orders of
Dukes, Earls, Lords, Judges, Justices, Knights, Gentlemen, yomen, etc. to the
lower sort of devils. Could any men forget themselves so much, as that against
all good manners, against honesty, against Christianity, yea, against nature it
self, which has printed in the minds of subjects all loyal and reverent
respect toward their most worthy Sovereign, and in the hearts of inferiors
all dutiful regard of their honorable Superiors, that you should utter such
blasphemy against Gods sacred Ministers, and so noble and so flourishing
estate as this is? He that privileged this, deserves he should privilege no
more. You thought to lade your Exorcist with the envy of so odious a
comparison: but all wise men will see, your selves are the Exorcist, and all
the rest of the persons in your books, whom ye make to speak what and how ye
please: and therefore whatsoever they offend, they ought to be whipped on your
backs. I take not upon me to define of the several orders of devils farther
then the sacred word of truth page 140. etc
is my guide. You contrariwise, that you might oppose your selves against me,
stick not to bend your forces against the very Scriptures. For you will have
nothing now amongst them, but a mere confusion, and a state without all order:
notwithstanding our Savior Matt. 12. 25 etc. and 25 41.
teaches, that the power of darkness is a kingdom: that there is a Prince of
this kingdom called Beelzebub, and inferior degrees called his angels (which
whether they be all of them equal, or no with out distinction or difference in
any respect whatsoever, you should have considered from these words, He takes
unto him seven other spirits worse then himself, and not vainly to have
trifled about the word Exusia) that there is a kind of policy of concord
maintained amongst them, whereby this kingdom is vpholden. These things are
plainly taught, and are such as no Christian may gainsay, yet you would
overthrow all this, striving for such a blended mingle amongst them, as is
utterly void of any the least distinction. But it is a true saying, Fools
whilst they labor one evil to shun, into the contrary presently run.
Whereas in these words, This kind goes, not forth but by prayer and fasting,
I have observed four things: That there are two kinds of devils: That one is
more difficultly expelled then the other: that the child was possessed with one
of the worser kind: that thence partly it was wherefore the Disciples cast him
not forth: you return, page 154.
They which want art to analyze the Scriptures, may here learn to bebutcher a
text, with Rhetorike ill beseeming unmannerly clownes. But tell me, is there no
difference between Analyzing, and making page 155
collections from a text? Prate no more of the extraordinary faith of the
Disciples, except you can make it good by sound reason they were endued with
such kind of faith at that time. Our Savior faith there was an Apistia in
them, a thorough defect, whereby only they failed in that extraordinary course
they attempted. page 157. 158.


But now you will show the impieties, absurdities and dangers which follow of
this doctrine. I ^^st, it is impiety to a^ouch any thing for truth that is
not. I acknowledge it is a great impiety: but this doctrine does not so.
Secondly, Lying wonders are the marks of Antichrist. I answer, you ly falsely,
when you make the casting forth of Satan by payer and fasting to be a l ying
wonder. Thirdly, it is impiety to affirm fasting and prayer (ex operato) may
effect such a work. It is impiety indeed, but you may as truly charge me with
this affirmation, as you might charge any* sound hearted Christian that knows
M* Deacon, with affirming* that he is an honest man. Fourthly, it is impiety to
pr^phane prayer and fasting without warrant from the word. We grant also this,
but withal join unto it, That it is no less impiety to call that profaning
of prayer and fasting, which is warranted by the word, as in this case it is.
^astly, it is impiety (say you) to make prayer and fasting which of God are
apprinted to be helps unto says, a sole means without faith for expelling
of devils. I subscribe unto it and wish with all my heart, that he which says
so* may receive the reward of a deceiuer: but if such cogitation was ever far
from my breast, that such impudent slaunderers might be branded in their
forehads with this mark: False accusers of their brethren. I doubt not but you
have read these words of the Discouerer* (who never speaks untruly for me,
whatsouer he does against Diseo. p^. 45.
me) M. Darrell confess^th the necessity ^f faith in the ordinary means. Your
absurdities (for so they are indeed) with the dangers partly foolishly, and
partly falsely imagined, what should I vouchsafe to repeat them? I will leave
these and such like to the Reader, able now by that which ha^^ been said, for
all your mask to discern you.

159,
You vpbraide me with hiding my self for fear of peril. I have learned by
the commandment and example of Christ Jesus himself, his Apostles, and of the
Martyrs in all ages, that I may, nay, ought to give place to the rage of man,
especially not forsaking in the mean season any duty that concerns me. Yet
that you may know I am not clean run away, by that time you have read my
Survey and this Reply, tell me whether you have not met with some body to cope
with in the field. You will not allow Christians, if they ^. 160
perceive not their first endeavors to prevail, to betake themselves to
further humiliation. whereas this is the practice of the Saints, as to continue
their supplications till the Lord have granted, so to increase their exercise,
the more difficult they prove the Lord to be. First, ^am. 12. ^, 17.
David besought the Lord for his child, and as it may seem without fasting:
then not obtaining, he joined fasting and watching withal: thirdly, he
continued the like till the seventh day. Did he in ^. 161. etc,
intend a seven days fa^t in the beginning? Concerning the effi^acie of prayer
and fasting, we have the same Coleworts sod again. You talk, as if I made
prayer and fasting for dispossession, an unwritten ordinance: whereas I only
suppose, that if it were not expressly set down, yet for that it is to be
collected out of the general places of a. 22. 12.
Scripture, as where the Lord does summon us, in the day of our affliction unto
weeping and mourning, to baldness and girding with sackcloth: and to call upon
him in the time of our ad^ersitie, and such like: and because also by
experience we prove it to be effectual, this were sufficient warrant to us for
the ordinance of God in this behalf. You might therefore have spared your
pains in proouing the sufficiency of the word of God, till you met with
some Papist, in which number I tkanke the Lord* I am not.

^ag. 167
For your demands, If dispossession be now ordinary, what be the things
ordinary in it. To satisfy you (though you little deserve it) for the medicine,
I answer it is fasting and prayer: the operation, is the mighty power and will
of God, apprehended instrumentally by our faith: the ministerial hand to apply
this medicine, is the assembly of Christians gathered for this purpose* The
theorie or skill to direct this hand, is the knowledge that they be warranted
in so doing from the word of God* the means to imprint this skill in those
physicians breasts, are the* means of knowledge* hearing, reading,
meditating,: the habit ^f this skill is their faith, which is more confirmed by
the often practice of the Church in all times. Now then, if you cannot see
what is ordinary in this work, bewail your ordinary blinde^sse which will
not suffer you to behold the truth. That which follows is no less foolish
then false, which you taike of faiths working ex opere operato: as also that
fasting and prayer cure by way of page 168 Matt. 6.
miracle: that fasting and prayer is no supernatural manner of cure: and that
if it be supernatural, then it is extraordinary* Is it possible for men to
dote in this manner? But if the light that is in men be darkness, how great
is their (...)?

To the testimonies of ancient and later writers alleged by me, you answer
first, that I wrest open their mouths, and make them speak what I please. It is
true, they speak what I please, because in this matter I speak nothing but
what pleases the* but you insinuat that I pervert them. If you could have
showed one syllable this way, all the world should have heard of it. Besides,
you have already testified in your former Discourses, that they spoke, as I
report the^. Secondly, you say, they speak nothing at all to my purpose in
hand. My purpose in alleging them was to show, first, that men in these days
may be dispossessed of devils. Secondly, that fasting and prayer have been used
by the most learned and godly in the Church from time to time, since miracles
ceased, for expelling of Satan out of the possessed. Now whether they spoke to
these purposes or no, because your selves have lost your eysight, let others
that can judge of colors say what they think. Your third answer is, that I
have not their own examples or practse, but only their bare reports concerning
the practice of some others co^uersing among them. This likewise is untrue*
Tertullian and Cyprian reckon themselves in the number of them which did expel
devils. And Chrysostom was present in the congregation, and preached two
several days at least, when public prayers were made for expelling of Satan
out of persons possessed, brought to that end into the Church at the
commandment of the Deacon. And therefore we have these three men's practice.
But admit that none of them had made mention of their own practice, might not
their judgment and coun^el^ that ^eruent prayers a^e to be used for the healing
of the p^ss^ssed su^^ic^? specially seeing diverse of them add, that they have
known D^ct. ^8
some that have been healed by the prayers of the godly. Fourthly, say you,
they give their advise for the ex^rcise of prayer alone. And this is your
fourth l^e, for some of them mention prayer and fasting. Thus much for reply to
^our general answers, let us now hear those which be particula^. To Origin
you answer, that ^e insinuates ^^mply page 169.
the supposed ^fficacie of fasting and prayer, but puts down no practice of
it as of a perpetual ordinance. Mark how false liars saulter in their speech.
Did Origin suppose such an efficacy of fasting and prayer and yet not think
it was Christ's ordinance, and to be used? Whence could it have efficacy, but
from Christ? Or to what purpose was efficacy, if to no use? He therefore that
acknowledges the lawful efficacy of fasting and prayer, does also
acknowledge, that there is an ordinance of fasting and prayer to such an end.
Tertullian you say, Speaks of many pretended deliverances from Satan, but
shew^th not the manner how they were fried from them. What? does Tertullian in
his Apology of Christianity against the Gentiles, to the whole state of Rome,
allege certain counterfeit deliverances from Satan, to countenance Christian
religion with? Does he use such policy in writing to the Governor Scapula, to
gain credit to the profession of the Gospel? Surely you are either not well
in your wits* or which is worse, you have for filthy sucres sake conspired to
make but mere fables of the great works of God. But he shows not, say you,
the manner how they were deli^ered* Do you stick at this matter? you will not
have it by miracle in any sort: ^^d therefore, say we, by fasting and prayer.
Nay but, will you say, if it were at all, it was by Miracle, and Miracles were
ceased before his days. Therefore speak plainly, and tell Tertullian to his
face that he lies, that he deluded the world with his pretended deliverances.
This is your meaning: and this answer would be short. How Cyprian is to be
understood, we shall know (say you) by James Pammelius, who tells v^, That
the Fxorcists office was not then in an^e use of the church, because that
office being joined with the gift of Miracles, did continue but for a time. I
do not allege Cyprian for the office of Exorcists, but for the casting forth
of devils in those days, which he testifies plainly, saying, And the devils
by torments of w^rds are cast out of*bod es possessed. To this add, if you
will Pammelius his testimony, that miracles were then ceased, and so we
conclude, That there were casting forth of devils in Cyprians time, and yet not
miraculous. But yet for James Pammelius let me tell you thus much* whereas you
allege his words for the ceasing of Ex^rcists before that time, and also that
a little after he should say, That the crafts and iugling sleights of
counterfeit Exorcists ^yp. Epist, 55 and 76* edit. ^ammel. Antuerp. ^n ad. b.
Petr^ ^elleri 1589
and coniuring priests, they are long since apparently ^uident: yea even to the
very eyes of the blind: I marvelled greatly to hear these words of James
Pammelius: I knew he affirms the clean contrary, maintaining strongly by
testimony of Antiquity that office of Exorcising both of Spirits possessing*
and in Baptism. I turned my Cybrian, but I could find no such words of his.
And therefore either you have met with an edition later then the last, or else
you are as notable in belying men's writings as the most shamlesse Papist of
them all. To the rest, as Chrysostom, Peter Marty^, Kemnitius, Phil.
Melancthon, Beza, Vogellius, Danaeu^, Chassanius, all of them most plainly
testifying dispossession, and that by means of fasting and prayer, you answer
not one word, but for the lenght of their footinges, refer us to that which
has been spoken of the former. Indeed these tread in the steps of the
former, and of all the godly ^earned that went before them and therefore by them
we may guess their footings* and so likewise by your three wi^les answers to
the three former we may easily guess what would be your answer to these,
namely all the absurd shifts you could devise to elude their testimonies, as
not having in purpose to find out the truth, or to yield to it being found,
but by hook and by crook to maintain your own giddy fancies, whatsoever
either Scripture, or any other shall say against it. What do I therefore
disputing with such companions, which make not truth their end, but some other
perverse respect, I know not well, what? Surely Christian Reader, that which I
do is for thy good, to lay open unto thee their unconscionable iuglings, least
by any colored pretenses thou should be beguiled by them Did not I well to
bind the^ to their good behauior by a public Instrument in their Discourses*
Thou see they have not one word of truth to say against the practice of the
Church of God from the Apostles time till now. But you are weary of these
authentical witnesses and therefore betake your selves again to your wo^ted
reasonings, where you may have more scope of words, and more hope to darken the
truth.

page 170.
If, say you, prayer and fasting be an establ^shed ordinance, then it should
be always effectual. I answer, you seldom bring an If but there is a lie in
the end of it. The prophet complayneth, How 2. Sam. 12. 18
long Lord? will thou hide thy face for ever? Because David obtained not by his
suit his Sons life, he might by this rule have bid prayer and fasting adue.
Infinite are the instances: it is marvel you could meet with none of them, to
cause you to hold in so gross an untruth. But I cry you mercy, you mean
effectual in regard of page, 171, 172, 173.
uttermost issue, not of the present time. Now then frame your reason. The
ordinance of god is always effectual, prayer and fasting is not always
effectual, and so not god his ordinance in this case. I answer. if you take
^ffectual for the last issue and such help as is expedient, you say untruly of
prayer and fasting: If you mean Effectual for ^ensible, imagined and present
help, then is it as false, you say of gods ordinance. And this i^ you mark it,
will su^fice for all you prattle pa. 174. 175
about this matter. So likewise, how Dispossession now is no miracle enough has
been spoken, except you can bring us something of more weight, then hitherto
^ou have done. Further ob^erue that here they spare not to deny (though in as
covert terms as they can) the witness of Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom,
and of all the rest before alleged, or that can be. Moreover, it this will not
serve, for compendiousnesse sake, and more security of their cause, they deny
the conclusion. I he argument is, If dispossession by prayer and fasting page
176.
be miraculou^, then Tertullian, Cyprian, Chysostome, and others wrought
miracles, when they expelled devils after this sort: but this is false: and
therefore the first. To this you answere^ Secondly, if it be true that here
tofore or now spirits be expelled by sole prayer and ^asting, th^n is the
work a mi^acle: which is the contrary a^firmation to the conclusion. page 177
When you ta^ke of sole prayer and fasting, you have a secret meaning of your
own of sole prayer without faith. Concerning which I tell you again, that if
M. Walker and you have such a kind of prayer and such a kind of faith, as
usually are separated one from another, you may do well to dispute of such
matters between your selves, for my part I allow no such prayer, neither does
the Church of God.

You argue, that dispossession is not by historical or temporary faith, page
179.
because God has appointed it to miracul^us faith: which thing if it had been
proved in the beginning, we had done long ^ince. Further, you see not wherein
i^sti^ying faith should be ^ar b^tter then T^mporarie, if this does ^ast out
devils, as if to cast out devils out of the bo^ies of men* were all in all
Besides, if historical ^a^th be suff^c^ent, devils might cast out devils. But
what if they will not? you a^e never a whit the nearer. Such trumperie sha l
have no other answer* ^or answer to your fourth reason I say, a reprobate may
app^^l end the mercies of God the Creator* but not of God the Redeemer, And
such apprehensi^n for the e^ecting of Satan ^ay ^ ffice.

You slander me* when ^ou say, that in disp^ss^ssion of Summers page 182
we purposely prayed to teach the b^^olders, that the w^rk ^as ^ff^cted by the
only ^ower of him t^ whom w^ put up ou^ pray^r. ^u^ what is page 183. 184. 185
it to say you sclander me? You make no more account to sc^ander me, then to
fillip me. Again I do not say, that parties b^w^ ^^hed have no warrant from
the Scripture t^ fast and pray^, (as is apparan^ in the place by you quoted,
where I counsel them to this hol^ exercise) but only, that there is not such
express mention in the word for the curing o^ the^, as for parties possessed.
And therefore all that is an idle dispute which you purpose for diverse pages
together in this matter* ^ou would ^a^^ have me a companion in this wicked page
186
a^^ertion, which your selves maintain as is apparent afterward. But note (good
reade^) for an egreg^ous blasphemy, that these Answerers make the Lord guilty
of the horrible sins committed by the wicked in s^^king to the ^^ueil for help
in their miseries. For how do they prove it to be an absur^itie to cond^mn^
p^oples going to the devil for help? Surely thus, (...) ^t be a sin to s^eke
help of the devil, we shall make the Lord ginit^^ of this sin with u^ whom it
cannot be done. Thou ^eest what blasphemy this proposition contains* for it
plainly affor death that which before I ^ay* And the Conclusion, to wit, it is
no ^^nr e to ^^eke ^elpe of the devil, is a conclusion of monstrous impiet^e.
^o where they would prove, There is no warrant from the worae for prayer and
^asting to be used in behalf of parties bewitched, page 188.
there argument is of this ^orte. ^f there be no warrant from the word tha^ sole
prayer and ^asting have any power of themselves ex opere ^perato, to r^^o ^e
^upernaturall ^udgem^^ts of God, then there is no warrant for parties b^
witch^d to use fasting and prayer as h^l^efull in this ^ase* But the first, say
they, is true, and therefore the sec^nd. ^ut what do you stick at parties
bewitched? You should have inferred generally, there is no warrant nor use o^
fasting and prayer at al for any thing ex opere o^erato. O men str^^ken with
the blindness of Sodo^e ^^ich before the d^re, seek the ^^^e, and cannot ^ind
it. Is it your foolishnes, that you cannot tell what you avouch? Or your
shamlesnes, that you ^as^e not t^oug^ you^ names should be dese^uedly odious to
all? Or is it, that you do so far ^e^pise all the learned of this land, that
you think there ^s not one man able to di^cearne such prod gious falsehood ^uch
^retched persons would rat^er be c^nfuted with a three cor^ed w^ip, the^ by the
writings, or words of any. An^ if that will not serve, it were ^eete such
order mig^t be taken with you that the Church of God sustain no damge by you.

page 19^
Whether I have so fondly trauersed this question of ^oss ss^o^ as you sa^, I
lea^^ it to the g^dly learned to determine, to whose cen^ure I willingl^ submit
my self bot^ in this and in all other m^ writings But as for your judgments I
pass ^ot. First make it appea^e* you have eyes in your own heads* before ^ou
take upon you to tel^ what is straight, or crooked in ^e then ^anctifie ^our
mouths b^ c^nfessing, your lies, your sclaunders* your blasphemies, before you
give sentence of any my doings. In the mean season, if you will needs be bar
king, I will find such a bone for you to gnaw on, as shall be fit for your
chaps,

^. 191, 192 ^93.
Concerning the counsel I gave for fasting and prayer, it was grounded from
hence: that in all judgments (of which kind possession is) we are called to
humiliation, for which I cite in the margin an induction of diverse examples.
To which you answer first, that with out particular knowledge of the
judgment, prayers could not be made in faith to remove it: which is one o^
those Axioms that never fails you, such an one as Ahabs prophets were inspired
with, when they counsel led him to war against Ramoth. Shall not the poor
country sick man pray to God for some comfort in his distress, because he
does not know particularly the nature of his disease? Secondly, that the quoted
Scriptures only testify the peoples ^umiliation by pray^r and fasting, so often
as any strange judgment was inflicted, but prove not essential p^ssessions
and disposs^ssions by those means. yet they prove the counsel I gave was
warrantable, and this I content my self with. It is enough if my poor
premises afforde me one natural and orderly conclusion at one time. Every
man's Cow can not bring forth colts* as yours do.

ag. 194. 95, 196.
To conclude, you tell us your great confidence in the cause, which no man
needs to doubt of, if he consider your former arrogant bold nesse: nor much
marvel at as strange, if he call to mind your incredible blindness. But if
your learning and consc^e^ce were more, your confidence would be a great deal
less. Then you in^erre of the premises, That if there be no possession, nor
dispossession now by fasting and prayer, how greatly they have erred that have
avouched it, and how much they are to be blamed which cannot endure it should
be impugned: But contrariwise say I, if all these things be true, which you
deny, as has been proved by stronger reason, then you possibly withstand,
what do ^ou deserve which have troubled the Church with new and singular
opinions in these points, and in broaching them, have offered to the world to
choke them withal other very many gross, fantastical and impious
absurdities? and yet you dare entitle your fooleries, The infallible truth, and
such, as Glory and praise is to be given to toe Lord for these his lately
revealed counsels by you concerning these intricate questions. O intolerable
proud ignorance! Have you by late revelation cleared these intricate questions?
Indeed your assertions be late* for they were never heard of in the Church
before: but they were never revealed unto you by the Spirit of truth, but by
that lying spirit, whose image does lively appear almost in every argument you
handle. And yet that my self be not only judge, let any man of understanding
weigh with equal balance that little that has been replied, and compare it
with yours, and then give sentence: whether any since the time of our peace by
our gracious Queen, professing the gospel, has published any writing of
divinity that does come near these your treatises in number of unsound
potions, in misconstructions and wrestings of Scriptures, in absured
collections, in impudent rejecting the authority of the ancient, in shameless
pretending the names of good authors against their own meanings, in childish
stumbling in the first rudiments of Arts, in most frequent lying and
slaundering, and which is greatest of all, in dangerous and scandalous
assertions mixed with some notorious blasphemies: and then it may be you shall
carry the bell of all that have written in our times. Great cause there is we
should all make bonefires for the publishing of your books, or rather of your
published books: but especially M. Bishop, who got the privilege ad
imprimendum solum, I believe he beshrewes your fingers for it.

A REPLY TO THE THIRD DIALOGVE.
YOur Uses are suitable to your doctrine. For what other thing can proceed from
a Cockatrices egg, then a serpent? Yet Lycanthropus admires and applaudes
them: and so perhaps may some 1. Ioh. 2. 27
do, that be not well in their wits. But they which have received the
anointing, that teaches us concerning all things, will abhor your
prodigious dotage, and the more when they consider your uses, which manifest
plainly that your errors be not about strawes and rushes, such as without
danger might be contemned and neglected, but which draw after them most
perilous consequences, mightily shaking the very foundation, and chiefest
pillars of our faith. You pretend that this your doctrine of final
determination of possessions and dispossessions of Spirits and Devils,
affords first, an holy meditation concerning the undoubted faithfulness and
truth of our eternal God, in that he promising four thousand years fully
before, to send the seed of a woman, which should bruise the serpents head,
has in his own determined time fulfilled the same, by sending his son. We
believe and know it, that not one jot of the Lords promise has failed, but
does your doctrine yield any confirmation of it? Nay verily, but does utterly
overthrow it, and make the Lord of truth to have falsified his word. The Lord
has promised by sending his son fully to subdue and vanquish Satan: your
doctrine does teach us, that Christ by his death has only made an end of
possessions and dispossessions of devils, that is, that he has only delivered
Demoniaks such as were actually tormented in their bodies by the Devils. What?
Are all the Elect Demoniakes? Have you not taught us. that Possessions were
very rare before Christ's time, and that it was very probable there were none
at all in Israel, till a little before his coming, and none after the
Apostles? Are only then these men delivered by Christ's death? You have quit the
Lord indeed well of his promise. He promised the breaking of Satan's head, you
make that Christ has scarce pulled one lock of hair from his head. He
promised deliverance for all his elect, you restrain this deliverance only to m
enactually possessed with devils. He promised us a gift^ as i^ were of an
hundredth thousand talents: you make him to have satisfied his promise in
bestowi^g upon us an hundredth pence. Do men satisfy bonds in such manner* Does
a Creditor* to whom is owing a thousand pound, hold himself contented in
receiving two or three shillinges. ^ye upon your comfort: you are miserable
comforters: But this determination* you say, of Satan's Actual possession may
confirm faith and hope for the utter subversion of the whole kingdom of
darkness. I answer, you ly falsely, if your doctrine be true. For hope can expect
no more then faith does presently embrace, but by your teaching, faith does not
embrace a full vanguishing of satan's kingdom by Christ's death* but only an end
of Actual possessions (which neither was accomplished, as has been showed) and
therefore hope cannot look for any further subversion of Satan's kingdom then
is alredie. Now let the godly judge what lies hiden in your doctrine, whether
they be things to be tolerated, and cooly dealt in or no: or rather of such
nature, that if you will not reclaim them, all lovers of the truth ought to
spit in your faces in detestation of your errors. So likewise when you speak
of God his al sufficiency, of Christ's triumph, and of the Devils captivity,
who so ever trusts to your doctrine in these points, shall perceive he leanes
upon a staff of reed, which when he shall stand in need of it will brea^e a
sunder* and run through his body, as may sufficiently be seen by this little,
that I have now remembered, as also by that has been more fully declared, in
Survey of your Sixth Dialogue. your uses then are wretched, and therefore I
leave them.

The proper use that can be made of your doctrine is, that Christians should
now show their wisdom in practicing that rule our Savior Christ has taught
them, namely this, beware of salse prophets which come to you in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Math. 7. 15
wolves. Thou have seen in this book of theirs, good Reader, these men
professing themselves, The Lord his unworthiest on earth: In the subscription
to three of their Epistles.
when they begin their disputations, to begin the same with prayer, recreating
themselves with singing of psalms: to wish the Reverend brethren if they have
faulted either in matter or mannerto confute them and spare not, withal
desiring the blessing of God to light on their hearts for their labor that
way: to have used many words of Dial. Discou page 7^. 262. Epist. Dedi. Ans.
goodly pretense, of great obedience to the magistrate, of great care of their
brethrens good, of great synceritie in calling every thing to the trial of the
Scripture, and many such other fair shows. On the other side thou may st see
by* this Survey and Reply what abundance of vile and gross errors is packed up
in these their treatises, What little conscience they make of god his truth* Of
lying and slandering, how exceedingly they have trifled in each several point,
and now by these uses how all tendes to this, to descredit God his truth in
fulfilling his promise, to impeach his sufficiency for van quishing of fatan,
to restrain Christ's triumph to a thing of nothing, to limit Satan's captivity
with loosing of a skonse, and such like: which things being thus, now it will
shortly and easily more appear, whither these men be false prophets, or no*
For if they shall recant themselves of their errors, and as they have given
public scandal to the Church, in laboring to draw men after their fancies,
so again in submission to the truth, disclame all such opinio n dissonant from
the sacred word, throwing the first s^one at themselves, to the end all other
may beware of them, then they shall be manif ested to have shipped but of
infirmi^ie, and to be such indeed, as they would seem. Otherwise if they will
still maintain and defend them, then thou ^eest good reader, these men's
sheep clothing, and how for thy sake I have pulled it over their ears,
whe^by thou ma^est behold them to be inwardly ravening woules: if they be to be
judged wolves, not only which rent the members of our bodies in sunder, but
also and much more they, which by infecting men with pestiferous opinions,
deliver the^ to saran to be torn in pieces both bodies and souls* In this
case it will behooue the Christian Magistrate, both Civil and Ecclesiastical*
to take order, that such cruel deucuring beasts may be driven from Christ's
fold: and that they would consider, that they make not dissensions and
scandales contrary to the doctrine we have learned, which stand for the truth,
but they which oppugn the truth. It is the rebel that makes civil war: the
faithful subjects wepons are not against the peace but for the peace, neither
is it the dog barki^g in the night, that disquiets the shepheardes, but the
Wolves approaching: the kepers stirring is to be commended, and the thieves
assaulting he is to be defended. This use then the Magistrate is to make of
your doctrine: generally all the Christians of this land, are to take it as a
watchword to avoid you as Scorpions, that they may know you to be men* ^hil. 3.
19. ^. Tim. 3. 5. ^ud. 16.
which have made your bellies your god, and to glory in your shame: which have a
form of godlynes and have denied the power of it, whose mouths speak proud
things, having the persons of men in admiration for advantage sake. These
manner of men are fortold should come in these last days, and our Church does
already feel it by lamentable experience. If thou shall make this use,
Christian reader ^. Cor. 11. 19
of their book it shall not be altogether unprofitable for thee. For It must
needs be that heresies should come, that they which are approved amongst us
may be known. The Lord therefore strengthen vs*so many as be of this number,
to stand for his truth, and give, us wise dome to discern those which would
craftily undermine it, that all such wicked workers being defeated, we may
constantly walk in the purity of it, till the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom, with the father and the holy Spirit be all honor and praise for ever.

Amen.

FINIS
Here follows my answer to the Contradictions they charge me with.
contradicti^ 13.
The Discoursers charging me with a shamfull company of Contradictions, no
less then fifty, I first framed an answer to them, with full purpose to
publish it, and therein have made it plain there is not a contradiction. But
this my Treatise proving much larger then I intended, and the answer to them
being of little or no use, save only to clear my self of this slander, and to
discover their filthiness, which needs not, I thought good rather to
suppress, then publish it: yet so as I will give thee, good Reader, a taste
thereof, and of their upright dealing herein, assuring, thee of my credit, that
even such be the rest of their contradictions.

Answer.
Darell, say they, in his Doctrine page 54. says, that prayer and fasting
being used aright, will certainly prosper either to the removing or sanctifying
of the judgment. But page 56. he says, their is no assurance to prevail.

contrad. 23*
I answer. There is no assurance to prevail, that is, we can not be sure the
party shall be delivered, the means being used, for so are my words. Had
then I said page 54. fasting will certainly prosper to the removing of the
judgment, and no more, I had contradicted that I say, page, 59 but adding or
sanctifying, a child may see here is no contradiction. Such a contradiction is
this: Certainly the Discoursers will either be ashamed of their contradictions, or
their sin is the greater: Assuredly they will not be ashamed of their
contradictions. And this: The sun is either under a cloud, or set. It is not
under a cloud.

In his Detection 163. Darrell says, fire has powe^r to burn, and in the
same page has no power to burn.

Ans*
All that we read Detection 163. is that Summers hand being in the fire was not
burnt. Would ever any man, these two excepted, hence collect a contradiction?
How many thousands in this land have said the same, and among them not a few
that be learned, and yet I dare say neither learned, nor unlearned ever feared
they spoke contraries. Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego being in the fire were
not burned, and yet they that cast them into the fire were burnt. I trust you
will not say here is a contradiction. But confess both these to be true. Fire
naturally burns, but restrained by God the ouer-ruler o nature, it does not
burn. Secondly, you should first have showed where I say, Fire has power to
burn, before you told us that I speak contraries.

^ntrad. 24.
In his Dotrine page 2. he says, that it suteth altogether with Satan's nature
to be filthy or wicked in speech. But Detection 175. he says, that it sutethe
as well with his nature to use good and holy speeches.

My words Detection 175. be, Holy words have been uttered by satan. Tell me
is this a false proposition? Or yet this: unclean and Ans.
blasphemous speeches suit excellently with the nature of the unclean spirit.
If both these be true, which none will deny, with what truth do you say that I
speak contraries, whereof the one must needs be false? These men sure had
forgot when they doted of this contradiction, that the devil is as well by
nature subtle, (and in his subtlety ready to transform him self into Angel
of light) as unclean and wicked. Of this stamp they have 18 contradictions
more.

In his Doctrine 47. He says the disciples by virtue of their so large
^ontrad: 11,
a commission could cast out a devil of any kind. But page 50. the Lunatike
child was possessed with one of the worst kind of spirits, and that thence it
came the disciples could not cast him out.

To make this contradiction they have detracted part of my words Ans,
in either proposition. In the former these, if their faith failed not: which
words, or words to the same effect in the aforesaid page 47. and the two pages
precedent I use no less then twelve times. In the latter proposition where I
say, thence partly it came, they detract this word partly: whereby I intimate
the Disciples faith did at that time fail them, when they could not cast the
devil out of the lunatike child, so that their incredulity was one let, which
often else where I express. And this you well knew, as appears by your next
contradiction, the twelft I mean. What meant you then thus to separate and
rent asunder those words which of purpose I had coupled together? And by
detracting that which in either of the propositions i^ so material, and in the
one I inculcate so often, to pretend a contradiction where you knew none was?
Who has bewitched you to use such curled devises, for the compassing of your
contradictions? A cursed pretense must this needs be, seeing it can not be
done in ignorance: For you cannot be ignorant hereof, that the words detracted
by you I used, spcially those so often iterated, and that in those pages from
whence ye have the sa de contradictorie proposition: considering also that to
make another contradiction you aleag the very same words you omit here, and
that from the same page, as witnesses the contradiction here following.
Neither can you be ignorant of this, that these words being used and added by
me, I am not contrary to my self, yea hence it is that you did omit them. It
must needs therefore be that you knowing here was no contradiction, have
against that knowledge of yours (by this devise of detracting these words) made
yet a fair show to the world of a contradiction. Here is no contrariety
except these be propositions contradictory: The Disciples could cast out a
devil of any kind, if their faith failed not: The Disciples their faith
failing could not cast the devil out.

contrad, 31
In his Doctrine 47. he says the Apostles faith failed not: But page 48 he
says it failed at this time when Christ spoke to them and in this very work.

Ans,
These words, the Apostles says failed not, you could omit, when such
omission serves for your purpose, as appears by the former contradiction. But
now when they must stand you in some stead, they are not to seek. He wants
the use of one of his senses, that smells not here your stinking breath. My
words be these. They were able to cast out al devils, if their faith failed
not: which imply not that the Apostles faith never failed them, as you would
have it, for otherwise here is no contradiction, but rather the contrary, that
their faith did at some times fail them. Again, though these words The
Apostles faith failed not, with the former are mine, yet thus rent and
separated from their fellows, I may truly say they are not mine. In your
Discourses you say, if the skies fall we shall have larks, By your wise rule
you there affirm, that the skies do fall and in the sa^e book page 24. where
you have these words: If Angels be uncreated then are they eternal: you
affirm, that Angels be uncreated: yet page 28. you say Angels be created.
These propositions be contradictorie, and the former of them absurd, and so
here is a contradiction (forsooth) and an absurdity, when indeed there is
neither. Here is paltrie and childish stuff. If I would walk but in this one
crooked step of yours, how easily could I make a book of your contradictions,
and another of your absurdities. But suppose I had said no more then you
produce. vz. The Apostles faith sailed not from thence ye could not infer a
contradiction, except I had spoken of the same time mentioned in the latter
contradictorie proposition. Their, faith might not fall them at one time, and
yet sail them at another time.

contrad, 15,
In Doctrine 52 Abraham's prayer is made a sole means of conception and
procreation of chidren: But page 60 another means is found appoi^ted of God
for that purpose, or else it would prove a miracle.

Ans,
As before by detracting so here by adding you abuse both me, and the Reader:
The words I use be these Who will deny but that as the sin of Abimilech (in
taking Sarah, Abraham's wife unto him) had shut up every womb of the house of
Abimelech, so the pray^r of Abraham was the mean whereby they were opened. and
that judgment taken away? Do I here make Abraham's prayer a sole means of
procreation? That I mean and affirm is, that by Abraham's prayer as a means
Abimelech his wife and women servants, were made able to conceive, which before
they could not, not excluding, but including the knowledge and seed of man:
which no man in his right mind would hence gather, this couple excepted.

^urad, 46,
In his Doctrine page 2. he says, it is absurd to affirm that the devil*
being without a man) can dispose of the whole or any part of man's body: but
Detection, page 11. he says that thediuel (in all probability) did use Summers
his tongue, notwithstanding he was essentiallie and sensiblic playing boe peep
under the couerleed.

Ans,
The former proposition is not mine, I say every part, you save, any part. And
so by altering a word you have made a contradiction where none is: except there
be no other part of Summers his body, besides his tongue.

And thus to thee Reader, but for brevity, I would make it evident, that of
the discoursers fifty contradictions, being examined one by one, there is not
so much as one to be found. The greater is their siune and shame who charged me
with so many.

And here we are to obseruefirst, that of these contradictions there are above
20. wherein there is no contradiction at all, taking them at the hucksters hand,
even as themselves have quoted them. And namely these: contradiction 4. 6. 7.
8. 13. 14. 17. 18. 19. 21. 23. 24. 26. 28. 31. 35. 38. 36. 37. 41, and 45

Secondly, to mark the several devises or sleights whereby they make semblance
of contradictions when there are indeed none if you take the words as they be
set down in my treatises. I his semblance they make.

1 By forging that I never affirmed (but often the contrary) as in
contradiction 1. 9. 17. 19. 20, 23, 25, 26, 27, 35, and 46.

2 By omitting or detracting some word or words material, as in contradiction
3, 11, 12, 25, 27, 30, 31, 33, 36, 39, and 40

3 By adding, and thus have they done in contradiction 15. 43. and 47.

4 By altering, as apeareth by contradiction 6, 17, 27, 29, 49

5 To this said end also, when both their contradictory propositions are in the
same page, and sometimes in the very same sentence, they run notwithstanding
for the one of them to a page far off, or happily to another book: Hereby (I
mean by alleging two distinct pages of mine, somewhat also asunder)
pretending, that what I say n one place, forgetting forsooth my self, I gaynsay
in another. As appears by contradiction 1. 3* 5. 22* 26. 36. 42. and 47.

Thus have these men so accustomed and taught themselves to falsife my writings
in whole or in part: by forging, detracting, adding, and altering, as they have
alleged very little of mine truly: and no marce: because truly alleged they
would not make for their purpose Yet notwithstanding they have by these cursed
means compassed their contradictions, I doubt not but that they please
themselves greatly, and glory in them, specially in the great number of them,
and do think therein they have showed not a little wit. But I will tell you, a
very fool that will give liberty to himself to add, detract and alter but
here and there a letter, may easily make, a thousand contradictions, where none
are: much more he that will do thus by words and sometimes by sentences, as you
have done.

Ans. Epist, to the Reader fol, 4
Whether now you have pretermited any thing material, and by such omitting,
and taking what part of my writings might make most for your purpose, even
purposely maimed my writings, which you deny and I affirm, judge thou
indissirently between us good reader. And whether you will acknowledge and
redress the offered wrong, whereof I complain, and which I trust to be a wrong
I have made manifest by this my Reply, unto all men, and to your own
consciences, as you pretend you will, nay, seem to abhor not to do it, if
once the wrong shall be made to appear, saying: God forbid that we should not
do it very willingly: in time both thou and I shall know. And thus much for
answer to their supposed contradictions. For brevity sake I omit my reply to
the Absurdities wherewith you charge me, and your slanders contained in them.

Here not unfitly may I charge you with the contradictions and Absurdities I
find in your writings: and if it fall out so that your selves be found faulty
in that, whereof unjustly you accuse another, then thereby learn henceforward
to pluck rather the beam out of your own eyes, then busy your selves so much
about less then a mote in your brothers eye.

In their Answer page 55 and page 179 of their Discourses, they say, that the
manifestation of Christ his deity, and declaration of his glorious and spell,
were the maine ends of possession: and a little after, that the possession of
devils were especially for these two ends: thereby in sinuating that there were
some other ends or end. Yet page 67 of the same book they say, that these were
the two only ends of this vonderfull judgment.

2 In their Dial. dis. page 58 they say, angels do evermore work after an
invisible, insensible, and spiritual manner. And the next leaf, page 60 they
say, that angels in all their ambassages they do other manifest themselves by
seeing and hearing, or assist us estsoon^s by some other sensible means. And
they bring Augustine flatly affirming that the angels do outwardly help us by
certain visible apparitions or sights, which they propose and offer before our
eyes.

3 In their Discourses pa. 42 they say, the mind it self, and it only is that
wherein motion consists: and the body is but the minds organon or instrument,
having naturally in it self no motion at all, or no further motion at the
most, then for those only actions wherein the said mind (whose organon it is)
imployeth the same. But in page 74 of the same book they affirm, that the
body it self has, and may accomplish or effect corporal operations and
motions by it self alone, without any the direction, moderation, guidance, or
(...) of the soul.

4 In their Discourses page 116 they say, the devil did so bewitch and charm
the Serpent, as that (through his crafty suggestion) she was very well able to
propound such a divination or sooths^ing, as d^d presently circumuent or
deceive Fuah. And in the same book page 1 9 they say, that a reasonable speech
cannot possibly be framed or understood of any but of a mind having
understanding and reason.

5 In their Answer pa 50 they say. These eight d^moniakes might be possessed,
though the devil was not essentially inherent in any one of their bodies: But
page 43 of the same book they say, The p^ssession of devils whatsoever is
ceased long since.

6 In their Discourses 173 they say. The Apostles might authe^tically avouch
for insallible truth whatsoever they preached. But in their. Answer page 126
128 129 130 they say, that the apostles sometime failed in doctrine. And a
little after: all these were their err^urs in doctrine and judgment. And
again. It was expedient for the apostles to err in some things, that is, some
points of doctrine. And this they understand after the holy Ghost fell upon
them, as is plain by the aforesaid pages.

7 In their Answer page 7, they say, that wonders and miracles are flatly
confounded: but in their Dialogicall discourses 209, they say, the devil may
work wonders, but can effect no miracles. And page, 310, thus, A thing effected
by essential means, howsoever it may be a wonder, yet no miracle in any
respect.

8 In your Discourses page 352. for your parts you assure me, that you are very
far from all suspicion of a precompacted confederacy between Summers and
me. Yet in page 42. of your Answer you say, why should we wonder at all, that
two ^unning compan^^ns (Meaning Sonnners and my self) consed^rate together
before should conclude such a course between themselves, as the one (by the
help of the other) should progms^icate strange and mered^ble events.

9 In page 39. of their Discourses, they tell us, There is not any one sound
Divine that d^th^n t understand Possession as they do, and none as I fondly
imagine and yet in the ^pistle to the Reader prefixed before that book, that
which they deliver concerning possession and d sposs ssion of d^uels, they
call, that private opinion: and in page 195 of their Answer, The Lord his
lately revealed counsels.

Part of their absurd and unsound Positions
1 Godby good Angels may effect fantastical, vain, and filthy effects
Answers 15.

2 Good ^ngels may effect vain and filthy effects* ibid.

3 Wheresoever the Scriptures speak of Angels or devils, they speak only by
metaphore* ibid.

4 The Devil has no desire to be in any man's body. Ans. 22

5 The Jews in Christ's time did (partly) know the parties which were
possessed, from the often revelation of the parties themselves. answ. 32

6 Godby his Spirit instructed the Cananitish woman (mentioned Matthew. 15, 22)
of her daughters malacie. answ* 33

7 The manifestation of Christ's deity, and the confirmation of the Gospel,
the only ends of Possession. answ. 67

8 Christ has put a final end to the possession of devils by his death and
resurrection. answ. 66

9 The supernatural actions or effects of the Devil in Demoniaks, cannot
possibly be comprehended by humane senses. Ans. 69

10 The working of miracles was only in Christ and his Apostles days, answ. 90

11 God has appointed plowing and sowing for a means of abundance or
barrennes upon the ground, answ 172

12 Good angels do euormore work after an invisible, insensible and spiritual
manner, Dialogical discourses 58. This is to be refuted by all those places
where angels are said to have appeared and spoken in visible forms unto men.

13 The body has, and may accomplish by her self alone, corporal actions and
motions, without any her souls direction, moderation, guidance, or consent,
Dial. disc. 74

14 The dead carcass of a man, or the body being separate from the soul, may
and does also effect corporal actions and motions. ibid.

15 The Devil did so bewitch and so charm the Serpent, as that (through his
crafty suggestion) she was very well able to propound such a divination or
soothsaying, as did presently circumuent and deceive Euah. Dial. disc. 16.
Absurd, that the Devil should not only thus make the Serpent it self to
speak, but also argue the matter like a reasonable creature

16 The apostles erred in some points of doctrine, after the holy Ghost fell
upon them: Yea, it was expedient for them so to err answ. 126, 128, 129, 130

17 It is very erroneous for able to imagine, that the eyes may possibly be
deceived, in discerning between spirits (that is, bodies assumed by spirits)
and true natural bodies. Dial. disc. 157. You forget that Abraham and Lot were
deceived, as appears by Genesis 18. and 19.

FINIS
I am to crave thy patience good Reader, specially the authors, for the late
coming forth of this book: for I confess it has layen in my hands almost
this half year.


