The faithful and true storye of the destruction of Troy, compyled by Dares
Phrigius, which was a soldier while the siege lasted, Translated into English
by Thomas Paynell.

Anno. 1553.

To the right worshipful sir John Bourne Knight, one of the Queen's chief
secretaries, Thomas Paynell wyssheth all health and prosperity.
AFter that this hystorye of the tuyne and destruction of Troy written by the
ancient histori^ graph Dares Phrigius, was even of late delivered me,
translated into French, and that I had perused, and well perceived the truth,
the pretty and fine conueyaunce there of, the politic and ingenius feats of
martial acts, and the prudent persuasions and counsels, both of the Grecians,
and of the Trojans therein contained: I was so in love therewith, that
incontinently I prepared both pen, ynke, and paper, to translate the same
into our English tongue: ponderynge there with, how pleasant and how
profitable a thing it should be unto the nobility of this our realm, most
feruentlye in these our days given to the knowledge of foreign historyes, and
subtell points and stratagenies of war, to have it, and to read it in
English. For albeit that histories do indifferentlye avail al men, yet most
specially noble and learned men, because that the knowledge of them is most
profitable and necessary to all those, which have the governance of commonne
weals, By these the minds of such noble and learned men may be sturred to the
study of true nobility, and virtue. By these the beginning of empyres is
known, and why there has chaunsed in them so great and so strange
alterations and grievous commotions. In these are contained the precepts of
offices and virtues, whereby the common weal may most prosperously be
preserved, continued, and auaunced. Histories do teach men what best besemeth
them to do, what may auaunce them, what may hurt and hinder them, what makes
the^ welthy and rich, what makes them poor and nedye, what makes them to
floryshe, what makes them to be in mysery, and how to know vile flatterers
from sure and trusty friends: good and faithful ministers, from false
feignynge dissemblers. Such histories then, are a treasure which never ought
to be refused nor rejected out of noble and learned men's hands, for by the
diligent turnynge and reading of them, they may be as profitable unto the
common weal, as to them selves, their friends, and private families, and
therewith have an exact knowledge of all that is necessary to be known,
concerning things done in times paste. Wherefore it shall please your
gentleness, not to consider the rude handlynge of^ this my small and simple
gift, or that I indge it worthy so learned a man in all points as ye are, but
to ponder the auncientnes, and ye truth of this historye, the knowledge that
may rise thereof, and my loving heart toward you.

Farewell.
The life of Dares Phrigius, taken out of Uolaterane.
DAres Phrigius the historio graphe has w^itte^ ^ greek the war of the
Grecians and Trojans, in the which he him self played the soldier, as I sidore
the first in a manner of all historiographes does write. The which Dares
(finally after the taking of Troy) remained in the retinue or band of Ante
nor, as Cornelius Nepos writes, the which translated out of Greek into Latin
the thing that Dares left in writing, dedicated to Crispus Salustius,

The original beginning of the Troianes.
DArdanus, of whom the Troianstoke their radical and first beginning, the
son of Jupiter and Electra, Athlas daughter by the divine counsel leaving
and forsakynge Itali, went by Thracia unto the isle of Samos, and named it
Samothracia. And from thence to Phrigia, the which in like manner he named of
his own name, Dardana. Of this Dardanus is issued Erichtonius, of who^
reygning there came Tros, a laudable man in justice and goodness: the which for
the eternal memory and celebration of his name, caused and commanded that the
country should be called Troy. This Tros engendered and begatte two sons,
the one he called Ilus, and the youngest and last borne Assaracus, the which,
inasmuch as they were borne of the royal scepter and blood, Ilus the eldest
son and first borne, did reygne, and of his name, named Troy, Ilium. Of him
came Laomedon, and of Laomedon Priamus. Of Assaracus, came Anchises, and of
Anchises Eneas.

Cornelius Nepos Epistle, unto Crispus Salustius. Cornelius Nepos unto Salust
his friend gretynge.
IN treating very curiously at Athens diverse matters, there fell into my
hands the hystory of Dares Phrigius, co^ teynynge the wars of the Greeks and
Trojans, written with his own hand, as the inscriptio^ does declare: the
which after I had effectuouslye retained, I incontinente translated it. And so
doing, I to declare the thing more plainly, and to avoid doubtful
obscurities, have added nor diminished nothing. For why, I thought it mete
and good, fo expreslye to write it in latin word by word, that each one
might most easily know and perceive, how the things therein contained were
done, so that it might be the better believed and the things esteemed true, the
which the historiographe being yet alive, when the divorce and conflicte was
between the Greeks and the Trojans, has left in writing. Should men give more
credence un to the poet Homere, the which was long after, affyrmynge in his
poetical wrytynges, that the Gods made war against mortal men, and at
Athens was taken for a fool, after the judgment and mind of all me^? But
leaving of such matters, let us return unto our purpose.

The hystorye of Dares Phrigius, of the ruin and destruction of Troy.
PElias reignynge in Peloponesa, had a brother named Aso^. Of this man is
issued Jason, and very excellent man in virtue: the which for because he had been good to his subjects, intreatynge them humaynlye and gentlye, was much
set by, and beloved of all men. King Pelias perceauyng that Jason was in such
reputation and authority with all the people, feared greatly least he should
do him some wrong, depryuing him of his kingdom. But to avoid the effect of
such a doubtefull and peryllous suspicion, Pelias fained that there was in the
I Will of Colchos a golden flese of a sheep, a rich thing, and worthy of Iasons
puissance and strength, perswadynge him through promis of great recompense, to
conquer and to bring it away perforce. Whereunto Jason, as one of hygh^
courage and much desirous to se many and diverse countries, thynking by such
means greatly to auaunce, and to augmente his honor, consented unto the
enterprise, so that Pelias would so furnyshe him with men and other necessary
things, that he should want or lack nothing.

Then Pelias by and by commanded his chiefest carpenter named Argus, to make
and prepare such fair and goodly ships, that they might please and content
Jason. As soon as ye br^te was spread through al Greece, as well of the foresaid
ships, as of the total and whole enterprise of Jason into Colchos, his
friends and familiares presented and offered their service and company unto him.
After that Jason had given them thanks, he prayde them to be ready, and wait
for the oportune, and conueniente time of his departure. They came at the self
same time well minded and appointed unto the place signified and assigned unto
them by Iasons letters, that is to wit, where the ship was, called Argo.
Pelias with all diligence caused the nauye to be furnyshed with all things
necessary, and exhorted Jason and his company, coragiously to accomplish the
thing which was begone, and so doing that not they only, but also all
Greece should obtain great honor and glory. But to declare by name all those
that accompanied Jason, I think it not mete nor to any purpose, let them
therefore which be curyouse to know these things, read such authors, as
have specially written of the Argonantes. Iaso^ then ariuinge and coming into
Phrigia, came and brought his ships unto the haven of the river Simois, and
there all his soldiers landed.

But when king Laomedon was advertised thereof, he was greatelye moved, as well
for the great number of ships, which were aryued and rested there, as for
the multitude of the young me^ of Greece, which were coming thither:
consydering also to be very dangerous unto his people in time to come, if the
Greeks accustomed them selves so to aryue and to camp in his dominions and
countries. Therefore Laomedon admonished them by Ambassadoures to retire and
depart out of his country, or else that he was minded rughelye and rudely to
repulse them. The which thing was very strange to Jason and his company, and
not easelye to be suffered, so vngentlye to be entreated of him, whom they
never offended. Nevertheless, they fearing that through the ire and anger of
ye king, they might be destroyed and spoiled by the multitude of the barbarous
people, if contrary to the will and commandment of Laomedon, they should
make resistaunce, saying they had no preparation to war, departed unto their
ships, and finallye came to Colchos, where they incontinent obtained the
golden flese, and returned unto their own country. A while after Hercules
having in remembrance the evil receite and intreatinge of Laomedon toward
Jason, went unto Sparta, to desire Castor and Postur, in Salamina, Che^amo^, in
Thessalia Peleus, in Pile Nestor, to favor and aid him to revenge the injury,
that the Greeks had received of ye king of Troy: the which thing was
willinglye promised him, and he declaringe his mind unto Nestor, said he was
sorye to be constrained to make war against the Trojans, whom Nestor did well
allow. Hercules perceyuinge the good will of them all, caused. xv. ships to
be made, and such men as were mete for the war to be gathered. When the time
of his departure was come, and that he had assembled by his letters, and
otherwise those which he had desired and prayed, and had prepared all things
in a good order: they failed until they came by night into Phrigia, unto ye
port and haven of Sige, where that Hercules Thelamon, and Peleus did most
dyligently cause their host to be set a land, making Castor, Pollux, and
Nestor the chief rulers to defend the shippes^ Laomedon perceauinge the
Greeks army to be pitched, and in camp at the port of Sige, by and by went
thither with a great company, and began to fight valiau^tly. In the mean
season Hercules compassed about, and besieged the town Ilium, so that he
mo^ested the citisins very sore, having no word thereof, and undefended. Then
Laomedo^ going thither to succor and to aid them, was slain of Hercules, with
all his children, Priamus excepted which at that time (by his fathers
commandment) had the leadynge of an Army in Phrigia. The Trojans army being
thus destroyde, the town battarde, taken, spoiled, and overthrown, the Greeks
(after they had filled their ships and vessels with the pillage and spoil)
purposed to return home again. Among other things Thelamon for his boty took
with him Hesiona king Laomidons daughter, whom Hercules for the virtue and
excellencye that was in him, and because he was the first that boldly
approached unto ye breche, and entered the town, gave for a reward. Priamus
therefore perceauinge that his father was dead, his ^itisens of Ilium subdued,
and his sister Hesiona to be genen for a pray, was very sorry thus to se the
state of the commonwealth of Troy, entre^ted of ye Greeks. Wherefore he
returned, accompanied with his wife Hecuba, and his children, that is, Hector
Alexander, Deiphobus, Helenus, Troilus, Andromacha, Cassandra, and Po^exena, to
go into Ilium. He had also other children out of wedlock, but yet men esteemed
them not, nor called none the kings children, but such as were lawfully
begotten. As Soon as Priamus was come again to Troy, he edified his town
again, he fortified it with much greter and stronger walls, repaired it with
all kinds of munitions and fortresses, and with a great number of men of
arms, fearing least he should be destroyed, and suddenly brought to ruin
as his father Laomedon was. Besides all this, he builded a palace royal, where
he consecrated a temple and an image unto Jupiter. The names of the gates of
the foresaid town are these, Antenorida, Dardamda, Ilia, Scea, Catumbria,
Troiana. But after that he saw his town, and other things aparteyninge
thereunto sufficientlye prepared, he looked for a conueniente time, to revenge
the wrong that was done unto him in his goods, and in the person of his
father. And therefore he purposed to send one of his an Ambassador into Greece,
named Antenor, with a certain complaynt to demand amense, as well for the
death of his father, and taking away of his goods, as for the rauyshement of
his sister Hesiona: promisinge nevertheless willinglye to endure and suffer,
and to take all things in good part, so that his sister were restored him
again. Antenor obeyinge the kings commandment, take shyppyng, and wandered
so long upon the sea, that he came unto a place in Greece named Manesia: where
Pelius received him, and feasted for the space of three days. At the fourth
day he required him to declare the cause of his legation: the which answered
that it was only to admonish the Greeks, to restore Hesiona. Peleus
understanding that, and that the matter some what touched him, took it
impatiently, and therefore he commanded him incontinent to retire from thense
unto some other place. Ante nor not being therewith content, sailed unto
Salamina, to persuade and induce Thelamon to restore Hesiona king Priamus
sister, declarynge not to be right nor reasonable, to keep the daughter of a
king in such bondage. Whereunto Thelamon annswered, that he had not offended
Priamus, and that he was not minded to restore the thing, which was given him
for his virtue and valiauntnes, and therefore that he should do his diligence to
depart. Then Antenor took shyppynge as before, and went to Achaia, and there
solicited Castor and Pollux to content Priamus, as well for the rauysshinge of
Hesiona, as for other things, the which denied with great boldness, that in
no wise they had offended Priamus, but contrarywyse that they and the other
Grecians were first provoked and offended by Laomedon, therefore they commanded
him to depart.

Furthermore Antenor the Ambassador went to Pile unto Nestor for the self same
thing, the which threatenynge did say, that he marueyled that Antenor a Trojan
was so bold and hardy to come into Greece, considering that the anset of malice
was first given by the Trojans. When Antenor perceived his labor lost, and
also had heard the proud and bold aunswers of all the princes of Greece, he
returned home, making a reckoning unto Priamns of his iourny, and did him to
understand and perceive the threatnynge aunswers of the Grecianes, and
therwithall provoked him to make war against them. Priamus at the same self
instant, called all his children, his friends, princes, and lords, as Anchises
Eneas, Ucalegon, Talantus, Amphotes, Panthus, and also his children begotten of
his concubines, and recited unto them the whole order of the legation and
message made unto the Greeks by Antenor in his name that is to wit, of the
death of his father, of the ruyn^ and destruction of (...), and of the rape of
Hesiona, whose restoryng he promised to be a full satisfaction of all wrongs,
and therewith the answer of them, the evil and unkind intreatinge showed unto
his Ambassador. And therefore seeing he could have no part of his mind, he
purposed to prepare an host, to the intent that the Grecians so punyshed, should
not at any time have the barbarous Troianes in de^ision. First of al he
admonished his children to take the principal charge of this thing, and
specially Hector his eldest son, the which promised to fulfill the will and
commandment of his father, and also that he would not only revenge the
death of his graundefather, but also all the injuries and offenses committed
against his elders, to the intent the misdedes of the Greeks should not
remain unpunished: but yet he doubted much of the end of his enterprise,
because that ye Grecians should and might have great succoure and aid of
diverse nations. Also because that in Europe were very strong men, and apt
unto war, and in Asia men were delicatelye nourysshed in rest and ydlenes,
and therefore destitute of a navy mete for such a purpose. This notwithstanding
Alexader exhorted that a navy should be prepared for this journey unto Greece,
offering him self to be the chief and principal conductor of the army, if it
so pleased the king his father, such confidence he had in the Gods, adn
trusted to return unto his house victorious and triumphing over his enemies.
For he said as he went a hunting in the forest named Ida he fell a s^epe,
unto whom Mercur^us came, saying he had chosen him judge as concerning the
beauty of three goddesses there present. Juno, Minerua, and Uenus, and that
Uenus had promised him the fairest lady of all Greece, if among those three, he
would judge and esteem her to be the fairest: and that for this reason and
cause, Priamus should have the better hope, inasmuch as Uenus did fauer
Alexander.

This opinion did maruelouselye well please Deiphobus, whereby he trusted to
have right, and satisfaction of the Greeks, if the thing which was
enterprised, were followed. Helenus clean contrary, as a true Prophet,
foretold the coming of the Greeks, the Destruction that they should do in
the countreye and town of Troy, the ruin of his father and brethren, if his
brother Alexander brought away perforce a woman out of the country of Greece.
Troilus the yo^gest son, but yet no less coragio^s and valiant then Hector,
counseled, and persuaded a nauye to be provided, and with all diligence to set
forward unto Greece: and that men should not fear, nor have no regard unto
his brothers words.

Whose counsel was greatly allowed and approved of all men. This done, Priamus
sent Deiphobus and Alexander into Licaonia, to chose out, and to gather
together men, mete for the war, and to assemble the people to the counsel.
After that Priamus had purposed to show these things unto his children, he,
to the entente that the inferiors should be obedient unto their elders and
superiors, declared unto them the injuries and wrongs that they had suffered
of the Greeks. And that he had sent Antenor into Greece, to the intent he
might be reasonably answered for his sister, and other things, and that
Antenor was ignominiouslye received and entreated, nor could not accomplish,
nor obtain any thing of his business, as concerning his legation: and
therefore it was very expediente that Paris (as it was purposed) should revenge
the death of his graundfather, and other grievous and great injuries committed
unto the Troianes. He also commanded Antenor to show his mind, which
encouraged the Troianes to make war upon the Greeks, showing them in few
words what he had done, in Greece. Priamus or ever he went any further in this
matter, did openly yet once again ask them, whether there were any of his,
that agreed not unto this war, to the end he should tell him in open field.
Whereunto Panthus in the presence of Priamus and other, answered and spoke the
thing, the which as he said, he had learne^ of his father Enphorbius, that
if Alexander brought a woman out of Greece, it should be the ruin and extreme
misfortune of the Troianes: and that it were much more honest and better to
live in tranquillitye, then thoroughe wars, and other troubles to lose their
ancient liberty, and so lyghtelye to put them selves in hasarde and icopardye.

The people dispraysed the counsel and authority of Panthus, and submitted
them selves unto the kings will, as ready and disposed to do that should
please him to commau^d. And after that Priamus had promised to prepare ships,
and other things to go into Greece, and that in such sort, that nothing
should be lacking, they all with one boyce promised him their whole
obedience. Priamus then thanked them, and so the counsel cesed and brake up.
Therefore with al speed, Priamus did send laborers into ye forest Ida, to hew
timber to make ships. And in the mean season, he sent Hector into the hye
parts of Phrigia to assemble an Army. Canssandra now understanding and
perceauing this enterprise, foretold the thing that should chance unto the
Troianes, if her father would persevere and go on to moleste the Grecians with
war.

But the time being now come, and the ships furnished, and the soldiers of
Licaonia brought thither by Alexander and Deiphobus, there lacked nothing but
their departure.

Priamus having thus all things in a readiness made Alexander the general
captain of his army, and with him as guydes, Deiphobus, Eneas, and Polidamus:
commaundynge Alexander first to go unto Sparta to Castor and Pollux to co^mun
with them for the restoryng of Hesiona, and that performed, the people of
Troy would be right well satisfied and content: and y^ they denied him any
thing, that he should be aduersited thereof, to the intent he might send him
fresh aid and succor. Then Alexander with his, and Antenors the Ambassadors
company, sailed into Greece. But yet or ever they came to the isle Eitherea,
they recountred and met Menelaus in the mid way, going unto the pyle,
merueylynge and doubting to what part or cost this great army went.

And so they met both together, and although they saw^ and beheld one another,
yet they were ignoraunte nor kn^we not whither the one and the other went. Even
upon the self same day Castor and Pollux were gone with their gales toward
Clitemnestra, and had brought thet^er Hermiona Helena her daughter. The day
when Alexander came to Citherea, was dedicated and holy in the honor of Juno,
in the which place he understood, that there was a temple of Diana and Uenus,
The Citherians demanding through great admiration what he was, and from
whence this great and triumphant company was come, had this answer: that it
was Alexander king Priamus ambassador to Castor and Pollux. Helene Menelaus
wife knowing that Alexander was in Citharea so nobly and royally appointed,
desired greatly to see him, and went to a town nigh unto the sea (called by
her name Helena) where she purposed within the temple to do sacrifice unto
Appollo and Diana. Alexander being very joyful of the approchement and
coming of Helena, mindyng and remembrynge her great bwetye, began through
a great desire and affection to see her and to go and mete her.

Helena perceiving that Alexander was come to her town, no less desirous on
her part to see Alexander, mete him by the way, where the one seeing and
beholdynge the other, were even forthwith taken with such love, that they
appointed the time and convenient hour to speak and commen together.

Therefore Alexander commanded all his men to be in a readiness in their
ships, purposynge in the night following to take Helena and a certain number
of her damse^s as she was doing sacrifice in the temple. The which thing was
fulfilled and done. The citesyns perceiving that, sought very long against
him, but yet they failed so much to recover their Helen, that they themselves
through the multitude and great company of Alexander, were overcome, the temple
and the town spoiled, many prisoners carried away: this done, incontinent they
loused and hoysed up their sails purposynge to return from thence, he came to
an haven named Tenedon, where after he had conforted Helen being very heavy,
he certified his father Priamus by letters of all things that was done.
Menelaus being in Pylas was certtfied of this deed which went with all
speed unto Sparta with Nestor from whence he sent Argos desiring his brother
Agame^non to come thither to him

In the mean time Alexander came home to his own house with his pray,
recited the order and disscourse of all his doings, whereof Priamus was very
joyful trusting that at the lest his sister Hesiona through the recouerynge
of Helen should be restored with other recompense and satisfaction of all that
here to fore the Greeks had destroyed, pylde, and carried out of the countreie,
and from the people of Troy. And after he had with fair words comforted the
desolate Helen, he married her to his son Alexander. As Soon as Canssandra
beheld her she began to prophesye even as before. And therefore by the
commandment of Priamus she was taken and closed up.

After that Agamemnon was come into Sparta, and had comforted his brother,
they purposed to send into al Greece to complain them of this open injury,
and that to revenge the same, it was necessary to proclayme war against the
Troyans. Where Achiles, Patroclus, and Diomedes went purposely into Sparta to
Agamemno^ ready with arms to reueng ye iniurius ded of the Troyans, appointing
Agame^non to be chief of all the army. After this they signified through out
all Greece their interprince, to the intent that every man should be ready in
arms at the assemble in the port of Athens, to defend their right and
honor, and to revenge the rauishement of Helen.

Among whom Castor and Pollux followed the company with ships unto the
port Lesbe, because of the wrong committed in the person of their sister
Helen, but yet through a certay^e rage that chaunsed there even sondenly, they
left of to sail and to follow, and vanished away as it had been the air, in
so much that in no part they were ever seen after.

Therefore men esteemed them to be transported into heaven, and set in the range
and number of the Gods immortal. And notwithstanding that the inhabiters of
Lesbia sought and persued them by the sea with ships and galls even unto
Troy: Yet there is no mention that ever they were found again Dares Phrigius
the auther of this history, being present at all feldes and iourneyes even
until Troy was sacked, says, that he saw them in the time of war and
truces, and furthermore that he learned of the Greeks the grace, face and
nature of them both. He says therefore that they were like one another,
their here was somewhat yelowe, great eyes, fair faced and cleave, and well
made and furnished with all the members of the body.

Helen was somewhat like unto these, fair, of a sweet grace and simple, well
made of her members, and a little spotte between her brows, and a little mouth.
As touching Priamus the king of Troy, he was of a fair behauuer, great,
and sweet in words, of body somewhat swarte. Hector lisped, white courld herd,
^andblynde, light and quick membred, of a venerable countenance, berded, well
proporcioned, hardye in war, courageous, gentle to his subjects proper and
mete, and worthy to be beloved. Deiphobus and Helenus like unto their father of
face, but of diverse naturs and manners Deiphobus was strong, Helenus gentle,
wise, foretellynge the things that were to come.

Troylus great, very strong, very fair, valiante, and for his age wise, and
desirous of virtue.

Alexander was white, strong, very fair eyde, yelowe herd and soft, fair
mouthed, a sweet voice, quick co^etous of domination.

Eneas ruddye, square, eloquent, good to speak withal, religius, wise in
counsel, fair, open and quick eyde and black.

Antenor, long, flender, light membred variable, dissembling, and ware.
Hecuba great, but somewhat broad of body, fair modest, of a manly constancy,
just and good. Andromacha clear eyed, long, faier modest, wise, chaste, sweet.

Cassandra, of a mean stature ^ounde mouthed, ruddy, glistering eyes, knowing
the things that were to com^ Polixena, white, hie, fair, long necked, fair
eyed, long here, right up, her members well made, and well proporcioned, long
fingerde, straight legged, her feet well compassed, of mind simple, liberal,
sumptuous, and in bwetye far passing all other. Agamemnon white of body,
great, strong of members, eloquent, prudent, noble, and rich. Menelaus mean
of stature, r^ddy, fair, acceptable, and of a good grace. A chilles
courageous, fair mouthed, very strong of arms, very cour^d herd, gentle,
rugh in arms, a merye face, liberal, his here of ye color of mir. Patroclus
fair of bodi, grene eied, strong shamfast, fearful with modesty, right up,
wise, liberal. Aiar Oileus square, mighty of members, swart of body, merye,
strong, and sage. Ajax Thelamonius, valiante, clear of voice, black herd
and curlde, simple, sweet of spirit, otherwise furious against his enemis.
Ulixes, assured craftye, mean of stature, of face joyful, eloquent, sage, rude
and anstere in war, very sharp, heddye substel, impacie^t, hardy. Diomedes
strong, square of body, honest of face austere, sharp in war, often crying,
subtel, impacient, dum, harrdy. Nestor great, lodge nosed, large, white
through out all his body, good in counsel and wise.

Protesslaus of a resplendent body of a good and honest grace, assured, light,
presumpteous.

Neoptolemus great, courageous, dispitefull, stammerynge, of a crooked visage,
round eyed, proud.

Palamedes, slender, long, sage, of a great heart, and glosynge.

Podalirus gross, valiant, proud, heavy. Machaon great, strong, prudent,
pacient, prompt and ready to mercy. Merion of a mean stare, ruddye, merye of
face, vicious, obstinate, cruel, impacient.

Briseis fair, not to hie of statuer. White yelowe herd, and soft, with
frowning brows, fair eyed, a well proporcion^d body, sweet, shamefast,
simple and good. Thus the Greeks navy being ready and instructed, came to
Athens. The first was Agamemnon from Micenes with a hundred ships. Menelaus
from Sparta with three score. Archelaus and Protenor from Bruce with fiftie^
Ascalaphus and Almenus from Orceine with thirtie^ Epistrophus and Schedius from
Phocis with fourtye.

Ajax Thelamon for company sake brought from Salamine his brother Teucer,
Bublation, Amphimacus, Dorius, Thesius, and Polisemus with fourtye ships.

Nestor came from Pile with lxxx. ships in number. Thoas from Etolia with
three score. Ajax Oileus from Locres with seven and thirty ships. Antippus,
Phidippus and Thoas of Alcedone with thirty shyppes^ Idomeneus and Meriones
from Crete with four scour ship Protesilaus and Protarchus from Philaque
with fourtye. Podalirius and Machaon the son of Esculapius with fourtye and
two.

Achilles with Patroclns and the Myrmidons from Pithia with fiftye. Telepolemus
from Roodes with eight. Euripilus from Ormena with three score. zantippus and
Amphimacus from Elida with twelve. Polibetes and Leontius from Larissa with
forty ships. Diomedes, Euripilus, Steleneus from Argos with fonre scour.

Philoctetes from Melebra with vij. Enneus from Ci^ers with xxi. ships.
Proteus from Magnesa with xl. Agapenor from Archadia with forty. Mnesteus from
Athenes, with fifty. Creneus from Pile with two and twentye. The names of the
captains of Greece do mount unto three score and nine, the which brought to
the war about a leven hundred and forty ships.

After that they were all come to Athenes, Agamemnon called his captains to
counsel, praised them and exhorted them to maintain their right and quarrel,
promysyng to content them at their pleasure.

Furthermore, they thought it very good, or ever they departed to take counsel
of Appollo, where unto every man accorded. And to do this thing, Achilles was
sent with Patroclus unto Delphos. In ye mean while Priamus being well
advertised of ye will and preparation of his enemies gathered me^ thorowout al
his cou^treies exhorting every man courageously to defend his contrei. When
Achilles and Delphos had understood by the oracle, that the Greeks should
bear away the victory, and Troy at the tenth years end should be taken and
destroyed by them, he did sacrifice unto God Appollo, as it was commanded. At
the self same time likewise Calchas was sent to Delphos to gratify Apollo with
gifts and rich Jewels, for the Troianes, and to counsel with him of the state
of his realm and other goods, unto who it was answered by the oracle, and
counseled, that he should confederate him self with thee Greeks against the
Troyanes, and that he should bear them as much favor as he might possible
in disclosynge the thing that he might per^eyue and understand of the
affairs of Troy, to this intent, that the Greeks should not leave of nor
depart until Troy were taken and destroyed. Achilles and Calchas met
together within the temple, and after they had confederate their answers of
the oracle together, the which were like and agreeable, they reioysed and
confirmed their aliance and amity. So they came together to Athenes, where
Calchas was gentelye received of all the Grecianes. Their ships being now
prepared to sail, they were suddenly taken, and troubled with an horrible and a
merueilous tempest: therefore Calchas as a prophet counseled them to turn
their sails to some other part, and go toward the port named Aulis, unto
the which they came at the last. Af^e^ that Agamemnon had with sacrifice
apaysed and satisfied Diana, he cansed to hoyse up their sails, and to go on
unto Troy, and to do this more easly^ Philocte was unto the^ as a guide, the
which before time had been with the Argonantes in the la^d of Troy. By the wai
they came unto a town appertaynynge to Priamus, which after they had taken
and sacked, they went to Tenedon, killynge man, woman and child, the which
they took in like manner. But Agamemnon divided the spoiye among his
soldiers. This done, he called a counsel wherein it was concluded, that
Diomedes and Ulixes should go unto Priamus, requirynge him to restore Helen
with other things ravished and taken away by Alexander. During the time that
these men communed with Priamus, Achilles and Thelephus were sent to take Misia
for a pray, where king Teuthras reigned. Where when they came, they spoiled all the country.

And Achilles so wounded the king coming in arms in the defense of his
countreye, that he fell to the ground, whom Telephus covered with his shylde,
that Achylles slew him not out of hand, and that because in times paste
Teuthras had lyberallye received Telephus Hercules son into his house,
being yet but very young.

Some other do say, that even then Hercules had slain Diomedes with his
pusiant and wild horses, and delivered all his kyngedome into the hands of
Teuthras and that Telephus therefore had succurred him. But Teuthras perceiving
that through that stroke he could not escape death, he being yet alive
delivered his kingdom of Misia unto Telephus, and instituted him king as his
heir and successur, whom after that he was deed Telephus did burye most
honorably. Finallye, Achilles showed Telephus that the best conservation of
his kyngedome and to the intent that in his necessity, he might be succuered
and helped of the Greeks: was to furnishe and yerelye to prepare a certain
quantity of corn out of his realm, for the Greeks camp, whereby he him
self with his hooste should not go against ye Troianes: but remain at home
for the more surer conseruatio^ of his new kingdom. This ended, Achilles
returned with a great pray and botye from Misia to Tenedon: recitinge at
length to Agamemnon and his companions, what he had done, of whom he was
greatly praised, for his industry and viligence. In the mean while the
Ambassadors of Greece recited and declared unto Priamus the causes of their
legation, and the will of Agamemnon, that is: to know if the Troianes would
restore Helen with the other botye, and that the Greeks being satisfied and
contented for those things, would pesably return again. For an answer
Priamus recited the iniurye of the Argona^tes, the destruction and sacking of
Ilium, the death of his father, the violent rape and iniust seruitute, in the
which his sister Hesiona was deteyned by the Greeks, the evil and ungentle
intreatyng of Antenor his Ambassador in Greece: therefore he denied the peace,
denunced war, and commanded them to return, and depart out of his
countreye. The Ambassadors being returned, and the answer of Priamus
declared to the Greeks, the matter was revoked into the counsel. Now we
think it good to recite the names and provinces of the Lords and princes,
which came with them hoostes, to succoure Priamus against the Greeks. First
from C^^ia came Pandarus and Amphide^stns from Colophonia, Amphimacus and
Mnesteus.

From Licia, Sarpedon and Glaucus. From Larissa Hippor^ogus and Cupesu^. From
Cironia Remnes. From Thracia Pyrus and A^canus. From P^onia Paractemesus, and
Teropeus. From Phrigia Ascanuis Zantippus, and Portius, from Eliconia.
Eusemeus^ from Beocia Asuneus and Foricus from Buctiua Epistropolis and Boccius
from Palaconia Philleminus, from Ethiopia Pirses and Mennon, from Thracia
Heseus and Archilogus, from Agrestia Adrastus and Amphius, from Auzoni^
Epistrophus. Unto these companies and hosts, Priamus appointed Hector for
chief and principal Captain, next after Deiphobus, consequently Alexander,
Troilus, Eneas, and Memnon. And as Agamemnon on the other part took
deliberation, and made provision for the enterprise^ came Palamedes the son
of Nauplius from Corma with thirtye ships, and excused him self, that he
came not to the assemble at Athens, withholden and let by sycknes, but that he
came incontinent, and as soon as it was possible for him to come, and as the
opportunity of time would serve. The which excuse was taken of all other in
good part, gave him thanks, and prayde him to assiste them, as one of the
counsel. And forasmuch as the Grecians doubted of their setting forward to
Troy, they would know Palamedes counsel, whether they should give the
assault to Troy by day or by night. He answered, that he found none
occasion, why they should give the assault by night, but in the mids of the
dai, as he thought it most expedient, whereunto they all consented and agreed,
and choice Agamemnon captain of al ye army. The which sent forthwith Hesiodus
Demora^tes and Anius into Misia and other places for sufficient furniture of
vitelles and other munitions: which done he called for his men of war, and
praised, admonished, and exhorted them to be dilgente, faithful, and to their
superiors obedient. And after the sign was geued, they sailed, and finally
came with all their ships unto Troy. The Troyanes being advertised thereof,
defended their borders and limits ma^fully. Protesilaus made excurtions and
rodes by land, beat down and chased al before him, until that Hector mete
him, whom he slew, chased the other, and put them out of order. But where
Hector was not, there, the Troyanes were chased and overthrown. And after
great occision and murder on all parts, at length comes to the field
Achilles, constraynynge the Troyanes to fle, and chased the^ into Troy. And so
long continued the skyrmysh, that the night separated the battle. Agamemnon set
the rest of his hooste upon the land and campt all his men together.

Hector the next day following brought his men out of the city, and
afterward ca^pt, and set them al in good order. Agamemnon on the other side,
went with a great brute to mete him, whereof ensued a very sharp and furius
battle, wherein was none so valiant nor so strong, that fell not to the ground.
Hector even at the first slew Patroclus, spoylde and cast him out of the army.
Furthermore he pursued Merion, the which he slew in like manner. And as he was
occupied and busy about ye spoil, Mnesteus gave him a strock with his swerd in
the thighe. But notwithstanding he was so wounded, he ceased not to lay on
and strike until he had smitten down a great number of his enemies, and
manfully pursuyng the other, he caused the^ to forsak ye filde If Ajax
Thelamonius had not suddenly come thither, with whom Hector incountrynge knew
that he was of his blood, that is son of Hesiona his father Priamus sister.
Therefore at his request he caused the fire to cease and to be removed from the
Grecians ships and all his army to retire. After that the one had gratified
the other with gifts, they departed good friends. The next day following the
Greeks obtained a truce. Agamemnon to the honor of Protesilaus made noble
funeralles, and caused al other to be buried. Achilles mourned, and celebrated
funeral plays for his friend Patroclus.

Whilst the truce continued, Palamedes continually moved sedition, saying
that Agamemnon was unworthy to be principal of the army and therefore in the
presence of all the men of war he showed him self, and his willing study and
diligence to the things pertaining to ye war he returned out of the camp to
set an order in the munitions, and in the disposition of the watch, to know
and understand the usual signs of war, to see equity of measures and
waightes, and to be short, for the instruction of all the whole camp.

After this deed he said that it was not reasonable, that Agamemnon which was
chosen of a small number of men to this dignity, should command, and be
superior of all those, the which were to come to the war, considering that
all inferiors and subjects do look and hope for some virtue in their
captains In the mean season that the Greeks quarelled and discorded thus
among them selves for the superiority, and that two years were expired, the
war was renewed and set up again. Wherein of the Grecianes part were chief
doers Agamemnon, Achilles and Deomedes and Menclaus.

Of the other part: Hector, Troylus, and Eneas. And when they recountred and
met one with another, there was great murder, and the most valiantes of both
parts were slain.

Hector among all the other slew Boetes, Archilocus, and Protenor. But yet the
night departed the battle.

Then after that Agamemnon had called his Captains to counsel, he boldelye
admonyshed them to prepare them selves to fight, and pryncypallye against
Hector, the which had all ready slain the most Ualyaunte Captains
amounge them.

The next day following in the morning, the Army of the Troyannes was
leadde and guydyd by Hector, Eneas, and Alexander.

Against whom the force and the wholle Nobilite of the Grecianes so set
them selves, that of both sides in this furious imbekerynge a great number
of men were slain.

There Meuelaus and Ajax instantly pursued Alexander which thing he perceyuyng,
with a fliyng darte smote Menclaus through ye thighe with which strocke
notwithstanding he was moved with great pain, yet ceased not with Ajax the
king of Locrus to pursue him. But Hector perceyuyng his brother in this
danger came accompanied with Eneas in his defense, whom Eneas brought out of
the mids of the army into the city, but the night ended the battle.

The next day following, Achilles and Diomedes guyded the army: and of the
other side Hector and Eneas, There was great murder.

Hector killed Orchomemes, Oramenes, Palamon, Epistrophus, Schedius, Delpenor,
Dorius, and Polixemus al captains. Eneas slew Amphimacus, and Nerius. Achilles
on the contrary part slew Euphenius, Hipocrates, and Ascerius. Diomedes,
zantippus and Mestes. Agamemnon considering that his most strongest and most
valiant men were slain, retired, whereof the Troyanes being very joyful,
returned to there camp. Agamemnon held a counsel, styrde up his captains, and
other to sustain and manlye to fight for that that was to come, and by no
means to leave of: and in as much as a great part of his army was already
distroyed, he trusted day by day that a fresh company of soldiers should
come from Misya to aid and succor them. The next day following, he
constrained at his h^oste and captains to go to battle, and contrary wise the
Trojans were brought to the filde under the conduct of Hector: where the smote
so rudely on the one part and on the other, that there fell many thousands,
both Greeks and Troyanes. And thus they continued manfully fighting for the
space of four score days. Agamemnon perceiving that his men decayed more and
more, and in so great a number, and that he was so greatly let that he
could not as yet intend to bury, his dead corpses: he demanded of Priamus by
ambassadors truce for in. years, yt they might have a convenient time to bury
ye dead, as well of the one part as of ye other and to heal the wounded, and to
repare there ships, and to gather men, victals, and other ^^nitions together.
Ulixes and Diomedes were sent by night toward Troy on this message, whither as
they were going they met Dolon ye T^opane, which questioned with the^, wherefore
they came so aimed into ye city of Troy. To whom ye answered, yt they were
ambassadors sent by Agame^non to Priamus. Priamus knowing yt they were come,
and perceiving their will I mind, caused ^continent an assemble of his
chiefest and led captai^es, and in ye counsel he opened ye truce required of
Ageme^non for iii. years, the which Hector found very suspitius and strange,
because of ye long time and continuau^ce thereof. But Priamus willed ^uer^ man
to sai his advice. They thought it good al, to suffer the Grecians to have
truce for iii. years. In ye mean space, ye Trojans repaired there fortrases
These three years being now expired and ended, and that the time of war was
come: The Troyanes came first into the field under the conduct of Hector and
Troylus. And the Greeks under Agamemnon, Menelaus, and Diomedes. They made
great occision. Hector in the very point of the army slew Phidippus, and
zantippus captains. Achilles Liconius, and Enphorbius Troyanes And of one part
and an other there died a great number of soldiers and foot men: yet that
notwithsta^dynge they ceased not to fight sharpelye the space of thirty days
continuallye. Priamus perceiving that he had lost the greatest part of his
host, sent ambassadors unto Agamemnon to demand truce for six months: The
which thing by the deliberation of the counsel, was granted him. The time
of truce being expired, they fonghte very manfullye together by the space of
twelfe days, where that on both sides many stout warryers were smytten
down, many wounded, and afterward died.

Agamemnon demanded a truce of Priamus for thirtye days, to bury his men the
which were slain, which thing Priamus through good counsel did grant him.
The time of the war being come, the truce ended: Andromacha Hectors wife had
knowledge by her dream which she recited unto Hector, that as that day he
should not enter into the battle, the which thing Hector mispraised and
took it for a fable and for a woman's dream.

Andromacha being full of heaviness, prayed Priamus to let Hector as yt day
from the battle. Therefore Priamus sent Alexander, Helenus, Troilus and En^as
to the co^flicte and battle. Hector perceiving that reproved greatly Andromacha
and bad her bring him forth his harness, for he could not by no means stay
him self. For this cause Andromacha (the which had moved all the city with her
complayntes and lament acions) went toward Priamus recytynge unto him the
thing that she by her dream had learned of Hector, and that he not
withstanding that, by force and hastiness had cast and conveyed himself
into the myddest of the battle. And with her son Ast^max in her arms she
kneled down to Priiamus, besechynge him that for that day, he would withdraw
Hector from the battle Then Priamus sent them all to war, only Hector
retayn^d. Agamemnon Achilles and Diomedes, and Ajax Locrus perceyuinge the
absence of Hector were encouraged, and bolded to fight the more sharply, and
in such sort that they slew many cap^aynes, and other great lorde^^ of
Troy. Then Hector being advertised that in this skirmyshe the Troynes were in
great travail and da^nger^cast himself into the battle, and out of hand
kylde Idumeus, L^outheus, woundyd Hiphilus very soore, and with a dar^ pearsed
the thygh of Steneleus.

Achilles seeing diverse of his most valiannt men cast down by the hand of
Hector, prepared him self against him, and inforsed him to meet him face to
face, thynkyngeful well that if he overcame him not that he would destroy, and
beat many of his men: but in the mean season the battle was very soore.
Hector in this conflicte and battle slew Polibetes a very excellent
captain, and as he enforsed him self to spoil him, Achilles came, so that
the fight was augmented, and a great brute moved thoroweout all the camp and
city, whom Hector finallye wounded in the thighe. Therefore Achilles moore
cherelye pursued him, and left not of his enterprise, until he had smitten him
to death, put all the Troyanes to flyghte and chased them with the Dente of the
swearde unto their town gates, whom Memon resisted manfullye, fought with
him until the night separated them both soore wounded. And among all other
Achilles being wounded departed from the army. All that night the Troyanes
cessed not to lament the death and the absence of valiant Hector.

The next day following the Troyanes entered again into battle, under the
conducte of Memon. Agamemnon counsayled and persuaded his men to require a
truce for two mouths, that men might burye them which were slain in
battle. Therefore they sent unto Priamus, of whom they es^lye obtained their
demand.

Then caused Priamus his son Hector to be buried before ye gates Troy, and
magnificent pompes and funeral plays to be celebrated. While the time of the
foresayed truce endured, Palamedes ceased not to complain of the impire and
principallitie of Agamemnon.

Therefore Agamemnon without any contradiction there unto, said that he
would remitte the matter to the descretion and will of the people. The next
day following, he assembled all the people, where he purged him self, and
showed that he never coueted such aucthoritye, considering that he was king
and lord of Mycenes, the which sufficed him: but alonely the utter
destruction of Troy, and that he would be well agreeable to all that the people
would define, and unto him that should be set and appointed unto his estate.

Then in presence of them all, he demanded of every man his deuyse. There
Palamedes presented him self, willing to cause men to perceive and
understand his good spirit, judgment and counsayl, in the feats of war.
Of which occasion, the Greeks appointed him their graunde captain, which
after he had given them thanks, began to exercise ye right of that, that not
long before he had enterprised.

Achilles never approved but utterly blamed this alteration, yet that
notwithstanding (the truce being ended) Palamedes appointed his host in good
order, and encouraged them to fight manfully. Deiphobus on the other part did
as much for the Troyanes, the which at the sight triumphed to fight, among
whom Serpedon with his men did so much purswed the Greeks, that he kylde and
smote down a great number. In this fight Tlepolemus Rhodius met with him, the
which as well in the battle as otherwise was finallye ouercommed. Secondelye, in
his stead and place, Perses the son of Adneste fortified and renewed the
conflicte, the which likwyse coming to the battle was slain of Serpedon
almost hand to hand. But yet Serpedon being soore wounded was compelled to
withdraw him self from the filde. Thus for a certain days the skir mished
and fought, and diverse knights on both parts were destroyed and slain, but
yet of Priamus his bound the greater number. The Troyanes ambassadors
obtained a truce, and for the time that it endured, they on both parts buried
the dead, provided to heal their wounded. And when on both parts they had
taken and given good assurance and promis, they Greeks went unto Troy for
their pastime, and ye Troyanes unto the Greeks camp. In ye mean season
Palamedes sent Agamemnon Athama^tes and Demophon together unto Thesida to
prepare muntitio^s, and principallye to take up corn that grew in Misya
pertaining to Telephus, and to cause it to be bro^ghte unto them. When they
were come to that place, the Ambassadors recited unto Telephus the sedicion of
Palamedes, wherewith he was greatly miscontent. Agamemnon perceyuyng this,
desired Telephus not to be displeased, seeing that the thing was done by his
will and consent.

When their ships were charged, they returned. Palamedes in this pass time
fortified his camp round about with fortrases and rampers. In the mean
while the Trey^mes also ouersawe ^h^ir army, made walls, towers, diches, and
other mete and convenient things as well for the protection and defense of the
town, as for the instruction and feats of wa^^e.

While these things now were a doing, Priamus, Hecuba and Polixena with other
princes of ^roye, celebrated (about Hectors ^^aue) his year mind, whither
there came Achilles, and beholding Polixena king Priamus daughter, was by and
by greatly taken with her love. Then as an impacient lover, he lived for a time
in all solicitude and anguyshe, partly because Agamemnon was deposed from the
impier, and that he was subject to Palamedes. Then he sent a faithful
seru^unte of his a Troyane, unto Hecuba to demand Polixena to be his wife,
and so doing heard his Myrnidons would depart, and by that means the rest
of the Greeks. The servant being now come to Hecuba, showed the content of
his legation and message. Whereunto the foresayed Hecuba answered, yt she was
well content, if it so pleased Priamus her husband. In the mean while that
she declared the matter to Priamus, and that by her commandment the servant
was departed: Agamemnon went with a great company unto his camp. Then
Priamus to that that Hecuba had propounded unto him, answered, that it was a
thing impossible, not because he esteemed Achilles to be insufficient, or
otherwise unworthy of his aliaunce, but ye the Greeks (although he gave him
Polixena, and that he and his bond departed) would never the soonerdeparte.

Furthermore, that it were not reasonable to join and mary his daughter to dys
enemy, And therefore he esteemed good, if Achilles would ensue and follow his
interpryse, that they should first and above al things, make a perpetual
peace between them, and that the Greeks hooste should return and depart, so
that their aliaunces and agrementes might be well assured and confirmed, and
that thing being once ended, he would wyllynglye give him his daughter.

Achilles even as it was appointed sent his servant again unto Hecuba, for to
know the will and deliberation of Priamus, the which being known, the
servant by and by brought it unto his master. Therefore Achilles began in
presence of them all, greatly and by all means to complain him, declaring it
to be unlawful, that for one Helen all Europe and Greece should be destroyed, and
that by so long war, so great a number of men should be lost, the
liberty of the countrei to be brought unto bondage and cast under foot:
therefore it were good and necessary for them to make peace, and to go their
ways. Thus they consumed a whole year. After all this Palamedes repaired and
set up his army. And on the other part Deiphobus. Achilles being not therewith
content, was not at the skirmish. Palamedes moved by a certain occasion, (...)
prepared him self against Deiphobus, that he slew him: the war on the one
part and on ye other was sharply stird up and foughten, in yt which many a man
did perish. Palamedes in this conflicte held the point, and the voward, that
the more freely he might ^olden and stir up his men to fight, and even so as
they met, he slew Serpedon the Troiane. And thinking to glorify and to rejoice
him self in this deed, Alexander shot him through the body with an arrow. The
other Troyanes seeing that, ceased not to cast darts, as though Palamedes had
not been dead, for whose death the Greeks were disconfited, and went back unto
their camp, and the Troyanes persuing them, brake in, put their camp out
of ^^^er, and burnt their ships. Achilles advertised of this, dissembled ye
matter, but Ajax Thelamonius valiantly sustained ye thing until the night
departed ye battle. The Greks al ye night long bewailed most heuily Palamedes,
because of his knoledge, equity, virtue and clemency: ye Trojans likewise most
rufully the death of Serpedon and Deiphobus. The ancient Nestor all that night
called the captains to counsel for to elect and choice a head captain to the
army, and if it seemed expedient unto them, to chose without any further
controuersye Agamemnon again. He asked, and styrde every one to say his
advice and mind, he showed them also, how that in times paste al things
succeeded prosperouslye, and that the whole hooste lived fortunatly under the
conducte of Agamemnon.

Whereupon Agamemno was chosen superior by the whole consent of them all. The
next day following the Troyanes went forth boldly to the batell, and so did
Agamemnon, until that on both parts they were chased one from the other.

But after the day was well spent

Troylus retourneth with the first into the filde, and fought strongly,
killyng and destroyinge, insomuche that he chased the Greeks into their tents.

And again, the next day following, the Troyanes set them selves first in
the filde. And Agame^non against the^: there was a sore conflicte seven days
continuallye, in so much that the Troyanes slew diverse lords and captains of
the Greks. And Agame^non obtained a truce for two months, caused Palamedes
and other Lords of Greece honorably to be buried.

During the time of this truce, Agamemnon sent unto Achilles, Nestor, Ulixes
and Diomedes, prayinge and desyryng him to take deliberation, and to go to
war.

Achilles being heavy and sore troubled purposed not to give one strok against
ye Troyanes, as he had promised Hecuba, for the great and singular love yt he
bare to Polixena, nor received not the foresaied ambassadors with good
countenance. But answered them that he (all war set a parr) desired peace.

Agamemnon perceiving that, calde his lords and captains, and also the better
part of his men of war to counsel, and to take deliberation what were best
to b^ done in this matter, and of this he asked eueri ma^s ^duice. Menelaus
began first to animate Agamemnon his brother to war, and that for one
Achilles he should not leave of the interprise, she wyng them that the strength
of the Troyans was greatly broken and demished through the absence of Hector,
consederynge that they in all their bands had none like unto him. Contrary
wise Diomedes and Ulixes did stifelye affirm that Troylus was even as wise,
and as valiant as ever was Hector. Against whom Menelaus resistynge, ceased
not as before to persuade the war.

And to this purpose Calchas (taught by the oracle) persuaded the war, and
in the same he promised the Greeks to be victorious. The time of truce being
expired, the Greeks went to the filde, under the conduct of Agamemnon,
Mekelans, Diomedes and Ajax, where they fought very strongelye to the great
occision of the one part and of the other.

Troylus wounded Menelaus very greuouslye, and slew many, the other he
chased at the point of his swearde, so that the night separated them. The
next day all the Greeks fought strongelye against the Troyanes, prepared
to fight by Troylus and Alexander, Troylus hurt Diomedes, and did as much
pursuynge Agamemnon, and afterward many other.

Thus they continued sharply fightyng for certain days, and a great number of
men were smitten down on every part. Agamemnon considering that day by day
he lost a great number of his men, and that he could no longer bear such
losses, demanded a truce for vi. months, yt which thing Priamus recited
unto the counsel, where that among all the assembles, some with all their
power withstode it, because of the long truce which they demannded: but
rather they required to sack the Grecianes, to pille and to spoil them of
all their goods, and to set their ships a fire.

Yet notwithstanding after that every man had said his mind, the truce by
the consent of them all, was granted. During the time of the truce,
Agamemnon did royallye burye his people, and caused Diomedes and Menelaus the
which were hurt, to be most diligently entreated, and as much did the
Troyanes on their part.

This done, Agamemnon (the time of truce continuynge) went him self by the
deliberation of the counsel, to Achilles to persuade him to the war.
Achilles troubled as before, withstode it, and would be no traitor, but said
that it were better to demand peace: But because that in this case with
honesty he could deny Agamemnon nothing, he promised him that in the time of
war he would send his men to aid him, praying him yt for the rest he might
be excused. Then Agamemnon heartly thanked him. The time of the war coming on,
the Greeks and the Troyans prepared themselves one against another. Achilles
first sent his Myrmidons prepared and appointed in good and sufficient order,
the which caused the war to be a great deal ye stronger and greater: this not
wtstanding Troylus at the first shocke wan, chased the Myrmidons, made rodes
and skyrmyges even unto the Greeks camp, and killed many here and there as well
of the Greeks as of the Myrmidons, other he maimed very greatly, and for all
the risistaunce that Ajax Thelamonius thought to do ye Troyanes returned to
their city with at honor and victory.

The next day Agamemnon with the Greeks and the Myrmidons came first into
the filde, against whom Troylus (after long and terrible war unto the death
of many a man) had so strongly sustained and persued ye Myrmidons, yt some he
chased, and the other he slew on ye gorund For this cause, and to bnrye his
men, Agamemnon demanded a trace for xxx. days, the which Priamus granted
him, to do the like things on his part.

After the truce, the Troyanes and the Greeks as before, began the war
again, and fought sharplye. Troylus the most part of the day was ye first
in the battle, he fought merueylously, and smote many to the ground. Then the
Greeks w^ a great clamor and cry fled their ways. But when Achilles
understood that Troylus did so furiously spoil the Greeks, and therewith without
ceasinge smote down the Mirmidons, he came to ye battle, w^ whom Troylus
valiantly incou^tred, that he wounded him very sore, whereof he was constrained,
even being hurt to depart from the battle.

Thus they continued the space of six days. The seventh day both the
hoostes chased each other, and were constrained mutually to retire. Achilles
being absent for a while because of his wounds and pains, set in a raie,
encouraged and commanded his Myrmidons with strength and fiersnes to set upon
Troylus person. The same day about the end thereof, Troylus entered a horse back
very joyful into the battle, whereof the Greeks being advertised, cried out
mainlye, so that the Myrmidons coming to there aid made their whole force
and battle according to Achilles commandment against Troylus, by whom a
great number of them were slain. In this cruel and strong battle Troylus
horse was wounded and fell down betwixt his legs, so that Troylus being let
through the fall fo his horse, and the straytnes of his harnes, was constrained
to fall, whereof Achilles being advertised, came w^ al speed, slew him, and
would have drawn him a side and carried him away, but that he was let by
Memnon, the which came suddenly upon him. This Memnon after he had taken away
and delivered the body of Troylus from the enemies, wounded Achilles, by means
whereof he departed from the battle, the which Memnon perceiving, with a company
of Troyanes perswed him, of whom Achilles having knoledge, and his wounds
being somewhat amended, fought in such sort for a time, that through many and
violent wounds he kilde him, and so wounded departed. After that ye king of
Perses was slain, the rest fled to the town, so that the night did sever and
depart them. And therefore the next dai (the gates being spard) Priamus sent
unto Agamemnon, demanding a truce for twentye day^s, the which was granted
him. Priamus caused Troilus and Memnon to be buried with great pomp and
triumph, and as well the Greks as ye Troyanes caus^d their dead corpses to be
buried. Hecuba with all he^nes and desolation lamented that Achilles had so
cruellye destroyed her two sons Hector and Troilus so strong and valiant and
in her f^minine counsel, she thought and purposed to revenge such injury.
Therefore she (...), monished, and persuaded her son Alexander to revenge ye
iniurye done to him and his brethren: that is secretlye, and by spies to take
Achilles unprovided, and to kill him.

The which thing they might easily do, in as much as Achilles had through a
singular desire demanded Polixena in marriage, and that she, after the will and
answer of Priamus had promised her unto him, that there might be between
them a constante and a perpetual peace. Then was it purposed to lai an
embushemente of men wtin the temple of Apollo Thymbreus next unto the gate of
Troy, whither Achilles should come and entreat of this marriage, and this
done, Hecuba would throughlye hold her content and satisfied, so that
Achilles were slain. The which thing Alexander promised to do.

Therefore in the night a certain of the most strongest of all the host were
chosen, and laid with the watch word in the foresaied temple. Hecuba even as
she promised, sent unto Achilles. Then he being in great love with Polixena,
purposed not to be faultye in his part. The next day following when Achilles
(having in his company Antiochus Nestors son) was come to the place
appointed, by and by, even at his entering in, Paris stirde up his soldiers and
spies, the which incontinent began to smite. Achilles and Antiochus perceiuinge
this, even forth with cast their clokes about their left arms, drew out
their swerdes and slew many. Aleander killed first Antiochus, and wounded
Achilles with many strokes. And thus died Achilles, which could not resist
that, that was so secretlye prepared against him. Whose body Alexander
commanded as a pray to be cast to the fowls of the air. But Helenus be
sought him not to do so, but to deliver it unto the Greeks. And so they bare
it out with Antiochus unto ye Greeks camp, where Agamemnon caused them to be
buried with great magnificence and honor. And to the end he might the more
commodiously build for Achilles a proper sepulcher, he obtained a truce of
Priamus. After this his great lords and familiers amsse^bled unto the consel,
to this end, that the charges and affairs of Achilles might be committed to
Ajax his neighbor Where unto Ajax answered, that Achilles had yet one son
left alyne, named Neoptolemus, unto whom the charges of his father Achilles
were moore due and convenient, then to any other, and therefore it were mete to
call him to the war, and to restore unto him ye thing which pertayned unto his
father. Whereupon Menelaus was chosen to go into Scyria, to bring Neoptolemus
out of the hands of his graundfather Lycomedes: to the which thing the
foresaid Lycomedes consented very wyllyngiye.

Then after that the time of truce was finished: Agamemnon prepared and led
forth his host. And on the other side the Troyans issuing out of their city,
they met together, and ^ought strongly one against the other. Ajax being bare
and without armer at ye clamor and brute that was made, set him self in ye point
of the battle, where there sell many as well of ye one part as of ye other.
Alexander w^ his bow well and strongly bent, slew di^^rs among who^ he persed
the bare side of the which being soore wounded; turned him self, and persued
Alexander, nor ceased not until he had slain him. Ajax being thus brooken,
and not able to do any more because of his wound which he had received, was
borne into his tent, and after the dart was drawn out of his body, deceased.
Alexanders body was brought into the city. Diomedes fought couragiouslye
against his enemies. But the Troyanes being very werye fled unto their city,
whom Diomedes chased unto the walls. Then Agamemnon with his men of war,
came nere, and campt all the night about the walls of the city, nor they
ceased not to watch and spy ye one after the other. The next day following,
Priamus caused the body of his son Alexander to be buried with great pomp,
whose death Helen for the great and mutual love that was between them
lamented most sorofully. And again because that Paris had received her into
his country most honorably, and humanely had entreated her, Priamus and
Hecuba seeing her in such heuinesse, exhorted her not to forsak the Troyanes,
nor yet desire again the company of the Grecianes.

The next day Agamemnon approached nie unto the gate with his army, besiged
the town, and provoked the Troyanes to war. Priamus on the other side,
fortified and tamparde his city, in the mean space every man took heed to
his charge, lokynge for aid of Pente^ilea with her Amazones. The which coming
incontinentlye with her company, brought forth her army against Agame^non,
fought so valiauntlye for certain days, yt the Greeks were chased unto their
camp, and partly ouercomm^d, in so much that if Diomedes (although with great
dificulte) had not resisted, the noble Penthesilea had burnt the Greks ships,
and finallye spoiled the^. The battle ended, Agame^non retired and continued
in his ca^pe. But Pe^thesileacesed not from day to day furiouslye to scermishe,
spoil, and to provoke the Greeks to fight. A game^non by deliberat consel
fortified his ca^pe, and purposed not to go to war until Menelaus was returned,
Wherefore Menelaus being now returned from Sciria, delivered Achilles arms and
other charges to Neoptolemus ye which after he had received lamented very
greatly in ye Greeks camp about ye tu^^e of his father Achilles, Penthesile^
even as she was accustomed prepared and set her men to ye filled, and came even
to ye Greeks camp. Against whom Neoptolemus ye capten of ye Myrmidons prepared
him self, and inlik mane^ Agame^non, so yt they two went together. Neoptolemus
made great murder, against who^ Penthesilea resisted, and valiantly defended,
and for certain days they fought so veheme^tlye yt of one and other there were
many slain. But at ye length Pe^thesilea hurt Neoptolemus, ye which being
mained through great pain and anger, slew Penthesilea ye princes of the
Amozones, and by this menes, the rest of the Troyans fled to the city. Suddenly
the Greeks compassed so the town, the walls, and fortes of the Trojans, that it
was impossible for them to essue out of the town any moore.

Antenor, Polidamas and Eneas considering and wayinge well this thing, went
unto Priamus solicityng him to see, and by counsel to take aduisement, what
were good to be done, as well for their goods, as for them selves. The counsel
being assembled, Priamus admonished every man to say his mind. Unto whom
Antenor showed that the most valiauntest princes and protectors of the Troyanes
common weal and liberty, the kings children, and like wise the princes and
captains strangers were consumed: and that on the contrary side the most
strongest and viliauntest of Greece were yet living, that is, Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Neoptolemus, no less excellent then his father Achilles, beside
these, Diomedes, Ajax Locrus, and many other strong, crafty, and expert
men, as Nestor and Ulixes, and that the Troyanes were enclosed on all sides,
beseged, and almost broken and distroyed. He cou^seled therefore to be much
better to restore Helen, and all that Alexander and his had taken and carried
away, and that so the peace should be made: After that they had sufficiently
spoken of this purpose and matter, the pusante Amphimachus Priamus son stood
up, and accused the deeds and the sayings of these, which favored the
counsel and will of Antenor, and showed that they should rather take upon them
to send their host to the feld, and assail their enemies in their camp, so
that they might other bring the victory with them, or else ouercommed, die
manfully for their countreye. This done Eneas by sweet and loueli words spoke
against Amphimacus persuadi^g peace. It the last Priamus stood up courageously,
embrading and laying many evil deeds unto Antenor and Eneas, as to the^ that
were the first authors of the war, and that embessadors were sent into Greece.
Also that the self same Antenor being ambassador, and returning from Greece,
complained him that he was con^umeliouslye entreated, and that he therefore with all his pouer persuaded war. Further more, he cast this in Eneas tethe, yt he with
Alexander had ravished Helen, and brought away a great bouty out of Greece.
Therefore Priamus was well assured yt peace ought not, nor culd not be made
between the^. The Priamus co^miunded the^ to be ready and diligently (after ye
sign were given) to issue out of ye ^ates, other to win triumphantlye, or to
die valiantly. After yt Priamus had thus spoken, he dimissed the counsel, and
accompanied with Amphimacus went his wates, saying unto him that he was in great
doubt yt he, his country and his goods should be betrayed, and delivered by
the^ that had demanded peace, into ye hands of his enemies Also he perceived,
that the^ mights have aid and favor of the best parts of all the common
people, and therefore he was minded to put the^ to death, and if ye thing were
wisely handled, he trusted not only to defend his country, but also to
overcome his enemies. Following this purpose, he prayed and induced Amphimacus
to be faithful and favorable unto him, and daily to be ready and prepared to
accomplish his interprise the better and without suspicion.

And to bring this to pass, Amphimachus counseled him to call the^ to supper,
and to feign some sacrifice, and suddenly so to take the^. Amphimachus promised
to do it, and afterward departed from Priamus. The self same dai Antenor,
Polidamas, Ucaligon, Amphidamas, and Dolon being assembled together, merueyled
greatly at the pertinacite of the king, and found it to stra^g a thing that
he loved rather to suffer his countreye, his princes, and lords perish, then
to make any peace. Whereunto Antenor answered that he had found a mete remedy
for them al, so that al they would be faithful. There bound them selves with one
mind unto it. After that he saw the thing to be so agreed unto, he sent unto
Eneas, signifiyng unto him that the laud must be betrayed, and he to save
himself and his it was nedful, to send someone to Agamemno^ to declare with
dfligence and without suspicion their will and mind, in as much as they had
seen Priamus, when any man spoke unto him of peace depart from the counsel
very angrye, fearyng lest he should excogitate and invent some new interprise.
They all promisynge this with one accord, sent secretly Polidamas the which
was lest suspected among them, to Agamemnon. Now when he was come to the
Grecianes camp, head clared unto Agamemnon the mind and will of his companions.
Wherefore Agamemnon all that night did secretly assemble his counsel, and
declared what he had perceived of the Troynes, and hervpon he demanded every
man's advice. It seemed good unto the^ all that f^delite should be kept with the
traitors Troyanes. But Ulixes and Nestor said they feared the enterprise.
Against whom spoke Neoptolemus, so that there was a di^^sion among them. But
yet finaliye they agreed, to have a sure watch word of Polidamas the which
should be carried by Sinon to Eneas, Anchises, and Antenor. Then went Sinon
unto Troy, and for as much as Amphimachus has not yet delivered the keys to
the kepers, Sinon gave the watch word, whereby he knew of Eneas and Antenor
the whole matter, the which he reported to Agamemnon. They were all of this
mind, to promise them their faith, to confirm their aliaunce, and on all
parts to bind them with an oath, under this condition, if Antenor, Eneas,
Ueal^gon, Polidamas and Dolon would deliver up the town the next night
following, that then they would keep their whole faith and promise with them,
and their wives, children, friends, familiers and neighbors, and that in
fo^^me of the foresayed, all that they would demand, should be granted
them, This agreement thus appointed, and faith promised on every part, and an
oath taken, Polydamas persuaded to bring the host by night to the gate called
Scea, where that without there was an horse head graven upon the portall,
and Antenor, and Anchises having their Garrison there, should in the night
open the gates to the Greeks, holding up in the air the burning flame of
fire, the which they connted among the^ selves to be the sign and tooken of
their prodition, that is to wit, that the Greeks seeing it should not dout to
approach and enter, and that there were men ready there to bring them unto the
place where the king was After that the compacte and agremente was thus
accorded, Polidamas returned into the cite, declared what was done, advertised
Antenor, Eneas and other of this conspiracy, to bring al their men by night
to the gate of Scea, ye which they should open lifting up the forsaied flame
into the air, and so to let in the Grecianes. Antenor and Eneas were ready by
night at the foresaid gate, where they received Neoptolemus, unto whom and
his men of arms, they liftynge up the flame, opened the gates. And doing this,
they thought upon their own departure, as a sovereign remedy of their
prodition and treason, whereunto Neoptolemus did succoure and aid them.
Neoptolemus entered in, and set an order and a garrison in the town: and by
Antenor was conveyed and brought into the kings palace, where was the garrison,
and the sovereign defense of all the Troianes, and from thence he pursued and
chaste Priamus until he came before the temple of Jupiter Herceus, where he at
the last kilde him. Hecuba also fliyng with Polixena met Eneas, and delivered
her unto his kepinge, whom he set in his father Anchises house. Andromacha and
Cassandra hid them selves within Minerues temple, the Greeks reased not all that
night long to pylle, destroy, spoil and carry away, when it was day, Agamemnon
caused all his to be called into the castle, and there he gave thanks unto the
gods maysed his host very greatly, commanded the bouty to be brought in, which
he equallye divided to every one of them. This done, he asked counsel and
every man's advise, whether it were mete to observe and keep their faith
promised to Eneas and Antenor the betraiers of their country. Whereunto every
man with one voice answered to be lawful. Then they called for them to
deliver them such things as pertayned unto them. Then Antenor demanded
license to speak, the which thing Agamemnon granted him. Antenor at ye
beginning of his oration gave thanks unto the lords of Greece. Furthermore, he
declared how yt Helenus and Cassandra at all times had desired and counseled
their father to peace, and that Achilles at the persuation of the foresaid
Helenus was buried. Therefore Agamemnon by the mind of his counsel, set
Helenus and Cassandra at liberty. Helenus prayed Agamemnon for Hecuba and
Andromacha, giving him to understand, that they always bare him good will,
unto who^ also liberty, by the sentence and mind of his counsel was granted
In the mean time, he divided the bouty again, praised a gave thanks unto ye
gods, offered sacrifices, and purposed to return and depart the fifte day:
upon the which day, there suddenly arose great and horrible tempests, so that
they were for ^ time constrained to tarpe.

Calchas answered them, that they had not done their duetye to ye gods
infernal. Neoptolemus remembered that Polixena for whom his father Achilles
perished was not found in the kings castle. Then Agame^non caused Antenor to
be called, and commanded him to find out Polixena with all diligence, and to
present her unto him. Then went Antenor to seek for Polixena which was hidden
in Eneas house, and brought her to Agame^non, and delivered her to Neoptolemas,
ye which nigh unto his fathers tomb put her to death most cruelly. Agamemnon
provoked against Eneas for the co^celement of Polixena, commanded him quickly
to depart the country the which thing Eneas did. His lands Agamemnon gave
unto Antenor. After this Agamemnon departed out of the city as a conqu^ror.
Helen now being in more he^^es and sorrow then ever she was before, was carried
again by her husband Menclaus into her country. Helenus with his mother
Hecuba, Canssandra his sister, and Andromacha his brother Hectors wif, went
into Cheronessa. S^ here are the things that Dares Phrigius has written of
the acts and deeds done at Troy. In the which place after the wars, there
dwelt and remained certain of the line and kindred of Antenor. The war between
the Greeks and the Troyans continued the space of ten years, six months,
and twelfe days. There were slain of the Greeks as Dares Phrigius has written,
the nu^bre of eight hundred four score and six thousand. Of Troyans until the
betraiyng of the city, in nu^bre vj. C. lxxvj. M. Eneas departed out of the
country with ye ships wherewith Paris had made his viage from Greece, in
nu^bre xxij. And there followed him men of all ages in nu^bre MMM. CCCC. And
Antenor MM. and. D. Helenus and Andromacha a M. CC.

Thus ends ye history of Dares.
The names of the Troay^es which slew the Princes of Greece.
THe first Hector slew Protesilaus, Patroclus Merion, Boetes Archilocus,
Protenor, Deipenor, Dorius Polixenus, Phidippus, zantippus. Leonteus Polibetus.
Serpe^on Lepes ((...)) Lu^or Epistrophus.

Schedius Maimentus and Palamon. Eneas Amphimachus and Nireus. Alexander slew
Palamedes, Antilochus and Ajax. Ajax Thelamonius and Alexander killed each other.

Here ensues also the names of the Captains Troyanes slain by the Greeks.
Achilles slew Euphemius, Hippo^u^, Plebeius, Asteri^, Liconius, Euphorbius,
Hector, Memnon. Neoptolemus slew Penthesilea, Priamus, and Polixena nigh unto
the tumbe of Achilles his father Diomedes slew zantippus, Mnestens,
Epistroph^s, and Or^meneus

Menelaus oration unto the Troyanes for the repetion of Helen.
IF Paris would have kept any spark of reason, or of honesty (O ye people of
Troy) truly we should now need nothing wether it were of counsels, or of
arms, or of legation: but clean contrary we should live in our houses at rest
and without detriment or loss: your goods also and your persons should be in
greater and more sure tranquillity. But the thing which Paris has chosen,
settyng^ voluptuousnes in the place of virtue (O ye people of Troy) has
invited and provoked us to come hither, not for to molest any man unjustly, but
for to repete if it be lawful for us, the thing yt is our own. Therefore ye se
from you walls and hie pynnacles the men of war of Greece nie unto you in as
great and number, as in triumphant preparation and order. But yet we have well
forsene and considered hitherto to be discrete, and to do no manner of thing
against reason and justice: for notwithstanding we have our arms in our
hands disploied, yet it is so, that we had rather use sweet words, to the end
that we having recovered by words only the thing that pertayneth unto us, may
incontinent retier: if not to finish the thing that we have already begun. And
as our purpose is not lightly to set our hands to our wepons: so it is not for
us to abstain if ye will annihilate and little esteem our ligation and request.
It is now in you to chose, whether it be more dearer unto you to prefer the
pleasure of Paris above your own wealth and liberty, or else with Helen to
be exempte from al war. Certain it is, that continually unto this dai we have
rejected all the fault in Paris only nor would not, if any wrong were done
unto you, attribute the same to ye common people of Troy: although that the
issue and the deliberation of this assemble, shall other confirm our opinion,
or certainly declare openly the deed to pertain only to Paris, but the
enterprise unto all. And if in tellyng your advice and mind in the counsel,
ye favor Paris any thing at al, ye shall declare your selves to be ye principal
of these deeds: but contrary wise, if beyond the judgment and will of him ye
do after right ^ equite, all the crime shall finally redoune unto him. But my
custom is not to make so long a rehersall of such things, and it seems to
stan de with good reason. Be ye well assured I pray you, that for one unjust
cause I would not once open my mouth to speak, and for a good and just cause
I esteem that with few words I may greatly satisfy and content you.
Therefore I thought in this case (although I have been customed to use a
certain prolixite) to be very mete and convenient to speak succinctlye and
brefelye.

This thing in very truth is such, that it requires no laborius nor no
difficulte means, considering that there rests nothing, but with one
simple and easy oration to ouercume his aduersarye.

Now Paris tell me, by the great God Jupiter, have thou not ravished the thing
yt was none of thine? Make restitution then, Haste thou not taken it without
any right and by violence? Then thou ought to be punished. Thou must know
of two things one, other that thou show that thou have taken nothing or if
thou confess it, that a^ the le^t thou do cesse in will unjustly to defend it.
I think thou do not votsafe to deny that thou have spoiled me of my goods
to me most derest, and most precious, for I know that thou do desire to be
praised of thy euel deed. And therefore it were more than reason yt thou
should bear thy self of such an enterprise upon us. And although that we
have received thee unto us as a stranger, yet thou have recompensyd us more
cruellye then an enemy. Esteem it not at all that he, by an honest and an open
interprise might do us so great an injury, nor repute him not so brave a man, and us so weak to suffer such injury, if he had given us knowledge of
that that he enterprised. But I pray you to here how the thing was done. Paris
as it is to be presumed ha^h recited the fact unto you, not as it is, but all
to his own advantage, will lynge with his (...) to cover a leasing. Of al men
the which offend there is scarcelye one that will know and confess his fault,
but with all their power go about to disguyse the truth: to this end, that
partly they may receive great emolument and profit, and partlye be taken for
men of honestye. The thing purposely ente^ded was thus done. Paris on a
certain day as well accompanied with many as rychely appointed, came into
Laconia to make muster of his own person, and after yt he had been in Sparta,
among al other thiges he used unto every man (fayning a certain goodness and
modeste) great humanite and swetenes, and that because he desired to obtain some
noble and honest loges When I preceiued yt, I esteemed nothing more honorable
and worthy of nobilite, the^ to minister unto him ye thing yt was necessary for
a stranger: therefore I opened my gate unto him, and volu^tariously comunicated
al yt I had and esteemed most dear and pr^cius, saui^ge my wife, and my
daughter, not thinking any thing (O ye people of Troy) of all this yt chaunsed
afterward. I thought verily that Jupiter was i^ a manner ye chife and pri^cipal
co^ductor of this his coming, also I was persuaded yt he was as egal and in
like condition with the gods yt receives another man, as he which is so humainly
and gentlye received: but this man to be much more bounden, in as much as he
has received more goodness and profit, then he of who^ he received it. with
what great good will think ye, shall we now honor and observe ye noble and
excellent man Antenor, we wish him al goodness and honor more and more, and
desire nothing less, the^ yt any such misfortune should come or chance unto
his family. And of my part I used toward my gest all swetnes and benignite.
Let Paris come now into the pliane and say if any necessary thing required, was
denied him? Or if he know yt we have endured his long tariynge with any
heaviness or tediousnes? Has he not continually received were it much or
little the thing that pleased him?

Has he by any means sooner known then reprehended our avarice and mecanicall
scarcenes? Has he perceived that any man has done him wrong? If he accuse
us of any of these foresaid things, let him show it, and I shall frelye
confess that he received not the thousand part of that, that he has
deserved. But for as much as in this matter he can say nothing, so like wise it
behooves no man to speak of it. But so it is that the faithful opinion which
we conceived of him, was the cause, that we suffered him to dwell among us
with great assurance and liberty, and without any suspicion no more then of a
familier friend, the which thing may accustomably chance to all men: and al
those things the which be right and reason ought to be holy and inuio^able
(O ye people of Troy) He ha^h intierly turned up side down. Furthermore,
evil for good, maleuolence for hospitalite, rapine for lodgyng, iniurye for
honor, for good say the he has rememberd al cruelty. He had no fear of the
gods, nor no reverence to his benefactors, nor to you, and much less to his
father Priamus, the which we learned to be a great obseruer of the gods and of
religion, and very careful that his son should not commit any such act or
misdede. But Paris nothing regarding all these things has ravished my wife,
and stolen my treasure and riches, besides that he has taken away my
servants, and diverse other things. But what need is it of so long a tale,
principally unto those to who^ the thing is notorius: The things which he
has brought hither do sufficiently show how greatly he has spoiled me.
Certes he is now rich to my great loss and hinderaunce. And to know more
largely the unworthiness of the fact, it needs not to send any man, but to go
into Paris house, and to question with him under this manner. How is this woman
thine, which thou possessist? Kepest thou Helen in thy house spoused by the
right of marriage, as Priamus holds thy mother? Then other as shamfast of the
case he shall falselye deny it, or else if he will tell the truth, he shall
openly confess his euel deed. Nor none of you in ye mean space ought to
think me importune, if I in my oration do speak freely: for at ye first we can
not obtain the thing that is ours. And of your selves ye can not comprehend
the veri^e of ye deed, if it were not largely declared unto you. By this means
it shall be easy to judge what an unworthy and how unfortunate this deed is.
And if one man do recite openly the thing wherewith he was offended, he is
grievous unto those that have committed or done such like things: how is it
reasonable that they should scandalize and shame themselves, which are wounded
and hurt with the self same deed? Furthermoore it is not possible to make a
man's quarrel apeare just, if he first declare not the author of ye crime to be
culpable. Thou see the^ how evident and how just our cause is. Uerelye there
are but two points that may justify him that is accused, yt is to wete, that
other he has committed the crime, or else if it so be, that with good right he
has committed it. If Paris then can not deny such rape not prove it just,
that which rests is of it self evident enough. What honest reason shall he
allege? I have taken her, says he, I hold her, in no wise be not tedius. To
have taken her, to hold her, is not enough Paris. He might have caused some
one to take that away, the which he ought not to take, and although he
possess the thing that is none of his, yet for all that it is not to be said,
that incontinent he has gotten the just possession of ye thing so ravished:
but so if there be no unrighteousness nor wrong: nor we ought not to have
respect to the thing which we have ravished, but much more be what reason, the
which thing we ought much more in such a case to consider. Thou see that
sacriligious persons remain not unpunished when they take or steal the thing
consecrated unto the gods. Furthermore, if the possession of the thing were
enough to defend him, whosoever should have possession, should also be sone
justified. Now (as me thinks) men should think that to be a vicious thing
that any man should hold and possess the thing which of right pertayneth
not unto him. It is not sufficient for a man to lai his hand upon a thing, but
he must of necessite have some right unto it. If Paris after he had chased
away his father, and before usurped the kingdom, would be lord over you and
your goods, should he be esteemed to tak upon him things honest and
reasonable. But contrariwise, his father being so secretly provoked could not
endure it, nor you another being advertised of the thing, but should rather
esteem him worthy as a misdoer to be punished. Therefore thou should not
excuse thy self to have taken the thing, but to show in taking thereof not to
have don amiss: for ye right is on my side, if Priamus be an equal judge. But he
says, we that dwell in this part of the earth, and ye that do inhabit the
other, are perpetual enemies. There is some right and reason to take, pyll^,
and bear away the goods of our enemies, so there be no other fault. Truth it
is Paris: but is it reasonable to lodge with a man's enemy, to receive gifts,
and other honest things? And as touching thy self, thou have received yt thou
most desire. Alas, you should not eue^ at the beginning of thy coming (O
noble Paris) approached so, but rather avoided the loges of thine enemy: thou
should not have received any benefit, nor have been so familier with those,
whose perpetual enemy thou reputest thy self before. And if for a certain
time thou vsedest them as good friends, how happened it, that afterward thou
vsedest them as enemies? And man this forsaid time there was not in me, where with
thou might have been offended, and therefore thou have none occasion of any
quarrel. If the^ at ye beginning thou heldest us for enemies, why did thou
dissemble it: Why saidest thou other wise then thou thoughtest in thy heart?
And if afterward thy will and mind being changed, thou would offend us,
answer us by the gods, for what demerite of ours. Certes you can bring no
reason at al, but that afterward thou co^ceiuedest in thy brain a very ^^tius
deed, to enter into my house as a geste, and to depart as an enemy.
Furthermore, to cloak thine astute and craftines with fair words, thou
tho^ghtest to disguyse and deface thy misdede. But yet thou can not persuade
ye deed to any man living otherwise then it is, because thy words are
repugnant to nature. For the thing yt we commonly do speak, ought to have some
agreement with nature If Paris had gone into Lacedemonia with a navy of ships, or
with a great host of men well appointed, if he had openly declared his enmite, if
with the sword in hand, or with shakinge of his spear he had done some force, it
had been reason he should have carried away the victory, other through fortune,
or else by virtue and strength: be it so that he had taken the town, and the
men, then Helen should have chaunsed unto him as a part of his bouty, let him
hold her, let her serve him. But we abuse our selves, taking vice for the wages
that men ought to receive of war. And although thou did show in all things,
as in ships, countenance, words, in manner of living, and con^ersation signs
of peace, yet the end was far contrary to ye beginning. Let it be known that
victory does far differ from theft, and soden taking wittely adorned with
warly virtue. For victory does declare the nobilite of the man, and
pusillanimite of such as accomplish by treason, that they can not by the
honesty of virtue. It is not peradventure to much unreasonable (so that the
laws of war permit and suffer it) that great men father them selves with
goods of their inferiors. Yea, but of his frewyl to attempt unto the goods
of ye more virtues, or who^ me^ durst never declare them selves enemies, is
truly a deed of extortion, and worthy to be punished. And because we have
endured and suffered great injury and wrong, we have brought our army into your
country and possessions, not as authors of wrong and evil doings, but as
reuengers of iniurye. As touching the rest, I persuade my self yt it is well
known and perceived by diverse points, that there remains nothing in Paris
but v^shamfastnes. Nevertheless our will and mind has been rather to use words
then wepons, and that for many reasons. First because it is a very worthy act
for an honest man, not lightlye to lay his his hand upon his wepon, but rather
attempt, if it be possible otherwise to recover the thing pretended.
Furthermore, lest it should seem just unto us for the misdede of one alone,
to make a universal punishment, the which thing in war necessarely does
chance. There men can not pardon nor spare the innocents, for whosoever
falls must needs remain. Fearyng then lest such cases should chance, or yt
any of you should fall into such affairs wherewith ye would not be molested, we
refuse not that the controversy be ended by legatio^s and suffrages, for we
believe the divine favor is most commonly conversant in marcial affairs, yt
which we do see every day in a manner to favor not those that interprise
most, but those that have most just cause.

Wherefore this cause abatynge our courage, have first of al used legations, to
thentent if that alone might suffice to the decision of our act, we should need
none other thing: otherwise we trusting to ye divine helpe^ and favor because
of the equity and truth of our cause, we come finally to the second effort and
help. Therefore consider the one and the other, and compare the fact and deed
of war, with verbal disceptation, wepons with words: likewise considering the
present felicite, and the misfortunes yt may chance to such things, choose of
two ways the better. It is very necessary (O ye people of Troy) in such
matters to use ripe and diligent counsel: for ye know right well, that an
error committed, can not afterward be restored to his perfectnes again. But
before the war begins, al his entire and whole: and easy it is not to fall
into smche inconvenience, but to fly and by mature deliberatio^ to avoid it.
For when the hand is lift up to the battle, the euels and misfortunes increase
without end, unto ye which victory alone, and no other condition be it never so
modest, can give any final end. Take heed therefore, yt ye choose not war in the
place of peace, lest that after ye have felt the inco^modities of the war, ye
repent you when the occasion shall be void and gone. Furthermore, if another war
nor no other danger should ensue and follow, yet it were necessary evermore to
choose the thing yt were just and reasonable. For this is very certain yt such
men have the acco^plishement of their desiers. Now if ye will afterward
examine the thing, ye shall have no leisure, although ye have a contrary will,
to do otherwise. Se ye not the companies of the Grecians spread about al your
country in so great a number that it being so little and so narowe can scarcely
receive the^? The which not withstanding they be thus gathered out of diverse
places, yet they have al one will to revenge even unto the end al those, that
have received injury. And in very deed they are so ready and so purposed to do
their best, that it is no need to bynd them by an oath, for they them selves
have so bound them selves with so religious and so strayte an oath, they if they
would refuse it, men might most easily co^strayne them. Now what man is so
unprovided of good wit, that will not render up the thing, the which finally he
may leese with great detriment and loss? Shall he delai it at al (O Jupiter)
because of the uncertain issue and end of the war? No by the gods, the end
is not uncertain, nor it is not to be doubted but that equ^tie shall receive
her reward before unrighteousness: and that the just shall receive another manner
of retribution, then the fauters of iniquity, if we need not to doubt another
of the one nor of the other, certaynely it is then vndoubtful, yt they which
have the iuster cause shall be victoriers and superiors in the war. And as
concerning those which ye hope to have to succur and aid you: I am sure that
many of our men will regard them no more, then if ye were sure to have a greater
nu^bre. And I say this, yt if the rest of ye men of war would stand still
without smiting of any stroke, that Ulixes alone is sufficient to annihilate
all your alies and confederates, and by wisdom and a fortunable spirit to
destroy the whole multitude. This that I do say, is not that I refuse or
avoid the war, or that I am otherwise desirous of new affairs. Certes it
is very easy for me to speak many other things, but it is not nedeful. For if
ye take not pleasure in the things before spoken, we should but in vain go
any further. Now I do call the great Jupiter hospital, and all the other
gods and spirits the rulers of this province to witness, that we being first
styrde and provoked, are come in arms against Troy, and yet at this present
do desire to end this matter by words only: and that we begin not, nor
by any means do stir up war, but as constrained by our enemies.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Paul's churcheyard, at the sign of the holy ghost, by
John Cawood prynter to the Queens hyghnes.


