THE QVEENES ARCADIA. A Pastoral Trage-comedie presented to her Majesty and
her Ladies, by the University of Oxford in Christ's Church, in August last.
1605.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Simon Waterson, 1606.

The names of the Actors.
Melibaeus. two ancient Arcadians. Ergastus. Colax, a corrupted traveler.
Techne. a s^btle wench of Corinth. Amyntas. the lovers of Cloris. Carinus.
Cloris. Palaemon. jealous Lovers. Siluia. Mirtillus. Dorinda. Amarillis, in
love with Carinus. Daphne, abused by Colax. Alcon, a Quack^^^^. Lincus,
Petyfogger. Montanus, the father of Amyntas. A^rysius, the father of Cloris.
Pistophoenax, a (...) of (...)
To the Queens most exccellent Majesty.
THat which their zeal, whose only zeal was bent
To show the best they could, that might delight
Your royal mind, did lately represent
Renowned Empress to your Princely sight:
Is now the offering of their humbleness;
Here consecrated to your glorious name;
Whose happy presence did voutchsafe to bless
So poor presentiments, and to grace the same:
And though it be in th'humblest rank of words,
And in the lowest region of our speech,
Yet is it in that kind, as best accords
With rural passions, which use not to reach
Beyond the groves, and woods where they were bred
And best become a claustrall exercise,
Where men shut out, retired, and sequestered
From public fashion, seem to sympathize
With innocent, and plain simplicity:
And living here under the awful hand
Of discipline, and strict obseruancie,
Learn but our weaknesses to understand,
And therefore dare not enterprise to show
In louder style the hidden mysteries,
And arts of Thrones, which none that are below
The Sphere of action, and the exercise
Of power, can truly show: though men may strain
Conceit above the pitch where it should stand,
And form more monstrous figures then contain
A possibility, and go beyond
The nature of those managements so far,
As often their common decency they mar:
Whereby the populasse (in whom such skill
Is needless) may be brought to apprehend
Notions, that may turn all to a taste of ill
What ever power shall do, or might intend:
And think all cunning, all proceeding one,
And nothing simple, and sincerely done:
Yet the eye of practice, looking down from hie
Upon such ouer-reaching vanity,
Sees how from error t'error it does slote,
As from an unknown Ocean int' a Gulf:
And how though th'Woolfe, would counterfeit the Goat,
Yet every chinke bewrayes him for a Woolfe.
And therefore in the view of state to have showd
A counterfeit of state, had been to light
A candle to the Sun, and so bestowd
Our pains to bring our dimnesse unto light.
For majesty, and power, can nothing see
Without it self, that can sight-worthy be.
And therefore durst not we but on the ground,
From whence our humble Argument has birth
Erect our Scene, and thereon are we found,
And if we fall, we fall but on the earth,
From whence we plucked the flowers that here we bring;
Which if at their first opening they did please,
It was enough, they serve but for a spring,
The first sent is the best in things as these:
Amusicke of this nature on this ground,
Is ever wont to vanish with the sound.
But yet your royal goodness may raise new,
Grace but the Muses they will honor you.
Chi non fa, non falla.
THE QVEENES ARCADIA.
Actus primi.
Scena. I.
Ergastus. Melibaeus. Erg. HOw is it Melibaeus that we find
Our Country, fair, Arcadia, so much changd
From what it was, that was thou know of late,
The gentle region of plain honesty,
The modest seat, of vndisguised truth,
Inhabited with simple innocence:
And now, I know not how, as if it were,
Unhallowed, and diuested of that grace,
Has put off that fair nature which it had,
And grows like ^uder countries, or more bad.

Mal. Indeed Ergastus I have never known,
So universal a distemperature,
In all parts of the body of our state,
As now there is; nor ever have we heard
So much complaining of disloyalty,
Amongst our younger Nymphs, nor ever found
Our heardsmen so deluded in their loves,
As if there were no faith on either side.
We never had in any age before
So many spotless Nymphs, so much distaind
With black report, and wrongful infamy,
That few escape the tongue of malice free.

Erg. And me thinks too, our very air is changd,
Our wholesome climate grown more maladiue,
The fogges, and the Syrene offends us more
(Or we made think so) then they did before,
The winds of Autumn, now are said to bring
More noysomnesse, then those do of the Spring:
And all of us feel new in ^^^mities,
New Fevers, new Catarres, oppress our powers,
The milk wherewith we cured all maladies,
Has either lost the nature, or we ours.

Mel. And we that never were accustomed
To quarrel for our bounds, how do we see
Montanus and Acrysius inter-striue
How far their several Sheep-walkes should extend,
And cannot be agreed do what we can:
As if some vnderworking hand struck fire,
To th'apt inkindling tinder of debate,
And fostred their contention and their hate.

Erg. And me thinks too, the beauty of our Nymphs
Is not the same, as it was wont to be.
That Rosy hew, the glory of the Cheek,
Is either stolen, or else they have forgot,
To blush with shame, or to be pale with fear:
Or else their shame does make them always blush^
For always does their beauties bear one hew,
And either Nature's false, or that untrue.

Mel. Besides their various habits grow so strange,
As that although their faces certain are,
Their bodies are uncertain every day,
And always diffring from themselves so far,
As if they scorned to be the same they are.
And all of us are so transformd, that we
Discern not an Arcadian by th^attyre,
Our ancient Pastoral habits are dispisd,
And all is strange, hearts, clothes, and all disguisd.

Erg. Indeed unto our grief we may perceive,
The whole complexion of Arcadia changed,
Yet cannot find the occasion of this change:
But let us with more wary eye observe
Whence the contagion of these customs rise,
That have infected thus our honest plains,
With cunning discord, idle vanity,
Deceiptfull wrong, and causeless infamy.
That by the assistance of our grauer Swains,
We now at first, may labor to prevent
The further course of mischiefs, and restore
Our late clean woods, to what they were before.

Mel. Content Ergastus, and even here will be
A place convenient for so fit a work:
For here our Nymphs, and heardsmen on this Green,
Do usually resort, and in this Grove
We may observe them best, and be unseen.

Actus. 1. Scen. 2.
Colax. Techne. Col. Come my dear Techne, thou and I must plotte
More cunning proiects yet, more strange designs
Amongst these simple gross Arcadians here,
That know no other world, but their own plains,
Nor yet can apprehend the subtle trains
We lay, to mock their rural ignorance.
But see, here comes two of their amorous Swains
In hot contention, let us close convey
Our selves, here underneath this couerture,
And ouer-heare their passionate discourse.

Tec. Colax, this place well such a purpose fits,
Let us sit close, and faith, it shall go hard,
Unless we make some profit by their wits.

Carinus. Amyntas. Ca. Now fond Amyntas, how came thou possessed
With such a vain presumption, as thou art,
To think that Cloris should affect thee best,
When all Arcadia knows I have her heart?

Am. And how Carinus can thou be so mad,
T'imagine Cloris, can, or does love thee,
When by so many signs, as I have had,
I find her whole affection bent to me?

Ca. What are those signs by which you come to cast,
And calculate the fortune of your hopes?

Am. More certain signs, then thou can ever show.

Car. But they are more then signs, that I can show.

Am. Why let each then produce the best he can,
To prove which may be thought the likeliest man.

Car. Content Amyntas, and do thou begin.

Am. And I am well contented to begin.
First if by chance, whilst she at Barely-breake
With other Nymphs, do but perceive me come,
Straight looks her cheek with such a Rosy red,
As gives the setting Sun unto the West
When morrow t^mpests are prefigured.

Car. Even so that hew prognosticates her wrath,
Which brings to thee, the stormy winds of sighs.

Am. And if I find her, with her fellow Nymphs
Gathering of flowers by some sweet Rivers side,
At my approach she straight way stands ^pright,
Forgets her work, and down lets slide her lap,
And out fall all her flowers, upon the ground.

Car. So does the silly sheep forg^t to feed,
When it perceiues the greedy Wolf at hand.

Am. And if she meet but with my d^g, she takes
And strokes him on the head plays with his ears,
Spits in his mouth, and claps him on the back,
And says, come, come Melampus go with me.

Car. She may love what is thine, but yet hate thee.

Am. Whilst at a Crystal spring the other day,
She washed her lovely face, and seeing me come,
She takes up water with her dainty hand,
And with a down cast look besprinckles me.

Car. That shows that she would gladly quench in thee
The fire of love, or else like love does bear,
As did the Delian Goddess, when she cast
Disdainefull water on Actaeons face.

Am. As Siluia, one day, sat with her alone,
Binding of certain choice selected herbs
To her leaft arm, against bewitching spells;
(And I at the instant coming) she perceived
Her pulse with far more violence to beat
(As sh' after told me) then it did before.

Car. The like is felt when natures enemy,
The hateful fever, does surprise our powers.

Am. And even but yester night, she going before
With other maids, and seeing me following her,
Lets fall this dainty Nosegay, having first
Bestowd a kiss thereon, to the end I might
Receive it so, and with it do the like.

Car. Poor withred favors, they might teach thee know,
That she esteems thee, and thy love as light
As those dead flowers, she wore but for a show,
The day before, and cast a way at night.

Am. Now friend Carinus, thou that mutterest so
At these plain speaking figures of her love,
Tell by what signs thou do her favors prove?

Car. Now silly man, do thou imagine me
So fond to blab the favors of my love?

Am. Was It not a pact agreed twixt thee and me?

Car. A pact to make thee tell thy secrecy.

Am. And have thou then betrayed my easy trust,
And dallyed with my open simpleness?

Car. And fitly art thou served, that so wilt vaunt
The imagined favors, of a gentle Nimphe;
And this is that which makes us feel that dearth
Of grace, to have kindness at so hie a rate.
This makes them wary how they do bestow
The least regard of common courtesy,
When such as you poo^e, oredulous, devout,
And humble souls, make all things miracles
Your faith conceiues, and vainly do convert
All shadows to the figure of your hopes.

Am. Carinus now thou do me double wrong,
First to deride my easy confidence,
And then t'obrayd my trust, as if my tongue
Had here profaned fair Cloris excellence,
In telling of her mercies, or had sinned
In vttring the honor of a modest grace
Bestowing comfort, in so just a case.

Car. Why man, thou have no way deserved her love.

Am. Desert I cannot urge, but faith I can,
If that may have reward, then happy man.

Car. But you know how I saved her from the hands
Of that rude Satyr, who had else undone
Her honor utterly; and therefore ought
My love of due reign Sovereign in her thought.

Am. But how that free and unsubdued heart,
Infranchisd by the Charter of her eyes,
Will bear the imposition of a due
I do not see, since love knew never Lord
That could command the region of our will.
And therefore urge thy due, I for my part,
Must plead compassion, and a faithful heart.

Car. Plead thou thy faith, whilst I will get thy love,
For you kind souls do seldom graceful prove.

Am. The more unkind they, who should better way
Our honest vows, and love, for love repay,
But often they bear the penance of their will,
And for the wrong they do, they speed as ill.

Scen. 3.
Colax. Techne. Col. Alas poor fools, how hotely they contend
Who shall possess a prey that is yet vngot.
But Techne, I must by thy help forestall
The mart of both their hopes, and whilst they shall
Pursue the Air, I must surprise their gain.
And fitly now, thou may occasion take
By these advantages discovered here,
T'impresse in Cloris tender heart that touch
Of deep dislike of both their vanteries,
As may convert her wholly unto me.

Tec. Why will you then Dorindas love forsake,
For whom you trauayld so, and made me take
Such labor to entice her to your love?

Col. Tush Techne we desire not what we have,
But what we would, our longings never stay
With our attainings, but they go beyond.

Tec. And why? Dorinda is as fair as she.

Col. That I confess, but yet that pays not me,
For Cloris is another and it is that,
And only that, which Techne I desire.
Some thing there is peculiar, and alone
To every beawtie that does give an edge
To our desires, and more we still conceive
In that we have not, then in that we have.
And I have heard, abroad where best experience,
And wit is learnd, that all the fairest choice
Of women in the world, serve but to make
One perfect beauty, whereof each bringes part.
One has a pleasing smile, and nothing else:
Another but some silly Mole to grace
The area of a disproportioned face;
Another pleases not but when she speaks,
And some in silence only graceful are:
Some till they laugh, we see, seem to be fair,
Some have their bodies good, their gestures ill,
Some please in Motion, some in sitting still,
Some are thought lovely, that have nothing fair,
Some again fair that nothing lovely are.
So that we see how beauty does consist
Of diverse pieces, and yet all attract
And therefore unto al my love aspires,
As beauty varies, so does my desires.

Tec. Ah but yet Colax do not so much wrong
Unto a Nymph, now when thou have subdude
And won her heart, and know she holds thee dear.

Col. Tush wrong is as men think it, and I see
It keeps the world the best in exercise
That else would languish, and have naught to do.
Discord in parts, makes harmon' in the whole:
And some must laugh, whilst othersome condole.
And so it be not of the side we are,
Let others bear it, what need we to care.
And now Dorinda something has to do,
Now she may sit, and think, and vex, and plott,
For ease, and ioying of her full delight
Would but have dulld her spirits and marrd her quite.

Tec. Alas yet I must pity her poor soul
In this distress, I being one my self
Of that frail corporation, and do know
That she will take it very grievously.
And yet in troth sh'is serud but well inow,
That would neglect Mirtillus honest love,
And trust strange protestations, and new oaths,
Be won with guarded words, and gawdie chothes.

Col. Well, well, Dorinda shall not wail alone,
She shall have others to consort her moan:
For since my late return from Telos Court
I hauemade twenty of their coyest Nymphs
Turn lovers, with a few protesting words
And some choice complementall periuries;
I made Palaemon, to suspect the faith
Of his chaste Siluia, and chaste Siluia his,
In hope thereby to work her love to me.
I wrought coy Daphne to infringe her vow
Made to Menalcas, and I told her how
Those fetters which so heavily were laid
Upon our free affections, only were
But customary bands, not natural.
And I think Techne thou have done thy part,
Here, in this gentle region of kind hearts,
Since thou came hither, for I see thou thriu'st.

Tec. In deed whilst I in Corinth did remain,
I hardly could procure the means to live,
There were so many of my trade, that sold
Complexions, dressings, tiffanies and tyres,
Devisors of new fashions and strange wiers
Bedbrokers, night worms, and Compositors
That though I knew these arts as well as they
yet being so many we could get small pay.
Here, who but Techne now is all in all?
Techne is sent for, Techne only shows
New strange devises to the choycest Nymphs:
And I think Techne teaches them those tricks.
As they will not forget again in haste.
I have so opened their unapt conceits
Unto that understanding of themselves,
As they will show in time they were well taught,
If they observe my rules, and hide a fault.

Col. Ah well done Techne. Thus must thou and I
Trade for our profit with their ignorance,
And take our time, and they must have their chance.
But pray thee Techne, do not thou forget
To lay a train for Cloris. So adieu.

Tec. Colax I will not, and the rather too,
For that I bear a little leaning love
To Sweet Amyntas, for me thinks he seems
The loueliest Shepherd all Arcadia yeeldes
And I would gladly intercept his love,

Scena. 4.
Melibaeus. Ergastus. Meli. So this is well. Here Is one discovery made;
Here are the heads of that distemperature,
From whence these strange deban'shme^ts of our nimphs
And vile deluding of our Shepheadrs Springs:
Here is a monster, that has made his ^ustes
As wide as is his will, and leaft his will
Without all bounds, and cares not whom he wrongs,
So that he may his own desires fulfill,
And being all foul himself, would make all ill.
This is that Colax that from foreign lands,
Has brought home that infection which undoes
His country goodness, and impoysons all.
His being abroad would mar us quite, at home.
It Is strange to see, that by his going out,
He has out-gone that native honesty,
Which here the breeding of his country gave.
For here I do remember him a child,
The son of Nicoginus of the Hill,
A man though low in fortune, yet in mind
High set, a man still practicing
T'aduance his forward son beyond the train
Of our, Arcadian breed, and still me thought
I saw a disposition in the youth,
Bent to a self conceipted surlinesse,
With an insinuating impudence.

Erg. A man the fitter made for Courts abroad,
Where I would God he had remained still,
With those loose-liuing wanton Sybarites,
Where luxury, has made her outmost proof.
From whence Pheare he comes, and hither brings
Their shames, to brand us with the like reproach.
And for this other viper, which you saw,
I do remember how she came of late
For succor to these parts, and sought to teach
Our younger maids to dress, and try out Flax,
And use the Distaffe, and to make a hem,
And such like skill, being skill enough for them,
But since I see she has presumed to deal
In points of other science, different far
From that plain Art of honest huswiferie,
And as it seems has often made repair
Unto the neighbor Cities round about,
From whom she has these strange disguises go^
To Abuse our Nymphs, and as it seems desires,
To suit their minds, as light as their attires,
But we shall soon prevent this growing plague,
Of pride, and folly, now that she discry
The true symptoma of this malady,
And by this ouerture thus made, we trust
We shortly shall discover all the rest.

Actus 2.
Scen. 1.
Siluia. Cloris. Sil. O Cloris, here have thou and I full often
Sat and been merry, in this shadie Grove.
Here have we sung full many a Rundelay,
Told Riddles, and made Nosegayes, laughed at love,
And others passions, whilst my self was free,
From that Intolerable misery,
Whereto affection now inuassells me.
Now Cloris I shall never more take joy
To see, or to be seen, with mortal eye,
Now sorrow must be all my company.

Clo. Why Siluia, whence, should all this grief arise?

Sil. I am undone Cloris, let that suffice.

Clo. Tell me, sweet Siluia, how comes that to pass?

Sil. O Cloris if thou be, as once, I was
Free, from that miserable plague of love,
Keep thee so still, let my affliction warn
Thy youth, that never man have power, to move
Thy heart to liking, for believe me this,
They are the most unfaithful impious race
Of creatures on the earth; never believe
Their protestations, nor their vows, nor tears,
All is deceit, none means the thing he swears.
Trust a man's faith? nay rather will I go
And give my self a prey to Savage beasts,
For all they seek, and all they labor for,
Is but t'vndoe us, and when that is done,
They go and triumph on the spoil the'haue won.
Trust men, or take compassion when they grieve,
O Cloris it is to chearish and relieve
The frozen Snake, which with our heat once warmd,
Will sting us to the heart in recompense,
And o no marvel tho the Satyr shund,
To live with man, when he perceived he could,
With one and the same breath blow heat and cold.
Who would have ever thought Palaemons oaths
Would have proved false? who would have iudgd the face
That promisd so much faith, and honesty,
Had been the visor but of treachery?

Clo. Is It possible Palemon should b'vntrue?

Sil. It Is possible, Palaemon is untrue.

Clo. If it be so, dear Siluia, I think then
That thou say truth, there is no trust in men,
For I protest I never saw a face
That promisd better of a heart then his,
And if he fail, whose faith then constant is?

Sil. O Cloris if thou did but know how long,
And with what earnest suite, he sought my love,
What vows he vsd, what oaths, what tears among^
What shows he made, his constancy to prove,
You would admire: and then again to see
How I although I loved him with my heart
Stood out, and would by no means urged be,
To show the least affection of my part.
For I had heard that, which (o now too well)
I find, that men were cunning, and would not
Regard the thing that easily was got.

Clo. Siluia, indeed and I have heard so too.

Sil. And therefore I would try him, and not seem
His vows, nor protestations to esteem,
At length one day, here in this selfsame place,
(Which I shall ever, and good cause I have
To think on whilst I live) walking with me,
After he had vrgd me most earnestly:
O Siluia, said he, since nor oath, nor vow,
Nor tears, nor prayers, have the power to move,
Nor all that I can do, can make thee know
How true a heart, I offer to thy love;
I must try some way else to show the same,
And make thy undiscerning wilful youth
Know, though too late, (perhaps unto thy shame)
Thy wayward error, and my constant truth:
When thou may sigh, and say in grief of mind,
Palaemon loved, and Siluia was unkind.
With that wringing my hand, he turns away,
And though his tears would hardly let him look,
Yet such a look, did through his tears make way,
As showed how sad a farewell there he took.
And up toward yonder craggie Rock he goes,
His arms incross'd, his head down on one side,
With such a mournful pace, as showed his woes
Way'd heavier then his passions could abide:
Feign would I have recald him back, but shame,
And modesty could not bring forth his name:
And feign would I have followed, yet me thought
It did not fit the honor of a maid
To follow one, yet still I sent from me,
To Attend his going, fear, and a careful eye.
At length when he was gotten to the top,
I might perceive how with unfolded arms,
And looks bent up to heaven, he stands, and turns
His woeful face unto the other side,
Whereas that hidious fearful downfall is:
And seemed as if he would have thrown him off:
And as I thought, was now upon the point:
When my affrighted powers could hold no more,
But pity breaking all those bands of shame,
That held me back; I shrikd, and ran, God knows,
With all the speed my feeble feet could make,
And clammering up at length (with much adoo)
Breathless I got, and took him by the hand,
And glad I had his hand, and was not come
Too late to have it, and I pulled him back:
But could not speak one word, no more did he,
Sense seemed to fail in him, and breath in me.
And on before I went, and lead him on,
And down conducted him into this plain.
And yonder lo, under that fatal tree,
Look Cloris there, even in that very place,
We sat us down, my arm about his neck,
Which Jove thou know held never man before:
There only did my tears confer with his,
Words we had none, it was enough to think,
For passion was too busy now within,
And had no time to come abroad in speech.
And though I would have spoken, yet me thought
I should not, but my silence told him this,
That told too much, that all I was was his.

Clo. Well Siluia, I have heard so sad a tale,
As that I grieve to be a woman borne,
And that by nature we must be exposd
Unto the mercy of unconstant men.
But what said then Palaemon in the end?

Sil. Oh what he said, and what deep vows he made,
When joy and grief, had let his senses loose.
Witness o gentle tree under whose shade,
We sat the while; witness if ever maid
Had more assurances by oaths of man.
And well may you bear witness of this deed,
For in a thousand of your barks he has
Incaru'd my name, and vnderwrote his vows,
Which will remain so long as you bear bows.
But, Cloris, learn this lesson now of me;
Take head of pity, pity was the cause
Of my confusion, pity has undone
Thousands of gentle natures, in our sex,
For pity is sworn servant unto love,
And this be sure, where ever it begin
To make the way, it lets your master in.

Clo. But what assurance have you of his fraud:
It may be you suspect him without cause?

Sil. Ah Cloris, Cloris, would I had no cause,
He who beheld him wrong me in these woods,
And heard him courting Nisa, and protest
As deep to her, as he had done to me,
Told me of all his wicked t^eachery.

Clo. Pray who was that? tell me good Siluia, tell.

Sil. Why it was Colax, one I know full well
would not report untruths to gain the world,
A man of virtue, and of worthy parts,
He told me all and more then I will show,
I would I knew not half of that I know
Ah had he none but Nisa that base trull,
The scorn and jest of all Arcadia now
To serve his lusts, and falsify his vow?
Ah had it yet been any else, the touch
Of my disgrace, had never bin so much
But to be leaft for such a one as she,
The stale of all, what will folk think of me?
Cloris in troth, it makes me so much loath
My self, loath these woods, and even hate the day,
As I must hide my griefs out of the way
I will be gone, Cloris, I leave thee here,
I cannot stay, and prithee, Cloris, yet
Pity thy poor companion Siluias care,
And let her fortune make thee to beware.

Clo. Siluia adieu, the Gods relieve thy woes,
Since men thus fail, and love no pity shows,

Scen. 2.
Cloris. Techne. Clo. Love? nay, I Am taught for loving whilst I live,
Siluia, thy council has locked up my heart
So fast from love, as let them sigh, and grieve,
And pine, and wail who will, I for my part
Will pity none of all this race of men.
I see what shows so ever they pretend,
Their love is never deadly, none of these
That languish thus, have did of this disease
That ever I could hear, I see all do
Recover soon, that happen thereinto.
And if they did not, there were no great hurt,
They may endure, they are of stronger powers,
Better their hearts should ache, then they break ours.
Well had I not been thus forewarnd to day,
Out of all question, I had shortly fal^e,
Into the melting humor of compassion too;
That tender pity that betrays us thus.
For something I began to feel, me thought,
To move within me, when as I beheld
Amyntas walk so sadly, and so pale,
And ever where I went, still in my way,
His looks bent all to me, his care of me,
Which well I saw, but would not seem to see.
But now he has his arrent, let him go,
Pity shall never cure that heart of his
T'vndoo mine own, the grief is best where it is.

Tec. What Cloris al alone, now fie for shame,
How ill does this become so fair a face,
And that fresh youth to be with out your love?

Clo. Love Techne? I have here as many loves
As I intend to have, whilst I have breath.

Tec. Nay that you have not, never hault with me,
For I know two at least possessors be
Of your kind favors, as themselves do boste.

Clo. Boste of my favors, no man rightly can.
And otherwise, let them say what they can.

Tec. No Cloris did not you the other night
A gallant nosegay to Amyntas give?

Clo. I never gave him nosegay in my life.

Tec, Then trust me Cloris he does wrong you much:
For he produced it there in open sight,
And vaunted to Carinus, that you first,
Did kiss the same, then gave it unto him:
And told too, how far gone you were in love,
What passion you would use, when he was by,
How you would jest with him, and wantonly
Cast water in his face; call his dog yours,
And show him your affections by your eye.
And then Carinus on the other side
He vaunts, that since he had redeemed you
Out of the satyrs hands, he could command
Your love and all, that you were only his.
This and much more, I heard them I protest
Give out of you, how truly you know best.

Clo. Techne, their idle talk, shall not vex me,
I know the ground I stand on, and how free
My heart, and I inioye our liberty,
And it Amyntas, has interpreated
My look, according to his own conceit,
He has m^stooke the text, and he shall find
Great difference, twixt his comment, and my mind
And for his Nosegay it shall make me take
More care hereafter how I scatter flowers:
Let him preserve it well, and let him make
Much of his gains, he gets no more of ours.
But thus had I been served, had I reueald
The least regard of common courtesy
To such as these: but I do thank the Gods
I have reserved me, from that vanity:
For ever I suspected this to be
The vain of men, and this now settles me.
And for Carinus, let him vaunt what good
He did for me, he can but have again
My hearty thanks, the payment for his pain,
And that he shall^ and ought in woman-hood.
And as for love, let him go look on her
That sits, and grieves, and languishes for him,
Poor Amarillis, who affects him dear,
And sought his love with many an woeful tear.
And well deserves a better man then be,
Though he be rich Lupinus son, and stands
Much on his wealth, and his ability,
She'is witty, fair and full of modesty.
And were she of my mind, she rather would
Pull out her eyes, then that she would be seen,
To offer up so dear a sacrifice
To his wild youth, that scorns her in that wise.

Tec. Cloris in troth, I like thy judgment well,
In not affecting of those homebred Swains,
That know not how to manage true delight,
Can neither hide their love, nor show it right.
Who would be troubled with gross ignorance,
That understands not truly how to love?
No Cloris, if thou did but know, how well
Thou art esteemd, of one that knows indeed
How to observe thy worth, and his own ways,
How to give true delight, how to proceed
With secrecy, and wit, in all aslayes,
Perhaps you might think one day of the man.

Clo. What is this creature then you praise a man?

Tec. A man? yes Cloris, what should he be else?

Clo. Naught else, it is enough he be a man.

Tec. Yea and so rare a man as ever yet
Arcadia bred, that may be proud she bred
A person of so admirable parts,
A man that knows the world, has seen abrod,
Brings those perfections that do truly move,
A gallant spirit, an understanding love.
O if you did but know how sweet it were,
To come unto the bed of worthiness,
Of knowledge, of conceit, where strange delights
With strange discourses still shall intertaine
Your pleased thoughts, with fresh variety,
Ah you would loath to have your youth confin'de,
For ever more, between th'vnskilfull arms
Of one of these rude vnconceiuing Swains,
Who would but seem a trunk without a mind;
As one that never saw but these poor plains,
Knows but to keep his sheep, and set his fold.
Pipe on an Oaten Reed, some Rundelayes,
And dance a Morris on the holidays.
And so should you be always sweetly sped
With ignorance, and two fools in a bed.
But with this other gallant spirit you should
Be sure to ouerpasse that tediousness,
And that saciety which cloyes this life,
With such a variable cheerfulness,
As you will bless the time to have been his wife.

Clo. What has this man you thus commend fa name?

Tec. A name? why yes, no man but has a name.
His name is Colax, and is one I swear
Does honor even the ground whereon you tread,
And often, and many many times, God knows,
Has he with tender passion, talked of you:
And said; Well, there is one within these woods
(Meaning by you) that yet of all the Nymphs
Mine eyes have ever seen upon the earth,
In all perfections does exceed them all.
For all the beauties in that glorious Court
Of Telos, where I lived, nor all the Stars
Of Greece beside, could sparkle in my heart,
The fire of any heat but only she.
Then would he stay, and sigh; and then again
Ah what great pity such a creature should
Be tide unto a clogge of ignorance,
Whose body does deserve to be embraced,
By the most mighty Monarch upon earth.
Ah that she knew her worth, and how unfit
That private woods should hide, that face, that wit.
Thus has he often said, and this I say,
Observe him when you will, you shall not see
From his hye forehead, to his slender foot,
A man in all parts, better made then he.

Clo. Techne, me thinks, the praises that you give
Shows your own love, and if he be that man
You say, 'twere good you kept him for your self.

Tec. I must not love impossibilities,
Cloris, he were a most fit man for you.

Clo. For me? alas Techne you move too late.

Tec. Why have you past your promise t'any yet?

Clo. Yes sure, my promise is already past.

Tec. And if it be, I trust you are so wise
T'vnpasse the same again for your own good.

Clo. No that I may not when it is once past.

Tec. No Cloris, I presume that wit of yours.
That is so piersiue, can conceive how that
Our promise must not prejudice our good:
And that it is no reason that the tongue,
Tie the whole body to eternal wrong.

Clo. The tongue is but the Agent of the heart.
And only as commissioner allowd
By reason, and the will, for the whole state,
Which warrants all it shall negotiate.

Tec. But prithee tell me to what rustic Swain
You passed your word to cast away your self?

Clo. No I have past my word to save my self
From the deceiptfull, impious periuries
Of treacherous men, and vowed unto my heart,
Until I see more faith then yet I see,
None of them all shall triumph over me.

Tec. Nay then, and be no otherwise it is well,
We shall have other time to talk of this.
But Cloris I have fitted you in faith,
I have here brought, the most conceipted tire,
The rarest dressing ever Nymph put on.
Worth ten of that you wear, that now me thinks
Does not become you, and besides it is s^ale.

Clo. Stale why? I have not worn it scarce a month.

Tec. A month? why you must change the^ twice a day.
Hold hither Cloris, this was not well laid,
Here is a fault, you have not mixed it well
To make it take, or else it is your haste
To come abroad so soon into the Air.
But I must teach you to amend these faults,
And ere I shall have done with you, I think,
I shall make some of these inamored youths
To hang themselves, or else run mad for love.
But go let us try this dressing I have brought.

Scen. 3.
Palaemon. Mirtillus. Pal. Mirtillus did Dorinda ever vow,
Or make thee any promise to be thine?

Mir. Palaemon no, she never made me vow,
But I did ever hope she would be mine.
For that I had delivered up my youth,
My heart, my all, a tribute to her eyes,
And had secured her of my constant truth,
Under so many faithful specialties,
As that although she did not grant again,
With any show the acquittance of my love
Yet did she ever feeme to intertaine
My affections, and my services t'approoue.
Till now of late I know not by what mean,
(Ill fare that mean) she grew to that dispight,
As she not only clouds her favors clean,
But also scorned to have me in her ^gsight.
That now I am not for her love thus, moved
But only that she will not be beloved.

Pal. I^ this be all the occasion of thy grief,
Mirtillus, thou art then in better case
Then I supposed, and therefore cheer thy heart,
And good cause too, being in the state thou art.
For if thou did but hear the history
Of my distress, and whatpart I have shared
Of sad affliction, thou will then soon see
There is no misery unless compared.
For all Arcadia, all these hills, and plains,
These holts and woods and every Crystal spring.
Can testify my tears, and tell my flames,
And with how cleene a heart, how clear a faith
Palaemon loved Siluia, and how long.
And when consumed with grief, and dried with care.
Even at the point to sacrifice my life
Unto her cruelty, then lo she yields,
And was content for ever to be mine:
And gave m'assurance underneath her hand,
Signed with a faithful vow, as I conceived,
And witnessed with many a lovely kiss,
That I thought sure I had attaine'd my bliss.
And yet (aye me) I got not what I got,
Siluia I have, and yet I have her not.

Mir. How may that be, Palaemon pray thee tell?

Pal. O know Mirtillus that I rather could
Run to some hollow cave, and burst and die
In darkness, and in horror, then unfold
Her shameful stain, and mine own infamy.
But yet it will abroad, her impudence
willbe the trumpet of her own disgrace,
And fill the wide, and open mouth of fame
So full, as all the world shall know the same.

Mir. Why what is Siluia false, or is she gone?

Pal. Siluia is false and I am quite undone.

Mil. Ah out alas who ever would have thought,
That modest look, so innocent a face,
So chaste a blush, that shamefast countenance,
Could ever have told how to wantonise?
Ah what shall we poor lovers hope for now
Who must to win, consume, and having won
With hard and much ado, must be undone?

Pal. Ah but Mirtillus if thou did know who
Is now the man, her choice has lighted on,
How would thou wonder? for that passes all,
That I abhor to tell: yet tell I shall;
For all that would will shortly know it too well:
It is base Thyrsis that wild hare-braine youth
Whom every milkmaid in Arcadia skornes:
Thyrsis is now the man with whom she walks
Alone, in thickets, and in groves remote.
Thyrsis is all in all, and none but he,
With him she dally, under every tree.
Trust women? ah Mirtillus, rather trust
The Summer winds, The Oceans constancy,
For all their substance is but le^itie:
Light are their wauing vailes, light their attires,
Light are their heads, and lighter their desires:
Let them lay on what couerture they will
Upon themselves, of modesty and shame,
They cannot hide the woman with the same.
Trust women? ah Mirtillus rather trust
The false devouring Crocodiles of Nile,
For all they work is but deceit and guile:
What have they but is faind? their hair is faind,
Their beauty feigned, their stature feigned, then pace,
Their iesture, motion, and their grace is fain'd^
And if that all be feigned without, what then
Shall we suppose can be sincere within?
For if they do but weep, or sing, or smile,
Smiles, tears, and tunes, are ingins to beguile.
And all they are, and all they have of grace,
Consists but in the outside of a face.
O love and beauty, how are you ordaind
Like unto fire, whose flames far of delight,
But if you be embraced consume us quight?
Why cannot we make at a lower rate
A purchase of you, but that we must give
The treasure of our hearts, and yet not have
What we have bought so dearly for all that?
O Siluia if thou needs would have been gone,
Thou should have taken all away of thee;
And nothing leaft to have remained with me.
Thou should have carried hence the portraiture
Which thou have left behind within my heart,
Set in the table-frame of memory,
That puts me still in mind of what thou were,
Whilst thou were honest, and thy thoughts were pure,
So that I might not thus in every place,
Where I shall set my careful foot, confer
With it of thee, and evermore be told,
That here sat Siluia underneath this tree,
And here she walked, and len't upon mine arm,
There gathred flowers, and brought them unto me.
Here by the murmour of this rusling spring,
She sweetly lay, and in my bosom slept:
Here first she showed me comforts when I pin'de:
As if in every place her foot had s^ept,
It had least Siluia in a print behind.
But yet, o these were Siluias images,
Then whilst her heart held fair, and she was chaste,
Now is her face all sullied with her fact,
And why are not those former prints defaced?
Why should she hold, still in the form she was,
Being now deformed, and not the same she was?
O that I could Mirtillus lock her out
Of my remembrance, that I might no more
Have Siluia here, when she will not be here.

Mir. But good Palaemon, tell what proofs have thou
Of her disloyalty, that makes thee show
These heavy passions, and to grieve so much?

Pal. Mirtillus, proofs, that are alas too plain;
For Colax one thou know can well observe
And judge of love, a man both staid, and wise,
A gentle heardsman, out of love, and care
He had of me, came and reported all:
And how he saw them diverse times alone,
Embracing each the other in the woods,
Besides she has of late with sullaine looks,
That showed disliking, shund my company,
Kept her aloof, and now I think to day,
Is gone to hide her quite our of the way.
But Siluia though thou goo and hide thy face,
Thou can not ^ide thy shame, and thy disgrace,
No secret thicket, grove, nor yet close grott,
Can cover shame, and that immodest blot.
Ah did thou lend thy hand in kind remorse,
To save me from one death, to give m'a worse?
Had it not ye^ been better I had died,
By thy unspotted honest cruelty,
Then now by thy disgraced infamy?
That so I might have carried to my grave,
The image of chaste Siluia in my heart,
And not have had these notions, to ingraue
A stained Siluia there, as now thou art?
Ah yes, it had been better far, I prove,
To Have perished for thy love, then with thy love.

Mir. Ah good Palaemon cease these sad complaints,
And moderate thy passions, thou shall see
She may return, and these reports be found
But idle fictions, on uncertain ground.

Pal. Mirtillus I perceive my tedious tale,
Begins to be distastefull to thine ear,
And therefore will I to some desert vale,
To some close Grove to wail, where none shall hear
But beasts, and trees, whose sense I shall not tire,
With length of moan, for length is my desire.
And therefore, gentle Shepherd, now adieu,
And trust not women, for they are untrue.

Mir. Adue Palaemon, and thy sad distress,
Shall make me wey Dorindas loss the less:
For if I should be hers, and she prove so,
Better to be mine own, and let her go.

Scena. 4.
Ergastus. Melibaeus. Erg. Now Melibaeus; who would have supposd,
That had not seen these impious passage^,
That ever monstrous wretch could have exposd,
Two honest hearts to these extremities,
T'attaine his wicked ends? by having wrought
First in, unto their easy confidence
Away, by an opinion to be thought,
Honest, discreet, of great experience.
Whereby we see open-fac^t villainy
Without a mask, no mischief could have done,
It was the couerture of honesty,
That laid the snare, whereby they were undone.
And that is the ingine that confounds us all,
That makes the breach whereby the world is saclet,
And made a prey to cunning, when we fall
Into the hands of wise dishonestie:
When as our weak credulity is rackt
By that opinion of sufficiency,
To all the inconveniences that guile,
And impious craft can practice to beguile.
And note but how these cankers always seize
The choysest fruits with their infections,
How they are still ordained to disease,
The natures of the best complections.

Mel. It Is true. And what an instrument has he there got,
To be the Agent of his villainy?
How truly she negotiats, and does plot,
To undermine frail imbecillitie.
How strong, these spirits, combine them in a knot,
To circum^ent plain open honesty?
And what a creature there is to converse
With feeble maids, whose weakness soon is led
With toys, and new disguises, to reuerse
The cour^e wherein by custom they were bred?
And then what fitness too, her trade affordes,
To traffic with the secrets of their heart,
And che^p^n their affections with fair words.
Which women straight to women will impart?
And then to see how soon example will
Disperse it self, being met with our desire:
How soon, it will ^nkindle others ill,
Like Naptha, that takes fire by sight of fire?
So that unless we run with all the speed
We can, to quench this new arising flame.
Of vanity, and lust, it will proceed
T'vndoe us, ere we shall perceive the same:
How far already is the mischief run,
Before we scarce perceived it was begun?

Actus 3.
Scen. 1.
Alcon. Lincus. Al. What my friend Lincus? now in troth well met.

Lin. Well met good Alcon, this falls happily,
That we two thus encounter all alone,
Who had not any conference scarce this month.

Al. In troth I longd to hear how you proceed,
In your new practice, here among, these swains,
For you and I must grace each others Art;
Though you knew me, when I in Pa^ras dwelt,
And waited on a poor Physicians man,
And I knew you a Pronotories boy,
That wrote Indentu^es at the Town house door.
Yet are you here, now a great man of law,
And I a grave Physician ^ull of skill,
And here we two are held the only men.
But how thrive you in your new practice now?

Lin. Alcon in troth not any thing to speak,
For these poor people of Arcadia here,
Are so contented each man with his own,
As they desire no more, nor will be drawn,
To any contestation, nor indeed

Is there yet any frame composd, whereby
Contention may proceed in practicke form?
For If they had this form once to contend,
Then would they brawle and wrangle without end.
For then might they be taught, and ^concell'd how
To litigate perpetually you know;
And so might I be sure to do some good:
But having here no matter where upon
To furnish real actions, as else where,
No tenures, but a cons^umarie hold
Of what they have from their progenitors
Common, with out indiuiduitie;
No purchasings, no contracts, no comerse,
No politi^que commands, no services,
No general Assemblies but to feast
And to delight themselves with fresh pastimes;
How can I hope that ever I shall thrive?

Alc. Is It possible that a society
Can with so little noise, and sweat subsist?

Lin. It seems it may, before men have transformed
Their state of nature in so many shapes
Of their own managements, and are cast out
Into confusion by their knowledges.
And either I must pack me hence, or el^
Must labor wholly to dissolve the frame,
And composition, of their strange b^ult state.
Which now I seek to do, by drawing them
To appr'hend of these proprieties
Of mine and thine and teach them to in croch
And get them states apart, and private shares.
And this I have already set a work
If it will take, for I have met with two
The aptest spirits the country yelds, I know,
Mon^anus, and Acrisius, who are both
Old, and both cholorick^e, and bothperuerse,
And both inchnable to A^arice
And if there quarrel hold, as it is begun
I do not doubt, but all the rest will on.
And if the worst should fall, if I could gain
The reputation but to arbitrate,
And sway their strifes, I would get well by that.

Al. It Is maruayle, that there long and easy peace
That fosters plenty, and gives naught to do,
Should not with them beget contention too,
As well as other where we see it does.

Lin. This peace of theirs, is not like others peace
Where craft lays trapps t'inrich it self with wiles,
And men make prey of men, and rise by spoils.
This rather seems a quiet then a peace.
For this poor corner of Arcadia here,
This little angle of the world you see,
Which has shut out of door, all the earth beside
And are barrd up with mountains, and with rocks;
Has had no intertrading with thereste
Of men, nor yet will haue^ but here alone,
Quite out of fortunes way, and underneath
Ambition, or desire, that ways them not
They live as if still in the golden age,
When as the world was in his pupillage.
But for mine own part, Alcon I protest
I envy them that they thus make themselves,
An everlasting holyday of rest,
Whilst others work, and I do think it fit
Being in the world, they should be of the world,
And If that other states should do this too
As God forbid, what should we Lawyers do?
But I hope shortly yet, we shall have here
As many of us as are other where:
And we shall sweat, and chafe, and tal^e as loud,
Brawle our selves hoarse, as well as they shall do
At Patras, Sparta, Corinth or at Thebe^,
And be as arrogant and even as proud
And then 'twill be a world, and not before.
But how do thou with thy profession frame?

Alc. No man can wish a better place then this
To practice in my art, for here they will
Be sick for company, they are so kind.
I have now twenty patients at this time,
That know not what they aile, no more do I,
And they have physic all accordingly.
First Phillis got running at Barly-breake
A little cold, which I with certain druggs
I ministered, was thought to remedy,
Doris saw that, how Phillis physic wrought
(For Phillis had told her, she never took
So delicate a thing in all her life
That more revived her heart, and cleared her blood,)
Doris would needs be sick too, and take some.
Melina seeing that, she would the like,
And so she had the very same receipt,
For to say tr^th I have no more but that,
And one poor pill I use for greate^ cures.
But this is only sweet and delicate,
Fit for young women, and is like th'hearb John,
Does neither good nor hurt, but that is all one,
For if they but conceive it does, it does,
And it is that Physicians hold the chief
In all their cures, conceit, and strong belief:
Besides I am a stranger come from far
Which does add much unto opinion too.
For who now but the Arabian or the Jew
In foreign lands, are held the only men,
Although their knowledge be no more then mine.

Lin, It Is true friend Alcon, he that has once got
Th'Elixir of opinion has got all,
And h'is th'man that turns his brass to gold.
Then can I talk of Gallen, Aucrois,
Hippocrates, Rasis, and Auicen
And books I never read, and use strange speech
Of Symptoms, Crisis, and the Critique days,
Of Trochiscs, Opiats, Apophilegmatismes,
Eclegmats, Embrochs, Lixiues, Cataplasmes,
With all the hideous terms, Art can devise,
T'amuse weak, and admiring ignorance

Lin. And that is right^ my trick, I ouer-whelme
My practice too, with darkness, and strange words,
With Paragraphs, Condictions, Codicille^,
Acceptilations, Actions rescissorie,
Noxall, and Hypothecall, and inuolue
Domestic matter in a foreign phrase.

Alc. Then am I as abstruse and mystical
In Caracter, and giving my receipt
Observing still th'odd number in my pills,
And certain hours to gather and compound
My simples, and make all to attend the Moon.
Then do I show what rare ingredients
I use for some great cures, when need requires,
The liver of a Wolf, the Lions gall,
The leaft side of a Mole, the Foxes heart,
The right foot of a Tortuse, Dragons blood,
And such strange savage stuff, as even the names
Are physic of them selves, to move a man.
And all the drugs I use, must come from far,
Beyond the Ocean, and the Sun at least,
Or else it has no virtue Physical,
These homebred simples do no good at all.

Lin. No, no, it must be foreign stuff, God wot,
Or something else, that is not to be got.

Al. But now in faith I have found out a trick,
That will perpetually so feed their rheumes,
And intertaine their idle weaknesses,
As nothing in the world could do the like,
For lately being at Corinth, 'twas my chance
T'incounter with a Seaman, new ariu'd
Of Alexandria, who from India came,
And brought a certain herb wrapped up in rowles,
From th'l s^and of Nicosia, where it grows:
Infused I think in some pestiferous juice,
(Produced in that contagious burning clime,
Contrarious to our nature, and our spirits)
Or else sleep'd in the fuming sap, it self
Does yield, t'inforce th'infecting power thereof,
And this in powder made, and fired, he suckes
Out of a little hollow instrument
Of calcinated clay, the smoke thereof:
Which either he conuayes out of his nose,
Or down into his stomach with a whiffe.
And this he said a wondrous virtue had,
To pu^ge the head, and cure the great Cata^^e,
And to dry up all other meaner rheumes,
Which when I saw, I straight way thought how well
This new fantastical devise would please
The foolish people here grown humeto^s.
And up I took all this commodity,
And here have taught them how to use the same.

Lin. And it is easy to bring in the use
Of any thing, though never so absurd,
When nations are prepared to all abuse,
And th'humour of corruption once is stird.

Alc. It Is true, and now to see with what a strange
And gluttenous desire, th'exhaust the same
How infinite, and how in^atiably,
They do devour th'intoxicating fume,
You would admire, as if their spirits thereby
Were taken, and enchanted, or transformd,
By some infused philter in the drug.
For whereas heretofore they wonted were
At all their meetings, and their ^eastiualls,
To pass the time in ^elling witty tales,
In questions, riddles, and in purposes,
Now do they nothing else, but sit and suck,
And spit and sla^er, all the time they sit.
That I go by, and laugh unto my self,
And think that this will one day make some work
For me or others, but I fear it will
B'another age will find the hurt of this.
But sure the time's to come, when they look back
On this, will wonder with themselves to think
That men of sense could ever be so mad,
To suck so gross a vapor, that consumes
Their spirits, spends nature, dries up memory,
Corrupts the blood, and in a vanity.

Lin. But Alcon peace, here comes a patien^, peace.

Al. Lintus there does indeed, therefore away.
Leave me alone, for I must now resume
My surly, grave, and Doctorall aspect.
This wench I know, it is Duphne who has wronged
Her love Menalcas, and played fast and loose
With Colax, who reueald the whole to me.

Scena. 2.
Daphne. Alcon. Daph. Good Doctor Alcon, I am come to crave
Your counsel, to advise me for my health,
For I suppose, in ^roth, I am not well,
Me thinks I should be sick, yet cannot tell:
Some thing there is amiss that troubles me,
For which I would take Physic willingly.

Alc. Welcome, fair nymph, come let me try your pulse.
I cannot blame you, ^hold your self not well.
Some thing amiss quoth you, here is all amiss,
The Whole Fabric of your self distempred is,
The Systole, and Dyastole of your pulse,
Do show your passions most hystoricall,
It seems you have not very careful been,
T'obserue the prophilactick regiment
Of your own body, so that we must now
Descend unto the Theraphentica^l;
That so we may prevent the syndrome
Of Symtomes, and may afterward apply
Some analepticall Elexipharmacum,
That may be proper for your malady:
It seems fai^e Nymph you dream much in the night.

Da. Doctor, I do indeed.

Al. I know you do,
You Are troubled much with thought.

Dap. I am indeed.

Alc. I know you are.
You have great heaviness about your heart.

Dap. Now truly so I have.

Alc. I know you have.
You wake often in the night.

Dap. In troth I do.

Alc. All this I know you do.
And this unless by physic you prevent,
Think whereto it may bring you in the end.
And therefore you must first euacua^e
All those Colaxicall hot humor which
Disturb your heart, and then refrigerate
Your blood by some Menalchian Cordials,
Which you must take, and you shall straight find ease,
And in the morning I will visit you.

Dap. I pray Sir, let me take of that you gave,
To Phillis the other day, for that she said,
Did comfort wondrously, and cheer her heart.

Al. Fair Nymph, you must, if you will use my art,
Let me alone, to give what I think good,
I knew what fitted Phillis malady,
And so, I think, I know what will serve you.
Exit. Daphne sola. O what a wondrous skillful man is this?
Why he knows all? O God, who ever thought
Any man living, could have told so right
A woman's grief in all points as he has?
Why this is strange that by thy very pulse,
He should know all I ayle, as well as I.
Beside I fear he sees too much in me,
More then I would that any man should see.
Me thought (although I could not well conceive
His words, he spoke so learned and so strange)
He said I had misr^ld my body much,
As if he meant that in some wanton sort,
I had abused my body with some man.
O how should he know that what is my pulse
Become th'intelligencer of my shame?
Or are my looks the index of my heart?
Sure so he said, and me thought too, he named
Menalcas, or else some thing very like,
And likewise named that cunning treacherous wretch
That has undone me, Colax, that vile devil,
Who is indeed the cause of all my grief,
For which I now seek physic, but o what
Can physic do, to cure that hideous wound
My lusts have given my Conscience? which I see
Is that which only is deseas'd with in
And not my body now, that is it does so
Disquiet all the lodging of my spirits,
As keeps me waking, that is, it presents,
Those ougly forms of terror that affright
My broken sleeps, that lays upon my heart
This heavy load that weighes it down with grief;
And no disease beside, for which there is
No cure I see at all, nor no redress.
Did thou allege vile man to my weak youth,
How that those vows I made unto my love
Were bands of custom, and could not lay on
Those manacles on nature, which should keep
Her freedom prisoner by our dome of breath?
Oimpious wretch now nature gives the lie
To thy foul heart, and tells my grieved soul,
I have done wrong, to falsify that vow
I first to my dear love Menalcas made.
And says the assurance and the faith is given
By band on earth, the same is sealed in heaven.
And therefore how Menalcas can these eyes
That now abhor to look upon my self,
Dare ever view that wronged face of thine,
Who have relide on this false heart of mine?

Scen. 3.
Colax. Techne. Col. Is It possible sweet Techne, what you say,
That Cloris is so witty, and so coy?

Tec. It Is as I tell you, Colax, sh is as coy
And has as shrewd a spirit, as quick conceit
As ever wench I brok'd in all my life.

Col. Then there is some glory in attaining her;
Here now I shall be sure to have something yet
Besides dull beauti^ I shall lie with wit.
For these fair creat^res, have such feeble spirits,
And are so languisli^ng, as gives no edge
To appetite, and lo^^, but stuffes delight.

Tec. Well if yo (...) her, then you shall be sure
To have your (...) and yet perhaps that store,
You find in her, may check your longing more
Then all their wants whom you have tried before.

Col. How? if I get her? what do you suppose,
I shall not get her, that were very strange.

Tec. Yes sir, she may be got, but yet I know
Sh'will put you to the trial of your wit.

Col. Let me alone, could I find season fit
To talk with her in private, she were mine.

Tec. That season may you now have very well.
For Colax, (...) has (...) faith fully
This evening late (...) me at the cave
Of Erycina underneath the hill,
Where I must fit her with a new attire.
Where with sh' is far in love, and the other day
Thinking to try it at her fathers house,
(Whether I went with (...) to deal for (...)
The old Acri (...) was himself at home,
Which did in force us to defer our work
Until this evening, that we might alone
There out of sight, more closely do the same:
Where while she stays (for I will make her stay
For me a while) you at your pleasure may
Have th'opportunitie which you desire,

Col. O Techne thou have blessed me, if I now
On this advantage conquer not her mind,
Let me be loathed, of all womenkind.
And presently will I go suit my self
As bravely as I can, go set my looks
Arm my discourse, frame speeches passionate
And action both, fit for so great a work.
Techne a thousand thanks and so adieu.

Ex. Tec. Well Colax, she may yet deceive thy hopes,
And I persuade my self she is as like,
As any subtle wench was ever borne,
To give as wise a man as you the skorne:
But see where one whose faith has better right
Unto her love then you, comes here forlorn
Like fortunes outcast, full of heaviness.
Ah poor Amyntas, would thou knewst how much
Thou art esteemd, although not where thou would,
Yet where thou should have love in that degree,
As never living man had like to thee.
Ah see how I, who setts for others love,
Am took my self, and intricated here
With one, that has his heart another where?
But I will labor to divert the stream
Of his affections, and to turn his thoughts
From that coy^ Cloris, to the liberty
Of his own heart, with hope to make him mine.

Scen. 4.
Techne. Amyntas. Tech. Now fie Amyntas, why should you thus grieve
For a most foolish way ward girl, that scorns
Your honest love, and laughes at all you do;
For shame Amyntas let her go as (...)
You see her vain, and how peruersly set,
It Is fond so follow what we cannot get.

Am. O Techne, Techne, though I never get,
Yet will I ever follow whilst I breath,
And if I perish by the way, yet shall
My death be pleasing that for her I die.
And one day she may hap to come that way,
(And be it, o her way) where I shall lie,
And with her proud disdainefull foo^e she may
Tread on my tomb, and say, lo where he lies,
The triumph, and the conquest of mine eyes.
And though I loose my self, and looso my tears,
It shall be glory yet that I was hers.
What have I done of late, should make her thus
My presence with that strange disdain to fly,
As if she did abhor my company?
Cloris God knows, thou have no cause therefore,
Unless it be for loving more, and more.
Why thou went wont to lend me yet an ear,
And though thou would not help, yet would thou hear.

Tec. Perhaps she thinks thy heat will be allayd,
The fire being gone, and therefore does she well
Not to be seen there where she will not aid.

Am. Alas she knows no hand but hers can quench
That heat in me, and therefore does she wrong
To fire my heart, and then to run away.
And if she would not aid, yet might she ease
My careful soul, if she would but stand by
And only look upon me while I die.

Tec, Well well Amyntas, little do thou know
With whom that cunning wanton sorts her self,
Whilst thus thou mourn'st, and with what secret wiles
She works, to meet her lover in the wo^des,
With whom in groves, and caves she ^allying sitts,
And mocks thy passions, and thy doleful fitts.

Am. No Techne, no, I know that cannot be,
And therefore do not wrong her modesty,
For Cloris loves no man, and that is some case
Unto my grief, and gives a hope that ye^
If ever soft affection touch her heart,
She will look back, and think on my desert.

Tec. If that be all, that hope is at an end,
For if thou will this evening but attend
And walk down under Ericinas grove,
And place thy self in some close secret bush,
Right opposite unto the hollow cave
That looks into the vallye, thou shall see
That honesty, and that great modesty.

Am. If I see Cloris there, I know I shall,
See nothing else with her, but modesty.

Tec. Yes something else will grieve your heart to see^
But you must be content, and think your self
Are not the first, that thus have benedeceiud,
With fair appearing outsides, and mis^ooke
A wanton heart by a chaste steming look.
But I con^ure you by the love you bear
Unto those eyes, which make you (as you are
The Example of compassion to the world)
Sit close and be not seen in any case.

Am. Well Techne, if I shall see Cloris there
It is enough, then thither will I go,
Who will go any where to look on her.
And Cloris know, I do not go to see,
Any thing else of thee, but only thee.

Tec. Well go and think yet of her honest care,
Who gives thee note of such a shameful dead,
And judge Amyntas when thou shall be free,
Who more deserves thy love, or I or she.

Scen. 5.
Melibaeus. Ergastus. Me. Now what infernal proiects are here laid,
T'afflict an honest heart, t'expose a maid,
Unto the danger of alone aslault,
To make her to offend without her fault.

Er. And see what other new appearing spirits
Would raise the tempests of disturbances,
Upon our rest, and labor to bring in
All the whole Ocean of unquietness,
To ouerwhelme the poor peace we live in?
How one would feign instruct, and teach us how
To cut our throats with form, and to contend
With artificial knowledge, to undo
Each other, and to brabble without end.
As if that nature had not took more care
For us, then we for our own selves can take,
And makes us better laws then those we make.
And as if all that science ought could give
Unto our bliss, but only shows us how
The better to contend, but not to live.
And evermore we see, how vice does grow
With knowledge, and brings sorth a more increase,
When skillful men begin, how good men ^ease.
And therefore how much better do we live,
With quiet ignorance then we should do
With turbulent and euer-working skill,
Which makes us not to live but labor still.

Mel. And see that other vain fantastic spirit,
Who would corrupt out bodies too likewise,
As this our minds, and make our health to be
As trouolesome as sickness, to devise,
That no part of us ever should be free;
Both forraging on our credulity,
Take still the advantage of our weaknesses;
Both cloth their frivolous uncertainties
In strange attyres, to make it seen the less.

Actus 4,
Scen. 1.
Techne, Amyntas. Tec. Amyntas must come back I know this way,
And here it will be best for me to stay,
And here, indeed he comes, poor man I site
All quite dismaide and now i will work on him.
Come, who tells troth Amynta, who deceiues
Your expectation now, Cloris, or I?

Am. Peace Techne peace, and do not interrupt
The grief that has no leisure to attend
Ought but itself, and has shut up with it
All other sense in private close within,
From doing any thing, but only think.

Te. Think? whereon should you think? y'haue thought ynow
And too too much, on such a one as she.
Whom now you see y'haue tried her honesty:
And let her go proud girl accordingly,
There Is none of these young wanton things that know
How t'vse a man, or how to make their choice.
Or answer men's affections as they ought,
And if y' will think, think sh' is not worth a thought.
Good Techne, leave me for thy speech and sight
Bear both that disproportion to my grief,
As that they trouble, trouble and confound
Confusion in my sorrows, which does loath
That sound of words, that answers not the tone
Of my dispayres in accents of like moan,
And now has sorrow no worse plague I see,
Then free and vnpartaking company.
Who are not in the fashion of our woes,
And whose affection do not look likewise
Of that complexion as our miseries?
And therefore pray thee leave me or else leave
To speak, or if thou speak let it not be
To me, or else let me, not answer thee.

Tec. Well I say nothing you know what y'haue seen.

Am. It Is true I do confess that I have seen
The worst the world can show me, and the worst
That can be ever seen with mortal eye.
I have beheld the whole, of all where in
My heart had any interest in this life;
To be disrent and torn from of my hopes,
That nothing now is leaft, why I should live:
That ostage I had given the world, which was
The hope of her that held me to hold truce
With it, and with this life is gone, and now
Well may I break with them, and break I will
And rend that pact of nature, and dissolve
That league of blood that ties me to my self.
For Cloris now has thy immodestie
Infranchizd me, and made me free to die:
Which otherwise I could not least it might
Have been (some stain and some disgrace to thee.
Ah was it not ynow for this poor heart
T'indure the burden of her proud disdain?
That weighed it to the earth but that it must
Be crushed thus with th'oppression of her stayne?
The first wound yet though it were huge and wide,
Yet was it cleanely made, it festred not,
But this now given, comes by a poysned shot,
Against all laws of honors that are pure,
And rankles deadly is without all cure.
Ah how she blushed when as she islued forth
With her inamor'd ma^e out of the cave?
And well then might she blush at such a deed,
And with how wild a look she casts about
Her fearful eyes? as if her loathsome sin
Now coming thus into the open sight,
With terror did her guiltines a^lright;
And up she treades the hill with such a pace,
As if she gladly would have out gone shame,
Which yet for all her hasting after came.
And at their coming forth, me thought I heard
The villayne use my name, and she return
The same again in very earnest sort,
Which could be for no good I know to me,
But only that perhaps it pleased her then
To cast me up by this way of her mouth
From of her heart, least it might stuff the same.
But Cloris know thou shall not need to fear,
I never more shall interrupt thy joys
With my complayntes, nor more observe thy ways;
And o I would thy heart could be as free
From sin and shame, as thou shall be from me.
I could (and I have reason so to do)
Revenge my wrong upon that wicked wretch,
Who has surprised my love, and robbed thy shame,
And make his blood th'oblation of my wrath
Even at thy feet, that thou might see th^a n^
To expiate, for this injustice done,
But that the fact examind would display
Thy infamy abroad unto the world,
Which I had rather die then once bewray.
And Techne pray-thee, tell her thus from me,
But yet, ah tell it softly in her ear,
And be thou sure no living creature hear,
That her immodestie has lost this day,
Two the most honest guardians of her good
She had in life, her honor, and my blo^d.

Tec. Now I may speak I trust you speak to me.

Am. No not yet Techne, pray-thee stay a while,
And tell her too, though she spares not her shame,
My death shall show, that I respect her fame.

Tec. Then now I may.

Am. O Techne no not yet.
And bid her not forget Amyntas faith,
Though she despised him, and one day yet
She may betoucht with grief, and that ere long,
To think on her dishonor, and his wrong.
Now Techne I have done, and so farewell.

Tec. But stay Amyntas, now must I begin.

Am. I cannot stay Techne, let go your hold,
It is in vain I say, I must be gone.

Tec. Now dear Amyntas, hear me but one word.
Ah he is gone, and in that fury gone,
As sure he will in this extremity
Of his despair, do violence to himself:
And therefore now what help shall I devise
To stay his ruin? sure there is no means
But to call Cloris, and persuade with her
To follow him, and to prevent his death;
For though this practice was for mine own good,
Yet my deceipts use not to stretch to blood.
But now I know not where I should find out
That cruellmaide, but I must cast about.

Scen. 2.
Amarillis. Dorinda. Ama. Dorinda, you are yet in happy case,
You are beloved, you need not to complain;
It Is I have reason only to bewail
My fortunes, who am cast upon disdain,
And on his rockie heart that wrackes my youth
With storms of sorrows, and contemnes my truth;
It Is I that am shut out from all delight
This world can yield a maid, that am removed
From the only joy on earth, to be beloved:
Cruel Carinus scorns this faith of mine,
And lets poor Amarillis grieve and pine.

Do. ^' is true indeed you say, I am beloved,
Sweet Amarillis, and perhaps much more
Then I would be: plenty does make me poor.
For now my heart, as if divided stands
Betwixt two passions love, and pity both,
That draw it either way with that maine force,
As that I know not which to yield unto:
And then fear in the midst, holds m in suspense,
Least I loath both by mine improuidence.

Ama. How may that be Dorinda? you know this,
You can enjoy but one, and one there is
Ought to possess your heart, and love alone,
Who hunts two Hares at one time, catches none.

Do. I must tell you dear friend the whole discourse
From whom I cannot any thing conceal,
Arcadia knows, and every Shepherd knows
How much Mirtillus has deserved of me,
And how long time his woeful suit has lain,
Depending on the mercy of mine eyes,
For whom I do confess, pity has been
The A^turnie evermore that stands and pleades
Before my heart, the justice of his cause,
And says he ought have love, by loves own laws.
But now the master sovereign Lord of hearts.
That great commander, and that tyrant love,
Who must have all according to his will,
Whom pity only Vshers goes before,
As lightning does the thunder, he says no,
And will that Colax only have my heart,
That gallant heardsman full of skill and art:
And all experience of loves my steries:
To whom I must confess me to have given
The earnest of my love; but since that time
I never saw the man, which makes me much
To wonder that his dealings should be such:
For either love, has in respect that I
Despised have the true and honest faith,
Of one that loved me with sincerity,
Made me the spoil of falsehood and contempt,
Or else perhaps the same is done to try,
My resolution, and my constancy?
But yet I fear the worst, and fear I may,
Least he now having got the victory,
Cares for no more; and seeing he knows my love
Turns toward him, he turns his back to me,
So that I know not what were best resolve,
Either to stand unto the doubtful faith
Of one that bath so dangerously begun,
Or else returne^ accept Mirtillus love,
Who will perhaps when mine begins have done
So that inwrapt in this distracted toil
I vex, and know not what to do the while
And therefore Amarillis I think sure,
(Se'ing now how others love in me has proved)
You are most happy not to be beloved.

Seen. 3.
Cloris, Amarillis. Dorinda. Clo. Now here between you two, kind loving souls,
I know there can be no talk but of love,
Love must be all the scope of your discourse,
Alas poor hearts, I wonder how you can
In this deceiptfull world think of a man.
For they do nothing but make fools of you,
And laugh when they have done, and prove untrue.

Am. Well Cloris well, reioye^ that you are free,
You may be touched one day as well as we.

Clo. Indeed and I had like so this last night,
Had I not looked with such an angry eye,
And frownd so sour that I made love afeard,
There was a fellow needs forsooth, would have
My heart from me whether I would or not,
And had as great advantage one could have,
I tell you that he had me in a Cave.

Do. What in a Cave? Cloris, how came you there?

Clo. Truly Dorinda I will tell you how.
By no art magique, but a plain devise
Of Techne, who would try her wit on me,
For she had promisd me, to meet me there
At such an hour, and thither bring with her
A new strange dressing she had made for me,
Which there close out of sight, I should try on:
Thither went I poor fool, at th'houre decreed,
And there expecting Technes company,
In rushes steering Colax after me.
Whom sure she sent of purpose to the place,
And there with his affected apish grace
And strained speech, offering to seize on me,
Out rusht I from him, as indeed, amazd
At his so sudden and unexpected sight.
And after follows he, vows, swears, protests
By all the gods, he never loved before
Any one living in the world but me,
And for me only, would he spend his life.

Do. Alas and what am I forgotten then?
Why these were even the words he spoke to me.

Clo. And then inueighes against Amyntas love,
Vants his own parts, and his great knowledges,
And all so idle, as, in troth me thought
I never heard a man more vainly talk,
For so much as I heard, for up the hill
I went with such a pace and never staide
To give regard to any thing he said:
As at the last I scarce had leaft him breath
Sufficient to forswear himself with all.

Do. Ah what has then my silly ignorance done
To be deceiud, and mocked by such a one?

Clo. And when I had recouerd up the hill,
I fayrely ran away and leaft my man
In middst of his coniuring periuries;
All empty to return with mighty loss
Of breath and labor, having cast away
Much foolish pains in tricking up him self
For this exployte, and goes without his game,
Which he in hope deuourd before he came.
And I too, mist my dressing by this means.
But I admire how any Woman can?
Be so unwise to like of such a man,
For I protest I see naught else but froth,
And shallow impudence, affected grace,
And some few idle practisd complement:
And all the thing he is, he is with out,
For affection strives but to appear,
And never is of substance, nor Sincere.
And yet this dare of falsehood has beguild
Athousand foolish wenches in his days.

Do. The more wretch he, and more hard hap was theirs.

Clo. Why do you sigh Dorinda are you touched
With any of these passages of mine?

Do. Noe truly not of yours, but I have cause
In my particular that makes me sigh.

Clo. Well well come on to put us from this talk,
Let us devise some sport to pass the time.

Am. Faith I have no great list to any sport.

Do. Nor I in troth it is farthest from my mind.

Clo. Then let us tell old tales, repeat our dreams,
Or any thing rather then think of love.

Am. And now you speak of dreams, in ^roth last night
I was much troubled with a fearful dream.

Do. And truly Amarillis so was I.

Clo. And now I do remember too, I, had
A foolish idle dream, and this it was:
Me thought the fairest of Montanus lambs,
And one he loved the best of all his flock,
Was singled out, and chased b'a cruel curre,
And in his hot pursuit makes toward me,
(Me thought) for succor, and about me ran,
As if it begd my aid to save his life,
Which I long time deferrd, and still looked on,
And would not res^ue it, until at lenght
I saw it even quite wourtied out of breath,
And panting at my feet and could no more:
And then me thought, I took it up from death,
And cherisht it with me, and brought it back.
Home to Montanus, who was glad to see
The poor recouerd creature thus restored;
And I my self was greatly pleas^d, me thought,
That by my hand so good a deed Was wrought,
And Amarillis now tell us your dream?

Am. Me thought as I in Eremanthus walked
A fearful woolfe rusht forth from out a brake,
And toward me makes with open hideous (...)
From whom I ran with all the speed I could,
T'escape my danger, and t'ouertake
One whom I saw before, that might lend aid
To me distressed, but he, me thought did run
As fast from me, as I did from the beast.
I cride to him, (but all in vain) to stay;
The more I cride, the more he ran away;
And after I, and after me the Wolf,
So long, as I began to faint in mind,
Seeing my despair before, my death behind:
Yet ran I still, and lo, me thought, at length
A little he began to s^ack his pace,
Which I perceiving, put to all my strength
And ran, as if desire had wingd my heels,
And in the end me thought recou'red him.
But never woman felt more joy it seemed
To overtake a man, then I did him,
By whom I scapte the danger I was in,
That when I waked, as presently I waked,
Touched with that sudden joy, which my poor heart
God knows, had not been vsd unto of late:
I found my self all in a moist faint sweat,
Which that affrighting horror did beget,
And though I were deliu'red of my fear,
And felt this joy, yet did the trembling last
Upon my heart, when now the fear was past.

Clo. This Amarillis may your good portend,
That yet you may have comfort in the end.

Am. God grant I may, it is the thing I want.

Clo. And now Dorinda tell us what you dreamt.

Do. I dreamt, that having gone to gather flowers,
And weary of my work, reposing me
Upon a bank near to a Rivers side,
A subtle Serpent lurking in the grass.
Came secretly, and seizd on my left breast,
Which though I saw, I had no power to stir,
But lay me still, till he had eat a way
Into my bosom, whence he took my heart,
And in his mouth carrying the same away,
Returns, me thought again from whence he came,
Which I perceiving presently arose,
And after it most woefully I went,
To see if I could find my heart again,
And up and down, I sought but all in vain.

Clo. In troth it is no good luck to dream of Snakes,
One shall be sure t'heare anger after it.

Do. And so it may be I have done to day.

Clo. Indeed and I have heard it never fails.

Scen. 4.
Techne. Cloris. Amarillis. Dorinda. Tec. Come you are talking here in iollitie,
Whilst I have sought you Cloris all about:
Come, come, good Cloris quickly come away.

Cl. What is the news? what have we now to do,
Have you another Cave to send me too?

Tec. Ah talk no more of that but come away,
As ever you will save the woeful life
Of a distressed man that dies for you.

Clo. Why what does Colax whom you sent to me
Into the Cave, faint now with his repulse?

Tec. I sent him not, you would so wisely go,
In open sight, as men might see you go,
And trace you thither all the way you went.
But come, ah it is not he, it is the man
You ought to save; Amyntas is the man
Your cruelty, and rigor has undone:
O quickly come, or it will be too late;
For 'twas his chance, and most vnluckely,
To see both you and Colax, as you came
Out of the Cave, and he thinks verily
You are possessed by him; which so confounds
His spirits, and sinckes his heart, that sure h'is run
T'vndoe himself, and o I fear it is done.

Clo. If it be done, my help will come too late,
And I may stay, and save that labor here.

Am. Ah Cloris haste away, if this be so,
And do not, if thou have a heart of flesh,
And of a woman, stay and trifle time,
Go run, and save thine own, for if he die,
It Is thine that dies, his blood is shed for thee,
And what a horror this will ever be
Hereafter to thy guilty conscience, when
Years shall have taught thee wit, and thou shall find
This deed instampt in bloody Characters,
Within the black records of thine own thoughts,
Which never will be razed whilst thou have breath,
Nor yet will be forgotten by thy death.
Besides wide Fame, will Trumpet forth thy wrong,
And thou shall be with all posterity,
Amongst the examples held of cruelty,
And have this savage deed of thine be made
A sullein subject for a Tragedy,
Entitled Cloris, that thereby thy name
May serve to be an everlasting shame;
And therefore go prevent so foul a stain.

Do. Ah go, go Cloris, haste away with speed.

Clo. Why whether should I go? I know not where
To find him now, and if he do this deed,
It is his error, and no fault of mine.
Yet pray thee Techne, which way went the man?

Tec. Come Cloris, I will show which way he went,
In most strange fury, and most desperate speed,
Still crying, Cloris, have thou done this deed?

Clo. Why had not you staid? and persuaded him?

Tec. I could not stay him by no means I vsd.
Though all the means I could devise I vsd.

Clo. Well I will go, poor man, to seek him out,
Though I can do him else, no other good.
I know indeed he has deserved my love,
And if I would like any, should be him,
So that I thought he would be true to me.
But thus my dream may now chance come to pass,
And I may happen to bring home indeed
Montanus son, Amyntas that dear Lamb
He loves so well, and by my gracious deed,
He may escape the danger he was in.
Which if I do, and thereby do inthrall
My self, to free another misery,
Then will I sit and sigh, and talk of love
As well as you, and have your company.
For something I do feel begin to move,
And yet I hope it is nothing else but fear;
Yet what know I? that fear may hap be love.
Well Techne come, I would not have him yet
To perish, poor Amyntas in this fit.

Exeunt. Ama. Well Cloris yet he may, for ought I see
Before you come, unless you make more haste.
Ah cruel maid, she little knows the grief
Of such a heart that is desperate of relief,
Nor understands she her own happiness,
To have so true a lover as he is.
And yet I see sh'is touched, if not too late,
For I perceived her color come and go,
And though in pride she would have hid her woe,
Yet I saw sorrow look out at her eyes.
And poor Amyntas if thou now be gone,
Thou have (like to the Be that stinging dies,
And in another wound leaft his own life)
Transpierced by thy death, that marble heart,
Which living thou, could touch by no desert.
And if thou shall escape, thou have suruiu'd
Her cruelty, which now repents her wrong,
And thou shall by her favors be revived,
After the affliction thou have suffered long.
Which makes me think, that time, and patience may
Intenerat at length the hardest heart,
And that I may yet after all my woe,
Live t'ouertake Carinus mercy too.

Do. And here this sad distress of such a true,
And constant lover, overcome with grief,
Presents unto my guilty memory
The wrongs, Mirtillus has endured of me.
And o I would I knew now how he does,
I fear he is not well, I saw him not
Scarce these three days, I marvel where he is,
And yet what need I marvel, who have thus
Chased him from me with frowns, and usage vile,
And fondly leaft the substance of his faith,
To catch the shadow of deceit and guile?
Was Colax he I thought the only man,
And is he now proved to be such a one?
O that I ever lent an easy ear,
Unto so false a wretches flatteries,
Whose very name I now abhor to hear,
And loath my self, for being so vnwife.
What shall I do sweet Amarillis now,
Which way shall I betake me to recover
The loss of shame, and loss of such a lover?

Ama. Indeed Dorinda you have done him wrong,
But your repentance, and compassion now
May make amends, and you must learn to do
As I long time have done, endure and hope,
And on that turn of Fortunes Scene depend,
When all extremities must mend, or end.

Scen. 5.
Melibaeus. Ergastus. Mel. Well, come Ergastus, we have seen ynow,
And it is more then time, that we prepare
Against this Hydra of confusion now,
Which still presents new hideous heads of fear:
And every hour we see begets new broiles,
And intricates our youth in desperate toils.
And therefore let the advantage of this day,
Which is the great, and general hunting day
In Eremanthus, serve for this good deed^
And when we meet (as all of us shall meet
Here in this place anon, as is decreed)
We will advise our Shepherds to intermit
That work, and fall to this imports us more,
To chase out these wild mischiefs that do lurk,
And worse infest, then the Eremanthian Boar,
O^^ll Beasts else, which only spoil our fields,
Whilst these which are of more prodigious kinds,
Bend all their forces to destroy our minds.

Erg. And this occasion will be very fit
Now to be took, for one day lost may lose
More by example, then we shall reget
In thousands, for when men shall once disclose
The way of ill that lay unknown before,
Scarce all our pains will ever stop it more.
Man is a creature of a wilful head,
And hardly'is driven, but easily is lead.

Actus. 5.
Scen. 1.
Amarillis. Car^^us. Ama. Ah gentle Lelaps, pretty loving dog,
Where have thou leaft thy master, where is he,
That great commander over thee and me?
Thou were not wont be far off from his feet,
And o no more would I, were he so pleased;
But would as well as thou go follow him,
Through brakes, and thickers, over cliffes and rocks
So long as I had life to follow him,
Would he but look upon me with that eye
Of favor, as h'is used to look on thee.
Thou can be clapped, and strookt with that fair hand
That thrustes away my heart, and beats it back
From following him, which yet it ever will
And though he fly me I must after still.
But here he comes, me thought he was not far.

Car. What mean you Amarillis in this sort
By taking up my dog to mar my sport?

Am. My dear Carinus thou do much mistake
I do not mar thy sport, it is thou marrstmine,
And killst my joys with that hard heart of thine.
Thy dooge perhaps by some instinct does know
How (...) I am his masters creature too,
And kindly comes himself, and fawnes on me
To show what you in nature ought to do?

Car. Fie Amarillis, you that know my mind
Should not me thinks this ever trouble me.

Am. What is it troublesome to be beloved?
How is it then Carinus to be loathed?
If I had done like Cloris, skornd your suit,
And spourn'd your passions, in disdainefull sort,
I had been wooed, and sought, and highly prizd,
But having n'other art to win thy love,
Save by discovering mine, I am despisd.
As if you would not have the thing you sought,
Unless you knew, it were not to be got.
And now because I lie here at thy feet,
The humble booty of thy conquering eyes,
And lay my heart all open in thy sight,
And tell thee I am thine, and tell thee right.
And do not sure my looks, nor cloth my words
In other colors, then my thoughts do wear,
But do thee right in all, thou skornest me
As if thou did not love sincerity
Never did Crystal more apparently
Present the color it contayn'd with in
Then have these eyes, these tears, this tongue of mine,
Bewreyd my heart, and told how much I Am thine.

Ca. It Is true I know you have too much bewrayd
And more then fitts the honor of a maid.

Am. O if that nature has not armed my breast
With that strong temper of resisting proof,
But that by treason of my weak complexion, I
Am made thus easy to the violent shot
Of passion, and the affection I should not.
Me thinks yet you out of your strength and power,
Should not disdain that weakness, but should think
It rather is your virtue, as indeed
It is, that makes me thus against my kind,
T'vnlock my thoughs, and to let out my mind,
When I should rather die and burst with love
Then once to let my tongue to say, I love.
And if your worthy parts be of that power
To vanquish nature, and I must be won
Do not disdain the work when you have don,
For in contemmig me you do despise
That power of yours which makes me to be thus.

Ca. Now what ado is here with idle talk?
And to no purpose, for you know I have
Ingagd long since my heart, my love and all
To Cloris, who must have the same and shall.

Am. Why there is no such odds twixt her and me,
I am a Nymph, it is known as well as she.
There is no other difference betwixt us twain
But that I love, and she does thee disdain.
No other reason can induce thy mind,
But only that which should divert thy mind.
I will attend thy flocks better then she,
And dress thy Bower more sweet, more daintily,
And cheerish thee with Salets, and with Fruits,
And all fresh dainties as the season suits;
I have more skill in heat bes, then she, by far,
I know which nourish, which restoring are:
And I will find Dictamnus for thy Goats,
And seek out Clauer for thy little Lambs,
And Tetrifoll to cheerish up their Dammes.
And this I know, I have a better voice
Then she, though she perhaps may have more art,
But which is best; I have the faithfulst heart.
Besides Amyntas has her love, I know,
And she begins to manifest it now.

Car. Amyntas have her love? that were most strange^
When he has gotten that, you shall have mine.

Am. O dear Carinus, let me rest upon
That blessed word of thine, and I have done.

Scen. 2.
Mirtillus. Carinus. Amarilli^. Mir. Well met Carinus, I can tell you news,
Your rival, poor Amyntas, has undone
And spoild himself, and lies in that weak case,
As we think never more to see his face.

Car. Mirtillus, I am sorry t'heare so much:
Although Amyntas be competitor
In The Empire of her heart, wherein my life
Has chiefest claim, I do not wish his death:
But by what chance, Mirtillus pray thee tell?

Mil. I will Carinus, though I grieve to tell.
As Titcrus, M^nalcas, and my self
Were placing of our toils (against anon
That we shall hunt) below within the straight,
Twixt Er^manthus, and Lycaeus mount,
We might perceive under a ragged cliffe,
In that most uncouth desert, all alone,
Distressed Amyntas lying on the ground,
With his sad face, turned close unto the rock,
As if he loathd to see more of the world,
Then that poor space, which was twixt him and it:
His right hand stretched, along upon his side,
His leaft, he makes the pillor to support
His careful head, his Pipe he had hung up
Upon a Beach tree by, where he likewise
Had placed his Sheephooke, and his Knife, wherewith
He had incaru'd an woeful Elegy,
To show the occasion of his misery.
His dog Molampus sitting by his side,
As if he were partaker of his woe:
By which we knew 'twas he, and to him went,
And after we had called, and shook him up,
And found him not to answer, nor to stir
And yet his eyes abroad, his body warm;
We took him up, and held him from the ground,
But could not make him stand by any means;
And sincking down again, we searched to see
If he had any wound, or blow, or wrinch,
But none could find: at last by chance we spide
A little horn which he had slung aside,
Whereby we gest he had some poison took.
And thereupon we sent out presently
To fetch Urania, whose great skill in herbs
Is such, as if there any means will be,
As I fear none will be, her only art
Must serve to bring him to himself againe^

Car. Indeed Urania has been known ^ have done
Most desperate cures, and peradventure may
Restore him yet, and I do wish she may.

Mir. But having there used all the help we could,
And all in vain, and standing by with grief,
(As we might well, to see so sad a sight)
(And such an worthy Shepherd in that plight)
We might perceive come running down the hill,
Cloris, and Techne, with what speed they could,
But Cloris had got ground, and was before,
And made more haste, as it concernd her more.
And nearer as she came, she faster went,
As if she did desire to have been there
Before her feet, too flow for her swift fear.
And coming to the place, she suddenly
Stopped, startes, and shrikt, and having made such haste
To Have something done, now could she nothing do.
Perhaps our presence might perplexe her too,
As being ashamed that any eye should see
The new appearing of her naked heart,
That never yet before was seen till now.

Car. And it is ill hap for me it was seen now.

Mir. For we perceived how Love and Modesty
With seu'rall Ensigns, strove within her cheeks
Which should be Lord that day, and charged hard
Upon each other, with their fresh supplies
Of different colors, that still came, and went,
And much disturbed her but at length dissolved
Into affection, down she casts her self
Upon his senseless body, where she saw
The mercy she had brought was come too late:
And to him calls; o dear Amyntas speak,
Look on me, sweet Amyntas, it is I
That calls thee, sit is, that holds thee here,
Within those arms thou haste esteemed so dear.
And though that love were yet so young in her
As that it knew not how to speak, or what,
And that she never had that passion proved,
Being first a lover ere she knew she loved,
Yet what she could not utter, she supplide,
With her poor busy hands that rubbed his face,
Chafd his pale temples, wrung his fingers ends,
Held up his head, and pulled him by the hands,
And never leaft her work, nor ever ceast.

Ama. Alas the least of this regard before,
Might have help all, then when 'twas in her power,
To Have saved his heart, and to revive his mind,
Now for all this, her mercy is unkind;
The good that is out of season, is not good.
There is no difference now twixt cruelty,
And the compassion that's not understood.

Mir. But yet at length, as if those dainty hands,
Had had a power to have awakened death,
We might perceive him move his heavy eyes,
Which had stood fixed all the whole time before,
And fastens them directly upon her.
Which when she saw, it struck her with that force,
As that it pierced through all the spirits she had,
Made all the powers and parts of her shrink up,
With that conuulsion of remorse and grief,
As out she shrik'd, o dear, o my dear heart,
Then shrinkes again, and then again cries out.
For now that look of his did shake her more,
Then death or any thing had done before,
That look did read t'her new conceiving heart,
All the whole tragic Lecture of his love,
All his sad sufferings, all his griefs, and fear,
And now in the end what he had done for her.
And with that powerful force of moving too,
As all a world of words could never do.
Ah what a silly messenger is Speech,
To be imploi'd in that great Embassy
Of our affections, in respect of the eye?
Ah it is the silent rhetoric of a look,
That worker the league betwixt the states of hearts,
Not words I see, nor knowledge of the book,
Nor incantations made by hidden arts,
For now this look so melts her into tears,
As that she powered them down like thunder drops,
Or else did Nature taking pity now
Of her distress, employ them in that store,
To serve as vailes, and to be interposde
Betwixt her grief and her, t'impeach her sight,
From that full view of sorrow thus disclosde.
And now with this came in Urania there,
With other women, to employ their best
To save his life, if b'any means they can.
And so we came our way, being sent for now
About some conference for our hunting sportes,
And with us Techne comes, who is supposde,
To Have been a special cause of much of this.

Car. Alas this sad report does grieve me much,
And I did never think, that Cloris had
So dearly loved him as I find she does,
For by this act of hers I plainly see,
There will be never any hope for me.

Ama. There may for me, if now Carinus thou Will stand but to thy word, as thou have said.

Mir. Ah would to God Dorinda had been there,
To Have seen but Cloris act this woeful part;
It may be, it might have deterred her heart
From cruelty, so long as she had lived.

Am. And I am glad Carinus has but heard
So much this day, for he may hap thereby
To have some feeling of my misery,
But for Dorinda never doubt at all,
She is more yours Mirtillus then you think.

Mir. Ah Amarillis. ^ I would that were true.
But lo where come our chiefest heardsmen now,
Of all Arcadia, we shall know more news.

Scen. 3.
Melibaeus, Ergastus, Montanus, Acrisius, with other Arcadians, bringing with
them Alcon, Lincus, Colax, Techne, Pistophoenax. Meli. You gentle Shepherds
and inhabitors
Of these remote, and solitary parts
Of Montaynous Arcadiae, shut up here
Within these Rocks, those unfrequented Clifts,
The walls and Bulwarks of our liberty,
From out the noise of tumult, and the throng
Of sweating toil, rattling concurrencie,
And have continued still the same and one
In all successions from antiquity,
Whilst all the states on earth besides have made
A thousand reuolutions, and have rowld
From change to change, and never yet found rest,
Nor ever bettered their estates by change.
You, I inuoke this day in general,
To do a work that now concerns us all:
Least that we leave not to posterity,
The Arcadia that we found continued thus
By our forefathers care who leaft it us.
For none of you I know, whose iudgment's grave
Can ought discern, but sees how much we are
Transformd of late, and changd from what we were;
And what distempers daily do arise
Amongst our people, never felt before,
At which I know you marvel, as indeed
You well may marvel, whence they should proceed:
And so did good Ergastus here, and I,
Until we set our selves more warily
To search it out, which by good hap we have,
And found the Authors of this wickedness.
Which Devils attyr'd here in the shape of men,
We have produced before you, to the end
You may take speedy order to suppress
Our growing follies, and their impiousnesse.

Erg. Indeed these odious wretches which you see,
Are they who have brought in upon our rest,
These new and unknown mischiefs of debate,
Of wanton pride, of scandalous reports,
Of vile deluding chaste and honest loves,
Of undeserved suspicious desperate griefs,
And all the sadness we have seen of late.
And first this man, this Lincus here you see,
Montanus you, and you Acrysius know,
With what deceit, and with what cunning art,
He intertaind your strifes, abusd you both,
By first persuading you that you had right
In your demandes, and then the right was yours,
And would have made as many rightes, as men
Had m^^nes, or power, or will to purchase them;
Could he have once attained to his desires.

Mon. We do confess our error, that we were
Too easily persuaded by his craft,
To wrangle for imagined titles, which
We here renounce, and quit for evermore,

Acry. And we desire the memory thereof
May dye with us, that it be never known
Our feeble age has such example shown.

Erg. And now this other strange impostour here,
This Alcon, who like Lincus has put on,
The habit too of empty gravity,
To catch opinion, and conceit withal,
Comes here to set us all at variance too,
With nature, as this other with our selves,
And would confound her, working with his art,
And labors how to make our minds first sick,
Before our bodies, and persuade our health
It is not well, that he may have thereby
Both it and sickness ever under cure.
And foreign druggs bringes to distemper's here
And make us like the wanton world abroad.

Mel. But there are two the most pernicious spirit;
The world I think did ever yet produce.
Colax and Techne, two such instruments
Of Wantonness, of Lust and treachery,
As are of power to entice and to debaush
The universal state of honesty.

Erg. But Techne who is that stands their by you,
What is your company increast of late?

Te. Truly it is a very honest man
A friend of mine that comes to see me here.

Erg. He cannot then but be an honest man,
If he be one of your acquintance sure.

Mel. This man I found with them now since you went
Mayntayning hot dispute with Titerus
About the rites, and mysteries of Pan.

Erg. H'is like to be of their associats then.

Er. Techne, what is this secret friend of yours?

Tec. For-sooth he is a very holy man.

Erg. A very holy man? what is his name?

Tec. Truly his name Sir is Pistophoenax.

Erg. What is he maskt, or is that face his own?

Tec. He is not maskt, it is his complexion sure.

Erg. Techne we cannot credit thy report.
Let one try whether it be so or not,
O see a most deformed ougly face,
Wherewith if openly he should appear,
He would deter all men from coming nere.
And therefore has that cunning wretch put on
This pleasing visor of apparencie,
T'intice and to delude the world withal;
So that you see with what strange inginiers,
The project of our ruin is forecast.
How they implanted have their battery here,
Against all the maine pillors of our state,
Our Rites; our Customs, Nature, Honesty.
T'mbroyle, and to confound us utterly,
Reckning us barbarous, but if thus their skill
Does ciuilize let us be barbarous still.

Mel. But now to show the horrible effects
Of Colax, and of Technes practices,
(Besides this last exploit they wrought upon,
Amyntas (who, poor youth, lies, now full weak:
Under Vranias cure, whose skill we hear
Has yet recalled him to himself again)
We have sent out abroad into the woods,
For Siluia and Palamon two chaste souls
Whom they have torturd so with iealosie,
Of each the other, as they made them ru^
A part, to languish severally alone;
And we have sent for diverse others too,
Whose hearts have felt what impious craft can do.
And here they come, and now you shall know all.

Scen. 4.
Palaemon. Mirtillus, Carinus. Siluia. Dorind^. Amarillis, Daphne. Cloris.
Amyntas. Erg. Come good Palaemon, and good Siluia come,
You have indurd too much, and too too long.

Sil. Ah why Ergastus do you set our names
So nere together, when our hearts so far,
Are distant from each other as they are?
Indeed whilst we were one as once we were,
And as we ought to be, were faith obserud,
Palaemon should not have been named without:
A Siluia, nor yet Siluia without him.
But now we may Ergastus, we are two.

Pal. Siluia, there in the greater wrong you do.

Sil. Palaemon, nay the greater wrong you do.

Erg. Alas we know well where the wrong does lie.

Sil. I know you do, and all the world may know.

Pal. Siluia, you see your fault cannot be hid.

Sil. It is no fault of mine Palaemon, that
Your shame does come to be revealed here;
I never told it you your self have not
Conceald your work so closely as you should.

Pal. But there stands one can tell what you have been.

Sil. Nay there he stands can tell what you have been.
And sure is now in public here producd
To testify your shame, but not set on
But me I do protest, who rather would
Have did alone in secret with my grief
Then had your infamy discouerd here.
wherein my shame, must have so great a share.

Pal. I have not sought to manifest your shame
Which Siluia, rather then have done I would
Have been content t'indure the worst of deaths,
I having such an intrest in the same.

Col, No Siluia, no Palaemon, I stand here
Not to accuse you but t'accuse my self
Of wrong, you both God knows are clear
I have abusd your apt credulity,
With false reports of things that never were
And therefore here crave pardon for the same.

Pal. why Colax, did not Siluia intertaine
The love of Thyrsis then as you told me?

Col. Palaemon no, she never intertaind
His love, nor wronged you as I ever knew.

Sil. But Colax you saw how Palaemon did
With Nisa falsify his vow to me.

Col. Siluia, by heaven and earth I swear not I,
But only faind it out of subtlety;
For some ungodly ends I had decreed.

Pal. O let not this be made some cunning bait
To take my griefs with false belief, for I
Had rather live with sorrow then deceit,
And still b'vndone, then to have such relief.

Sil. Ah let not this devise be wrought to guild
My bitterness, to make me swallow' it now,
That I might be another time beguilde
With confidence, and not trust what I know.

Pal. Ah Siluia now, how were I cleared of grief,
Had I the power to vnbeleeue belief.
But ah my heart has dwelt so long in house
With that first tale, at this which is come new,
Cannot be put in trust with my desire
So soon, besides it is too good to be true.

Sil. Could I Palaemon but vnthinke the thought
Of the will first heard, and that it were not so,
How blessed were I? but lo I see how doubt
Comes in far easier then it can g^t out.
And in these miseries of jealousy,
Our ear has greater credit then our eye.

Mel. Stand not confusd dear lovers any more,
For this is now the certain truth you hear,
And this vile wretch has done you both this wrong.

Pa. Is It possible, and is this true you say,
And do I live, and do I see the day?
Ah then come Siluia, for I find this wound
That pierced into the center of my heart,
Has let in love far deeper then it was.

Sil. If this be so, why then Palaemon know,
I likewise feel the love that was before
Most in my heart, is now become far more:
And now o pardon me you worthy race
Of men, it I in passion vttred ought
In prejudice of your most noble sex;
And think it was m'agrieued error spoke
It knew not what, transported so, not I:

Pal. And pardon me you glorious company
You stars of women, if (...) raged (...)
Have ought profan'de your reverent dignity,
And thou bright Pullas sovereign of at Nimphe^,
The royal Mistress of our Pastoral Muse
And thou Diana honor of the wood^s
To whom I vow my songs, and vow my self,
Forgive me mine offense and be you pleased
T'accept of my repentance now therefore,
And grace me still, and I desire no more.

Sil. And now I would that Cloris knew this much
That so she might be vndeceiued too,
Whom I have made believe so ill of men.
But lo see where she comes, and as it seems
Brings her belief already in her hand
Preuents my act, and is confirmd before.
Look Cloris look, my fears have idle been,
Palaemon Loves me there is trust in men.

Col. And Siluia I must now believe so too
Or else god help I know not what to do.

Pal. Look here Mirtillus look what I told you
Is now proved false, and women they are ^rue,

Mi. So I perceive Palaemon, and it seems
But vain conceit that other wise esteems.

Mo. Alas here comes my dear restored son
My lovely child Amyntas here is come.

Acry. And here is Cloris my dear daughter come
And looks as if she were affrighted still,
Poor soul, with fear, and with her sudden grief.

Col. Lo here Montanus I have brought you home
Although with much ado, your son again
And sorry am with all my heart that I,
Have been the cause he has endured so much.

Mon. And I restore him back again to you
Dear Cloris and do wish you to forget
Your sorrows past, and pray the Gods you may
From henceforth lead your life with happy joy.

Acr. Do Cloris take him, and I wish as much.

Erg. Well then to make our joyful festiuals
The more complet, Dorinda, we entreat
You also to accept Mirtillus love,
Who we are sure has well deserved yours.

Do. Although this be upon short warning, yet
For that I have been sommoned before
By mine own heart, and his deserts to me
To yield to such a motion, I am now
Content t'accept his love, and will be his,

Mir. Dorinda then I likewise have my bliss
And reckon all the sufferings I have past
Worthy of thee to have this joy at last.

Mel. And you Carinus look on that good Nymph
Whose eye is still on you, as if she thought
Her sufferings too, deserud some time of joy
And now expects her turn, has brought her lap
For comfort too whilst fortune deals good hap.
And therefore let her have it now poor soul
For she is worthy to possess your love.

Car. I know she is, and she shall have my love,
Though Colax had persuaded me before
Never t'accept or to believe the love
Of any Nymph, and often to me has sworn
How he had tryde them all, and that none were
As men, beguild by shows, supposd they were:
But now I do perceive his treachery,
And that they have both love and constancy.

Ama. O dear Carinus blessed be this good hour,
That I have lived to overtake at last
That heart of thine which fled from me so fast.

Erg. And Daphne, too me thinks your heavy looks
Show how that something is amiss with you.

Dap. Nothing amiss with me, but that of late
I took a fall, which some what grieves me yet.

Erg. That must advise you Daphne from henceforth
To look more war^ly unto your feet,
Which if you do, no doubt but all will be well,

Mel. Then thus we see the sadness of this day
Is ended with the evening of our joy:
And now you impious spirits, who thus have raisd
The hideous tempests of these miseries,
And thus abusd our simple innocence,
We charge you all here presently t'auoyd,
From out our confines, under pain to be
Cast down, and dashed in pieces from these rocks,
And to have your odious carkases deu^^r'd
By beasts, being worse your selves then beasts to ^

Col. Well then come Techne, for I see we two
Must even be forced to make a marriage too.
And go to Corinth, or some City near,
And by our practice get our living there.
Which both together joined, perhaps we may:
And this is now the worst of miseries
Could come unto me, and yet worthily,
For having thus abusd so many Nymphs,
And wronged the honor most irreverently
Of women, in that sort as I have done,
That now I Am forced to undergo therefore,
The worst of Plagues: To marry with a W.

Alc. But Lincus, let not this discourage us,
That this poor people jealous of their rest,
Exile us thus, for we no doubt shall find
Nations enough, that will most ready be
To entertain our skill, and cherish us.
And worthier people too, of subtler spirits,
Then these vnfashion'd, and vncomb'd rude swain.

Lin. Yea and those Nations are far sooner drawn
T'all frivolous distractions then are these.
For often we see, the gross do manage things,
Far better then the subtle, cunning brings
Confusion sooner then does ignorance.

Al. Yea and I doubt not whilst there shall be found
Fantastic puling wenches in the world,
But I shall flourish, and live iollily,
For such as I by women must begin
To gain a name, and reputation win.
Which when we have attaind to, you know then
How easily the women draw on men.

Lin. Nor do I doubt but I shall likewise live;
And thrive, where ever I shall plant my self;
For I have all those helps my skill requires,
A wrangling nature, a contesting grace,
A Clamorous voice, and an audacious face.
And I can cite the law t'oppugne the law,
And make the gloss to overthrow the text
I can allege, and vouch authority,
T'imbroyle the intent, and sense of equity:
Besides by having been a Notarie,
And used to frame litigious instruments
And leave advantages for subtilty,
And strife to work on, I can so devise
That there shall be no writing made so sure
But it shall yield occasion to contest
At any time when men shall think it best,
Nor be thou checked with this Pistophoenax,
That at thy first appearing thou art thus
Discou'red here, thou shall along with us,
And take thy fortune too, as well as we.

Pis. Tush Limus this can not discourage me,
For we that traffic with credulity,
And with opinion, still shall cherisht be.
But here your error was to enter first
And be before me, for you should have let
Me made the way, that I might have dislinkt
That chain of Zeal that holds in amity,
And called up doubt in their established rites,
Which would have made you such an easy way,
As that you might have brought in what you would,
Upon their shaken and discattered minds,
For our profession any thing refutes,
And all is unsettled whereas faith disputes.

Mel. Now what a muttring keep you there, away
Be gone I say, and best too, whilst you may.
And since we have redeemed our selves so well
Out of the hands of mischief, let us all
Exile with them their ill example too,
Which never more remaynes, as it begun,
But is a wicked sire t'a far worse son,
And stays not till it makes us slaves unto
(That universal Tyran of the earth
Custom) who takes from us our privilege
To be our selves, reads that great charter too
Of nature, and would likewise cancel man:
And so inchaynes our judgments, and discourse
Unto the present vsances; that we
Must all our senses there unto refer,
Be as we find our selves, not as we are,
As if we had no other touch of truth
And reason then the nations of the times
And place wherein we live, and being our selves
Corrupted, and abastardized thus
Think all looks ill, that does not look like us.
And therefore let us recollect our selves
Dispersd into these strange confused ill,
And be again Arcadians as we were
In manners and in habit as we were.
And so solempnize this our happy day,
Of restoration, with other feasts of joy.

FINIS.

