A DETECTION OF THAT SINNFVL SHAM FVL LYING, AND RIDICVLOVS DISCOURSE, OF SAMVEL
HARSHNET. ENTITVLED: A DISCOVERY OF THE FRAVVDVLENT PRACTICES OF JOHN DARRELL
WHEREIN IS MANIFESTLY AND APPARENTLY SHOWED IN THE EYES OF THE WORLD NOT only
the vnlikelihoode, but the flate impossibility of the pretended counterfayting
of William Summers, Thomas Darling, Kath. Wright, and Mary Couper, together
with the other 7. in Lancashire, and the supposed teaching of them by the said
John Darrell.

Psalm. 7. 14. Behold, He shall travail with wickedness: for he has conceived
mischief, but he shall bring fourth a lie.

IMPRINTED 1600.

TO THE CHRISTIAN AND WELL AFFECTED READER, JOHN DARRELL MINISTER OF THE
WORD, WISHES ALL GRACE AND HAPPINESS: WITH a judgment to d^^cerne betwixt
things that differ, between that which is true and false, good and evil.
In the days of Henry the second of France, father to Charles, the great
massacrer and murderer of Gods Saints, when the Sunne^^ine of the Gospel
began to break forth in that kingdom, and the name of Hugonot as a byword
of reproach was given to the professors thereof: in the very entry as it were
of those troubles and hurly burleyes for religion, it is recorded of the
Italian weomen and credulous popularitie of that country, that hearing of the
great stir that was then risen about those Hugonotes, they would needs know
of their gostlye fathers and holy inquintinge Friars, what those French
Hugonotes were: unto whom that devout and Pop-holy generation (not unlike
themselves) made this wholesome and catholic answer: That they were not men
forsooth, but vglye and monstrous shapes of men, headed like Dragons, faced
like Dogs: eared like Swine, snoured like Serpents, with Boares tuskes and
Asses jaws, yea such as would eat and dououre up their own mothers, etc.
whereupon the poor weomen and sily multitude, never requyringe nor examining
the matter any farther, fell straight to a kind of hissing and clapping their
hands, with most bitter out cries and hatfull exclamations against them, with
fie on them wretches, fie on them wretches. Now even thus good reader (and no
better then thus) fares it with me at this instant. The name and sound of
Darrell, of his imprisonment, and the cause thereof, has in a manner possessed
and overspread the whole land. why, what is he says one? what is the matter
says another? Answer is made presently and readilye by our two English
Inquisiters. Samuel Harsnet and his master, together with such others, whom
they with their crooked conueyances have be witched, that Darrell is forsooth
a cogger, a cousener, a Iugler, an Exorcist, a counterfeite, a deuill-flinger,
a deuill-driuer, a Seducer, a deceiuer, an Impostor, and I know not what: that
of an impious simplicity he holds it lawful to lie, cogge and feign, so it
be to a good end, (as his fauorits term it,) to the glory of God, in which
regard he has taken upon him to be deeplye seen in the mystery of devils,
and has played his public prize in this iuglinge science, casting out more
devils by prayer and fasting after a good dinner perhaps, then ever any? of the
Apostlee did at so full a season. And this in effect not only the streets and
Tavernes have ronge off, but (as I have been informed) the very benches and
Seats of Justice have sounded with the noise of this Darrell, the devil
driuer, and of the counterfeite tricks that he should teach. Wherein
notwithstanding I thank God, when they have thundered out the uttermost they
can against me, I may truly say (and that with the testimony of mine own heart
and conscience) that I am just so guilty of the thing they charge me with, as
the fore-recited French Hugonotes were of all that rablement wherewith they
were so besmeared and de pictured by that Italian munckish fraternity. For if
it be true that the had heads like dragous, faces like dogs, ears like
swine, snoutes like serpents, and that they would eat up their mothers, etc.
Then is it also true I confess, that Darrell is such a mounstrous vile fellow
as is here laid forth and described. But alas good reader this is no new
thing: look back to ages past and thou shall find it to be an old inueterate
ouerworne practice of satan, newly furbished and set abroach again by his
instruments, to paint out the professors of the gospel in the most ougly
deformed shape they can devise: (as we see by our Savior Christ and his
Apostles and so consequently by his ministers specially:) not that they be such
indeed as they are despitfully featured out, but to this end, to make them
more odiously envied and maliciously hated of the world, which is the special
mark the enemy shoots at.

Now the principal thing that is charged upon me, (and which I have all this
while denied, and still deny) is, teachinge to counterfeite. But what is this,
that Darrell should thus teach to counterfeite? why nothing else forsooth, but
a real entrance and possession of the devil of and into the bodies of men, to
be dispossessed and removed thence by fasting and prayer, and all to grace and
make good the hipocriticall fasting and exercise of the puritans, which
otherwise (without some such fetches and devises) would prove stark naught.
This then we see is the sin, if it be true. And suerly allow it to be true
and to be such indeed as they have laid it forth to be with all his
circumstances, I my self will subscribe and join with them in the
condemnation of it to the bottom of hell, and the sinner to the very depth of
the grave, as wherein (if it be rightly exami^ed and weighed,) is closlye shut
up and included not only the dishonor of God and disgrace of his works, but a
foul and detestable abuse of Gods church and a mocking of Gods people, with a
scornful and shameless contempt both of magistracy and ministry. And can not
the wisdom and majesty of the state of England find out adue punishment and
correction for so wretched and greiuous an enormitie as this? no question but
it can, may, and ought, if the party were once orderlye and by law convicted.
But as it was not the manner of Romans in ancient time for favor to deliver
any man to death before the party accused had his accusers before him, and
leave to defend him self: so is it not the manner of the Honorable Courts of
Justice in England, to proceed to sentence before conviction, or to punishment
before apparent proof. And this is it that has and does make me more
confident in defense of mine own innocence, and the equity of my cause, even
the reverent opinion and estimation that I have of the ordinary courts of
Justice in this land, before whom whenever I shall be called, I know it is not
a hundred of such lying and libelling discourses as this of Samuel Harsnetes,
that shall any way swaye them, either to sentence or censure the meanest of her
Majesty's subjects without evidence and proof.

But my fault they will needs have to be double: one an error in my Judgment,
the other a plain knacke of knavery (for I can call it no better) in my
practice. For the first my simple Judgment (as I have already both by word and
writting made known) is this: That as the bodies of men may really be
possessed of Satan in this age as well as in former times: so the ordinary
way and means of their dispossession and deliverance is prayer, or prayer and
fasting. This is (in effect) all that I hold, and contend for. wherein I
willinglye refer and submitt my self to the godly learned of our Church. I
challeng no power to work miracles, nor gift above others to cast out devils.
I have not used any adiuration: all which are fathered upon me, but I condemned
the same in others. And now before the Lord and men I do utterly and from my
soul renounce them, as heretofore I have often done with my tongue and pen:
what gross and dangerous error then do I maintain? For the other that is my
knacke or pack of knavery in teachinge to counterfeite, and fayning a
dispossession by prayer, when their were no such things performed: I cannot be
persuaded (for all this impudent and shameless discourse of S Harsnetes, so
bedecked and adorned with my L. of Londons flowers) that they themselves in
their consciences do be leeue this knacke of knauerie against me in that sort
as they have set it down. 1
The reasons that induce me so to think be these.

First, as men proph^ly call them.
because they would not suffer Summers or rather the devil in him to do his
tricks, though they were sundry times desired publiklye and privately that he
might do them for the better endinge of the controversy, and that he offered
to do the same.

Secondly, their manner of proceeding against me contrary to the ordinary
course of justice and equity: 2
yea such as heathens and infidels would blush and be ashamed to use: as
appears by the particulars in the treatise following. Now what need they to
have used any such extraordinary and unlawful proceedings, If they were
persuaded of the truth of that which they pretended against me, or that they
had any just matter or sound and clear evidence to convince me by? nay if they
wear not in themselves persuaded, that Darrell would clear himself of
teaching to counterfeite, if he should be admitted to a proceeding according to
the laws of the Realm in such cases provided?

Thirdly, their very writtinge against me in this case in that manner as they
have done, 3
is sufficient in the judgment of the wise to discry and discover the guiltines
of their consciences this way. For what a test were it to punish treason or
rebellion by Booke-writting? I willinglye confess the sin they charge me
with (if it be true) to be as bad as rebellion, and to deserve more then the
pillorie, yea a shameful and a reproachful death to the terror of others. And
if they can prove the things published against me in that printed Libell of S.
Harsnetes, they shall need no Jury to pass upon me, neither will I crave any
favor but justice with severity. Seeinge then the punish not nor never went
about to punish this supposed offense according to the weight and desert
thereof: nay have been so far from that, as within 14. days after the
publishinge of the book made against me, they offered me liberty upon
condition I would promise not to preach of possession nor dispossession: nor in
my public preaching justify the possession and dispossessinge of the persons
controverted nor deal any more in the dispossessinge of any: and yet have
publiklye made it known for so heinous and notorious a crime, what does this
argue but that inwardly in their own souls, they do not believe their own
lible?

Fourthly, their often and ordinary bringinge in the testimony of Summers
against me in their said book, (able to make a horse to spue) whenever
they are at a stand and can by no means writhe nor wrest in that which they
would feign make good (being utterly void of all honest course of defense)
then forsooth comes in M. 4
Summers dropping out of M Harsnets budget as an authentical witness. And what
does more argue the guiltines of there consciences, the desprate^es of their
cause, and the shamlesnes of their defense then this? That they are not abashed
to suppress the examinations of sundry honest men, wise men and gentlemen of
good place, taken by Commission from the Arch. B. of York as things of no
account: and instead of them to tell us a tale of Robin-hood, or rather if you
will, of Robin the devil, alias, William Summers? why alas, are they so simple
or sottish to imagine, that any man that is well in his wits, will believe
this or that because Summers says it, that infamous and notorious liar,
counterfeit, blasphemer, and forsworn wretch?

Fifthly, their winkinge at their 7. Lancashire counterfeits, and smoth
passing by them not punishinge them, albeit 6. of them were in the same family,
nor any of those 4. whom they have deait with, and say upon their examination
have confessed that they have counterfeted, no not Summers their principal
supposed counterfeite: but favored, entertained, countenaunced, ^^erished and
made much of him though most vile and infamous, and such as they must needs
know to have scarce any match in lewdnes and iniquity: as if counterfeiting
and blaspheming were a praise or but a spirt of youth in him, and teaching to
counterfeite only odious in me. Now whence comes this stealing by the 7. and
impunitie of all, but from the conscience of man, tening him that they are no
counterfeits, and therefore it is best to let them alone, and not to punish all
these innocents: Lest they in their innocence denying constantlye to have
counterfeited, and exclaming against them, should bring them to great shame.

Sixety and (...) the thing that most moves me thus to be persuaded is: their
winking at, and not answering at all to the impossibilities of or concerning
Dacling, Katherine Wright, Mary Cooper, and the 7. in Lancashire, which are the
only things we al^eadge against their counterfeiting, why they neither are
nor can possibly be counterfeites: and the silly thiftes (to blere the eyes of
men) they have deu^ed and forged out of their own brains for answer to the
impossibilities presse^ aga^^ Summers counterfeiting, and namely to the
depo^tions of the 17 pro^ing the impossibilities by oath. Hereunto I may add
the (...), and more then ridiculous proofs of my teaching 4. pro. 14. 15.
(...) their (...) ^eites. For (...) stolidu^n vulgus, the foolish people,
which w^ll believe every thing (that Christ was a glutton, etc. that he had a
d^uill, specially when they have the phariuees telling them, that (...) feth
forth devil, through Beelzebuh: that he is a blasphemer, specially when the
high priest says he has blasphemed, ye hear his blasphemy:) will upon the
producinge of these silly shifts and absurd proo^es, by a Prelate specially
and his Chaplain, hand over head, and of their word, rather then upon an^
diligent examination of the matter receive these for covnterfeites, and me for
their instructor: (which the B. of London and S. Harsnet knew full well, eis
they would have saved that labor:) yet the Prelate and his Chaplain cannot
possibly so believe and be persuaded in their consciences, which have forged
them to this said end and purpose, and have deliberatly and advisedly wayed
all things thoroughly concerning this matter: except you will clean put out the
eyes of their vnderstan^ingl, and deprive them of their reason, math, 28. 13.
and make them of reasonable, unreasonable creatures. Though the people of the
Jews through that silly shift of the Hie Priests and the Elders did believe,
that Christ's disciples came by night and stole him away, whiles the soldiers
sleept, yet the hie priests and Elders who devised this shift for the
smotheringe of Christ's resurrection, knew and were persuaded in their
consciences it was not so, but far otherwise. Even so in this our case, though
many of the people of England do in their simplicity and rash credulity
verelie believe that Summers and the rest have counterfeited, and I instructed
them, be cause of the silly reasons printed and published to that end by the B.
of London and S. Harsnet: yet the B. and Harsnet which have invented and de
uised those sottish reasons, and framed a whole book for the smotheringe of
the work of God wrought upon these persons, can not but know and be in their
consciences persuaded, that they have not counterfeited, nor I taught them.

These then (good reader) with sundry others are the special reasons that
move me to think, that they themselves (what face soever they set on it) do
not yet in their own consciences betwixt god and them, constantly believe all
that they have thus published or rather libelled against me, being a thing
vnpossiblie they should. And if it fare so with the bitingest and bitterest
adversaries, I may the bolder I think (even by the law and rule of equity) be
an earnest suter unto thee whosoever thou art to suspend thy judgment, and not
hastily to pass any sentence against me: and entreat thy patience christian
reader and favorable censure of me thus far fourth, as to cause thee to stope
thine ears to all unjust surmizes and odious exclamations against me, till
proof and trial have discovered my guiltines or innocence. And this the
rather I trust you will do, if you remember and forgett not that saying of the
holy ghost: he that is first in his own cause is just, then comes his
neighbor, and makes inquiry of him. And that other in the same place: he
that answers, amatter before he hear it, it is folly and shame unto him.
pro. 18. 13. 17.
He that answers, that is, takes upon him to judge or determine of a matter
incontrouersie, before he hear it, meaning, what can be said of both sides, it
is folly and shame unto him, that is, a point of folly coming from the lake
of wisdom, and such as whereof one ought to be ashamed.

And the rather I am to entreat this favor at thy hands, in that I have not
been dealt with according to the ordinary course of Justice of this land, but
altogether against the hair and in the vnreason ablest manner of proceeding
that might be, as if it were no matter at all what violence and indignity they
offer to a man of my condition, or to so base a fellow as Darrell is. Neither
by their patience do I think, that they can for their lives give me an
instance or show me the like president of their irregular and disorderly
proceeding against me, in any of the honorable civil cour^^^ of the Realm,
which is worthy the notinge, yea to be recorded and nailed on the posts of the
streets to the veiw of posterity. One would think that the reverent fathers
of the Church, should in their courts and judicial proceedinges give their
children (as they would have them counted) the reverent Judges of the land, and
fathers of the common wealth, an example and pa^terne of Justice and equity:
and not such an example as they would abhor and be a shamed to follow. I have
heard that among other the excellent graces of God upon her Majesty, this is
one that does exceedingly grace both her person and her government, namely, that
in the making and ordaininge of her Judges, she does among other things
enjoin the^ this special charge: That what soever in equity may be produced
on the behalf of the subject, may be patiently heard and favorably admitted
without exception or partiality and that they should not persuade themselves
to sit otherwise in Judgment for her self, then for her subject. which kind
of equal and christian procedinge if it had been held with me, I needed not
now to have spent my time in refuting this shameless and malicious invectiue.
what proceedinge has been used against me will plainly appear by this
discourse followinge, and namely in my answer to the second chapter of the
first book, by the quaeries or demaundes to the Discouerer (I mean the B.
page 14 of the Discovery.
of London and S. Harsnet) iustifiynge the same, and affirminge that this cause
has been examined, according to the usual course by the laws of the Realm
in such cases provided. And yet shall not the Discouerer be ever able to name
in what one thing after my appeara^ce before the high commission, I was dealt
with according to law. Truly for my own part I can not. If he can, let him
do it. For these reasons I hope good reader, that layinge aside all
partiallitie and prejudice, you will reserve the one ear, to hear what
Darrell has to say for the Lord and himself, and against counterfeiting, and
teachinge Summers, Darling etc. to counterfeite: and that you will beware how
you receive a false report against your neighbor, specially against the Lord
himself and his works.

If any think that the charge of counterfeiting, and of my teachinge to
counterfeite (the sum of the book answered by me,) is so lying,
slanderous, abhorring to common sense, palpable false, and impossible to be
true, that it was altogether unworthy the answearinge and convincing, or at
least of so large an answer and conviction as here follows: such may
remember that the Apostles being charged with drunckennes and to be full of
new wine, act. 2. 13 14. math. 12.
Peter for them all answer (...) and convinced that vile slander. In like
sort did our Savior Christ being charged more vily to be a coniurer, and to
cast out devils through Belzabub, the prince of devils. which things are
written for our learning, even to teach us what to do when any such thing
falls out. Now the larger I have been for these two reasons. First, I thought
it fit to answer to all that is contained in the Discovery, which seems to
make more or self against the cause or my self: least passing by some of this
kind, it might be thought I therefore did it and purposly, because I were not
able to answer. Again, I considered that many have already given an ear to
counterfeitinge, and verily believe our Demomakes to be counterfeits: for their
sakes therefore, and that I might draw these preiudicate: persons from their
error to the imbracinge of the truth, it was requisite to answer all that in
the face made for counterfeitinge, which could not be performed in few words.
Secondly, I knew the credit of the adversary was great, my own little,
being a base and contemptible person in the eyes of the world. That my self
then and that which I contend for might be believed, even of this dotinge and
blind generation, It was necessary I should not only crack or diminish the
credit of the a duersarie, even with his best friends, which might have been
done in afew words: but take all credit from him, by detectinge all his
filthiness: for in making his name to rotte and stink, and the counterfeit
cause he has in hand, their is hope that men will give some ear unto me, and
that I strive for, be I never so mean. Now this would be best performed in the
larger pursuit and stirringe deeply in the falshods, lies, and absurdities of
the Discouerer, which could not be done without the multiplyinge of words.
For the more one stirs in that which is stinkinge and filthy, the more
stinking savor it sends forth. And so shall we find it to be in the ample
ripping up of this foul Discovery, to the Detection whereof we will now
proceed, God assistinge us. If the falsehood of some be detected, and thou find
out the truth by this our Detection: then open thy mouth in the defense of that
truth, and assist me with thy prayers.

Thine in the Lord, John Darrell.

As in all ages there have been some which have gainsaid the holy doctrins of
god revealed in his word, so likewise there have not wanted such as have
resisted the works which he has wrought before the children of men. Exodus 7. 11.
Against the wonderful works wrought in Egypt by Moses did those sor^erers
Iannes and Iambres rise up, and set themselves with all their devilish art and
power. When the holy ghost fell upon the Apostles in the form of cloven
tongues like fire, even of those which were eye and ear witnesses thereof,
there were some that mocked them, act. 2. 13.
saying that they were full of new wine. The Apostle Paul having cast the
devil out of the Pythonisse, her masters were offended therewith: caught him
and Sylas his associate, and drew them before the maiestrates: who upon their
incensinge, commanded them to prison, act. 16. 18.
and to be beaten with rods: whereupon they were beaten fore, cast into an
inward prison or dungeon: and their feet made fast in the stocks. When
there was brought to Christ Jesus one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb,
and that he had healed him, so that he which was blind and dumb, math. 12. 24.
both spoke and saw: all the people (it is said) were amassed, and said, is not
this that son of David? And upon the same work wrought upon an other at an
other time, the multitud marueiled saying, The like was never seen in Israel.
But the Pharisees resisted as other works of his, math. 9. 23.
so both these and said: he casts out devils, through Beclzebub the prince of
devils. In a word, the mockinges and scourgings, the banishments, the bonds and
imprisonments, the puttinge to death of Christ Jesus, the Prophets, and his
Apostles do testify, how the word and works of god have been from time to
time resisted. Even so it is now: God having wrought diverse rare and great
works, there have been some found to withstand them: and to bear the world in
hand that all is but connterfeyting and notorious cofenage. Among these the
chief are D. Ban^xoft B. of London and Samuel Harsnet his chaplain and
Examiners whose labor day and night it has been for the space almost of two
years and in that time have they applied and abused their wit and authority,
to persuade this to the world, and to this end have they published a book
called a- Discourie. 2. tim. 3. 8.
But as Paul says of Iannes and Iamhres that withstood Moses, and of certain
men in his time of corrupt minds, repr^bat concerning the faith, which did
then resist the truth: even so and the same say. I o^ these men: They shall
prevail no longer, for their madness shall be evident unto all men, as theirs
also was.

Hereunto serves as the former treatise, wherein the truth is declared, and
these works published and made known to the world, (for the declaration of
the truth, is a conviction of the falsehood) so the treatise following: wherein
the DISCOVERY is fully I trust answered and the evil name raised up, and given
out against thease works, viz. of counterfeyting, and my teaching (the some
or twoe parts of that book) taken away. And when the sord shall yet further
pursue the manifestation of these works, disclosing that which is now covered,
and making that known which now is hyd, which I doubt not but in due time he
will: psalm. 10. 14. mark. 4. 22. 1. tim. 5. 24. verse 25.
Then will their filthiness and madness be evident indede. And for our further
assurance ^crein, we may remember, it is written Thou (Lord) behouldest
mischief and wrong, that thou may take it into thine hands. And again:
There is nothing hyd that shall not be op^ned neither is there a secret but that
it shall come to light. And again to this purpose it is said by the Apostle:
Some men's sins are open before hand, and go before unto judgment: but some
men's follow after. Likewise, also the good works are manifest before hand,
and they that are otherwise cannot be hyd. whereby it is plain that howsoener
the sins of some men are for a time in this world unknown, as having been
committed in secret and in the darkness, yet the Lord in his time will bring
them to light, and manifest them to the world: and on the other side, though
the good works of some be not for a time through the slanders of some
manifest and known to the world to be such, yet it shall not always be so,
they shall not always be hyd, but in an other time god will reveal them, to
be that indede they are.

It is in the second place to be observed, that as satan has ever used by his
instruments to resist the doctrines and works of god that thereby he might
keep god from his glory and praise, and man from believing and profiting by
them: so the principal means whereby he has prevailed in all times, has been
the slaundering of those whom the Lord has therein used as instruments: for
the old serpent knows full well, that the credit and good name of men being
taken away be the doctrines they teach never so true and wholesome, and the work
wherein they were used never so profitable and to be admired, they will not be
received. Neither is he ignorant hereof that let the slander be never so
manifestly or palpably salfe, yet the world will believe it and run^e away with
it as current, if once it be raised up and spread abroad: for he knows that
there is not one wise man of a thousand, who uses to consider of a thing and
hear what can be said of both sides, pro. 14. 15.
before he embrace it as a truth: and that the foolish will believe every
thing. act 24 5, act. 17. 6.
Hence it is that in these cases it is his first and chief labor to raise up
and spread abroad slanders. By this means he prevailed aganst Paul stirring
up some to affirm that he was a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition that
he subverted the state of the world: and was an enemy to the state (as we spoke
now of some) a tra^tor, doing against the decree of Caesar. Yea of Christ
himself the devil by his instruments gave it out, that he was a Deceauer, and
worse then so a Coniurer: castinge out devils through the prince of devils. By
the same means that ancient slaunderer, mat^ 17. a 3. R^t^^. 12. 9.
and accuser of the brethren day and night, both to god and men, who thereby
deceaueth all the world, has hitherto mightily prevayled against the works of
god we speak of: spreadinge abroad that Master More and I, especially my
self: are Deceauors, Imposters, cozoning merchants, that I have taught some (I
know not yet how many) to counterfeyt. But as S. Paul notwithstanding the
aforesaid accusations, was nither seditious nor traitor, but one that
practiced and taught the contrary: and Christ was no Deceauer but one in whose
tongue was found uo guile, neither cast out deuilles by the prince of devils,
but came to destroy the works of the devil, eue^ so we in lik manner
notwithstanding that we are thus accused to be deceivers and cosoners, and I
know not what, and my self to have taught Summers and others to counterfeyt:
yet it shall by gods grace appear by the sequel, that we are no such men
indeed, and that my self is not (I thank god) guilty of any such
abomynation, as mine adversaries most unjustly lay upon me. where by the way we
may learn thus much, that it is not enough for one to be accused, for then
innocence it self (Christ Jesus I mean) should not go uncondemned. Therefore
as in all other accusations and evil reports of our neighbors brought unto
our ears, so in this concerning Summers and me, if we desire to avoid the
justifying of the wicked, and condemning of the just, both which are an
abomination unto the Lord: we must examine whither the things alleged to that
end by the Discouerer do thoroughly prove the same or no: otherwise they be but
empty words discovering the malice of the Discouerer. To the furtherance
whereof this may serve that here follows, whereunto we will now by gods grace
proceed.

OF THE EPISTLE.
This casting out of devils is ( says he) now discovered to be but a pure
play, containing two principal parts of a vice and a devil, one shift devised
to to help this vice of the stage, that he might not be hissed at of all the
world is: that to cast out a devil, is no such great matter, as men make
account of being but mirandum et non miraculum, in the nature of a wonder, and
not of a miracle.

Think thou (Christian Reader) that this Discouerer (or rather Masker
coming thus to play his part on the stage) means good sooth, that behaueth
himself so ridiculously in the very entrance of so weighty a matter: or that
his intent is to bleare thy eyes of understanding, with his colors of
rhetorike, fine quipps, and multitud of words and depositions: least you
should se these works of god to his glory and your comfort. But to come to the
point: S. H. is very ignorant if he cannot see a difference between mirandum
and miraculum for by mirandum is meant only athing admiratione dignum worthy
admiration, or to be admired, of which number who knows not therbe many works
which be not miraculous. There was small cause then why he should sport himself
therewith and call it here a shift, a miserable shift, and a little after a
slysilly shift, August liber 3. de ^^r^ta. D^neus opus. 39 p. 1. c.
saying Augustine, and after him Danaeus a man of great learning, put an
apparent difference between mirum and miraculum, a wonder, and a miracle.
According to whose judgments I may well term that election of spirits we
speak of, mirum a wonder and deny it to be miraculum a miracle. Now if it so
fall out that the Discouerers procedings be answerable to his beginning: his
book to his epistle, and his dealing concerning the matter of fa^t, to this in
matter of doctrine: then may his book be rightly called a Discouerye, not of a
pure play, but of his own inward and secret corruption (as well malice as
ignorance) which no doubt he greatly desires should be covered. But let us
hear what he says further against this silly shift of mine.

What dull conceits ( says he) had the rulers of the Jews, that they could
not see this slysilly shift, to deprave the miracles of our Saviors Christ,
and to tell the people there was no just cause they should believe, page 4.
that our Savior was the son of God: in doing such mighty miracles among
them: the chief one whereof was casting out of devils: by reason that action
was but mirandum, et non miraculum, a strange thing for silly people to wonder
at, and not a miracle, to enforce them to believe.

The Discouerer might have remembered that I do not affirm that the casting
out of devils performed by Christ, was by fasting and prayer, and so miranda,
et non miracula: but the contrary (even there where I treat hereof) to both
these. in my apology
To cast out devils ( say I) by aword, so as one no sooner commands the
spirit to go out, but forthwith he departs as Christ and his Apostles did,
is not only a miracle, but of them the greatest: but by the means of prayer
and fasting to drive out Satan, or rather to entreat Christ (to whom all
power is given in heaven and in earth) to cast Satan forth, is mirandum, non
miraculum.

Had these words of mine been spoken to the Pharisees could those dull conceyted
Rulers of the Jews have thence taken occasion to have depraved our Savior his
casting out of devils? Sure one would think they served rather to the
magnifying thereof. Now if the Discouerer could prove, that Christ did cast
forth wicked spirits by fasting and prayer, or yet his Apostles, then indeed
for as much as I houlde all eiection performed by them to be miraculous and yet
houlde that it is no miracle, when Satan is expelled by prayer and fasting, he
should convince me otherwise he does but tryfle and abuse his Reader in
causing him to spend his hours in such vain idle and unprofitable discourse
as concerns nothing the matter in question neither touches his adversary
any thing at all.

He proceeds. There is a place says he in the last of S. Mark. wherein they
mightily please themselves, and taking it as a rod of defense to maintain
their cause, it proves in handling a serpent that deuoureth them up, the words
are these: These signs shall follow them that believe in my name they shall
cast out dyuells, and shall speak with new tounges etc.

This is a mere slander for it is as far from me and ever was from
alleging this scripture in my defense, as it is from taking upon me to work
miracles, and I will as soon do the one, as the other. How this scripture is
to be understood of svch as had the myraculous faith, I have showed before
against Thyreus and the papists perverting it to their disposiessinge of
devils: and that it cannot be understood of all beleuers as he expounds it.

But to proceed. In steed of the author his name, we have in the end of the
Epistle these two letters S. H. so that men may only guess who has made the
discovery. Were the truth on the discouerers side, he would sure in plain
and full letters have set to his nam withont staggeringe, and thereby
intimated thus much, Look what I have said of counterfeytinge, and by Darrell
or any other, I such a one: am ready to justify the same but the discouerer
being privy to his own false and corrupt dealinge. and fearinge least that
would be descryed and come one day to light, thought it wisdom to conceal
his name: who can tell also how the christian magistrate will take this, when he
shall perceive how greatly God is dishonored hereby and see the intolerable
injury that is done first and chiefly to the Lord himself. who has wrought
these great works, and to whom great glory and praise is due for the same:
secondly to those whom God (among others) has used herein, and those upon
whom these works were wrought, taking away the good name both of all those
and of others that I could name, as mnch as in him lies, besi^es the greuious
and causeless molestation of many subjects in the land. and the wrong down to
them both in their substance and good name. In this respect also there is cause
why the Discouerer should set down two letters, rather then his name: for it
is good policy to prevent a mischief, and cast for the worst.

There is no doubt but that S. H. stand for Samuel Harsnet chap line to the
Bishop of London, but whither he alone, or his lord and he have discovered
this counterfeyting and cosonage there is the question. Some think the book
to be the Bishops own doing: and many think it to be the joint work of them
both. Of Harsnet I think men doubt not consideringe the two first letters of
his name be subscribed. As touching his Lord and master it is probable,
seeing the book is commonly called the Bishop of Londons book, and that all
or part of it was made by an high Commissioner such as the Bishop is, as
appears by these words: The author of the brief narration to draw US
peradventure from dealing with M. Darrell: page 14.
now other Commissioner in no reason can it possibly be. For the Bishop of
London it is that has deposed and examyned I know not how many, and that is
acquainted with every quirk and corner of this cause, that has managed this
matter, that has persuaded not only the rest of the high Comissioners, but the
whole land also as much as in him lies, that all is but counterfeyting and
knavery: but how truly he and his chapline say so, and what reward they both
deserve at the hands of god, and men, for all the great pains they have taken
in this behalf, does partly appear by the premises, and will (I trust) more
fully be made manifest by that which follows.

THE FIRST BOOK.
THE 1. CHAPTER.
The number of such persons as are said to have been dispossessed, by M.
Darrels means.
M. Darrell growing into some small credit with the simpler sort: page ^.
became very peart and proud. Something to this purpose he confesses some
thought that I did glory somewhat tomuch in the action of casting forth devils.
page 3.
And a little after There are added in the end of the history of the boy of
Burton these words uiz. shortly you shall hane the true story come forth of
those 7. in Lancashire that were possessed with unclean spirits, and all
seven delivered at one time by this man, meaning M. Darrell as he himself
confesses.

Hereby the Descouerer laboreth to persuade the world that I did glory in the
casting out of devils as is plain by these words: what M. Darrell took upon
him after this his second exployt, it may be surmy sed by glorying in the first.

To the first of these I answer that I have not altogether so deposed, as
appears by page 277. of the Discovery. But admit it were so, and that some
have so thought of me as is said, yet it follows not theirvpon, that I
gloryed etc. for many have mise conceived the sbeaches and actions of men. when
Eliab David's eldest brother, heard the words of David concernninge the killinge
of Goliath he theirvpon thought, and said unto him, that he was com down to se
the battle of pride and the malice of his heart: and yet it was nothing so.
How often did Joseph's brethren conceive amiss of his speeches and actions? To
the second I answer, that being examined by the B. of L. upon my oath, whither
I thought that by these words this man, with the rest were meant my self: I
answered affirmatively. And it being plain that he did mean me, (for who else
had to do with Darling and the 7 in. Lancashire) how could I answer otherwis
without periuery? These words also we must remember are not mine but the
printers, as I told the Bishop at my examynation, and at the same time
condemed them greatly (both which the Discouerer I warrant you concealeth) how
then do they or my answer unto them argue my glorying in the actio^ of casting
forth de uels? Let the Discouerer fram his argument and it may be he will be
ashamed of it. Moreover were it that I did glory somewhat toomuch herein the
same makes not against the cause, but argues only my corruption.

Darrell being sent for into Lancashire by one M. Starchy dispossessed in the
said M. page 2.
Starchyes house seven persons at one clap: viz: John Starchye, Margaret
Hardman: page 323.
Elianor Hardman: Ellen Holland: Margaret Byrom and Jane Ashton. And in the end
of the discovery the Discouerer has these words: unto these notable exployts
of Darrells, concerning Mary Cowper, Katheryn Wright the boy of Burtou: and
William Summers something might be added of his pretended dispossessing the
seven (so often mentioned) in Lancashire, out of one M. Mores examynation and
confession touching that matter: his said examynation is in the Registers
office to her Majesty's Comissioners. And if any will take the pains to pervse
it, he shall find that M. Darrels, and M. Mores course held with those in
Lancashire, was as vain and ridiculous as with any of the other.

We hear of M. Mores dealing and mine, about the (pretended) dispossessing of
7. Lancashire and in general terms of the course we held with them therein,
but from these first words unto these last we hear not what they for their
parts did, save what is intimated by these aforesaid words: so as the reader
knows not well what to make or think of them, of whom notwithstanding there
is often mention made, and wither he should account them counterfeyts, yea or no.
I desire therefore to know of the Bishop of London and Harsnet what their
judgments of these seven whither they counterfeyted a possession or were
indeed possessed: for one of these sure they did, because they were handled so
like to those that are possessed, both in and during the time of their trouble
(or so feigned) and at the time and instant of their deliverance (or dissembled
deliverance) every one of them crying aloud, being rent sore, and lyinge as
dead, or seeminge so to be, math 12. 43.
which are the signs of dispossession: Yea after also as we have heard in the
story, either the vnclehne spirits being gone out, returned upon them all,
seeking to reenter into them again, according to the Scriptures, or some such
thing they feigned. These things duly considered, it cannot be denied but that
either they were possessed or dissembled a possession. If possessed: it is to
be hoped that they are now dispossessed, considering the signs of
dispossession mentioned in the gospel were heard and seen at the time and
instant of their amendment, and that since that very time, (being three years
past) they have continued free from being vexed by Satan, as before they were,
one excepted that is repossessed. The return also of the spirits does confirm
their eiection. If thus it go and have gone with the 7. in Lancashire: then we
see men may be possessed in these days and dispossessed, yea that the greatest
part of the persons controuerted were so indeed, and did not faigne so to be
as is pretended.

If they counterfeyted, why was not M. Starchy and some other about them, being
so many, fetched to London by Purseuants or war rants, as well as sundry from
Nottingham about Summers, and diverse out of St affordshire about Thomas Darling?
And why was there no commission directed to some in Lancashire, for the better
inquirye into this counterfeyting, and sifting of those counterfeyts (if such
they be) being 7. as well as one into Darbyshire, an other into Lecestershire,
and 3. or 4. (I take it) to Nottingham, for the finding out of the counter
feyting of those four there? If these have counterfeyted with Summers and
Darling, why were not they or some of them fetched up and received into the
Bishop of Londons house, and by his Lordship and S. Harsnet deposed and
examined about their counterfeyting, as well as Summers and Darling their
fellow counterfeyts were? for mark what the Discouerer himself says in the
end of this chapter: page 4.
touching all these (saving those in Lancashire) examynatio^s have been taken,
and as well by the confessions of the parties, as by diverse other
circumstances, it does plainly appear, that all which was done betwixt M.
Darrell and them was merely counterfeyted. I demand now why these Lancashire
persons were omitted? why their examinations were not taken, and they tried
what confessions they would have made, as well as Summers. Darling. Kath:
Wright, and M. Couper. if these likewise me^rely counterfeyted. Surely me
thinks that if these 7. were counterfeits, the Bishop and Harsnet do hereby
greatly prejudice the cause they have in hand, and them selves. for admit one
or two of them were obstinate, and would not confess a counterfeytinge, yet it
may be some of them would. There are sundry of them, and they are not all sure
made of one moulde. Some of them also very young, and it is likely they would tell
the truth moreover it cannot be that the Bishop and Ha^snet taking such great
and long pains about two years, day and night, to find out 4. counterfeyts,
would ^^aue passed by such a number of counterfeytes, so great a pray as (...)
was, if so be they were counterfeyts. And much less would they ^aue sought out
one single counterfeyt Kath. Wright by name, have deposed and examyned her
(with sundry others) for counterfeyting 14. years past, and let all these
alone with their counterfeyting about three years ago, if these were
counterfeyts as well as she (is pretended to be) Again if those 7. have
counterfeited so that we have not 4. but 11. counterfeyts, considering I dealt
with these 7. as well as the other 4. why is there no mention made (not so much
as in generalty) of my fraudulent practices and procedings concerning the
pretended possession and dispossession of these 7. nor any word used tending
thereunto, as well as or Will. Summers Thomas Darling and the rest even in
particular and by name? Surely the Discouerer did greatly forget himself to
mention my (pretended) dispossessing of 4. only in the title of his book, and
in the first chapter of the book wherein he treats of the number of such
persons as are said to have been disposessed by my means to name 11. Besides
if those have counterfeyted seeing then they are the greatest part of the
counterfeyts, and have not at all been dealt with for their counterfeyting, it
is plain that the Bishop and Harsnet have but slightly shuffoled and slubbered
over the matter of counterfeyting wherewith they have been wholly taken up a
long time, and left their work imperfect: much like to an unwise builder who
not first sitting down and casting with himself what his house will cost him,
falls of building: but perceiving after he has builded a while, that he is
not able to fynish that he began, is constrained to give over his building,
whereupon all that behold it begin to mock him: or that foolish man which
unawares builds his house upon the sands, but afterward perceiving the same
to be no sure foundation, cease to build any further: for this cause I advise
them either to confess the truth and give glory to god, or else for shame to
proceed on in finding out more counterfeyts, and add to the 4. they have
already those 7. for all eleven were handled alike: and their condition the
same, yea so much is in effect acknowledged by the Bishope and Harsnet in this
whole first Chapter of theirs, and in very many places of there book:
otherwise all that hear thereof will laugh at the^, and their doting
partiallity, that would be so hot and sweat so much about 4. and let 7. of the
same counterfeyt condition pass and escape untouched. Furthermore, if these 7.
have likewise counterfeyted, I desire to know of the Discouerer who taught
them so to do, and that he make him known to the world, as he has done the
teacher of the other four, for why should we not think that they likewise had
an in structor, specially seeing 5. of the 7. were very young, and their fevts as
admirable and hard to be done as those of the 4^ my self (we hear) scholed
Summers Darling Kath: Wright and Mary Couper, and saying the (...) were handled
alike to these 4. counterfeyts, and that I dealt with the 7. as well as the
other 4. and that 3. of the 4. were helped by the same means, viz. by prayer
and fasting, or dissembled the same with these, it is in all reason likely,
that if I instructed the 4. to counterfeit then I have done the like to the 7.
in Lancashire also: but considering I am not accused thereof, and if I were I
trust they would clear me themselves: it is to be thought that this
notwithstanding, I am free from teaching John Starchy Anne Starchy, and the
other 5. who he is then that instructed them, it would be known. John and Anne
Starchy with the rest would be deposed and examined by the L. Bishop of London,
and made to tell who it was, what his name is, that being known the world
might be better satisfied as touching their counter feyting, and he whosoever
he is, might partake with me in punishment, seeing he has committed the like or
the same fault. Lastly if Io. and Anne Starchy: Margaret Hardman Elianor
Hardman etc. be counterfeytes, why are they not punished for counterfeyting,
considering it is a fault deserving very severe punishment, and not to be
tolerated or borne with in any, much less when so many conspire and ioyn
together in committing this said abomination. Thus you see (Christian Reader)
in what straits the Bishop and his Chapline have brought themselves on which
hand soever they turn them, whither to the right or left. If they say the 7.
in Lancashire were possessed, then we hear what follows thereupon: if they
affirm they counterfeyted a possession, (and the one of these as is before
showed it is very certain they did) we see they are little or nothing helped
thereby: ^lence is best where answer cannot be made without a braned
consience.
the only thing I fear is that they will not be drawn to return any answer
hereunto at all: though I have multiplied my words, and enlarged my pen, and
thereby would provoke them thereunto.

Jane Ashton is since fallen into the hands of certain Seminary priests, and
has been carried by them up and down that country to sundry recusants houses
(as certain idle men were wont to carry puppets) and by cunning counterfeiting
of certain fits and staying of hirself by the secret dire ^ti^ns of the said
priests, (...). 2.
she has gotten god knows what: they by such leu dnes have won great
credit, but her Majesty's subjects have in the mean time been shamefully
abused.

Thus it is Jane Ashton being with six other dispossesed as we have heard, was
after (embracing the popish religion) repossessed, and thereupon fell into the
hands of certain priests, who have carried her up and down the country,
exorcising and adiuring the devil in her after their manner. ^^o (...) favor
to priests then to ministers of the gospel.
Now I demand of the Bishop of London why these Seminari^ priests have not
been in all this time committed to prison and punished as well as M. More and
my self, for besides that they are priests, it is acknowledged (and it is most
true) that thereby her majesty's subjects have been shamefully abused, and
further it is said that she stays herself upon their secret directions,
whereby it should seem (if one may believe the Discouerer) that these priests
have taught^ her to cou^terfyt, at least in part, why also is not this
notorious cou^ter feyt punished, that has had a principal hand in this
abusing of her ma^iesties subjects? but it may be she is no counterfeit, for it
is said that through the directions of the said priests she has gotten god
knows what: Imagine that it is the doing of some tricks, or as is said here
the counterfeyting of certain fits whether she will or not as Mary Couper is
brought forth deposing, that certain speeches of mine (principally) and of
certain women, together with her experience of the signs of possession in her
brother, made her to do that which she never thought to have done, and this
whether she would or no, so as she could not refrain: no marvel then though
she have not been punished for counterfeyting, page 3. 1^
and this is the very reason why of 11. counterfeyts (as some call them) none
have been punished for counterfeyting: no not Summers: who if it were so was an
horrible blasphemer, and otherwise most abominable.

OF THF 2. CHAPTER,
The occasion why M. Darrells dealing with Summers was called into questyon at
Lambeth.
M. page 9
Darrell by virtue of her Majesty's Commission for causes ecclesiastical being
sent for, appeared before the L. Archbishop of Canterbury and others at
Lambeth: from whence he was committed to prison, by reason of his absurd and
untrue (but yet very confident) assertions: giving thereby just occasion to
suspect, that he was but a cou^terfeyt: and order was taken for the further
examination of that cause, according to the usual course by the laws of the
Realm, in such cases provided. The issue whereof was, that upon the hearing of
M. Darrell, and the depositions against him in open court, before the L.
Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Bishop of London, etc. he the said M, Darrell
was by the full agreement of the whole court, condemned for a counterfeyt: and
together with M. More (his companyon) who took upon him to iustefy the said
Darrell, had otherwise greatly misbehaued himself) they were both of them
deposed from the ministry, and committed to close prison, there to remain
until order were taken for their further punishment.

All I affirmed at my commitment was, that Summers had not counterfited: Let men
now judge, whether that be absurd and falce 2. whether so to affirm be
herisy: for I was committed to prison for heresy, and other heresy (I then
uttered not) and not for teaching Some. to counter feit: which fact was not the^
in question, no not until a month after I had been in prison: yea by the
discouerers own words, (which be that I was committed to prison by reason of
(or for) my absurd and untrue assertions: it appears that I was not sent to
prison: for the same cause I have been so long deteyned in prison viz. teaching
to counterfeyte. 3 Let men judge, whither for this confident assertion I
deserved to be committed to prison. what order was taken and agreed upon by
some in secret, and whither the self same that after was put in execution I
know not: but that in the examination of this cause there was a proceeding
according to the usual course of this Realm in such cases provided howsoever
the Discouerer in general terms affirms it, yet he makes not the same to
appear in the particulers. Sir Discouerer you affirm indeed that I was
iudicially proceeded against by due course of law and ordinary practice of the
high commission court, according to the laws in that behalf provided. I pray
you therefore answer me.



England, has appointed high commissioners? And if this be the due course and
ordinary practice of that court, whether do you know the same to be according
to the laws in that behalf provided?

Sir Discouerer did) with imprisonment, bringing up to London, burning of their
feet, or with some other kind of vyolences in case they depose not to their
humor and contentment: And if it be so whether do you know the same to be
according to the laws in that behalf provided?

Item whither do you know, that it is the usual course and ordinary in
absentia partis reae? And if this be the usual course and ordinary practice of
that court, whether do you know the same to be according to the laws in that
beehalfe provided?

Item whether do you know, that it is the usual course and ordinary Sir
Discouerer did at London) And if it be so then whether do you know the same
to be according to the laws in that behalf provided?

Item whether do you know, that it is the usual course and ordinary

Item whither do you know etc. that the defendant, whether he be an
adulterer, an incestuous person, or perjured person etc. for the clearing of
his innocence touching the crime objected, be not suffered to produce
witnesses, and to have them examyned on his behalf? And if this be the
ordinary practice of that court, whether do you know the same to be
according to the laws in that behalf provided?

Item whether do you know, that it is etc. To deny such as are

Item whether do you know, that it is etc. to condemn any person

Item whether do you know, that it is ect. that socius criminis, be instar
duorum testimoniorum omni exceptione maiorum? And whether this be according to
the ecclesiastical laws in that behalf provided?

Item whether do you know, that it is etc. to deny unto the desendant

Item whether etc. to commit a minister of the gospel, or any other absurd and
untrue, though confident assertions? and if it be, whether do you know the same
to be according to the laws in that behalf provided?

Item whether do you know, that it is the usual course and ordinary

Item, whether etc. to proceed to the condemnation of any

Item whether do you know, that it is the usual course, and ordinary

And where the Discouerer adds, that the issue thereof was, that upon the
hearing of me, and the depositions against me in open court, I was by the full
agreement of the open court condemned for a counterfeytte: and together with M.
More deposed from the ministry, and committed to close prison, there to
remain until order were taken for our further punnishment:

I demand of him who was present at this hearing: first whether I used any
continued speech then, save one: and whether in the same I was not cut of. 2.
whether being charged to teach Summers and M. Cooper his sister, Kath: Wright
and Tho. Darling, I spoke any thing in my own defense concerning the 3, last,
one word or two excepted, concerning Kath: Wright, which raised up collor in
this Discouerer. 3. whether Th: Darling being in the court by the Bishop of L.
commandment, was heard to say any thing touching my teachinge of him, or his
own counterfeyting, or not counterfeyting: yea whether ever he or any other
affirmed that I taught him to counterfeyte. 4. whereas the depositions against
me were heard then to speak their their fill, so the depositions (of the 17.
taken by the 12. Comissioners) which are for me, were heard to speak at all,
either then or at any other time before, though I have often and instantly
desired the same. 5. whether ever any one of my witnesses, (who have hundredes
to clear me) were heard to speak either in court, or country before
commissioners. 6. whether if it be as I seem to intimate by these my demands,
this hearing he speaks of was likewise according to the usual course by the
laws of the Realm in such cases provided yea or not 7. where he says we are
r^serued for further punishment, I ask of him whether this be according to the
laws of the Realm, that we the accessaries (if there were any counterfeyting)
shall thus have punishment upon punishment, and the counterfeyts (if such they
were) nor any of them, be punished at all: as if all the iniquity were in
teachinge to counterfeyt, and none in learning and practicing the same:
otherwise (sure) they should be punished as well as we, and not all the strypes
laid upon M. Mores back and mine. And where it is said, that I was by the full
agreement of the open court condemned for a counterfeyt, it is untrue. Neither
was that or any other definitive sentence given of me. In the end we being
commanded to stand aside (as the manner is) were forthwith after in the open
court suspended, and commanded to close prison there to remain till we should
be are further from the^ And so have we done (save that we have not been all
this while close prisoners) waiting when we shall be heard according to the
Queens laws, and be either acquitted or condemned. More then this was not done,
nor word said.

They that ymagine Summers was not possessed, but did counterfeyt (says the
preface) do by ^onsequence deny the the sovereignty of our Savior in that
action. pa^. 1^.
And one of the written pamphlets: to deny the work of the devils and God in
the dispossession of So: may seem to be after a sort to deny them in the
gospel. Then follows his confutation, Indeed if M. Darrells credit were as
good in saying, that So: was possessed, and that by his and his fellows means
he was dispossessed: as the Evangelists and Apostles ought to be, when they
tell us of diverse that were possessed in Christ's time, then their said
collections were pertinent. Otherwise many false knaves from time to time,
having deluded the people with hipocrisy, and pretense of casting forth devils,
it is a suggestion of Satan for any to colect that thereby the said actions of
our Savior: and his Apostles, are in any sort blemished: but let them rayleon.

If Summers were possessed and dispossessed (as I trust is made manifest) then
are these their collections very pertinent though Darrels credit nor his
fellows, be any way to be compared with the Evangelists and Apostles: neither
are the said actions of our Savior and his Apostles in any sort blemished by
these words, as this man suggesteth, no man so collecting: but a man would
think rather that they be ble^dyshed, which will not receive the possessiou
and dispossession contended for notwithstanding it has so great confirmation
from the gospel But let them (says he) rail on. Is not here very perylous
railing? well. If there be not here, yet elsewhere there is, whereby they show
of what spirit they are. And this he does by setting down many railing
sentences (so termed by him) which are scattered here and there through out the
Naration and Praeface to my Apollogye: Some of which I will repeat, but of the
shortest for breuity sake.

M. Darrell hitherto could not obtain so much as patient audience or any
iudicyall course of proceeding. page 21.
Again, their proceedings have been indirect, contrary to the royal
commandment of her Majesty, her laws and lawful liberties of her loyal
subjects, and again his judges became parties, pleaders, and accusers: again
M. Darrell and M. More are now imprisoned for giving testimony to the truth.
again let men beware in creditiug false rumors against those holy men of god,
who do now or shall hereafter suffer in this holy cause. Again I would
advise them that slander this work, and persecute the servants of god without
cause to tak heed, least they be found even fighters against god.

Thus we see what railing the friends of this cause do use: let us now
consider, what railing and scoffing (to let others go) this man an adversary
to the cause, and great friend to counterfeiting does use: that so comparing the
railing together, we may the better discern of it, and of these raylers.

This casting out of devils is discovered to be but a pure play, A Patorne of
Harshents and his Lord, and Masters sobriety
contayninge two principal parts of a vice and a devil, let them with all
their iuglyngs drive out a melancholic spirit, out of any poor soul in
Bedlam. Thus much for a taste of devil driuers legerdemayne: open the curtain
and see the puppets play. M. Darrell is thought by some to be such a one that
if he met with the devil, he was able to curb him. Is M. Darrell will be a
right Exorcist after the current fashion among the Jesuits: if he want the
faith of doing miracles, he may cast his capp at them meaning devils. when
Summers was dispossessed, the devil was shroudly dressed, he was forsooth so
extremely tormented by the fasting, prayers, and preaching of M. Darrell and
the rest, as he had no leisure to say what he must do, or what he would do,
but rudely without taking any leave of them departed. The devil was trick^
with their conceived prayers. One devil would have been mad at the name of
Presbyter, an other at the sight of a minister that will not subscribe, an
other to have seen men sit or stand at the communion. And who knows whether
in time, the naming of a presbitery would not have had the virtue of a popish
relic, as well to cast out a devil, as to disclose him If their scholars be
of the new cut: they cry, they wallowe, they foame, and show the signs
mentioned in the Scriptures. Open thine eyes then good ^^eder and let thy
consience be Judge who is the Rayler.
There Exorcists for want of work are driven to their shifts, and like Tinkers
walk up and down from place to place, seeking to be ymployed. Two points
served his turn instead of iugling slicks, here is fast and loose as the
Egyptian lists. If the resemblances of Darrells practices to Pedlers be not
fit: then as you remember Summers and Darrell colluding together, think upon
the pretty feats betwixt Banks and his horse. So skillful a catt is Darrell
in hunting Darlings mouse* here unto add that he calls us devil flingers,
Imposters, iuglers, absurd mates cosoning merchants, false knaves, etc.

A great deal more there is of this stamp: yea the whole book from the first
leaf to the last, is written in such scoffing and raylinge characters, that it
might seem rather to have been compiled by Nash Pasquil, or some
Interlude-maker, then any other of sobriety and judgment. But the style is
suitable to the matter. And so to return unto the former railing, used by such
as contend against counterfeyting, and for Some: possession: Let us see what he
infers and concludes thereupon. First, that my friends in so doing show
themselves to be but children, which it is a shame for grown men to be: and
that in these words These are children iudeede^ to what rypenes in railing
think you they will grow, by the time they be men? To be perrilous children
eue^ the children of the devil: and this he does out of James It is true
(says he) There is a wisdom whose children by their outward appearance they
may be well accounted. page 12.
Of which wisdom S. James speaking says. If ye have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts rejoice not, neither be liars against the truth, for this
wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly sensual, and devilish.

I answer him, and upon occasion of his own railing and scoffing, retort this
scripture upon him thus. If it be a truth (as it is most true) that Some. Kath:
Wright, and Darling were possessed and dispossessed, that neither they nor Mary
Couper have counterfeyted, Pro. 13. 23. Iere. 13. 2 cor. 13. 8.
that my self have taught them no such thing: which this Discouerer avouches
and contendeth for as a matter of truth, then for-asmuch as he has bitter
envying and strife in his heart for the falsehood (whereof S. James speaks, as
the words following do show: for contention for the truth is lawful and
commendable) as appears by his tongue and pen, and is a liar against the
truth: It must of necessitye therefore be, even by the testimony of the spirit
of god, that this Discoverer and such as he, are the children of this earthly,
sensual, and devilish wisdom: out of his own mouth then let this man be
judged.

OF CHAP. 3.
How M. Darrells friends have set out the pretended dispossessing of W. So.
The Disc. tells us of certain counnterfeyts, as of a maid of Chester of one
Mildred the base daughfter of Alice Norrington: of a Dvtch man with some
others. Ergo concludes he, Summers is a counterfeyt, and that superexcellent
wonder which M. Darrels favorers, even those of the ouerworne Consistoryan
faction magnifye so much is a counterfeyt and lewd practice.

Consideringe this very objection is answered, and the absurdity thereof
showed in the narration, this man who takes upon him to conrute that said
treatise, should rather have showed the weakness of the narrators answer to
this said objection if so he could: then have taken up that stale objection
again. The narrator has here tofore answered this argument thus: this
follows not, for we may with as good reason say many have not counterfeited,
Narratiou in the answer to the 1. objection.
therefore Summers did not counterfeit 2 there could never any man counterfeit
such things as Some in truth has done. Hereunto I add, that Summers
counterfeitinge follows not here upon, except these things withal be true,
first that this maid of Chester Mildred the Dutchman ct. counterfeited.
Secondly that Some. and they carried themselves alyke: for if Summers. were
handled after a different manner from them, what lets, that he might be no
counterfeite. although they had counterfeyted? Before then this argument be of
any force, the Disc. must show: that those Englysh and Dutch folks ^e
mentions, had a variable swellinge runninge all alonge their bodies. and so
of the rest of the rare accidents whereof concerning Some. we have heard:
neither of which he has performed: And then also it follows only probably.
Again, if this be a good reason, then is this also* I. N. publyshed a book
stuffed full of untruths. whereupon it was called a legend of lies: therefore.
S. H. the publysher of this book, has so done.

Moreover it is certain that all those the Disc. here sets down for
counterfeits, did not counterfeit, yea I think none of them the maid of Kent
excepted. For the maid of Chester, it is well known and to many, that she
counterfeited not. And how does he prove the Duchman, (concerning whose
possession and dispossession there is a book printed,) to have dissembled?
forsooth Samuel Harsnet says so a substantial proof, and worthy argument
sure. He himself confesses that the Mayor of maydstone (a town in Kent)
Nicasius Vandersch^ure (the minister of the duch church there (and John
Stikelbowe, with diverse others did subscyibe to that pamphelet as he pleases
to call the book aforesaid. The question and doubt now is whether we shall
believe this single man, and such also as we shall hear, or these other which I
know not how many more. After this manner he proves the rest he names to
have counterfeited. Although these had counterfeited it makes nothing against
us, as has been showed: yet who that is wise will believe this man's report (for
other proof have we none,) that they counterfeited, seeing he does intimate no
less by M. Throckmortons children, whose vexation by Satan was so manifest and
notorius? for mark what is said page 93. moreover he had heard and read
(meaning Some who suerly studied the art of counterfeitinge) some part of a
very ridiculus book concerning one M. Throgmortons children (supposed to have
been bewitched by a woman of Warboyse (whereby he says that he learned some
point, and was not ignorant as ^ut occasion served, to ascribe what he list to
witches. And this again the Disc tells us in the person of Summers.

It is twice affirmed that Some. learned some points from M. Throgmortons
children, they therefore it is to be thought did counterfeit, for from whom
are counterfeyt tricks to be learned but from counter feyts, and such as have
that skill in those worthy feyts, as they can act them themselves? And in
particular it is said, that from them he learned to ascribe what he list to
witches: page 9. 7.
viz. as they had done before him. Again the Dis: denies that they were
bewitched: for if they were but supposed to be bewitched, then were they not
bewitched indee^e. And yet it is manifest by many of their speeches and actions
(mentioned in the printed book concerning the witches of Warboys specially by
their crying out upon Allice Samuel the witch, they seemed so to be. And
therefore if they were not bewitched and vexed by the Devil they counterfeited.
In a word look into the printed book and you shall find, that if they were
not vexed with unclean spirits, they were most notorious counterfeyts, and
such as before them never were, but says the Disc. they were not bewitched or
tormented with evil spirits: confederating with some wicked man or woman there
abouts ergo conclude I counterfeyts, and so indeed the Discouerer means: yet
he thought it best and most for his safety because they were the children of an
Esquier, not to say so in plain terms: as he does likewise by M. Starchyes
children in Lancashire. He now that would feign have the world deem these for
counterfeyts, (though for shame he dare not say so) considering whose children
they were, the number 5. the time they were afflicted, above 3. years, their
age being some of them about 9. or 10. years old* the sundry impossible
things to be counterfeyted done in appearance by them, as their
supernatural swelling in their bodies, etc. their supernatural strength,
knowledge, whereby it came to pass (to let other things go) that one of them
(M. Ioane by name) foretold that there should be twelve of them which should
be bewitched in that house in one sort or other and named them all, the printed
book^ ^ol. ^.
being all weomen kind, and servants in the house, herself and her sisters
being five of the number, all which proved afterward very true, for they had
all their several greifs, and most^ of them aff^licted in the same sort and
manner as these five sisters were: and furthermore that those servants that
came in their places, for the most part of them were aff^licted in the like
sort as the other, for the space of two years together: and that besides two
of them M. Ioane and M. Jane Throgmor ^on were at the Assizes at Huntington
seen of the Judge and Justices in diverse ^its, and M. Jane in her fit set in
the court: both of them before such witnesses grievously tormented, most
pitifully to behold: And lastly Alice Samuel (together with her husband and
daughter) was not only found guilty by the Jury of bewitching them, but besides
did her self at her execution confess that she had bewitched them, (...)
printed bok.
and sent her spirit to torment them: Considering (I say) these things, and
that these (with other) proofs, presumptions, circumstances, and reasons,
proving their bewitching and vexation by the Devil wereat largedeli-puered
before the Judge, and therefore upon oath: and after published to the world,
and known (as it appears) to the Discouerer, what a shameful thing is it,
and intolerable injury done to those gentlewomen, and their parents yea to
the Jurors and Justices that condemned the witches, to affirm (in effect) and
proclayme to all men, that they counterfeyted? And me thinks one should not
deal thus, and that advisedly, except he thought that there were no witches,
nor devils, or at least that the devils have no power to torment men in their
bodies. But he that will not have these 5, to be bewitched, but counterfeyts,
(from whose counterfeyting Some learned some of his tricks, and so not all of
them from me) let him tell me in good earnest in his reply (if he be not
ashamed to make any reply) what he thinks of the Iaylor his man of
Huntington, for seeing he was in all respects handled as the five children
were, it is to be thought that if they were not bewitched nor vexed by the
devil, but did counterfeit, it was so likewise with him. That he was handled
alike to them, and therefore their condition alike, appears by the evidence of
the said Iaylor (upon his oath) gave, which is set down in the book
entitled, The Arraignment and execution of the witches of Warboyse: in these
words followinge. Then the Iaylor of Huntington gave this evidence: that a man
of his finding mother Samuel very unruly whiles she was prisoner, at a time
chayned her to a bed-poast: wherefore not long after his man fell sick and in
all respects was handled as the forenamed children were, with heauing up and
down of his body, shaking his arms, legs and head, having more strength in
him in his fitts, then any two men had, crying out of mother Samuel, saying
that she did bewitch him: and thus remaining in this extraordinary course of
sickness, about 5. or 6. days after dyed. If it fall out so that he say that
this man counterfeyted too, and learned so to do of M. Throgmortons children
(as Some. did in part) I think all that hear of it will laugh at his folly,
And here we may observe how the Dis. to prove Some. a counterfeyt, bears us
in hand, first, that Tho. Darling, Kath. Wright, M. Couper, and the 7. in
Lancashire were counterfeyts, Secondly the maid of Chester, Mildred etc. In a
word, that all vexed indeed by the devil, on this side and beyond the seas,
among us and the papists were counterfeyts, ergo (says he) Summers
counterseyted. And this is, his main and general argument. The antecedent or
first part whereof I deny, and do desire the Bishop and S. H. to prove that,
and then I will give them the conclusion, and all they contend for.

For-asmuch as M. page, 19.
Darrells friends do so often allege Tertullian. S Cypryan. S. Ambrose. S.
Austen. S. Chrysostom, with Prosper, etc. it is not amiss to hear what
Kemnitius (writing against the counsel of Trent) says of this point,
Exorcistas ct. They have transformed their Exorcists in to magical Inchanters.
In times past it was a peculiar gift to cast out devils out of men's bodies by
the voice of man, and power of god. And the same gift continued in the church
in the times of S Cypryan, S. Ambrose S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and of
Prosper: Obsessi in templum adducebantur, et saepe communibus ecclesiae
precibus liberabantur: The posessed were brought into the church, and were
oftentimes delivered by the common prayers of the church: postea illud demum
etc. But afterward (says he) that gift ceased. If M. Darrell have again
obtained it, let him make much of it.

The Dis* perceiving that besides the holy scriptures, the auncent fathers are
not only for possession in these days, I mean since miracles ceased, but also
for dispossession by earnest prayer: thought good to make show of this, that
the testimonies we allege out of the ancient writers are perverted, and make
not for us at all: and why? Kemnitius says so.

I answer, Peter Marter as great a divine as he, (to let others go)
affirms the contrary, as before we have heard. where is now this argument,
if I should say no more? but for our better satisfaction, let us consider
what Keminitius says, math. 10, 1, 8. mark. 3, 15. Luke 9. 1.
and how truly. The same guifte says he (meaning that power over unclean
spirits, given by Christ's to his Apostles) contiued in the church in the times
of Tertullian Ciprian Ambrose. Aust^n, ct. How can this be so, saying to cast
out devils as the Apostles did etc. by a word is a miracle. and that miracles
were ceased be fore there times? we may remember that when and to whom this
peculiar gift to cast devils out of the bodies of men was given, then and to
the same persons was there withal given, to heal every sickness and every
disease. for as much then as Tertullian Ciprian, Ambros Augustine, Chrisostom,
Prosper, had not the guyft to heal sycknesses and diseases, to give sight to
the blyndect. It can not therefore be that these fathers had this Apostolical
gift, as Kemnitius affirms, and the Dis. would have it* yea the thing it
self shows the contrary, and Kemnitius (and the Dis. with him) overthrows
him self in his own words* The possessed (says he) were brought into the
church in the times of those fathers, and were often times delivered by the
common prayers of the church. e^go not by my (...).
Did the Apostles cast out Satan thus? or rather having authority over the
diuils, commauned them in the name of Jesus to go forth, and immediately they
departed? if these fathers had the same guifte with the Apostles, as is here
affirmed, why did they not use it in the same manner, and with like success
that they did. I mean, the present and spedy dellyuerance of the party
possessed? but cast Satan out after another manner, with more longer delay,
greater help^ then ever the Apostles did or had? For howe^oeuer there is not
mention made in the scriptnres of all those the Apostles dispos^e^sed by far,
yet by infallible reasons taken out of them, it is clear, that the Apostls did
not deliver any that were possessed by the common prayers of the church as it is
here said of these ancient fathers, They had a more ready and easy way to
drive out the unclean spirit of what kind so ever it was. Luke 9. 1. acts,
16. 18,
ct. by a word, yea some times less sufficed. which as it did more set forth
their authority and power over wicked spirits, so it commended also their
doctrine and ministry, acts. 19. 12. It is very likly also that upon the
shadow* of ^. peter, deuilles went out, acts ^. 15. 16.
above this e^e^^ing of satan by prayer, espetially being assisted therein by
others. It can not therefore be that the Apostles did at any time dispossess
satan by the public prayers of the church as is here affirmed, and that
truly, of those fathers: Now what does these things argue but this, that
howesoeuer the same expulsio^ of Devils out of men's bodies continued in the
church, and was in the times of Tertullian Ciprian Ambrose Chrisostom etc. yet
the Apostolical power over Devils, was before those times gone, and no man
then guifted with that power: If in these deliverances by the public prayers
of the church whereof Kemnitius speaks ^ertullian Ciprian ct. had any pecular
gift as it is here said: I demand of the Dis. (for Kemnitius is dead, and he
is of his judgment otherwis he would not have alleged him) first, what this
gift was, for the the same that the Apostles had (notwithstanding they both
say it) it is clear it was not. 2. why rather one of these should have a gift
in casting out devils, then the people or any of them that joined with them in
such expulsyon, seeing the means whereby Satan was cast out was prayer, and
that the people present, prayed and intreted god in this behalf, as well as
these their leaders, and their prayers were not in vain, but as well prevailed
with god, as the supplycations and intercessions of their ministers: for what
though percase the prayers of these holy men were more fervent, and by
consequent auayled more with god, then the requests made by any private
christian: shall we therefore ascribe such expulsio^ of the devil to one
particular man, and therewithal I know not what special gift therein? what
is this in effect but to make the prayers of the rest of gods people present^
as speeches spoken in the ayere, and beatinge it, and such as god rega^deth
not?. 3. saying by the Dis. own secret confession, men were possessed in
Tertullian Ciprian, etct. there days, why not now? 4: Seeinge in the days of
these ancient fathers, men were dispossessed and Satan cast ovt by the prayers
of the faithful. why may not men be dispossessed now upon the vsinge of the
same means? were the prayers of gods people then mighty with god to the
expellinge of Sath an and are they of no force now? or rather is it impossible
they should prevail so now, and in these our days, as the Dis. because
Kemnitius. says so, will needs have it? In a word, what lets it that men
may not now in this our time be dispossessed by prayer, or praer and fasting
as well as when Tertullian Ciprian, Ambrose Chrysostom, Augustine and Prosper
lived. 2 saying that in their days miracles were ceased, and an end put to
them as well as now: and that these fathers had no more a guifte to work
miracles, then M. More and my self, whom God has pleased (among others) to
use in the like work. These questions I desire the Disc. to answer, and I will
expecte it at his hands if ever he reply: except he be content in plain
and express terms to yield to this truth. And thus we see that rather then
the Disc, will have nothing to say against dispossession in these days, he
will bring us yet the error at least of one man: and that he says so it is
inoughe (forsooth,) because he was otherwise greatly learned But how proves
the Disc, Isa, 8. 20,
this out of the holy scriptures? which saying he does not, nor I trust can
not, it is because there is no light in him, yet wisely must we observe here
what Kemnitius error is, least we should do iniurye even to the dead. Herein
he said then very truly that the gift is ceased: and very fitly also against
the Papist, (against whom he writ) whose exorcists challenge such a gift,
where up on as did the Apostles, so do they ad^vre or charge the spirits to
go out, only herein he spoke as a man and mistook the matter: first in that
he took this gift to continue in the church until and in the aforesaid
fathers times. 2 in that he thought (as it seems) that there is no castinge
out of Devils now, because that gift is ceased for besides that extrordinarie
and miraculus kind of eiection of satan, which being temporary, continued
only in the church whiles other miracles lasted, and together with them had an
end, which was long before some of these fathers days: There is an other
ordinary and perpetual. viz. by prayer, or prayer and fasting. By this
means and after this manner the above named fathers in there times cast out
devils and not by any peculyar and miraculus gift bestowed upon them,
continuinge in the church until their days. And thus are or may be evil
spirits cast forth at this day. and whereas he scornefully adds If M Darrell
have again obtained it, meaning that peculiar gift to cast out Devils, which
the Apostles had: let him make much of it: I in good earnest answer, that as I
have no such gift nor yet any spetiall gift herein above the least of my
brethren or private christian: so neither ever did I from the first time that I
dealt in the dispossessinge of any arrogat any peculiar gift to my self. but
have from time to time cast the same as far from me as I could both with my
tongue and pen. 2 by the carriage of my self in this action I have showed no
less. and herein may all men be confirmed as by my whole treatise before
concerning dispossession: so by that is here aforesaid: Greatly then are they
to blame, which charge me with challenging I know not what gift in casting
out Devils:

OF THE 4. CHAPTER.
M. Darrell did of his own accord (after he was sent for by M. Dee, and M.
Starchy) acquaint one M. More with the matter, and obtained him to be his
compannyon in that action.
Having showed the several occasions of that christian duty I of chap, 4. How
M. Darrell is made a fite instrument to cast out diuiles, then many other.
performed to Kath. Wright and Th. Darling, but corruptly. he proceeds in the
same vain to the rest: and in the third place tells us how it came to pass
that M. More, and my self went to those in Lancashire. Where he says, that I
went upon the sending for by M. Dee and M. Starchy, he is deceived. For a
messenger coming unto me from these, I refused to go, and returned that for
answer. About some 10. weeks after (I thinking to have heard no more of it)
came an other messenger with a letter from M. Starchy, wherein he was
vmportunate with me, beseeching me even for gods love to see his distressed
children, and an other from M. James Ashton a Justice of peace there by,
declaring the manner of their handling, and requesting my pains to come unto
them. The next day (being the exercise day at Ashby de la zouch where I then
dwelt) I made this known to sundry preachers, in number about 16. Their
resolution was, that I should do well to go, and withal they thought it fit
(upon the motion of one of them, not of mine nor it M. Mores) that one of the
company should go with me, to this end principally, that if it should please
God to prosper us in that we went about, the same upon our return, and report
might stand and be confirmed in the mouth of two witnesses. And hereof there
be many witnesses. And then I went not upon M. Dee his letter, so neither did I
of my own accord acquaint M. More (in perticuliar) with the matter as the
Disc. pretends. And therefore he mistaketh or rather (I fear) wittingly
misreporteth this whole matter. But he proceeds on, to the occasion of my
going to Summers.

By the time that So. had his fits M. Darrell was of some name: and besides
having a sister in law in Nottingham, one Mistres Wallis, she was not
tongue-tyed, what a man her brother was: and thereupon being urged by certain
weomen, she writ to M. Darrell a letter importing (says Mis, tres Gray) that
the Lady Zouch, she herself. and diverse other gentlwomen-requested him to come
over to see the said Summers. page 23,


Next to the name I had, the tittle tattle (forsooth) of my sister in law, and
her letter importing as is here specified, occasioned my going to Summers. But
the truth is this. After So. had been about a month very strangely and
grievously afflicted, and that in such extraordinary manner, as thereupon he was
suspected to have an evil spirit within him causing it, Mistres Gray having
read the prynted book concerning Th. Darling, and of the advice there
specifyed that I gave, made relation thereof to one Mistres Beresford, who
told her that I had a sister in law dwellinge in Nottingham. Heere-vpon she
was sent for, requested to write unto me, for my speedy repair to Some, She
refused, saying that I would not come upon her writing, but said she if you
will write a letter unto him, I will join therein, and subscribe my name unto
it. Upon this a letter was framed by one Sir Euan; (as they call him) and
subscribed by my-sister in law, the tennor whereof was this.

Brother Darrell after most hearty manner etc. These are not only of my self to
request you, but also all the whole town of Not, wills you, and also M.
Strilley to take so much pains as to come unto us to a young man for as by the
letter hereinclosed, we think he is possessed of some evil spirit: which they
hearing of that good gift that the lord has given you and wrought mightily by
you, we generally crave your presence and assistance with us, which we will do
to the vtermost of our powers. These are therefore to request you to take the
pains to come with as much expedition as possibly ye may, and thus the lord
be with you assist and keep you now and evermore. This second of November 1597.

Under this letter were subscribed these few lines following, which they meant
by the former words, the letter here enclosed, conteyninge the special
things which induced them to think that he was possessed.

His manner of taking is thus: sometimes it is in one place, sometime in an
other: and when we charge it in the name of the father to avoid. it tormenteth
him, and he skriketh and cries, and after he is able to speak, he says he
did not skrike. And he says he sees diverse likenesses, sometimes a mouse,
sometimes a dog, and it persuades him to spoil himself, and them that pray
for him, and with other like perswasio^s to give him a bage of monney, and fine
clothes, aad to make him richer then any of the town, if he will but one
fortnight let him alone.

With this letter came another to the effect aforesaid from M. Aldridge the
boys pastor: when perusing this subscription, I found diverse signs of
possession, whereof some are mentioned in the gospel, others I had observed in
experience: and questioning with the messinger, heard besides of his foming,
casting into the fire, extraordinary strength etc I returned in answer that
those things being true that they in their letter, and their messenger more at
large related unto me, the boy was undoubtedly possessed with the devil: and
withal I advised them to use the means of fasting and prayer for his
delyuerance from Satan: but therein I said they were to spare me, for diverse
reasons I rendered them, and to crave the assistance of others of greater
guiftes and nearer them then I was. Heerevpon they did wright presently to M.
John Ireton. and M. John Brown: the one being then from home, the other in
his answer advised them to send for me because of the experience I had above
others. (besides he M. Ireton I mean wrote to me to the same end) upon this M.
Mayor his letter was procured and sent to me, upon the receipt whereof I went.
For thus truly I thought, that forasmuch as sundry of the inhabitants of
Nottingham and among them his master, his pastor, together with the
magistrate who were interessed in the boy, called and desired my poor advice
and assistance, it was my part and duty to go, and to yealde them my best
assistance, contrary to that I had purposed and written before, as being called
of god to that work: and hereabout I consulted also with two godly and learned
men then in Ashby: who were eve so also persuaded, and whose allowance I had in
that I did. I went not then to So. upon my sister in laws bare letter, neither
does the same ymport as the Disc. under the name of an other reports but
being instantly requested by such as you hear: and if S. H. stand for Samuel
Harsnet as all men suppose and whereof there is no doubt then knows he the
most of these things as well as I: yea almost no man better: for besides that
he has heard (undoubtedly) of these several letters ( M. Ireton his excepted)
many times: he may remember, that he being a commissioner, among other
intergatoryes, they had one concerning the occasion of my coming to Not. and
that Mistres Gray and M. William Langford among others being deposed and
interrogated thereabouts, answered that M. Mayor that then was (viz. M. Peter
Clarke) did write unto me to that end, and that thereupon I came: bending their
speech to the said M. Clarke who was present, as being a commissioner, Indeed
this part of their depositions was not set down among the rest as I was
shortly after credibly informed. And now let others judge of M. Harsnets dealing
herein.

It is by the way to be observed that the Dis. himself (although in his
scoffing vain (confesses that I ran not of my self to Some. nor any of the
rest but have been sought unto: from whence a probable argument may be drawn,
that I did not teach him to counterfeyt nor any of the other, For if I had so
done for gayning glory to my self in a feined dispossessing of him: surely
(after so much pains taken for sundry years together) I would in all
likelihood have winded my self by some odd practice and devise or other into
that action, otherwise what had his counterfeyting been to me, or would have
advantaged me more then an other? true says the Dis. and therefore very
cunningly you did so. For Some. has deposed that these words you said unto him
in Ashby park: He also (meaning my self) told me, says Some. page 8. 6.
that he having a sister in law in Nottingham, one M. Wallys, I could no
sooner name him when I should be thought to be possessed, but that presently
and the rather by his sisters means, he should be sent for to come unto me.
This our said meeting in the park is hereafter overthrown and thereby it is
manifest that no such speech was there uttered by me. But it is strengthened by
Edmond Garland's deposition: Before M. Darrell was sent for (says he) I have
been present twice or thrice at several times, when Some. page 8^
has in his pretended fits used these words: Darrell, Darrel Darrell. If the
deponent mean of the first sending for me, that he deposes is false: if of
the latter I yeald unto it: but howsoever he mean and others take it, it
mattereth not, because it is plain by the premises that I went not to Some.
upon his naming me, but upon other occasion, whereby the falsehood of Some.
deposition does further appear and Garlands also if we respect the end
whereunto it serves. moreover had there been any such compact between Some. and
me, why went I not at the first sending for, being especially so solemnly sent
for by a messenger of purpose, bringing with him a horse for me to ride on (to
make sure I should come, as some percase thought) such a letter as we hear,
and an other besides from M. Aldridge? But notwithstanding this I sat still,
and not only so, but returned besyds such an answer as whereupon they write to
two others as is aforsaid either of whose assistance had they of Not obtained,
we had never heard any thing of my teaching to counterfeyt. who can now in
reason ymagine that there was any such compact? could I be sure that I should
be the second time entreated, having also denied in twoe several letters to
deal in that action? Indeed it so fell out by the providence of god (who had
thereunto appointed me) but in respect of men by chance. For thus it was. One
of the Earl of Huntington's men May. Hoult by name, bei^gat Nottingham, the
Mayor toulde him of a purpose pose he had to write by him to his Lord, to be a
mean to me, to comvnto them to a boy greatly distressed. M. Hoult answered,
that he thought that need not, for that his own letter to me would suffyce
and prevail so far with me, his place considered. And hereupon the said
letter was made, and sent by him, who was presently to come to Ashby to his
Lord, remaining there, where my self also dwelt at the delivery whereof he
made this known unto me. And thus much touching the occasion of my going to
Some. wherein through the unreasonableness and wresting of my adversary, I have
been enforced to be longer then I desired.

Having begun the study of the law he perceued therein such great
corruption, page 24.
as he gave himself to the study of divinity: that so he might serve god
and keep a good concience.

The use of this is to alienate the affections of those which be of this
calling from me, and there withal from the cause it self. But God is my
witness that I never affirmed any such thing, neither did the same ever enter
into my thought. The common laws I hold and ever did since I studied them, to
be grounded upon the law of god and reason, and to be of necessary and
singular use in the common wealth so farram I and ever was from condemninge the
study of them, far therefore was that from me, the Disc. here suggesteth.
Only this is true, that when the Lord (who had long before purposed to
imploye me otherwise, and in the study of an other ^aw,) did draw^^e another
way, by layinge his hand upon me, in causinge a strange and extraordinary
sluggishnes to fall upon me, being a student of the common laws) even then
when I was most free and far from the sam I thus thought with my self, and it
may be I have some times used words to this effect, that without all
contradiction it were much better for me, to spend my days and strength in
the study of the divine then humane law, and to be occupied and labor or
work upon the souls of men, endeuouringe their eternal salvation: then
about the lands and goods of men and rightinge of the wrong, don unto them
therein which only concerns this momentary life, and reaches not to the
bodies of men, much less to there fowls: The welfare and salvation of which
next to the glory of god is only worthy to be sought and labored for: all
other things being mere tryfles in comparison thereof. Besides consideringe
seriously of the before said hand of God, upon me, and of the continuance of my
very rare sluggishnes (the like whereto I think, has been seldom found in
any,) notwithstanding my earnest striving against the same, I began to fear
least I did (...) against the pricks, and imagine that the lord sure would
use my (...) in some other thing, and place me in another standinge. And this
^ I (speak the ^oth in Christ, and lie not) caused me to change my mind, and
wars^^^ my study from the law of man to the law of God, and not any corr^ption
in the same that I perceived.

His friend forgets himself in affirming that M. Darrells life has been so
searched into, for true it is that diligent care was had and commandment
given accordingly, that touching his conversation, page 25.
otherwise the^ apperteyned directly to his pretended course of casting out
devils there should not any one point, be inquired into: neither was there, as
by the acts in record it may appear, and as it is supposed. M. Darrell will
himself confess.

No verily, I am so far from confessing this, that I am fully assured of the
contrary. I have been very credibly informed of a serching after the life I led
at Cambridge, and by page 95. it appears that upon some inquiry, information
has been given. How I behaved myself at Ashby and at Nottingham the Dis.
himself may remember, that he and an other Commissioner deposed and examyned
one Web his wife of Nottingham (at whose house at my first coming I made my
abode for a sewe days) whereupon and what moved her to inter tayne me, what
speeches in secret passed between her and me, what words I uttered in the
prayers I used while I was there, or to this effect, and not concerning my
casting out devils or Some, counterfeiting or not counterfeyting, concerning
which she could say tho least of a thousand: And for^asmuch as this fact of the
Dis. was contrary to the commaund^ment given him, and that herein he and his
fellow commissione^^ ^^ent beyond the bounds of their commission, and that
the thing he did is in it self most intolerable, I desire all men to consider
of it, specially, those that be in authority, But what has the Dis. in all his
searching found out? I ask of him whose ox or affe I have taken, or to whom I
have done wrong if he can tell let him hereafter declare yt.

But one thing is reported of M. Darrell, which passes the rest, and makes it
probable (you may not doubt) that God has given him an especial grace above
all other Exorcists, page 26.
now a days to expelli devils, For the say that after a sort, he has forsaken
house, lands, and all for Christ's sake^ which being an Apostolical resolution,
why should not he have that guifte granted unto him? Indeed one is as true as
the other.

The reason why it has been said as is here repored is, because, for a
preaching ministry sake, and so for Christ and his gospel sake, I changed my
habitation: and when I dwelt in my own house, and upon, my own land, in my
natiu country, among my kinstolkes and acquayntance, to my full contentment and
hearts delight for the things of this life, I (through the grade of god) left
all these to my loss, and puched my tent in an other coast, and hereof I am
not ashamed. And why might not he who knew this to be true, say as is
aforesaid? this the Dis. scorneth, being one of those that will neither enter
into the kingdom of heaven, nor suffer those that would, He seems by his
scornful speeches following, to think that there is no forsaking of h^^ use,
land, and all to follow Christ, but where one sells house, land, and all he
possesses and gives the money to the poor, according to the speech, of Christ
to the young man in the gospel, if you will be perfect, sell that thou have,
(...) 19. 21.
and give it to the poor. But to let this error go, what means the Dis. to
call this an Apostolical resolution? It should seem the answer give by Peeter
concerning himself, and fellow Apostls, Behold we have forsaken all and
followed thee. But the Disc. must know that all this resolution to forsake all
and follow Christ is not proper and peculyar to the Apostles, but common to
them with all christians, yea this resolution is so general, as he that is not
resolved to for^ak house land, yea and his own life also, and all to follow
Christ and his gospel, ( u) is not worthy of Christ, mark. 8. 34.
and cannot be his disciple. Thus says our Savior, mark. 8. 34,
( u) whosoever will follow me, let him forsake himself, that is, resolve
with himself, or be willing and ready to lose or lay down his life for my
sake whenever I shall call him thereunto, which he must daily expect: much
more house and land and all things besides: and again, if any man come to me,
and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, Luke. 14. 26.
and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also he cannot
be my disciple. And here-vpon ymediatly after, he compares him that is not
resolute and ready to forsake life and all, and to endure whatsoever
persecutions can befall him for Christ's sake, and yet profess himself to be
Christ's, to a rash and foolish man, that begins, to build, but is not able
to make an end, and to an vanduised king, going to war against an other, who
will neither send embassage and desire peace, neither yet is able to meet him
that comes against him: and then concludes the same thus: so likewise
whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
disciple. Yea observe I beseech you here, how by the next words following
these of Peter (whereupon it must needs be the Dis. gathers this resolution of
forsaking all, to be Apostolical) this is manifestly convinced. For when
Christ had upon occasion of Peeter's words, told him and the other of his
disciples, what reward they which had thus forsaken all and followed him should
have, that they should sit upon twelve thrones and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel: there he shows that neither this forsaking of all, nor reward, is
proper to them his Apostles, but common to others, saying: And whosoever shall
forsake houses, or brethren, orsisters, or father or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands, for my name sake, he shall receive an hundred fould more,
and shall inherit everlasting life. As it Christ Jesus had said, not only you
my Apostles, but whosoever else shall forsake all to follow me, ma^h. 19. 19.
mark. 10. 1^. Luk, 18. ^^.
shall have the same recompense of reward with you. And this is expressly set
down by the 3. Evangelists, which argues a greater ignorance in the Dis. From
this resolution to forsake house, lands, and all for Christ's sake. which I
would be sorry I had not: he concludes me to have or to pretend to have the
Apostolical gift, meaning, the same gift to cast out devils and power over
unclean spirits, By this worthy collection of the Disc. Lethu^^. Ridley,
Cram^^^, and those worthy men in ^. May time, the must needs have the
Apostolical gift of casting out devils, because they forsook all for christ
and his gospel sake
which the Apostles had. And mark what he adds. Indeed one is as true as
the other. But I say who should know better then he, the one is more true
then the other, and that the latter is as false, as the other is true. But to
leave my self, what says the Dis. to many thousand ( a) martyrs in former
ages, who had not only this resolution, but did indeed forsake house, land and
all yea their own lives for Christ's sake: were they all Apostles, and indewed
with that Apostolical gift, by a word to cast out devils, and by consequent
to work other miracles? Thus we see that whiles the Dis. in moc kage
blundereth out Apostolical resolution, and Apostoliicall guist, he delivers
doctrines rather Apostaticall then Apostolical, I mean, such as can in no
sort be drawn from: nor agreeing with their holy writings.

Will you know how he has forsaken all to follow Christ? Having two or
three houses, and a little land in Mansfeild and elsewhere, left him by his
father, he sode the same, and since bath lived upon the money, (being as one
of his friends says) five or six hundred pounds. Page 26.
If then to sell land and live upon the monney, be to leave all, and follow
Christ, and afit noate of one that can cast out devils, we shall not want men
of that trade: many usurers in England will prove good Exorcists.

It is clear that howsoever he does not in plain terms call me usurer, yet
he does intimate so much, and would have men so to accounte of me, But I desire
all men saying it is not so, to be better persuaded of me, and not to give ^are
to this his false report. True it is that after certain short leases which
my father left me were expired, (which were worth yearly three times more to
me then my la^d I sold that little land I had, as being not able of the
annual rent thereof (spetially in those dear years) to mayntaine my self
and family, having 5. children. But it is as true, that presently with the
same money I took a farm in Ashbie-delazouch, and bought some store of
sheep, kine, horses, oxen, with other things appeartayninge to husbandry, for
the maynte^nance of my household, which both religion and nature taught me to
provide for. And these things are well known to many. It is plain then that
I neither soulde my land to that end the Disc. pretends, neither being sold
did live upon the money, that is, let it forth to usury as usurers do. I am
sorry thus to trouble the world. with the readinge of my private affairs, but
that the vnresonablenesse of the adversary and his sclanderous tongue does
thereunto enforce me, in the just defense of mine own innocence. But has
not the Disc, hoar faithfully kept his promise, in that he said he would not
meddle with my life or is he not taken tardie, in that he said he had not
searched there-into.

OF. CHAPTER 5.
How M. Darrell knew Some. and the rest, to be possessed.
M. Darrell affirms that Christ did not ordeyne any means to know who was
possessed in the apostls time: page 2, 7.
but left that to be discerned by the manner of their sitts, and so sraming his
judgment accordingly, he says: that the only means whereby now men are
descerned to be possessed, are: the signs which are mentioned in the
scriptures.

I neither do nor did say that the Apostles did by no other way or means
discern who were possessed, then by the manner of their vexation by satan,
which he calls here the manner of their fits, for it may be that some times
they knew so much by some present and extraordinary gift, act^s 26, 26.
and so it is likely that Paul knew the Pythonesse to be possessed, and
therefore I said that the only means whereby NOW men are discerned etc. but
this is it I say, that Christ did not ordeyne any such means, for then we
should have it in the Scriptures, and such ordinance there I dare be bold to
say we have none. Besides what needs Christ to have ordained any other means
for the disceerning of the possessed, seeing by their manner of handling in
their fits it was so manifest, and a difease so easy to be known, that the
common people, yea even the simple women could discern thereof, as has before
been showed? verse. 10.
yea but says the Dis. there is such an ordinance: for in the 1. to the Cor.
Chap. 12. among other gifts, there is mention of one, called discretio
spirituum, the discerning, of spirits: which says the Dis. was a measure of
gods spirit to discern betwixt counterfeyts, and such as were indeed
possessed. math. 7. 15. math. 24 24. and verse. 11.
But we must know that the holy ghost means hereby an other manner of gift.
( u) Beware (says Christ) of false prophets, which come to you insheepes
clothing but inwardly are rau^ning wolu^s. ^ cor. 11. 13. chap. 4. 1.
And again * thore shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive
the (...) elect, And S. Paul speaks of ( v) false Apost les which were
deceiptfull workers, transforming, themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and
of Satan his ministers, transforming themselves as though they were the
ministers of righteousness. And S. John says thus: Dearly beloved, believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of god: for many false
prophets are gone out into this world. All these bear the world in hand that
they have the spirit of god, and teach the truth, or true and only way to
salvation, whereby they deceive many, and yet it is not so. 1 T^^^. 4. 6. 1.
Tim, 4. 1.
He now that is in-abled of god to discern the false prophets, and false
Christ's, from the true, and put difference between ( v) the spirit of truth,
and * the spirit of error: he I say and all they have this gift, called the
discerning of spirits: which is common to all the elect. But he that herein
has an excellency and sharpnes to discern the same above others, may fitly be
said, and I think most properly, to have this gift, In this gift Peter (as
it is probable.) excelled Philip in discerning of Simon Magus. This gift they
also may be said to have, which can best discern between those who though they
preach the truth, 1 timothy 1. 4. and 4. 7, and 6. 20 2 timothy 2. 14, 16, 23. titus.
3. and 1. tim. 6, 3, 4. 5.
yet they mingle the same with vain and unprofitable doctrines (which Paul
calls fables, profane and old wives fables, profane and vain bablings,
folish and unlearned question^c^. bidding us to stay such doctrines, to put
away such, to avoid such, and to separate our selves from such teachers:) and
those which be good and profitable unto men, the wholesome words of our, Lord
Jesus Christ, and the doctrines which be according to godlynes. This is it that
the spirit of god means by the discerning of spirits, and not a gift or
measure of god's spirit, whoreby to discern between counterfeyts, and such as
were inder depossessed, which never any dreamed of before the. Disco^erer. And
no marvel. For there is no such difficulty to discern between counterfeyts
and the possessed indeed. Whosoever looks into the gospel and considers
of the manner of their vexation by Satan, who are there said to have been
possessed may easily know when one is possessed. No physician can so easily
and surely discern the disease of his patient by pulse, vryne, and other
signs: as a christian man of understanding, may by the signs of Satan his
possessing one, discern of possession. And reason will teach men to discern
of counterfeyting viz. whether. those things they behold can possibly come
^^ther from nature, or art.

It is also to be observed that the Dis. speaks of the time: past, and not of
the time present: I would be known^ (says ^e) what that gift WAS, he does not
say, what that gift is, and again, (...) to discern betwixt counterfeyts,
and such as WERE possessed, he says not such as are possessed: whereby it is
plain that in his opvnion th^^ gift whereof he speaks is gone, so that none
is now able to discern between a counterfeyt, and one possessed. How is it
then that the Dis. takes it upon him to judge that Summers and the rest be
coun^terfeyts. What fools does the Dis. make of men? and what a difficult
thing is it forsooth to judge in this case? Surely he thinks the none can be
now possessed, and then no marvel though his gift b^ withered, for to say
(men at this day being possessed) that none (...) descerne, whither they
counterfeyte or no, it is too absurd to speak^ of.

OF CHAPTER 6.
Of M. Darrell's knowledge. who sent the devil into Summers and the rest.
All the devils that M. Darrell has hitherto encountered, page. 36,
were sent by witches (as it seems) into his patiens. Whether witches can
send devils into men or weomen (as many do pretend) is a question, among
those that write of such matters: and the learneder. and sounder sort do hold
the negative, against whom Thyreus opposes himself, and with Thyreus M^
Darrell.

It is the Lord (if we speak properly) that sends devils into men. Shall we
receive good at the hands of God (says Job) and not receive evil? meaning,
Job, 2, 10.
the evil of punishment. And the Prophet Amo^ Shall there be evil in a city and
the Lord has not done it? chapter^ 3, 6.
That then I mean and assirme is this: that Satan being sent of god and so
permitted, to enter into one, as sometimes he was into Darling Summers etc. the
devil being thus sent, stirs up the corrupt affections of some, with whom
(as I may say) he has some familiarity, and laboreth to bring them to hate
that same person, and in that hatred, after their accustomed manner, by him or
his ministry to be revenged of the party. And whereas without this, he is to
enter into and possess the said person, and will: yet takes he often this
course, that thereby he may draw men to sin, which is the very work and
labor of his hands, and (as by his practice it should seem) to shame and
punishment withal: for not only with our afflicted persons, but others also,
as one Margaret Herison of Burnham vlpe, (concerning whose vexation by Satan
there is a book printed) M. Throgmortons children, with sundry more, either
possessed, or otherwise vexed by him, the devil so ordered the matter, as that
the party, or parties, whom he had before stirred up to join with him in the
afflicting of them, he discovered and made known to the world: and this we
may well think he does to this second end, because it is his manner to bring
one first to sin, and the sin being perfected, to chasten them to shame and
punishment, as he did by Judas, neither is it to any purpose to object that
witches are very simple folks, and know not what belongs to possession for
that they direct not the spirit thereunto, but speak only to their spirit or
familiar, of tormenting the party whom they hate, (as appears by their
confessions) the devil of his own accord entering into the parson to be
possessed, unto which fact and sertuice the lord himself has indeed appointed
him. And where the Dis. says that the learneder and sounder sort do hold
that witches cannot send devils into men, if he understand not by that he
calls sending, as is aforesaid, he says nothing against me, nor to the
matter: but if so as I ymagine he does, then I demand of him, who I know
consents herein with these great learned men: why witches and their
familiar spirits may not as well agree together in this special case as in
others where Satan kills men, or beasts, or strangely vexes them by some
external operation, which we call witcheryes? seeinge all is merely a
tormenting of the body by Satan, the difference lying in the manner of it,
which I trust is by the witch left to the will and discretion of the devil? as
this latter we all know is confirmed: by the confessions of thousands of
witches and that in all ages from time to time, so is this other also by the
confession of some. Yea but says the Dis. to object the confession of the
witches is to no purpose, and is already answered by the former learned men.
His words be these: And touching the confession of the witches themselves* page
3^^
that may be left well enough to such learned men as have written sufficiently
of it.

I desire now to know of the Discouerer who have made answer to the confessions
of the witches themselves, but they that hold that there are no witches as
Wierus and Scot, which are the sound and learned men he here speaks of, for
these men maintayning this false position that there be no witches, must needs
answer to the confession of the witches themselves: which every one would
object. And this says he these learned men have done sufficiently: whereby it
is plain that this man is of the some opinyon with them. But he thought it
wisdom not to say so^ plain terms, least he should provoke the reverent
Judges of the land against him, for that so saying he made them guilty of
innocent blood.

It is to be remembered that howsoever in plain and express^ words the Disc.
does not affirm, that none can in these days be dispossessed, yet in effect
he does it under the name of (...). So albeit he do not say that none can be
now possessed with devils yet consideringe his covert carriage of himself
there-in, not once grantinge (I warrant you) in all his great volume any such
things, and that he will have all the possessed persons among us and the
Papists also counterfeits, as appears by this his first books who can
conjecture any other, but that he holds, that none can be as this day
possessed? In like-sorte I say, be does here by witches, not plainly denyinge
any such to be, but secretly insinuatinge as much to the reader Thus we see he
does deny (but covertly dispossession of devils. 2. possession with devils. 3^
all compact with devils to the hurt of others ^f he proceed but one stepe
further, it will be covertly to the deniel of devils. Well this I dare be
boulde to say of the Disc. whosoever he be: that howsoever he profess that he
believes in god, and that there are devils, yet by this very work of his,
(this Discovery. I mean (he denies both.

OF. CHAP. 7.
OF THE CAUSES PRETENDED, WHY MEN ARE POSSESSED.
Alyce Goodrig of Staphenhill in Darbishire, having a spirrit called Minnye in
the likeness of a dog, party colored, red and white, did send^ the same to
torment, page, 37.
Thomas Darling: the seven in Lancashire were (as it seems) possessed by the
means of one Edmond Hartley. page 41.
and a little after: But Thomas Darlinges venial sin exceded the rest: for
he meeting Alice Goodrige in a coppice, did let an escape (as the book terms
it which she taking to be done in her contempt, used these words, Gip with a
mischife and fart with a bell, I will go to heaven and thou shall go to hell.
And there-vpon her Minme entered into him.

Howsoever the Disc. derideth this reported in the book of Darlinge, and no
marvel, seeinge he is persuaded that there are no witches: yet there is in
reason (how strange, and incredible so ever it seem to carnal reason) to
persuade us to receive it for a truth, for first we have Alice Goodrige the
witch confessinge this of her self and that sundry times 2. the circumstances
mentioned in her confession are true* upon such a day said she, I met Darlinge,
in such a place or wood called the coppice and the boy leting an escape, as the
book terms it, I mistaking the boy for one Sherrats boy, who had before
broken me a basket of eggs used these words: Gip with a mischeife etc. and
there with-all bad my Minnie go and torment him: who after returninge unto me,
said he had done so. Consideringe now that it is very true and known so to be
to others, that this Alice m^t Darlinge upon the day and in the place named,
that Darlinge then and their did, and Sherrats boy also before, as is here
specifyed, and that she used these words aforesaid, and lastly that the very
same night D^^ling began to be sick and so continued worse and worse, until
(...) as evident as the daylight at noone, that he was tormented by the devil:
who ( I say) consideriug these things, can in reason otherwise ^ think, but
that she says truly concerning her sending of her Minny to torment Darling.
As then it is certain, yea so certain as without blushing it cannot be
denied, that Darlinge was tormented by the (...), so it is hereby very plain
that Alice Goodrige did there abouts confederate with her familiar spirit.
Moreover in that we read the like of others we are thereby to be confirmed
herein. Alice Samuel a witch of Warboyse confessed (as is set down in the
printed book) that she sent her spirit called Pluck, The (...) and execution
of, the witches of, warboyse.
to M. Throgmortons children, and willed him to go and torment them. And that
they were tormented by the devil, even 5. of his daughters, it is notoriously
known, and so generally received for truth, as the Dis. himself dares not
deny it, though feign he would, as appears by his nibling at them. If this
now were true, that Alice Samuel says of herself: why should not the like
confessed by Alice Goodrige of herself, be also true? And if the one of these
strengthened especially by sundry circumstances we can all of us believe: why
should we not credit the other also, confirmed by as many, yea more and as
strong circumstances as the other^ But what is it that offends the Dis.
so much and makes the confession of Alice Goodrige so incredible, yea
ridiculous unto him? does this offend him, that she sent her familiar spirit
to go and torment him? or this, that she was so malicious and cruel upon so
small occasion? or this, that her spirit was in the form of a dog? or this,
that her spirit had a name, ((...) M^^y) agreed upon I mean betwixt them? or
this, that the devil did usually (as it should seem) appear unto her like a
little dogger or rather all these, and especially that any man or woman should
have such familiarity and intercourse of speech and thus compact or confederate
with the devil? Least these should be as stombling blocks in our way, as it
should seem they are in the Discouerers: let us add to that is aforesaid,
these twoe things. First, that his last, which is the strangest and indeed
all in all, is according to the scriptures: and that some of these rest have
likewise in the general, though not in the particular, confirmation from the
holy scriptures, for by them it plainly appears, that among the sonns and
daughters of men, there are some which have familiarity with devils, have
speech and compact with them about this and that action, chap. 28. 7.
Hereunto serves that in the first of Samuel (...) that Saul repaired unto,
is said to have a familiar spirit. And in that the devil at her call, appeared
unto Saul in the likeness of Samuel, and had speech with him: what should let
us to think, that if not always yet sometimes, and when she would, the devil
(...) unto her in this or that form and had (...) are said to work with
spirits, (...) and they confederate in the same works, and therefore (no
doubt, Levit, 19, 31. Lev, 20. 6.
this phrase or manner of speech is used, ^^^shall not (says Moses,) ^^^gard
them that work with spint^. (...) work with spirits. The second thing to be
observed is, that not only Alic Samuel but thousands other have confessed the
like, as strange, and incredible as these of Alice Goodrige, and the truth of
the same have been confirmed by many circumstances, whereupon these kind of
people, (witches I mean) have received the punishment due to such malefactors.
Neither did this Alice Goodrige escape unpunished: but was for this very fact
and no other committed to Darby gayle by a lustice of peace, found guilty
thereof by the jury, and by my Lord Anderson adjudged to ymprisonment, where
since she dyed. Nor yet Edmond Hartley who after he was found guilty by the
jury, was adjudged by the Judge to death, and accordingly executed. Now if this
concerning Alice Goodrige and Darlyng which was the very evidence given at
Darby against her, be a mere jest and ridiculous matter as the Dis. makes it,
and that indeed there was no such thing, (this Darling being as M. Harsnet
would have it a very counterfeyt boy, and in that respect also the case nothing
so in truth) who sees not, that to make the best we can, he does thereby
condemn, Judge, Justice, and Jury of simplicity: and he is the only man
(forsooth) that has had a true and thorough insight into this matter. Whether
this man be in the Praemunire that has so directly and publicly impeached the
judgment given by the Queens Justices against the salde Alice for bewitching
of Darling, specially sentence being given herein, I desire the reverend
Judges of the Common Laws of England (who can best judge hereof, and whom it
chiefly concerns deliberately to consider. And if it fall out so that he be
not in case of Praemunire yet sure it is such, and so notorious an abuse, as
they I trust in their wisdoms will see redressed.

Where in this chapter the Disc, calls Thirens my Master and in this whole
first book of his seems to match us together, Page ^^.
as master and scholar: and in many places does pretend as though I had
learned I know not what from him: surely he greatly forgets himself for well he
knows that in other doctrines, I dissent a little more from the Jesuit and
the rest of that generation then he, for all his gloss and fair show in this
his book, and therefore it is very unlikely that I should so thoroughly agree
with him in the doctrines of possession and, dispossession, as usually the
master and scholar do neither can he be ignorante here-of, who is so well
studied in Thireus, that Thireus, his treatife from which I should learn
forsooth all my skill, came to light, an. 1598. which was after all our 10.
persons were dispossessed, and, the said book not to be had in England,
until after I was in in the, Gatehouse (that I know of) and therefore it can
not be that I learn^^d any thing for my practice hitherto from him. except I
went beyond the seas unto him, and had it from his own mouth. But I marvel
where this first book of the five had been, if Thireus book had not come to
the Disc. hands, before this Discovery came from them: for whosoever has
read Thireus, may easily see, how that as wind fills a bladder, and so makes
it bigg, which in it self is little: so has Thyreus treatise of Demoniakes
made the first book of the Discouerers to swell greatly.

OF CHAP. 8.
Of the means alleged by M. Darrell and others, whereby men are dispossessed.
The ordinary means ordiyned to continue in the church for the casting out of
devils M. Darrell makes to be very ancient. Page 42.
For he says: that it has been in the church since the fall of Adam.

Seeing this means has not only continued in the Church since Christ's time,
but was before, as may be collected out of the * Scriptures, and that we read
not of the first ordeyning of any such means: why may we not well think,
math. 12. 27, acts, 19. 13.
that as god in mercy left and ordained means in nature, for the curing of the
natural diseases and infirmityes of men's bodies, even from the time man's body
was subject, unto them: so he did appoint this supernatural means, for the
healing of this supernatural disease, from the time it also was subject
thereunto, which is the fall of Adam, But says the Dis. Herein Darrell has no
great certainty, for he confesses that there is no mention in the old
testament, of the institution of that means. And so of likelihood men were
possessed from time to time during the space almost of 4000. years, God
himself having ordained no ways to cure them. Out of my own mouth and
confession, he pretends to convince me. But mark how vnskil fully he does
it. page, 42.
Darrell himself confesses, that there is no mention in the old testament of
this means, which he says has been in the church since the fale of Adam: by
his saying then it is likely, that men being possessed about 4000. years, god
ordained no way to cure them. He should have inferred of my said confession,
men therefore being possessed about 4000. years god in writing left no
special or peculiar means all that time for the curinge of them, but instead
thereof he concludes as we hear. But let us take the argument as he himself
has framed it: In the old testament there is no mention of this means or
medicyne to cure the possessed. Therefore from Adam to Christ there is was no such
means or medicine ordained of god to heal them. I answer, that the argument
follows not, as may appear by that which follows. In the old testament
there is no mention of special means or medicines to cure fevers, or other
diseases, therefore. God has ordained no means or medicines to heal men so
diseased. And here I might proceed to a thousand (...) The reason why this
consequ^ce is not good is, because many yea almost insinyte things are decreed
in the secret and aeternall counsel of god, and known so to be of man, which
are not set down in his revealed will: so that although there be no ordinance
as touching the healing of the possessed by prayer, or fasting and prayer
mentioned in the old testament, yet notwithstanding the same might well be a
means ordained of god for the cutinge of such. Sec^n^ly, we may assure our
selves that god revealed many of his ordinances to them which lived under the
law, which were not set down in the scripture of the old testament: because
how soever now to us under the gospel, and in the last days * god speaks
only by his son, h^b 1. 1.
bidding us * h^are him in his word * and ministry, so as at this day for our
information in the Lords will and pleasur with man, ma^^h, 17 ^, ^uke 10, 16.
we are to go to the holy scriptures only, and the ministers of Christ
deliueringe, that which from them they have received: yet at sundry times and
in diverse manners god spoke in the old, times to our fathers, besides by the
scripture of the old testament, as by his prophets, by dreams and, h^b. 1. 1.
visions, and by vrim: well therefore might prayer and fasting be, not only the
ordinance of god for the castinge of Satan out of the bodies of men, but also
revealed and made known to be such to the Church of god then, albeit the same
were not mentioned in the old testament. ^ Sam. 28. 6.
From this argument the Dis. proceeds to a second, wherein also there is as
little art: taken from the testimony of Thyreus, and that he does in these
words.

But in saying that the same means do continue now in the church, that were
in use before the coming of Christ: page 43.
that his masters the popish ex^r^ists, will condemn as an error in him. For
one of them says, that the ways of casting out devils in the old Testament,
Thereus pat, 3. cap. 41.
iam vetustate, si non alia de causa antiquatae sunt, et abolitae, as being
grown in dotage, are now abolished for their age.

Behold his consutation. Surely this man was barrayne of arguments, otherwise
he would never have run to Thyreus for so absurd a one as this is, to convince
me with. If he had produced the testimony of an ancient father or late writer
he had said something: and yet it had been argumentum in-artificiale, an
argument wherein were n^ art at all, especially in a matter of religion, which
is to be decide^ by the holy scriptures and not by the writings and opynions of
men. But for the convincing of me a minister of the gospel, to produce the
say^^g of Thyreus a Jesuit and such as has neither sap nor savor in it, is
to beat the air, and not to dispute. Thus he may as well connince me in not
so few as an hundred several points of doctrine, as the number of sacraments,
the presence of Christ in the bread and wine, etc. wherein the Jesuit
dissenteth from that which I with the church of god do hold and maynteyne.

M. Darrell holds that in the Apostles time, there were two sorts or kinds
of casting out devils, the one ordinary, which was in the church before the
coming of Christ: page 43.
viz. fasting and prayer, and the other extraordinary, ^iz. commanding of
Satan to depart in the name of Christ.

Of this latter kind of eiection of Satan there is no question, the doubt is
whether the first was in the church in the Apostles time and that rests to be
discussed. Seeinge we read of a castinge out o^ devils by fasting and
prayer, even then when Christ himself was upon earth: (for Christ says not,
this kind shall not go forth as speaking of the time future, math. 17. ^1.
Mark, 9. 24
or that which afterward should be, but this kind goes not out, as meaning
of the time present, and that which then was done or in use:) and that after
this manner the Apostles did not dispossess the devils as is made evident (I
trust) where I treat of this scripture: it must needs be that this kind of
e^ection of unclean spirits. viz by prayer or prayer and fasting, was in the
church in the Apostles time. And this is confirmed by these words of our
Savior: ^ I through Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast
them outs? therefore they shall be your judges. By whom (says Christ; math.
12. 17. Luke 11, 1^.
do your children cast them out? as if he had said, though Beelzebub or by the
spirit of god? by which interrogation is insinuated, do they it not by the
spirit of god? for you say not of them neither will say, that that they do,
is done by the devil: therefore that is, because you say that your children
cast out devils by the spirit of god wherein indeed you say truly: and in the
mean season affirm that I cast them out by Beelzebub: and so of the like
actions, done by the same finger, give a contrary judgment, which is a most
unrighteous thing, they shall be your judges: that is in the day of judgment
shall testify against you: according to which testimony, god shall judge you.
It is now to be considered, by whom and by what manner this was done, whether
by the Apostles, or some other which had from Christ received the same power
with them over unclean spirits, and so by commanding Satan to depart in his
name, or by some other kind of men, and after an other manner: First then we
are to know that by those which are here called your children, meaning Jews
which in Christ's time cast out devils, cannot be understood coniurers, because
they cannot well be said to cast out devils as is here said of these: for
how can Satan drive out Satan? but specially, for that Christ approves of
this e^ection, mark. 3. 2^.
and secretly confesses it to be done by the spirit of god, Neither hereby may
we (although many do) understand the Apostles or Disciples, nor yet any who
expelled evil spirits by commanding them in the name of Jesus Christ: bycaus
these their children the Pharisees confessed to cast devils forth by the power
of god, but this as they denied to Christ, so it cannot be but that they would
deny the same also to all of his household, math. 10. 24,
and to who^ soever that should plainly and directly in his name, and by any
power received from him cast forth Satan: for the disciple is not above his
master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the disciple to be as
his master is, and the servant as the lord. If they called the master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? And as the pharisees
because of their extreme malice against Christ, which must needs extend it
self to his disciples, could not but be far from the approving and commending
of any great work done in the name of Christ, John 11, 48. and 12, 10.
so also for that they could not endure that the people should believe in him,
but when any miracle was done that might cause or help forward that same, they
were ready to burst for anger. That this generation of vypers then, who
excommunicated the blind man for bearing witness to the work that Christ had
wrought upon him, and ordained that if any man did confess that he was Christ,
John 22. 34.
he should be excomunicate out of the Synagogue: who consulted together to put
Lazarus to death, because for his sake many of the Jews went away, and believed
in Jesus: would acknowledge that work to be done by a deuyne power, John. 12.
10,
(and so allow and commend it) which was done in the na^^ and power of Jesus
Christ, and was very effectual to bring the Jews to believe in Christ, as they
did here of this eiection of devils performed by their children, as a thing
even impossible. For these two reasons it cannot be, Luk 1^ ^^
that they who are said he^re to cast out dyuelles, were either of the
Apostles or 70. disciples of Christ, or any other that by power communicated
from Christ did in the extraordinarye manner cast forth wicked spirits. If
therefore evil spirits were cast out of some in the Apostles time, and not by
the Apostles nor by any others after that extraordinary manner the Apostles
did, viz. by commanding of Satan to depart in the name of Christ Jesus, as by
the Scripture is manifest: must it not needs be, that then there was an other
manner of eiection besides that extraordinary used by the Apostles and
disciples of Christ? and why may we not say, that it was by prayer, ma^^ (...)
9. 29.
or prayer and fasting, considering those words of our Sa^^ur, This kind can
by mother ^eanes come forth, but by prayer and (...)* The former of these
Calvin writing upon this very place, does not only a^firme, but also confirm
and prove out of the scriptures, and ^o the latter he does very much inclyne,
although he do (...) the same. Cal^ni ha^^


(...) ^^^piunt etc. their children, so take for the children of that whole
(...) that the Apostles were so called. Others referr them to the old
Prophets. But I doubt not but that he understands the Exorcists of whom then
there were many among the Jews, as appears by the 19. chapter of the Acts,
for it is likely that they did judge no better of the disciples of Christ, then
of the master. And presently after speaking of the original of these
Ex^rcists he says this: Ita fier^ potest vt inuocato Dei nomine, doemones
fugarent etc so it may be, that by calling upon the name of god ( that is by
prayer) they did cast out devils and the people having had experience of such
power of god, did rashly ordeyn unto themselves an ordinary funct^ion.

But the Disc. laboreth to confute, first by producing M. More his contrary
iudgmente. I answer, that M. More and my self are fellow minnisters, and
that the same is no more a conviction of my opinion then mine of his. And what
although we dissent not only here in, but in some other points also concerning
the doctrine controuerted, which the Disc. I warrant you seteth out and
pursues to the uttermost are we not men and subject unto error as well as
others? And is it such a rare matter to see two differ about the
interpretation of the same place of scripture? and of such use, as the same
(forsooth) must needs be published to the world? surely nothing less. But
this use we may make of it, that the same con^idered, it is not likely there
was any such devise or confederacy as the Disc. affirms in the 15. page of
his Discovery. His words be these. Of these premises it would peradventure
anger them, if any should collect, that in all likelihoode* seeinge neither by
learning nor sufficient arguments, they could heretofore prevail, for the
settinge up of their pres^iteriall conceits, they thought to supply^ there
wants therein, by this divise of castinge out devils. In pressinge the
difference in opinions betwixt us, the Disc. overthrows the likliehood he
here speaks of, more then he was aware. Secondly, he goes about to convince
me. by two arguments of his own: the first where of is set down in these
words. To hold with M. Darrell, that there was an ordinary mean to cast out
devils in Christ's time, page 44.
does derroga^ much from the honor of his miracles in casting out satan. I
answer, no^no more, then to hold that there was then an ordinary means to
heal other diseases and infirmities of man's body, does derrogat from the honor
of his miracles. in healinge persons so diseased or affected, but here of he
gives a reason: for the infidels might have surmised, that Christ had done it
by the ordinary means, having used the sam^ secretly without there
knowledge, The unbelieving Jews could no more surmise thus, then in his
curinge of natural diseases, that he did the same by natural means, or
medicines secretly applied unto them before. And neither of these could they
in any reason so much as surmise, consideringe the insinit number he healed,
and that immediately, so son as he (...) them, yea often times before. upon
the touching of the hem of his gr^ment. His second argument follows.
moreover, it may argue the extraordinary means to be superfluous: there
being then an ordinary, page 44.
means, and that of such facillitie, as will after appear. no. for the
expulsion of satan by the extraordinary means. ct. by a word, so as Christ
no sooner spoke. or the Apostles in his name, but the evil spirit went out: did
most manefestly and palpablie (as I may say) set forth, or publish and
preach to al men, the dietie of Christ Jesus: which the ordinary by calling
upon the name of God, did not. 2. The extraordinary and miraculus election by a
word, yea some times by the very shadow of one, so guifted, or kercheiefs or
handkerchiefs carried from such, argued a far greater power and authority over
unclean spirits and so did more commend and dignifie such persons and there
ministry, then the eiection by the ordinary means. The extraordinary
therefore, was not superfluous but of singular use, notwithstanding there was
then an ordinary means. Neither is the ordinary, of such facillitie as the
Disc. imagines. Is it so easy a thing to pray, or to be so affected with the
misery of an other, as to send up sighs or groans to the Lord in their
behalf? Indede to babble or to use the labor of our lips for our selves or
others is an easy matter, common to the prophanest that live: but to labor
inwardly in our spirits, or to offer up a spiritual service acceptable to God
in Christ, psalm. 25. 1.
or as the Prophet David says, to lift up our hearts to god, with sighs and
groans for our selves or others, they being fast glued to the earth, and
naturally given to look thither, is a very uneasy hard and difficult thing*
and far more uneasy to continue and hold out any time therein: and hard lie
of all can we be contented, and that for the good of an-other, to waine our
selves for a day from meat and drink, and all other comfortes of this life:
Our profits and pleasures, afflictinge and humblinge our souls together there
with. That this is not a matter of such facillitie as the Disc. affirms,
lamentable and daily experience does show. But if we will speak of a
facillitie, in castinge out devils, then must we go to Christ and his
Apostles, who no sooner spoke the word but it was done, yea sometimes with more
facillitie then a word, as is laid down before.

M. Darrell confessing the necessity of says in the said ordinary means, (...)
says: that neither the faith of doing miracles. nor the justifying faith is
therein necessary: but that the temporary, or historical faith may suffice. It
being h^re objected, that an historical faith sufficing, (as is before
expressed) and that the prayer and fasting in such as have but that faith
cannot please god: it will follow that the ordinary means which Christ has
left in his church f^r casting out of devils as necessary, is such a means as
(...) not accept able to almighty god: M. Darrell answers, that the
consequent is not good, and so that point lies.

And so he answers again, and again will, if the Disc. should ympleade him
a thousand times. Surely one would think this argument follows not. The
prayer and fasting of such as have only the temporal or historical faith,
cannot please god in Christ, to the obteyninge of any spiritual blessing:
therefore not to the casting ont of satan, or obteininge of their corporal
benefit: and so by consequence, we have a means to cast out diu^els, if this
be one, which is not acceptable or pleasing unto god. If the Disc. reply that
he does not so understand the Antecedet, or first part of this argument, as I
set it down, then I meant not to deny the argument, neither do I now, but the
Antecedent, which must be this The prayer and fasting of such etc. cannot
please god to the obteyninge of any blessing, (that is so far prevail with
god) otherwise he concludes nothing. Now this is false. For the prayers and
humiliation of the wicked, may avail with god to the obteyning of a corporal
benefit, and removing of a temporal judgment from himself or an other, and
such is possession, 1 kings 11 ^1 27. 29.
and deliverance therefrom: albeit the sa^ is not effectual to procure a
spiritual blessing, as the remission of sins and such like. Ahab fasting and
humblinge himself, though it were but outwardly and not in soundness and
syncerity of heart, did thereby escape not only himself, but his son also that
punishment which otherwise had certainly overtaken them both. exodus 22. 21.
verse 23. verse 2^. 27.
Thou shall not (says the lord by Moses) do injury to a stranger, neither
oppress him: ye shall not trouble any widdowe, nor fatherless child: if
thou vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely here
his cry. And a little after if thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou
shall restore it unto him before the son go down: for that is his covering
only, and this is his garment for his skyn: wherein shall he sleep? therefore
when he ^^yeth unto me I will hear him: for I am merciful. Shall we think
now that god hears not the prayers or cries that the stranger, widdowe,
fatherless, etc. send forth to the lord out of the anguish of their souls,
and greuousnes of their oppression, except they be such as be indewed with a
justifying faith? god forbid. For howsoever it is certain that in the^ and in
such like cases the ears of the lord are open to such, and their prayers most
auailable with god: yet are they not shut against sinners but god hears them
thus far, as to deliver them from the oppression they are in, and to take
vengeance* of their oppressors. And it is to be observed that we have no such
limitation here. Is it not thus said by the lord? If the stranger, widdowe,
fatherless child that fears my name, call an^ cry unto me, I will hear:
but more generallye, if any widdowe or fatherless child whatsoever, being
iniuried, or oppressed, call and cry unto me I will surely hear. Thus then it
is. God does hear the sighings and cries etc. that wicked men in their
miseryes, or unminent danger thereof do send forth unto him, and delivers
them, (...) 45. 9.
as the creator ready to show mercy to his creature, which although as a sinner
he abnorreth, D^^ ^2. 6. 13. ^4 luke ^.
with his prayers and all his sacrifices, yet as his creature he loves, and
has compassion of, specially in misery, as appears by the places of
scripture above written: where this is set down for areason, M^th. 4, 45.
(...) 6 (...) ^4. 17.
why he will surely hear the oppressed stranger, widdowe, fatherless etc. for
I am merciful: also by that saying or David: The lord is god to all. And
herein we shall be further confirmed, if we call to mind, how the lord in
respect of our creation calls himself our * sather, and us in the ^ame
respect his sons and daughters: Math 1. 21, (...) 113 ^21. (...) 12. 13. ^
(...) 1 1, Lo^ 3, 15, 16. and 1^. 10, L^^ 1^. 11. 12. Io 14. 17. 9.
well therefore may go theare his children by creation, in a matter pertayninge
to this ^^re, seeing also in the things of this life he is so abundantly
gracious unto them: But concerning the life that is to come, or spiritual
blessings in heavenly things, it is no marua^e though he hear them not at ad,
but only his sons by adoption, considering he will bestow no such *
treasures upon them, (...) that Jesus Christ makes no^ intercession for them:
^ pet: 2. 5.
in whom only and for whose mediation, such requests are accepted of god.

But an other point may not be left asleep. Ca^. 45.
Darrell says that in the said place of Math. 17. 20. that the faith there
mentioned, is to be understood to be the says of dung miracles: That the
Apostles were reproved for their? weakness in that says: And that if the same
had been strong enough, they might have cast ut the wicked spirit mentioned in
that Chapter, verse 21. without prayer of fasting: whereby it follows (for
ought that dull men ca^discerne) that M. Darrell houlding (as is before
mentioned) that place of scripture to be a secret ordinance for the ^ontinuance
of fasting and prayer, as the means to cast out devils, and that therein by
faith is understood the faith o^ doing miracles: (which if it had been strong
enough in the Apostles prayer and fasting had been superfluous) it will follow
it is thought, that the historical faith will not serve his twne, but that it
must be the faith of thing miracles: which must be understood for the says
that is required of nec^ssary when there is need to cast out devils. So as if
he want that, he may ((...) his own doctr^in^) cast his cappat them.

Mark (^tood Reader) his noate of attention, or preface before my a^lertion
but an other point may not be lest asl^epe: and after his cole^tion there-vpon,
the caling of a capp, ymagine his own into the n^re, and you shall see the man
marvelously tryu^phing so tha^ either now sure he has the vi^tory, and that
he has got also out of my own words, or else he will never have it. The point
I a^firmed was, that the faith minityned Math. 17. 20. ^^to be understood of
the mira^^lous faith and hereof I gave two reasons, which are here likewise
set down. There-vpon says the Disc. it follows, that Dar. holdinge that
place of scripture to be a secret ordinance for the continuance of fasting and
prayer as the means etc. I answer, that all that he infers was true, and
very fitly collected, if I hold the place the speaks of viz. Math. 17. 20. to
contain in it the ordinance we speak of: But all men know that it is not
Math. 17. verse 20. which were most absurd: but verse 21. viz. these words:
This kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting. Yea the Disc. himself
confesses the same, but the leaf before this, page 43. Thus in a word we see
his collection and boastinge to be merely in vain. Yet for our better
understanding and further answer, we must remember: that two kinds of
expulsion of satan are here spoken of one extraordinary, wherein the
miraculous faith is required, verse 20. and an other by an ordinary means,
viz. prayer or prayer and fasting, verse 21. and here howsoever the iustifyinge
faith is to be wished, and is best: yet the faith temporal, or historical may
suffice, for the expelling of satan after this manner, or by the ordinary
means, which stands not so much in the says of the person therein used, as
in the mercy of god obtained, man vsinge the means which to that end he has
ordained. And as this faith may suffice, so it should seem that it has or
shall: for we read that in the day of the lord, some workers of iniquity
shall say for themselus lord have we not in thy name cast out devils? math. 7.
22.
why should we understand this of Judas only and such as he, who by a word cast
out devils, seeing that manner of eiection continued so small a time in the
church: And not as well of the sons of Sceua? (and such as they) who it is
probable cast out devils by the ordinary means, wherewith they had mixed
some adiurations, (whereupon they were called Exorcistes) added thereto in
that and former time when all things almost were corrupted, and as it is very
likely upon some imitation of the prophets, who had (no doubt) cast out devils
by adiuring or commanding the spirits to go out in the name of the lord: as
the papists do now in the ymitation of Christ and his Apostles: both of them
forgetting that they had not received any such power over unclean spirits, and
therefore should have refrayned from commuanding or adiuring them. True it is
that they were far from casting the evil spirit out of the man mentioned Acts
19. the reason I think was because they entered upon that whereunto they were
not at all called of god: for not contented with that manner of eiection they
had formerlye used, because it showed no such authority over devils, as that
perf^rmed by the Apostles, and by consequent did commend them nothing so much to
the people, which was the only thing they desired: they at tempted to cast
evil spirits out of sundry in the name of the lord Jesus: n^ marvel
therefore though they had no better success therein, albeit they percase after
an other manner, I mean the ordinarye means both before and after that
dispossessed diverse. And why does this ^eme so strange and incredible to some,
as I known it does? why may not a wicked man be as well an instrument to cast
out devils after the ordinary, as the extraordinary manner? and out of the
body, as well as the soul of man? seig especially this latter is a far more
worthy work, If we object as (I think) we can object nothing else, that god
hears not the prayers of such, nor regards their humiliations: that is
answered already.

They powerful preaching is annexed for a means to prayer and fasting.
Whereunto may be added the word of God (as the story says) which the d^^lls
(forsooth) could not endure to hear, page 50,
but would be gone. And so you see them fall into the said popish follies,
making the signs of possession, the means and causes of dispossession.

We do not, neither ever did affirm, that these are the means ordained of
god for the castinge of satan out of the bodies of men, for we doubt not but
that without the vsinge of either of these he may be expelled, as it was in the
dispossession of Kath. Wright and Darling. Yet notwithstanding we think that
in this said work theris good and holy use thereof. First, because in this
case, men wrestle not against ^l^sh and bl^ud, but against principallityes and
powers, and against the worldly governors,, the princes of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesse^ which are in the high places: ^ph. 6. 10.
It stands them therefore upon, to take unto them the whole armor of god
that they may be able to resist so strong an enemy, and having finished all
things stand fast. Now part, yea a principal part of this armor, is the word
of god, even the sword of the spirit: math. 4.
And herein we have our blessed Savior for an example to imitate, who when
the devil in an extraordinarye and visible manner appeared unto him, speaking
also unto him, he resisted and overcame him by the word of god. Secondly,
because the reading, ^. p^. 5. 9.
interpreting, and applying of the holy scriptures serve to stre^gthen our
faith, whereof there is need: for resist (says S. Peter) the devil steadfast
in the says. 3. to stir up whatsoever gift of prayer is in us, or feruency
therein, and to work the true humbling of us under the mighty hand of god. But
admit we hold readin^ and expoundig of the word of god were means of
dispossession, yet that follows not there upon which the Disc. from thence
collecteth viz. that we make the signs of possession, the means and causes
of dispossession. Did weeuer hold the reading and preaching of the word, to be
signs of posession? surely not for these signs are nothing else but the
fea^efull effects and operations which satan being within the body of man
sends forth: in which number to place the word of god and preaching thereof,
is a most sottish and impious thing: and simple men though we be, yet I trust
we were never so absurd: which being so, the Disc. collection is not worth a
straw.

But says he, it is most apparent by M. Mores conceit, who thinks prayer
more necessary, page 50.
then the signs of possession mentioned in the scriptures, for the true
discerning of those who are possessed.

It appears that M. More does not say altogether so, as is here mentioned.
But be it granted: does he ther^ore make prayer a sign of possession? ^8 so
one and the same thing, a sign of p^ss^ssion, and means or cause of
disposs^ssion? Behold how the Disc. argues. By prayer a man may discern of
those that are possessed: ergo, prayer is a sign of possession. If this be a
good argument then are these also: By the guifte called the discerning of
spirits, the Apostles truly discerned of those that were possessed, as the
Disc. affirms page 28. ^rgo, that gift is a sign of possession. By the
knowledge of the signs of satan possessing one, mentioned in the gospel, we
may truly discern of those that are possessed: ergo, that knowledge is a
sign of possession. And so the Apostles were possessed, and all endued with
this said knowledge for where the proper sign of a thing is, there is also for
certainty the thing signified thereby. Again, by good skill in physic, one
may truly discern of a fever: therefore skill in physic is a sign of a
fever.

Thus to reason does very ill beeseme a batcheller of arts, much more a
batcheller and Doctor of divinity. But this much worse: professed deuines to
charge falsely (and that in print) a preacher of the gospel, to hold, that
prayer is a sign of possession, whereupon follows, that al which pray are
possessed.

OF CHAP. 9.
Of the signs whereby M. Darrell and others do discern (as they say) when
satan is expelled.
M. Darrells ignorance makes him (as it seems) in this point confident. He
is peremptory, page 50.
that because it is said in the scriptures: that the spirits of the lunatike,
when he was cast out of him did cry and rent him sore, and that b^ lay as one
dead: that therefore these three are infallable signs appointed of God to
know when one is dispossessed, Nay rather then fail he will be content with
one of them, as in his dealing with Thomas Darlinge hereafter will appear.

VVhere-vpon I houlde these three for signs whereby to know when one is
dispossessed, as signifying the egresse of the spirit. I have before declared*
it remains therefore only that I answer to those objections the Disc. makes
against them. The first whereof is this: Some lewd knave may easily counterfeyt
these signs: ergo etc. I answer, that none can counterfeyt, that is, do the
like to any one of them, much less can any counterfeyt them all. For the holy
ghost speaks not of a natural cry, sent forth by man's voice or power, the
like whereunto an other man may utter and so counterfeyt: But of a
supernatural loud cry, sent forth by a supernatural power, I mean, the
devils: for it is said, ^^^ke 1. 26.
the unclean spirit cried with a loud voice and came out of him: in like
sort it is said, the unclean spirit tare him: now one would think that both
the hand and tongue of man were too short to perform that is done by the
devil. It is besides said of the possessed child mentioned Mark. 9. verse 26
that when the spirit was gone out of him, he was as one dead, in so much that
many said he is dead. meaning that howsoever he was not indeed dead, but had
life remaining in him, yet he was in all things like to a dead body, without
any appearance of life, stark and stiff, the pulses not beating, nor taking
breath etc. like to a man in a swound. in whom although there be life, yet no
such thing appears to be. Even so it was with the dispossessed child,
whereupon the people which thronged about him took him to be dead. Now this
lewd knave cannot easily nor yet possibly counterfeyt Howsoever then, were our
10. dispossessed persons counterfeites, as the Disc. will have them, there
crying, renting, and fayning to lie as dead, an other as lewd might easily
counterfeyt: yet to say that one may counterfeyt the crying, renting sore, and
lying as dead, mentio^ed in the gospel, and caused by the devil, is both
absurd and impious. His second objection is set down in these words. M.
Darrell confessing, that in the Apostles times, some spirits were cast out more
easily then others, might in reason have thought, that those that went out so
easily, did not so grievously torment the parties at their casting out, as the
rest did.

True, not so grievously torment at their going out, as the rest did, therefore
not grievously torment at all, ^^g. ^1
and so of the other signs. This follows not, as every child may se. Two
malefactors are whipped (ymagine) for one and the same falt, by two several
tormentors: the one being beaten by the more cruel man, has 40. stripes: the
other by him that is less cruel has but 20. By this reason now of the Dis.
this latter was not beaten at all, for he was not beaten so grievously as the
other was.

His third objection follows: And somewhat it is that although there are
diverse mentioned in the scriptures, ^^g. 51.
to have been dispossessed by our Savior Christ and by his Apostles: yet it is
said of none but of the lunatic Mark. 9. that when Satan departed, the spirit
either cried, or rent him sore, or that they lay as dead. To make therefore
such particularities in one, a general rule to all, argues greatly the
weakness of his judgment.

The Disc. is greatly deceived, for of an other Mark. 1. (a man and not a
child, as the lunatike was Mark. 9.) it is said, that when he was
dispossessed, the unclean spirit tare him, and that he tare or rent him sore
appears by Luke 4. where the same story is set down. mark^ 1, ^^. vo^^ ^.
Secondly it is written, that he cried with a laud voice, and came out of him.
And in the 8. of the Acts, that the unclean spirits crying with al^de voyc^,
came out of many that were possessed. And in that this is not said here of a
particular person, as Mark 1. and 9. but of many, it is thereby plain, that it
was an usual thing with the spirits, to send forth or cause loud cries, when
they went out of those they possessed. Thus has the Disc. in saying that none
but the lunatic Mark 9. either cried, or was rent sore, uttered vn-awares a
manif^st untruth, and therein showed no great learning or judgment, who
vpbraydeth others with ignoran^e, weakness, and want of judgment. We read not
indeeue in every place where mention is made of casting out diulls, of these 3.
effe^ts, that they cried, were rent sore, and lay as dead, but only in the 9.
of Mark: nor in any place besides, that they in that case were for a season as
dead, and had the Disc. said either of these, he had said truly: yet
notwithstanding it is very probable that thus it went with the dispossessed
generally: for in the 17. of Math. and 9. of Luke where the dispossession of
the lunatic child is set down, there is no mention neither of crying * nor
renting, verse. 1^. verse 42.
nor lying as dead, yet by the 9. of Mark it is clear that when the devil went
out of him he cried, was rent sore, and lay as dead. In luke. t^ere is
mention of (...) of tearing. but that is to be understood of the time of his
po^session and not after that lesu^ (...) the devil, and comm^^ded him to go
^orth and so of the act (...).
In the 4. of Luke we read of the dispossession of one of Capernaum, whom
Christ met in the synagogue, but we hear no thing of any loud cry: that then
was sent forth, yet by the 1. of Mark verse 26. where the same miracle is
recorded it is plain there was such a cry: for it is said, the unclean spirit
cried with a l^^ud voice. In that there is then no more mention in the gospel
of these I call signs of dispossession, it is not because they which were
dispossessed, did not cry, neither were sore rent, nor lay for a season as
dead, at the going out of the spirit, but only the luna^^dke Mark 9. whereof
few will doubt, the e^place compared and considered with that of the Act: But
for that the holy Fuangelists laboring after breuity do (usual:) (...) only
the said great works with some sewe circumstances, as out of whom the devil
was cast, verse. 15.
where and specially by whom and in what manner it was done vi^^ by the word
or commandment of Christ: without describing at large the manner of satan's
vexing the said party, either while he held his possession, or when he went
forth, the 9: of Mark only excepted, where both these are performed^ and
therefore it is that els-where we read not of all the 3. signs, and not
because other dispossessed persons did not cry etc. when the sprit went out,
but only he. And where the Disc: says that rather then fail I will be content
with anyone of them: I answer that howsoever I think these 3: signs were
usually heard and seen in the egresse of the spirits, yet it may be not
always, but sometimes two or percase one did suffice to signify the same, and
yet are not the other therefore in vai^e because the more signs the more we
are confirmed in the dispossession of one: for why may not this as well be true
of the signs of dispossession as of possession? where all the signs are not
required. but some of many may suffice, as has been showed before yea what and
if we should see one bowed together, so as he could not lift up himself, as the
verse 11. for it is very likelye she was posest.
possessed woman was Luke 13. might we not well thence gather (especially if we
perceived that it was not natural) that he had a spirit causing the infirmity
of body, and that he was so bound by satan? And yet this is but one effect or
operation of satan: and so but one sign of possession. And why one sign may
not suffice to signify the spirits going out of a man, as well as this being in
the body of man I for my part do not see neither do I think that the Disc.
can show any reason. And although be it one, or more, there is singular use of
the sign or signs, to signifye the egressse, as I have showed before,
treating thereof: Yet are the signs of dispossession of no such absolut
necessity, as the signs of possession are, as might easilye be showed. And
therefore I will not deny but that one may be dispossessed, and none of these
signs appear, which is more: the health and ease of the party from all former
vexation by the devil, declaring his deliue rance from the devil, as it is in
natural diseases: yet I think it falls out thus very seldom if ever, for
the reasons formerly given by me. Understand me of the eiection of satan by
the finger of God, de Doemon. cap. 52. sect. 20.
and not of his voluntary egresse as is in the papacy, which may well alter the
case. And so is Thyreus fully answered saying, non raro fit vt spiritus de
scendant, nullis sui discessus post se datis signis. It is often seen that
satan departs, leaving no signs of his going: which the Disc. in the end
of this Chapter obiecteth out of him against me.

From these signs he proceeds to certain other, which my self have
observed in experience, whereof we have heard before, and says that it may not
be omitted of whom I have learned them, even of Thyreus forsooth. But how can
this possibly be true? seeing Thyreus tretise de doem^niacis, from which by my
hands these counterfeyts should have received their directions concerning the
signs, came not to England until the year 1598. they suffering or doing the
same, the one of them I mean Darling 1595. and the other viz. the 7. in
Lancashire 1596.? How greatly also in this respect did the Disc. f^rget^
himself to make (almost) a whole I mean the first bodke of the Disco^tris
book to this end, to persuade the world, that I have learned all my skile
(forsooth) concerning possession, of Thyreus the lesuite, and in the same book
every where allege him to consute me: whe^eby appears that Thyreus and I
dissent in judgment as much almost as two can dissent about the doctrie in
question: and therefore it is very unlikely that I have learned I know not what
from him. He proceeds to object against the signs heard and seen at the
dispossession of the parties controuerted as follows.

The chief assurance, page 53.
that M. Dar. and M. More had, that satan had left lane Ashton, was her own
words, viz. when rising from her sit, she said he is gone, he is gone, I am
well, I thank god. And having wept in the said fit, she also said, that then
Satan departed from her. So as here we have a new sign of Satan's going out
of one: viz. the wepinge of the party.

That M. More has said no such thing, as the truth is, so it is probable
heerby, for that the Disc. in the margent has not noted the article and page,
as his usual manner is in other places, which if he could have done, he would
never have omitted. And truly for my own part (god is my witness) I never
said so, yea it was far from me, much less did I depose so, as the Disc.
affirms, yea what need it, seeing besides her most extreme torments at that
time, I (with many more) saw her lie as dead for a season: which had I
forgotten as it is not likely, yet thereof the story of the 7. in Lancashire
written by M. Dickons (one of the coppies whereof I had) would have put me in
mind: ^. hereof also I was never deposed nor examyned, no nor yet concerning
the 7. in Lancashire, save the first time I was before the Bishope a word ar
two, concerning them all in generaall, as whether I had not seen them before
M. Starchy writ unto me, and whether M. More had not been there before he went
with me. VVherby appears the corrupt dealing of the Discouerer, who in the
margent has Darrell ad art. 17 page 144. And whereas in the Lancashire story
penned by M. Dickons, from whence (and not from M. More nor me) the Disc. has
both this and a great deal more in this said chapter, and elsewhere scattered
here and there, there is mention of her increase of torment (which as I
conceive is meant by those words Mar. 9. rent sore) whereupon these words are
used: Now in this time they were all grieved to see how pitifully she was
tormented. and together with that he here mentions this, viz. she was cast
into a trance, and lay as one dead for a while: he has of purpose omitted
both these: that so he might weaken that it is said by me concerning the
signs of dispossession, and withal bring the reader ignorant herefo, to
suspect her dispossession, and together with hers all the rest. To which
purpose he proceeds to the dispossession of Margares Byrom, and the siges
thereof: wherein he deals more playnlie and less corruptly, I mean
especially in that he tells in the argument from whence (...) had the same:
not from M. Mores deposiuons and mine, but from the history of the 7. in
Lancashire.

Margaret Byrom said that at her reuerting^, after she had lain as dead half
(...) her belly toward her breast, (...)
thence to her throat etc. as follows the history before. It le^t behind it
said ^heea (...) throat, and a filthy (...), that a week after her meat was
vnsau^ry. Here we have the Jesuit, stinche. And besides the must infallable
mate among^e I. (...) diposs^ssi^^, viz. ^ying for dead is here confuted, for
this party was (...) was gone.

This objection arises only of the misplacinge of one word which the writer
of this story M. Dick^n (...) which being placed in his right place the
objection is ea^^y an (...): for whereas it is thus set down. This word (...)
^etto.
M. (...) ( a) that at her (...) after she had lain as dead (...) etc. it
should have been thus Margaret Byronsay (...) had lie as dead (...) an hour,
that she felt the spirit come up etc. neither can the first in any sense or
reason be Byron, as they must needs it we take the words as they are (...)
reported: for she knew not how long ^he lay dead, no more then a dead body:
But very (...) they belong to the writer of (...), as appears by the right
placing of the word that. From Margaret Byro^^ he proceeds to the (...) and
out of the Lancashi^^ story, sets down at large the several thapes that
the evil spirits (as it should seem) caused presently upon their egresse
from them, and presented themselves into their eyes. as if they had gone for^^
of them endued with such bodies and there-vpon pla^eth upon Darlings m^^wse.
And all this to make their dispossession odiou^, or ridiculous if he could,
whereas indeed it conf^ometh the same. But he says never a word of their most
extrame torments, for renting sore, their cryinge (...) their lying all (...)
they had been stark dea^e, which in the (...) down with their several
circumstaunces: The^e things he thougt good to omit:

(...) all the signs of dispossession, and therein the dispossession of o^r
Demnia ^k^, (...)
confirmed by the signs thereof, he (...) they may show them, and yet not
(...). (...) cap. (...) sect. 4.
I answer (...) and grant that (...) as the putting out of a c^^ die, the
breaking of a quarry in the glasse-windowe, and such like ridiculous signs, it
is most true* the signs also which of their own accord they give, as the
sensible and vi^^^ (as I may say) going out in such (...) as we hear, vomiting
etc. I doubt not but they may at their lunt^^ pleasure omit: but that they
may show them and keep their possession. especially the signs mentioned in
the gospel, as the ^esuite will have it, and that also after the means is
used arig^^t, which god ^^ath or^e, ne^ for the casting out of devils I deny.
^or it cannot be that god will suffer the spirits thus to delude and mock his
people, which shall be heereabouts occupied in faith and obedience to his own
ordinance: wherein as the wicked spirits would delight exceedingly, thus (I
mean) to di^^emble an egresse, in handling the persons possessed in such
manner as some times they did when they went out of men, and especially at the
time we speak of, so would they use the same full often: yea I trust if it
were so, and left to then pleasure, and that the devils were not in this case
over ruled and brydled by that over and allrusig had of god, all England should
have heard of it before this. Again were it thus that the spirits might give
these signs and tarry in men, or that the spirits might omit all the signs
metioed in the scripture when they go forth of men, we could not know that the
possessed were dispossessed as has been showed, but must needs stand in doubt
thereof at least for a time, and that time wherein we are affected with the works
of god, it ever: whereby it would come to paste, that when this wonderful
work of god should at any time be wrought, the lord should neither be hattely
praised, for the same, and receive that glory that otherwise would be given
him, nor man receive sound profit thereby. And it is a wonderful thing to
consider how ready the papists are to affirm that their Exorcis^s can and do
compel the spirits to give such signs as they pleaseof their departure, and
never once think of gods compellinge them to give the signs mentioned in his
word at their egresse, for the a^s;surance of his people, that they are gone
out, who without the same cannot possible know (...) much nor of his
restrayning them to show the said signs when yet they remain within them.

OF CHAP. 10.
Of M. Dar. and M. M^res conceit: that Satan being cast out of one, does
presently after seek to rep^ss^ss him.
M. Darrell like a kind (...) with the disposs^sion of any: page 53
but for (...) Care therein, he may be thought to haued (...) ^^mmendation. For
his persuasion to such (...) that they should use all diligence and
circump^^lim, that satan did not again reenter in to (...). Th^^ his
perswation has eur been drawn from a position, which he (...) that Satan
being expelled out of man, does seek prsently after to reenter into him
again: page: ^
and that it is commonly a very h^rd matter to withstand him, by reason of his
subt^tly, allui^ng (...) by promise^, and terrifying of them by threatenings.
And a little (...) in the scriptures.

(...) (says Christ) math 1^43
is (...) from where I came and when he is come, he (...) Then he goes, and
takes unto then (...) and they enter in, and dwell there: and the end of that
man is wisse then the begning. Even so shall all it be with this generation.
This place of scripture is indeed metapharicall as appears by the^e words,
even so it shall be with this wicked genera^^: and is used by our Savior, to
illustrate and plainly set forth the miserable (future) estate of the Jews, if
they continued in their sins. The metaphore is this. As it is with a man which
has an unclean spirit cast out of him, if notwithstanding that great mercy
of god received, he continue in, or return to his former sins, whereby it
come to pass that the devil returning and seeking to enter into him again,
do indeed enter in, which he certainly will, if he find his old guest such,
and that with seven other spirits worse then himself, the end of that man
shall be worse then his beginning, miserable therefore and fearful* even so
shall it be with this people of the Jews, who being in their blood and
filthynes, Exodus 1925. Deuteronomy. 32 9. Exodus. 19. 4. Zech, 2. 8. Romans 3, 2.
Romans 9, 4,
god washed and cleansed and made them his peculiar people, and * chief treasure
above all people, so as they were the lord^s, portion and Jacob the lot of his
inheritance, and has * carried them upon eagles wings, being so tender over
them, that * he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, and * has
committed to them his oracles, so as * to them apperteyneth the adoption, and
the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of
god, and the promises: if this people now having been made partaker of these
and many other unspeakable mercies of god, shall return to their former
filthiness for their intolerable unthankfulness their last estate shall be
very miserable, and worse then their first: which scripture as our fathers
before us so we at this day see fulfilled before our eyes, in that as it was
said to Cain, they are cast out from their own land, which flowed with milk
and honney, and are vagabonds and runagates in the earth, and so their estate
far worse, even seven fold worse, then ever before. From this scripture I
collect these things. First and chiefly, that the devil being cast out of
men, seeks to enter again into them. 2. That he desires the recovery of
that pray he has lost. (that is the possessing again of the said party) above
many other prays. 3. that he does recover and repossesse such as give
themselves to the service of sint^e, and otherwise can not. 4. That in this
case the unclean spirit en reth not in alone, but with more and worse. 5. that
the end or last estate of such i^ all be worse then their fist. Now what
though this seripture be used by the Lord as a metaphor or similitude to
illustrate and th^r thing may we not therefore gather these things from hence?
or is there no truth (trow we) in the metaphors themselves used by our Savior?
If the salt (says Christ) have lost his sau^^er, math 5. math. 13. 3^. gal. 5.
9. pron ^. ^, pron 728.
it is good for nothing: men do not light a candle and put it under a bushel,
but on a ca^al^stick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house. * The
kingdom of heau^n is like unto leaven, which a woman takes and lydeth in
three pecks of meal, till all be leauened. In like manner. S. Paul * A little
^auen haueneth the whole lump. * Go to the pismire O sluggard, (says Sal^mon)
behold her ways, she pr^^pareth her meat in the summer, and gath reth her
soode in the harvest. He that goes upon coals, his feet shall be burnt.

These are metaphors and yet in them and a thousand more in holy scripture,
there is a certain and undoubted truth. That is said here of going upon
coals, of the Pismire, leaven, and the rest with infinite more of the like
kind, is very true* notwithstanding the same is metaphorically spoken, yea let
the Disc. show but one metaphor in all the scriptures, wherein there is not a
certain and undoubted truth: how can it then possibly be that this spoken of
the unclean spirit going out of a man, should be untrue, because it is
metaphorically? That this is spoken metaphorically, hinders not at all the
truth thereof. And whereas the Disc. pretends as though I did only rely upon
the metaphorical place, and had no other proof, for that I so confidently
affirm as touching the return of the devil, and seeking to enter again into
him out of whom he is gone, he is deceived: for a most pregnante proof hereof
there is (as has been already showed) in the 9. of Mark where Christ Jesus
being about to cast the devil out of one, and knowinge the aforesaid metaphore
to be most true, and that the unclean spirit being gone out of man will
return, and seek to enter into the same man again, forbids him so to do,
I mean, the reentring or repossessi^g of the said party, it may be the rather
because he was a child: I charge thee (says he to the spirit) come out of
him, verse 15.
and enter no more into hi^. Albeit then one testimony of the Lord Jesus might
abundantly suffice, yet behold a double testimony of his for the further
confirmi^g of us in this truth: why then does this seem some strange or new
doctrine, or odd conceit, not only to the Disc. but to many other that
abhor the counterfeyting he contendeth for, seeinge it has such warrant, and
is so playnlie set down in the scriptures? me think (...) we tooked into the
nature of the devil and how hest^d (...) toward god and man, this should not
(...) that he (...) the possession thereof, yet will he not pre^ently give over
all (...) thereto, and seek no (...) the (...) or any (...) he can compalle
the possession again, (...) do he (...) it not, yet it is clear he will
(...) gen^rally true, so specially if it be a (...) the usurper takes great
pleasure to (...) in, and he also one o^ great (...) and hating dead (...) and
much more wicked and (...) are (...) and powers) being as usurpers cast out
(...) mea, the gloribus temples for the holy (...) all possible means to enter
into them (...) We all know and confess, that satan (...) of the soul of
man, which he possesses so long as we continue the (...) of disobedience, he
does more egerly besett it, and (...) of it, then ever he did before: and this
beside, (...) the holy scripture teaches us, every convert knows to be true
(...) own experience. Now why should not the same spirit take the same course
presently after his election out of that other part of man, his body (...)
mean: seeing not only the scriptures, but the parties (...) so (...) out of
their own experience signifye (...) there was just cause I think to per (...)
as I did, and is set down before. And (...) there for the Disc. to condemn
the reason (among others) of the (...) required of them viz. because (...) And
yet behoulde how he boasts as if the truth were firmly and undoubtedly of his
side, and as if he had answered all that men have to say in two words, page ^.
viz. that the scripture we rely upon, is a metaphorical place. But M.
Darrell (says he) and his friends will peradventure be better provided in this
point hereafter. How Dar. is provided he now sees: And by that time S. H. is
provided for objections, I trust Dar. will be sufficiently provided for answers
unto them. And thus much for answer to the objections made against my opinions,
which sometimes I delivered to the B. of London, little thinking that the same
should have been published to the world. It remains that I proceed to the
matter of fact charged against me: in which two points the discovery
consists.

OF CHAP. 11.
How those that took upon them to cast out devils do get themselves work, and
of their devises to cover their lewdnes
The Exorcists of both kinds for want of work are driven to their shifts:
and like tinkers walk up and down from place to place seeking to be employed.
page 60


Observe here not so much the Disc. railing, as his contrariety and thwarting
of himself: for page 22. he himself says and confesses, that when Kath.
Wright was first troubled, she was by one M. Beresfordes advice sent to M Dar.
at Mansfeild, and to one M Beckingham to be comforted, or cured of her
infirmity. And concerning the occasion of my dealing with Th. Darling thus: The
certainty hereof is, that M. Walkedeu (the boys grandfather) hearing how M.
Dar. had helped K. Wright, procured him to come to Burton, to help Darling:
from him he peoceedeth to those in Lancashire: When the 7. in Lancashire were
troubled M. Starky, and M. Dee resolved upon him, and writ their several
letters unto him for his repair into Lancashire: page, 23.
And lastly as touching the occasion of my going to Summers, he says: that * I
having a sister in law at Not: one Mistres Wallye, she writ unto me,
requesting me to come over to see the said Summers: Her evpon he adds and
colle^teth (and that trimlye) thus: Hitherto it may appear, how M. Dar. has
beue sought unto.

If this his collection with the premises be true, (otherwise he is greatly to
blame to publish them to the world, and that for certain truths) how can this
also be true, that like a tinker I walked up and down etc. It is one thing to
be sought unto, and an other to seek for work, and to be ymployed. And thus
is the Discou^rer conuynced by his Discovery: and let this suffice for answer
and refutation of his tinkerlike stuff.

It is a matter of some difficulty to discover their shifts and sleightes to
that purpose, page 6^
they have so many: and by their experience do manage them so crastely. Diverse
of them are here set down, and the rest may be supplied peradventure by some
hereafter. Sometimes they make ch^yce of some such boys or wenches, as they
think are fit for then purpose, whom they procure by many promises and
allurements, to keep their counsel, and to be (as they term it) advised by
them.

The Disc. and So. page 79 and 81. page 86. p^g. ^2. and 84,
hereafter tell us, how for his counterfeiting^ I * promised him he should
never want whilst I lived. 2. * that so doing I doubted not to procure him a
release from his master: that besides I allured him by giuinge him first xij.
pence, and after that an other xij. pence, but we hear nothing of the promises
I made either Kath. Wright, or Th. Darling, or Mary Cooper: nor yet how these,
or those in Lancashire were allured to counterfeyte. page 63.
But I conceive how it is. These were not sit scholars to dissemble and
collude with me as Some. was and others of that kind, but counterfe^ts of an
other kind, such as I did not confederate or covenant with, as I did with
Summers: but as my coming to their feigned dispossession, page 63.
sound ill at case, troubled either in their stoma^k with choler or fleame, or
in their belly with grypinges or colic, or in their head or joints with
aches or numnesse* and upon certain speeches used by me a reformed Exorcist
began to suspect them selves to be possessed, page 65. page, 66.
and others also with them: whereupon they (pore souls) unawares acted they
knew not how the signs of possessyon and dispossession. Did ever one read any
thing more absurd then this? It may be we shall hereafter hear that which is
as absurd of Summers: but otherwise we seldom or never read the like sottish
and ridiculous stuff, as the Disc. has for 8. leaves together, from page 61.
until the end of his first book. But he proceeds in his childe-ish tale

And these are commonly of the poorer sort, either the children or servants, of
such persons, page ^1.
as the Exorcists do well know, to be of their own stamp, and well aff^cted
toward them.

Here the Disc. greatly forgate himselfe^ for albeit some of our Dem^macks
were pore, yet was not Th. Darli^g of the porer sort, much less M. Starkies
children, whose son is to inherit land worth (as I take it) some hundreds of
pounds by the year. But he worse forgot himself in that which follows: for
how could we know the parents or masters of such to be well affected toward
us, whom we never knew or saw in the face, before we dealt in the
dispossession of the persons possess ^ as they are ready to testify, and one
in reason may well imagine of M. Starky and Mar. Byroms mother, seeing we dwelt
about to miles asunder. He adds that we know them to be of our own stamp:
what he means hereby (because these words are somewhat obscure) we may
perceive by that here following, set down page 69. you shall observe a little
wonder: It will heardly be showed, that any of this sort have been found, but
either in the houses of R^cusants, or of such as have on the other side
pretended some zeal, for they know not what reformation. Herein also the
Disc. was greatly deceived, for it is well known that the parents and master
of the persons possessed, were not Recusants, and for zeal after reformation
they were so far from that, as undoubtedly they know not what that reformation
he speaks of meant, no not any of them, Darlings friends excepted. Thus you
hear of what stamp they were, whose children or servants counterfeyted, as the
Disc. terms their vexation by satan: whereby it is manifest of what stamp
we are, that dealt in the dispossessinge of these counterfeytes: which also in
the same place he declares more at large: Besides it falls out amongst us:
that they who have taken upon them, page 69.
to have cast out devils, have still been men of that humor, as being
forsooth more pure then the rest of their brethren where by the way first we
may learn* who is more pure then the rest of his brethren that is in plain
terms a puritan: not he as all men imagine, who challenges some purity to
himself above other men, but he who is of the humor of reformation: more
playnlie: he that has some zeal for reformation. If the cause be thus, as it
is clear it is, there is no cause why these puritanes (as they call them)
should be hated, despised, abhorred, and so shamefully entreated, as they were
rather dogs, then men. It is a good thing (and deserving love and reverence)
to desire the reformation of that which is amiss in church, or person: a
better and more pleasing to god, to seek and labor after it, so it be done
aright and in due order: and best of all and highly accepted before god to be
earnest and zealous therein. But admit that these men seek after the
ref^rmation of those things which be not amiss, and need not therefore to be
reformed: in particular, admit that it was lawful for men to reepe carnal
things, of those congregations where they sow not spiritual things: to eat
of the milk of the flock, though they feed not the flock: for these kind of *
soldiers to have wages, albeit they go not a warfare, and that it were not
the Lords ordinance that they only which preach the gospel, 1 timothy 2. 3, 1
cor, 6. 14, 16.
should live of the gospel: and that necessity lies not upon every minister
to preach the gospel, but that the reading thereof suffices, and that men may
live of the gospel, although they be not able to preach the gospel, or if they
be able, preach little or not at all, or not to the people from whom for their
said preachi^g sake they receive their maintenance also that weomen may
baptize, in the case of danger or necessity as they call it, etc. Admit this I
say, yet notwithstanding forasmuch as those whom men call ^uritans, do seek
the reformation of these things, and others of the same kind in a zeal of
god, as is hereby manifest, in that for this cause they do and are ready to
forsake father and mother, wife and children, house and land, liberty with all
the comforts of this life, yea life it self it god call them thereunto: and are
contented in and during this life to be of all men the most miserable: there is
small cause why the Discouerer and the world with him, should hate, scorn, and
so contemptibly use them as if they were the o^^cowring of the world, and
refuse of the people. S. I^aule in the 9. to the Roma. calls God to witness
to his conscience, that he had great heauiness^ and continual sorrow in his
heart, and that he would wish himself to be separated from god, verse 1.
for his brethren that were his kin^men according to the flesh, and in the
beginning of the Chapter follwing, he uses these words: Brethren my hearts
desire and prayer to god for Israel is, that they might be saved, his reason
thereof follows. For I bear them record, that they have the zeal of God but
not according to knowledge. ^ce^ 1.
If Paul were thus affected toward the Jews, who were so exceedingly violent
and outrageous in whatsoever they went about in their blind zeal, as at large
appears by the story of the Acts of the Aposties* because they had in them a
zeal of god: would he, were he now living among us, be so affected as the
most are, toward the puritanes as they are termed, in whom it is manifest
there is a zeal of god, be it that it were not according to knowledge? seeing
they do nothing in their said zeal in a tumultuous, but all peaceable manner:
as by prayer to god, and humble petition to her Majesty the head, and the
body of this Realm met and joined together in Parliament? either would S.
Paul (trow we) call these men in scorn as the Disc. does: * men of the
ouerworne consistorian faction, men of the hum^ur of reformation, men more pure
then the rest of their brethren, that is, puritanes: or with others precisians
fantastical men: etc. yea of Satan Sathanist^ as my self have heard them
called: because of their zeal, admit it were a blind zea el: who for the
blind zeal that the Jews had, called them so lovingly brethren? It is not
possible:

As from some things which might be observed, so from these two places, and
some other, especially that, page 15. (where upon certain worthy premises he
collecteth, that in all likelihood, seeing neither by learning nor sufficient
arguments, they of the over-w^rne Consistorian facti^n could heretofore
prevail, page 15.
for the setting up of their presbyteryall conceyts, they thought to supply
their wants therein, by this devise of casti^g our devils:) It may very
probably be gathered, that the thing which has vexed the Disc. and made him
sweat so much about counterfeyting, is not the counter feyting, and teaching to
counterfeyt a possession: nor his hatred and abomination to sin, and in
particular to this detestable cousenage: but his hatred against the
instruments which god used in these great works of his: whom, together with
also^ the same stamp, as from his soul he has of long hated, so hereby was
the same mightily increased, in that these kind of men should be thought to
have such interest in Christ Jesus, as that at their (falsely termed) verbal
prayers, and hypocritical fasting, he should as it were visibly descend from
heaven, and tread down Satan under their feet. This said the Narrator before
the Disc. came forth, cannot be endured. whereby we may se he coniectured
aright. And mark what he thereupon out of the Apostle adds: But god has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to ^onfound the mighty. As if he had said: in that the
Lord has used in these rare and great works of his, such weak and
contemptible me^, we should rather considering the lords manner of dealing, be
confirmed thereby in these works, and further assured that they are of god
then kept from believing and embracing the same.

These are not dealt with but there must be a great assembly gathered together
in one corner or other: all of them such persons, as they know to be their
friends, page 6^
or at the least as their said friends do bring with them, and are thought fit
to be perverted.

The falsehood of this is hereby manifest, in that M. More and I knew not
those persons in Lancashire who joined with us in prayer to god for the casting
out of Satan of the persons possessed, as they can witness: nor yet any one
of them being mere strangers of them al^ and they to us: and at Not. also
they were generally unknown to me neither was their any choice made by some of
our friends, At the (...) on of the 7 in Lancashire there were present about
40. and of ^o. at N^. 15^.
and procuring of men to come, (as is well known to them that did come who
were not a few) as the Disc. suggesteth: Besides this partly argues, that
(were there a counterfeytinge indeed) these our said friends were
confederates therein, which I think hardly any will savor. It is marvel that
the Disc. affirmed not likewise that all those which have seen Summers,
Darling, and the 7. in Lancashire in their (pretended) fitts, were not my
fre^d^ (so should I have some stoare of friends:) or at least that my friends he
speaks of did bring them, or procure them to come, knowing them to be such as
were like to be perverted, for this he might as truly have affirmed as the
other: and this had been to some purpose indeed, whereas the other is to none.
It is strange therefore that he strayned not himself a little further: but
though he do it not here, yet he says something els-where bend^g this way:
for speaking of the 12. Commissioners, he has these words * that they are not
to be impeach^d, page 20^.
(...) their want of wisdom, as for their blynding the eye thereof, by their
(...), they held with M. Darrell. If now the principal eye witne^^es of S^m.
^itts for wisdom, learning, and authority were thus affected toward me^ well
may it be that the rest also were: And if by my friends I could pr^cure these
persons to see So. in his fitts, who albeit for their wisdom they were not
easily to be deceived, yet because of their proposterous affections were fit
to be perverted, much more by the said friends of mine might I procure meaner
persons to see him, more fit to be perverted then they. And this is to be
supposed of the rest of our Demoniacks, viz. that the principal and other
witnesses of their vexation were likewise blinded all, and every of them with
preposterous affection, which no man (sure) will beeleue, the Disc. excepted.

The end of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK
OF CHAP. 1.
Discouerer.
Of M. Dar. intercourse with So. by st^^ts at Ashby, from about the year 1592
until 1597. for his instruction how to dissemble himself to be possessed.

Darrell
This my supposed guiltynes is proved two ways, page 7^
first by Summers accusing me to have taught him: Secondly, by circumstances
arguing the same: deposed by diverse witnesses. In the accusation we are to
observe first, the accuser: secondly the accusation it self, lastly the
circumstances confirming the same (as is pretended) deposed by others.

The accuser is William Summers, a young man about the age of 22. years: who
first is known to be a notorious and infamous liar: for 4. times has he
varyed with that double and false tongue of his: sometimes affirming, at other
times denying all counterfeyting: and eue^y of these times openly, and to an
infinite number of men. 2. By his own confe^sion he has counterfeyted a
possession: and if that were so, profaned the holy exercise of prayer and
fasting: and is therefore most vile and abominable. 3. If he have counterfeyted,
he is most horrible blasphemer: If that wretched and notorious Blaspheamous
H^ck^t^, were mistly and worthily condemned and executed, for such like
blasphemy and indignities as this may it not seem strange that this lewd
per^ned boy should be (...) cherished and much made of, by the Bish. and his
C^aplen.
having sometimes said there is no god: and sometimes used these words, I am *
god: I am Christ, as is deposed. 4 He is a forsworn wretch: for he has sworn
both ways, that he has counterfeyted, and that he has not counterfeyted:
yea with an execration, betaken himself to the devil if ever he
counterfeyted: he must needs therefore be forsworn. In regard hereof I
answer that forasmuch as there is only one witnessinge against me, I ought not
thereupon without further proof, neither by the law of god, nor by the civil
law, be held and adjudged as guilty. 2. I have to all the articles framed
against me out of his accusation, answered negatiuely and me thinks were I a
private man, in regard of my educatyon, years, and life, I should be credited
rather then Summers: much more being a minister of Christ Jesus and preacher of
his gospel. 3. Besides my own oath and protestation against this single
accuser, Ans.
* learned and grave deuines have offered to be my compurgators: ^ Deuteronomy. 19.
15. John, 8. 17. 2 cor. 13. 1. 2
which by the civil law (according to which I am to be judged) does
abundantly suffice for my purgation: seeing my own without theires is
sufficient. 1 timothy 5. 19,
I take exception against his testimony in regard of his unworthiness, which
appears by the premises. And because of this I a^^irme, M. John I^eton. M
John Brown^ M. Robert Ev^^gton, M. Tho. Boulto^ page 244.
that there is no body testifying against me the crime laid to my charge: for
there is none but Summers (as by that which follows is made evident,) and he
in all law is nullus testis: no witness.

Discouerer.
The Disc. says of him, that he has dealt since his examynation at London
much more sinceerly in this matter then I.

Darrell.
Admit then Some. were not such and so vile as we hear, but as the Disc. it may
be will have it, a young man of good report admit likewise that not only he
but others also joined together with him in the accusation, yet notwithstanding
for-asmuch as the accusation it self is most false, as we shall hear, all will
make nothing to prove my guiltynes. And so from the accuser let us proceed
to the accusation, and examyne it.

Discouerer.
About a quarter of a year before my departure (says So.) from ^. Tho.
Grayes, (with whom I then dwelt at Langl^y. Abb^ym l^y ^^^shire) I was sent
one day to Ashby de la Zouch (being 4. or 5. miles distant) vp^nsome occasion
of busynes. At what time ^ with other ^ boys, going into an About 100. of the
chief of them among whom I n^ne live ^ have all^eadie (in effect) witne^sed,
that I used to go in to (...), as little as other preachers of the gospel.
alchouse, what these boy^s were and there ^a n^s it would be known. also wa^.
Al^house.
sound there M. Darrell, whom I litlle regarding, but buys usually play in
the sendes or streets
playing the wagg, and shrewd boy with my compannion* M. Darrell d^parted out
of the house, and stayed at the door vntit^ I came ^orth And then he took me
apart, asked me my ^am^, where I was borne, with whom I dwelt, Alas (quoth he
further) thou art a pretty boy, and my countreyman: I knew thy father, and am
sorrye to see the in ^o mean a case: for I was simply apparrelled, even as
meanly almost as could be. He also promised to bring me out of the town, and
to tell me somethings, wherein if I would be ruled by him, I should not be
driven to go so dare as I did but be able to mainteyne my self as long as I
lived. When I had dispatched my busynes, I ret^rned homeward, and found M.
Darrell not, ^ar^ from the place where I left him, talking with (...) me^ have
neither names nor surnames, no more then the boys. But no marvel for they were
to ^^strangers.
two or three strangers, about one Katheryne Wright whom he said he had
dispossessed of an vnclean^ spiryt. After he had ended his communication with
them, he went with me along in the street in my way homeward and as we were
going together, I having ouer-heard some of his speeches with the said
stranger, asked him what they meant: he answered me with a long speech
concerning the possession of K. Wright, and told me the manner of her fitts
etc. as there ^^^oweth: where is set down at large our first (pretended
meeting) or acquaintance with the occasion thereof, the allurements I used to
persuade him to counterfeyte, and the acting of certain tricks by my self
for his better instruction.

Darrell.
I answer before the Lord, and as I shall answer it at the dreadefull day of
judgment, that I never (to my knowledge) saw William Summers before the 5. Ans.
1.
of November 97. which was but two days before his dispossession, an that was
also upon earnest entreaty made by the Me^r (then) o^ N^ttin^ham and by ^undry
others: much less then had I for certain years before 97. diverse and secret
metings with him, and confederated with him, as he accuses me.

Secondly, I answer, that forasmuch as Summers was gone from M. Crayes before
the ti^e he a^firmeth our first meeting or acquaintance be (...) it cannot
therefore possibly be, that this his said accuration is true. About M^d^o^mmer
1598. I being by the B. of London deposed and examyned, it was articulated
against me, that about 4. years (then) ^ast, as I was talking with two or
three strangers in Ashby concerning (...) came to us. and that leaving them, I
went with (...) the way homewards perswadinge (...) to counterfe^t a (...) had
done. (...) and charged against me in Michelmas term followinge at Lamb^th
before my Lord chief Justice and some other of her Maiestyes most honorable
privy counsel. And this was done in the presence of above an hundred. Then or
at that time (as we see) our first acquaintance began Anno 1594. now six
years past: but So. accusation being since by the Disc. refyned. and cast into
a new mould, because of an Apology of mine made after this, he is now said to
have been acquainted with me from ab^ut the year 1592. whereby the Disc. has
gained two years, which stands him in singular stead. for take the
accusation as it was at the first, and is in the article, and continued long
charged against me, as in equity we ought, the Disc. and Some. are manifestly
convinced by the discovery it self. for by pages 94. and 95. it appears,
that it is now about eight years since Some. went from Master Grayes, and the
accusations being in his first frame, it is little more then six years since
Summers and I were first acquainted, as he affirms: so that Some. should have
been gone from M. Grayes, about 2. op orre^ mend ^cem (...) memo^em.
years after the Disc. account, before he and I were acquainted, and therefore
the accusation false. Blame not then the Disc. for this alteration of the time,
for had he let it go as it was framed at the first, either he must have set
that point of my Apollogie alone, or else have clean overthrown himself and
all: now whether of them soever he had done, it had been against himself, and
the latter shamed him for ever. It was wisdom then (I trow) with a dash of his
pen to prevent all, which was by writing the figure of 2. instead of the figure
of 4. and cha^nging 94. into 92. But let us take the time of our first
acquaintance to be, not as So. has affirmed, but as the Disc. now reports
it: (for I see no remedy) yet by the discovery it self it will appear, that
the accusation is false herein: for by page 94. it is plain (as forth with we
shall hear) that So. went from M. Grayes above 7. years before the discovery
came forth, and the Disc. himself confesses. that it was then but 7. years
since we were acquaynted, for from 9^. (which is said to be the first time of
our acquaintance, if we were acquavnted so soon) until 99. are but 7. years:
and besides Summers says that we met together about a quarter of a year and
page 80. twelve or thirteen weeks before he went from M. Grayes. By the
discou^ry it self therefore it is manifest, that he could not come to me at.
Ashby from M. Thomas Grayes at Langley abb^y a quarter of a year before his
departure thence, as both here and page 82. is by Summers in his accusation
affirmed* whereby it is evident that the Disc. in his discovery has plainly
discovered my inocency, together with So. and his own falsehood and corruption.
And this is the second time the Disc^uerer is convinced by his discovery. And
if here by my innocence and the ^a^^hood of So. accusation appear: How would
it shine and be clear if upon a commission granted I should make proof that
it is above 10. years since his departure from ^angley abbey, whereof I am
very sure, and how or which way it will forthwith app^^e

It will not help him to say that he does not dy^e the affirm that we became
a^qua^ted 92. but about 92 for this word about must have relation to the time
after 92. vi^. 93 and not to the time before, beca^se he says in the next
words followinge, that I became a^qua^nted with (...), Ast by about 5. or 6.
years pa^, meaning from 98. which is all one as if he had said from 92. or
93. whereas otherwise he should have said, about 6. or 7. years past.

Discouerer.
Against this the Dis^. obie^teth as follows: Where M. Darrell says (viz. in
my Apollogy) that it is 9 years or thereabouts since ^om. page ^.
went from M. Grayes, if that were true, he had said somewhat, for the clea
ring therefore of this: First M. Gray and Mistress Gray being interrogated 23.
October. 1598. how long it was since So. left their service: the one says: more
then six years past: and the other about six years as they remember. But
there is some better certainty to bolt out the truth herein. So. was bound
prentise (as M. Dar. confesses) with Thomas Porter, about a monneth or sieve
weeks after he was discharged of M. Brackenburyes service: and So. says that
be remained little above a quarter of a year (if so long) with M. Brackenbury:
and it will be confessed, that he went from M. Grayes to dwell with M.
Brackenbury: so as if we can find when Some. was bound pretice, it will appear
how long it is since be dwelte as M. Grayes, Now the Indenture it self whereby
he was b^unde, bears date the seventh of May in the 35. year of her
Majesty: whereby it is manifest the promises being true, that it is not yet
s^auen years since Some. dwells with M. Gray, which coutr^wl^^h M. Dar. nine
years.

Darrell.
The pr^miss^s being true, that he says is not thereby manifest for if we add
to the date of the Indenture, the monneth or 5. we^kes and quarter of a year
he speaks of, it is likely to be full 7. years, and as well mo^^ les^e. yea
the premises being true, it is manifest that his not ye^ 7. y^are. (viz. at
the time the discovery came forth) is false for if (...) then 6. years in
October 1598. since So. departure from M. (...) must it not needs be more then
7. years in November 15^^ which was the time wherein the discou^ry first saw
the light? (...) time the third Discouerer is conuiced by his own (...) the
promises, being true, (...) 9. (...) notwithstanding deposed truly and so did
(...) for the present. They thought as it may (...), that they would make sure
to swear truly, and to keep them within their bounds, and no marvel seeing
norwithstanding that (as I was credibly informed) the B. of (...) said to M.
Gray when he thus deposed, that he had forsworn himself: offering to lay him
a ^unched pounds that it was not 6. years su^ce S le^t his ser^ice, albert M.
Gray being ready to lay with him, he after refu^ed and not only this, but
threatened him and Mistr^sse Gray likewise to send them to prison, what would he
have done, or at least said, if they had gone as far as truly they might? Had
they deposed that it was not 7. years, or that it was not eight, or not 9.
years past, their depositions being true, that I said of 9. years must needs
have been false, but we see they have deposed otherwise: and I trust if they
should now be deposed thereof, after they have better considered of the matter
their depositions would not controu^ but confirm Darrells 9. years, But
admit it were but 7. years. (yea somewhat less) from the time of So.
departure from M. Grayes, until the time I writ my appollogy, which was in
October 98. it had been all one and as much for the clearing of me, as if it
had be^e 9. or 19. years from the time he went thence, because thereby it had
ben^ evident he was gone from ^angley Abbey before our pretended meeting should
begin: which is sufficient for me, yea although we take the time of our first
acquaintance to begin in the year 92. or as the Di^c. after affirms, about
5. or 6. years past from 98. much more if we take it as it was at the first
laid out in writing against me: for if So. were gone from M. Grayes 7. years
before the year 98. which was Anno 91. then was not he there 92. vhereby we
may see had the Disc. controuled my 9. years: it would not avail him for the
proo^ing of my guiltiness. And if the Disc. will here in say any thing to
the purpose, (otherwise he may in this point be hereafter sylent) h^e must
leave my 9. years, and prove that So. was at M. Grayes at lang l^y. Abbey in
the year 92. as he and S^mers affirm: which I think he shall find as
vmpossible for him to do, a^ to prove So. a count^r feyt. And when he has
performed this (if it prove possible) yet is he never a whit tl^e nearer my
teaching of him,

And where in this account of the Disc. he says So, was bound pren^ice as (M:
Darrell con^essith) with Thomas (...), about a month or syue week^s after he
was discharged of M. Brackenbury^s (...) observe I beseech you his cunning: for
he pretends to the (...) thou^h that ^ere granted by me for a truth whereas
(...) I (...) is this, that (...) very placing of my (...) as much, a^ (...)
But to let that go: the Disc. and Summers in these and the words following
before mentioned have uttered 3. untruths, even as many as there be several
points denuered: For first besides that Some. was about ^. weeks with Porter
before he was bound, as Porter and his wife are ready to witness, he was (as I
offer a^^o to prove) after he came from M. Brack^bu^y at his mothers nouse in
Nottingham first (...) for certain weeks, alter in health before he went to
^orter, In the (...) as I contec^ure by that which follows, about half a
year before he was bound prentise, 2. (as (...) we ^ha^ near) being M
B^a^kenbu^yes boy, he remained at (...) the County of Wy g^rn from the feast of
^entic^st in the year 91. unto the least of Michael the ^rchange^ and from
thence he went to his mante. s^ouse at ^olme not far from Newark upon Trent:
where also ^e ^ema, ne^ for a season, besides the time he was M. Brack^^eno^
yes (...) before ^e came to Bell hall, which as I think was about a year.
(...) little above a quarter, and because he had (...), near en (...) adds
if so long. 3. Summers being taught by M. Gray^s (...) and not able as it should
seem to (...) was due unto him, ran away from M. Grayes (...) where likewise he
continued a season, before (...), but how long I know not. It will not then
(...), except it be by Samers and the Discouerer (who spa^ (...) to (...) any
thing for truth be it never to false) that he (...) ((...) a strayghte foot)
(...) Ma^ler Grayes to dweil with M. (...) ^bury. we have hear^ before, that
the Disc. his premises being true, yet that he infers upon them is false,
viz. that it is not yet 7. years since ^omers dwelt with M. Gray: how much
more then the premises being false? so that both conclusion and premises be
false and deceitful, ^ke to the authors an^ ^uentors of them.

Discouerer.
And where the Discouerer upon occasion of these words of mine in my (...)
Summers was gone from M. Grays 5. years before (...), has these words: If M.
Darrell mean their (...) a palpathle untruth, to say, that Summers was (...)
before that tim^ if he vnd^rstand their (...) indeed from M. Grayes ab^ue
three years before that time, but not (...).

Darrell.
He must remember, that I used those words for the conuynci^g of the
accusation then lay de ^ut in sundry articles against me, wherein our (...) was
said to be about 6. years now past, and that I trust would prove no untruth,
if I should be put to my trial: and not of the accusation now in prynt,
wherein our arquaintace is stretched about two years further, which is as much
the Disc. as Some. accusation, and a miserable compound, as I may say^ 2. Admit
I had been misinformed, it had been a fault in them from whom I received that
information, and an other in me to spread it abroad, (although with no purpose
of printing it) yet nothing auayieable to prove me guilty of teaching So. to
counterfeyt.

And whereas Summers says in his accusation, that dwellinge at M. Craye^ at
Langley abbey, he came from thence to me at Ashby de la zouch (being sour or
five miles distant) upon some occasyon, where I taught him to counterfeyt, and
that sundry times as appears by page 82. whereupon it is to be intended that
I dwelt then at Asbby, as I have for diverse years: this also (it is evident)
is false, in that he was gone from M. Grayes before I came to dwell at Ashby.
for from thence he went about 10. years past, and it was but 7. years upon
the feast day of S. Mychaell the archaungell last (I mean Anno 99.) since I
went to Ashby: so he was gone about 3. years before I came thither or indeed
ever saw Ashby. This urged by me heretofore in my Apollogy, the Disc. seems
to convince in these words following.

Discouerer.
Summers affirms (says Darrell) that when he repaired to me to be taught,
page 95.
he came from one M. Grayes of Langley, with whom he says he then dwelt, to
Asbhy where I then dwelt, as he affirms: and in a park there we met. In
which words there are f^ure untruths. First, Some. does not say that ever he
repaired unto him to be taught, but that being with hun he was taught by him.

Darrell.
Whether Summers as is pretended came to me at A^bby with an intent to be
taught and to that end, or no, it mattereth not, for the question is, whither
ever we met at Ash^y, S^ whither he was taught by me or no. Now and against
this meeting and teaching at Ashby, both in my Apolog^e and here I bend my
self, and teaching at Ashby, both in my Apolog^e and here I bend my self, and
thus I reason ^e was gone from M. Graye^ before I came to (...), and whiles I
dwelt at Ashby he remained not at M. Gray^^ It cannot therefore be that Some.
dwelling with M. Gray came to me dwel^ing some four or five miles distant at
Ashby as he affirms. And where the Disco trifieth a^^ut the end (...) set
before himself in coming unto me, surel^ if there were any such meeting at
Ashby, and teaching there to counterfeyt, as S^mer^ and the Discou^rer pretend,
considering it is said, that * after our acquaintance began and agreement
about counterfeyting, page 8^
he met me three or four times in Ashby: one would think that he came to
receive some new instruction from me, or to have the old renewed: for
wherefore else came he unto me? It is not said any where that I went to him,
or sought him out at Langley abbye or els-where, page 80. pa^ 82. page, 83,
or yet in Ashby, but that he * found me in an alchouse in Ashby, and (a) met
me three or four times in Ashby. And again (b) I went to Ashby, and enqu^ring
for M. Darrell, found him in a house by the school were the Churchyard.
Having met with him, he walked with me (...). page 84.
And again (c) I took? shby in my way of purpose to see M. Darrell whom I
found there: Is it now credible that he should come thus of purpose to me at
Ashby, being come inquire and seek after me, when he has found me and we met,
I presently fall of teaching him, and he of learning, and yet he come to no
such end? It he had said thus of our first meeting it had been another
matter, but to affirm that he (...) repaired unto me to be taught, had there
been any such repayring and teaching, must needs be in the judgment of all men
very untrue. Yea it is contrary to page 84. with 85. Thus is the Discouerer
convinced the fourth time by his own discovery: and pretending to show my
untruths is himself fallen into an untruth, were there any truth in my
teaching Summers to counterfeyt, which he contendeth for. But let us proceed to
his second untruth.

Discouerer.
Secondly the times of So repayring to M. Darrell were not whilst h^ dwelt
with M. page 93.
Gray: but afterward when he was run away from his master Thomas Porter of
Not. for Summers only lays to M. Darr. charge that on a time when he dwelt at
M. Gray he met him the said Darrell by chance at Ashby, and was then first
instructed by him.

Darrell.
Contrary to this are these words page 82. Also the said Somer^ affirms
that after (...) former acquaintance begun with M. Darrell and whilst he shall
remained with M, Gray he met M. Darrell three or four times in Ashby And
continuing his speech concerning our meetinge at Ashby, whiles Summers remained
with M. Gray at Langley abbey, h^ adds this surthe^ at other times also the
said M. Darrell did kindelye salute me: and so proceeds the Discouerer (as
there appears) to mention S^mers departure from M. Grayes to M.
Brackenburyes, and how shortly after he was with him, he fell a counterfeyting
and pracising these seyts of actiuity, which of me he had learned at. Ashby,
whiles he was at M. Grayes Whereby it is plain if the Discouerer say truly
page 82. that we met more then one time at Ashby whilst Summers dwelt at M.
Grayes, which is contrary to that is here affirmed.

Thus the fifth time the Discouerer is consuted by his own discouerye, page 9^.
and if he speak the truth page 82. (otherwise he is to blame to publish a lie
for a truth) he speaks here untruly: and so in conuvncing me of an untruth,
he himself is found with an other untruth.

Thirdly Som^rs does not affirm that M. Darrell dwelt then at Ashby, when he
dwelt at M. page 93.
Grayes and met him in Ashby they might meet there together though M. Da^rell
did not dwell there.

Be it that in the article laid out in writing against me, it is not expressly
said, that I dwelt then at Ashby, yet considering it is said that he came
sundry times to me at Asby before he went from M. Grayes, we have heard in
reason it is to be so intended, and the same was to be understood, which is all
one as if it had been expressed, for howsoever Summers might meet me by chance
at Ashby the first time he was (as they say) instructed by me, (and yet this is
very incredible that we should not only stumble one upon an other in an
alehouse but agree so quickly of our match, and fall so roundly to our work
even at the first dash) yet that by chance thus he should meet me after at
Ashby three or four times and at other times also before he went from M.
Grayes, as is abouesaide, I not dwelling at Ashby but 20. miles of and above,
he also dwelling four or five miles of, and in subjection to an other, is
(almost) as unlikely, as that a blind man should catch an hare with a taber,
as it is in the proverb: for it is not said either by Some. or the Disc. that I
appointed him to meet me at Ashby, we dwellinge both of us elsewhere: for that
had been as absurd, considering the places of our aboades, as presently will
appear. We may therefore assure our selves that the reason why it is
mentioned so carefully and purposely, first in So. accusation, then in the
circumstances confirming the same, page 80. and 87.
that Langley abbey and Ashby were four or five miles distant, is because men
might there-vppon conjecture that I dwelling in Ashby, and he no further of,
might well in some probabillity and likelihood meet in Ashby. and that diverse
times, and in the park which stands between them both: whereas had it been
confessed that I dwelt not there but twenty miles from the place, had I say the
accusation been so framed, and the place of my dwelling also named, it had been
made thereby in all indifferent men's judgments not only very unlikely to be
true, but also incre-dible, as may appear by that which here follows.

I am able to prove by a multitude of witnesses that from the time I left the
University of Cambridge which is about eightene years past, until I went to
Ashby, I dwelt either at Ma^sse^ld in Sheerw^d, or Bulwell a village three
miles distant from Not. save that I was at London a student of the common
laws of this land, almost a year, which was about fifteen years past, now
Langley abbey with these two towns are north-wardes from Ashby and the
grounds belonging to the Abbey, M. Grayes demeanes lie very near the ^igh way
(...) both the said towns to Ashby, the ways meeting thirteen or fourteen
miles before you come at Ashby, so that from which of (...) pla^es soever of my
aboade I went, (as from the one of them I (...) not at Ashby) I must needs
pass by M. Grays house where (...) dwelling was, when I was short of Ashby 4.
or 5. miles, which considere, who can be so gross as once to ymagine that we
would appoint and that sundry times, Ashby to be the place wherein to consult
and do our tr^cks: a man would think, that had So. and I met as he a firmet^,
some part of the grounds belonging to Langley abbey (there being especially
trees and bushes, as well as in Ashby park) had been sa^er and more for our
case: for so much labor bestowed in vain might ^at least have saved.
Considering also it is said that we met in (...) town, and so in the use of
others and that often, wherein m^st need; be great danger least one day it
should make to the deserying of us and * b^ing (...) hanging: Ashby was the
most unmeet place of a thousand we might have agreed upon and made choice of.
It is most true the Disc. page 86.
says, that I dwelt not at Ashby, (but indede at (...)) wh^^ S^. dwelt^ at M.
Grayes, nea^er will any man den^, but that we might (...) there together though
I did not then ^^w^ll (...) but that the accu^ation was thus framed against me
at the first (according to which (...) my Apology is as false, as this is true,
what fault then was com (...) by me herein in my (...) yet if we will believe
the D^c. when he speaks un truly, by his ^aying it may be gathered that I did
dwell at. Ap^^y when S^n. (...) at M. Gray for (...) reckoning page 94. and 95.
how ring it was from the time that (...) went from M. Grayes: has these words:
It is not yet 7. years sin^e (...) dwelt with M. Gray: and reckoning on the
othersid in the page (...), how long I dwelt at Ashby, he uses these words
which (...) amount (...) years and a (...) page 96.
Y^ those two speeches or accounts of his be true, (which under color of truth
he publishes to the world) by the dis. his own testimony when (...) at M.
Grayes, I dwelt at Ashby, and (...) let this third untruth of mine alone. And
(...) convinced by his discovery. Howsoever (...) dwelt th^re or not there (as
it greatly mat cre^^ not) the Disc. is taken in an other untruth and contra
diction, yea in the very same leaf, as by his discou^ry is further discovered
(...) and his own.

Dis^^^.
Fourthly, page 9^
whereas M. Dar sa^si (if he mean plainly,) that So. affirms their meeting
in the park to have been whi^^e he dwelt at M. Grayes: he is therein greatly
deceived. For there said meeting there was little above a year before his
pretended dispossession at Nottingham.

Darrell.
It is said page 80. that when we were first acquaynted and agreeed of this
match, which is supposed to be diverse years before the latter meeting nere
spoken of, I acted his tricks unto him. Now this meeting I ever took to be
meant in Ashby park. But seeing we met not there then, as the truth is: and
the Disc. himself con^esseth, and yet notwithstanding met then somewhere, as
the Disc. and So. affirm, I des^re them both to bethink them and agree of the
place, where I taught and he learned at our first acquaintance, and to discover
that in the next discovery, for the better strengthening of their wreecthed and
miserable accusation: for in Ashbyparke we hear it was not, and no other place
of our meeting has hitherto been named, the Alehouse and Ashby streets
excepted, in neither of which places it is clear by the^e own words page 8.
that I acted not his tricks unto him.

Where I affirm in my apologye, that it is but 6. years since I went to.
Ashbie, the Disc. indeuoreth to persuade the world that when he published his
discovery it was about 10. years: and this is an other untruth (forsooth) of
mine. His words be these:

Discouerer.
If the information given be true, page 96. It (...) por^d (says he) your own
forg^d d^ ^se at Ash by (if there were an^ such) is utterly false, yea in the
Disc^^ own conscience. It may appear by that watch thu^ follows.
he does therein forgett himself. For it is reported that he dw^lt in one
Perrincs house in Ashby about one year Then ^u one John Hollandes about 6.
years, and lastly in William Swinsons about a year and a half: which being
laid together, do amount to above eight years and a half. whereunto (if M.
Darrell do not still continue his family there, but has dwelt since a year
or two at Nottingham) that tune also since he departed thence, may also be
added.

Darrell.
It is reported (says he) that I dwelt etc. but by whom Sir Discouerer is
this reported, or is it simply your own forged devise? That the report and
information of my dwelling eight years and a half at Ash by (if there were
any such) is utterly (...), yea in the Discouerers own con^cience, it may
appear by that which here follows.

I went to dwell at Ashby (as I can easily and sufficiently prove) upon the
feast day of Saint Mychaell tha^ changed 92. and my Apology I made since my
departure from ^shby about the same time of the year 99. How is it then
possible, that I should dwell there 8. years and a half and that herein I
said truly in my Apology and (...) himself cannot be ignorant: for page 24. he
mal^eth menti^n of a testimonial from N^tting^am (he should have added also
from Ma^s field^ and Bulwell, for the inhabitants of these three to^nes joined
to gether in one and the self same testimonyall) and of an other from Ashby,
having some 200. names of the chief of these towns subscrybed, for the
witnessing of my god be^auiour during, the space of my aboade with them, (...)
which was about 16. years, which with sundry other writings the B. of London *
iniutiously took away from me, being prisoner in the Ga^^house, And in the
Ashby testimonyall he knows are these words: We the Inhabitants of Ashby de
la Zouch etc. ^^rtify that for the space almost of six years t^gether,
during^ which time he has dwelt here in As^by, he has lived among us in very
good rep^rte, behauing himself every way as became his profession, and the
gospel of Christ. And this they offer (being above 30. in non ber) to testify
further, if it shall please authority to call them thereunto. Now if my
dwelling in Ashby (as the Disc. upon a false report insinuates) had been eight
years and a half, is it credible, that so many honest inhabitants, purposing
to give a true testimony all of my behauioure during all the time of mine
aboade with them, would have diminished more then two years and a half of my
continuance at Ashby? seeing especially they voluntarily offer to testify that
they have subscribed unto, upon their corporal oaths and that the thing I
desired (as I can prove) was not a testimony all concerning my behauioure, but
as touching the time of my aboade with them. Is not this Discouerer then (his
own conscience witnessing the same) a Discouerer, a reporter, or an informer
of a shameless untruth? for is it not a shamlesse thing that he should publish
and make show to the world, that ^ dwelt at Ashby at least 8. years and a
half, himself knowinge the same to be false? Is the information (trow we)
whereupon he affirms this, to be compared for number and credit, with the
aforesaid information to the contrary? But I desire to know of the Disc from
whom he had his information. Surely from none in Ashby, for the inhabitants
generally of that town know that I neither dwelte six years nor six days
in a house of John Hollands: yea that he had no house (then) to let and spare
me, and that I did not dwell half six years in any one house of any one
particular man's in Ashby. But it may be he had his information from William
S^mers, who has informed him in many other worthy things, and whose testimony
with him is of great credit, such as he receaueth before the oaths of above
thirty. why should he not then believe him herein (if he be the informer)
before the report of above 30. others? But let us hear Summers speak in his
own person, and proceed in his accusation.

Discouerer.
Within 12. (...)
or 13. weeks (as I think) after my first acquaintance with M. Darrell. M.
Gray placed me with one M. Anth^ny Brackenburie to keep certain silver hayred
con^eyes, with whom after I had rema^ned abont 6. or 7. weeks, (as far as I
remember) I began to put in practice sundry of these instructions that M.
Darrell had given me. I feigned my self to be sick: I foamed at the mouth: I
did sometimes lie speachlesse as though I had been dumb: and so by the space
almost of a monneth I did counterfeyt as well as I could, such fits as M.
Darrell had told me that Katheryne Wright did practice. How be it I was not
(as it seems) at that time my craftesmaister. For M. Backenburie and M.
Randoll Barton his brother, being verily persuaded that I was but a
counter^eyt, and that I had dissembled all that I had done, I was turned out of
service, and went home to Nottingham to my mother: with whom after I had
remained about a month, I was bound prentise for seven years, to one Thomas
Porter a musician in that town.

Darrell.
Before he has told us how and what I taught him presentlye upon our first
greeting, and now he tells how and where he putt in practice sundry of these
instructions, with the ill success which followed upon that his forwardnes, in
that he would be doing before he was his crafts master: which made him I
warrant you take time enough before he did his feyts the second time. That this
is false and come out of the same shop with the former, and from the same
author, the devil I mean, the father of lies, is hereby manifest, in that he
was gone from M. Crayes in Leycester shire, and servant with M. Brackenburie in
Worcestershire, before the time that he and I are said by the Discouerer
himself to have been acquainted together. For we have heard before out of page
78. that we became acquanted About the year 1592. and out of page 79. about
sieve or six years past before 98. Now I can by oath prove that from the feast
of Penticoast 1591 William Summers the M. Anthony Brackenburyes boy, remained at
the manor house of Bell hall in the county of Wigorn, until the feast of S.
Mychaell tharchangell, and from thence went to his said master his house at a
town called Holme. How long before this time he had been M. Brackenburies boy
I yet know not, but that he ran away from M. Grays home to Nottingham and there
continued a time before he went to M. Brackenbury is certain. If then So was
gonne from M. Gray 91. yea I take it in the year 90. if not before, which is
9. or 10. years past, how could he possibly be M. Grayes boy, and remaining
with him in his service at Langley abbey, come to me from thence to Ashby for
12. or 13. weeks 92. and 7. or 8. years past, except he had returned to M.
Grayes service again after he had been with M. Brackenbury, which is manifest
he did not by page 83 84. and neither So. nor the Discouerer ever affirmed
that. And where he says he foamed, I think it passes his skill, and that he
counterfeyte. and was there^^ore turned out of service, and went home, the
truth is, that being strangely handled, vexed indeed by satan, and as I
verily think then po^se^sed, and thereby a continual trouble to M.
Brackenbury^ he was from thence sent home to his mother on horsback, and that
with two or three for his more safetye, and with monney also from Mi^^esse
Brackenbury to his said mother, and this was the counterfeyting he used, and
the manner of his turning out of service. Thus much for a^^wer to the first
part of So^ners accusation, conteyninge our first a^quayntance and agreement
about counterfeyting: wherein as there be diverse other absurd things (which for
breuity sa^e and partli for that they are unworthy the answering I omyt) ^ this
is one, that me^tioning my teaching of him, and acting of certain tricks for
his better instruction, we hear not of any place where this should be
performed: for the Discouerer tells us that our meetinge in Ashbye park was
not till above 3. years after this, and other place is neither here nor
elsewhere named. This dealing is much like to his, that accusing one before the
judgment seat of robbery, na^neth not any plac where he should be robbed. page
81.
But let us proceed to our third pretended meeting, for the second meeting
which is said to be upon his first running from his master and in his way
going to Essex, conteinth only a few words betwixt us concerning
counterfeyting, without any teaching and acting on my part, and learning on
his, and therefore I will omyt it. Where first I will set down the Discouerer
his words ser^^ing to make away thereunto, and then So. his own.

Discouerer.
Upon his second running fr^^ h^^ mai^ter, and after he had remained in ^ss^x a
good part of a year, till he was w^ary he re^urning homewards a^aine t^wards
Notting ham with better h^pe then before, t^ buy out his years, th^ught it
convenient in his i^rney homewards to take Ashby in his way, of purpo^e t^ see
M. Darrell, whom he sound there as he says, (...) had d^aling with him as
follows.

Vp^n my co^rning at that time to M. Darrell, he asked me where I had been
whither I was going^, and whither I had attempted to practice a^^ of his
in^^ructi^ns. To whom I answered ac^ordine to his questions! that I had no
conu^nient time, otherwise then when I was alone to do any of those things:
th^n h^ told me many things of the b^y of Burton. whr^ vp^n I sh^wing my
self to have a desire to go and see him. M. Dar, said I sh^ud do well in so
doing, because that seeing of him in his fitts, I might the bett^r l^arn^ to
d^e them my self af^^rwar l^^b^ing thus encouraged, I w^^t t^ Burt^n, where I
sawe^^ Da^ling: but ^erceyning that a ^reate n^^b^^ spe^ple came likewise to
see him, and ^^aring that some of them might know me, I returned to Ashby, not
staying to see Darling in any of his fitts. At my coming back again to M.
Darrell he demanded of me^ whether I had seen the boy many of his fitts: and
I answered that I had no^ for the reason last mentioned: which M. Darrell not
well approving, said that I might well enough have staid to have seen some of
them, because ^ was not likely that any there could have known me: Then upon
some further occasion of speeches betwixt us, M. Darrell delivered unto me in
writing, the particular fitts, which the said Thomas Darling lately had, and
did act the most of them himself before me, we two being in the park together
alone, by Ashby. At that time also M. Darrell delivered unto me in writing,
certain signs and gestures, which were to be used, he said, to signify sundry
kinds of sins: which gestures he did likewise act himself in the place
before mentioned. Then follows the acting of certain feats on his part: and
after that he thus proceeds. These things thus finished I told M. Darrell
that I meant to return to see if I could get my self released from my
master, and he approving my purpose therein, said that when the time served I
might well put all the former things in practice there with good effect: and
that in so doing he doubted not, to procure me a releas from my master. He
also told me, that he having a sister in law in Not. on Mistress Wallys I could
no sooner name her when I should be thought to be possessed, but that presently,
and the rather by his sisters mea^es he should be sent for to come unto me. and
so we departed. And thus far So. ( quoth the Dis) for the proof of all the
former particulers, wherewith Dar. is charged

Darrell.
As in the two former (pretended) meetings, so in this third, neither Some. nor
the Disc. do tell us in what year of the Lord, or of the Queen we met,
which I desire the Reader to observe. They knew not be like what year to name,
least thereby they should disadvantage themselves. Before we heard of no place
where I should give these worthy instructions: neither then, nor now do we
hear of the certain time wherein this should be done: which dealing is like to
his that accusing one to have robbed him, can neither name plac^ where he
robbed him, nor the time when: which accusation if it ^ho^ld be received, as it
is far from any Judge, so it would peradventure trouble one were he never so
innocent, to clear himself thereof. But as before out of the Disc. and So
words, uttered elsewhere and to an other end, I have, will they nill they,
found out about what time our first pretended meeting and acquaintance
should begin, though not the just time, and thereby clea^ed my self, and
shew^d the falsehood of his accusation, even so I trust to do here. In the
page before, viz. 83. it is said that the second time Some^rs rann from his
master, was about a y^are and a hal^^ before he fell to his practices at
Nottingham: and here it is said, that upon this his second running and after
he had remained in Essex a good part of a year, we met in Ashb^ park in his
return from Essex to Nottingham. Now to his said practices he fell at. Not.
in October Anno 97 so that by So. and the Disc. saying, this our meeting in the
park was in the year ^^. and this the Disc. page 94. (though to an other
end) con^esseth, saying: There meeting in the pa^ke was little ab^ue a y^are
before his pretended dispossess^^n at Nattingham: but this his disposs^ssion
pr^tended (as he terms it) was upon the 7. of November 97. therefore this
our meetinge must be (if there were any such) by the Discouerers own
confession in or about October 96. which possibly cannot be so: for that at
this said meeting So. says that I told him many things of the boy of Burton
and advised him to go and see him, whereupon he went to Burton, and saw
Thomas Darling etc. as is aforesaid: than I delivered unto him in writing the
particular fitts which the said Darling lately had etc. now these things
cannot possibly be true, (and so the accusation is notoriously false) because
Darling was not at that time possessed, but dispossessed, and delivered from
satan and his vexation, about half a year before this time, and a year and
a half before Summers dispossession as in the beginning of his fifth book is
made manifest.

On^ ( says he) Thomas Darling dwelling at Burton, page 265.
upon Trent, beginning to be sick in February 1595. did afterward take upon
him to dissemble certain tricks: wherein continuing till the week before
Whitsontyde following, he was deemed by M Darrell to be poss^ssed, and the next
day after (as it is pretended) was disposs^ssed. From which time he continued
well, by the space of about eight days, and then being at the school he fell
again to certain tricks and perseuered in them by starts two days whilst it
was pretended that satan sought to repossesse him. But since he has left
those practices. This appears also by the first and second pages of his book.

If Darling were recovered and well, so continuing (or left his practices) at
the time the Disc. mentions, as the truth is, and Some. dispossed upon the 7.
of November 97. how can that which is here reported be true? So that the Disc.
has again in his Discovery discovered my innocence, and the falsehood of
himself and So accusation. And this is the seventh time the Discouerer is
conuynced by his own Dis^ouery.

Moreover where the Disc. and Some. affirm, that ^n his return to Nottin^ham,
after his second running from his master, and a little above a year before
his pretended disposs^ssion, we met in Ashby park and that there I taught
him: I am able and offer to prove by sundry witnesses, that So. after his
second vagary or running away from his master, was returned again to Not. to
his said master and there continued with him above two years and a quarter
before his dispossession. How can the premises then or accusation possibly be
true.

And whereas he says, that I delivered unto him in writing the particular
sitts which Darling (then) had, and again, that I d^l^uered unto him in
writing certain signs and gestures, I demand what is become of this writing,
and why mine own hand is not brought forth against me. It may be that Some. tare
it in pieces after first he had written the same in a S^ntentiae Pueriles,
(...) 82,
as he did by the writing he had at our first meeting, and has lost this
book also with the other. O that these things be admodum puerilia, and must
needs smell (and be laughed at) in the judgment of the wise, yea it was well
for some they were no worse.

The Disc. adds: And thus far Some. for the proof of all the former
particulars, wherewith M. Darrell is charged. Aworthy proof sure but suitable to
the rest. I marvel that the Disc. is not ashamed, to account So. This ar^^^h
adesperat (...)
testimony a proof, and much more to produce his testimony so often, I think (
a) 40. times at the least, and for the prouinge of so many several things as
he does: he being a notorious liar, a perjured person, in a word as infamous
and vile a youth as lives I think this day upon the face of the earth,
Notwithstanding says the Discouere. (u) the confession of Some. page 87.
is of great moment. And is it so indeed? Why So. has said there is no (r)
god, what then? yet why should not his tell^^ ^y (...) gaiult (...)
and used these words, I am god and (a) Christ, as is deposed: Blush then and
be ashamed (O thou man) of those speeches. Besides, Some. has sai and sworn
that ^e did not counterfeyt. If his words be of such credit with the Disc. and
some few others (for with few or none that are wise and godly I hope they be
not) why should not his words sealed at other times with oaths and
execrations be of like vallew? And why does the D(...). or any other rather
believe So. affirming he counterfeyted, then ^enying the same? seeing especially
he has as often denied, as a^^rmed that he counterfeyted, and that he has also
varyed so much with that double and false tongue of his, even 4. times, and
therefore is not to be believed in any thing he says, nor his testimo^y to be
admitted in any court of record. Yea but says the Disc. Sem. con^^ssion is
(...) so hare as M. Darrell pretends, but is strengthened with many ^n (...)
(d^pos^d by many) as d^e argu th^ame^m all (...) to be irue; yea in any of them
together with the b^y^s oath, are very (...) part pr^^f^s (...) page 106. And
thusmuch concerning the accus^^ n^ now we will proceed to the circumstances
con^yrnange (at is ^retended) the same.

Discouerer.
It it conf^ssed by M. page 17. The first circum (...)
Gray and Mistress Gray, and by M. D^ himself, that So. dwelt with M. Gray at
Langley, within 4. or 5. miles of ^reby de laz^ueh: and did run ^n crrands as
Mary Houlden says.

2. the 2 ci^cum^^ c page 67.
Al. Darre^ h^aring So. describe the situation of Ashby, did thereby w^
perc^aue, that he had been at Ashhy, So as there is no impediment in that
r^spect why be might not meet M. Darreel there as is deposed.

3. the 3 ci^cum^^ (...) page 87.
It is also confessed to he true, that So. going to dwell with M. Brack enbury
(...) certain books at M. Grayes.

Likewise that Some. the 4 and 5. circum (...) page 88.
was bound a prentise with Thom. Porter and that he ran twice from him is
acknowledged to be true by M. Dar. himself. and so the said So, had sufficient
opportunity to go to Ashby, and to talk with M. Dar. at such tunes, as upon
his oath he has delivered,

Darrell.
By these and such like circumstances, had Summers charged any other with
teaching him, the same person might as well (and indeed as truly) be proved
guilty thereof as I, For instance: Admit So. had accused S. Harsnet insteade of
I. Dar. and that the accusation were thus: About eight years past I dwelling
at Langley Abbey with M. Tho. Gray^ and going on errands now to Ashby a market
town there by, now to Loughorrow an other, met on a time one M. Harsnet at
Ashby, and there the said M. Harsnet persuaded me to counterfeyte to be
possessed with the devil, which he said I mig^^ easily learn, and he would
teach me: promising me that if therein I would be ruled by him he would take me
into his own service, a^^ ^aintain me while I lived. hereupon we went into
Ashby park, and ^eing there M. Harfuet the better to teach me did act diverse
tricks, for gnashinge with his teeth, he knocked his own teeth together diverse
times, for fomi^g, he rolled his tongue in his mouth, and then put out some
little spittle^ betwixt his lips, and said that I might soon learn to do
it better, by rolling a stone in my mouth, but specially if I could get a
little loape to use at such times: (etc. as follows page 81.) and because we
were to depart far one from an other for my better remembrance he gave me
dire^tions in writing, c^arginge me to make away the writing, which I did after
I had writ the same in a Sent^ntiae Pueriles, which book I lest at ^. Grayes.
Now about 12. or 13. weeks (as I think) after my first acquaintance with M.
Ha^snet: M. Gray placed me with one M. Anthony Brackenbury to keep certain
silver hayred conves: with whom after I had remained about six or seaue^
weeks, I began to put in pra^^ise sundry of those instructions that M. ^a^net
had given me, etc. as before we have heard out of page 83. Heerevpon being
turned out of service I went home to Nottingham (...) was bound prentice first
to Tho. Porter of Not. and after with a (...) in London: where being I
repaired to M. (...) chamber in the B. of Londons hou^e, and made known to
(...) my ^lsuccene: who told me that he must further instru^t ^e, and ^^^che
he might the more ^a^ely and and conveniently do it, he said he would procure
his Lord to agree with my manter for my years, and to receive me into (...)
house, aand after I should be his man, as (...) had before promi^ed me, and
then he would teach me in his (...), and accordingly he did so.

(...) S. Ha^sne: shall deny this, and say that here is nothing but ^o. bear
accu^a^ion: I will out of his mouth return against him. (...) the a^cusa^on is
not so bare as he pretends, but is strengthened with such ^ircumstances, as
the argu^ the same in all likelihood to be ^rue: yea lay le together with some
other that mi^^, be added, are pregnant proofer thereof: for first it is
manifest that So. ^^welt with M. Gray, and did ru^ on errands as Mary Holden
says. 2. Some. has been at Ashby: So as there is no ympediment in this re^pe^t
why he might not meet Sa. Harsnet there, as he charge him. 3. So. dwelt with
M. Brackenbury 4. Some. going to dwell with M. Brackenbury left certain books
at M. Grayes. S. So. being at M, Brackenburyes did counterfeyt, and was (...)
before turned out of service, as is sa^d page 81. 6. So. was bound prentise
with The Porter, and did go after to London, 7. being there he was bound
prentice with a barber in East-Smythseild. 8. He was from thence received b^
the B. of London into his house, agreeing with his master for his yea, ^s, and
it may well be this was by S. H. procurement 9. being in the B. house So. was
often in S. Harsnet his chamber, and they two alone. 10 So. was S. Harsnets
man, and had maintenance from him. The six first of these circumstances the
Disc. telseth us is true, and the four last he knows to be true: and yet the
accusation I trust he will say is false. The circumstances then of an
ac^usation (vain and tryfling ones I mean as be the^e) may be true, and the
accusati^n very fal^e. Notwithstanding then the truth o^ the Disc.
circumstances precedent and subseuent, yet the accusation of my teaching of S.
m^rs to counterf^yt, man be (and indeed is) most no^oriously fa^se. And
hereby is ^iscouered the vanitye and lightueile of the Dis^ouerers, filly and
sottish ^^u^stance^, which may as^ell serve for the appea^^ng of himself or
any other, as of me against whom they are brought. So that I shall (...) need
to spend any more time in refuting that which refut^th it self in the judgment
of the wise. page ^8. The (...)stance.


D^^couer^^.
6. Soners practiced at M. ^rackenbury^s (...) as he had as (...) Nottingham,
where^^on M. Brackenbury did discharge him from his service, as Some has
affirmed.

D^rr^ll.
This is answer ^before 2. So. fitts at Not. were not counterfeyted but done
by the devil ergo So. counterfeyted not at M. Bra^^burries, but was then
poisessed, for it is said, that his sitts at th^se t^o ^laces were a^^ke.

Discouerer.
7. (...)
So in (...) fitts at N^tt. and before M. Dar. coming thither, did name him
the said Dardurtese tim^s.

Darrell.
I deny not but that be named me, before I was the second time sent for by the
Matters letter: but the Disc. must prove that he named me before the first
sending for me, when to one of the letters for my repa^re to Sa. Mistr^sse
Wallys my sister in law subscribed her name, and that the said naming of me,
was the occasion of my sending for. otherwise this naming me strengthens not
So. accusation as is plain by page 86. ^n^entioned before in the very last
words of So. accusation And this as hitherto the Disc. has not done, so
neither shall he be able to perform: as may appear by that I heretofore have
reported concerning the true occasion of my going to Some, which I can easilye
prove.

But a^mit it were otherwise then I a^^rme, yet seeing it was not Some. but the
devil. by his tongue that na^ed me, it argues rather the ^ub^ety of the devil
at that time la^ing the foundation of that building ^e ^ince ha^^ erected, then
my teaching him to counterfeyt.

Discouerer.
8. (...) (...)


Darrell.
(...) ans, but neither of them in the name of Summers but of the poor: The
first of them was at the private fast held at Some disposse^sion. The second at
a public fast kept at Not. These collections all me I trust will allow of.
But was the monney at these times collected given to S^mers? or not a penny: or
yet was all or most of it given for his rele^fe to Cooper his father in law?
nothing less. The monney received at the first colle^ction vas part of it
given to the poor of Nottingham, and part to Thomas Porter S^. master, because
of the loss he ha^ su^^ered, and the charge he ha^ been at through Summers
aff^iction, for the space of above a month before. as M. Aldred M. William
^angfo^d with some others can witness. That which was given at the second and
public fast was distributed by the Mai^r, where of some he gave to the poor
of that town, and some to Cooper, partly because of the charge and trouble he
had been at whiles S^mers remained with him, partly for the clothing of him,
who scarcly had any to cover his nakedness. And how does this confirm his
accusation, and prove that I taught him to counterfeyt as the Dis^. page 80.
page 81.
affirms? The l^ing boy says in his accusation that I promised him if he
would ^e rul^d by me, h. should be able to maintain him self as long as ^e
hau^ and again that (...) never want whalest he lived. If this were the
principal end of his counterfeyting as is pretended, why (when he had
counterscited and d^ne his seats) did neither he den aunde, nor I give him any
thing? But let the Disc. and Some. say what they please, for there t^ngues are
their own, and they lords over them: the deed s^eweth that ^e has lived and
(...) better marytrened. sa^e be said ^e ^^nterfeyted th^n whiles he did
c^unterfe^t, as the D^^c terms his possession, page, 89. ^c. to 6. (...)
so as the devil may seem to lauel (...) with him ^it^erto al^uing him thus:
^^ou ^ad b^^ty (...) and live like a man, thou to ^aue (...) to a counterf^yt,
and go^ into the d^^gyes ^and (...) laue nothing.

Discouerer.
9. (...)
I bought ^ut the years of his a^prent (...) proved ^y my own (...) which is
they I ^aue my word in (...) 13 (...) 4. p^nce t^rl a, ^him of (...) which
(...) I did perform.

Darrell.
(...) master was a fidier, which trade of life we all know is much abused.

3. Porter being besides a weauer, had kept him still in his service, so that
he would naue ymployed him only to the trade of weauing. 4. all this was known
to diverse, and to what end it was done: whence it came that I paying the
aforesaid 13. s. 4. d. the Mayor sent me at the next collection for the poor
6. s 8. d. of it, desiring me to take that until the next collection
following, and that then I should have the other moytie. page 97. 86.
And when that came I had of M. William Longsord though not all, yet 3. s. 4.
d. the other 3. s. 4. d I went without, for that trouble about Summers grew then
upon me. And this is all the buying I used. This also is said to be the other
end of his counterfeyting: To be released (quoth So. from my master according
as M. Darell had pr^se^me, I did began the course that M. Darr. had wished me
to (...). A likely thing that he who knew so ready away, and of the (...) ^^ch
better, I mean to run away from his master, would to that (...) end
counterfeyt to be possessed with the devil, 2. It is to be (...) cred, what I
did f^r him in this behalf, when he had perform (...) condition on his pa^t^
even that ^s here aforesaid, which (...).

Disc^uerer.
10. M^i^ss^ Wallys a^cording to M. Darrells former words, did send for M.
Dar. to come unto him.

Darrell.
This is answered before: page (...)
where we must observe that this circumstance with the 4. next precedent, have
b^ne purposly inserted in the (...) there in part true;, or seining so to be to
the (...), the accusation it self might thereby seem to (...), eaue sony
confirmati^n. whereas were all (...), the whole as they are not, yet (...) (as
t^uching the life of it, I mean my teachinge (...) be must sa^e, as in deed
it is: which but for (...) here have ma le very plain. And thus much (...)
a^^caldged by the D^^c. for the (...) now follow ac other circumstances
generally (...).

Dis^ur^r.
(...) b^^des set down by the Disc. (...)
Certavne (...) as first that I with ^om (...) Tau^rne int^rteyned him with
good.

Darrell.
Being at supper with diverse preac^ers at the sign of the castle, Summers came
in, and one of the company, not my self, willed him to ^it down and to take
part with us, which accordingly he did. As before the Disc. would have the
reader imagine that I was an alehouse haunter, so here a haunter of tauernes,
but he has two certificats co^ c^^ng my life and conversation, with about 200.
hands subscribed, that te^^eth him it is otherwise, whereby his sin herein
is made the greater. page 89. the 2 general (...).


Discouerer.
2. When So. was accused to have bewitched one, M. Dar. dealt with the Mayor of
Not that he might be bayled.

Darrell.
It shall be hereafter showed, that this is false: But why might I not well
have done so, had I been then at Not. as I was absent^ seeing it is manifest
(as in his place will apeare) he was innocent of the murder for which he was
imprisoned, and so hardlye entreated through the malice of some? And how does
that conclud the compact of counterfeyting betwixt us two? or what lodgick call
you this?

Discouerer.
3. Whilst M. Darrell was at Nottingham he had secrett conference with So.
diverse times. page 90, th 3 general (...)


Darrell.
I never had speech with him in private until about 9. weeks after his
^ispossession, neither is there any thing deposed to the contrary, (no not by
So. himself) and that was to my remembrance only once, as I have deposed, the
occasion whereof I can show, and upon his father in law Robert Coopers request
I did it. But be it, diverse times. why might I not lawfully speak with him
apart? I think in some respect better then others both in regard of his former
affliction, and the danger he was in above others, and that he was one over
whose soul I was by my calling to watch. If this be a good circumstaunce
against me, (...) will likewise be of some strength against some others in
Not. whom I could name, who talked with him apart as well as I, and ofter
too, especially meeting with the other circumstances: as, that they knew him,
dwelt in the same town with him, so as they might have sufficient opportunity
to meet together, were o^t with him, with many circumstances more as strong as
these objected against me, But I will show wherein this circumstance is
defecliue, whereby the weakness of it may yet better appear. If they which have
deposed to our secret and diu^rs conferences had gone a little further, and
said that they harkning heard (...) commend him for doing such a trick well,
and such a feate excellently well so as my self could not have bettered it, or
to some such purpose: then had there bine a circumstance indeed, even a (...)
^ed, (...)
and pro^ably (...) ne notion but that the (...) take the circumstance as it
is, of my (...) him, and it is of no validity at all.

Discouerer.
4. When (...) him thus: (...) 90 the 4 (...)
all (...) them (...)

Darrell.
The ^arr was this, He said that he had counterfeyted: I denied and gainsaide
the same, Now in this letter ^athan by his instrument did go about to persuade
me to cease to contend against counterfeyting, that is, for the Lord and his
work: and thus the truth is, that I have counterfeyted, and it is to your
discredit that you have been deceived by me, but much m^re discredit will it
before you, if you meddle further in it: give over therefore your contending
against my counterfeiting. But suppose that. So. meant as the Disc. pretends,
that there had been some packing betwixt (...) concerning counterfeyting, and
that he had expressed his meaning in plain words: the same had not made me
guilty of teaching him, except Summers bare accusation did suffice thereto, and
then had the matter been long since ont of controversy, and the Disc. might
well have saved a great deal of labor. And here by the way note the wisdom
of the Disc. And euidente ^gne that the (...) plentiful in (...)
that will strengthen So. accusation, by Summers letter, that is (a) Summers by
Summers, 2. Let us here observe, how that notwithstanding the extreme folly
he shows herein and in the rest of his circumstances, yea generally in all
that he says throughout all the discovery, yet alas many by his lies and very
fables, have been drawn from believing the works of god, to give ear to his
slanders and foolery, and to iustifye the wicked, and condemn the just, which
are heinous sins before the Lord.

Well it must needs be that offenses come, (...) 18. 6 ^
but woe be to that man ( says Christ) by whom the offense comes, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea.

The falsehood and vanity of his fifth circumstance of turning my cappy as
touching the witch, page 9^. ths 5 circu^stanc^.
pretended by me to have sent her spirit into S^m. relying only upon the Disc.
bare report. I for breuity omit, referring the Reader for his satisfaction
therein to the beginning of the story concerning Summers.

OF CHAP. 2. and 3.
Discou
OF M. Darrells private directions to So. whilste he was at Not. with him, page
9^.
how he should from time t^ time be have himself in his counterf^^ting

Disco.
In this 2. Chapter So. charge me that coming to Not. upon the 5. of
November, the two next morninges being the 6 and 7. of November, I came unto
him and had certain speeches with him priuatlye, as touching the a^ling of
his sitts upon the day of his dispossession, the said 7 day of November: and
also what he should do in his remouall (and upon the very motion thereof) from
the house where he was, page 100.
to the place where the fast appointed was held for his dispossing, which last
part of his accusation is set down in these words after many other. And even
so said M. Dar. (the second morning being the 7 of November) the like order
shall be taken with thee this morning. An^ne one shall be sent to see if thou be
ready: at what time thou shall shewethy self to be much troubled in thy
fitts: upon signification whereof, six or seven shall come to bring thee upon
there shoulders, whom thou maiste greatly troubl^ in their carriag of thee, by
struggling with them, as other, that were poss^ssed did: and a^ though the
devil had compelled thee so to do, being very loath to come to so godly an
exercise. Shortly after M. Darrels departure, all things were done
accordingly. One Langsord was sent to see if I were readie^ at whose coming I
did make show of my greatest fits, in an unquiet manner, Thereupon the said
Lan^ forde returning to M. Darr. by and by seven came to carry me, whom (I
think) I did very much trouble and whereupon it was given out, that I was so
heavy in my sitts, as seven was scarce able to carry me.

Darrell.
If this accusation were indeed true, who se^th not, how easy amatter it were
by sound and infallible testimonies to manifest the truth thereof. For as
certain nights and days, before my coming to Not. this pretended
counterfeyte had diverse persons of honest report abidinge with him, partly by
reason of his grievous and lamentable affliction, and partly to preserve him
from destroying himself, which by as many ways as he could, he attempted to
have done, (which argues also that he was no counterfeit, but indeed really
possessed, for what counterfeite, did ever seek willingly by all means to
murder himself) so after my coming to Not. until his dispossession, he had
much more company with him then before, both day and night, so that he never
being by himself alone after my coming, it is not possible that I should
have such, and so long ^riuate consere^e with him as is here pretended. And if
I could not be with him, and c^nferr with him in an invisible manner, how
comes it to pass that so many eye witnesses being present, there is not one
produced to prove this conserence? or did I at my coming put all forth of
there place where he remained, and where we had conference? why then are not
^ome of the^ produced, sworn and examined to depos^ this their thrustynge
out? sythence by the rules and maxims of the ecclesiastical law, by which I
ought to have been ludged, onus probandi incumbit agentisuae accusanti, and
that acbore sieve accusatore non probante, absoluendus est reus: I appeal to
all the doctors of the Civil law, whether the testimonye of So. being as
himself confesses a counterfeyt, being socius crimmis obiecti, being a
vagarant ruuagate from his M. should in this ease be a good testimonye to prove
this private consere^e yea or no. But to let their opinion pass touching this
point: I am ready. and able by sundy credible and honest persons in whose
company altogether I remained those two morninges, to make good proof, that
I was neither of these morninges with Some at all, neither alone, that (...).
nor yet with others (a) If then Summers was neither of these two mornings
privately by himself alone: If also as well by such persons as were at that time
with him being not a few, as by such persons with whom I remained in aplace
far distant from Some. lodging, I be able to prove, my self not to have been
present, but all to gether absent, from the party with whom this pretended
private conference should be: Let the reader Judge whether these two false
witnesses Some. I mean and the Disc. the one principal the other accessory as
graund confederat^ and conspirators against the good name of an Innocent, be
not worthily of all good men to be exploded and hissed at.

Discou.
Yea but quoth the is^ M. Dar: himself conseseth somewhat which tends to the
confirmation of this his second conserence with Summers: page 10^.
For being deposed he acknowledged, that he sent William Langford that morning
t^ take order for the present bringing of So. to Smales house, and that M. Lang
sorde brought him word, that as soon as he speak of the boys ^emouinge, he
was presently cast into asore fit. And again, in his history be has these
words: The boy was brought by 6 or 7 strong men, who had all of them enough to
do, to bring him to the next convenient and seemlye room, to the place of
his aboade.

Darrell:
My confession tends nothing to the confirmation of any such pretended
conserence: For what though I sent W. Langford, that W. Lang lord did bring me
word et: and that he was brought by 6 or 7 does this prove that upon the 6 and
7 of N^uember in the morning, I had speech priuatlye with Somer^? mark the
Disc: argument.

Darrell does confess that these and these things were done by Lengs^d, et.
therefore Darrell had private conference with Summers about counterfeiting which
argument if it be good, why then not this followinge also?

W^ Langford confesses these things to be true:

therefore W. Langf^rd had private conference with Summers the 6 and 7 of
November about counterfeyting.

Now if this argument hold not against W. Langsurd why should it hold against
me^ Idenye not that it fell out as is here said with So. upon the motion to
rem^ue him, and in the removing of him, but that I upon the 7 of November 97,
(or yet at any other time) directed or advised him so to do I deny. which fact
being thus denied the Dis. confirms or proves thus. So. did thus and thus,
(as appears by D. orels own deposition, and his history) ^rgo Dar.
instructed him so to do. If this be a good argument, it is a very easy
matter to prove that I have taught So. to counterfeyte: and had So. accused the
(...) as he has done me, and be but sent M. Langford or some other to (...)
that he was removed, lest that should be to do when the people were assembled:
I could with great facility prove him guilty of teaching him to counterfeite.
And here we may see what the disc. proves or confirms by this his worthy
confirmation: and how herein (as often else where) be buisieth himself to
prove that which is or will be granted, and omiteth that which is by me
denied: 2. we must here understand, that the disc. knowing these things to be
true, has inserted them among S^. lies, thereby hoping to dazel the eyes of
men, and deceive the simple, or over hasty and unadvised reader: who seeing
these things, being agreat part of his accusation to be true, may thereupon
imagine that the rest is likewise true. And this is the maine fallcie and
deceit he uses in setting down S^. accusation.

For the preseruinge of some from being thus be guiled by this deceauour we
must know, that when one is accused of a matter capital or criminal, to
prove the accuse I guilty, it is not sufficient that certain circumst^nces or
perticulers conta^ned in the accysation be true for it is an ea^e matter for
him that cares not with the disc^. how foolish an^ ridiculous, besides, false,
the accusation be, to frame such an accu^ation (a limit of high treason) is
shall be true in 19. cir^u^stances or se^erall points of the accu^a^ion, an^
very false in the 20. being the treasonable a^tor intent it self, as may
ea^^ly be conie^iured by the instance given before concerning S. Ha^net. Even
so it is in S^. whole accusation, and this p^^te thereof, wherein notwithstan^ing
^undrie circumstances (not material) are true, ^et that whereof I am accused,
(...) of him to count^^teit^. is (...) false and nothing proved nor yet
produced that probabile mi^ht consi^me the same. And thus have I answered the
accusation of Some. or principal points thereof, concerning my teaching him to
counterfeite and trust the falsehood of it is made euidente to all men. Let us
^ow proceed to the circumstances, that is, certain speeches of mine, whereby
also the disc. will prove that I have scholed Summers. where by the way we must
observe, that the accusation being false, (whereof I think hardly any
christian that has read the premises does once doubt) no circumstances can
ever make it true. In this respect it is a thing needles to use any more
words about them. Yet that my innocence may be the more manifest, and lest in
not answering them, some should imagine that I were not able to answer, I will
say something to them, but with what brevity I can, Leaving So. who has so
accustomed his tongue to lying, that he scarslye utters a true word in all
that follows, to the disc. to believe his lies: who calls falsehood truth,
and truth falshod.

The first circumstance proving (as is pretended) my instructing him, is set
down in these words.

Discouerer.
M. Dar. the 1. circumstance. page 107.
having never scene Some. (as he pretends) did affirm, that he was certainlye
possessed by a wicked spirit, upon the rude report of a simple man, ^art 9.
p^g. 16
one Hugh Wilson, and upon a letter received by wilson from his sister in law
mistress Wallis. This M. Dar. confesses in these words. Being certified in
mysisters letter and by the messengers further speeches, of the manner of So.
fits: I did send them word, that those things being true he was possessed,
and this I did before I saw Summers.

Darrell.
We must know that other proof the Disc. has not of this his circumstance,
then this my confession: and it is apparent that my confession proves it not:
for in the circumstance it is, that I said So. was certainly possessed, and I
write uncertainly and undoubtedly thereof, as appears by my words. And
considering that in the letter (which is set down before) there are diverse
signs of possession mentioned, and that Hugh Wilson told me further of So.
foaming, of his extraordinary strength, castinge into the fire, with other
signs of satan his possessinge man, mentioned in the gospel, as I can prove:
and that where the proper sign or signs of a thing is, there is the thing
signified thereby: why might I not well write as I acknowledge here I did? and
what did I therein ill beseeming me? And how absurdly does this conclude my
instructinge of So. to counterfeite? Let the reader frame here the argument,
and he will easily grope and find out the absurdity.

Discouerer
Darrell said, (...) page 108.
that he purposed to have a fast for Some. dispossession, and that he doubted
not of good success, by that means to procure the boys deliverance.
Heerevpon the disc. collecteth as follows. This M. Dar. confident bragging
that he doubted not of good success, as it argues his ignorance: so the same
being joined to his rash credulity, does make it probable that either he had
laid his plotte with the boy before, or else that he kn^we very wll, h^w by
his cunninge to draw one the boy for the seruinge of his turn as he himself
list.

Darrell.
What and how great my confidence in this case is, and whereupon the same is
grounded, appears else where, where I treat of the means of dispossession.
But mark how the Disc. argues thereupon: Darrell doubted not of good success,
ergo it is probable that he had plotted before with the body about
counterfeiting, or else knew very well et. By this reason had M. Ireton or M.
Brown, who were writ unto, and there counsel and pains desiered about So. as
well as mine, hoped of good success a fast being used for his dispossession,
and so affirmed: they had either plotted with him about counterfeiting, or else
et. Again if this be a good circumstance, and that out of it one may probably
conclude as you hear, then can I tell and prove to the Disc. who taught the 7.
in Lancashire, for I am sure he will have them counterfeites too. Surely M.
More, For when he went and came into Lancashire, he was very coufident of good
success, a fast being used for there dispossession, and his ignorance and rash
credulity concerning there deliverance equal to mine as touching So. this
also he did affirm to others, as I know he will confess: therefore he either
had laid his plotte with them before, or else he knew very well how by his
cunning to draw them on for the serving of his turn, as he himself list. The
absurdity of the Disc. first collection concerning my plotting with Summers to
counterfeite, because upon just occasion I writ that he was possessed. with
such a caution as you have heard, every child may espie^ and surely his second
collection is no less absurd. for how could I know and that very well that he
would be drawn on by me to counterfeite, before I had speech with him or yet
did see him? It might be for any thing I knew to the contrary, having then
never seen him, that if the boy was not possessed, yet he was otherwise
greuiouslye aflicted whereupon the letters and messenger came unto me) and so
would have small list to serve my turn again, were it not so, yet percase he
was not apt to do such rare feits as in that case are requisite. Moreover,
admittinge both these to fall out patte as he would have it, yet how could I
know before I set eye of So. that he would be willing to counterfeite a
possession with the diuil, and that he was altogether graceles, for otherwise
he neither would nor durst commit such an abomination.

Discouerer.
The chiefest means whereby M. Dar. did seduce the people, and cunninglye in
fruct So. p^g 102.
without suspicion in any that believed him, were these two false gr^undes,
(whereof in the first book) vz. that those who are poss^ssed, have in there
sitts no use of there senses or saculties of there minds, and that whatsoever
they either d^e or say at such times, it is not they but Satan that does both
say and do it.

Darrell
Howsoever the Disc. does not only here but (I know not how often) else where as
page 30. 69. 111. 289. 306. prattle and flourish with empty words as though
these were the two principal and false grounds whereby I am said to have
bewitched all the beholders: we must first know that he proves not the
former of these (whereto I will first answer) no not so much as by a false
witness. For his 4 witnesses here following, and two page 111. do only depose
that I said So. was sen^lesse in his sits, and those two page 306. that I
said the same by Kat. (...) which joined together prove not that I said th^se
who are p^ss^ss^d are sen^^less^, p. 41. 30.
or as he says else where and means here ( a (...) is p^ss^ssed, is in his
fitts altogether sen^lesse 2. I have upon myoath denied, page ^06.
that I said this of So. vz. at the times articulated against me^at another
time I deny, p^g 289.
that affirmed Kath. Wright was sencles, and a third time being here about
deposed, I answered thus: ( a) I b^leiue that The. This is the eight (...).
Darlinge had not his senses or memory in his fits: but I (c) thinks that
Satan might so order the matt^r, as that he eith^r had or might (...) had his
senses in his said sitts. And surely I must needs think so, except I were so
gross as to imagine, that satan being entered into man, is bound (as I may
say) hand and foot to deprive every such person of there senses, and cannot
otherwise do: and secondly should mundi forget my self, who have in
experience seen the contrary in (...) Ashton, and also in W. S^mers, as I have
showed before, where I treat of the signs of possession. I or this reason
confirmed by some experience, I am as far as any other from saying that the
Disc. page 50.
so often inclucateth and fathereth upon me, vz. that wh^soeuer is p^ss^ssed is
altogeth^r s^n^les in all there sits, yet notwithstanding I hold that the
possessed ordinarily are seneles in their fitts, not onl^ because my self an^
others have observed this in experience, but specially because the same may be
probabile colle red out of the scriptures. For did not the devil deprive them
(at least) of some of their sense, ma^h 12 12. (...) 5. (...) 5. 5.
(...) blind and ^^ase? whereupon the spirit was called by Christ Jesus ( d)
lease spirit? and may we not well think that the^ were without feeline, who
sto^ke themselves with stones? and (...) of there minds, both of their
understanding and memory (for it is plain by the context that they were ( k)
out of their right mind) have we not then good cause to judge that they were
depryued of all their senses internal and external? And that thus it went not
always with them, mark 5. 15. Luk 8. 35.
but in their ^ytts, that is in the time of their vexation by Satan, may be
gathered out of the 8. Mark, where it is said of one of them, insteade of both
that b^ing often bound with setters and chains he brake them: and then it was,
that no man could tame him, and made his aboade (naked) in the mountains and
graves, and stroke himself with stones, so as there were other times viz. when
they were out of their fitts, when he lived and conuersed among men, clothed
and in his right mind. And that not only these, but generally the possessed in
Christ's time were ordinarily for the time of their fitts without their senses,
we may probablye think, because it is evident that they had not their
understanding: otherwise they would never have cried out mark 1. 24,
what have we to do with thee, O Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy
us? and that not only these but many possessed with devils used these kind of
speeches, appears by Mark 1. 34. Thus we see that one of these which the
Disc. calls my false grounds wherewith he charge me to have seduced the
people, and (a) iugling sticks whereupon my Legerdemayne (as he calls it)
did consist. is warranted by the holy scriptures. Beesides, this has been
observed and reported of some, who it should seem were possessed. page 30.
In an history printed 86. concerning the afflictions of Margaret Herison of
Burnham Vlpe in Norfolk, and the speech the spirit had with M Robinson
minister at the same place, it is said that she was of all senses both
internal and external, to the judgment of those that were present, utterly
depryued, and in an other place, she coming to her understanding cried etc.
And in the book printed of the bewitchinge of M. Robert Throckmortons 5.
daughters, who as I take it were possessed, it is reported that they were
depryued of all use of their senses duringe their fitts, and that they could
neither see, hear, nor seele any body: and to this effect there are scattered
very many speeches throughout the said book: yea it is plain there that two
of these gentleweomen, Mistress Ioane and Mistres Jane had not their senses in
their fitts before the Judge and Justices.

And where the Disc. by way of prevention has these words: The lunatic in
the scriptures was in his sitts dombe, page 30.
but it cannot be sh^re. that he wanted the rest of his senses:

He sees now more may be showed by other persons then possessed: and truly it
is an easy matter to show, that the lunatic ^anted one of the external
senses he speaks not of, mark 9. 25.
viz. hearing: for Christ in healing the lunatic said: Thou dombe and deaf
spirit I charge thee (...).

(...)
(...) in their (...), it is not they, but Satan (...) it.

Darrell
That the devil v^eth the tongue of th^se he possesses, and speaks (...) it
is an (...) by these scriptures among others (u) what is thy (...) I (...)
many. (...)
(a), And the (...) me: If the (...) out, suffer (...) into the heard of
swyne. (p) (...) thy (...) and come out of him. (h) (...) many devils, and
(...) not the devil to say that they knew him. (^) And devils came out of
(...) crying, and saying, thou art that Christ that son of God. Heerevpon
(...) affirms, Diab^^um e^us lingua vti, m^uues (...) at the devil uses his
tongue, into whose body he is entered. yea in the manifold speeches of the
possessed mentioned in the gospel, we read^ not of any one which was not
uttered by the devil. It is clear the that (...) if not alwa^es in the fitts
of the possessed, Satan (...). and not they. And as the unclean spiritts use
the tongues of (...) whom they are, and speak what they will by them, so do
(...) use the other parts or members of their bodies to perform other actions:
as their ^eete to go with their hands, to smite with, etc. so the devils ^ent
with the ^eete of the man possessed with the (...), carrve^ them into the
mountains and granes, went with the sa^e seete (^) (...), and with the means
hands offered (...) no doubt to diverse, (...)
so that N^ man might go by that way: (I (...) in pieces, wherewith the^ were
(...) with their own (...) And (...) Pesides, the parties possessed we treat
^f (...) time their sitts being ended, (...) or did, (...) you (...) nights and
(...) ever, (...) as freel, as at other times, an ^ yet (...) of that they had
said or d^ne all that time, nor of anythinge (...) been (...) or done to them.
And of M. (...) it is written thus: (...)
when it pleas^dge^d (...) (...) as this is reported of the 5 daughters
generally and (...) the same is said of 7. (...) in these words: (...) and a
^ions. (...) in their (...) and did come from the devil, (...) they (...) the
same time otherwise vexed, and not from (...) or (...) just came to believe them
thus affirming, when we see it (...), that some things are uttered by them,
which pa^^eth their (...) ledge, and reach, and done which are impossible to
be done by then. And seeing it is evident that whatsoever these persons
possessed said and did in their sittes, the same was spoken and done not by
(...) but by the d^uell, and that so much is manifest by the scriptures in part,
though not in the wh^le; why may not I (...) own part (...) or be of opyni^n,
that whats^^uer the (...) (^^ina (...)) (...) the time of their s^tts, it is
not they, but Satan that (...) say and (...), as the Disc. charge me (but
falsely) peren^^t^tily to (...) And yet the Disc. proves not thus much as n^we
voluntarily (...) but only that I have said to this effect in particular,
(...) So. and (...). And thus much as (...) my sec^nde (...) sed false (...),
and iugding stick whereupon (...).

Now let us consider what the Disc. (...)
gather^th or concludes of (...) two supposed (...) grounds of mine. First,
that (...) the people, and draw them to think and say, that the, (...)
trouerte swear possessed. Alas poor sill^ ^^ules, which were so (...) by these
few words of mine se^uced and blinded. Why (...) all were not hereby seduced,
and drawn to think and give (...) these were possessed, for sundry weeks
before I (...) (a (...) I did speak then,) (...), many thought and (...) (as I
can pro (...) whereupon there as a rumor thereof in th^se (...)?

(...) how can this be, seeing all the counterfeytes, had their lessons at
their fyngers ends, some about a month, some a quarter of a year, some two
year; before? and against this the Disc. says not any thing save about So.
Besides if this be a good reason to prove my instructing of So. why does he not
use the same to prove thereby my teachinge of the 7. in Lancashire? which
howsoever he would have the world to think is true, yet for shame he dare not
publish it to the world. Lastly, this being a good argument of one his teaching
to counterfeyte, the Dis^. shall do well to inquire after him who said as much
heretofore of M. Throckmortons children (and of others) as I concerning So.
Darling and Kath Wright yea the very same with me, that being found out he
might be punished for such instruction as well as I. For albeit it be some
years since such instructing, and counterfeyting was, I mean of M.
Throckmortons children yet it is little more then half so ^ong as it is since
Kath. Wrights counterfeyting and my teachinge of her, and therefore may mvch
better be inquired into, then this other fact done sundry years before. And
thus the Disc. having made a way to that which follows, and laid this as his
foundation, whereupon his whole Discovery rests, as whosoever has read and
observed that worthy work cannot but see, he proceeds to build thereupon,
proportionably to the rotten and worse then sandy yea ridiculous foundation, to
the overthrowing and casting down whereof I also will proceed, and so come to
the rest of the Discouerers circumstances, whereby he proceeds to prove my
teaching of Summers to counterfeyt.

Discouerer.
Upon the aforesaid hare relation of Hugh Wilson and before he had the^ scene
So. The 3. circumstance page 108.
Dar. sent word by him to Not. that Summers was in his fits sense less. It is
untrue.

M. Darrell at his coming to So. The 4 circ^m (...) p^g ^. 9.
to Not. said he was possessed before he had seen him in any sit, especially
such a fytt as might not easilye be counterfeyted. false.

M. Dar. upon his first coming unto Some. The s^en (...) page 11^.
affirmed, that it was not So. that spoke in his sitts, but the devil by him.
I grant, what follows?

M. Dar. the first night of his coming unto the b^y affirmed in the presence
of the said b^y, The (...) umstance p^g 111. ^^7. cu^cumsta^^e. page 113. the 8
circumst^^nce. Page 113.
that he was in his fitts senseless. false.

M. Dar. specifyed the same night in the presence of So. and diverse others, the
manner of such fitts as the possessed had in the scriptures, and of those wh^^h
were seen^ (as he said) in Kath^^ Wright, the boy of Burton, and the seven in
Lancashire. what of this?

M. Dar. then said to the persons present in the heareing of Some. that be the
said So. would do the like. false.

M. Dar. told them in So. hearing, that he the said So. was not so much
noubled for his own sins, The 9. ^circu^^stance page 114.
as for the sins of the people, or of the inhabitants of Not. false.

M. Dar. affirmed in the presence of the boy, that satan did use to show by
gestures in those that were possessed, The 10 circum^stance page 115.
the particular sins that reigned in those places where they dwelt. false.

M. Dar. affirmed in the hearing of So. and presence of many, that he verily
thought the devil would do the like in So. The 11. circ^^stance.
and declare by signs and gestures the sins of Not. and of others. false.

So. acting those gestures, M. Dar. did expound them very learnedlye, The 12.
circu^^stance page 116. the 13 circumstance. page 120. the 14 circumstance. Page
122.
to signify this or that sin that reigned in Not. false.

The next day (being Sunday) M. Dar. coming to So. used the like speeches then
in the presence of others that he had done ouernight: viz. that So. was in his
fitts senseless etc. false.

M. Dar. did take upon him to foretell many things that would happen the day
appointed for the fast: as that they should see very strange thing, that Satan
would wonderfully torment-the boy, and that he doubted not but that they should
perceive by the signs of possession and dispossession, that the boy was
possessed, and that then he should be delivered from Satan. false.

M. Dar. the 15. circu^^stance. page 124.
the day of the fast affirmed in his sermon, that they should evidently
perceive by the signs of possession, that So. was possessed, and by the signs
of disposs^ssion that So. should be dispossessed, if god would: and coming to
entreat of the particular signs of possession, and so of dispossession, he
used such pawses, as that the boy had leisure to act them in order as he named
them. The latter part of this circumstance is false: It is proved by So.
deposition only.

In the declaring of these speeches deposed by many, conteyninge in them so
many circumstances, consists my instructing of So. by speaking to others in
his hearing, page 126.
those things which I men's that he should practice: wherein I dealt so
cunningly as that albeit I had never seen him at Ashby, nor dealt with him
privately at Not. yet this said course which I held with him there, and with
those that cam^ to see him in his s^tts, was so contryued as might casily in
form So. what he had to do, and did indeed blind and misleade many of the
people.

Darrell.
I answer generally to these and all the former circumstances first that all
these circumstances with the rest of the depositions in the Discovery. my p^st
peneralan^ (...) the circumstances.
were taken by Commissioners chosen and appointed by them which are against me,
I not being suffered to join with them therein: neither have I had nor
possibly could get any copy of them, or Commission granted for me, to
re-examyne these witnesses. Now these proceedings are contrary to the Queens
laws, and the ordinary practice of the high Commission court^ and for that
cause (had I nothing else to say) these circums^ances (with the other
depositions in the Dis^^uery) are of no force, neither proving anything, nor
yet proved against me.

2. These Commissioners were and are my mortal enemies, (...) answer
and therefore very partial, one of themselves also M. William Gregory by
name, being their clarke or notary. And as it cannot (almost) other wise be, so
I am able to prove, that they have carr^e themselves very corruptly in the
execution of their several Commissions: And therefore in all equity and
indifferency, the things here and through out the Discovery deposed are to be
more then suspected, even to be rejected.

3. I affirm that many of these circumstances are false, ^y (...) answer.
and offer to bring at least an hundred witnesses (if so many were needful)
to de pose otherwise for the falsifying of them.

4. Admit that I had joined in these Commissions, my 4. answer.
and that all were true which is deposed: I affirm that these circumstances
are to weak and insufficient to prove that I taught him to counterfeyt
supposing he were a counterfeyt: for if we will prove a thing in controversy or
matter criminal by circumstances, as they must be diverse, so they must be
strong, every one probably concluding that whereunto they serve, bearing the
name and nature of a presumption, as we very well call it: the etimology of
which word teaches, that the presumption being true, it is thence to be
presumed, and in all likelihood thought, that that is true whereof it is a
presumption And thus diverse presumptions meeting together, being so many
probable arguments, (specially having respect to the other presumptions) they
make among them a sound and substantia^l proof, and necessarily conclude that
whereof they are presumptions. As for example, and for the better understanding
thereof: Let us vmagine that in Grayes Inn feildes I S a gentle man of Grayes
Inn is slain, no body being eve witness thereof, so that I. S being dead,
and none present at the murder, the murderer is to be found out by
circumstances, or not at all If against I. N. being apprehended upon suspicion,
it should be objected, that he was of Grayes Inn as well as I S. that he knew
him well, and was a^quainted with him, and the place also where I. S. was
slain that he was seen walking with him the day before in the city, that he
was ^nown to be of great valor, and therefore able to perform (...), and
that he was his own, and to go where he would at his (...) and so had
suffi^ient opportunity to goo and sight with him and slay him: these
circumstances (I say) and an hundred more such, are not available to prove I.
N. guilty of the said murder: for notwithstanding these circumstances were
most true, and many more of this kind, I. N. might be as innocent and free
from the murder as the babe in the won be: yea by such like circumstances a
thousand several persons might be as well condemned as I. N. And if in this
case upon the aforesaid or no stronger circumstances, a Justice of peace
should commit I. N. to prison, the Jury find him guilty of murdering I. S the
Judge pronounce sentence of him, and he thereupon be (a) executed, would not
all men that should hear thereof wonder at it^ and say with one consent: This
(...) my case, (...)
Surely the gentleman was innocent for any thing that appeared to the
contrary. But if against I. N. it should be given in evidence, that the same
morning I. S. was slain, they two falling out, challenged one the other,
naming time and place, where and when, after I S. was killed, that shortly
after the murder committed, ^e was seen coming from the said place
sprinkled with blood, that ^is sw^rde was bloody, and his dagger found where
this murder was done: by these and such like circumstances or presumptions, it
was as manifest he slew him as if there ^ad been some present at the mutther.
And mark I pray, how every of these circumstances and such l^ke which we very
aptly call presumptions, do probably conclude I N. to have done this murder,
yea the least and weakest of them the other presumptions considered therewith:
which the former circumstances do not at all. Even so it is in the matter of
teaching to counterf^yt, whereof I being accused, the ^is^. would prove me
guilty by circumstances^ but they being all of the same k^nde with the first of
the aforesaid circums^ances alleged against I. N. that is frivolous, vain,
and ridiculous, not one of them deserving the name of a presumption, d^e not
prove me guilty of such instruction, no more then the first above na^ med
circumstances prove I. N. guilty of murdering I. S.

That these are such frivolous circumstances will appear to him that standing
in doubt thereof shall mark how hand^^ml^ the^ conclude my instructings of So.
to counterf^yt, whereunto they serve (...) ^^rcumstances, and otherwise do
their master the Discouerer no service at ^ll. As thus for example^ Darrell
before (...), of the signs of ^oss^ssion were s^^ne in (...) was (...) babble
therf^re that Dar. taught him to counterfeyt a p^ss^ss^on. A air^, ^ar.
aff^^m^d that it was not So, that spoke in his fitts, but the (...) him, it is
therefore pr^bable that Dar. instructed So. (...) Dar. aff^^med in the ^re^^nc^
of So that he was in his ^itts senc^l^ss^, (...) to be pr^^um^d therefore that
he saught ^im to ^^unterfeyt. Dar said ( (...) the Disc. and his false
witnesses tell us) that So. was not so much trou^^led ^^r his ow^^ sins, as
for the sins of the people: ergo he taught him to c^u^terfey: If thus we
should go through the Disc. circumstances and weigh them in the balance of
reason, we shall find them as light or lighter then vanity it self Truly I
think since the world was m^de, there were never more vain, idle, and
sottish circumstaunces objected against any m^n living.

My 5. and last answer is, (...)
that if there were a possibillity of counterfeyting, as there is not, and
these circumstances were a little stronger in appearance then they are: yet in
this case of teaching So. I can not be proved guilty by circumstaunces. for how
can it possibly be made true by any circumstances that I have taught So. to
counterfeyt, so long as he cannot tell where nor in what place I taught him,
nor when? can any action be done, but there is a p^ace and time wherein and
when the same is done? Even so it is in this my schooling of Summers. Have I
taught So, to counterfeyt? I desire to know where and when. In A^bby park (for
other place as yet there is not any named) I have showed it cannot be, and it
is as clear as they day light at noone, where then^ It would be known: So.
hereof can not be ignorant if there were any such thing performed. Let him
then tell the place where, the weeks, months, or years wherein the same was
doing with other circumstances thereunto apperteyning. If this So. cannot do
(as hitherto he has not truly and men may well think he cannot, for if he
could he had done it before this) we may be most assured it is because there was
never any such instructing of him. It is not in this our case as it is in
murder and such like offenses, Some. is not dead, but alive, he is not absent
and to seek, but at hand, neither can he but know that which I desire he
should make known, if any such thing be. And until this be done by So, the
aforeseid circumstances and a thousand such more are not sufficient, or any
whit at all available to prove me guilty of teachinge him to counterfeyt. yea
to what purpos^ are my circumstances in this case of ours, except this I speak
of be first performed^ truly to none at all: except it be to dazell men's eyes,
and so to keep them from seeing that which otherwise they could not but see
most clearly. If Some. had once done this I speak of, and so as I were not able
to convince him, then indeed there would be some use of circumstances to
strengthen his accusation. They had need also to be very strong ones,
considering the unworthiness of the accuser, and the rare and wondetfull feyts I
should teach him. But that being not done, I marvel how any man of reason and
judgment, should hold me guilty upon those aforesaid poor and empty
circumstances.

For where the Dis^, says that I did so cunningly instruct Some. by speaking to
others in his hearing those things that I meant be should practice, page 106.
This is the argument of the 3^ chapter.
as that albert I had never seen him at Asbby, nor dealt with him priua^ly at
Not. yet the course that I had held with him there was so contryued a^ it
might easily inform So. what he had to doc^ it is most absurd. For who can be
so void of reason as to think, that I could no sooner speak of the signs of
possession mentioned in the gospel, as foming, casting into the fire,
extraordinary strength ect. and of othere very admirable feyts, as of a great
swelling in the body, and of a little swelling to run along the body between
the flesh and the skyn, of making the arms and legs heavy as iron, of
retorting the tongue into the throat, so as no part of it could be seen in the
mouth, of enduring the pricking with pynnes, and keeping in the blood so as
none not a drop should issue at the places pricked, with many more such like
but that So. presently could and did thereupon do the same? was there ever so
nimble a boy and so apt a scholar heard of before since the world began? It
is no marvel then though the Disc. term him an apt scholar, So. says he
being an apt scholar for M. Darrell to practice upon, page 11^
hearing by M. Dar. speeches what was to be done at his hands did etc.
wherewith all that were present were much amazed.

But admit this were possible, as me thinks none should say so besides the
Disc. yet out of question it is impossible, that the speeches I used to others
at Not. in So hearing upon the fifth of November and after, before which time
my voice was not heard in the presence of So.: should instruct So, in those
things he practiced for the space of 4. how can the Dis^ avoyde this without
blushinge.
weeks at the least before that time. which being so, and withal mani^est and
notoriously known, confirmed also by the depositions of the 17. That So. or
the devil did the very same things before the 5. of November and my coming to
him at Not. which he did after, whereupon I was sent for and requested to
come: it cannot be that So. was instructed of me by speaking to others in his
hearing, those things that I meant be should practice. Beesides, it is against
common sense that I should instruct him after this manner, if that were true
that the Disc. and So. affirm to be true, I mean that I had been scholing of
him before at Ashby, and pryuatly also instructed him at Not. For he having
been (as they sav) four or fyuo years learning his tricks and having had them
also in writing from me, he could not (sure) be to learn them when he should
act them. Again it had been extreme folly or rather madness in us both, that
having so long time and opportunity to teach and learn in, could find out
none, but deferr it vn^^ll the very instant they were to be practiced.

Thus the Discon. himself may see, that his circumstances albeit they be many,
are too weak and insufficient to prove my teachinge of his counterfeyt, and
t^erefore S^. accusati^n must do the deed, or else it will not be^ which (as
appears by the premises) is palpable false, The 2. ^hap. co^ (...) part of
the former (...) and (...).
having n^it^er face nor possibilli^y of truth in it. The best way then for the
Di^couerer, I mean the B^sh. of London and Samuel Harsnet is, to confess the
truth and publish it, and so give glory to god: seeing the salshood of this
Disc^u^ry is now made manifest in the eyes of the Sun.

OF CHAP. 4.
Discouerer.
Of M. Dar. cunning ins^ructing Summers, by speaking to others in his hearing^
of Satan's secking to reposs^sse him: page 127.
and of the acting of certain trick^ under a couerlet.

In the former part of this chapter the Disc. tells us of a second or new
^^senage, viz. So. counterfeytinge of a repossession: and after what manner I
instructed him we hear in the title of the chapter. page 128.
This cosenage the Disc. pretends to prove by two speeches of mine the one is
that I should affirm to my Auditory in the hearing of Some. that for a
certainty Satan would seek to repossesse the said So. and prevail against
him except he were mightily withstood by faith The other that I affirmed the
night he was disp^ssessed in the hearing of So. and diverse others, that satan
returned the same night he was dispossessed out of certain in Lancashire, and
that so returning he appeared unto them in certain somlitudes.

Darrell.
When the Disc. has proved me guilty of the first cosenage, I my self will
yeald the second: and until he have performed that which yet he has not, none
that is wise, will regard what he says, concerning this new cosonage, as he
terms So repossession. 2. All or most of that I have given before in answer
to the afor^said circumstaunces, serves also for answer unto this. 3. Seeing
between So. dispossession and repossession (which was about thirteen weeks)
he and I had se^ret con^eren^^ together diverse times, as the Disc. tells us,
and that for the instructing of him to disseemble a repossession, pag^ 90.
it had been sufficient, to have in a word or two at one of these our secret
con^^ren^es. to have b^d him fall again to his former tricks, and say with all
that the devil did seek to enter into ^im: so that this i^ structinge of ^im
by (...) in his ^earinge ne^e not. 4.
And one would think, that were there any such new ^^^nage, I would rather
have given him his dire (...) the same apart, then before diverse others. 4. So.
was then reposses^e as now at this (...) is.

The (...) at move me to think that (...) sessed are these. (...)
1. because about 12. or 13. ^^eches after (...) session, I (among diverse
others) saw in him the signs of possession, even all the same I did before,
and beheld him handled after the very same manner he was the time of his first
trouble: 2 mark. 9. 25. ma^h. 12. 43.
and therefore if the possessed, he is so now, and if ever he was possessed,
then and for the same cause he is again possessed. 2. The scripture tells
us, that the rn^^ane spirit being gone out of a man, does not only return and
secke to enter into his said house again, but indeed enter and possess the
said party, if returning be find him empty, swept, and garmshed, that is ready
and prepared to interteyne his oulde gueast the devil, which is when the party
is unclean and lives in sin, for an unclean person is a fit receptacle
for the foul spirit: but So. out of whom the devil was cast, ^
is and has been such, as is manifest by his abominable lying in denying the
work of God wrought upon him, his false accusinge of the innocent, joined with
great obstinacye and ympudencie, his perjury, and other grievous and open
svnnes of his: It must needs therefore be that So. is repossessed. 3. There is
something in reason to confirm us herein: page 205.
in that from time to time So has been doing in secrett, and offered sometimes
openly to do his tricks, as some call them. After he had said the second time
that he had counterseyted, and was as free from being vexed by satan, and as
far from all appearance of possession as now he is, he, (as is notoriously
known, and the Disc. himself confesses,) showed his tricks before my (...)
^^nderson, and diverse others, in some extraordinary sort. At one of my
examinations before the B. of London M. Barker register to the high commission,
and another gentleman being present, So. upon occa^ion of some words uttered
by me, would ^aue been doing his tricks, and had undoubtedly but that the
Bishop ^ebuked him for it, and pre^ently for fear thereof sent him away. It
should seem that the ^^sh^p ad seen him do his tricks before that time, yea
percase often, other^ if he would have been as glad for the further satiffyinge
of himsel^e to have seen his fevts, as some there present. At ^ombeth upon
^^itson-eue, in open court So. offered to do his tricks, and had not the B. of
London said, it was to no purpose, because M. More and I (...) sav, it was not
he, but the devil that did them he had (...) tion fallen to his work Neither
can we in (...) that (...) were bare offers or words, he not being a^le to
(...) thing, considering (to ^myt other times^ ^e or (...) some o^ his tricks
before my (...) is ready to (...) them, when (...) the eye-witnessses the c^f
con^e^^e, (...) and the chief of them, that if the boy did not say he
counterfeyted, and cease to do the tricks when he is bidden, he should verily
think that he did them by the devil: may not this well after the premsises
confirm us in his possession? whether So. was packt beyond the seas by some
that knew he was possessed, and feared least that would one day appear, or
went of his own accord about some great busynes of his own, let other men
judge: as also why it will not be granted that the means may be used which
the (u) word of god directs us unto for the discovery of Satan, whom we
are boulde to affirm lurketh in him.

And where some men can hardly with any patience endure to heareof this
repossession, Luke 11. 22.
because no such thing appears: they must know that Satan does and has long
labored to obscure the work of god wrought upon So. and to anninilate it, if
it were possible, that so god might go without the glory and praise which
would be given him in the acknowledgment thereof, and man lose the profit he
would make of such a rare work of god. To this end and for the better bringing
of this to paise, the devil (having recovered So. and entered into his house,
the body of So. again) endeavored by himself and his instruments threatening
and promising, to draw him to deny the work of God, and affirm that he
counterfeted, and therewithal couenanted with So to help him to do any thing
that he would take in hand, meaning those things that he had in the time of
his possession done. The case being thus, and this being the work that the
devil has in had, it is not to be ymagined that Satan being in So. should
torment him, and so make it appear that he is there: for thus he should be
against himself, and ouerturne all he had done and has in hand. If the
devil having drawn So. (after that he was again entered into him) to say he
counterfeyted should vex him, and sent forth the same e^^ects he did before
he thus affirmed, causing a very great swelling in his belly, an other and
much less to run along his body between the flesh and the skyn, depryuing him
of all sense, so as being pricked deep with pynnes, he would not styrr, nor
blood issue, retorting his tongue into his throat, causing him to foame
excessiuly, to be (in appearance) of supernaturail strength, and knowledge,
casting him into the fire without being burnt etc. and that daily: what would
it advantage the devil for So. to say and swear he counterfeyted, when the
deed every hour done by himself showed the contrary? and where had been my
teaching to counterfeyt? and the imprisoning the innocent? how would also the
children of men have been generally kept from beeleeuing the work of god and
magnifyinge him for it, and not only so, but insteade there of brought to
receive a false and vile report against his servant, and that which is far wone
against the work it selte. Howsoever then the devil is naturally carried to
vex and torment them in whose bodies he is, and to sen^e forth such effects as
we hear, and ordinarilye does so: yet we may be assured that when he sees it
is more for his advantage to refrain, (as it is in this our case to draw
thousands to sin, then to torment one sole body) he being in man will not
show himself and make that known, but lurk and lie cloase (as I may say^)
like a su^ tie serpont, and oulde fox as he is.

We have heard before in the story, that for the space of a fort night or
thereabouts satan did withdraw himself from vexing John Starky, and Anne
Starky for certain days, insomuch as their parents with others did verilye
think at the first when M. More and I came to Cleworth, that they had been
well, and no wicked spirits within them: yea we have had experience thereof
even in Summers: who after he had given it forth that he counterfeyted, and
therewith continued as well and free from all appearance of possession, as at
this present he does, for the space of 4, or 5. weakes, was fearfully
tormented by the devil, before the Commissioners, and many other witnesses,
and so continued about 12. days, (in the view of all that came unto him) until
the adversaries having gathered heart to themselves, did rise up again for
counterfeyting, and took him the second time into their custody, in whose
hands he was no sooner, but presently he was (as they thought) well, and no
devil (forsooth) in him: and so has remained as they think until this day,
which suddayne amendment, if I may so call it, with the cause or occasion
thereof, might help us to spi out the reason of Satan's not vexing of So.
albeit he be in him still if we were wise. Now I desire to know, why the devil
may not as well by the space of some years abstain from tormenting the man he
possesses, as for the space of some weeks. Thus we see that So. not being
vexed by satan, does not let but that he may be possessed. We see also the
reason why the devil thus withdraws himself, which well considered we may
perceive that it is not possible it should have been or yet be (so long as all
things continue as they are) that the unclean spirit entered into So. with
seven worse then himself, should vex him at all, otherwise then in corners,
before such, and in such manner, as he thinks good, and sees it to make for
the vphoulding and mainteyning of that evil name of counterfevting, which he
for the obscuring of the great work of god, ma^h. 12 2^. Luk 11. 21.
has raised up, and spread far and neat, for what says the scripture? when
the strong man armed keeps the b^use, the things that be possesses are in
pea^c^ This is first to be understood of corporal possession, as is plain by
the occasion thereof. Now did ever the strong armed man possess a house more
^u^e the, then he does (...) or body? when no man resists that usurper, when
So. himself and some such as are ru^ers in the ^^urch and common wealth, yea
and too many ^ti^ers, are for this unjust possessor, for (...) and (...) no man
almost in a ze^le of god and his gl^ry rises up against him. As then the
repossession of So. is according to that (...) his foretoulde us by the holy
scriptures. even so in ^^is is lurl^ng of sat^ an (...) being at peace with
S^mer, we see the scripture likewise fulfiled Nit^er do I doubt, but that if
any zealous for the l^or^e of hoasts, shall procure such order to be taken,
that the means may be used for the dispossessinge of this usurper, and so
Christ Jesus the stronger ^ane upon this strong man, he shall be spoiled of ^as
hou^e, that armoure wherein he trusted taken from him, and his spoils divided:
and we therein also see the scripture fulfilled before our eyes, we desire
that a tr^all here of may be made, that so happily if no other way an end may
be put to this controversy. To deny this were very hard, and injurious to the
manifestation of the work, and peace of those which contend abut it. If I had
only known Some. possessed, and not to have been beesides dispossessed, I
should have been less confident in this present possession, for why I should
have doubted least Satan peradventure had leave from god, to possess him only
for a season, which time being expired he might remain there no longer, albeit
no means was used for his expulsion and against this I find nothing in holy
scripture. But of the repossession of one, I am otherwise persuaded: because it
is said and that of both the Tuangelists which spoke of the condition of the
repossessed, m^^h 12. 45. Lul. 11. 26.
that the sp^rite having entered in with seven worse then himself, will dwell
there, and take up his habitation, as having some right and interest in the
house. In which respe^t it may be it is said that the last stat of that man is
wo^s. th^n the first: meaning that the condition of the man reposessed, is
worse then it was when he was first possessed. For first Christ speaks in
both the ^uangelists in the pre^ent tense, not in the future, the last state of
that man is worse, not shall be worse, 2. The antithesis or opposition between
first and last estate, confirms this exposition, for by first estat^ we are
to understand the condition of the possessed from the time ^athan enters into
man. until the time of his eiection, and by last estat^, I think his like
condition of being possessed, but after eie^tion whereby it may w^lbe
distiguished from the former, and rightly he called (...) haung respe^t to the
other and like estat going before And this (...) of one possessed, which is
that we call repofessi^n is said to be the (...) first, because into such the
same spirit which ^as there be^^re is entered with s^auen worse then himself.
2. because they will dwe^l there that is, though they he cast ^ut, (...) their
possession, And truly no n^arua^^e though the estate of the (...) ^^^led be
such as well ca^e, and (...) th^n on the estate of th^^e persens possessed out
of whom the unclean spirit was never cast c^nsi^^ing their great
unthankfulness, for so singular and sen^lie, mercy of god bestowe^ upon them,
and that notwithstanding the Lord ^^uing corre^ed them for their sins by the
devil. and after delivered them out of ^is hands, yet they return to their
sins again: ^^hout which one cannot be repossessed. This I say considered it
is (...) with god, to deliver them up to the full possession of the devil, or
devils, or at least to some further possession and interest in them then
before

As for the B. of Londons objection, that So. having remained a year in his
house, has gone to the Church all that time, and there carried himself as
orderly as any other of ^as samely, and likewise in his prayers at home a^ M.
Harsu^ (quoth he) can witness: it is easilye answered, for we read in the 1.
of Mark, that at Cap^r^aum there was in t^^ Synago^ue a man in whom there was
an unclean spirit: and how est the same man had been there who can tell^ and
quietly (no doubt) he carried himself there, otherwise that had been no place
for him. Indeed he cried out when he saw Jesus, but this all that were
pos^essed did wheresoever they met him, so that said ex^lan atien was not
because of his being in the Synagogue, but because of Christ his being there.

Where I say that So. what (...) lo possessed
is now possessed, I do not mean that the devil is for certa^nty at the very
instant when I so speak in the body of Summers for as. he may be there, so at
that present may he be without him, as I suppose: but I mean that Satan has
leave from god ^^emer into that body of his, and t^rment it, which he is denied
to do b^ others, ^uk 9 39. (...) ^l^p. 8 16 4. math. 12. 29 44.
which lets not but that he may or does go forth sometimes, and come in
again at his pleasure, And this I c^nceanue g^ne rally of the possessed, and
Satan his being within them, for it is li^e ly that the devil does with those
he enters into as the father of the Lu^atick says, concerrings his dealinge
with his child, (a) And ^he (qu^th he) a spirit takes him, and sud^enly he
cries and he treareth him that he s^^ameth, and hardly departs from him,
when he has (...) These are said in the ^criptures to be (b) possessed with
the devil, meating touching their bodies, which in this case is called his
(...) for concerning their s^^ules they are no more nor otherwi^e possessed
the^ others, mark 123
now a man is possessed of his house, although he rema^ne not a^^a^es in it.
Even so it is (I think) bet^eene satan and his house, that is the body he
poss^sse^h. Indee^e (...) to be p^ss^sse^, in whom there (...) but it
folloveth not thereupon that the spirit is always in the man, and never out of
him. Yea except now one spirit, now an other should go into the body of the
possessed, after the diuen takes once possession of the body of man, which is
vul^^^ it must needs be that the spirit goes out sometimes: for other wise it
is not possible, that the spirit should utter these things he is by
experience seen often to do by the tongue of the party possessed, as the
speeches and actions spoken and done else where, at or about the same instant
they are spoken and done. And thus much concerning Some. repossession.

Discouerer.
After this So. page 134.
devised new tricks under a euierlet, up in this occasion. Lying upon his bed
with a cou^rlet cast over him, he moved by chance he knew (...) how, some part
of his body, when he was supposed to be in a fit, and cheresore senseless.
where upon he the said M D^. gave it out, that it was the devil, that made
that motion under the couerlett: which was such an instruction to Some a^ he
ceased not to feed that error: Likewise (says So.) lying in my bed, I did
sometimes knock and fillip with my fingers and toes, against the had sides and
feet: and this also wa^ ascribed to M. Dar. as to have been love by the devil.

That which St. here deposes is confirmed by the depositions of diverse, page
239
The very ^nocking at that time I wa^ there, ( says M. Hallam) was ^ne of his
^es, slipping down from the other: when the voice of 4. or 5. knocks were
heard together in manner of a chyme, quoth M. Crauen, I found one of the to be
his singer thrust under his thigh, as he lay upon his back, ( ^eorge
Richardson thus, Touching the likenesses of kitlinges moving in So. bed, I have
heard much wonder thereof, at one time when I was there, it was the bows
s^^nte. Edmun. l. Garland thus. Catching on a time at that which I saw move the
^hathes, I got ^^ilde of it and offering to cast up the cloathe, t^^se what I
had in my hand, it slipped from me, and I b^ele^ue was the h^uae priuym^mb^rs.
Again I hearing a knocking at the b^^^ feet, catched the boy by the toes,
which I perceived to have made the former knocking. M. Aldred thus. the rapping
in M. Hallams opinion w^^ thing else, but the rapping of me of his navles upon
in other. M. Par The rapping was the sillipoing of his syngers or ^one motion
with his toes.

We hear what So. ^arrell
and his witnesses say, let us now hear what was deposed before the 12.
Commissioners.

M. Aldridge. This examinas says that he standing in the hall heard a great
knocking in the parlour where the b^y lay, and sudd^ly he ru^^ed in where he
found the b^y al me in his bed, Nu ^^on (...) 2.
lying with his face upward in his s^^t, with his in (...) his in eyes,
staring, at though they would (...) h^ad. And kne^^ne down to prayer he h^d
the knoke (...) again under he knees as he though^^ and in the bed under the
c^u^r let, he saw the form, and shape as it were of five kitlings in
quantity to the uiew of the eye. And again this examinate saw the bedcloathes
at the seere to shake, move, and leap, as the leaves of an aspen tree, shaken
with the wind. dep. 6.


Loan Pie says that diverse times she had heard a clapping in his bed, as
though it had been the clapping of 3. hands, and that she has seen a maton
in the bed, as though it had been the creeping of 3. kitlings, which she and
diverse others have inderuored to take houlde of, but never could, for when they
attempted the same, it has vanished, his hands and feet never sturring to
their sights and that at other times, she has heard at his bedds feet a
knocking, as though it were under the bed to their understanding.

E^izabeth Milward says, dep. 14.
that she heard a thumping, or knocking in his bed, and she putting her hand
into his bed, felt the said knockinge (as she: thought) at a hollow place
above the chest of his body: which knowcking she heard as she went down the
slayres being so fearful as she durst not stay above with him.

M. Pare says, dep. 15.
that he he heard a thumping, or knocking in the boys bed in three several
places at once, and he putting his hand into the bed felt it sensibly knock
under his hand.

Thomas Gray Esquire says, dep. 10.
that he saw a moving under the uppermost covering the bed (not far distant
from the small of the said William Summers leg,) which lay in a round lump
pantinge, which this Examynate perceuing, poynted at, and said to the standers
by, what might this be^wh er upon one of them said, it is his feet: then it was
answered by those that sat upon the beds feet, thus: we have his feet here,
and do hold them. Then this Deponent for the better understanding thereof
laid his hand upon the said lump, and felt it move, and clasping his hand
together, he felt that it yealded, as air, or wynd, and opening his hand
again it filled the same in very full manner, And this Examynat taking away
his hand, saw the clothes settle very softly down, like as a bladder being
blown full of wind falls together after it is pricked and ymediatly the like
moving was on the other side of the said William Summers, and this deponent
seeing it said (laying his hand upon the place, where before it was) here it
was even now, and at that very instant this deponent (without moving of his
hands) sensibly felt something under the clothes patt very fast in the palm of
his hand like the foot of a kitling, or such like thing.

Darrell.
The Disc. tells us, what his own deponents, (of his own culling, and of
his own sifting and examynation, and some of them of his own stamp and
affection, whose depositions also are produced by his own self, deposinge
more or less as he pleasth) do say: but in his whole Discovery, we hear not
of these other depositiones, deposed and examyned by other manner of persons
then himself, and fellow Commissioners. The Discouerer belike thinks thus
to blind the eyes of the world, but the must know that the producing of
these absurd and ridiculous depositions of I know not whom, taken as it were
behind a cloth by such as are parties, and no indifferent Commissioners, are
a slender conviction of the depositions of these other five here specifyed, so
grauel^, iuditially and orderlye done, let the Disc. hereafter then convince
that which they have de posed: for until that be done, and these 5. proved
perjured: It cannot possibly be (as every child may see) that that or those
things which moved under the couerlett, seen and looked upon as they moved
or crept up and down the bed from place to place, stirringe and moving under
the hands of many, as if they had been whelps, kyt lings, ratts, or such like
living creatures, sometimes also vanishinge under men's hands, when feeling
them they beegan to claspe their hands etc. as before, heard likewise to
make a thumping or knocking, should be So. feet, or his toes, or fingers, or
pryuie members: or this knocking be caused by his synger thrust under his
thigh, or by the filliping of his fyngers, or by one of his toes, slyppinge
down from the other, or by the fillipping of one toe with an other upon the
bed, or yet by the tapping of one of his nails upon an other. For (to omyt
that which contained in these five last depositions offers it self to the
consideration of every one,) it is notoriously known to the inhabitants of
Notting ham that his moving and knocking under the couerlett, continued ten
days and nights, by times or rather more, and that So. was vsuallye held by
some, arms and legs, his arms also (he being in his clothes) on the day time
above the coueringe, and seldom or never under it. And this is (in part)
confirmed by M. Grayes deposition. I saw (says he) So. lying opon a bed, being
held by sundry persons at his feet, and also at his head etc. Again as
before we have his feet here and do hold them. How could then this motion
and knocking be made by his hands or feet? 2. Some. on the day time was
always in his clothes: it came not then (surely) from the tapping of one of
his two nails one upon an other 3. Neither in the night when So. was in his
naked bed could the knocking or rapping come either from the slipping down of
his toes from the other, or his finger thrust under his thigh, or the
fillippinge of his toes or fingers, or tapping of one of his toe navles upon an
other, because of the loudnes thereof: for says Elizabeth Miswarde, I heard
the knocking as I went down the stayrs, being so fearful. as I durst not stay
above with him. And M. Aldridg, (speaking of an other time, and when he was in
an other house) s^anding in the haule I heard a gr^ate knocking in the parlour
where the boy lay. And this which M. Al^rige deposes, there are a great number
of witnesses ready to depose.

4. It is to be observed that M. Hallams deposition begins thus Having
heard of many wonders, of certain knockings in So. bed, I was very desirous
etc. And George Richardson after this manner: Touching the likenesses of
kitlings mouning in So. bed, I have heard much wonder thereof, and at one
time etc. whereby it is plain that either there was some very rare accident,
or seeming so to be, which we may be assured did draw many to behold him: And
beesides at this time M. Hallam and M Freeman (because his kinswoman was now
appeached to be a witch, for this accident, and the Discovery of certain
persons for witches, began, continued and ended together) gave it out that So.
was a counterfeyt. Which two things considered, and that by reason of the
latter the most that came unto him had an especial eve to counterfeyting, how
simple, and what silly souls must they needs be, that were thus deluded by
the tipping and tapping. slipping, and fillipping of a boys toes and fingers?
But as in other things so in this particular, the Disc. will not only put out
their eyes who beheld Summers troubles, and deprive them of their senses I
mean their feeling, and hearing, but also of their reason and understanding,
as if they had been ^ooles or naturals, or more like unto brute beasts then
men. And this I desire the Reader to consider of.

OF CHAP. 5.
Of M, Dar cunning instructing of Summers, by speaking to others in his hearing
such things, as he meant he should practice in the detecting of witches.
After M. Dar. Disouery.
brought him on to an other matter concerning the detecting of witches, page
137.
affirming to diverse in the presence of Summers, that it was ordinary with those
that were lately dispossed to detect witches, and that So. would do the like.
These things M. Dar. denies.

Darrell.
As before the Disc. has told us that I instructed So. in his practices from
the 5. of November until the 7. 2. to dissemble a repossession. 3. certain
tricks under a couerlett, by speaking to others in Some. hearing: so here he
says the same concerning the detecting of witches: that I instructed him
therein, by speaking to others in his hearing. Hence it comes that both in
these several instructiors a^nages mentioned by the Discouerer, and the
depositions proving the same and namely this touching witches, we have
ordinarily some of these clauses, in the presence of Summers. see for a ^t ^et
(...) 113.
in the boys presence, the boy being present, Summers being present, in the
presence of the boy, M. Dar^ affirms t^ these that were with the boy, in the
hearing of Summers, before Somer etc. And those with such like clauses are most
materyall, and such as might not be omitted, for then my cunning instructing,
and depositions concerning the same do fall to the ground. Did ever any since
the world was made publish to the world for truth and in good earnest, so
absurd and ridiculous stuff, as this is of my instructing So. by speaking to
others in h^^ hearing, what I would have him to do? The Disc. speaks often
o^ wonders, he may well let this go among one o^ them, for I am sure it is a
matter to be wondered at were it true, viz. that Darrell and Summers should agree
together about counterfeyting a possession, dupofession etc. which are not very
easy to be counterfeyted, mere together thereabout for the space or 4. or 5.
years, have instuctions in writing paise between them, after coming to d^eii
at the same town meet often in Dar. chamber alone, and even then when t^^ele
counterfeyt tricks were doing, and yet notwithstanding ^efer another
instructing and learning until the very time cameth the^. So. ^^id do his
feytes before others. One would think t^^^men would ra^^r hi^se at these
things then believe them. but by (...) ne^^cable experience we see it is
otherwise: wherein the folly of man, and now easily he is missed and seducep,
does evidently appear.

George Richardson deposes thus, (...).
One Mistrisse Wallis and others did talk in the roun^ where So. lay, of such
persons as were suspected to he witche^, before be the said Summers did name
them.

By this deposition of the Disc. (...)
own witness as I may say, (and therefore not by him not to be denye^ for
sure testimony) this last supposed instruction of mine is very much weakened,
for it is very unlikely that I did instr^t him to dete^t witches, seeing I did
not dyrect him what persons he should name for witches, as appears by this
deposition, which ymplyeth that he had such direction only from this speech of
Mistress Wallys and others, But what if Mistress Wallys and the rest had not
come in the nick, as I may say? or coming had (...) named these persons
suspected to be witches? or if they had named them, yet had not so done in the
room where Summers lay, that is not in his hearing? I fall these things had not
fallen out thus hand patt as the say, where had then been this detecting of
witches? For it must needs be that evther this cosenage had never been, or Some.
had at ^east named other persons. But it may be that Mistress Wallys at least
if not the others had confederated with me about my teachinge So. to
counterfeyt, and there are these circumstances to strengthen it. 1. S^ee is my
wifes sister. 2. when it was she was not t^ngur-ty^^ what a man her brother
was. 3. She writ a letter unto me to come over an^ see, ^om. 4. we hear what
words she uttered (if we may be^leue George Richardson swearing) and that in
So. h^aring. Considering these circumstances surely the Disc. did greatly
forgett himself, for el^e undoubtedly when it was, he would have deposed and
examyned Mistrisse Wallys about this matter.

Discou.
M. Dar. page 142.
(says Robert Cooper) desired the Mayor to make inquirye through the town, if
any person could charge any of the pretended witches. The Mayor did so
accordingly, and nothing being said to diverse of their charges, they were all
set at liberty upon bonds, saning two.

Darrell.
I said that the said detecting of certain persons for witches was done by
Satan, and as he might therein speak truth to an evil end, so being the
father of lies, there was more cause to suspect him of lying: and therefore
whosoever should there-vpon hold and report them (or any of them) to be witches
without some proof had thereof from men, should iniure them in their good name,
and sin against god. For whereas So. was very strangely and grievously handled
at the bringing and carrying away of the detected persons, and so often as that
was don whereupon percase some suspected them to be witches: we must remember
that this also was done by the devil (as by the manner of it it did appear)
therefore not to be regarded, who were they, or some of them, most free from
witchcraft, yet might have done so, thereby to have drawn the innocent to
punishment, and man to condemn and slander the righteous Heere-vpon I
affirmed, that if any could testify any thing against them concerning
witchcraft, it were well they did it. And I heard that witnessed against them
yea almost all of the^, before they were had to the magistrate, that for my own
part I did and still do suspect them generally to be such as work with
spirits, and that Alice Freeman, Widow Higgit, Widow Boot, Groves, Millycent
Horslay, and So. aunt (whose name I know not) are such I have no doubt, and I
think I could make proof of those facts of theires, as would make it manifest
to others. And hereby it is plain that it is untrue the Disc. (...).
says, that the parties brought unto Summers. were thereby reputed for witches:
for thus it was: Presently upon the detection, matters of fact came to light,
first privately, then openly in the town hall, which lay hid until then, and
there-vpon were they reputed for witches. yea it is well known to the
inhabitants of Not that when these of the town of Not. were openly before
the magistrates of the said town for suspicion of witchcraft, there was not a
word used concerning the detection: widow Higgit was reputed a witch, for
diverse fa^s wherein it must needs be that the devil and she did conspire to
gether, and especially for murdering the child of one Bingham of Not whereof
he openly accused her in the town hall. So Alice Freman was reputed a witch
for matter of fact, specially a little after the dete^^ion, upon suspicion of
murdering the child of Mary Cooper sister unto Summers, whereupon she was
condemned by (a) two Iuryes of w^lfull murder, and it is strange that any Jury
should be found to acquit her there o^. Thus might I proceed to the rest,
save that none of them were charged with taking away the life of any. Yea let
all men judge of Milli^ent Horslayes own confession: who being by M. Perkyn^
Justice of peace examyned, and denyinge that ever she hurt any body,
acknowledged that she had helped diverse, but it was (forsooth) by good prayers,
whereof she then said one.

Discouerer.
But this devise of Dar. page 142. page 143.
concerning the detecting of witches is almost laid asleep. and again This
deceit of Dar. is so dashed, as it is supposed we shall hear no more of it.

Darrell.
It is a practice of Satan and no devise of mine to disclose the acquaintance
he has with some of his familiars. This has been seen beesides in Tho.
Darling and the 7. in Lancashire, in Margaret Heryson, (of whom before) M.
Throckmortons children, and many others. And where the Disc. supposes we shall
hear no more of this, surely we had not if he had not given cause thereof: and
before I end, I must once again tell him and all men, that it was not So. but
the devil by his tongue, that detected the witches. For first it is not likely
that he could have disclosed so many, 2. As Satan was during this Discovery
sensibly about So. body under the covering to our sight, hearing, and feeling,
(as is aforesaid) so was he also sensibly vexing him in his bo^y, as was
manifest to the great multitude that duringe that time beheld him: In
probabillity therefore might not the devil use his tongue and other
instruments of speech, although that be very rare and extraordinary, as well as
perform other things as rare, yea more rare about him. and also molest him in
his body, and some other parts thereof? 3. He knew nothing more or less of the
infinite speeches he then uttered, and namely of his calling for and naming
certain persons to be witches, as himself then affirmed, when there was some
believing of him, and in reason to lead others to believe him, as will appear
by the reason following. 4. whiles he was discovering these persons, he uttered
those things which pass^d his knowledge and understanding: For now it was that
he expounded the Creed by the space of an hour: when Alice Freeman and widdowe
Higgit were searched by diverse weomen, a good way from his fathers hou^e, he
told thereof even as they were searching, and that Alice Freeman ha^a mark of
such a shoulder, and the other none found of her, which was even so. When
Milicent Horslay was had before the abouenamed M. Perkins 4. or 5. miles
distant from Not. he told the very time she was examyned, the words she then
used for herself, and of the stripping and searching of her. In like sort he
told of the speeches and actions of her sister a mile of Not. even when the
same fell out. And were it not to avoid tedyousnes, much more of this kind
might here be said. Seeing then it is clear, that these speeches were uttered
by the devil: why should we not think that the other speeches, which
concerned and accompanied the same, and were uttered as it were with the same
breath, came from the same spirit?

OF CHAP. 6.
Of M. Dar. course, from about the seventh of December until the fourteenth
of January, whilst Summers refused to dissemble any longer.
Discou.
M. Dar. bent his chief force to persuade his auditorye, page 145
that satan would lurk sometimes about one (out of whom he had been cast)
suffering the party to be well for a good space, but that he was verily
p^^swaded, that Satan would not give him over, until in the end he had
reposs^ssed him.

About 8. Darrell.
weeks after the time the Discouerer. here speaks of, and after Summers had
given it forth that he counterfeyted, I did openly affirm, that Summers had
not counterfeyted, and 2. that he was repossessed, and that it came from the
subtlety of satan then lurking in him, that he vexed him not, but I would
have b^ne ashamed, to have said, that Satan would lurk sometimes about one,
or that Satan would not give So. over until he had repossessed him, as the
Disc. charge me to have done: but proves none of them not so ^uch as by a
salfe witness, no not by So. own testimony, who stands him in great stead at
other times for the proof of many worthy things. But that which the Disc.
says here, he thwarteth and overthrows elsewhere. for here from the 7. of
December until the 14. of January, he will have me prattling to my auditory
that Satan lurketh sometimes about one, and that satan would not give over
until in the end h^ had rep^ssessed Summers. in the whole Chapter following
also affirming, that he began to be repossessed about the 14. of January: and
in page 127. he tells us that ^o. supposed repossession was about the 21. of
November. If I held and gave it out about the 21. of N^uember, that So. was
repossessed. it is not credible that I should from the 7. of December till the
14. of Ianu^r^ ia^g^e as the Disc. affirms. And this is the 9. time that the
Discouerer is convinced by his own Discovery

Discou.
The author of the Narration writes thus upon So. page 147
disposs^ssi^n M. Dar. was retained preacher in Not. that populous town,
having h^d no settled preacher there before this time, since the beginning of her
maiestyes reign. ^yther M. Aldridg or his companion are in danger of an hard
imputation: except it may be thus helped. M. Aldridg is v^^ar of S Maryes in
Not. whereas this fellow peradventure accounts neither persons nor vicars nor
any that bear such popish names, for preachers: the Doctor to be chosen by the
parrish, as M. Dar. was, is the preacher (forsooth) that must bear the beil.

Darrell.
The Narrator denies not, that they have had a preacher, but no settled
preacher, or standinge mynisterie, for that M. Aldridg has flocks or
congregations beesides to attend upon as well as that, whereby it has corn
to pass, that his people of Not. have heard his voice often times but once in
a monneth, sometimes sildome: which many besides the Narrator account no settled
ministry.

OF CHAP. 7.
How So. about the 14. of January fell again to the acting of certain fitt^,
wherein he continued at times, till about the 24. of Febauary, and how M. Dar.
pretended that he was possessed.
Discouerr.
M. page ^48.
Dar. spent about 4. or 5. weeks (next going before the 14. of January) in
preaching, and reuiling those that held So. for a counterfeyt.

Darrell.
Had I carried my self in the pulpitt and work of the ministry, a^ the Disc.
bears the world in hand, I had been more fytt and worthy to have sit at the
plow tail, and guided it, then in the chair of Christ Jesus, and to have been
a guide to his people. I published the work of god, presently after the
dispossession of Summers and then and (as in duty I ought) make mention openly
of So. and at other times I deny that eue^ I mentioned him, save that about a
quarter of a year after his dispossession, and after he said he counterfeyted,
I ^a^e against that ^urs^d confession of his, and against them that would ^aue
him to be a counterfeyt. And this I did twice, once upon the ^ordes day to my
own people, and an other time not long after to them and others come out of
the coasts thereab ^uts met together at a fast At this latter time also I
remember, I used a few worcester les conco^niuge his re^oss^ssion And whereas the
Disc. says in the chapter before that I prea^hed at Not. about that time,
viz. from about the 7. ^f (...) to the 14. page 145.
of January 6. or 7. s^rmons, v^pon the 43. 44. 4^. (...) upon the 12. of
^ath^w, con^erning satan's return to re^n^ter he (...) for they ^ere preached
in November, two of them (...) of his month, and so on forwards ^n the Lords
days until I had finished that ^cripture. He brings me in depo^ing this,
but (as ^ull often) he has corrupted my deposityon the (...) o^ ^^me being o^
his own inserting. Beesides when I pr^ached these ^ermons more then 6. of the
7. sermons were of spir^ua^ po^e^ion. and that in both these I spoke as the
truth is, the inhabitants of Not. can witness.

The Disc. Page 145.
^aith further that with this argument of devils I so troubled my audito^y,
that they grew very weary of a, and some blamed me for ^ to my ^ace.

Truly it is very unlikely, seeing whiles I was preachinge of this scripture,
they generally made choice of me for their teacher. It (...) indeed that some
two or three of the chief friends to counter^ei ^ing, natural men, not
favoring of the spirit, showed some dislike to my preaching, and adui^ed me to
preach of love and charity, saying that they were ever in charity before I
came there: but this was about a quarter of a year after the^e 7. sermons,
wherein I had preached the ^aw (that ^o they might be drawn to hunger and
thirst after the gospel, and made fit to receive it) which was not sweet and
pleasynge unto them and therevppon they kicked with the heel against me
pre^uning to instruct their teacher, and to direct their guide (like to the
schosier, that should take upon him to teach his schoolemaister) which is no
new nor strange thing.

Discouerer.
My father in law (says So.) received at two collections made by M. page 148.
Dar. means the so^e of twenty nobles, or thereabouts, in respect of his
trouble and charge, when I was in my pretended fits.

Darrell.
What a shameless boy is this, seeing the contrary is notoryously known to
the inhabitants of Nottingham. I have showed before that at the first
collection made at his dispossession, his father in law had never a penny, and
at the second but part thereof, as I guess about 20. s. or 4. nobles, whereof
part was to apparel Summers And these collections were not by my means,
otherwise then by spakling to the people at the dissoluing of the congregation
to be mindful of the poor, if so I did. Neither do I doubt but that the
Discou. knows this to be very false, yea few better, and yet behold he
publishes it for truth to the world. For who can think but that he has
examyned the boy his father in law thereabouts: first in hope to have it
confirmed by his deposition, if any such thing happily had been: 2. though it
should prove otherwise, ^et hoping either by threats or by flattering speeches
to draw him thereunto: for if Rob. Cooper the bo^s father (...) law have
deposed as the Disc. affirms, he has sundry times in other things deposed
as falsely as So. himself has herein. Beesides it is very likely that the
Disc. has had some speech hereof, either with the Mayor, or M. Freeman, or M.
William Gregory, from whom he might learn the certayntye herein. For the
Mayor give So father in law that which he had of the collection, and if it were
20 nobles, from him he received it, who can witness that I never spoke word to
him concerning the same so that were that true which is false and that So.
father in law had 20. nobles, yet it made not against me. Seeing now we hear
nothing of this 20. nobles from none of these but only from Summers, not a
deposition among the multitude of depositions confirminge this, we may be sure
that it is not only false, but justly suspest the Disc. himself to know the
falsehood of it.

Discouerer.
It is to be observed: page 150.
how some of M. Dar. chief friends have left him after a sort in two of the
chiefest points of this whole action. One of them having given his opinion,
that So. did not dissemble those fitts which he acted before the Commissioners,
deputed from the Lord Archbishop of York: but that it was the devil in him,
that played those prankes in his body, could (it seems) be content to
acknowledge, that he was possessed: but a^ the time of his examynation, he would
not affirm that the said So. had been at any time dispossessed, although
(says he) I have heard by depositions and other reports, that might induce me
very probably to think that he was dispossessed. The other being a very rash
and headstronge young man, one M. Brinsley a minister: he at the time of his
examination doubts as much of Some repossession as the former did of his
dispossession. I am fully persuaded (says he) that William So. was possessed
with an evil spirit, and that he was dispossessed: but concerning his
repossession I am not therein so fully persuaded: although I have many reasons
to induce me so to think.

Darrell.
At the time of his examination (meaning M. John Brown one of the 12.
Commissioners, a very reverend and learned man) he would not affirm, that is,
upon his oath (for the book was presently called for so soon as any appeared
before the B. of London) that So. was dispossessd. Did M. Brown leave me, or
yet the cause and work of God which he regards a little more then me because
he would not swear that So. was dispossessed. Truly it had been very strange if
he should have so deposed. One would think that he has showed himself a
friend to the cause, whatsoever he is to me, in saying that he did not
dissemble. 2. in affirminge that he was possessed, and that it was the devil
in him that played those prancks in his body, as the Disc terms them. 3 that
he did think that he was dis^oss^ssed, or to this effect. And for M. Brinsley a
preacher of the gospel, it appears by his deposition, that he has not left
me nor yet the ca^. For he has deposed that he is fully persuaded that So. was
poss^ssed. 2. that he is fully persuaded he was dispossess^d. 3. that though he
be not so fully persuaded of his repossession, yet he does think so, meaning of
the time present, because for any thing he knew, satan after his repossessing
of So. might percase be departed, Surely the Disc. was not wise in producing
those depositions which every child may see makes not for him, but against
him. And as unwise was he to tell us that M Ireton his credit wrought some
inconvemence, through his facillity in believing those things which were told
him: albeit his speeches still did rely upon this supposition, that if those
things which he heard were true, then thus and thus. For M. Ireton is known as
to be of singular learning, so of great wisdom, and therefore (as it is said
of svch in the proverbs) will consider before he believe as the things
reported, so the credit of the reporter, prou. 14. 15.
with other circumstaunces and none of those foolish ones which will believe
every thing 2. prou. 14. 15.
M. Ireton was not only told and heard of the strange and fearful operations
of satan, in and upon the body of Summers, but was also an eye witness
thereof, the day of the commission, he being one of the Commissioners, so
that this silly evasion of the Disc. will not serve his turn. And hereby, as
partly also in that M. Ireton being by the B. of London deposed, concerning So.
counterfeyting, possession, dispossession, and repossession, as well as the two
former, (for he came not (sure) to London, dwelling an hundred miles of for
nothing, neither bein^e come was he kept by the Bishop sundry days, deposed,
and often examyned, about nothing, but in all likelihood the very same that M.
Brown and M. Brinsley were,) and that of the said depositions or answers of
his to the same articles, we hear nothing in this volume of depositions, it is
a very easy thing for men to conie^ture, what M. Ireton thinks of Some. For
had there been but a line for the Disc. purpose, all the world should have
heard of it. The same may be said by M. Euington a great scholar likewise and
Commissioner, who together with M. Brown and M. Brinsley was deposed and
examyned: of whose answers also and what he an eye witness has said to So.
counterfeiting or not, his possession, dispossession, and repossession we hear
not a word. The secret testimony of these 4. so reverent deuines, and open
also by their speeches from time to time, the wise and discreetr will regard
more then all the depositions the Discouerer to the contrary produces.

Discou.
Upon M. page 151 or rather as the Disco. says
Dar. report and preaching that So. was reposs^ssed, there was then greater
resort unto him then before. M. Dar. still perswa^ing every on that came (as
(a) So. says) that he the said So. was reposs^ssed: and that he remained in
all his sits utterly senceiesse.

Darrell.
This is a manifest untruth, for the next day after I first said he was
rep^^eded, an^ before I preached ^o, I wen^ to Ashby, where my (...) remained,
and before I returned (being the ^ater day ^o^lo^ing) ^e was had to S. Ioanes,
and said he councerte, ted, whether al^o I neither did no^ might repair unto
him, one only time excepted when the Mayor was present. And after the Discovery
of satan before the 12. Commisioners, I was ^it^ him only the next morninge
with diverse ministers at Edmund Garlands house, departing presently home to
Ashby, from whose house he was departed, and (...) the dog turned to his vomit,
I mean his former confe^sion of counterfeyting, which he had disclaymed for a
season, before I returned to Not. and both these I can dyrectly prove. But now
does the Disc. proou^ that be affirms? why thus So. says it: and then the
Reader may be su^e it is a lie.

Discouerer.
It might gr^atly be maruayled what estimation and credit M. D ar. got by those
new sorgery of So. pretended repossess^on. page ^^
Howbeit many of the wiser s^rt, that were not poss^ssed, with the giddy
humor of nouel^yes (covered forsooth with zeal and sighings) did laugh this
to scorn, as they did the rest.

Darrell.
The wiser sort the Disc. calls those which did laugh to scorn the work of
god. Of such scorners the world was never without some when a far greater work
then this we treat of, and more wonderful was wrought, and that ymediatly by
the Lord himself, whereof we read in the 2. p^lm^ ^1.
of the Acts, it is said some mocked. There is a generation and ever will be,
that sits in the seat of the scornful. But who are those wis^men he
speaks of? forsooth M. Walton Archdeacon of Darbyshire, and M. Sales
official: both nonresydents, and the latter a man of no learning, and as
l^ttle wisdom and government: He would never else (as I have credibly heard)
have been the ryngleader in the setting up of a may pole the last summer, with
pypinge, and dancing, and that upon the Lords day. Out of the ministry are
of these wise men, M. Peter Clarke Mayor then of Not. M. Freman and the other
Not. Commissioners. For beesides these there were s^arslye any (some papists
only excepte^) which were known to wag the tongue against the work of god,
the multitude not only acknowleding it but reioycinge in it, and magnifyinge
the name of god. And in the ministry none were known to be for
counterfeyting, and against the possession and dispossession of Summers but the
two former: upon occa^yon that M. Walton did rise up and that openly against
the manifest work of god, after one public meeting about Some. there was an
other at the same time agreed upon. When the appointed day was come, there
were met together many ministers and learned men, all which were for
possessio, and no man heard to speak a word for counterfeyting, this arch
deacon and official excepted. Now all these the Disc. accounts to be men
poss^ssed though not with devils, yett with the giddy humor of noueltyes.
Well my brethren, it is far better to be one of the foolish of this world,
and for that folly to be laughed at and scorned, then of the wise, and princes
of this world, and for the same to be laughed at by him that dwells in
heaven, and of the lord to be had in derisyon. 1 cor. 1 2^. 1 cor. 2. 6. psa.
2. 4.
But I desire to know of the Disc. (who can so well discern of spirits) with
what spirit M. Walton was possessed, when before the Commissioners after all
this contention, he renounced counterfeyting, and confessed it to be the finger
of god, as both M. Euington and M. John Strelley with others can witness: and
whether at that time he also were not possessed with the giddy humor of
noueltyes, covered with zeal and sighings.

Discou.
So. grew weary of this his said relapse, after he had continued therein about
six weeks, page 15^
and said to John Cooper that he should be quiet if he might get out of M.
Darrell fingers, and be at S. Ioanes. And again in the next leaf: Cooper
signified to some of the Aldermen, what So. had said unto him touching his
desire that he might remain with him, that so at the l^ngth he might be in
quiet.

Darrell.
In these words the Disc. tells us how So. by the means of John Cooper, got
himself from his father in laws house to S. Ioanes. The reason mouiug him
thereunto was, that being weary of counterfeyting through is long continuance
therein, viz. for 6. weeks together, he could not tell how to give over his
dissembling, because of me. To help himself therefore in this straight, he
bethought hi^ of this course we hear of. For answer hereunto: first the Disc.
does not prove that So. was the cause of his going to S. Ioanes, no not by So.
deposition, but only says so him self. 2. By the deposition of John Cooper
page 177. the contrary does appear, as we shall presently hear. 3. we may
hereby conjecture how false this is, in that S. Ioanes is a house in Not.
whether vagrant and idle persons are sent and kept ver^ straight to work,
being severely corrected if they fail therein. Now who can think that So.
who had runn away, first from M. Grayes, and after twice from Tho. Porter, was
a young fydler and singing boy, had also played the counterfeit boy as the Disc.
says, first at M. Brackenburyes, then at Not. should offer voluntarily his
neck to the y^ake, (I mean of toy^esome labor) and his back to the rod of
correction. And wherefore shoul^^ (...) this? because (forsooth) otherwise he
could not be q^y^t. and ^^tt himself ^ut of my f^ngers, but must neades will
he ^^ntinue ^is c^unt^rfeyting, whereof ala^ he gr^w w^ary. An ^st riduculous
(...), all (...) ^ell considered, which I leave to the (...) him of. Yea but
the Disc. is of an other mind: for mark what he tells us, and that very
solemnly in an other place.

If any says be do^ surmise these practis^s to be improbable, as being much
subject to danger, page 7.
in that the said parties that are so ^unningly drawn on in those courses, may
upon many occasions detect them: they must know that these fellows are well
enough furnished in that behalf. For first among^st the Papists, it were
sufficient to bring a suspicion of ^eresye, that should but doubt that one
were not p^ss^ss^d, if their priests affirmed the contrary. And we see amongst
our selves, how hardly it is ind^red, that (...) pret^nded Exorcists are called
into question, but be it that the worst should fall out: yet they have such
rules, as if you will allow them, they are safe enough. For if any do once
fall into their hands, or yealde th^ms^lues unto their practices, they can
never be ridd from them by any means, so long as they are pleased to work
upon them.

Considering these words of the Disc. and that he says that c^unterfeytes can
never be rid by any means from their teachers so long^ a^ they are pleased to
work v^on them: it is no marvel though Some. we^e glad to get himself even
to S. Ioaues (the worst place for his case of a thousand) that so he might
(...) himself of me: but rather a marvel that he could so berid of me, ^eeing
the Disc. says that such scholars can never be rid of then mais^^rs, no not
by any means. If ^i is be true S. H. how came it to pass that So. rid
himself out of my ^andes on^e before when he was weary of counterfeyting, as
now he is sai^e to be? So. (quoth the Disc.) beginning to be werie of
counterfeyting, for ought that M. Dar. could do, altogether refused to
continue his dissembling course any longer: and so made no show of any of his
pranks for the space of S. weeks. And again: So. growing weary of his
dis^mulation, contrary to Dar relis persuasions gave over all his tricks and
practices. And this he pr^^th substantially by So. testimony Hereof (says ^e
So. in this s^rt. About the beginning of December, page 144. page 11^.
I did grow very weary of all my former practices, and there upon did wholly
leave them, contrary to M. Dar. good liking who end^u^red to perswad me still
to continue (...) could not preuayl^ with me so far. ^us. 1.
Here by the way we (...) is contrary to himself, And this is the 10. (...)
^inced by his own Discovery. But I would (...) (I say) (...) Disc. why So,
could not as well get himself^^ is latter tin cout (...) without the conueying
of himself to S, Ioanes, as well as before. Others will think though the
Disc. be of an other mind, that were it so that I had taught S^. to
counterfeyt, as he will have it, and he had but in secret told me, that being
weary of counterfeyting, he would counterfeyt no more, and rather then so he
would discover all, I would have been willing enough to have rid my self of
him, and if needs I must busy my self in this worthy art, ^aue ^ather sought
out a new scholar, then have trouble^ my self with ^ne so lazy, so way
war^e, wavering, and p^ruerse, wherein also was such danger. For how (...) ever
amongst the papists there is no danger to the pr^st tea^^t ge one to
counterfeyt, though the counterfeyt bewray all, so long as the priest affirms
the contrary, if we may believe the I^scouerer: yet I trust he will not say the
same of the ministers of Christ Jesus among us, and yet he does say something
bending that way. Moreover, if S. m. said thus to Cooper and went by his own
pro^urement to this said and to S. Ioanes: why when he was come thither di^
Cooper ^^reat^n to whip him, if he would not leave his ^ricks, as Cooper
^imselfe con^esse^ upon his oath to the 12. Commissioners? but more for the
c^nuincing of this follows forthwith. And where the Disc. pretends that So.
grew weary of his relapse meaning counterfeyting to be reposses^e^, because he
had continu^^ th^r^ about six weeke^ (...) is therein greatly deceived, for it
was but two wee^es. So. Le^an to be repo^^essed at or about the time of his in
pris^^n^ent, as appears by the beginning of t^is chapter page 49. but that
was ^ot about the 14. of (...) as the Disc. says in the argument of this
c^apter and So. also a little after, ^ut the 14. of ^^ruary as I ca^ pr^^e by
many witness. and the 24. of I (...) ^e went to S. I^an^s, as is (...), where
^ee was pr^^ntly quiet and confessed his dissi^^ulati^n. By t^is that has here
said we may partly see, that So. removed not ^imselfe for the cause here
alleged, to S. Ioanes, but they in^eed cau^ed ^^is r^m^uall wh^me Satan used
as his instr^^ents to get from the boy that ^ursed confession of counterfeyting
which soon after he was there ^ee made, the means first being used, which
served there unto: viz. promises and threats, as ^eereafter will appear. And
those were our Nottingham Commissioners, who caused him to be carried thither
greatly against the boys and his parents will, under coullour to find out
some counterfeytinge, where it was as manifest as the daye-light at noon, that
there was no possibillity of co^nterfeytinge.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
OF CHAP. 1.
How Summers confessed his dissimulation at S. Ioanes in Nottingham as soon as
he was out of M. Dar. disposition.
Discouerer.
Concerning the occasion of So. page 1^7.
removing from his father in laws house to S. Ioanes in Not. (a place where
the poor are set to work) John Cooper the keeper there deposes thus. Being
oft^ntimes with So. in his fits, and dilligently behoulding the course of his
carriage in them: I grew very suspicious that he did but dissemble, and there
upon was well content, to have the tuition of him, to make trial of the
matter: the rather, for that the boys kepers and friends that were about him,
were willing to pleas^ him in all his humors.

Darrell.
The true occasion or rather cause of Summers removing, was neither the former,
whereof I have spoken, nor yet this latter here mentioned, but first and
chiefly the malice of M. Freeman Alderman, because his kinswoman Allice
Freeman was by So. detected for a witch which could not stay it self in
accusing So. vniustlly of witchcraft, and imprisoning him, and after upon
bail byndinge him over to answer it at the Assizes, but proceeded and never
gave over until So. confessed that he had counterfeyted, he hoping thereby as
it should seem to recover the good name of his kinswoman, and partly to
disgrace and so consequently to be revenged of me, whom in regard of that
discovery and the counterfeyting he then strove for and I gaynsaid, he hared
extremely, so as at the length he could not endure to come to the church, when
I exercised my ministry 2. the malice of M. Gregory the town clarke (a
popish mate) against the work of god, that is the dispossession of Summers and
this because of his religion, being in heart a papist, as is plain, in that for
the space of eleven years before he had not received the lords supper. Now
the papists and their adherents (albeit the learneder sort of them do
acknowledge a real possession and dispossession of Satan in and out of the
bodies of men) cannot yet in patience endure that any such work should be
wrought in our church and by our ministry by fasting and prayer performed b^
us. This forsooth the^ will have peculiar to their own synagogue, t^ their own
portusse, to their own Te rogamus, mu^bled prayers, processions, coniu^ings,
and ceremonies, as else-wher has been manifestly showed. To these came M.
Morey an Alderman one also reputed to be vmound and popish these three did draw
with them M. Heart Alderman and M. Clarke then Mayor a man very easy because of
his simplicity to be ^^ulled: which 5. assembled in the town hall, sent for
me, signifying unto me, that they purposed to take So. and commit him to the
custody of two honnest men, because they suspected him to counterfeyt, which
accordingly they did 3 days after: save that the men they provided to be So.
keepers namely John Cooper and Nich. Shepherd were scarsely honnest and of good
name as we shall hear hereafter.

Discouerer.
The day after that So. Page 178.
came to S. Ioanes, he did counterfeyt himself (says Nicholas Shepherd) to be
in a fit, because (as I think) certain we^ men were come thither unto him to
see him, who did greatly bemoa^e him: where upon I removing the said weomen
from him, told him whilst he was in his tricks and in John Coopers pres^nce:
that if he would not leave and rise up, I would set such a pair of k^p-knaps
upon him as should make hi^ to rue it: and there upon So. did presently rise,
and left his said tricks, and had no more fits, whilst he continued there,
being the space almost of a monneth. The next day I falling into some better
acquaintance with him, (be upon my promise that I would be his friend, and
procure him favor from M. Maeior and his brethren) did confess unto me, that
all he had done in the course of his former tricks, were but counterfeyted, and
said, that when I would. I should see all his said tricks, and how he did
them. The same day I told John Cooper, what So. had confessed unto me, and
willed him that when they were in bed together, he should talk with him
thereof, saying, that I verily thought, he would confess all unto him at
large. And accordingly it fell out. For as John Cooper has deposed, So. told
him, that all the tricks he had done in his said possession and repossession
were all of them counterfeyted.

Darrell.
It is very true that is said here of a fit that So. had before certain
weomen, and is as true that the same day or day before he had an other in the
garden before M. Freeman and some other: upon the sight whereof, because of his
grievous beating of himself, with his face groueling and tongue thrust into the
moulds, wallowing, and foming, he the said M. Freeman affirmed, that he had the
falling sickness, and this was presently bruited throughout Nottingham. If So.
were weary of his relapse or pretending to be reposs^ssed. that is of
counterfeyting, and said unto Cooper, page 152. and 178.
that his desire was to be at S. Ioanes, and that so at the l^ngth he might be
quiet an^ give over his counterfeyting, as is said in this very page, and in
the lea^e before why did he fall to the doing of his tricks again after he
was at S. Ioanes? It is absurd to say that he did thus, because the weomen did
bemone him for the weomen being removed or as Cooper deposes page 193. put ^ut
of the house, and so departed, he was st^ll at his tricks: It cannot therefore
be that he did at this time his tricks because of the ^eomen: neither because be
thought men took some pleasure to behold him, and for that cause himself in
the a^ti^ge of them. Neither can it be that Shepherd and Cooper did threae^
him, that the weome^ or any other might see, that they could make him leave his
tricks, and all his knavery: seeinge the weomen were gone home, and they two
alone with Some. in his fit, when they did threaten him. Moreouor, it is
confessed that So. at S^m Ioanes in a fit, being threatened by Co^per to be
whipped, and by Shepherd to be pinched with a pair of knipknaps, page 19^.
See then good reader (...) this Dis^o crosieth and entangleth himself for if
this ^^pposed count^rfeyt. did give oue^ his tricks: for th^eates o^feare, how
then did he grow we ar^ of them, or did volunta^^ly reu^e himself to be quiet.
did thereupon presently leave his tricks, and had no more fits, whilst he was
at S. Ioanes: It cannot therefore be that So. left his counterf^yting, because
he grew (a) weary thereof, and did of himself go to S. Ioanes to be (a)
quiet, and that he confessed so much to Cooper before he came to S. Ioanes, as
the Disc. affirms page 152. and 178. And this is the 11. time the Discouerer
is convinced by his Discovery.

We are besides to observe here, first that this confession of counterfeyting
was got, by one Nich. Shepherd, and John Cooper two very dissolute and
infamous men. I remember in a certificate made by one of Not. to the
Archbishop of York, whereunto many of the chief of Not. subscribed, there
were these words used concerning these honest men, that they were two and yet
(...) good ^uough against Darrell.
rak^shames, the better of them having been twice (o) araigned. 2. that these
were fit instruments for Satan to work by, 3. that Some. confession of
counterfeytinge was not voluntary, but extorted and by threats compassed.

Discouerer
The 26. of February being Sunday, So. was desir^us to go to the church, and I
told him that if he should so do, and then fall again to one of his old
tricks, page 193.
the people would be much troubled. Whereupon (quoth So) you know what I have
confessed unto ^ou, and I will give you my hand and do promise you ^aithfully
that I will not then fall into any sit And so I went to the church with him,
both in the for^noone and in the afternoon, and he kept his promise with me.
N^c Sheppearde page 207.


Darrell
By this deposition of Sh^^h^ards, it is plain that ^otwithstanding S^m.
c^n^ession and show of c^unter^e^tinge ^ettle deponent did not hastily believe
him, but made (...) at least at his counterfeyting or else why should (...) use
th^se such like words: if ^^u should ^all (...) would be much tr^ubled etc.
hence also it was, that both (...) all the time he was at S. Ioanes, were ever
both or one of them at his elbow, giving their diligent attendance upon this
counterfeyt where soever he was in church or elsewhere, as is well known to
the inhabitants of Not. In that likewise the Mayor with the Aldermen
aforesaid, and Gregory hired this couple of honnest men, and gave them their
wages, to wayt at an inch upon Summers and that not only until he had
confessed he counterfeyted, but after also for the space of a month, all one
as if he had denied that he dissembled, and stood to the truth and present
possession, in which state whosoever is, it is very requisite he have a keeper
or keepers, because of the danger he is in to be destroyed by the devil: it
argues that they also doubted he was no counterfeyt, notwithstanding his
confession suspectinge the truth thereof.

OF CHAP. 2.
How M. Darrell dealt with So. for the reuocation of his said confession that
he had dissembled.
Discouerer.
M. Dar. page 185. page 186.
was charged by her Matesties Commissioners to have sought many ways to have
withdrawn So. from his said conf^ssion, and have sluck unto it that he was
possessed. And again, when M. Dar. perceived that So. by no pryuate means
that he could use would be drawn etc.

Darrell.
Here is a whole chapter consumed, and many words used about just nothing. I
once and only once used a few words to So. whiles he remained at S. Jones, and
that in the presence of the Mayor and some others, reproving him of the heinous
sin he had committed, and the great scandal he had given, in affirming that
he counterfeited, his own conscience accusing ^im thereof: neither is any more
^eposed against me. And what herein did I ill beeseeming me, or that I ought
not, and in duty was bound to do?

I confessed being examyned that So. in saying he had in the whole course of
his former fits diss^mbled, lied therein grievously against his own c^nscience,
page 186.
to the d^shonor of god, and lurt of his church Thereupon says the Discouerer,
Consider the gentle zeal of benefiting the church, by his faculty and skill in
casting out devils.

My me^ning ^as that the people of god believing and meditating of the work of
god wrought upon Summers, would no doubt receive thereby great profit, whereof
many though not all, through this lie of his, and cursed confession of
counterfevting are deprived an^ not only so, but thereby drawn to receive a
false report and evil name against the work of god, and by consequent against
the Lord himself, and to justify the wicked, which is an abomynation before
^he lord. And this tends to the dishonor of god, and hurt of his church
(...) people

OF CHAP. 3.
H^w M. Dar. devised two or three shifts, to have avoided So. confession, that
he had diss^mbled.
Discouerer.
Being examyned I confessed, page 187.
that I had said at sometimes, that So. affirming that he counterfeyted, was a
confirmation that he was repossessed.

Darrell.
M^ reason is, math. 12. 42.
because the same, enjoined with his obstinacy is (...) certain argument that
he is empty swept and garnished, and therefore if he were possessed and
dispossessed, he is repossessed.

Discouerer.
M. Dar. p^g 188.
breathed out his second oracle ( which is my second shift to avoid So.
confession) saying that it was no marvel though he could the his sits
considering that he had more devils in him then before. Hereof M. Dar has not
been examyned, because it was one of the interogatoryes whereunto he refused to
answer. For true it is that after that he had been examyned diuer^ times about
this matter, he found himself so perplexed, as that he refused to be any
further examyned, saying that his conscience was troubled, in that he had
answered so much already. wherein he is not greatly to be be blamed. For
although a liar must have a good memory, yet by many cross questions, he may
be taken short, as it has happened to him in many particulers.

Darrell
Herein appears manifestly the malice, craft and perverse wrestinge of this
Discouerer:, For as I knew not what the interrogatoryes were I refused to
answer unto, so did I not therefore refuse because I was taken short as he would
have it, or for that I was not able sufficiently to answer them, neither I
thank god was I therefore in my self perplexed, or my conscience troubled, but
for that having yealded to so much before as men with any modesty or conscience
could require at my hands, yea to more, and having answered already to no less
I think then to 190. or 200. interrogatoryes, I perceived evidently by lamen
table experience, tha^ my said answering albeit it were by oath, did not at all
help to purge or clear me as an innocent, and to put an end to the
controversy, whereunto the Lord has sanctified an oath and which was the thing
I expected, and hoped for: ^ea that this was not the scope and drift of this my
examynation and multitude of Interrogator^es (howsoever the B. of London did so
pretend) but to entrap me cunningly, if happily they could, and to make me my
own appeacher and accvser, when they were wholly dectitute of other me aues to
prove that which they did so eagerly and earnestly strive to boult out against
me, namely this counterfeiting as now is manifest to all men, a thing that
neither by the law of god nor man I was bound unto, if I had been guilty, as
heaven and earth is my witness I was not. Secondly I refused to depo^e any
further, because many of the interrogatoryes were most vain childish and
ridiculous, as may appear by the Discovery it self, especially if we
consider, that from the^ my guiltynesse was in part to be gathered, For this
cause also I confess I was greiued (and as I tak it justly greiued) in my
soul to answer any further upon my oath, and to call to witness the glorious
and fearful name of the Lord, (whereat every Christian ought in reverence to
tremble) to such base, tryflinge, and ridiculous things as were then propounded
unto me without end or lymitation, (which I per^eiued by former experience) as
being not worthy to be confirmed by the testimony of gods most glorious name.
But alas I knew not what the articles were until I was sworn: and at the
first time I was before the Bishop to be examyned, I yealded to answer to
those things which should concern my dealing with So. or any of the persons
whom I had affirmed were possessed: which I did for the further confirmation
of my innocence, and for auoydinge of that suspicion which I feared would have
risen upon my denial to have answered. And at the tim of this refusal to
answer, I spoke to this effect to the Bishop as partly appears by the words
here mentioned. Now where the Disc. pretends that I am contrary to my self
in many particulars, I demand of him, why he has not noted and recorded those
my particulars contrarietyes, or at least given some taste thereof. It may be he
has referred t^em to his next volume or malicious inuectiue against Darrell,
because peradventure there is such a heap of them that they cannot well be
contained in this Discovery of his without tediousness to the Reader: Indeed
as the Disc. orderth the matter there be many contradictions betwixt his
deponents and me: But the questiou and doubt is first, whither he has produced
both their depositions and mine truly or no: Secondly, if he have done so, then
whether I have deposed truly, or they whose depositions have been obtain ^and
compassed for the most part by threats or a lurements as I offer and am^able
to prove to those that are in authority if I may be thereunto admitted:
notwithstanding I find it not mentioned throughout his whole D^sc^uery, in
what one partic^uler thing I am contrary to my self, wh^rof to the wi^e and
impartial Reader I leave the c^nsideration, as also of the manifould
contrariet^es or particular things wherein the Discou^rer is contrary to
himself in his Dis^ouery: in number 15. which in their propper places I have
noted, and to judge him of his own mouth: desiring the Discouerer in his next
treatise, to reconcile those places in his Discovery: and to show how I have
either ignorantly mistaken him, or maliciously perverted his words or else hold
his peace altogether, and by his silence proclaim to all men the falsehood he
has hitherto maynteyned: for that he will confess the truth, and sha^e
himself to give glory to god, (which for him were a happy thing) thereof
there is little or no hope.

OF CHAP. 4.
How M. Dar. and his friends to discredit So. confession did falsely report,
that he was induced thereunto by promises threatenings and enchantments
Discouerer
Amongst many ways whereby men are corrupted, and induced to speak falsely,
allurements by fair promises, and threatninges have not the leyst force: which
being very well known to M. Dar. and his good friends, they thought it might
carry some good probabillity, page 191.
and serve for a shift, to give it out: that So. was so wrought and drawn to
affirm, that he had dissembled. But how untruly they have charged him herein,
the depositions following will declare

So. page 191.
( as the Disc. says) deposes, that he was not induced by any promises so to
confess, but did it willingly. And M. Hurt, M. Iackson, M. Freeman, and M.
Gregory testify, that he did of his own free will without compulsion anyways.
The men that were chiefly suspected to have dealt with So. page 193.
as here it is supposed, were John Cooper and Nicholas Shepherd: whose
depositions follow. I never knew (says Shepherd) of any promises made to the
boy, page 192.
to confess that he had counterfeyted: but I remember that M. Jack son
promised, page 193.
that if he would declare the truth, he would be good unto him and help him to
a service in London. Indeed I confess, that in one of the boys fits at S. page
192.
Ioanes I threatened to have a pair of pincers to pinch him by the toes, if he
used these tricks. And John Cooper thus: I do not know any that persuaded So.
to confess himself to be a dissembler. Again So. (after his coming to S
Ioanes) did pretend himself within a day or two to have certain fits, page 193.
whereupon the said Cooper, putting at one time sundry wives out of the house,
(at whose coming he the said So. did fall into one of the said fits) and then
giving him some words of correction, viz. threatninge to whi^ him, he the said
So presently rose up. By neither of these depositions can it be collected, that
they threatened the boy to say he had dissembled, or that thereby he was induced
so to affirm.

Darrell.
And ^eere is all the Disc. proof of that he says, and disproofe of that I
have affirmed. If So. testimony be true (else sure the Disco. would not rely
so much upon him, nor produce him as he does eueri hand while, for the proof in
a manner of every particular thing, wherewith it pleases him thus falsely and
injuriously to charge me) that which he has testified concerning this point
is to be regarded, aus. ^.
which here follows. After So. had for the space of a month, even during
that time he remained at S. Ioanes, said he counterfeyted, he was brought
before the 12. Commissioners, affirming the same, until being cast into sundry
fits, and vexed anew by satan (wherein the deed it self showed the contrary)
he acknowledged to the Commissioners, that he did not dissemble. Thus saying
(viz. that he dissembled not) and being tormented by the devil, he continued
10. days at one Ed. Garlands house, in which time he was asked by Garland and
others then present why he had counterfeyted, seeing it was other wise? He
answered, and after set it down with his own hand writing, (which is yet to
be seen) thus: Being at S. Ioanes there came unto me a thing like unto a dog,
and said unto me etc. And Nicholas ^he pheard said, and if I were in a fit
again, he would fetch a pair of knypknaps and a rope, and he would make me
confess, (meaning that he was a counterfeyt) or else hang me, And John Cooper
and Shepherd said, and if I would say, that I was a counterfeyt, that M. Mayor
and the Aldermen would give me ten pound, and I should set up any trade that I
would, and I had better to say that I was a counterfeyt and live like a man,
then to have nothing. For if I should say that I was not a counterfeyt, and go
into the cleargyes hands I should have nothing

If this answer and hand writing be true (and it is greatly confirmed by
Shepherds deposition and made manifest to be true in part) this point is
cleared and it thereby evident that So. an^ ^.
was induced by promis^s and threatenings to say he counterfeyted. 2. This
appears by the aforesaid depositions, for howsoever the former depo^ents
being^ odlesse men, not fearing an oath, deny the promise, which doubtless they
from the Mayor and some of the Aldermen made known unto him (for as I remember
M. Iackson Alderman acknowledged as ^uch in the town hall in the hearing of
many, but said they did it in pollic^e, to draw the boy on) least they should
bring some disgrace upon the said Mayor and Aldermen, yet Shepherd we see
makes mention of a promise, if he would declare the truth, that is, confess
that he had counterfevted: for he had not until that day affirmed that he did
not c^unterfevt, which if they had accounted for truth, that he had declared
unto them already, A promise then viz, to be good unto him etc. was made to
So. if he would conf^sse a counterfeyting, called ^eere the truth. And page
179. Shepherd deposes thus: So. upon my promise that I would be his friend,
and procure him favor from M. Mayor (...) his brethren did confess unto me,
that all he had done in the course of his former tricks were but counterfeyted,
whether now there was any promise made to So. by Shepherd and he induced
thereby to say he counterfeyted. Let the discreet Reader judge, as also
whether this deponent of the Disc. and for counterfeyting, be not forsworn.

But that by threatenings he was induced to say he dissembled it is by their
depositions evident. For So. being in one of his fits, the one of them
confesses that he threatened whip him, the other to pinch him with a pair of
pincers, if he used any more of those trycks that is counterfeit tricks: the
learning of which and never using them afterward as it is confessed he did
upon these threats, carries with it in reason a secret or still confession of
counterfeytinge. which I say was sought and aimed at in these threats. page 178.
This furtheir appears by Shepheardes deposition mentioned a little before:
The day after ( says he) that So came to S. Ioans he did counterfeyt himself
to be in a fit, whereupon I told him whilst he was in his tricks that if he
would not leave and rise up I would set such a pair of knipknaps upon him,
as should make him to rue it: and thereupon So. did presently rise and lest his
said tricks, and had no more fits, whilst he continued there, being the space
almost of a month Here we see that Shepherd swears that So. counterfeyted,
and that being so persuaded he threatened him if be would not leave his
counterfeyting, now let every one judge, whether it is not likely that with the
forsakinge of his counterfeyting he sought not for a confession of
counterfeyting: we are to observe here that Shepherd threatened So. with a
pair of knipknaps if be were in a fit again according to So. answer and
writing, which may well induce us to believe So. in the rest he has uttered
with the sa^e breath, and namely that Shepherd said he would make him
confess, that he counterfeyted or else hang him, with the roape that he
threatened to fetch with his pair of knipknaps. 3. Speaking of this his
threatening it is said, that thereupon So. left his tricks, and had no more
fits. The ti^e when So. made this confession is to be marked. It was presentlye
after this threatening and promising, and not before. These things considered it
cannot be denied but that So. by promises and threats was induced to affirm
that he had dissembled: at the least, that in my Apollogy I did not falsely
report hereof as the Disc. in the argument of this Chapter affirms but
according to the truth: Mv words are these: For the obteyning of this
confession, Cooper and Shepherd (two most lewd and evil disposed persons)
threatened him the one to whip him, the other to pinch him with a payr of
pincers, as appears both by So. confession, and their own vpp^n their oaths
before the 12. Commissioners: upon occasion of these words and for the
disprouing whereof this chapter was compiled by the Discouerer.

Discouerer.
But by M. Dar. own rule, in that So. being in a fit heard their said
threatening speeches, page 19^
and rising up had no more fits, whilst he was at S Ioanes, it seems to be
apparent that he was a dissembler.

Darrell
My rule lets not but that So. being in a fit might hear: for I hold that
howsoever those in whom are unclean spirits, be in their fi^s ordinarily
deprived of their senses, yet not always, nor at all ties but is then and so
ort otherwise, as the spirit shall see it make for his advantage, which I
affirm of this fit, and every other that S^. has had (specially) since that
time, and has still I doubt not in secret bofore some, if it be so that in
these fits he does hear. But how does the Disc. prove that So. did hear
their threatening speeches in the fit he men^onetn? su^ery not at all. It is
to no purpose to say that he seemed to hear by that which he did presently upon
their threatenings for they that be possessed ^eeme to others to see, when they
see nothing, to go with their feece, to strike with their hands, and to
speak, when not they but the devil performetn these things, as has already
been showed out of the scriptures: even so they seem to hear, when they hear
not And for the rising up, that is the giving over his tricks, having no more
fits for a month: we must understand, that he which did these tricks (as the
Disc. prophanly calls the^) could as easily put an end unto them, and would
readily do it, when he saw it make for his advantage, that is, the persuading
of the world, that So. had counterfeited what and how greatly the devil
gayneth by this cunning trick of his above the rest ^e has done in So. body,
every one may now see, and we that have been thus long prisoners do feel.

That which the Disc. adds concerning sorcery, charming and anointing, of So.
is false fabulous and slanderous: neither my self nor any of my friends ever
dreamed, that through these or any of these Some. was ever induced or compelled
to say that he had dissembled, as the Disc. affirms, but proves not nor
never will be able justly to prove: page 194
only this it was: Some in Not. suspected least whiles So. remained at S.
Ioanes there were that sought the casting of the devil our of So. that
counterfeyted, not by prayer and fasting, but sometimes by coniuration, at
other time by an ointment wherewith M. Gregory a reputed papist caused him to
be anointed. It is said by the Disc and deposed by his witness Shepherd and
Cooper that by M. Gragoryes appointment, this ointment was given him to make him
more nimble to show his tricks: yea but it should seem that it had an other
odd quallity in it, for when Shepherd gave some of this oyatment to Mary
Cooper, (Some. sister) to annoint her finger as by his deposition appears, he
said that she should have no more fits, what this ointment was, and where it
was had, whether of M. Gregory himself, or by his appointment of the
Apothecary, does not appear in the depositions, in which point is to be noted
the covert and close carriage of both the deponents.

OF CHAP. 5.
Discouerer
Of M. Dar. (...) 195
ridiculous pretense, that So. was induced by the devil in form of a black
dogg^ and an ass, to say he had dissembled.

Darrell.
But hereof we shall not need to doubt, how ridiculous soever it seem to the
Disc. if we can persuade our selves of the truth of Summers former answer and
handwriting whereupon it relyeth, and is grounded, His words be these.

Being at S. Ioanes, there came unto me a thing like unto a (o) dog, and said
unto me: And if I would consent unto him and say that I was a counterfeyt, he
would give me a bagg of gould, and if I would not, he would make me be hanged,
orelse he would tear me in pieces. And if I would I should do any thing that
I would take in hand, and he would come ^o me like a mouse, and would help
me. And there came to me a thing like an us Summers be a man of that (...) and
h^ste stin^so (...) t^n ticall with M. Ha^s^^tt and the Bishop against M (...).
why are they not as kiud here to believe him in this point, when he ^peaketh
for the clearinge of D^rrell. yea the cause it self also, for which Dar. fusse
reth.
ass and said if I would not say that I was a counterfeyt, he would cast me
into the well, and so went away.

We shall be the better persuaded of the truth hereof, if we first remember
that which by experience has been found true, that it is Satan's usual manner
to appear in visible shapes to them he possesses, and that So. was now
possessed. 2. that So. in his sitts before the Commissioners said (as it were
in the throat) a black dog a dog a dog a dog, iterating the same very often
and speaking at that time no thing else in his fitts. Thyreus chapt. 6. 5. et
cap 7. 6.
3. that three of the Commissioners saw a black dog (in appearance) about the
boy in a fit or fitts, busy about his face, and none other. Now it could not
be but had it been a dog indeed, some others also should have seen him,
there being so many thronging about him, yea surely one or other would have
driven him away, either for the safetye of the boy, or that they might the
better have seen, whereof every one was so desirous: and would never have
endured him to have chopped at his face, as a water-dogge at a duck, as it was
said by some of good credit he did. 4. where this thing like a, black dog
that is the devil, promised to help Some. in any thing he would take in hand,
mening, to do those things he formerly had done in him, because So. saving he
counterfevted (upon which condition he made him this promise) might the rather
be believed to counterfeyt, it is manifest that therein this writing is true,
for that ever since he made that confession until this day, So. when he will
does his trick^ such as none can do, and therefore we may be assured this
thing like a mouse does help him, and when he will, he leaves and puts an
end unto them, as though So. had done all, and not this mouse. S. That the
second or latter part of this writing also is true, as is before showed. Now
these five things being true, as indeed they are, I see not why any should
doubt of the truth of this writing: which being true it is manifest that So.
was induced by the devil in form of a black dog and an ass, to say he had
dissembled: and then is not this Darrells ridiculous pretense?

OF CHAP. 6.
How M. Dar has falsely affirmed, that So. was induced to say he had
dissembled, for fear of hanging: whereas he falling into his fitts before the
commissioners at Not. (upon a former compact) the fear of hanging was one of
the chiefest causes, that he then affirmed, that he had not dissembled.
Discouerer.
There is added a sixth inducement, viz. the fear of hanging: he being
slandered to have bewitched one Stirland to death. page 199.
For the clearing therefore of this untruth: So. before has deposed, that one
cause why about the 14. day of January 1597. he fell again to those fitts,
(whereupon M. Darrell affirmed that he was repossessed) was this: viz. The
fear of such danger, as he otherwise might have fallen into, by reason of the
said accusation, co^ cerniug his bewitching of Stirland to death.

Darrell.
Is not this untruth like to be well cleared by So. deposition? But to let that
go, and to deliver herein the truth. So. being charged with felony and for
the same imprisoned, as is confessed page 149. we all know that at the assizes
he was to be arraigned and therefore in danger of hanging. I desire now to know
how So. could be freed from this danger, by falling into his former fitts. The
Disc. tells us for that th^r by he should be sure to be defended and vpheld
by M. Dar. and his friends so far forth as they were able themselves, or by any
other means that they could procure on his behalf. why but Dar. and his friends
had they been willing and desirous, were not able to deliver him from the
danger he was in, and keep him from his trial, specially the matter being in
the hands of Dar. and So. great adversaries: neither yet did I or anve of my
friends attempt any such thing. as the Mayor with the Aldermen and town clarke
know full well: whereby it is plain that as we were unable, so we desired not
to keep him from his trial: This therefore can be no reason of So. returning
to his old byas of dissanulation. Yea I desire the Disc. hereafter to show,
how possible So. falling again into his former sitts could any way help to
deliver himself from the suspicion of witch^ (...) being the thing that
brought him within the danger of hanging. I am very sure it was the only way
to bring him to be condemned for a witch, and so to the gallows: and therefor
we may be sure it was not Summers, but the devil in So. that being returned
and entering into his house again, fell to his old byas: for thus it was: The
adversaries especially M. Freeman and ^^l. Gregory, having contended for
counterfeyting about 11. weeks, but not preuayling, it so fell out, that one
Sterland of Snenton near Not. having been one day in the ma^kett at Not.
fell there sick, whereof he dyed, but before in his sickness said (a^ his wise
and others affirmed) that So. had trod, upon his hee^e, when he was last at
the said marke^t, and had certainly bewitched him, as appeareeth by page 149.
Herevppon it was bruited throughout Nottingham that S^. was a witch, and not
possessed, and so all that he had before done, or suffered, came from himself,
and his familyar spirit. This rumor spreading it self, the matter was
inquired into, and found out that he dyed (as the physician says) of a bastard
plurisy, in his rauing saying as is afore^aid, which is confessed page 149. his
wife also affirming, that she would not for any thing say that So. had
bewitched her husband. Heerevppon the aforesaid rumor suddenly vanished and
came to naught. But M. Freman and M. Gregory coming from London abont ten
days after, reu^ued the same, and of iu^t nothing made a heinous matter, and
would needs have So. to be a witcn. M. Freeman got to his own house Sterlands
wi^e, and some of her neighbors, and so wrought them that the poor wife and
her neighbors said forthwith after openly in the town hall so much, as
whereupon for the bewitching Sterland her husband to death, So. was imprisoned
and they bound to give evidence against him at the next a^sises. And hereof
So. was not ignorant, being a matter notoriously known to the inhabitants of
Not. Thus we see how So. came to be in fear and danger of hanging, and by
whose means or procurement. what was now to be done by Summers or what was the
safest courie for him to take, whereby to free himself from the danger he was
in, and to save his life? Surely to say and stand to it that he counterfeyted
in all that he had done before, for who would then accuse him of witchcraft, or
give ear to such accusation? If he would affirm that he himself did all by
art in disse^nulation, no body would believe that he had either devil or
spirit, or any thing to do with spirit or familiar, this (I say) wa^ an eas^
and sure way to save his life, an^ so it proved. Again, S^^ might thus think
with himself M. Freeman and M. Gregory who would fa^ne have me to be a
counterfeyt: are they who have caused me to be accuse^ of witch^^a^^, and they
are able to take that order with M. Mayor, and the other Aldermen they
specially ioyninge (...) matter shall (...) stood to the truth, and had never
acknowledged any counterse, (...), for any ^^ing man could see, he had been as
certaynlye arraigned of (...), as ^e ^as accu^ed and ymprisoned for the same,
^^rlands wise an^^her neig^bours had given evidence against him, a^ such a lury
((...) trust) ca^^ed out to have gone on him, as it (...), be would have found
(...) guilty, as well as one at the ^ame a^^nes, that found (...) not guilty of
murmering or be (...) to death the child of (...) Co^per (...) to ^omers. page
200.
Whether So now were d^awne to say he ha^ ^^ssembled, for fear o^ hanging, as
I a^firme, or the care of hangig (...) as the Disc. a^^irmeth ^et the ^^eader
judge. Put the Dis^. proceedet^ yet a little ^urther in (...) proof of that ^e
a^firmeth.

Discouerer.
(...) after that So. upon that o^ca^im, and some others, fell to his (...) in
them about six weeks, page 199.
and did (...) make (...) known, ^or all that time, an^ his (...) to (...)
that So. for (...) again to (...) by^s of (...).

Darrell.
(...) only about ten da^es (...) which the Disc. m^erieth the (...), viz. that
(...) fell again to his dissimulation?

Discouerer.
Assuredly ( quoth the Disc.) this fellow through his acquaintance with satan
(as it should seem) is gra^vne to extraordinary and pre^^np tuous b^uldn^sse:
page 199.
not shaming to say any thing that may serve his turn

Darrell
Whether this latter part may be truly said of himself, and he be judged out
of his own mouth, let him that has heard us both speak judge.

Discouerer.
So. fell into his sits before the Commissioners at Not. upon a former
compact. (...)
and for fear ^shanging (chiefly) then affirmed, that he had not dissembled.
This is by ^egrees made manifest unto you.

Darrell
But how? by So. depositions, which are strengthened by the depositions of
others, these latter I will for a season spare, and we will hear what So
says the principal deponent here. as also throughout the 2. 3. and 4. books
of the Discovery.

Discouerer.
Concerning the first So. deposes thus. page 200.
It being known, that I was to appear before the Commissioners, Nich
Shepherd, and others moved me, that when I should come before them, I should
show some of my trickem such manner and form as I had before done them, and
not rise again until M. Mayor should call me, that thereby (say they) it may
plainly appear to the Commissioners, that whatsoever thou have done before was
done of thine own accord, and merely counterfeyted, This counsel being
agrecable to M. Majors desire (as I was informed) I did willingly yeald unto it.

Now for the second point, page 201.
let So. proceed, upon the aid agreement, I appearing (says So: before the
Commissioners, and after some speeches had with me (by some of them) fell down
and played diverse of my tricks: as I was accustomed to d^e^m my pretended fitts.
There I continued tumbling and acting my tricks for a long time, still
expecting when M. Mayor would call me whi^est I was thus tumb^ng, two did
prick me with pynnes: one in the hand, and an other in the leg, which although
I felt most sencibly, yet I endured it because I still waited, that M. Mayor
should call ^ne, but beforgetting (...) and I being no longer able to continve
in that sort, I did risvp my self, as I was wont to do, in the end of other
my dissembled fits.

Darrell.
Whether there was any comp^ct between the Mayor and Summers it mattereth not,
If there were not, their sin is at the door and will one day find them out
that have so deposed. If there were it came doubtles^e from the (...) of the
devil, who having for sundry weeks before lurked in Somer, (that so he might
the better raise up the euil^ name of counterfeyting of the great work of
god^ and being by the appointment or commandment of god (as is to be
supposed) at this time to manifest himself, thought t^e^^ by to help
^^mselfe, and persuade the world still notwithstanding this his ^^c^uery, that
So. was a counterfeyt. If any demand why should the Lord commaound the spirit
to discover himselfes? I answer, that at is a secret and ^nly known to the
lord: yet it may be, because the Lord having fore appointed a mighty and
wonderful opposition against his manifest work, he would have solemn
witnesses fu^^ t^ereof, for the further strengthening of those who should
beeleue his work, and making those the more, yea out of measure mexcusable,
who should resist and fight against it, per^ase also and partlye to strengthen
and encourage his servants whom he would especially use not only in bearinge
witness to the possession and dispossession, but also to the repossession of
S^mers, which last the world would not endure to hear of: and to put them in
hope (for their further encouraging therei^) that as then after ^athan had
withdrawn and hid himselfe^ a time, whereupon there was great contention,
whether the boy were possessed or counterfeyted, the Lord did discover the
spirit to the manifestation of the truth, and that before solemn witnesses,
so one day after an other manner of contention, I mean far greater, and
before more solemn witnesses, of greater authority, god would vnca^e that ^ul
till spirit and deceauer of the world, to the full manifestation of the truth,
and his own glory, whether then I say there was any such co^pac^ as is here
mentione^ or no, it mattereth not, neither whether (...) were afraid of
hanging^ but the matter indeed to be considered by us is, whether So did those
strange things whereof the Commissioners were ey witnesses, as So. and the
Disc. affirm, or the devil as we affirm.

The Commissioners with sundry others of account and good credit do know, that
before them Some. wallewed to and f^o^^n the chamber floar, or swiftly rolled
with his body stretched out to the full length, in very strange and admirable
(^ea I man truly say) (...) supernatural manner. 2. That he lay before them
with his body swelle^ greatly. 3. His intrall^ were short up and down along in
his body, much like to the s^^o^ting of aweauers s^ittle 4. great violence was
offered unto him thereby to make try all i^ he had any feelinge, and namely he
was pri^ed with p^nns in hand and leg, whereat he stirred non^^re then a
stock. 5. being pricked and that deep, not a drop of blood if ue^^^t. This
pricking with pynn^s, and the induringe the^eof So. himslefe we see confesses,
so it may be^^ did, the not issuing of blood, and the Disc. thought good to
keep that back: but (...) come cure only, yet this I am sure of, that (...)
was held up before (...) where he had been pri^^ed, but the (...) to be there
gathered, and (...) did not (...) because the skyn was (...) by name, that only
pricked (...) men deep, (as M. C^^ge Sma^^ (who (...) of London, as also (...)
down, of purpose (...) would be. Yt now Some. (...) are to order the matter,
that (...) pynnes, a d^euer stir thereat, nor (...) his intra^s, then I deny
not but (...) the Commissioners: otherwise (...) from the devil, and so he
(...) the Disc. will put out the eyes, not only (...) but (...) many others
also.

(...) show his own tricks, and (...) with the Mai^^ was that thereby (...)
Commissioners that whatsoever he had done (...) counterfeyted, or as M Fre
(...) and the (...) them and was asked be (...) fell down, did he answer that a
(...) and in a word so as by his answers it was (...) he could not, or would
not tell of any thing that (...) had done, or wa^ done unto him by others (...)
the company of his counterfeyting, wh^^ (...) why he then did his prank^, but
to induce (...) contrary. So. is produced by the Disc. answerange this (...)
words.

Discouerer.
(...)

(...) durst not speak his mind therein, and call me, seeing the rest of the
commissioners, and many others so confident indeed, that I was repossessed.
Further more I also then feared least M. Markhams, and one ^aques words, with
sundry others, would prove true: who the same morning and ouernight ^ad could
me, that if I were found to be dissembler, I must be hanged: whereas quoth
Jacques, if it then appear that thou art not a dissembler, there can no law nor
Judge hurt thee. In these respects I thought it the safest way for my self, to
yeald for that time to their humors, and to answer as before is expressed, that
I had not dissembled.

Darrell.
For our better understanding of the iugling and deceit here used, we must
know that even as So. was facing it out to the Commissioners, that he had
counterteyted, and yet refusing to counterfeit so again, he was vyolently cast
down, the spirit then trifling excedingly: so framing his countenance, and
toying with his arms and legs as a man in carnal reason would have verily
thought that he counterfeyted: nothing being done but that might easily be done
by any. Our help was thus, that being pu^led by the ears and hair of the
head as (...) they should have naue been plucked of, and there withal his
head beaten so to the floar, at a merciful man would scarsly do to a dog yet
he stirred nor not at all thereat, nor at the pricking of him with pinnes,
neither did any blood issue at the places pricked.

This fit ended, he being asked by the Commissioners what he had done also
what others had done to him, he could tell of nothing, one of the
commissioners askinge him, whether he were not pricked of one of his hands
with a pynne, he answered yes hold inge forth the wrong hand: whereby those
that were present perceived, that he would gladly have uttered those things
that had in that fit be fallen him, if possibly he could, that so still he
might have perswa^ed men that he had formerly dissembled. Lastly being
demanded whether he had counterleted, he answered with a braten face as before
the said fit that he had counterfeyted Forthwith he was carried away by his
keepers and presently after elsewhere in the town fearfully tor mented by
the devil, whereof when tidings was brought to the Commissioners, viz. that
now So. was very fearfully handled, some commanded that he should be brought
back again, which being done accordingly, he no sooner appeared before them,
but he was in a fit, and so proceeded from fit to fit, till he had had
sundry, the spirit in these vexing him indeed, and showing his rage and malice
against man, and not in subtilty as he did at the first,

Where now the Disc. affirms, that So. liinge in the fit, he had at the
first, when he was pricked with pynnes, and out of which the (...) should have
called him, did upon good deliberation (for sooth) change his my^^e, and
according thereto the fit being ended, say to the Commissioners that he had
not dissembled it is v^true, for then be affirmed the contrary, that he had
dissembled, as the Commissioners (...) sundry others can testify: And if So.
did say to the Commissioners, that he had not d^ssembled which I do not
remember, it was after he was sent for the second time, and upon the fearful
vexat^^n be then endured thick and threefoulde by Satan which helps (...)
the (...) at all (...) notwithstanding that were so, yet this that So. and the
Disc. do tell us, is false.

Secondly it is to be observed how the Discouerer proves that Summers thus
changed his mind lyinge in his fit^ why Summers (o) says so, neither can this
be otherwise proved. Also how he proves that Summers at the end of this said
fit, (...)
(o) affirmed that he had not dissembled: Summers deposes it: and there is not
so much as a false witness strengthening it, so that the truth hereof rests
only and barely upon So. credit, which I think is long ago shameruily cracked,
and shiuered both with wise men and with fools. 3. were So. credit better
then, it is, yet the tale which is told us, is so unsavory or rather so
absurd, and senseless, that me thinks it is more then strange that any man
of wisdom and judgment should ever harken unto it, or embrace it as a truth.

For mark I pray you: here is a paltry boy brought in delyberating and
consulting, as if he were a grave man of great deliberation and aduisement.
And when I pray you and at what instant must this grave deliberation of his be,
forsooth even then when he was doing of his rare fayts, and others using their
pleasure toward him: one violently beating his head to the floar, and
plucking him by the hair and ears full soundly, an other pricking him in the
hand with a pyn, a third in the leg: and he in danger to be so further dealt
with, and to have the like hard measure offered him: he knew not by how many,
me thinks that by means hereof his thoughts should have bear drawn an
other way, partly to the tricks he had in hand, partly to his pain and partly
taken up about the present denger and likelihood he was in of enduring yet more
pain, and by reason hereof so perplexed and interupted, as that he could
hardly have fallen into so grave a consultation with himself: and so orderlye
also have proceeded therein from one point to an other, from the first and
weakest reason that moved him, to the second and stronger, and from thence to
the third and most forcil^e of all.

Of all scasons this sure must needs be the most unfit and unseasonable season
for Summers to debate deliberate and consult in: neither dee I think that this
^lot and device of Some. and the Discover (...) sappor wit in it at all, to
make this consultation dete^^ vnation and re^omtion to be (...) or du^ing the
(...) pretended fitts. there would be no ^auor in this. Ye^ had in (...) more
probable if they had said, The fit being en^ed and past, o^ w^ilest (...) stco^
before the commissioners, bethinking himself what answer to make: but take
the ta^e as it is delivered us, viz. while he was in his (...), and I think he
is scarsly well in his wits that will believe it.

4. The third and mayn reason leading him there unto was (forscoth) the scare
of hanging, a^sing of t^^s speech, that if he were found to be a dissembler he
must be hanged. Be it that these we^des were spoken must So. therefore needs
be in such a great per plexity and fear of hanging, as if the very naming
thereof were sufficient to make him qua^e for fear?

Alas poor simple boy, belike he thought that every word was blow. But
wherefore do I call him simple, who deliberatinge and discussinge of matters
before he resolved what to do shows so much wit? where now was all his
ingenye and deep consultation, that scared hanging because of his dissembling?
does not every child know that for cousenage a man can not by our laws be
hanged, page 203.
but is otherwise to be punished?

And if herein he were ignorante, and that none of his friends of themselves
would have toulde him so much, yet he might easily by enquiry have learned so
much: But how proves the Discouerer that these very words of threatening were
used? By the testimony of Summers, and Nich. Shepherd and John Cooper his
keepers, three most vile and wicked men.

Secondlye, we may observe how the testimonye of these two witnesses (for the
third is an accuser and party) do prove the same. If it be proved (quoth M.
Markham) that thou art a counterfeyt, thou deseruest to be hanged: Thus
deposes Shepherd and Cooper^t^ us M. Markham said to So. that if he were
found to be a dissembler he must be hanged. page 204
Again Shepherd thus: One Jacques said to So. in the hearing of me, and of
John Cooper that if he were preued to be a counterfeyt he must be hanged And
Coper deposes after this manner, One Jacques told the boy, that if he did
counterfeyt he would be hanged: Concerning M. Markham his speech, the one
deposes th^w deseruest, the other thou must be hanged and the one swears
Iaque said he must the other he would be hanged: Hereby it appears that
these are false witnesses being so variable and dissonant one from an other:
Finally, take Shepherds words concerning M. Markham, and Coopers concerning
Jacques and there was ^n all ca^se why So. should be afraid of hanginge. and
less why the Discou. (...) ea^e (...) into the^e words. This was threatening
and terrifying indeed, page 149.
able to hau^ sha^ the c^^ancye of a stronger man: wherein the Disc. has
relation to the other fear that So. had of hanging, whereof he speaks in the
beginning of this chapter, as though ^orsooth this rear ^ar surpa^sed that.
But every child may see the contrary, and the Disc. vain b^asting: for deeds
^arr patle words: And I am ve risure, that had a stronger man then So. been
accused of felony, and for the same been imprisoned, as So. was, as the Disc.
himself confesses, which caused the fear of hanging in So. mentioned before:
though never so innocent, yet sometimes he would have feared the loss of his
life and so would no man or understanding in this case, though he were guilty
of counterfeyting, as So. was not. And thus much for answer to this
calumniation.

OF CHAP. 7.
Discouerer.
How So-was persuade by threatenings and promises, page 104
to have continued his dissimu^ation, after he had been before the
Commissioners at Not. until M. Dar. might again dispossess him.

Darrell.
Why might not some persuade So. having confessed the truth therein to
continue, what is this to the persw^ding o^^ to (...)
and to take heed of (a) returning with the dog to (...) vo^ntye? And what did
they therein ill beseeming them? The Disc. must remember that he has not yet
proved So. diss^mulation.

As for the threatening and promises the Disc. prateth of, he that will vouch
are them the reading, cannot but see, that they deserve rather to be laughed
at, then to have any answer at all.

Discouerer.
The Judges coming to Not. he the said So. being sent for before the L.
Anderso^ confest^^ at large, page 205
how he had dissembled, and there shewinge his tricks before has Lordship and
diverse others, in some extraordinary sort, to th^se that had not see^^ him
before, he presently started up, upon his Lo. bid^ling him to arrise, and
h^^wed himself to be as well as he was before.

Darrell.
I do in all reverence counsel and adueise my Lord Anderson and whosoever
heereto fore have seen, or hereafter shall see So. do his tricks, or rather
the devil his tricks in him, to turn away their eye from So. falling down,
and arrisinge at a call, to the things acted before them. The which albeit they
be easy to be counterfeyted in comparison of the rare effects the spirit
sometimes sent forth in Summers yet ^et them be well exam^ned, and they will be
found to be such, as can^^o^ done ^, any humane or natural strength and
agillity, and ther^^ (...) come from a supernatural power, which is the devil.
As for So. ^^ing down and rising at the beck of man, that comes from (...)
of the spirit thereby blyndeing the eyes of men, and (...) taken to think,
that it is not he, but So. that does the feyts, for (...) must remember that by
the holy scripture it is plain, that a (...) spirit possening one, as he does
now Summers, has the ouerru^^g or the body and parts thereof, at his pleasure,
as the spirit of man (...) when therefore the devil will, (and he will when he
sees it to make for his advantage) he can as well and does as readily cast down
the body of Summers and raise it up again, as any of us can do by ours Again
he that does those things I mean the supernaturell accidents men beheld in
Summers lying on the ground, can as easily throw down Summers and raise him up,
or put an end to his fitts, upon the word or command^^ of a man, that so
Summers may raise up himself: We may here also remember, how some of those in
Lancashire, continued 3. days and nights in a tit, in which time it is
certain they did many things at the speeches of others, and yet it was not
they but tho dyuell in them.

The Discouerer says, that Summers showed his tricks in some extraordinary
sort, It is very true: for the spirit tryfled and toyed excedingly, which
extraordinarilye he had done before, specially exceeded so much therein as then
he did. 2. It was extraordinary in that none of the sons of Adam can do the
like. But the Discouerer should have done well, and to the better satisfyinge of
the Reader, if he had told us the particular tricks he at that time did, as of
the swellinge he had then in his body, but this would have marred the fashiou
of all the supposed counterfeiting.
though nothing so big as in former times, of the exceeding weight of his
leg and arm like (a) iron.

Discouerer
Since which time (says Summers) I have been very well, page 205
I thank god notwithstanding M. Darrell did then and has since diverse times
affyrmed, that I remain still repossessed.

Darrell.
He is not, nor since has been better, then he was for sundry wekes before,
after which it appeared that he was not very well, but was indeed possessed
with the devil. And so I doubt not notwith^andinge this supposed well, and
very well being of his, but that he is so still, and that in due time, god will
make it manifest to all men.

OF CHAP. 8.
Of the depositiones taken on M. Dar. beehalfe at Not. and how upon the
examynation of his own witnesses, it falls out: that the bodily actions of
So. in his fitts, were not extraordinary, as they have been misreporoed

Discouerer.
The commission was procured, and expedited the 20. of March 1597. by these
Commissioners, (if the printed Narration said truly) John Sherwood ^squier,
high Sheri^s, Sir John Byron Knight, John Stanhop, Robert Markham, page 208.
Richard Perkins Esquires, Peter Clarke Mayor of Nottingham, Miles Leigh
Official, John Ireton, John Brown, Robert Fuington, and Thomas Boulton,
ministers and preachers, men for their sufficiency, it is true very meet to
have dealt in a far greater matter. The gentlemen are very well known to be
fit governors, (...) of what natu^^ that nether reuer end ministers of great
learning. no^ worthy gentle men, of great wisdom of sufficiency all of them,
could once ^each unto or were able to Judge of.
and are a greater matter. The gentlemen are very well known to be fit
governors, and are a great stay in those parts of the country where they
dwell. If the examynation of a matter of high treason had been committed unto
them, or any other of a lower degree, concerning the good and peace of their
country, they had been within the compass of their own element, and would no
doubt with all sufficiency have discharged the^ selves therein. But the
hipocriticall sleights of false seducers, in matters that concern religion,
they are of another (^.) nature.

Darrell.
The Disc. knowing that the depositions taken at this time, do utterly
overthrow So. counterfeyting, and prove it as impossible for So. by art to have
done those things he must have done, if he be a dissembler, as it is for him to
walk upon the sea, or to go to Room on a day, and that the said depositions
do receive some credit from the sufficiency and worthynesse of the
Commissioners themselves by who^ they were taken, thought it good policy first
and before all thines, to cast a mist as it were before the eyes of his Reader,
and to put some scruple and doubt in his mind whether these were the very
Commissioners indeed, as I and my friends do bear the world in hand, and yet
he knows full well (and no man better then he) that they were the very same:
only M. John Walton Archdeacon of Darbyshire is wanting in this roll and
makes them up 12. in number. Secondlye, allow these to be the men, then
forsooth he excepteth against them, as well in regard of their partiallity:
branded as before in these words By their preposterous affections they held
with M. Darrell, as in regard of the insufficiency of the gentlemen, closely
employed and marked in these words: They held not themselves within compass of
their own ^lemente. Concerning the first we must know that these are only but
the words and florishes of the Disc. and that indeed and in truth there is no
su^^ matter, all the chief of them (one only excepted) being mere strangers
unto me, and two of the other my great adversaries, nay I may truly say, that I
did not know any living that did more deadlye hate me then M. Walton. As
touching their svfficiency, albeit in other things the Disc. we see does surely
acknowledge it, yet in this present case of counterfeyting he has a glaunce and
wype at them, as if they did not well know what they did: for why alas poor
gentlemen they did not (forsooth) keep themselves within the compass of their
own element. Mark here good Reader: Peter Clarke, Richard Hurt, Anchor
Iackson, Richard Morey, and William Freeman, Aldermen of Nottingha^, Samuel
Mason gent. William Gregory Towne-clarke, and Samuel Harsnett the Discouerer:
whereof the most are tradesmen, and some very simple men, did not exceed
their bounds, went not beyond their compass, but held themselves within
their element in the execution of their several comissions: But the aforesaid
gentlemen that had this matter in examination before (notwithstanding the
gentlemen be of great wisdom and sufficiency) did by the censure of the Disc.
ouershoote themselves and went beyond their element.

A strange thing: But it may be that S. Harsnet, if none if his fellow
Commissioners, has that special gift whereof he speaks page 28. which in
his learning he calls the gift of discerning spirit^ which is a measure of
gods spirit, to discern betwixt counterfeyts, and such as were in deed
possessed: which none of the other has: vf he have so, yett me thinks these
other commissioners should at least be able to tell whether So. being pricked
with pynnes before their eyes. stirred thereat or no^ and whether any blood
issued out: whether his body swelled etc. and this (with such like) in this
case sufficed, and is sure within the compass of their element.

Discouerer.
And conscerning also the witnesses themselves, much might be said for their
excuse. page 209.
They having conceived well of M. Darrell, could not easily suspect any
treachery in him. that is as much to say, that they did not s^^ wear themselves
more, if S^r^^rs count sered as the In^^. will have it.
And to say the truth these grounds presupposed to be true (which M. Dar. had
taught them) viz. that whatsoever he did or spoke in his fitts it was not So
but the devil that did and speak it: it may rather be maruayled, that they
deposed no ( a) more, then blamed that they deposed so much.

Darrell.
Mark I pray you the vnconcionable proceeding of this Discouerer: First in his
preamble to the depositions, something be says to exte^^uate the oversight of
the commissioners, then for the excuse of the wit^^sses he tells us that the
witnesses also conceived well of me, or were (...) preposterouslye affected
toward me and thence also it came that they deposed in this manner as they
did: what a thing is this: that a^most all men should thus a^fect and love me:
whom others so much ^etest and abhor? The Commissioners they through their
preposcerous affections to me ha^ their eye of wisdom blinded: (...) 208.
so as they like vnwi^e men as they were, held with Darrell, believing that Some.
had not dissembled whereas the wiser sort believed Summers. The witnesses (being
no less then 17.) conceived so well of me as for the affection they bore me
(i^ the Disc. say true) they purposely forswear themselves: for it to those
things which upon their oaths they did avow, page 207.
they did depose not for that they saw and feit any such rare and impossible
things in So. as they deposed: but upon some partial and corrupt affection
toward me: then can it not be denied but that they did statly per^u^e
themselves: which if it were so the Disc. being a minister of the gospel,
might have been better occupied a great deal to have ^isp^ayed their
corruption and agrauated their sin, then thus to have pleaded in their
defense and excuse. An other thing whereby the witnesses were drouen to depose
as they did, was (says the Disc.) a fall and deceiptfull ground they had
received from M. Darrell viz. that it was not Summers, but the devil that did
and spoke all in his fits: To this I answer that notwithstanding any speech
they heard from me they themselves could well enough tell what they heard felt
or law in Summers: my speech could not (sure) put out their eyes or deprive them
of their senses and feeling, whither the things were spoken or done by So. or
by the devil, that was nothing to them. Moreover, almost all the witnesses
deposed to those things which they partly felt, and partly saw, before they
heard my voice at Not. as appears by the depositions (...) speech then of
^^ne could either so bleare and dazell their eyes or bewitch and ^e^um^ne their
s^nces to make them quite void of sense we^ in conclusion the Disc. do^^
heerevpon tell us that it may rather be maruayled they deposed no more, then
they blamed that they deposed so much. what a ^e^ceresie speech is this, and
how ill beseming any that professes himself to be a christian much more a
minister of the gospel. From hence the Disc, to the end of this Chapter
sets down the retractations of sundry of the deponents yea he bears the
world in hand, that they have all of them retracted all that before these
commissioners they had former^y deposed: Mow it is a sin and shame for any to
retra^^at which he has before absolutely advisedly and vp^^ good groun^
affirmed upon his oath. But a greater syune and shame it is to iusti^^ (...) in
so doing Secondly among these retractions there be some, (as forthwith will
appear) which have directlye (...) them^^ the Disc. report their depositions
truly. Now what (...) ab^m^nation is this, that a Bishop and his Chaylayne who
take upon them to be cen^urers and reprouers of men's faults have no reproof
for the per^ured, nay be ^o far from dealing so with often^^ of (...) that
they rather maruayle that ^hey are no more per^ured.

Discouerer
But one thing concerning our witnesses in hand, is worthy of a consideration.
that the most of these that were examyned, were, but simple persons, and such
as had not been past twis^ or thrice with the (...) of his trouble. page (...)
Some (having threescore ready) would have produced his (...) if witnesses
first, but peradventure it was thought good po^^icy to ^ay the burden upon the
s^mp^er sort.

Darrell.
A third and principal exception against our witnesses is, that they were
simple me^. I answer, some of them were gentlemen of wor^mp, others gentlemen
by office, 4. preachers. In a word none of the are accounted by such as best
know them, to be more simple then other men: yea I dare be bold to say not
any of the 17. deponents be so simple as some that I could name of the latter
Commissioners, which is a shame forsome, and disgrace of their commission. The
4. exception is, They had not been past twice or thrice with the boy. It is
most untrue, for sundry of them had been often with him in his fits, some almost
daily with him for the space of a monneth before, and one was continually in
the same house with him day and night. And where he obiecteth that I having 60.
ready, it had been fit I should first have produced my chief witnesses: we must
understand that the commissioners sitting two days together and calling for
some to prove now this, now that, one while this ympossible thing to be
counterfeyted, an other while such other matter as in their wisdoms they
thought good I was constrained to send in such as were then at hand. But how
knows the Disc. that these are not my chief witnesses? He that adu^^edly
considers of their depositions, will find that they have deposed materially
against counterfeyting, and so much as the world is not able to answer, much
less the Disc. with all the help he has from his miserable shiftings,
wreastings and reexamynations. Again if there were any omytted, which could
depose more materially and fully against this supposed counterfeyting, then
does this cause and work of God sustain the more loss, and is to the Disc
more advantage: he might well therefore have held his peace and contented
himself with that which is already deposed. But in all likelihood he would
heere-vpon pe^^ ade his reader, that the things deposed are of no moment at
all, but easily avoided and wyped away with a wett finger. But alas this is
harder for him then he ymagineth: It is beyond the compass of all his ^ca^ning
and wit, as may appear by that which he has done already: for having herein
labored what he can by such countenance and authority as he could possibly
procure, yea and pressed every thing (...) the uttermost, yet in the end
after all his sweating, canuasing and (...) he proved just nothing in the
acco^nt of any man of wisd^^ (...) and iu^gment: as I trust will ymed^ad
appear upon the (...) nations themselves. Had he not better then have sit
(...) and win^ed at these depositions, or smoothly passed by the^, as he (...)
by diverse other thin^s, as if he had not seen them, then thus to have strygle^
and striuen like a bird in the lyme, to the utter disgra^e and overthrow of
^imselfe and the pretende^ counterfeytinge he so earnestly stryueth for. And
thus much for answer to his coging and g^auering preface. Now to proceed to the
eamininge of the Dis. re-examynati^ns. That this may be done the more thoroughly
and exactly, I will first set down the first depositions of those whom the
Disc. has re-examyned, (where he either has not done it at all, or else but
in part) and so comparing their former and latter depositions or
re-examynations together, we shall plainly see what those witnesses have
retracted or qualyfied, and how worthily and substantially this Disc.
conuinceth the depositions of the 17, taken by the above named 12.
Commissioners.

Robart Aldridge clarke viccar of S. Maryes in Not. sworn and examyned,
says: Narration dep 2
that first he coming to W. Summers upon thursday being the 3. of November (as
he thinks) he found him lying upon a bed, no beddcloathes lying upon him, but
only his hose: and saw a thing runninge up his right leg to the quantity of
a mouse, and he calling unto god by prayer, ymediatlie it removed out of the
right leg into the left, and laying his hand thereupon, imediatly it removed
into his belly, where it did swell to a very great quantity, twice so byg as
his body as he thinks, and from thence in to his breast, and there it was the
bigness of his fist, and from thence into his neck and from thence under his
care, where it remained in the bygnes of a french walnu^t, not changing his
former cullor, and so remained there for the space of a quarter of an hour.

And this examynate further says: that he heard in a strange hollowish voice,
that he was his, and this examynat answering said that he lied, he was gods:
and that he had made a promise unto god in baptism to be his, then the voice
answered, that he was god Christ and a king, and that he made baptism, and
that he made him his by a new covenant.

This examynate also further says, that the said W. So. had such strength, as
five men had much ad^o to keep him down, duringe which time he exceeded in
swelling, skriking roaring and velling very fearfully, gnashi^g of his teeth,
and soaminge at his mouth. And also says that standinge in the hall he heard a
great knocking in the parlor where the boy lay, and suddenly he rusted in,
where he sound the boy alone in his bed, lying with his face upwards in his
fit, with his mouth drawn awry and his eyes staring, as though they would have
started out of his head. And kneeling down to prayer h^^d the k^^cking again
under his knees as be thought And in the b^dd under the couerlet he saw the
form and shape, as it were of five kythnges in (...) to the vi^w of his eye.
And again this examinate saw the b^d^^ (...) at the sect to shake, move,
and leap as the leaves of an Aspon tree shaken with the wind.

Now follows the Disc. re-examynation of this deponent. Discouerer.
M. Aldridge being asked, why heretofore he bad affirm^d, that he per ceaued,
whilst S^ was acting his tricks, the forms as it were of k^things, under the
couerlet that lay upon him, the said couerlett being betwixt his eyes and
them, M. Aldridg page 210.
rather then the forms of wholpes, of conneyes, of ra^tts etc. answers, I
think my so affirming did proceed of this etc because I have heard before,
that certain witches had spirits in forms of kithings, and those forms then
came to my mind. And again I do not very well know, that a man's senses may
be deceived. Besides I was then very greatly afraid, which is a great means
to deceive a man's senses: being a mighty passion, th^^ w^ll procure many
ymaginations, and cause a man to think that which is b^t (...) to be great,
that which stands, to move: and that to be, which is not. Whereby I confess
(my great fear considered) that I might be deceived, in affirming many things,
concerning the particularities of the said So. fitts: and I verily think it
may be true, that So. affirms, of making certain motions with his fingers
under the said couerlett, and of his knocking against the bedstock, whilst I
was praying by his bedside.

Darrell.
M. Aldridge being re-examyned denies not, that he saw the forms or shapes
as it were of 5. kitlings in quantity under the couerlet where So. lay but only
shows, why he rather termed or compared the said forms to kitlings, then
to other such like living creatures, as whelps conneys, ratts etc. occasyoned
thereunto by the interrogatory propounded unto him, except we gather the same
out of the last words of his deposition. But be it for fear, or through the
cunning of his examyner he was drawn unawares to retract that he had before
concerning this point deposed: was there therefore no such supernatural
accident under the couerlet, as the Disc. would have men he^revppon to
collect? why besides this deponent, there have 4. others deposed to this rare
accident, as has been declared before, whereof twoe at the least viz M. Th.
Gray and Ioane Pie have been likewise re-examyned thereabouts, but we hear
neither of retraction, nor yet of qualification thereof, whereof we may rest
assured that they itera^ed and affirmed the same again upon their
re-examynation. Shall now the rest be per^ured, (as needs they must (...)
there were no ^vch accide^^) beca^^ of the (...) of one. (...) more, does this
prove that M. A^^ridge (...) or qualified al^ that ne ^epo^ed at the first, as
the Disc. would ^ayne neerevppon m^^uate, and have the world believe. who ^eeth
(...) not to be otherwise? ^ea ^ora^much as in reason it cannot be but that he
was further re-examyned, and that we hear of no more qualifications, it is
thereby evident that he did not so much as qua^ty that he had formerly deposed,
concerning the running, varya^^ swe^^ng, and ^is supernatural strength.
Therefore those two impo^^ntyes remain (...) proved and vnretracted by M.
Aldridg oath, and to comequently unanswered and vn^uoy^ed by the Discouerer

Discouerer
Whereas Tho. Hayes deposes before the L. Arch-Bishopp of Yorks Commissioner^
at Not. page 212 Tho. Hayes
that he saw some thing runn out of (...) So. ^egg into the (...), and thence
forthwith into his belly, swelling the same: insomuch that the same was much
bowned upwards: and when ^he same departed thence, be saw it plainly in his
throat, in his tongue, and in his cheek, near to his (...)-^oote, to the
quantity of the yolk of an egg, which he taking between his fingers, foun^ the
same to be in sostnes like the yolk of an egg. Being reexamyned, he says
thus. I saw a swelling in his cheek, to the quantitye of the yo^k of an egg,
and in his throat of the same quantity: further then his throat and his face,
I could not nor did see it: So. ^ying in his clothes. But I saw a ^tirring
run down his breast, and into his legs, without any risinge or quantity, that
I could discern, saving in his bel^y, the boy at that time lyeing on his back
somewhat bended.

This swelling and running of somthinge in So. body, is one of the chief
sup^rnaturall actions or passions, (for the Apollogy it seems knew not
whether to cal^ them) that M. Dar. and the Narrator do insist upon, for the
proof that So. was possessed. But if they were no other, then M. Hayes upon
his examynation has deposed: there was no great strangenes in them. It is
supposed that M. Dar. will be very angry, to have these supernatural runnings
so extenuated: But he must be content, for it is very agreeable to his former
success.

Darrell.
See you how this man tryumpheth before the victory, yea before his adversary
once meet him in the feilds. I may very well say to him, (...) 11
as Ahab said to Benhadad: Let not him that girdeth his harness, boast
himself as he that put-eth it of, To prove that So. has not counterfeyted,
among sundry other actions or passions to the number of 20 at the least, every
of which is supernatural, that is such as neither can come from nature, nor
art compass, I account the running and variable swelling which So. had, to be
one of the che^est: So. (say I) had a swelling between his flesh and sky^ne of
a variable bigness, in some part of his body of the bigness of an egg, in
some other bigger, some se^^e, swiftly running up and down along his body,
sometimes making a stay for a quarter of an hour and sometimes less, in this
or that part of the body. It was seen and felt (to let other parts go) in his
foot, and to remove from toe toe, and in his forehead, and other parts of his
face his ear roots. yea in his very tongue, and which is most of all, to
thrust out his eyes extraordinarily big a blackness being sundry times upon
them for the present. Besides, being in the one arm it would be forthwith in
the other, and so of his legs, and when it made any stay in leg or arm, as
often it did, then and duringe that time the same member was as heavy and
inflexible as if it had been iron. That such a swelling there was I prove by the
depositions of 11. Two we have heard already, namelye M. Aldridge, and M.
Hayes both preachers: the rest follow.

W. narration dep ^
Hynds sworn and examyned says, that at his coming unto the said So. he did
see a swelling in his neck to the bigness of a great wallnutt, and from thence
it removed into the bone of his cheek, and there was to the bigness of a great
hasell nut: and from thence it removed into his eye and the skyn of his ey
waxed black, and because this examynat had heard before that he the said So.
did counterfeyt, he did lay his hand upon the said swelling upon the cheek
bone, which swelling did tremble like an aspen lease in a calm wind, and was
very soft, but in that place did not charge his natural cullor.

Tho. narration dep. 4
Westfeyld sworn and examyned says, that upon sunday at night being the 6. of
November, he saw So: having a great swelling under his left ea^e,, to the
bigness of a wallnutt, and from thence it removed into the eye, where it seemed
not so great, but caused a great blacknes in his eye and upon that this
examynat laid his hand and felt a certain moving and his ey changed into his
natural cullor ymediatly: and so changed 8. times between 3. and 6. a clock in
the morning.

Ioane Py^sworn and examyned says, that So. being in his fits, she has seen a
swelling in his feet, narration dep. 6
which removed from toe to toe, and so to his leg, and from thence in his body
to to the bygne, of a 3. pen^y white loas and so to his throat to the bigness of
a ratt, and under his ear to the bigness of a walnut, and in his ey^ brees
like a black clock, and so removed from place to place, which this examinate
and others have sensible seen, and felt.

William Langford sworn and examined says, that upon the 7 of November the
said So being extremely tormented, narration^d
and toyled, and his bu^^ns therewith opened, he saw a risinge or swelling, in
the bottom of his b^llie, which to his knowledge m^ued the clothes: and his
breast and s^omak^ b^^rge bare be saw visiblie the same rising, or swelling in
bigness of agoose egg, or a halpeny white loase, ass^nd up to his breast, and
so to his throat.

I Sterlley sworn and examined says, n^^ dep. 12.
that he saw a little thing to move in diverse parts of his body, swelling the
body, and risinge into several parts of the face, to the bigness of a crab or
walh^^t.

Kichard Me sworn and examined says, that on sunday at night being the 6 of
November, ^att. dep. 13.
he came, to the said So. to watch with him about 9 of the cl^^e at night, and
found with him M. Westfield, and others, and betw^ne 3. and 6. a cheke in the
morninge heard a voice saying that he would have his right eye: and then he
would have his left eye, the voice being as he thinks contrary to his
natural voice. And this examinate further says, that a day or two before, and
sundry other times this examinate did see aswelling in his arms and legs,
they being naked to the bigness of a wallnut, and rem^ouing from place to place
into his body, and that he felt it in his belly to the bigness of a 6. brown
loase, and that it was so heard that he could not press it down with his hand
which this examinate assayed to do, by putting his hand under the bed clothes.

I Pare sworn and examined says, na^. dep. 15.
that he saw W. Some. lie groueling upon his face upon the bed, and a certain
swelling or rising under his clothes to the bigness of a mouse: which removed
from place to place, to diverse parts of his body.

I Clarke sworn and examined says, nar. d^^. 16.
that the clothes being taken off W Some. he saw in his breast being in his
shirt, aswelling or risinge to the bigness of a ratte, which this examinate
took hold of: and found it as soft to his feeling as a down pillowe, and he
thinking to hold it fast, it presently avoided, and then the boy said it was
gone down into his leg. And this examinate says, that he saw him at sundry
times when diverse of his members, as his legs, arms, and others were
inflexible, and exceeding heavy, about nature, a^yron.

W. Hunt sworn and examined says, that he did see a thing in W. So fit to
the bigness of a wallnut, nar. dep. 17.
running in the fl^she of the said So. about his face, forhead, and eyes, and
so run about his face to his ear.

That So. then had such a variable swelling as I affirm, such as a reasonable
man will think, W. So could not counterfeite, or command to rune alonge in
his body at his pleasure, every on may see that will not willfu^l be blyndfold
himself: neither can it be otherwise, except these 11. witnesses be perjured,
and with them some others, who have since deposed the same. Now the Disc.
thinks to wipe all this away and to blind the e^es of the world, with
producinge the examination of on of the 11. deponents, and boasts as though
he had answered thoroughly and paid me home as touching this swelling, to my
shame, and proves yea as he supposes that I will be very angry, to have
thessuper natural swellings so extenuated. The Disc. sure takes me to be a
very impatient man, or else this thought would never have entered into his
heart. yet he shall see that I will answer him without any great choler. And
first I affirm that M. Tho. Hayes being reexamined, has not retreacted that
which before he deposed, nor yet qualified the same, except the Disc. counts
this a quallification, as I suppose he does, ans. 1.
that W. So. did then lie in his clothes, which in truth is a very sorry one,
or rather non at all seeing in his deposition before he had said that he saw
was upon all saints day and it is well known that Some. had his clothes on the
day time: And this for another, that the boy did at that time lie on his back,
somewhat bended. which words if they be M. Hayes his. I think he was contented
to be stowe them on the Disco: and his fellow commissioners, so to be ridd of
them: yet notwithstanding he deposes upon his reexamination, that he had a
swellinge in his belly, but in other words. Indeed I confess their is some
difference in words between his first and last examination, and no marvel
there passing a year between them and more, and that the commissioners at this
latter examination thirsted after some difference, contrariety, retractation,
or qualification, framing their interrogatories accordingly, they are the same
in substance: saving that in the first this swelling is urged a little further,
he depossinge that it was in his cheek nere the ear root, and in his tongue:
and in the latter ear root, and tongue are omitted: which was through M.
Hayes his forgetfulness, or else the Disco. has purposly omitteth or conceiled
them, as not serving his purpose. 2. Let us take this examination at the
hucksters hand, and as the Dis. has produced it, ans. 2.
and we shall find theiris small cause why he should so boastingly say, that
there was no great strangnes in the sweling. Is it not very strange to see no at
his own will and pleasure, make a swelling in his throat to the quantity of
the yelke of an egg, which Tho. Hayes being reexamined deposes? ans. 3.
3. But admit M. Hayes had upon his reexamination denied all that he had before
deposed, shall that prejudice the depositions of the other 10? or were they
therefore perjured herein, because he was perjured? It is manifest by the
Discovery that M. Aldridge Rich. Me. Ioane Pie, and W. Hunt, who have
likewise deposed to this supernatural swelling, were also reexamined, but we
hear not a word what these said upon their nor shall not I wa^^ante y^w so lo
go as ^^ay make not against Darrell.
reexamynations to this swelling: one may thereby imagine that they have neither
retracted, nor qualified the same. The constancy now of these 4 witnesses, do
much more confirm this swelling to have been in So. body, then the
retractation of one sole witness, page 213.
does weaken the same, if it had been so that he had alltogeather retra^^ed
that, which he had before deposed, as he has not. The Disc. adds the
deposition of M. Craven. I demauned what his said deposition does in this
chapter of reexaminations: and why he is set among the reexaminate, seeing he
was none of the 17. first deponentes, nor ever examined before. It should seem
by this and some other such like depositions of his, that he was one ready to
help the Disc. at a pinch, when he stood in need of a deposition for his
purpose. And here we may note the cunning dealing of the Disc. who to make
Darrell, seem the more odious and to help out this pretended counterfeiting,
(which cannot stand without such fly and filthy shifts) among his
reexaminants foisteth in this examinante of his own culling. 2. I answer,
that his said deposition is both very^ false and ridiculous, serving the Disc.
not so much to convince or extenuat these supernatural runnings, (which he
does forsooth wonderful soundly before) but to make way to a pretty jest of
his, wherewith he desiered be like to delight his reader. M. Darrell (quoth he)
do not here say, that the devil skipped out of the boys thigh into his
pocket, and turned themself: into a pare of gloves: the diuill may rather be
thought to have rune up and down in his own cosening pate, page 208.
then in the boys body. In ^^ce sort and to the end aforesaid, he brings
in John Wiggen, who was never sworn and examined before. yet the Disc. places
him in the rank of the reexaminants. Finally, he alleges So. authentical
testimony, which never fails him: and thereupon inserteth these words of his
own.

Discouerer
Besides he ( meaining So.) Likewise sets down how he did make the said
motions that seems to rune in his body, page 207.
in these words: I did move first the calse of my leg, then my knebone, which
motion of the knee, will likewise make a motion or rising in the thigh. Also by
drawing and stopping of my wind, my belly would stir and show a kind of
swelling. The bunch as they termed it about my chest, was by the thrusting out
of my breast. Likewise my secret swelling did make the end of my windpipe to
move, and to show greater then usual it is. Again, my moving of my Jaws one
bunch was ea^ly made in the side of my cheke near my ear. And about the
middle of of my cheke, with the end of my tongue thrust against it, these
motions by practice I would make a very fast on after another, so as there
might easilye seem to be a running in my body of some thing, from place to
place.

Darrell.
I desire every on to consider whethrr any of the children of men, admit there
had been no other swelling or motions then this beast confesses, can make these
motions here specified, who can move the calfe of his leg, without moving or
shaking his whole leg? and so I might proceed on to some other motions, 2.
where pretense is made that some swellings were made by So. his tongue specially
in his face: I answeere, that his tongue could not make that swelling under his
ear root, much less that which was in his forhead, and least of all thrust
out his eyes. and cause, ablacknes of them. But I demand how he made that
sewlling in his feet, remo vuing from toe, to toe: it was not with his tongue
sure he did that.

Discouerer.
The Disc. proceeds. Furthermore, on Rich. Me did depose before the said
Commissioners, page 216. Richard M^^.
that he had seen W. Summers stand, and turn his face directly backward, not
moving his body, and that his eyes were as great as beasts eyes, and that his
tongue would be thurst out of his head, to the bigness of a Calves tongue.

But let us see what the said Me has deposed, upon his reexamination. Whereas
I have been conceived, to say and swear, as is before expressed, my meaning was
and is (says he) that he the said So. turned his face agood way toward, his
shoulder, and not otherwis: and likewis my meaning was, is, that his eyes were
somewhat gogling out, but otherwise no more then ordinary. And thirdly my
meaning was, and is, that by reason it was candle light when I saw his tongue
thurst out, and by reason of my conceit of the strangnes of So. troubles,
before I saw him: his tongue being thrust out, it seemed somewhat bigger, then
if So. had been well, I should have thought it to have been.

Darrell.
Rich. Me did depose to about 11 several things, non of which can possible be
done by art, dep. 13.
as appears by his deposition in print: now being reexamined and I trust of
them all, he has only minsed that he said of the bigness of So. eyes and tongue
and turning of his face directly backward: which we regard not at all, as being
of no such moment: does the Disco. think by this trifling of his, that he has
answered all that Rich. Me has deposed concerning So.? he has done nothing
less. Me his reexamination sheeweth some little frailty, but overthrows
not his first deposition. Yea his relenting no more, (all circumstances
considered) does rather strengthen his former depositio^, then his
qualification weaken it. And this I say of Rich. Me, is to be vuderstod
likewise of Ioane Pie: whose deposition containing in it 14. impossible things
to be done by So. or any son of Adam. the Disc. answeareth, Ioane Pie.
with telling us she was reexamined, and of her qualifyng upon her reexminatio^
one (a) sole impossibility of the 14. page 216
But he must know (as is aforsaide) that besides these have not retracted
their first depositions, sundry others also together with them have deposed
the same things: which their retractation, much less these sorry
qualifications of theirs can not convince or disprove. And here we may again
observe the deceit of the Disc. who mentioning scarclye the 10. part of Rich.
Me and 20. of Ioane Pies depositions, pretends to the ignorante reader, as
though he had set down all that they at the first time deposed with their full
answears at their reexaminations. Besides the formers, Henry (...) pa^ (...)
and 217.
the Disc. produces Hen^y Nussey Rich. Newton and Will. Hu^^ who having before
deposed, the two first to S^m. speaking with hi^ (...) wh^e open the third with
his mouth shut close: being reexamined. Henry ^uss^ has qualified, the other
two retracted or denied, that the had before deposed, if the Dis^. have set
down their reexaminations truly: This perjury of theirs, the Disc. calls
the qualif^ing of their former depositions, and interpretations of their
m^^ning. page 211
But if men man be admitted so to expound their own words, we shall never
have any perjured, nor punished for perjury to the end of the world:
notwithstanding I answer: Seeing the Commissioners that examined, did (as I
am informed and do verily believe) threaten their examinats sometimes with
having them before the L^ of London, sometimes with imprisonment, and before
their eyes commanded Henry Butler by name to prison it is no marvel though
among many, some frail men were found, that would rather resent either in
part or in whole, from that which in their consciences they knew to be true,
then hazard and in danger themselves they knew not to what punishment and
trouble. Stronger men then they have done as much in the like case: we all know
how shamfully that notable Apostle of our faviour Peter another manner of man
then any of our examinats, for fear den^ed that he knew the Lord, and that
with an oath, or execration. It is no strange thing then for our reexaminats
(weak and infirm men as they were) to have shruncke and relented, had it been
further then this. 2. Let the very enimyes Judge whether voluntary oaths,
where no profit or fear of evil in the world was like to come unto the
deponents theirby, or oaths compassed partly with flaterie and other cuninge
dealinge, partlye with terrors and threats (as is notoriousl^e known) be more
like to be true 3. Those which have relented are but few, (...)
and can not therefore in any reason prejudice that which the rest being many
have depose ^which is abundandlye sufficient to clear the cause from
counterfeting: and that we disire may be answered: offering to make up the
number of these few pety reuolters (2 or 3. excepted,) with a supply and
advantage if we may be suffered 4 It is to be supposed that if the
reexaminations were (o) seen, it would appear that more is confirmed, then
extenuated.

Dis^ouerer
These were the chief points, which seemed most strange in the said
depositions, taken at Not whereupon it was thought good to have the said
witness, page 218.
examined. And how they qualify their former words, you see it apparent.

These ( says he) were the chief points. Darrell.
vz.. the running swelling, speaking with has mouth wide open, at other times
close shut, the turning of his face directly backward, his eyes being as great
as beast eyes, and tongue of the bigness of a Calves tongue, his body cloubled,
his head between his legs: for not on more then these has the Disc. named. I
answer, that there are sundry other point, besides, and among those some not
inferior to them, which the Disco. does not once name or touch in this his
Chapter of reexaminations, much less return an answer unto them: In the said
deposition taken at Nottingham, it was also deposed.

1. That sometimes his legs, sometimes his arms, were heavy and inflexible
like iron. deposed by John Strelley, artic. 12. Ioane Pie artc. 6.

2. That W. So. had such extraordinary strength, that sometimes 3. 4. 5. 6. or
more were searse able to rule him. deposed by Rob. Aldridg artic. 2. Ioane Pie,
art. 6. John Wood, art. 11. John Strelley, art. 12. Richa, d Me art. 13.
William Langford. artic. 9.

3. when 4 or 5. sturgled with him, (sometimes for an hour together) so as
they were thoroughly wearied, he did not sweat, pante, or change color.
deposed by Will. Langford art. 9. Richard Me arti. 13. John Wood artic. 11.

4. He wallowed, gnashed with his teeth and foamed at his mouth excessiulie
deposed by Robert Aldridge artic. 2. Will. Aldred art. 5. John Strelley art 12
Rich. Me art. 13. Will. I ang^^rd arti. 9.

5. His face and mouth ^earefully distorted, one lip toward one ^are,
another toward another: deposed by William Aldred arti. 5. Ioane Pie arti. 6.
Richard Me artic. 13.

6. His body plucked round upon an heap like a brown loaf: and so rolled, he
was cast up like a ball from the bed 3 or 4 times to geither, half a yard hie.
deposed by Ioane Pie, artic. 6.

7. Being cast into the fire (where he lay with his hand in the fire not
burned) sometimes against the walls and iron bars of the chimney, with great
violence, he received no apperance of hurt at all. deposed by Ioane Pie art. 6.
John Strelley art. 12. Rich. Me art. 13.

8. He told of diverse things done in his absence, without notice given by any
person, deposedd by Elizabeth Milward art. 14. Ioane Pie. artic. 6.

9. In his fits strange smelles were in the place where he lay, some times like
brimstone, sometimes very sweet. deposed by Ioane Pie artic. 6 Richard Me,
artic. 13.

10. A strange knocking perciued about his bed, in his fitts both his feet and
hands being held immovable. deposed by R^b Alared art. 2. Ioane Pie art. 6.
Eliza Milward art. 14. John Pa^^ art. 15.

11. He did cry hideously, sometimes like a Bull, bear, swine, and in asmale
voice impossible to be counterfeited: deposed by Willam Langford arti. 9.
Robert Aldrdg arti. 2. Rich. Me arti. 13.

12. His leg would be crooked with his falls, and could not be strightened,
deposed by Rich. Me art. 13. Tho. blaies arti. 1.

13. In his fites his pulses and temples did not beat. deposed by William
Lang ford, a Chirurgian arti. 9.

14. His eyes was black and changed color in his fites, deposed by William
Hind arti. 3. Tho. VVestfeild arti 4. Rich. Me art. 13.

15. He lay for an hour as one dead: cold as Ice, his face and hands black,
no breath being perceived to come from him. deposed by Ioane Pie art. 6. Eliza.
Milwarde article. 14.

These points, are contained in the aforesaid depositions, and seemed most
strange, as well as the former mentioned by the Discouerer, and if ^uer either
the Bishop or his Chaplain do plead for the diuill again, the must needs
return us answer unto these or else they do but tifle say nothing. Secondly,
he shall do well to make known to the world, what M. Aldridge, M. Hayes, Rich.
Me, Ioane Pie, and the other reexaminats did say being reexamined to the
other points they had before deposed. In the mean season every child may see,
that the Dis. has not performed that he professes to do in the title of this
chapter. vz. to make it plain, that upon the reexamination of my own
witnesses (as he calls them) it falls out, that the bodily actions of So.
in his fitts, were not extraordinary, seeing he has not so much as named
neither was it wisdom to name them see^^ge they must needs have marred the
fashion of all the supposed counterfeiting.
15. of them, and if I should grant him that those bodily actions (or
passiones) of So. which he mentions, were not extraordinary (for which he
says very little, and proves full silily) yet there is enought besides to make
it manifest and apparent to the world that it was imposible for Summers to have
counterfeited.

And whereas it pleases him to speak so indefinitly, and to say that That
said witnesses were examined, closly and cuningly theirby implieing as if they
had been all examined, and so it seems would feign have his reader conceive
and be persuaded, whereupon also: (doubtless) it comes to pass, that he never
mentions neither the number of the first deponents, nor of the reexaminats:
we are to understand, that upon the 20. of March 97. before the 12.
Commissioners mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, there were 17.
witnesses examined, whose names are confusedly set down before: with the
principal things they deposed. Since which time there have been sundry of
the said deponents by the Dis. and other of his colleges reexamined: but how
many I know not, and he himself mentions only but seven with their
qualifications: thinkinge by this mask and vizar of a reexamination, though he
bring in but a few, and of the meanest of the things deposed, suppressing and
silencing the rest of the rare accidents deposed, together with many deponents,
to carry away the cause as it were in acloud, and to dazel men's eyes and make
them believe, that all the depositions ( wherein I and my fellows do so
greathe trihumph) are fully answered, confuted, and overthrown. But we must
not forgett, that of the 17. ten of them have either not been reexamined at
all, or else being reexamined have resisted all their rem xationes, threats, and
allurements, and do through gods mercy continue steadfast and immovable: upon
the testimony of which witnesses (with many more) for besides these 17. their
have been (...) by the Bishope and his commissioners about 13. more deposed,
which have witnessed by Summers many things impossible to be counterfeite.
this truth, I meaine, the impossibility of Summers counterfeiting does re^ye
and stand so sure, that the world is not able to remove it. For if in the mouth
of 2: or 3. witnesses a truth by the ordinance of god is to stand, and every
controversy to be decided: how much more then is this truth to stand stead
fast, and controversy to be ended, even by the Lords own ordinance, in the
mouth of ten times 3. witnesses or their abouts

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH BOOK
The impossibility of Some. counterfei^ing being manifest enough by the last
chapter, in the eyes of any impartial and indifferent judge, were there nothing
else said, nor to be said, then theiris already said. I think it shallbe
wisdom to use few words more concerning the same. Besides, I am afraid the
reader is w^^rye in turninge over such patched and ridiculous stuff as this,
when my self am not a little greiued to see my time (which ought to be more
precious to me the^ the gold of ophir) thus vainly and idly consumed, in
turnninge and rakinge up such filthy and vnsaurie dunge, and were it not that I
am perswa^ed that the Lord has called me hereunto, both for the defense of
mine own innocence, and specially the setting forth of that wonderful work
of his, which wretched and ungodly men do seek by all means to deface, I
wou^d in that regard have buried all in silence long ago. For these causes
(most christian reader) albeit I purpose (by thy patience and gods assistance)
to make the case more clear and plain unto thee in that which remains to be
answered of the objections and surmisses of the Discouerer: yet will I theirin
be as brefe as possible I can, and as the unreasonableness of the adversary will
give me leave: the rather in that whatsoever he coineth and breaths out
against the cause rather then me hereafter, comes out of the very same forge
and shope with the former, whereof I am content to make thy self Judge in the
pervell.

OF CHAP. I.
Discouerer.
How M. Dar. labored from time to time, to make those things that So. did,
and were but very toys, to be thought both strange and extraordinary.

Darrell.
Whether the things deposed to be done by Some. (done indede by the Devil)
were very toys and nothing strange and extraordinary in them: and further
whether the things done by So. were such as he did or could do of himself.
and so argue a counterfeitinge, or whether the did pass his reach, skill, and
power and so argue a supernatural power, namly the power of the devil within
him, let the christian reader himself Judge by my answer to the last chapter.

OF CHAP. 2.
Discouerer
How M. Dar. would not suffer as nere as he could any to deal with So. page 225.
in his fiets, to try whether he were senseless or dissembled.

Darrell.
The ground of this chapter is this assertion fathered upon me: vz. that Some.
or whosoever is possessed is senseless in all their fites: whereunto I have
sufficiently answered in my answer to the 3. chapter of the 2. book.

OF CHAP 3.
How M. Dar. endeavored to excuse So. when he was taken short, and did such
toys, as did argue him sufficiently to be a counterfeit.

Discouerer.
It is objected that his foaming came from a piece of black lead he had in his
mouth. page ^93.
I put (says Summers) a piece of black lead into my mouth, that thereby I might
foame in more abundant manner.

Darrell.
It is true that one a time he had a little black lead in his mouth, ans. 1.
but (as I verily take it) he did not then foame, as partly appears by Edmond
Garlands deposition, (following) who was then present. But be it that he did.
his foaming came not, nor was because of the said black lead: for then another
putting black lead into his mouth, shall their by be made able to foame also
which I think non of understanding will affirm: and trial thereof may soon
be made: 3 we speak of a ^^ming in the time of his first possession, now
foaming, and then foaming, specially in great abundance the day of his
dispossession: and this black lead from whence his foaming should come, he had
only once in his mouth, when he was at Garlands house, as is plain by the
depositions concerning the same, which was almost 20. weeks after the foaming
we speak off. Now although black lead may peradventure have such an odd
mystical quality as is pretended, yet it could not (sure) cause him to foame,
so long and so many weeks before he had it. For theiris no body that deposeh
to any black lead: then and if he had had any we should no doubt have heard of
it: nay So. himself deposes no such thing: but by this deposition we may
rather conjecture, that if the devil caused not his foaming, but himself,
then it came by rolling a stone or soape in his mouth, for so says he I taught
him to do, that he might the better foame, But how does the Discouerer prove
that Summers foaming came of black lead? besides Summers testimony, by the
depositions of two witnesses. In one fit I saw William Summers (says Edmond
Garland) froath at the mouth very much, so as the foame roaped down into his
neck: page 23^
and at on time I found a piece of black lead in his mouth. He does not say,
and at the same time, vz. that he foamed, I found a piece et: but, and at one
time I found et: meaning, another time. So that by this deposition it should
seem, that Summers foamed not when the black lead was in his mouth. From hence
then we can no more conclude that So. foaming came from this piece of black
lead in his mouth, then from the morsels of bread, and gobbetes of flesh,
which he likewise has had in his mouth. But George Richardson deposes more
fully: page 235.
In a fit he foamed (says he) excedingly, and I hereing akind of grating of
some what betwixt his teeth, told Garland the boys keeper: whereupon Garland
taking him by the heaire of the head, and I by his mouth, we shook out of his
mouth a pecce of black lead.

Darrell.
I will not stand hear to show the falshod of man's deposition, but only I
ask, what and if So. instead of the black lead, had in his mouth a stone, or
pine? had the same caused his foaming both at that time, and long before? For
I doubt not but that either of these has as we^^ that virtue and workinge
quallitie in it as black lead has: I am tru^e ashamed to use so many words
about that which deserves rather to be laughed at, then answered: but the
folly of these who beleeiuinge this have in good earnest objected it against
me, as a matter of ^oment, has thus far constrained me.

OF CHAP. 4.
Discouerer
How contrary to M: Darr: page 235.
assertion, Somer, had his senses and understanding in his fitts.

Darrell:
In my answer to the 8 chap: of my 2 book, I have showed, that howsoever
Satan does (no doubt) ordinarily deprive those he possesses in their sites,
of their internal and external senses, yet not all ways, but can and does by
his slyghts so order the matter, as that the possessed have many times their
senses and understanding in as good measure as those that are not possessed, a
thing that I have always held, and never sense I came to any judgment
affirmed the contrary. Unless therefore the Disc. had proved that So: in all
his fits had his per fecte senses and understanding, (which he neither does nor
by any possibility can do) he says nothing at all against my assertion, but
fights with his own shadow, and confuteth a forgerie of his own, which he
faslye charge upon me.

OF CHAP. 5:
Discouerer:
Of the motions and knockings which were heard and seen about Summers in his
fitts, page 238.
that they were done and made by himself, and were not as M: Darr. has
reported, extraordinary or supernatural.

Darrell
This is answered before in my answer to the 4 chap: of the second book: and
may in a word be answered again that all that is their and here objected is
false, absurd, and ridiculous, as has allreadye been showed.

OF CHAP. 6.
How Summers casting himself into the fire, was voluntary, and no extraordinary
matter, as M. Darrell has pretended.

Discouerer
Because the words of casting into the fire (quoth So.) does seem to import
much: page 142.
First I say, that the fires in my Mistress house, and then afterward, in my
father in laws, were but very small, made of slat coals, and so compassed at
the ends and foreparte with bars of iron, that except I should have thrust my
self betwixt the said bars, and the wall, or had thrust my fingers betwixt
the bars, I could not in any wise have cast my self into the fire. But I
confess that M. Dar. having told me out of S. Mark, and like wise having
straightly warned such as keept me in my supposed fitts, that they should be
very carfull to look unto me: I did cast my self now and then into the
Chimney, or upon the yrons or grates.

Darrell.
Concerning this point Ioane Pie has deposed thus On Allhalow even at noone,
narration^d.
or their abouts I with sundry others, being with William Summers, he was
sitting in a chair about two yards from the fire side, and sudd^nly was cast
toward the fire, his head lighting upon the iron that keept up the ^ire, and
one of his hands in the fire: and they being 3 or 4 taking him up to save him
from burning, they could not set him in the chair again: for his legs were so
bowed as they all could not straight them, and be so heavy, as they could
scarce lift him, and that neither his head, hair, nor any part of his body was
hurt or burned by the fire.

And M. John Strelley after this manner: de P. 1^
He was on a sudden cast in to the fire in the presence of all: and suddenly
taken out without any hurt to him by the fire, being of weight as a foresaid.

And Rich. Me thus: And the said Some. would be violently cast into the the
fire, dep 13
standing from the fire a yard and half off, and none of his clothes burnt or
hear singed.

Let now the reader choose, whether he will believe this beast of England, or
these 3. upon their oaths, and many other affirming, and ready to depose the
same, and more then this. And where he says, that I straightly warned such as
keept him that they should be carfull to look unto him: how can this posible
be true, seeinge he was cast into the fire, before then blush for shame you
that plead for Summers.
I came to Nottingham as appears by the deposition of Ioane Pie which also
High Wilson made known unto me at Ashbye, when he came to me their for my
repiare to So. at Not. as he and somof my own family can witness. And where
he confesses, that he cast himself upon the yrons or grats: it should seem
that as the fires were very small (for sooth) and made of slate coals, so the
yrons or grates by means thereof were not hot neither, else the would sure have
burnt him.

Discouerer
Over and besides So. depostion the Disc. produces two others whereof one
deposes that on a time he clapped his buttockes upon the fire, M. Barnard
the other, that he fell down with his shoulders on the fire.

But he was often cast into the fire. so that his being cast at two several
times as is said, James Alwood
if that were so, lets not but that at other times he might be so cast, as
that some bare part of his body lay in the fire: yea it is directly deposed by
Ioane Pie of one time, and before the Bishop of London (as I take it) by Edm.
Garland of another time and place, that his bare hand lay in the fire, and for
some little space as appears by the circumstances, and yet was not burned.
And there are sundry ready to depose, that at another time and place in the
presence of many, he was thrown on his face into the midst of a hot and
great fire, his face bareinge down the hot coals that lyinge thus with a
l^n^ne cap on his head Mary Couper his sister snatched at him, pluck away the
cap, and left face and barehead in the fire: And yet behold no face burned,
nor heaire singed thereby.

OF CHAP. 7.
Discouerer
Of So pretended strength and weight in his fitts, that contrary to M. Dar. and
his friends reports, page 244
there was nothing extraordinary in them.

Darrell
So. say I had such extraordinary and supernatural strength, that 3 sometimes
4. 5. 6. or more, were scarce able to rule him, though they had him at great
advantag: as lying flatt upon the ground, or upon a bed, (yea a low trundle
bed) or tied fast to a chair 3. men for an hour or their abouts striving with
him, though they swet and were in a manner breathles, and theirby forced to
give place to others: yet did he not so much as chang his color, or pant, nay
he was scarcely perceived to draw his wind, as is deposed ergo, So. is no
answer this ^^g^men^ or else yeald to the (...).
counterfeite. For no man can add to his strength by counterfeiting.

Discouerer
The Disc. now tells us that his strength was not extraordinary, And he
proves it first by So. ridiculous deposition, then by the depositions of 7.
others.

Sometimes says Ed. Garland a man that has had great trial of Some.
supernatural strength) Summers strength was but ordinary And again, page 245
I found him often of easy strength.

Darrell
Why this leteth not but that at some other times in some of his fitts, he was
of extraordinary streugth: And this I doubt not but that Garland did at the
same time depose, though we here nothing of it. Yea his very words insinuat no
less. The other six depose that they aparte proving his strength, found it to
be but ordinary. I do not say neither ever did, that So. in all his fitts was
of extraordinary strength, for then indeed Garland and the other six had
deposed materially: but of such strength in some of them he was without all
question and co^tradiction. He foamed we say, he wallowed we say, he was cast
into the sire we say, etc. Yea we say not that he foamed, or wallowed, he was
cast into the fire in all and every of his fittes but that in some of them and
at sundry times he was evidently seen to be thus strangly and extraordinarily
visited. And presuppose that upon the apprehention of alewde person for some
fellonious act, 3 or 4. honest substantia men should bring in evidence, that
such a day and time they saw the p^rtie breakinge up his neighbors house and
taking away his goods were not this evidence sufficient in law and reason to
convince the fell^^, because that at some other time or times, other his good
friends did see him sitting in his chair and reading of a book? For this is
truly the Disc. manner of reasoninge in this case, to bleare the eyes of the
world with, and to prove this counterfeiting if (...) ^^lde, S^^nes (forsooth)
Summers strength was but ordinary: and Sometimes or often (says another) I
found him but of easy strength: ergo S^m strength was not extraordinary, as
Darrell affirms. In like manner he argues before: one a time says on, Some.
clapped his buttocks on the fire another, he sell down with his shoulders on the
fire, ergo So. was never cast into the fire, his face, or bare hands being in
the fire, and he not burned.

OF CHAP. 8.
Discouerer
So. knowledge in his sits was not extraordinary as M. Dar. and his friends
have falslye pretended: neither could he speak Greek, Hebrew, or Latin,
otherwise then he had learned.

Darrell
That his knowledge was extraordinary, I trust it is elsewhere in the history
made manifest. Against it nothing is objected worthy the answering. But alas
poor Summers himself) who never fails the Disc. at a pinch) he good soul
like an honest youth is as every hand while so here brought upon the stage to
patch out this desperate cause, and to depose at large: now whereas to this end I
have alleged that he (a boy scarcely understanding one article of the
Creeddid expound the Creed by the space of an hour togeither or their abouts,
(a thing acknowledged by two of the Discouerers own witnesses) this is
handsomely shad owed, glozed upon and daubed over in these words: that he was in
some sort enabled so to do, by reason that almost every minister, that came
unto him, had interpreted the Articles of the Creed diverse times unto him. It
had been good and a most equal and indifferent course (seeing So. is known to
be an impudent lying wretch) for the strengthening of this glozing deposition,
so unlikely to be true, to have had these ministers known, and there names, that
did thus enable and instruct Some. in the articles of the Creed: or at least
the depositions of some of those who were then present would then have been
taken. It had been no heard matter for the Commissioners to have sifted out
this upon the taking of the depositions, if it had pleased them, seeing it is
deposed (you see) that these Ministers have interpreted vnt^ him the articles of
the Creed diverse times and that in the time of this his tro^^le he was se^ome
or never alone. But admit that such a cour^e ^ere taken by I know not how many
ministers visitinge him in his sickness, (a thing that I suppose no man of
understanding will easily believe) ^et it is a question whether So. were of
himself able to lay up so much, as sometimes he delivered.

OF CHAP. 9.
There was no impossibility in So. sites as M. Dar. and his friends have (...)
p^^tended.

Discouerer
This th^^ Dis. proves by no less then 10. depositions. Now I (...) ( says
Robert Couper) what things the boy (...) in (...) than^^ a^y other of his
numb^enes and capacity may do the like.

Darrell
Robert Cooper being present at So. dispossession, with tears confessed his
sins before us all, being some 150. If at that time he though So.
counterfeited, then those tears of his and confession were hipocriticall. The
truth is that oppressed with fear, upon the fearful sight he then beheld, he
shed those tears and made that confession: as the men of Ephesus did upon the
report only of the like work of Satan: but being now without that fear, as
himself confesses, his mind or judgment as it should seem is clean
altered, as by this and other wretched depositions of his appears.

Discouerer
I was often ( quoth George Richardson) with the boy in his fittes, and could
never see any thing done by him, page 256
but I could do the like.

Darrell
George Richardson page 233. deposes that he saw So. in afitte, where in he
soamed exceedingly Now I think he can not do the like, though he put a peace
of black lead into his mouth to help him, as he says So. then did. And where
he says he was often with him, I spppose his often times, were not above 2 or 3
times.

Discouerer.
Seeing So in his fitts ( says M. Aldred) the fifth of November, page 2^6
heauinge up his belly, drawing his mouth toward his ears: scriching, et, I
departed away persuaded that he was a counterfeite, and that he did nothing,
but that a boy naughtely disposed might do as well as he.

Darrell
But I would feign know what M. Aldred did think upon the 7 of November, upon
which day he preached at So. dispossession, and in his prayer confessed his
sins with tears, on which morning also he said to some, that the said night
his sleep departed from him, upon that he beheld the evening before in Some. as
also what he thought of Some. when he was first deposed before the 12.
Commissioners. It may be their are many thousands in this kingdom which
sometimes thought So. to be ac^ounterfeite^ who now see and confess that it is
impossible it should be for this therefore is nothing to the purpose nor at all
against me that M. Aldred has deposed. For albeit the 5 of November he
speake^n off ne might Imagine those few actions of the boy to be counterfeite,
yet this ^etteth not but that at other times both after and before upon the
sight of other more strange and fearful accidents, he might be of an other
mind. And thus (but for breuities sake) could I par^culerly answer and avoyde
all these depositions of the Discouerer. page 257.


Discouerer.
I never did see any thing that So. Allow that all those and a duzen more say
true vz. that they never saw etc. no did John a Style nor Ihon a Nok^ they are
all we s^e in the negative. therefore 2. honest men in the affirmitiue crase
and confound them all.
did, to make me to think that it was supernatural: says Nich. Shepherd.
and M. Craven, I did not see him do any thing which another boy might not
easily have performed. And M. Foster, I saw nothing but it might be
counterfeited. and M Pare: I could not perceive any extraordinary thing to be
done by the boy, but what any other might well have done: And M Wallis, I
could not perceuie any such strangnes in the things I saw the boy do, and
James Alwood: upon the 5 of November at night: I observed that any body
naughtily disposed, might have done the same. And lastly says Rich. Newton: I
never saw Summers do any thing, but that aboy of his years might easily do.

Darrell.
Because these men were either blind, (...) 1^
or seeing would not see, shall we therefore put out the eyes of others, of the
17 deposed first, and of sundry others deposed since: as also of hundreds
besides ready to depose the same, if they were thereunto called by authority?
All men are not like to Peter and John who said unto the faces of the hie
prists and Elders, act. 4. 20.
that they could not but speak the things which they had seen and heard. 2.
where almost al these 10 witneses which saw So. in many fits depose, that they
themselves could do the like, others, that any body might do the same, yea
easily: how can it be but that they be perjured if they have so deposed
indeed? for their be almost 30 which have deposed to about 20 things
impossible to be done by any natural or artificial power. Besid, by the
depositions of So. and others deposed and examined by the B: and the Disc, and
alleged in this book to prove counterfeiting, and so by the Discovery it
self, it is manifest, that it is not so very easy a matter for one, much
less for any body naughtily disposed, to do the same So. did. Seven came to
carry me (says Summers) whom, as I think, I did very much trouble: whereupon
it was given ou^, that I was so heavy in my fittes as 7 were scarce able to
carry me. By this report it should seem that 7 could hardly carry him, not
because of his struggling, and yet every boy can not so struggle, but for the
exceedinge great weaight of his body (which is by some deposed) whereupon this
report did rise. page 180. and 18^.
It is also confessed and deposed, that he made his belly to swell and did hide
his tongue vz: so as no parcel of it could be seen with a candle, for not
long before and in the presence of the Mayor with some 50 others, his mouth
was by 12 persons or their aboutes looked into with a candle, page 23. 5 page
215. page 201. page 233. page 189.
but no tongue nor parcel thereof was their to be seen, save the root in his
throat: Again, Some: thrust his tongue backwarde into his throat, speak with
his mouth wide open, pricked with pinnes, endured it, foamed exceedingly, that
the foame ran down on both the sides of his mouth, page 2^3.
and about his chinne, and roaped down into his neck: These things
(confessed by the Disco. himself and the friends of counterfeiting, yea
deposed by his own deponents,) can not any body naughtely disposed easily do:
yea hereby it is evident that no body can by art do the like, and theirfore
So: has not counterfeited. Let the Disc. then and friends of counterfeiting be
judged out of there own mouths. And this is the 12. time the Discouerer is
convinced by his Discovery, Before we have heard that the Disc. in his
Discovery has discovered my innocencye: and here we plainly see that he has
done as much for the cause it self. If now hereby the impossibility of So.
counterfeitiug do appear: how much more, when hereunto we shall add the rare
and supernatural accidents mentioned in my answer to the last chapter of the
third book.

Discouerer
Whether these depositions will satisfy M. Dar and his friends, page 257.
it may be doubted, but to any reasonable men they will be sufficient, to show
the vanity of the foresaid pretended imposibilities.

Darrell
The Disc. may now be out of doubt, that these his depositions do not satisfy
me, as also why: neither do they or can they satisfy I trust any reasonable
men, but must needs appear unto them to be as generally vain and frivolous,
so most of them manifestly false, and the depone^ts plainly perjured, if they
have so deposed. Far therefore are they from showing any vanity in the
aforesaid imposibilities, witnessed by a cloud of witnesses. And thus is this
supposed vanity of the aforesaid impossibilities quite overthrown, and made
lighter then vanity it self.

OF CHAP. 10.
How contrary to M. Dar. and his friend assertions, W. So. was accounted by
many in Nottingham, for a dissembler, from the time that he begane his
practices there, page 259 Tho. Porter Ro^. Cooper Ed Garland M. Barnard
until be coufessed the same himself.

Discouerer
This he proves by sundry depositions. One deposes, I told M. Dar. it was
reported, that the boy did counterfeite. Another, I did verily think that he
did but dissemble. A third, many still hold opinion, that the boy did dissemle.
A fourth, I think that So. dissembled: and thus do 3 more depose.

Darrell
The people of the Jews said of Christ, that he was aglutton and a drinker of
wine, and that he had a diuill: yea the pharisees said of him, that he was
aconiurer, math. 11. 19. John 7. ^0 math. 9. 34. and 12 24.
casting out devils, through Belz^bub the Prince of devils. And yet behold
there was never any thing more false. Many, yea generally all the people of
the Jews did think and report, that the disciples did steal Jesus away by
night, whiles the soulders sleept: and I warrant you, math. 28, 13. 15
had the hie priests, (who raised up this slander of the resurrection of
Christ) sent forth Commissioners, enough would have deposed the same and yet lo^
exceeding false: yea not only so, but abhorring to common sense. For what more
absurd and senseles thing can be uttered, then that which the souldires
affirmed, that while they sleept, his disciples stole him away? if Chrst was
gone while the soldiers sleept, as they reported, and was generally believed,
a monge the Jews how knew the soldiers that the disciples stole him away?
and whether he raised up himself, and went away yea or no, as his disciples
affirmed? Thus we see theris nothing so false and absurd, specially if it be
against the glory of god and the good of his church, but if Satan once get
any to give it out in speech, many will believe it, and report it. Even so
albeit it be palpable false, abhorring from reason and sense and utterly
impossible to be true, that Some. did counterfeit, yet not withstanding it may
be bele^ued, reported, and deposed by many. So in considerate and foolish is
man to believe every thing. prou. 14. 1^.
This the old serpent has in long experience known to be true, and that
thereby yea by nothing more he has in all ages prevailed greatly against the
Lord, and his servants. Otherwise he would never spread abroad so manifest
slanders as incessantly he does. And as generally in other cases he does thus
without fail, and ever will: so has he done in these particul^r works of
god, whereof my self have been a witness. Kath. Wright was no sooner
dispossessed, but presently the devil rais^d up one Beckingham an old man in
the ministry, and a kind of preacher, to say that she had the falling
sickness: and yet the man never saw her until her dispossession. Darling being
dispossessed, Satan stirred up one Edward Baker to say that he counterfeited,
and others to report that he was helped by a witch of Staphenhil. when the 7.
in Lancashire were delivered from Satan, the papists gave in out and spread it
abroad that I was a Coniurer, in so much as M. Dickons writtinge unto me
thereof, adui^sed me to come to Manchester, and onenly in the pulpit to clear
my self of that slander. Neither do I doubt but that the same is noysed
among them until this day. For since my imprisonment I understand by writing,
that they report their, that I did put the devil into them all, the very same
words also have s^ndry of them said to my face in prison. And they papists at
they Cl^^ openly and a loud have called my beloved brother M. More, who joined
with me in the same work, (and in regard theirof has been my fellow in bonds)
Conturer. In like sort when the devil was cast out of Summers, he had some at
hand to say that he counterfeited: yea ceased not until by himself and his
instruments, he had not only drawn t^ boy (upon whom the work was wrought;
to say that he counterfeted: but that the same might be more probable and the
rather believed, to affirm besides that I taught him so to do: yea let us
assure our selves that if Satan should be driven out of thowsands hereafter,
against every such work of god, and for the obscuring of it, he would ra^e up
and spread abroad one slander or other: otherwise god should go with the
glory due to him, and man make his best profit thereof, without any resistance
by Satan, which is not possible, except in some special case, and for a
certain time it please the lord to chain him up. Be it then as the Disc.
says, (though in this chapter of his there be much untruth) that So was
accounted by many in Not. for a dissembler: it does no more prove So. to be a
dissembler, then the account and report of the people of the Jews proves that
John the baptist had a devil, math. 11. 18.
yea that Christ was a glutton and drincker of wine, that he cast ou^ devils by
the prince of devils and that he had a devil: In a matter of religion or
concerning god or his servants. vox populi, is not (as we commonly say) vox
dei, but often, if not for the most part, uox diaboli. Yet indeed the people
or multitude, said not from time to time, nor yet at any time, that So.
counterfeited, as the Disc. affirms, but the contrary. But let us frame and
thereby a little better observe the Disc. argument, thereby to see how
substantiallie he proves Some. to have counterfeited. It was reported, says
one: I think, I verily think (say others) that So. did counterfeit, ergo So.
counterfeited. Behold the Disc. demonstration. If this be a good argument, then
this also: many report that So. did not counterfeit, and some of better
judgment and credit then these deponents have so deposed: as namely M. Ireton,
M. Brown M. Evington, but alas these men were out of their own element.
M. Brinsley, preachers of the gospel: ergo So. did not counterfeite Thus also
I can prove that So. was possessed, for they aforesaid preachers have deposed
that they think so. Yea what is their so false, page 150. and 151.
that one may not (in appearance) prove, or so true that he can not disprove by
this kind of argument? many think and prattle of the fire of purgatory, ergo
etc. The Jews who are not a few think, and verily think, and say to this
day, that the Messiah is not yet come, ergo. The Disco. may be ashamed thus to
dispute. But this shamles kind of arguing, page 259.
does well sut with the cause he has in hand. Nevertheless I answer
particularly to the chiefest of these depositions.

Discouerer
I did always ( says M. Aldred) hubt in myhart, that he did but diss^ble.

Darrell
(...) we have heard before how greatly M. Aldred was affe^cted with that he
beheld in So. the 6. of November at night, and the day of his d^possession,
whither for breuities ^ake I referr the reader: so as it can not possible be
true that is here deposed. And if M. Aldred have (...) upon his oath, his
deposition is not to be regarded.

Discouerer
When I perceived (quoth M. Leigh) that the devil, page (...)
that was pretended to be in Summers, could speak no language but English, I
took the boy for a counterfe^e, and so always after I did repute him.

Darrell
I answer M. Leigh, that this a sorry argument and sily conclusion to persuade
him (and others through him) of Some counterfeiting, because he could speak no
language but english. For their be many (no doubt) in England which be somewhat
stragly handled, that can speak no other language but english, and yet are no
counterfeits. Neither does ^^ence (...) that he had no devil in him: except M.
Leigh can prove this, that whosoever is possessed and has a devil in him,
speaks diverse Languages: then indede he says something. Their is no doubt
but that the (...) can skill of all Languages: but it follows not their upon
that being in man, he theirfore will speak the said languages, or some of
them, at the beck also and pleasure of this or that man. He can do many
things, that he will not do. No question but the devil in So.m (god
permitting) could have done a thousand things whereby it should have been as
manifest he had been in Summers, as by speaking latin, or greek, whereof he did
not one: and yet it follows not theirvpon that he was not their.

THE FIFTH BOOK
OF CHAP. 1.
How M Darrells credit, touching his dealing with the boy of Burton, does
rely upon a false and foolish book, that was published of the said boy^
pretended possession, and dispossession.

Discouerer
And M. Dar. page 169.
himself confesses that he read, or at the least did hear the said book
read over, before it went to the press: and yet acknowledges upon diverse
occasions, as hereafter shall appear, that sundry point (...) are untrue:
which being considered together with the premises it may (...) bethought, that
M. Darr. writteth falsely, when he tells us that a great many would depose
the said book to be one would think that this Disc had never gone to school
he reasons so childishly as if a discourse may not be true in the substance
and yet faultye in some circumstance.
true, if they might be called theirunto by authority.

Darrell
The Disc. having used many words to small purpose and not worthy the
answearing, to prove the printed book concerning Darling to be a false and
foolish book, comes in the third and last place to that which he thinks to
be most material, namely, my own confession, in that I acknowledge sundry
points in it t^ be untrue: and these he shows in the chapter followinge to
be three. But we must understand they are matters of circumstance, and that I
do not justify the book in every circumstance, but the history to be true
in substance, as appears by page 266. Now mark good reader how the Disc.
argues: The book concerning Darling is untrue in some p^yntes, therefore in
all, or ergo the whole book is false. Has he his senses think you, that
gropeth not the grossnes of this argument? Now, whereas it may seem that I was
in fault in that I did not correct the book in these said points that were
a miss, seeing I read it over before it went to the prese, the very truth is,
that in a writing which I returned together with the book to M. John Denison
the publisher theirof, I did sect down the sum of that I speak to Darling
and his friends, desiering that that being the truth might be published, and
that the other lines which were penned (and now printed) wherein these said
untruths are contained, might be left out. Am I now in fault, because these
things were not accordingly reformed? Touching the other point, to wit my
affirminge, that many ^are ready to depose the said book to be true, though I
my self (forsooth) acknowledge it to be false: mark I pray thee (good reader)
the deceitful dealinge of the Discouerer: how he purposly leaves out the
special words that should clear the case, vz. for the substance of it. I
said in my Apology, the book printed for the substance of it, has been
offered to be confirmed by the oaths of a great many: a principal part
whereof we see he omitteth: without which omisiion he could never have made (as
every child may see) this goodly flowrish, and theirfore it must needs be that
the same was wittingly and advisedly done by him, which aggrauate^h his fault
theirin: whereas I meant then and do mean still, that the substantial
points theirof that make against counterfeiting, are true and justifiable For
confirmation whereof we must know that M. Denison when he came to the B. of
London to be examined about the same matter, brought in writing the names of a
great many (I think about 40.) who offered to depose to the same effect, if
they might have been admitted: neither doubt I but that he made this known to
the Bishop.

OF CHAP. 2.
Of M. Darrells rashness in affirminge Thomas Darling to be possessed, and of
his cunning instructing him, how to behave himself upon the day of his
pretended dispossession.

Discouerer.
This matt^r of Darlings was so acceptable unto M. Darrell having been out of
work from the pretended disposs^ssion of Katherine wright, page 270.
vz for about 9. or ten years, as that he thrust himself into it somewhat
grossly.

Darrell.
This he proves by the deposition of Robert Toone, who deposes that he
relatinge to other preachers and my self, the manner of the boys fites. I
answered, that my opinion was the boy was possessed. Darrell said he was of
opinion etc. ergo. a worthy argument sure. In the 22 page the Disc. has these
words: The certainty hereof is that M. Walkeden the boys granfather hereing
how M. Darrell had helped Kath. Wright, procured him to come to Burton, to
help Darling. If now the Disc. speak truly as indeed he does (though he
seldom fault that way) then every one may see that Darrell did not thrust or
intrud himself into this action, muchles somewhat groslye as the Disc.
affirms, being theirevnto requested and procured by the boys grandfather M.
Walkeden. And thus is the Discouerer convinced the 13. time by his own
Discovery.

And where he says that the afore^aid preachers upon my perswation, page 271.
resolved together with me and diverse other ministers of a fast to be had at
Burton for Darlings dispossession, and indeuoreth to prove the same by Iesse
Bees deposition. I answer that had we done so, we had done nothing whereof
we need to be ashamed, but the truth is we had not a word about that, as M.
Hildersham and M. More with the rest of the ministers can witness.

Discouerer
Being earnestslye entreated (says M. Darrell) for my presence at the fast I
deaied the same, page 276.
and that for these two reasons: vz. for avoiding the note of vain glory, and
that the people through mine absence might be kept from ascribinge any special
gift to me in casting out devils. In which his second reason it may be
observed: first his conceit, that the devil the next day would be cast out:
then it appears that he had used great vauntes of the dispossession of Kath
Wright, or otherwise, why should he have sus^cted any such thing by the people?
Again if this were not a shifting reason, how came it to pass, that he was
present at the disposs^ssinge of the 7. in ^ancashire: but especially of Will.
So. when his name was almost at the highest?

Darrell
What my conceit (as the Disc. terms it) herein is, and where upon
grounded, appears by that I have said in my Narration, treating of the means
of d^spossession. For answea^ to the second thing here objected against me, I
only put the christian reader (...) mind, that the people of the Jews would
have made Christ a king, and the people of L^stra with their priest would have
sacrificed unto the Apostles, ^^nabas and Pau^, as gods come down unto them
in the likeness of men: and yet it is certain that Christ and these his Apostls
were far from seekinge or desiring any such thing. To the third I answer,
that being p^^me to the great good I sometime had received in being an eye
witness of this notable work of god, and griued in this respect for my absence
here spoken of, especially after the boys d^^possession: I their upon
thought and determined with my self, it like occasion afterward should be
offered of my presence, not to with draw my self as I did any more, theirby to
^oose the benefit of that good which the Lord in mercy might a^foord me by
being present and an eye witness at these and such like denuerances: a^beit in
one two former respects, or for the two reason^ aforesaid, I after my self
desired and could rather have wished to have been absent then present. And that
herein I speak the truth, page 277.
and ^ye not, god is my witness.

Discouerer.
Howbeit, if he had been so careful to have avoided the note of vain gl^rie
as he pretends, he would never have suffered the words before mentioned of
the devil, touching his praying, as fast as they did, that were with Darlinge,
to have passed his hands: for theirby he seems so gre^y of some commendatio,
is rather then ^aile, he was contented to receive it from satan.

Darrell.
Had I been the publisher of that book the Disc. might then with Answer 1
some better color have framed this ma^^cious colle^tion against me 2. those
words are not so much set down for the matter of the, as for the manner of
their delivery, vz. with his mouth wide open: which thing impossible to be
counterfeited, will the sooner be believed, when it is not only declared that
the boy spoke with his mouth wide open, but also specified what words he so
uttered. and in this respect their was good and just cause of publishinge
them. 3. Their is small cause why any should commend me, or conceive well of
me in regard of this speech, seeing it was spoken by the father of lies, and
therefore g^eatlye to be suspected of falshode, except my self had published
the book: for my pervsinge of it was known only to some 3. or 4. (...).

OF CHAP. 4.
Of M. Darrells further practice with Darling to pretend, that Satan sought to
reenter into him, and of some other his untrue assertions concerning the boys
fittes, and of his cunning dealinge likewise with him, that be should never
confess his dissimulation.

Darrell.
From page 285. until 290. the Disc. pursues his own shadow, laboring with
many words to convince me of that I never affirmed. vz. That Darling in all
his fittes was altogether senceles: this I have showed before in my answer to
this general charge, whereunto to avoyde tediousnes and idle repetitions of
the same thing, I refer the reader for fill answer to all that here he
obiecteth against me.

Discouerer
Another thing that the Disc. troubles himself much with, and where aboutes
he bestows many lines, page 289.
even from the page 289. till page 293. is, that I should affirm, that it was
Satan only (as I did think) that used the words in those dialogues mentioned
in the said book: he the said Satan transforming himself into an angel of
light, at such times when he seemed to speak godlily. And this he confuteth
full soundly (I warrant you) first by producinge the boy Tho. Darling deposing,
that he does not believe so. Then by the deposition of Iesse. Be a sadler, who
says: that whosoever affirms so, does lie in so affirming. There reason is,
because of the godly speeches he used mentioned in the dialogues. Then and in
the third and last place the Disc. himself tells us, that for the same
reason he thinks that it can not be that the said dialogues came from the
devil: his words be these: If any man will take the pains to pervse those
speeches, which Iesse Be has fathered upon the boy in the said dialoges: he
shall find them to be such as will hardly be found again in any story that
ever was written to be ascribed to Satan.

Darrell
If now I can show out of a history of good credit against which their can no
exception be taken, as holy words and as unlikely to come from Satan, as
those mentioned in the dialogues, to have yet nevertheless been uttered by
Satan, then I hope the Dis. will yield, that the holiness of those speeches
does not let, but that the same not with standinge they might proceed from
the devil. We read then in the divine story, mark 5. 9. mark. 1. 24.
that the Temptor said unto Christ, it is written, alleging scripture for
his purpose, (all the words whereof be holy.) And often thus: Jesus the son
of the most high god. And again, I know thee what thou art, even the holy one
of god. What words I pray you be more holy then these? and what words more
unlikely to come from Satan then such as these? Sure if the Disc. had been
living in that age, and present at these holy and divine speeches, he would
not have thought they came from Satan. Even so likewise I muze what the B. and
S. Harsnet would have said, if they had been by, when that testimony and
commendation was given by the devil of Paul and Silas, whereof we read in the
acts These men (says he) are the servantes of the most high god, which show
unto you the way of salvation. What words almost could be delivered more
unlikely to proceed from the diuill, that adversary of mankind, then these?
for being true, a man at the first blush might imagine, that if the were the
speeches of the evil spirit, then sure he was not unwilling that men should be
faued: whereas the old serpent meant theirby to hinder, and did mightelye Kinder
the salvation of men, I mean the inhabitants of Philippi: for by often cryinge
out in that manner as he did, he moved and occasioned S. Paul to cast him forth
of her whom he possessed, and others upon that fact of the Apostle, to cast
him and Silas a prophet into prison, and so ordered the matter that upon their
inlargment they departed the city: which no question wasithe thing Satan
aimed at in the commendation he gave of Paul and Silas. So that by these and
such like examples of the holy scripture we may saflye conclude, that the
wicked spirit here spoken of, did aim sure at some evil practice and intent,
when he used those holy words mentioned in the said dialogus howsoever the
Disc. happily judge otherwise, and his deponent Iesse Be, because of the godly
speeches contained in the dialogues.

Discouerer
M. page 293.
Darrell being charged, that since the time of the pretended dispossession of
Darling, he had cherished, entertained and lodged the boy at his house: and
that least his own packing and dissimulation might happen to be detected is
well as the boys: he did use this, or the like persuasion in effect unto him:
vz. that he should continue constant, and not suffer himself by any alluerment
to be drawn to say, that he had dissembled in his former fittes, and that he
was never possessed with any wicked spirit. And his answer is thus: one night
I entertained the said Darlinge in my house at Ashby: and the rest he denies:
but Darling himself deposes it. I have been with M. Darrell (says he) diverse
times, sometimes at Burton, once at Apleby, once at Packington, at several
exercises: from whence I went hom with M. Darrell to Ashby, and supped that
night with M. Hildersham, M. Dar. two other ministers, and Mistress Ireton, at
M, Hildershames house, and did lie that night at M. Darrells. Also I confess
that M. Darrell has had some communication with me, and has willed me at
sometimes that I should be constant, and stick to the truth, meaning, that I
should not suffer my self to be drawn to affirm that I was not possessed:
but that I had dissembled in all my said fittes, and so consequentlye, that God
had not delivered m^ from the possession of Satan.

Here is great ado and much prattle about packing, dissimulation, and I know
not what, and of the fear forsooth that was on my behalf least the same
should be detected: but if the Judge should call for the evidence to prove
this, then come in nothing but 2. poor and silye circumstances or
presumptions: either of which if the be of force to prove any thing, the 1.
circumstauce
must needs probably conclude this said packing. The first circumstance and
argument of his is this. Since the preteuded dispossession of Darling, Darrell
has cherished, entertained, and lodged Darling: it is probable theirfore that
Darrell taught Darling to counterfeite apossession: and that at such time or
times there was some packing between them about the smothering of the said
dissimulation. The antecedent or former part of his reason the Disco.
pretends to prove both by my own deposition and Darlinges, but he does not
prove it fully: for in it he speaks of my cherishing of Darling, as if he had
been my darling in deed, or as if I had been some foster father unto him, but
proves no such thing, but only the bare lodginge of him one night only: and
truly I do not remember that ever he did eat one crumme of bread in my house
in his life. But admit he had supped with me as well as lodged with me, and
stayed with me a longer time, not that night only, but diverse nights, what of
all that? admittinge the antecedent to be true (as it is false) yet how does
the consequent and it hang together by M. Harsnetes logike? many have both
eaten and lodged with me, whom I never packed nor consulted with about
dissemblinge a possession. The second circumstance is, Darrell willed Darling
to be constant and stick to the truth, and not suffer himself to be drawn to
affirm that he had dissemled I would be loath to blot paper or stand long in
answering and refuting such ware as this: And therefore I only desire the reader
to open his eyes and to behold the vanity of it, and withal the shifting
pacherie of this discouerer who pretends forsooth and would feign have the
world to think that these words of mine were used to darlinge at mine own
house at Ashbie and that darling has so deposed, and therefore I deposinge the
flat contrary, must needs be forsworn. Now this cunninge insinuation of his.
is closely and darkely but yet maliciously shut up in these words of his: the
rest darrel denies: implyinge therein as if I simplye and absolutely denied
all the rest which (to make the case plain and apparent unto the good reader)
I do not. I do not deny that ever I used any such speeches to Darlinge at
all, But that I used any such speeches to him in my house at Ashbte the night I
lodged him there, or spoke any words unto him to that effect. This is that
which I denied upon my oath, and deny again: nay I have upon my oath to the B
of London confessed, that I said to Darlinge as is here by him deposed. But
where and when? in the Gathouse after this Darlinge had been in the Bishops
house for sundry weeks togeher, and sundry means used, yea and by your leave
none of the best (c) to have drawn him with Summers (for the strengtheninge of
Summers con^ession of counterfeitinge) to say and confess that he had
counterfeited: as threatening, and imprisonment in the Bishops house, forging
and deliueringe of letters to Darlinge as come from me, and thereupon requiringe
and obtaining answers from him to the same letters, a thing not denied by the
B. of London him self in open Court. In like forte Darlinge deposed that I
said thus to him (as here is specified) at the Gatehouse after his departure
from the Bishop, and not at Ashby: the contrary where unto he is ready to
depose. Now where the Disc. by his wresting and writhing, alteringe and keeping
back part of our depositions intimates, that one of us must needs be
perjured, and that in his christian and charitable intendement must needs be
Darrell. The truth is (and so it will appear) that in our depositions at large
we deposed one and the same thing in effect, our depositions strengthening and
confirming one another and not dissenting or crossing one another And by these
kind of sleights and slipperi^ dealing: the Disc. makes often shows of
perjury and contrarieues where none is. If you will have any more
circumstances, they are set down a little before in the Discuerye and do here
follow.

Darrell no sooner saw the boy in a fit, 3. cir^umstanc^ page 172.
but presently he affirmed him to be possessed.

Darrell told them in Darlinges hearing of Katherin wright, 4 page 272.
who having been possesed was troubled in such sort, as Darlyng was.

Dar repeated in the boys heareing what were the signs both of possession and
dispossession, 5 page 273.
mentioned in the scriptures, whereby Darlinge might learn, what he was to act
and practis the next day when he was to be disposessed.

Darrell moving the boys freindes to have a fast for his pretended
dispossession told them that that kind of spirit was not cast out but by
prayand casting. 6


Darrell having appointed the said fast, 7 page 174
he foretold to those that were present in Darlings hearing, that they should
see the devil cast him into very strange fitts, and that they should hear the
devil speak in him, whereby the said b^ye might learn whate he was to act
that day.

Darrell affirmed that Darling was senceles in all his fitts. 8 page ^35


Darrell affirmed that whatsoever Darlinge seemed to do or speak in his ^its
it wa^ nothe, 9 page 180.
but Satan.

Th^se circumstances are all of them in a manner false slanderous, and
mali^ious, so weakly proved and so s^tish^y and absurdly applied, as a man of
wisdom and conscience. must needs either smile or blush at them: for answer
therefore unto them moreite and to show how absurdly they prove my teaching of
Darlinge to counterfeyte I refer the reader unto my former answer to the same
circumstauces alleged against me, in Summers his case to prove that I taught
him to counterfeit: For the Disc. being (as it should seem) barraine and
destitute of proofs, is forced you see to fly to his former munition and to
borrowe the same wepons wherewith he did so lay about him in Some hi^ case. why
then should not I give him the repulse and drive him back with the very same
rampeire of defense I used before. where in his success I hope will be no
better then it was. But I would feign know and I demand of the Disc. if
Darling or any other creature did ever affirm that I taught him the said
Darling to counterfeyte surely no: For then we should have heard of it in this
Discovery. Where then the Disc. page 296.
says: It must be even as the apt scholar of M Darrells list: And again.
Darling dissembled by the cunning instruction of that impostor his master, page
285.
meaning Darrell: either these circumstaances four alleged do prove this
instruction and scholing, page 296.
or else if you be leave it, you must recieue it of M Disc. own word, and then I
am sure you are more credulus, then wise.

OF CHAP. 5.
How Darling confesses his own dissimulation.

How beit true it is that within a fortnight after he was set at liberty, page
285.
and had conferred with M. Darrell in the gathouse, and with some others, he
writ a letter to the B. of London affirminge that he had been drawn on by
subtilties to make the said confession: and adds these words: what is all
this to the purpose if I of frailty should say, Discouerer
that all was dissemblinge, was it therefore so? if I say that this paper is
black, is it so therefore? Those articles which I was sworn unto before, I
will stand unto them and justify them. but concerning the other I will never
consent unto them.

The maine and in a manner sole thing, Darrell
the Disc. alleges for proof of Darlinges counterfeiting, is his own
confession: set down before in this chapter. I answer negatiuely Darling
never made any such confession. Thus it was. S, Ha^snet examininge Darling on a
time to 3 or 4 articles, he having answered them, unadvisedly and like aboy as
he was, being then also his scholar forsooth, put his hand as Harsnet his
tutor did bid him at the lower end of the leaf, their being a great space
between his answeares, and the place where he subscribed his name. In this
space Harsnet did insert that absurd and ridiculvs confession mentioned in this
chapter, which was of Harsnets fo^sting and faigning, but never confessed by
Darling, as Darling after deposed, and justified the same before the L.
Archbishop to Harsnetes face 2. But admite he had made such a confession:
seeing it is evident it had been done of frailty and humane infirmity (which
yet god be praised head id not) what is this (as the boy himself says) to the
purpose? If I of fraultie should say etc. Here it must not be forg^tten how
Darling a young stripling of those tender and unsettled years was dealt with
and ensnared. He was for the space of a month in the B^sh^ps house: duringe
which time the Bishop and his Chapline with all their fetches and devises
wear daily and howerly in hand with the boy to wringe this confession from him
which they being not able b^ any means to obtain, and dispairing theirof as
it should seem, Har^net his scholemaster undertook to do this feait, when
they two were in his chamber together, and did effect it accordinglye, but in
such manner and by ^uch a worthy devise as we hear: and then presently
perceiuinge him not to be for there purpose as Summers was, they retayning
Summers, turned him out of the doors. But before and to the end aforesaid, I
mean the gettinge of a confession of counterfeitinge, (which notwithstanding
they went without) he was kept so straight, that none of his friends, no not
his mother, might have any access unto him. sometimes he was not alittle
fawned upon: sometimes mightily threatened. S. Harsnet they two being in his
chamber alone, offered to thrattle him, and threatened to whyp him, if he would
not confess Darrells practices, sheewinge of him two rods. diverse other
threatenings I omite. He was imprisoned in the Bishps house: sundri^ letters
also (as is before mentioned) were framed and delivered to him as sent from me,
from whom answeares to them were obtained, theirby likewise to have entangled
the boy and to have got some thing from him if possibly the could. Admit now
that Darling a boy of 15. years of age, being thus sore laid at for a
confession, had at length of frayltie, and in a desire to be at liberty and
rid out of their hands, yielded them that sorry confession that is thus
fathered upon him: had the thing confessed by him, been theirfore true? Men
sometimes of greater years and riper judgment, have in such case ben too
easily drawn from the truth to affirm that which is false and erroneous, How
easily then might such a weak boy be perverted and seduced? 3. Suppose that he
had voluntarily and of his own accord confessed that in all things he
dissembled, yet the same suffieed not to prove him a counterfeit, seeinge it is
evident some things were done or suffered by him which can by no possibility
be counter feited: whence may be drawn an unavovdable argument to craze the
credit of him and Somrrs and of the rest of the supposed counterfeites: For no
man confessinge or reportinge an impossibility of himself ought to be
credited: But Summers, Darling, Katherine Wright and Mary Cooper, confess and
report impossibilities of themselves, in saying they counterfeited, if so be
they have so said^.

Ergo they ought not to be credited.

Now concerning this Darling (to pase by sundry other strange actions or
rather passions of his,) he often times in aday in his sittes, had a great
swelling in his body, by reason whereof diverse times the buttons of his dublett
did brust off, and his aglet holees break, albeit they were purposly made and
set on the stronger. 2. He being but of 13. years of age was of that
strength that two strong men could not hold hi down or rule him, a thing
impossible to be cou^terfeited: for no man can add to his strength by
counterfeiting 3. In his t^a^ces he uttered sundry continued speeches with his
mouth wide open, as appears by the book that is printed of him. 4. his arms
and shoulder bones were in many of his fites thrust out of joint, seen and
selt sundry times by diverse. Now beside the pain and anguish of the joints
and senowes in this case, I would feign know for my learning, how it is
possible for a man to put his bones out of ioynte and in again at his
pleasure, and then immediately use and occupy his arms in as goo^d plight as if
no such thing had happened unto him. If M. Discouerer with his sweet Jewel W.
Summers can with all their nimblenes. packinge, and dexterity, but devise to
counterfeite such pretty tricks as these, then indeed the say something to
Darrell, and for Darling^ counterfeiting.

Furthermore Alice Goodridge the witch sundry times confessed, that she
mistaking Tho. Darling for one Sherrat a boy, sent her familiar or spirit in
the liknes of a dog (party colored read and white, called Minny) to torment
him in his body, and that she had caused his vexarion by the devil. And further
at her sendinge of him, she strained all her body, and vomited, bidding her
minny to go and do the like to the boy, who returning said, that he had done
so. Now the truth is, that besides the child was most fearfully tormented, in
and through all the parts of his body, he was much troubled with von^iting
and with often prouocations thereunto, page 276.
as if he had striuen and stiained to vomit and could not. It is also to be
remembered, that she named the time when, the place where, the occation
whereupon, and the words she used when she sent the devil to torment him, as
appears in the 26. page of the printed book. Hereupon Alyce Goodri^g was
committed to Darbye jail, indicted and arraigned, and found guilty thereof,
and by my Lord Andeson sentence given upon her to imprisonmente, where since
she died. These thin^es considered, to say and publish thus confidently that
Darling (...), what is it else, but presumtuosly to condemn both Jury and Judge
either of ^iustice or simplicity, or both. And these things are so notori of
y^knowen to an the Cuntrye, that an hundred such shame^e^se Disc^u^ryes as ^as,
are not able once to bring then. (I mean the impossid^ites afore-^ar^e) into
doubt or question there. For the further con^^rmation where of, we are ready
to prove and auerie the same by the oathe of many su^ficient witne^^es, and
there-by make it most evident and pla^ne to the world, that it is imp^ssible
that Darlinge should be a counterfeit. In the mean season we may remember
that two (...) of peace and quorum and above fortye of the inhabitants of
Burton neighbors thereunto, which were eye wy^nesses of Darlinges vexations
have under their han les in two several testimonia^s witnessed, that his
fitts, torments, or betakinges, were such and sosu. pernaturall, as they are
fully persuaded no man is possibly able to coun^erfeite and for this and some
other reasons are persuaded and do verily think that Darlinge did not
dissemble: as appears by the tenure of their letters testimonial here
followinge. The former where of the Bishop has, and a coppie of the latter, as
I take it.

To all those to whom it does or may appertain, we whose names are under
written, Justices of peace, and quorom within the countes of Staff^r^, and
Darby, amongst others send greeting. whereas we have bine r^quested and
d^sired to c^^tifie our knowledges, concerning the strange bandling or
b^takeing of one Thomas Darlinge. of late grievously handled and tormented, and
that in such strange manner as was wonderfully to behold, (whereof we wear eye
witnesses) we therefore for the better satis^ing of all those that are desirous
to know the truth in that behalf, have thought good to signify, that we are
persuaded, and do verily think, that the said Thomas Darling, did not
dissemble, or counterfeit in any those his fittes, or st^ange betakinges, and
the causes or reasons which move us so to think, is: First for that the manner
of those his fittes, torments, or betakeinges, wear such, and so supernatural
as we are fully persuaded, no man is possible able to counterfeite the like.
And also for that their was one Alice Good^eridge, the wise of one Oliver
Goodderidge, of Stap^nhill, within the coun^^ of Darby, who long before that
time, had been suspected for a witch, and being for that cause brou^ht before
us, did upon her examination before us, cous^sse that she did mistake the said
The. Darling, and thought it had bin^o^e Sherratte a boy who had done her some
wrong (as she says) and (...) we have bine informed by some of good creditt
to us well known, that the said Alice Goodderidge did confess that she did
call her (...) (for so she tearm^d it) which wa^ (^s she said) in liknes of a
little dog and called it Minnie, and b^d it go after the said Darling
(thinkinge it had (...) and (...) in all the parts of his body, which said
(...) returned to her agame, and sold her he has done a^ she bade him, and
further she did confess that after that time, she never saw the said little
dog, but once, that it came to her in the Gayole at Darby, whether she was
committed for the said fact, and she being in the said Ga^ie, was brought
before the Justices of Assise and Jail delivery, and their desiered the said
Justices to be good to her and forgive her, and she would never do so any
more. In testimony where of we here unto severally set our hands and seals,
dated the First day of October. 1598.

Humserye Ferrers. Thomas Gresley.


To all those to whom it does or may appertain, we whose names are under
written, as well resiantes and inhabitants of the town of Burton upon Trent in
the coun^ie of Stafford, as others greetinge. whereas we have been requested,
and desired to certify our knowledges, concernninge the strau^g hand^^ng or be
taking of one Tho. Darling of late grievously handled and tormented, and that
in such strange manner as was wonder fully to be bold, (whereof w^ wear eye
w^tnesses) we therefore for the better satisfiyng of all those, that are
desierous to know the truth in that behalf have thought good to signify, that
we are persuaded, and do verily think, that the said Tho. Darling did not
dissemble, or counterfeite in any of those his fi^^es, or strange betakeinges.
And the causes or reasons which move us so to th^nke be many, whereof for
av^yding of over tedious matter, we will only her^^n allege some few, (as
namely) first for that we have known the said Tho. Darling from his childhood
to be of an honest and gracious disposition. and both himself and his freads
in whose keepinge he was duringe his said fittes to be such as we are well
assured, would have no hand incounterfeit or lew^e practices, and also the
manner of those his fittes, torments or betakeings were such, and so
supernatural as we are fully persuaded that no man is possibile able to
counterfeit the like. And also for that their was one Alice Gooddridge etc. To
the effect in the before said Testimonial. And their upon this Alice.
Gooddridge being brought before the Justices of assise and Jail delivery was
by dew course of law then convicted of the same fact, in testimony whereof we
have hereunto severally subscribed our names, dated at Burton aforesaid the
fifte day of October. 1598.

Peter Eckersall minister at Burton. I. Grainger. VV. Caldwall VV. Hawes. I.
Hawes H. Blackwall R. Turner VV, woodcocke I. Fichit I, Finney E, wrightman V.
Palmer R. Moore R. Hyde I. Debanke I. Bridgett E. Hudsonne T, Dutton R. watson
I. Horbyne R. Baker H. Clarke E. Goodcole R. Tailor I. Simpson T. Hasten the
elder, constables of Burton. T. Hasten the younger R. Hayes w. Harresen I.
Tailor. R. Shenten. H. wackfeild. R. Tomson T. Saunders. I. Alsoppe. R. Teale.
w. Clarke. T. Stanly. R. Hendlye I. Henworthe I. Butler R. Bradlye Raphe Teate.

Thus we see that howsoever darlinges vexation by Satan is not confirmed by
the o^thes of men as Summers is: Yet by the testemoni^ of many witnesses of good
credit, who render 3. forcible reasons against counterfeitynge. He now that is
so filthye as to believe this Discouerer upon his bare report without any
proof or reason of Darlinges counterfeiting, before the testimonye of so many
alleging such effectual reasons against counterfeytinge: let him be filthy
still and yet more filthye. The matter contained in these testimonials making
against Darlings coounterfeitinge, I have sufficiently pressed and urged before
in my Apology whereunto the Disc. teturneth no manner of answer at all, and
yet bears the world in hand, that he has dispatched and wiped away all.
These things which make so strongly against counterfeiting are likewise set
down in the printed book of Darling, and are the principal things in it to
be observed to prove his vexation by Satan: against these therefore and the
rest of this kind, the Disc. should have bente his force in that course he
has taken, whereunto he says not a word: and not have passed by these as if
he saw them not, and instead of them cull out some petie triflinge things
that may easily be practiced, or make a show of a possibillitie to be
counterfeited, as namely, the speches uttered by the tongue of Darlinge
dialogue wise and his apparitiones of a Catt, a Dragon, a Bear Lightnings,
Thundering, a Lamb, a Dove, etc. which though I am assured that Darling did not
counterfeit, yet it is evident that it is no hard matter to counterfeite and
dissemble the same and more, if one were so lewdly given: and the world will
easily be drawn to believe a practice in such small and slighte matters as
these: when it neither ^ will nor can believe these things here mentioned to be
counterfeited. And thus is laid open and discovered the crafty and fraudulent
dealing of the Discouerer.

Discouerer
Lastly it is to be observed, page 292.
than Darlinge after he had continued a while in his first pretended fits, many
supposed and gave it out, that he was buta dissembler, as it may appear by
the depositions following vz, Iesse Bees and Edw. Bakers.

Darrell
This is his other argument to prove Darling a counterfeit. The very same he
used before to prove Summers a counterfeite. A worthy one it is sure and in
effect the same with this: many supposed and gave it out, that Paull was a God:
therefore he is a God. Thus we see what a blasphemous conclusion would follow
upon such an Antecedent, (...) 14. 11.
if it were true. when the Disc. has put this argument of his (denied by me)
into mood and figure, and proved the proposition, vz. whatsoever many suppose
and give out in speech is true, I will then yield him the conclusion, and
resign him the conquest, and acknowledge both Summers and Darlinge to be
counterfeites. And this may suffice for answer to the Discovery concerning
Darlinges counterfeytinge, and my teaching of him

OF CHAP. 6.
Discouerer
A brief of Katherin Wrights confession touching the beginning of her
dissimulation, and of the reasons that moved her so to do.

The general cause it self touching the late attempts of castinge out the
devil, is of great importance: otherwise it is not usual, that matter^ so
long past vz. about 13. or, 14. years should be searched into.

Darrell.
There is a cause then we see of our attemtiinge, he means pretendinge to
cast out Devils, but what this cause should be, that is a secret forsooth, we
shall hear more of that another time, for the present we must content our
selves with a general notize of a genrall cause, and that (says he) of a
great importance. It is to be thought therefore and presumed that he means
the same cause which he speaks of, Page 14. 15, that is, the setting up of
the Presbiteriall couceits, or discipline so long contended-for by some.
nehemiah. 6. ^
VVhere-vnto we answerer (if he mean so) as Nehemiah sometime did to Sanballat
the enemy of the Iew^s: It is not done according to these words that thou
say: for thou fainest them of thine own heart.

Discouerer.
Katherin Wright being examined, page 27^.
confesses upon heroath, that in all the course of her pretended possession
and dispossession, and of her fytts both before and since, whatsoever she did
that seemed to be extraordinary, it was all dissembled.

Darrell
To get this confessio^n from this poor and simple maid (which is all that
the Disc. has to prove Katherin Wrights dissimulation) we^ must know, that the
Commissioners (who were sent down by the B. of London for the same purpose the
president or principal where of for sooth was S. Harsnet. this Disc.) kept her
with the^ two half days and a night, and in the said time threatened to burn
her sete if she would not confess that she had dissembled: as she affirmed
forthwith after she came from the commissioners, bewaylinge her said
perjury. And herein S. Harsnet a commissioner was a principal agent. But be
it granted that this her confession was voluntary, and not extorted, as the
contrary is manifest. Yet therein is she not to be believed because in so
affirminge she reports those things to have been done by her self which
she possiblye could not do. although aspirit (...) be felt (...) cause (...)
shu^ (...) down (...) was (...) com (...)
For K. Wrighte (...) ^yts did swell excedinglie in her body and neck, whence
it came to pa^^e that the went daily with her petitioaie slack laced to the
length o^ one hand: something also was sen^blye felt to stir up and down in
her body,, as if it had been some quick thing. she was (...) of
extraordinary and supernatural strength, and of such exceeding wa^gn^, that
5. strong men by reason of her waighte (she not str^^ing o^ ^^ug^inge at a^)
could scarcelye carrye her a little way, (...) depos^ng (...) est (...) you
(...).
a^beit (...) were then but of some, 16. or 17. years of age. To thesse I may
add this one pretty toye of the devil, which I do not see how it could
possibly be counterfeite. She being at one M. Edward Beresfordes house,
desirous to drink, but could take none: M. Beresford him sei^e came and called
for drink, but as they held it to her mouth, be^olde the drink spirted up
out of the piece to the roof of the parlour.

Discoverer
And this course she confesses she has held from the time she began it,
vnti^ the time almost of her examination, vzabout 13. or 14, years partly
because she was by that occasion much made of, and for that she feared. that
if she had showed her self to have been perfectly well for any long season,
her ^ather in law would have fallen to his former hard usage of her.

Darrell
If K. Wright have counterfeited, page 208.
she has theirin spent the prime of her (...), from the age of 17. until
about 30. theirby depriueing her self of many, if not of all the comforts of
this life, as society, marriage etc. who can now in any reason think, that a
young damsel to my remembrance of a comely feature and personage. de^irous
enough (if not to much) of the pleasures of this life, would wittingly, and
willingly deprive her self of them all, and that for so many years together,
and to such an end as here is pretended. I deny not that K. Wright has
deposed that this was the reason of her counterfeitinge, But I trust S. Harsnet
did thereunto by his slyghtes and devises draw her and enti^e her. Nevertheless
who of understanding will believe either him or her, seeing there were more
easy and honest ways to have avoided the hard usage of her father in law,
(to admit such usage) then this of ^^ning to be possessed with the devil? as
either by going to service, or coup^ing her self to some in honest marriage.
And truly I can not out ^aru^le, that the has not been all this while weary
and double weary of counterfeiting and had her fill their of, seeinge she
has continued so l^ng in the pra^tise of it. It is something also that in all
this time her counterfeiting has not been espied nor found out, till the
D^s^ouer^ (...) with his fellow commissioners. But this surpasses all the rest,
that after so long coumterfeitinge about 14. year continuance. she is not yet
punnished at all for her said counterfeisting, nor M. Summers neither, nor any
of the rest. Oh says the Disccouerer concerning K^. Wright, page 19^.
when she was examined she professed, that (...) she would become a new^ wom^n,
and leave al her former d^ssi^ution. This then belike it satisfaction
sufficient for all her counterfeiting. As good a satisfaction are the like
words uttered by a notorious theife, murderer, or any other malefactors: and
yet never the^es they are punished by the Christian magistrate, and so ought to
be

CHAP. 7.
Of M Darrelles procedinges with Katherin Wright for her pretended
dispossession.

But there was another engine used, as Ka. Wrighte. has deposed in these
words. One fashion of M. Darrell in my pretended dispossession at Man^feilde,
page 300.
was to ^ye upon my bellye, saying that he would by so lyinge pr^sse the
Devil out of me. When this strange fashion was objected to M. Darre^^. A^
quoth he, I looked for this, and then fra^med his answer unto it in this,
(...) I having read in the scriptures, how Elias and Saint Paul (...)
themselves alonge on some that wear dead, in their recovery to life, and
being a young stvdent in diuiniti, not past four or 25. years of age, I did
in a blind zeal (as I think) lie upon the said Ka. Wright as it is
objected. Afterward this his said answer being repeated as the me^^er is,
he did thus amend it viz. I did lie upon the said Ka. Wrighte, but (...) upon
her (...), as I believe. This quallification being allowed of, he desire^ about
three days after a second reuiew: and then for the discharge of his
conscience as he said in delivering the truth, he set down his mind in this
sort: Whereas being examined upon the sudden of a fact done twelve years past,
I have said that I did the same as there it is expressed in a bli^d Zeal,
meaning a foolish and indiscrete imitation of the Prophet and Apostle I do now
protest that having called my self better to mind by conse^inge with my wife
was then present, and by better deliberration upon the same, that I verily
believe I did not the said fact, to the end there spetified: for that I never
dreamed at that time of working any miracle, neither did look for her
deliverance from Satan, but she being at that time very vn^ulic I did it to
keep her down, there being also at that time another upon some part of her,
and upon me that we might the rather keep her dow^e. And thus at the length,
you have his perfect answer wherein it is to be feared that he hathmade
boulde with his oath. For where as at the third time he says he was taken
upon the sudden, when he made his first answer, that seems not to be true,
for that his said lying upon her was no sooner mentioned unto him, but he
affirmed that he looked for i^, and had two examples ready for his excuse
therein.

I desire thee (good reader) with patience to hear and with wisdom to
consider of that which is here thus cunning^e and maliciously published against
me. I am charged thou ^eest with counterfeiting, and have been thus long
imprisoned, tossed and turmoile^, examined and reex a^ned for teaching to
counterfeit: but the proof of this failing, and S. Harsnet and his Master both
coming short of this their purpose and intent, to their grief and not being
able for their lives wi^h all there wreasting, packing, and miserable shifts,
to convince me of this sin, then they fly to another shifte (a sluttish one)
thinkinge theirby utterly to shame me, and disgrace me forever vz. To make the
world believe that I am a vicious and unclean person, their withal closly
implying and perswadinge men if they could: that Darrell who makes no
conscience of so foul a sin as that of uncleanness, will never make bones at
so small a matter as for glory to teach men to counterfeit: and herein ^yeth
the strength and force of all this foul battery against me, in that one sin
is apt enough to draw on another. But if I were such a one indeed as they
would so feign have me seem to be, vz. either a drunckard or alehouse haunter
with Summers, as before is in sinuated: or an unclean person of unchaste
behauior with K. Wright as here is insinuated, and more plainly by that
marginall note, page 37. Darrels lust: I doubt not, but they would have been
able after all their searching and inquiry into my former life, to have made
some better proof theireof then they have.

Now before I enter into the answer of such particulars as are here thus
unjustly charged upon my head, to wype away all jealousy and suspicion which
may happily enter into the conceipte of too many against me: I do here
unfeignedly protest in the presence of God and his Angels, that in all this my
dealinge with Kat. Wright, I had not (I thank God) so much as an unclean
thought: neither did I lie on her in such manner as Elias and Paul sometimes did
in the restoringe of two to life, nor yet in imitation of them: all which I
directly deposed before the Bishop. And that their was no uncleanness in act,
every one may be assured hereby, in that this said ly^ing were their present,
and eye witnesses theirof, my own wife with other weomen, and for that another
man also, Edward Loades by name lay together with me upon her: all or most of
which witnesses be yet liveynge, and ready to bear witness hereunto, if they
might be admitted: with one of which at the least, the wife of Henry Cross of
Mansfeild, S. Harsnet had speech at Mansfeild, as he with his fellow
commissioners returned from examininge K. Wright, but what she witnessed we
hear not, only my self heard that he received such answer from her, and
found her so backwarde from affirminge that he would have had her, as he
threatened to have her before the B. of London, and with imprisonmet their. This
being so, and my conscience being clear even coram t^^bunali, I may the bolder
good reader crave thy patience to hear my further answer to the particulars
as follows.

Being by the Bishop of London examined concerning this Lyinge I said that I
did not wel^ remember wherefore I did it, and no marvel, being so long since
it was done, about 14 years, and a thing not worthy the remembering?
notwithstanding the Bishop pressing me to an immediate answer, would needs
have me say something Where upon to satisfy his importunacy, I told him that
for the present I did think or imagine that I did it in some childish, foolish,
and vn^iscrete imitaion of the Prophet and Apostle: For quoth I unto him I was
then young and had studied divinity but a while, and therefore it may be did
fall into such an error and childish part. But after my departure entering into
a more serious consideraton of the matter and having my memory also helped and
releiued by other means I returned with all the convenient speed I could not 3.
days after as the Disc. says, but sooner, and craved that my said answer
might be corrected, for that I had much mistaken the matter. Where upon being
deposed again, I affirmed as the truth was, that I did not lie on her in
imitation of the prophet and Apostle, whereof I rendered 3 resons. Two of them
are mentioned by the Disc. himself, but the third and principal he has after
his usual manner craftily omitted, least the reader should happily light on
that might ten^ to my clearing. The reason was this If I had done so as Elias
and the Apostle did, Then no doubt I should have laid my mouth upon her mouth
my eyes upon her eyes and my hands upon her hands. etc. whereas there was no
such thing don neither can be imagined to be: for the I would have layen on
herin one of her trances,) seeing she had many) and not in a fytt and such a
fit wherein above all other she was worst to be ruled na^ it can not in any
reason be conceived that I intended any such thing considering Edward Loades
(a man yet living) joined with me in that Lying. This I did say vpou my oath,
and can preue part of it by witnesses. notwithstanding all this my first
answer was not corrected, wherein (as I am informed) I am dealt with contrary
to Law equity and Justice, but yet not contrary to the usual dealing of the
Bishop and his Chapline. Albe it then I freely confess that in the (...) done
so long since I was very indiscreet, and in my answer upon my examination
no less rash and vnaduise^: yet the case be^nge no otherwise then we hear,
their was small cause why either it should be objected against me before the
judgment seat or that ^octor Barlow should have it up as it were upon a stage,
in Cambrige at the commencement, or the Disc. in this triumphant sort to
publish and proclaim it to the world, thereby to make Darrell an odious and
infamous person: as if he should lie upon a woman in beastly manner, or else
foolish^y and presumptuously do it in imitatio^ of Elias or Paul: which as I
have prote^ted is most false. But suppose this latter wear true: yet seeing it
was done so many years since, when I was little better then a child in
understanding, and that now being of riper years I am as far from approving
theirof, or practisinge the like as any man whatsoever, it must needs be I
take it, and cannot be excused to be in the highest degree of ina^fice, and the
hardest measure of revenge, in this u^^pigh^^ and opprobrious manner to object
it against me. And yet when they have all done and strained and racked this
folly or vnd^crete part of ruin to the uttermost, it will be found to weak
to prove or convince me of that which they would so feign (yea rather then
their lives) find me guilty off. vz. This teaching the art of notorious
counterfeiting. what does my supposed lyinge on K. Wright (if it were true, as
it is false) help and further them in this their plea and accusation against
me? surely not one jot at all, but only to ease their stomokes, and wreake
their malice. And this makes me remember a report of the old Earl of Surrie,
who being araigned and called before the Comm^sioners for Hihg Treason, it was
among other things alleged against him by some then in authority, that he
had very disorderly broken the glass windows in Cheapside. whereunto the Earl
made answer: what? do you call me hither for High treason and do you
allege unto me the follies of my youth? Even thus (good reader) ^areth it
with me at this instant. I have been called hither by the High Commission, and
have endured thus long trouble and imprisonment, not for any trif^e or
triflinge matter if it should be true, but for such avile and shamfull
practice, as deserves rather the severe scourge or rigor of justice, and my
self to be made^ fearful example and spectacle to posterity, then to have
any book or any such baulinge discourse as the Disc. has written and
published against me. And yet we see when they come to prove this heinous
matter against me, then they fall to tell me (^s these men did by the Earl) of
my breakinge of glase w^ndowes I mean of my lying on K. Wright: which fact as
I my self do not approve of but condemn as very indiscreetly done, so they for
their parts may make much of it, but it will little ava^le them to prone me
guilty of teaching K. Wright to counterfeit a possession and disposs^ssion of
the devil.

That which pleases the Discouerer to term my qualification, is nothing
less but only an answer to certain words of the article which at the first
readinge of the B. (if he read them) I marked not well, containing in it a
plain and dire^t answer to that which was not answered before. wherein yet
the Disc. after his wonte^ manner has left out part and the best part on
Darrels behalf, vz. these words: I did lie upon her side, she lying on her
side, and this (as my answer to this article will witness) I deposed at the
same time when I said my lying was in imitation of the prophet, This p^rad
(...) would ha^ cleared Darrell too much, and theirfore no reason for M.
Hersne^ to se^ it dowue.
as I dull (vz. for the present) think: whereof as I was not then very sure, so
had I advisedly considered thereof, and better remembered my self, I had
presently and in the same moment corrected that false immagination of mine,
wherein I so much wronged my self. Now as the Disc. has omitted part of my
deposition, so (the better to piece up his patcherie,) has he added something
of his own, vz. as I believe: and again, I verily believe, which wor^s
because the argue a doubting, the Disc. has inserted, as though I had stood
in doubt of those things, whereof I am and was very sure and out of all d^vbt.
Neither would I have protested so considentlye as is here confessed, and then
come in after wards with I believe. I verily believe.

When I said Ah I looked for this. I did not mean such a fylthy and ridicuius
deposition as is ^ere mentioned, or such an article as then was read unto me
much worse then the deposition: but being examined concerning Ka. Wright, I
looked to hear of mysaid lying and to be examined thereof, and that the world
should be borne in hand that it was in an unclean desire, and thereunto inded
inclined the article, The reason whereof was because I knew Satan would bring
to light and spread abroad, this rash and indiscreet act of mine, if god did
permit him, and that the same through the great folly of man and prones to
believe any thing reported though never so false, espetiaily against a preacher
and minister of the word, would tend to my reproach, and not rest there, but
thorough the false perswation thereof, keep many from believing the works of
God wherein the Lord had used me as an instrument among others This greiuing me
inwardly in my soul, and in that my grief these words burstinge forth, the
Disc. would feign here upon infer, that I made bold with my oath, because I
said that I was examined upon the sudden. To this I answer and it is true,
that I was on the sudden examined of this fact, and yet looked for the same,
after that the Bishop began to examine me as touching Ka Wright: for before he
came to this article, there were diverse other articles proposed unto me
concerning this said Katherin, about the which the Bishop was a good space in
examining me. In which interim I looked to hear of that which now the world
you see (through the charity of this chaplain and his good Master) thus
infamously hears. As touching this deposition of Ka. VVrights, he is very
simple that knows not who taught or persuaded her so to depose and that it
came not of her self, if so be she have so deposed.

Discouerer
We see that Ka Wright wa^ dispossessed, but not by the ordinary means (of
prayer and, page 303.
fasting) that Christ appointed: and so Darrell must be driven to confess that
he wrought a miracle.

Darrell
I have showed else where that Devils are or may be cast out by prayer, or by
prayer and fasting, according to the kind of spirit wherewith the party is
possessed: and that this is the ordinance of Christ. K Wright then being by
prayer dispossessed, was healed by the ordinary means, as well as those which
be delivered from Satan by fast inge and prayer: and therefore not by miracle.

Discouerer
It being objected to M. Darell by her majesty's Commissioners, that he knowing
the said Katherin Wright to dissemble in her pr^tended fitet at Mansfield,
page 303.
had private conference with her, and taught her how to order her self in the
manner of her counterfeiting, whereby he encouraged her in that her lewd course,
he does deny it, but hereof Ka Wright deposes thus: Ans. ^.
M. Darrell after his coming to me at * Mansfeild, did tell and teach me alone,
2 the town where I then dwelt to one Edward Loades, to be helped by his father
in law: M. Becking^ans.
how to use and order my self in my fites.

Darrell
Ka Wright said this for fear least her feet should have been burned. 2. K.
Wright came to Mansfeild but two days before her dispossession, before which
time she had been for many weeks handled after a strange and greiuous manner,
even after the same manner as she was at Mansfeild and after at VVhittington
upon her repossession, as it evident by page 3 page 305. then sure their was
either counterfeiting, or else ^possession before. which indede is false,
neither is the same deposed by the 3 witnesses, but only this, that shortly
as^^ her return from Mans^^lde, she was as cuill as before, (...) after her
wont (...) manner (...) to her former fites which needs must be so, because
she was repo^essed. page 298.
305. whereupon she was first had to one Arthur a coniuere, to be helped if
it might be, and after by the appointment of the now Lady Bows, then Mistres
Fovliam to Chesterfeild a market town thereby, whether by her means also
repared sundry neighbor ministers, which seeing her in diverse fits, suspected
her to be possessed, whereupon the same was bruted in those quarters, and this
was before she came to Mansfeilde as the aforesaid Lady with many others can
witness. It can not be then (were K. Wright a counterfit that I did teach her
at Mansfield seeing whether she cou^terfeited, or was possessed, it was so with
her long before she was sent by M. Beresforde to Mansfeild, before which time
God he knows, I never saw her, neither does Ka Wright nor yet the Disc. say
any thing to the contrary. 3. I was says Ka. Wright when I parted from M
Darrell in the very same case that I came to Mansfeild. And for the
stre^gthening * here of are produced the depositons of three, whereupon the
Disc. (page 305) concludes thus: By which conference of the time it appears
directly that KaWright was not at all in any sort releiued by M Darrell. And
in another place thus. And this course sher confesses, she has held from the
time she. began it, until the time almost of this her examination, vZ. about
13. or 14 years. This considered I desire to know of the Discouerer, wherefore
I did teach Ka. Wright to counterfeit, If to glory in the dispossession of
her, as is to be intended, for the gain of one penny is not said to my charge
how comes it to pass, that Ka Wright feigned not her self to be dispossessed,
and so continued well ever after that I with others used prayer in her behalf,
but not withstanding the prayers use to the end to make show that she was
thereby dispossessed, and a secret a grecement theirof between us, if the Disc.
say truly, yet conti^ the very same, counterfeiting a possession after in like
manner as before? This tended to the shame of me her master, and not to my
praise: all the glory had been in the fained dispossession, whereunto the
dissemblinge of a possession only served, (if their had been any such
iniquity) and theirefore would in no case have been omitted who can be so
gross as once to imagine that I did teach K Wright to counterfeit a
possession, and give her not instruction concerning the dissembling of a
dispossessions specially seeinge I did affirm and bear the world in hand
that she was dispossessed upon the prayers used by my self and others? what
in common sense would K. Wrights sayninge to be possessed advantag me? Had K.
Wright dissembled to have had the devil cast out of her by me, and then must
she have remained well, after I pretended to dispossess her, in carnal reason
there was something to have induced me theirvnto, but their was nothing in reason
to lead me to perswad and teach her to couterfeite only to bepossessed with
the devil. and the sam for many years to dissemble. As this could not procure
me in particular the praise of men, and to be reputed to have some rare and odd
gift in casting out devils, but rather the contrary, all things well
considered: so neither in general could it further the setting up of the
Presbyteriall conceits: page 15.
seeing here was no devil cast cut by a Presbiter^all man, to commend him,
and his conceits to the world. And this is the 14. time the Discouerer is
convinced and shamed by his own Discovery.

4. It is to be remembered, ans. 4.
that K. wright setting down the cause of her dissimulation forsooth, does not
mention any profit or benifite she should receive from me, or that I did
bear her so in hand, but mentions the hard usage of her father in law John
Mekin, in beating and brusing her very sor^ to deliver her self from which she
fell of countering: whereunto the Disc. adds, page ^97 1298 and 313.
a desire to live at some case, and to he much made of by her parents. If
these were the reasons or causes of K Wrights dissimulation, as K. Wright and
the Disc. tell us: then she did not dissemble for Darrels sake, not for any
profit or benefit she was to receive from him. And this is the 15. time that
the Discouerer is convinced by his Discovery: except you will say these were
not the only causes o^ner counterieiting, which we can not in any reason
think, seeinge neither K. Wright nor Disco. (who between them I trust have
omitted none) have named any other cause.

Having answered that which is said to prove K. Wright a counterfeite, and my
self to have taught her, the rest in this chapter being of le^^e moment
(...), as not worthy the answearinge, and so will proceed to Ma^y Cooper the
fourth counterfeite.

OF CHAP. 8.
OF M. Darrels proceedings with M. Cooper, the sister of william Somer^

Discouerer.
First M. Cooper says thus: many times M. Darrell would call me unto him
alone, I being in my fathers house, and tell me that he doubted, that I would
prove in tune to be possessed, page 315. and 316
and theirfore bad me look unto it. His particular speeches with her were
nothing else, but a cunning project to put Mary Cooper in mind, that she might
counterfeite such a matter, and so she took it. Hereunto also that
apoer^aineth, which she deposes thus: I often times ^xard M. Darell say before
my pretended euilnes, that it was the devils custom, when he had possessed one
in a family, to seek to possess more of the same family likew^e. This (as
arguinge too plainly his cunning packing) M. Darrell denies: but it is some
what strengthened by Summers deposition in this behalf: before time (says he)
that I fell again into this course, etc. Further more whiles the said Mary
Cooper was meditating as it seems upon M. Darrels former speeches, it fell
out that a child of hers died a little before Christinas: which she took so
heavilie, as it made her as she says indeed and truly evil at ease, and
somewhat weak: wherevp in certain w^omen and others in the town, coming unto
me, told me (says she) that I was worse, then I knew my self to be: and
that I would be as evil as my brother william was. These words added to M.
Darrells former speeches: that he doubted she would prove to be possessed, and
that Satan was not content with one in family, together with her experience
of the signs of possession, which she had seen in her brother, and often
heard of M. Darrell, made her (as she says) to do that which she never
thought to have done: that is, (as she adds) to tomble and toss, to talk
idely, and to laugh.

Darrell
In this last chapter of the Discovery, the Disc. tells us of the
counterfeitinge of one Mary Cooper of Nottingham, wife of Robert Cooper the
younger, and sister to William Summers, and of my teachinge of her, or cunninge
and fradulent practices used to the said end. And this he proves by her
deposition, strengthened by Summers deposition, other proo^e has he none. She
counterfeited a possession. And to the end she might be deemed by the world to
be possessed, she did tumble and toss, talk idely, and laugh. Surely these
things are easily done, neither need thee to have any help to teach her them,
or I to have used any great cunning theirin, but of her self without me, she
was able to have tumbled etc. And were not they wise people trow ye, which upon
the doing of those to yes would deem her to be possessed? we must know then
(and may in reason assure our selves) that were Mary Cooper a counterfeite, to
make show theirof she did something one beside tumble and toss, talk idely
and laugh: yea by the words of the Disc. so much may be coniectured, in that he
says Mary Coopers experience of the ^ignes of possession, which she had seen
in her brother, and often heard of me, made her etc. whence it is to be
gathered, that she to be ^nought to be possessed with the devil as well as her
brother was, did (...) some (at least) of the signs of possession, as W.
So^ers her brother had to the said end done before her. Let us then (I say)
con^^der what counterfeit tricks she did, and whether they be such as I could
teach, and she learn and practice.

1 She constantly affirmed that usually in the nights she was troubled with
strange ^ights and visions, and namely of Alice Freman: some thing also now and
then speaking to her, and by some circumstances this might be made probable.

2 It is certain that on the day she was handled after a strange manner by
f^tes, and that by course or turn with her brother Summers, for ^e no sooner
ended his fites, but presently in the twinkling of an eye, she begane hers, and
when she ended, immediately begane her and thus they did though they were in
several rooms.

3. In the^e fites she speak very much, whereof she knew nothing after, and
that this is true, it might be made very probable by diverse circumstances also.

4. In some of her fites she was of that strength that 4. or 5. could scarslye
rule her.

5. She was of supernatural k^owledge, tellinge of diverse things done a good
way of her, and that at the same instant they were done.

6. In her fites she was in the Judgment of men without feelinge. As to her
brother, so to her, a little thing in appearance was done to make trial
theirof, which notwithstanding undoubtedly will suffice theirvnto. And that
was this: her little finger was bended withal the force of a man inward, so as
presently after it swelled much, and great pain had she theirof many days
after: yet their at stirred she not at all, no more did Summers.

7. her belly was in the midest as it were divided, and raised up of either
side.

8. Out of her belly was sensibly heard a kind of whupping, also a noise much
like to the whurring of^ catt.

9 her bellye on the sudden swelled, and was in estimation of the b^gnes of a
woman somewhat more then haife gone with child: and so continued being litlle
or not at all bigger, about a quarter of ayeare. 2. This swelling would
suddenly begone, and after a little while be their again 3. Upon and duringe
this swelling she felt somthinge (as it were quick) stir within her, whereupon
she thought especially at the first, that she was with child, and now and then
also through her great simplicity she so hoped a great while after: and yet
always from the begininge she said, that that stirring was nothing like to
that she felt within her when before she was with child. After she had thus
continued about 13. or 14. weeks, she fell a traueling, so as midwife after
midwife and neighbor weomen were called in and sent for, wherein (as I was
credibly informed) it went thus with her. At the beginning of her trauile, her
belly was about the bigness aforesaid and soft: the next day very bigg, but
soft: not long after very bigg, and hard as if she had been indeed with child,
and at the point of deliverance: sometimes also she was very gaunt, having
her belly less then a woman's ordinarily is. Moreover, a stirringe or movinge
was sometimes seen and felt in very strange and admirable manner, as if their
had been some quick thing causinge it, but so as no substance could be felt:
and this was in sundry parts of her body, as about her stomach, above her
breasts, and in her arm or shoulder. And this rare accide^t together with this
strange alteration in her belly, from little to great, and from great to
little, from soft to hard, and from hard to soft, was duringe the time of her
travel, which was for 2. or 3. days, as I remember. She had the pains of a
woman in trauill: and in danger of death, as many women in travel: in so much
as they which were with her despayringe of her life, caused the bell to be
toled for her. In aword, she was in althinges like to a woman in travel,
distering only herein from others, in that they bring forth something,
either living and reasonable creature, or some untimely birth: but she
nothing at all, neither then nor after: travel after travel, and nothing but
trauelinge, and one would have thought for a child, for their were all the
signs and ^orrunners of a child, and vet behold no child was brought forth,
nor yet any thing else. That issued from her, which never was known or heard
of to come from any woman, but where a child was either brought or their to be
brought into the world: and yet lo no child. Besides these things which she
had in common with other weomen, which weomen can tell it is impossible to
counterfeit, and a shame for men to say so: she had this in special and proper
to her^elfe, that lumpes of flesh came from her, and that which being carried
to the Physician, he said that if it came from nature, it was not possible for
her to live. Here was a bloody counterfeitinge, if you knew all, as the
weomen which were at this travel can tell better then I. VVhiles these
things, and presently after these things were done, she notwithstanding did
rise out of her bed, and go up and down the house, into the chamber, and
neither keept bed nor house for all her traueling: which had cost her it may be
her life if this her trauelinge had been natural, and not extraordinary and
supernatural. In her breasts also she had sometimes water, and sometimes milk.
It was a prittie piece of cunning to convaye now milk now water, into her
breasts, and such as few weomen can do the like: and yet this we se is but
the least of a many of her saytes. Is not this astrange kind of traueling, and
strange child sure that this woman went with? It may be it will prove so in
the end when this woman shall come to be delivered of this child. After all
this trauelinge I have seen this woman with her belly of a bigness somewhat
more then ordinary, and within half a quarter of an hovre and less, so bigg
to my Judgment and others, as a woman great with child and ready to be
delivered.

As the sum of this being examined by the B. of London concerning Mary
Cooper, I set down in wrighting, (whereof I read part to the Bishop he
refusing to hear the rest) affirminge upon my oath some of the same to be true
of my own knowledge, and that the rest I was credibly informed and did believe
to be true: so I offer now to those that be in authority to make proof hereof
by many witnesses. page 317.
Yea the Disc. himself confesses she had a swellinge in her body whereby she
verily thought her self to be with child. And a little after he produces M.
Cooper deposiing thus: when Mistres Gray and the rest of her company (vz. the
other weomen desired to come to her travel) came about me saying and
reporting, page 318.
that I should be delivered of some monstrous thing, Hereby it appears not
only that Mary Cooper trauiled, as is before said, but also that in the same it
went with her very extraordinarily: whereupon the weomen their present, looked
not that the said Mary should have been delivered of a child, but os some
monster: and truly no marvel the premises considered.

We hear what M. Cooper has counterfeited, and what I have taught her, if a
counterfeite she be. But how did I teach her? For sooth I said unto her I
doubted she would prove to be poss^ssed: and that Satan was not content with
one in a family. This latter speech says the Discouerer, (which no wise man
will bel^iue) argues too plainly his cuning packing. Did ever man read such
ridiculo^s stuff as this? Does it not deserve rather to be hissed at, then
answered? Frame the argument S. H. Darrell said to Mary Cooper, he doubted or
thought she was possessed etc. Theirfore he taught Mary Cooper to counterfeite
a possession. By the same reason certain women and others in Nottingham which
goeinge to Ma^y Cooper said, she would be as evil as her brother was, taught
her to counterfeit. For hereby they meant she would be possessed as Summers was,
which is more then that I affirmed. Heerevpon the Disc. ascribes her
counterfeitinge partly to them and this speech of theirs: but how sottishly he
does it, and how absurdly he reasons here against them and me, let every
child judge. A boy may see that were we deceived, and Mary Cooper not possessed,
this said speech argues our simplicity, but no such iniquity as the Disc.
pretends No less gross is this, that Mary Cooper and I dwelling in the same
town, and I desiring in my self that Mary Cooper should counterfeite, and she
willinge on her part to perform the same, as the Disc. pretends, yet
dwellinge in the same town and having sundry times speech together, neither I
nor she ever had word of counterfeiting, but only used such speeches as you
hear: which were a cuning protect (forsooth) to put her in mind of
counterfeiting. page 315
Here was an apt scholar I trow, that need no further instruction in so
difficult a matter, then to have a few sorye words (such as you hear) cast
forth, which might put her in mind only of that she should do. Her brother
was good at learning his feites, if you will believe the Discouerer, but she
far surpafseth him. But Mary Cooper in the deposition proceeds.

Discouerer.
Which laughing, I would sometimes have restrained, but could not, by reason of
the peoples foolish speeches that were present. page 316
This laughing and fleering some would think to be but a small matter: but
consider what M. Darrell gathers of it. I affirmed says he in Mary Coopers
hearing, that her laughing and fleeringe countenance was such as I had seen in
others possessed. Again, I have said that her laughter in her fits did proceed
from the devil.

Darrell
Concerning this laughing, and the words I spoke as touching the same, this
we must understand: that for certain weeks when Mary Cooper was about her
aforesaid traveling, and Satan most busy about her, she was given so to
laughing, that she no sooner looked of any body but she would laugh or smile,
neither could she abstain as she said, and no doubt truly. Now I seeing this
countenance in her sometimes and hearing of it by others, and perceiving
evide^tly at the same time the work of Satan upon her, and calling to mind
the sleeringe countenance and laughing not only of K. Wright, but also of 3 of
the 7. in Lancashire, and withal considering that such an (...)e might well
proceed from the devil, who by his nature is given to all vanity, and
theirfore might well cause such a vain and light countenance: did tell her,
that that her laughing or sm^^nge came no doubt from the devil. And this I
said theirby to have drawn her to have turned her eye to god, correcting her
for her sin, by the ministeri^ of Satan.

Discouerer.
Again the said Mary Cooper being thus deemed to be troubled with Satan, page
317.
it sell out that besides her said grief and weakness she had also some
swellinge in her body, whereby ^he verily thought her self to be with child.
And otherwise whatsoever she pretended in outward show, she nether had ^uffered
nor fell as she has deposed any thing in the world. Against her opinion of
being with child, M. Darrell opposed himself as much as he could. M. Darrell
(says she) labored to bring me from my perswa^ion of being with co^ld, by
often saying, that it was no child, but such a child as go^ ^^sse every good
body from.

Darrell
I perceiving this simple woman to be ever looking to nature, and ascribinge in
a manner a^ to nature, saying still she was with child she (...) she ^oped for
all this she was with child. I seeinge her to do this, as is the manner of us
all almost to look and gaze only upon the ^eanes, or second cause of our
troubles, and to go no further, and being most sure also that herein she was
greatly deceived: labored to ^rawe her from that fond, foolish, and absurd
conceit of hers, which kept her from profitinge by that affliction: and
indeuouringe this, a^sured her that she was not with child, and that these
things came not from nature, but from a supernatural power, and something
above nature, which was the deuil^ either inwardly possessing her, whereunto I
rather inclined, yea in a manner wholly: or being without by some external
operation of his. And this I therefore did, that I might theirby the better
draw her to look from earth to heaven: to go^ I mean the author of her
affliction, and his extraordinary hand upon her, afflictinge her in her body
by the ministerye of Satan, as I told her: that so the might be the more
thoroughly affected, and humbled under that Judgment, and the Lord so iudginge
her. If she had proved with child and brought forth one not long after, then
it had showed some simplicity in me, but not argued my teachinge of her to
cou^terfeite, if such she were, and then if those words had been cast in my
teeth, I could less have blamed them. But behold more then a year and half
after she felt something stir within ^er, and thought she had been quick with
child, as weome^ call it, she brought nothing forth, nether living creature,
nor yet untimely birth. Was I not then (trow ye) to blame to say as I did?
that she was not with child, it is now manifest, theirin then I said truly, and
for that one would think I deserved not to be blamed. Yet ^ow see I am, which
puteth me in mind of the proverb we have: truth may be blamed, but it shall
never be shamed. And what I should use the other speech again: God bless
every good woman from such a child? I think their is never a good woman in
England, but if I should say so in her heareinge, would say in her ^art, Amen
to it understand me you m^st conditionally. But this that follows I desire
the reader carefully to observe.

The Disc. confesses that Mary Cooper had grief and weakness, also a swelling
in her body, and alittle before it is said, that at her counterfeite travel
she was indeed and truly evil at ease, and somewhat weak, whereupon certain^
weomen coming unto her vz. to her trauel^ etc Of Summers (in effect) he
confesses, page 180. page 295.
that he had a disease in his bo^y by wading: Of Darling that he felt indeed
at the first some prickings in his legs, and that he v^mitred, and was
somewhat evil at ease and of Kath. Wright, that she growinge to some weakness,
began to be troubled with a kind of swelling in her body, occasioned (as since
she has learned) by some stopping of humors, page 298.
not unknown to diverse weomen. Hereby it appears that all these
counterfeites, did not all their feaites but that somof them came from nature
so that nature and craft may seem to have conspired and traueled together to
bring forth these counterfeites: yea every of them without exception. What,
were they all sick and evil at ease, S. H.? Sure they had not otherwise been
fit persons to have made counterfeits off: and belike the better to make
semblance of counterfeiting, they were to have some help from nature, which
they could not have from art. But what might that be which was natural, and
which they could not do by art? a swelling in the body why, but William
Summers did counterfeit this swelling, as appears by page 181. and 213. where
he tells us also full absurdly how he did the same. The other counterfeits
then ned not to have run to nature for the doing of this trick. But if they
were all of them indeed and truly evil at ease, as the Disc. and they
themselves say, and that truly: it is strange that they should have any heart
to counterfeite: also that being sick and weak they were able to show forth
such strength, and such admirable and manifold faytes, as is manifest they or
the devil did. And this is the sixteneth time the Discouerer is convinced by
his own Discovery.

Discouerer
When Mistress Graye says Mary Cooper and the rest of her company came about
me, page 318.
saying and reportinge that I should be delivered of some m^nstrous thing, I
laughed heartily at their folly and this my laughinge they termed my fite, and
would cry out now Lord bless her, she is in asore fit. The which their
foolish wonderinge made me laugh more and more: and tho more I laughed they
more they cried: Lord have mercy upon her, she is in a strange fit, besides
when I had laughed till my heart was (...) at them, because my strength was
spent with laugh^ng, then would the wh^le company of weomen, namely Mistress
Gray, and the re^^, cry out (...) her, lord b^^sse her, Lord Jesus have mercy
upon her, now she is in a trau^e.

Darrell
We have heard before of Mary Cooper being with child, and that after she had
continued so many weeks in apperance she ^ed (...) au^ing, whereupon diverse
neighbor weomen (and among them M^stres Cray) being first requeste^
(according to the cust^me) came (...) said travel, and how it went with her
theirin very extraordinarily, in so much as they weomen present theirat
conceived she would have been deliuer^d of some monstrous thing, as is here
confe^^ed. ^he Disc. now tells us in the person and deposition of Mary Cooper
(which I know he would have men believe to be true) that she did nothing but
laugh, and this laughing they termed her fit: were not these wise weomen,
which seeing a woman only laugh, did theirvpon think that she was in travel,
and not only so, but imagin^a that she would b^ d^^iuered of some monster, and
theirvpon cried unto the lord to have merry on her? Again it is say de, that
Mary Cooper was (...) and truly evil at ease: It is incredible then that
being sick, she should thus excee^e in laughing Surely if Calphurnius were
alive of whom the Poet says, pleno ridet Calphurnius ore, and should read
this ri^iculous depos^u^n, he would not only laugh with open mouth theirat,
but as it is saydhere of Mary Cooper, laugh till his har^^ were sore. Had not
the Disc. sold himself to all impudency and shameless gaynsaying the truth
would he ever have affirmed, much less published to the world, that Mary
Cooper did at her traueile whereof we have hard nothing but laug^? But as the
Dis. does here extenuate or rather make just nothing of the rare and grievous
effects, which Satan wrought upon the ^ody of Mary Cooper, at the time of her
supposed trau^^, (...) hat^ be do^e the like before (to his vttermest)
throughout his Discovery by other as strange and greiuous effects, which the
euil^ (...) in Summers, Darling, and Katherine Wright sent forth: and this is
above all things to be observed by the reader, for herein principally lies
^is ^eceite. Secondly, as here he does this besides impiously, very absurdly
and in ridiculous manner, so usually before. For instance Summers (...) I did
foame excessiuely: page 23^.
it is true quoth the Disc and his deponentes, but it was when he had black
lead in his mouth etc.

Discouerer
You hear in this deposition some ^ention of the Iudge^, page (...)
whereupon it is to remember unto you, what a very strange and malicious
practice was under taken, to have procured the death of apore wom^^ o^e Alice
Freman, upon pretense that she was a witch. This A^ce Freeman was one of those
whom Summers had named for witches, and is alied to M. Freeman an Alderman and
Justice of peace in Nottingham. It is said (but untruly) by some of M. Darrels
friends, that before the detecting of Alice Freeman for a witch, it was not
reported in Nottingham, that Summers was a dissembler, theirby inferring that
the offense taken by her detection, was the cause that raised up aslaunder for
sooth of Summers dissimulation. The practice was, to charge the said poor women
Alice Fr^eman, to have bewitched to death the child of Mary Cooper: and that
she likewise was the cause of the said Mary's trouble and vexation, as haueing
bewitched her in like manner. which conceit being thrust into Mary Coopers
head, she was arraigned: M. Darrell was one amongst diverse that gave in
evidence against the woman, grounding himself much upon Summers detecting of
her for a witch and matters were so prosecuted against her, as had not the
Judges in their wisdom discern ^omwhat, it is verily thought, the poor woman
(being found guilty by the great enquest) had been condemned to death.

Darrell.
Seeing the Disc. will justify Alice Freeman, and together with her kinsman M
Freeman have her to be a very innocent, and to have been without cause through
the malice (forsooth) of some accu^ed of witch craft, let us therefore see what
may be said concerning her: not that I will charg her with witchcraft, but that
we may see, she is not altogether so free from all suspicion of witchcraft as
the Disco. and her kinsman pretend: and that there was just cause of the
proceedinges used against her. In the beginning of December 97. presently after
the discovery of this Alice Freeman among other persons for a witch, by Summers
or rather by the devil vsinge his tongue, she the said Alice coming into the
house of Robert Cooper, father in law to Summers and to Mary Cooper his sister,
some angry words the said Mary gave her, calling her a witch The night
following (but how it came to pass I know not) Mary Cooper felt a stiring
within her belly, as if their were some quick thing, her belly swelling
(which was sensible to others) and the other grievous vexations whereof we have
heard before growing upon her by little and little. page 3 ^
To this stirring M. Aldridge has de^^sed afterward she grue to be
indifferently well, and so does continue: only she complayneth, that she has
a kind of stirring in her b^lly, But if Alce Freeman together with her familiar
spirit caused Mary Coopers strange and fearful vexations, then it was thought
that her malice did not sta^e it self there, but reached to her only child,
that so she might be further revenged of her and hereupon this suspicion di^
arise About 10 days after the former jar in a fair moan shine eue^ninge,
Alice Freeman went from her own house to Robert Cooper his house. One seeinge
her: and maruelinge to see her trudg so fast, that could so ill (being avery
ougly, old, ^ame woman,) do it, followed whott foot after her, and dogged
her. When she was come to the aforesaid house, she did not forthwith knock at
the door, as the manner of well meaning people is: but peepes first at the
chinckes of the door, then went she to the window, and thus she continued
playing at bo-peepe a good while, and yet she is no child but a well aged
woman. At length she espied the honest man which had followed after her, and
then she full mannerlye and honestly fell a knockinge. Into the house she
comes. Mary Cooper had then a little child standing at her knee in health and
playinge, Alice Freman desired to light acandle, but Robert Cooper denied her,
and asked her why she came to that house, which of all other was by the Mayor
forbidden her. Away goes she without lighting her candle, and as she went over
the threshold, the child which even now was so well and merry, begane to be
sick, and fell a scrighinge and sckreaminge, and so continued for two days
and then dyed.

Some questions might be here asked, which if they were fully answered, would
remove some scruple which remains still in many as, wherefore she went so so
hastily thither, and being come peeped in after that manner? wherefore to
light a candle at that house, rather then another? It being the only house
which was by the magistrate forbidden her: there being besides so many houses,
I know not how many betwixt her house and Coopers: Coopers house also standinge
out of the street, a good space into the churchyard. Moreover, to what end
she went, to light a candle, and how that contradiction of hers may be salved?
To some she said, she went with a candle from home, only to light it, and so to
return home: and this her answer was approved by the magistrates of
Nottingham, and yet can not be true the promises considered, besides that which
follows overthrows the same. To others that she had lost pinnes in the
churchyard, and would have lighted her candle at Coopers house stiding in the
churchyard to have found some of them, for it is odds she had not found them
all, to so^e other this question being asked I her, she answered she had lost
2d. in the churchyard, and that she desired to find. But it may be he that
pursued her, found that which she lost he would be examined thereof: but we must
first know, what she lost: whether money, or pinnes. It is a question also,
whether she went of purpose and made haste to lose something, that after she
might be occupied in seeking that she never lost. It would be demanded also,
why being denied to light her can there, she went not to another house to light
it, that so she might have gone about the seekinge of that whatsoever it was
she desired so much to find. Surely either she had lost nothing, or else she
grew careless of that she had cared so much for newly before: for she went
presently to another house, and a little while after home, without returning to
the churchyard.

I might add here another suspicious matter against her, concerning one George
Spence, by whose means in all probabillitie, as I could show, but that I haste
to an end he was so greiuously afflicted, that very many were quickly gathered
about him, and long after continued troubled in his body after a strange and
unnatural manner. I can tell also of a pretty pranck she played after both
these she came on a time into the house of a man in Nottingham whose name I have
forgotten who carries Aquauitae up and down the cuntrie: his wife welcumed her
with some shreud words: for there be few in Notting which love not her room
better then her company, she clasped her husband about the neck or back, and
departed, a strange kind of salution. The same day the man went forth with
his bottles on his backe^ when he was gone forward about a mile or two in a
fair even grene sword way, backwarde fell he and brake his bottles, and
there lay all the man's Aquavitae. Back he comes for new bottles and more
aquavitae: when he came at the very same place again, it fell out with him just
as before. If this was long of Alice. Fremans imbracinge him, the poor man I
dare say had as live she had so kindly embraced another as him, for the loving
salutation if I say it came from thence, scathed him 4. nobles. Home he comes
the second time, and after they two were made freindes he and his bottles
escaped well. I have heard of more such like stories of Alice Freman, as of one
which falling out with her as she was at meat, had like to have been choked,
and continued handled in that strange manner in her throat, as I never heard
of the like before, and that for the space of 5. hours or there abouts. even
until Alice and she were made cater-cousins, and then lo she was as well as
might be and this was as it is said and some other of this kind, before
Summers said she had a catt.

These things moved some to suspect Alice Freman of witchcraft, and though not
all yet part of this was given ineuidence against her: and not Summers
detecting of her for awitch, whereof there was no speech before the Judge and
being done by the lying spirit was theirfore to be held for false and
slanderous, or at lest to be suspected, except evide^t proof thereof might be
had from men. And hereof had M. Freman her kinsman well considered, he would
neue^ have labored so much by himself and his friends, I mean his fellow
Commissioners, to have proved Summers a counterfeite, thereby to recover (as he
thought) the good name of his kinswoman. Seeing the suspicion of her
witchcrafte relied not at all of Summers detecting her for a witch, but of
matters of fact to be proved against her: and that were Summers a counterfeite,
which he has thirsted so much after, the same would not free her from the
said suspicion. The Disc. parenthesis vz but untruly, is untrue my friends said
very true, if we understand them of the time after Summers dispossession, as
they (no doubt) meant. It is well known to the inhabitants of Not, that
before the detecting of Alice Freman for a witch, Summers was not reported in
Not. to be a dissembler: nether produces the Disco any thing to the contrary:
only himself says the contrary: whose testimony I think no man will
regard. But to return again unto Mary, Cooper, the Disc. proceeds etc.

Discouerer.
M. Aldridge deposes thus. page 322.
Afterward she grew to be indifferently well, and so does continue: only she
complayneth, that she has a kind of stirring in her belly: ( whereunto the
Disco. adds) and is not otherwise troubled, then it happens out upon
occasion with other weomen,

Darrell
It is first to be observed, that part of M. Aldridge deposition is wantinge:
afterward she grew well: these words must needs have relation to some
before, wherein something was said concerning her evilnes, and for the
confirmation of that I have to that end before delivered: but the Disc. thought
good to smother all that, as makeinge not for him, but against him: and this is
usual with him. 2. It is deposed that she has a s^irring in her belly,
(according to that I have before affirmed) and confessed that she is troubled
as other women are upon occasion: then sure there was something besides her
laughing, which so affected the women met at her aforesaid travail. page 323.


Discouerer.
The author of the Breife Narration writes in this sort: what goodly stuff
they ( meaning the Discouerer and his fellow Commissioners) have returned,
time and malice will make known unto us. The stuff such as it is (vile
indeed) his Maistershippe may be pleased now to pervse: and theirby reap some
profit, if he read it with no greater malice then it was written.

Darrell.
The Narrator (I dare say) was neither Prophet nor the son of a Prophet, and
yet herein he did foretell that which after came to pass The stuff that S.
Harsn^t and his fellow commissioners have returned him self confesses is
vile indede and sure so it is, yea as vile I am persuaded, as ever was returned
since England was a nation, for what is that stuff but an heap of false,
foolish, ridiculus, and absurd things witnessed upon the oaths of men, ^ome
few depontions except ^. But is this all that does make this stuff vile? no
hereby it is made more vile, in that this vile stuff was compassed by the
cunning persuasions, and threats of the commissioners. men for the present and
this act in authority, and such as ^hold rather have done their endeavors to
have preserved then drawn the deponents to periurye. But is here all? no the
stuff returned and publyshed to the world is made more vile by the
Discouerer, his additions, detractions, and alterations: being thereby made far
worse then at the first it was delivered. But is this all that makes this
stuff vile? no no: all this stuff has been compassed and produced not
against man, but against the Lord himself: not (indeed) to find out any
counterfeiting and teachinge to counterfeite whereof there is no more question
or doubt to be made, then whether it be day light at noone in the fairest
sunshine day in somer: but to obscure the works of god, and to keep his
people from believing them to be such: because they were brought to pass by
such as the Discouerer despisetn and hatetn, and would fame have al men to
hate and despise. And this is it that makes this stuff out of measure vile,
execrable, and abominable in the sight of god, and therefore ought so to be
reputed of all his people. Yea if we the inhabitants of England be the lords
people or inheritance as we profess: we can not but so account hereof, and
will therefore by all good means according to our places further thire
puni^hment: and our vice Gods, which are here on earth in Gods stead, will
take vengance of these traitors and rebels against God, for this unspeakable
dishonor done to him, and this treason or rebellion of theires, in taking
part with satan his enemy, (the God and prince of this world, who in some
extraordinary manner in risen up against these works of God) against the Lord
himself. (...)
If it be said by some in authority, that if it may be made to appear that
these things are true, they will not endure them, but severely pvnnish these
commissioners: I in all humillitie offer to make proof of these things, I do
not s^v o^ every ^erticula^ because it may be some witnesses will fa^le to
witness that th^^ know to be true and have formerly confessed.
and generally of whatsoever I have set down in this my Apollogie or defense
of the works of God, and of my self: and if herein I fail I refuse no
punnishment. In the mean season it is to be remembered, whereof these worthy
commissioners examined such as were by them deposed: surely for the most part
of such thing; as might serve to prove their foolish, absurd and ridiculus
cir^n^stances: and to this end vsualy they deposed them concerning the speeches
that I should utter in the hearing (forsooth) or presence of S^n. And how long
before should I have spoken the^e things? (...) a year: yea some of them
about 14. years then past. were not here good memories that could remember the
very words they heard so long before, specially the same little or nothing
concerning them, and being not worthy the remembering: yea the just (...) when
they were spoken, In the mass o^ depositions I think we scarsly have six
times the word or any (...) this effect.
and that ^o perfectly as they need not to (...) cause so (...) they remember
or other to this effect. One would think it had been fitter men should have
been examined concerning the actions of Some then of my speeches, and o^ the
strange and extraordinary things they had seen in him (...) happenly they
had seen any, as (...) commissioners did: for thereby only it would be made
(...) out of controversy by the (...) of men, whether Some. (...). It is be
objected that here of they did depose such as were examined by the 12
Commissioners: I answer and confess that they did so indeed by diverse of
them: but the Disc. has kept back and buried all that some of them affirmed
the second time upon their oaths, and in manner all that the rest then
deposed, as is made manifest by my answer to the 8. chapter of the 3. book so
that the cause is not bettered there (...) the Disc is made the more sin^ull.

Concerning the depositions published to the world under my name, this is it
we must know: that howsoever for the substance of (...) they ^e mine, yet many
of them as they be produced by the Disc. are not mine some he has fathered
upon me, I having deposed (...) thing, when I depos^d doubtfully with there
words (...) or other to (...) effect, which usually I did, the Discouerer
(...) seth p^duceth me (...) times ^ge^ m^^n depo^^nge d^^nfully. (...) as I
believe.
nor yet never been examined thereof: others ^e has corrupted, sometimes
adding, sometimes omitting or keeping back that which is ver^ ^ateria^^: and by
this his corrupt dealinge with my depositio^s on the one side and the like with
the depo^itions of his own depo^^ts on the other side, he makes great show
to the world of (...) w^ere none is. Now this per^ury he means to me. for why
I^^ but one, and the Disc. produces ordinarily 3. or 4. or more deposing the
contrary. And are not diverse to be believed before one? I answer,, not always
and in all cases. Against Paul Ana^^as the hig^ priest with the Elders and
sertuilus, and I know not now man, ^ewes besides witnessed before the judgment
seat, an I would no doubt have ^eposed, that he was a p^stilent ^edow, and a
^ouer of sedition, the contrary only Paul a pore prisoner affirmed: and yet the
truth was with this sole man. (...)
Even ^o it may be (and I would be sorry it were not) in this our present
case. And here it is not to be forgotten that my self being first deposed, S.
Harsnet went down with his commission after, his intergatories being framed
according to the things I had formerlie deposed: and there endeavored by
tareats and other wise to draw many of those which came before him and his
fellow^ commissioners to depose the contrary to that I had formerly deposed,
that so he might make me ^atfull to the world, because I was (for sooth) so
notorious a perjured person) to the great grief (alas) of the poor souls and
trouble of their consciences, the most of them not so much deposinge willingly
that which they knew to be true, as what the Disc. against their wills would
have them to depose, and persuaded to be true, saying, I trust, Darrell
himself has confessed it upon his oath etc. when I had deposed otherwise, and
that the same were false, as my self do assuredly know, and am able and
offer to make direct proof theirof by some of there depositions, and of many of
them could by the power of reason show the same, and would but for brevity
sake.

The Disc. tells us, that the reader shall reap some profit by his
Discouerer, if heread it with no greater malice then it was written.

The profit is in stead of glorifiyng God for the great works he has
wrought, and making that right and holy use of his works whereof at large we
have heard elsewhere, to receive an evil name and false and vile report of the
same: and to justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous, which is an
abomination before the Lord. And look what reward is due to him that sends
forth such cursed fruit, that may the Discouerer expecte and in justice is to
receive at the hands of the christian Magistrate, for all the pains he has
taken. For does not nature it self teach us that the labourer is worthy of his
hire? and reason this, that the hire or reward should be proportionable to the
labor or pains man takes? Whether this corrupt and worse then rotten
stuff, and whether S. H. Discovery detected now (I trust) to be a very
sinful, shamfull, slanderous, and lying treatise, came from charity as the
Discouerer prete^deth, or from malice which he denies, as it belongs to god
the searcher of the hearts to judge, so it is no hard thing for man to
conjecture. For as out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, so the
hand writes.

Howbeit peradventure, when he has better considered the contents of this
treatise, Discouerer page 3^4.
he will not be so peremtorie. Otherwis^ he has here matter sufficient to show
his skill in for the justification of it.

Darrell
As in these words the Discouerer very valiantly challenges the Narrator, so
page 58. does he challeng me likewise, saying after his scoffinge manner, that I
will peradventure be better provided hereafter: and that it were convenie^t
also that I furnished my self with some better profs. This challenge considered
there is small cause why any should be offended with me for answering the
Discovery, and producing the best proofs I have, for the prouinge that
William Somer^, the 7. in La^^cashire, Thomas Darling, and Katherine Wright
were indeed possessed with devils, and dispossessed of them, and did not
counterfeit the same, as is untruly affirmed by the Discouerer, and some
others. And if it be so that here in I have delivered the truth, as I trust it
is manifest by this and my other treatise, me thinks no christian should be
displeased therewith, but rather rejoice in this publishing and manifestation of
these works of god, and removing of the block that lies im the way,
hindering the Lords people from magnifiyng of him for them, and profitinge by
them. Can the child of God be offended with that which tends to the praise
and glory of God his father? or the lover of the truth, with the contendinge
for the truth, and conviction of the falsehood? Have I committed any thing
herein but that which in dewtie I did owe unto God, and could not without sin
have left unperformed? The Prophet Jeremiah complayneth that the people in his
time had no courage for the truth. Ier. 9. ^.
Had not I been guilty of this sin, and had not this reprofe reached it
self to me, if base and vile man publiklye defacing the truth and works of
God, I should not as publikly have maintained the same, and showed some courage
for the truth, being a principal witness of these works, and called also to
suffer for them? If S. H. had published a slanderous and reproachful book
against me, merely concerning my own person, and not against the Lord also, as
this his Discovery concerning my teaching to counterfeit is, pro. 22, 1.
I could have been contented in silence to have passed by it: and yet a good
name is a precious thing, above silver and gould, and such as one would be
loath to lose, or suffer to be taken from him: but to see S. H. slander and
bring up an evil name of the works of God, and spread the same far and
near: and for fear of punishment, or desire of liberty, or other carnal
respect, not to gaynsay S. H. and to justify the works of God against him and
all gainsayers, was apoynt of great cowardlines, and ill beseeminge the
soldier of Jesus Christ: 2 Timothy 2. 3. R^n. 21. 8.
and indeed to fear man, more then God. Such fearful ones shall have their
part in the take which burns with fire and brimston, which is the second
death.

The scope and drift of all that has been said concerning both the cause and
my self is, that the mouths of all men being stopped, and the work of God
being: acknowledged: The Lord may have his glory and praise, and man receive
his profit theirby. Secondly, that mine own innocence and fellow prisonners
appearinge, we may not only (being restored to our ministry and people,)
obtain liberty for our bodies, but also for our tongues: and they which have
caused all this sturr in our church, and unjust molestations unto us, and in
us, being ministers to the c^ngregations we ^el^erge, and ^aysed up this vile
slander of the great and rare work of God, and free s^eated to uphold and
maintain it being on foot, and theirin sought against God and his glory, and
the good of his people may be inquired i^^uired after: and being found out dealt
with as the enemies of God (...) church and receive their ^u^t recompense or
reward. The ^^^dnes of (...) cause, the in^onerable in^ur^e done to us the
servants an^ (...) of the Lord of (...), cry a ^ou^ and shir^ unto the (...) of
men, (...) mean the honorable and in ni^^ place and (...) for a ^pea^^
execution theirof. (...) ^^wes and of our land and the authority when from her
most excellent Ma^estie is derived to (...) trust mem^e and most (...) sup^^
our (...) Gods ^s: that they would ^ender the cause (...) zea^ous if ever, ye
Princes and ^ud (...) and (...) nor Gods cause to be th^s (...) or men^
Remember and forget not thus ^aying (...) I will (...) they (...) (...) then
you our (...) and honorable per^^ (...)
(...) right honorable indeed, be you care^ull to author (...) his.

And thus (...) conver^ my speech to thee (...) who (...) and (...) so ^e as
(...) only beloved (...) one my compa^^ day and night. If she (...) or that
which is (...)

The contents of the First Book. Answered.
The number of such persons as are said to (...) by M. Darrles means. Chap.
page 8 (...) occasion why M. Darrels deali^^e with (...) ^^tion at Lambeth.
Chap. 2. page 13. ^ow M. Darrels friends have set out the pre^^ (...) of
William Summers Chap. 3. page 19. How M. Darrell is made a fitter instrument to
cast out (...) many other. Chap. 4. page ^6. How M, Darell knew William Summers
and the (...) Chap. 5. page ^4. Of M. Darrels knowledge, who sent the devil
into (...) rest. Chap. 6. page 3^ Of the causes pretended, why men are
possessed, Chap. 7. page ^8. Of the means a^ledged by M. Darrell and others,
whereby men are dispossessed. Chap. 8. page ^ Of the signs whereby M. Darrell
and other (...) lay) when Satan is expressed. Chap. 9. page 91. Of M. Darrell
and M. Mores conc^ue, that (...) one, does presently after seek to repossesse
(...) page 57. How those that ^oke upon them to cast out (...) work, and of
their devises to (...)
The Countentes of the Second Book (...)
Of M. Darrels intercourse with Summers by startes at (...) bout year 1692.
until 1597. for his (...) semble himself to be possess. Chap. 1. page 66. Of
M. Darrels private directions to Summers whi^est he (...) gham with him, how he
should from (...) in his counterfeiting. Chap. page 92. Of M. Darrels
instructing of Summers by (...) ing, those things which he meant that he should
(...) of Nouem. when he came unto him, until the (...) same, being the day of
his pretended dispossession. (...) page 92. Of M. Darrels cuning instructing of
the Summers, (...) in his hearing of Satan's seeking to repossesse him, and of
(...) ing of certain tricks vnder^ (...) from the (...) uemben until about
the xxi. of the same. Chap 4. page 9^ Of M. Darrels cunning instructing of
Summers, by speaking (...) in his hearing such things, as he meant he should
(...) detecting of witches, from about the xxi of November, until about the
vii. of December. Chap. 5. page 107. Of M. Darrels course, from ab^ut the vii of
(...) until the (...) of January, whilst So. refused to dissemble any longer
C. 6. pa. 111. How Summers about the xiiii. of January fell again to the
acting certain fits, wherein he continued at times, til about the xxiiii of
(...) preteded that he was repossessed C. 7. p. 11
The contents of the Third Book, Answered.
(...) at S. John's in Nottingha^ as (...) as he was out of M. I. arrels
disposition Chap. 1. page 12 How M. Darrell (...) with Summers: for the
reuocation of his said (...) fession, that he had disembled Chap. 2. page 12
How M. Darrell devised two or three shifts to have avoided Some confession that
he had dissembled. Chap. 3. page 12 How M. (...) his friends to discredit Summers
confession did (...) report, that he was induced theirvnto by promises,
threating (...) Chap. 4. page 12^ Of M. Darrels ridiculous pretense, that
Summers was induced by the devil in form of blucke dog and an Ass, to say
he had dissem^ed Chap. 5. page 13^ How M. Darrell has falsely affirmed, that
VV, Summers was induce^ (...) say he had (...) for fear of hanging: whereas he
falling (...) to his fit before the Commissioners at Nottingham, (upon a fo^^
(...) comp^ct) the fear of hanginge was one of the chiefest cause^ that
h^^hen. affirmed that he had not dissembled Chap. 6. page 131 How (...)
threatninges, and promi^es to hau^ (...) he had been before the commissioners
at Nottingham, until M Darrell might again dispossess^^ him. Chap. 7. page 141
Of the depositions taken in M. Darrels behalf, at Not. and how up on th^r^^
examination of his own witnesses, it falls out: that the bodily (...) of
Summers in his fits, were not extrordinary, as the^ have been mi^^ported Chap.
8. page 143
The Contents of the Fourth Book Answered.
How M Darrell (...) from time to time, to make those thinge^ that Summers did,
(and were but very toys) to be thought (...) extraordinary Chap. 1 page 160
How M. Darrell would not suffer, (as near as he could) any to deal with (...)
in his fits, to try whether he were (...) or dissembled Chap. 2. page 160 How M.
Darrell endeavored to excuse Summers, when he was taken short, and did such
toys as did argue him sufficiently to be but acounter^^ Chap. 3. page 160 How
contrary to M Darrels assertion, Summers had his sentes and understanding in his
fits Chap. 4. page 162. Of the motions and knockinges which were heard and seen
abo^^ Summers in his (...), that they were done and made by himself, and (...)
page 162: (...) in self into the ^re: was volunta^^ and no (...) mat^^ as M.
Darrell has pretended Ca. (...) 102. (...) pretended strenght and weight in
his (...), that (...) to (...) and his (...) reports, the^ was no^^ing
extraor^^nary (...) Chap. 7. page 164. (...) knowledge in his fits was not
extraordinary as M. Darrell and his friends have falsely pretended neither could
be speak (...) ^brw^or Latin, otherwise then he had learned Chap: 8. page 1^5.
Their was no impossibility in Summers fits, as M La^ell and his ^rends have
falsely pretended Chap. 9. page 166: How contrary to M Darrels and his friends
assertions. w. Son was accounted by many in Not. for a dissemb^er, from the
time that he begane his practices their, until he confessed the same himself
Ca. 10 page 168
The contents of the Fist Book Answered.
How M Darrels credit touching his dealinge with the boy of Burton, does rely
upon a false and foolish book that was pvblished of the said boys pretended
possession and dispossion Chap 1. page 171. Of M Darrels rashness in affirming
Thomas Darling to be possessed, and of his cunning instructing him, him how to
behave himself upon the day of his pretended dispossion Chap, 2; page 173. Of M
Darrels further practices with Darling to pretend that Satan sought to reenter
into him, and of some other his untrue assertions, concerning the boys fites,
and of his cunning dealing likewise with him, that he should never confess his
dissimulation Ca 4. page 175: How Darling confessed his own dissimulation Chap.
page 179. A breife of K. Wrights confession, touching the beginning of her
dissimulation, and of the reasons that moved her so to do Ca 6. page 185. Of
M. Darrels procedinges with Katherine Wright, for her protend^ed dispossession.
Chap. 7. page 187. Of M. Darrels proceedinges with Mary Cooper, the siister of
William Summers. Chap. 9. page 195.
Faults escaped
page 8 sbeaches for speeches, p, 14 high (...) for commisioners, pa. 19 to be
(...), to be p 2 ^^snbscy: be for subsen^e ^b which I know for with I know p.
23. demu^ for denum ib. did etc. by for wa^. by. p. 26 and then for us then, p.
36. (...) 45 but the for but thus the, p 47. is it for it is p 54 ^^scendant
for ^^cedant. p. 7., (...) for as well more p 77 year 99. for year 98, p. 95.
undoubtedly for (...) indeed.

FINIS.

