A TRVE NARRATION* OF THE STRANGE AND GREVOVS VEXATION BY THE DEVIL, OF 7.
PERSONS IN LANCASHIRE, AND WILLIAM SUMMERS OF NOTTINGHAM. WHEREIN THE DOCTRINE
OF POSSESSION AND DISPOSSESSION OF DEMONIAKES OVT of the word of God is
particularly applied unto Summers, and the rest of the persons controuerted:
together with the use we are to make of these works of God. BY JOHN DARRELL,
MINISTER of the word of God.

He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
scatters. Math. 12. 30. PRINTED 1600.

(...)
We read in the 11. of the Acts, that the Apostles and brethren that were in
Judea, verse. 1.
hearing that the Gentles had also received the word of God by the preaching of
Peter, were offended with him for preaching unto them, and that when Peter was
come up to Jerusalem they contended against him, and rebuked him for the same:
But Peter beginning and expounding the thing in order unto them, and shewinge
that he was commanded of god so to do in a vision, they held their peace, and
glorified god. Even so many of the ministers and brethren in England having
been offended with me for saying and standing in this, that William Summers,
Thomas Darling, Katherine Wright, and 7. in Lancashire were possessed with
unclean spirits, and dispossessed of them by prayer and fasting, will I
trust when they shall hear the matter in order set down in this treatise
following, not only cease to be offended with me, but acknowledging the works
of god, magnify him for them. True it is that the people of god are borne
mightelye in hand that these are counterfeites, and have been theirvnto scholed
if not all, yet some of them by me, and the better to persuade this even to the
whole Church of England, their has been a book latelye published by one S.
H. entitled, A Discovery of the fradulent practices of JOHN Darrell: but how
untruly this is said, and impossible to be true appears at large by the
Detection of that Discovery, and partly by this treatise, and piece of the
Detection here following. Which being so, this ought no more to hinder us
from embracinge these works of god, Lohn. 9.
then the gainsayinge of the Pharisees, ought to have kept back the Jews from
beleiunge and acknowledginge the great work which Christ did, in giuinge sight
to the man which was borne blind: or that blasphemous speech of theirs, he
casts out devils through Beelzebub the prince of devils, math. 11. 24.
from confessing and iustifiyng that work of his: or that false, absurd, and
ridiculous report of the watchmen, (whereunto they were hired by the Hie
Preistes and Elders) that Christ his disciples came by night and stole him
away, while they slept, from beleiuing the resurrection of Christ. math. 28. 12.
Let not any then be hereby kept from giuinge ear unto that which follows,
but rather provoked to examine thoroughly what is said of both sides: and then
I doubt not but whosoever he be it shall be as easy unto him to perceive on
which side the truth is, as opening his eyes to discern betwixt light and
darkness. And to the end the truth might appear, and not always lie hid, and
the falsehood be convinced which has hitherto prevailed, I have presumed to
publish these followinge lines: wherein I could not be wantinge, if there were
any love in me to the truth, or fear or love to the god of truth, seeing the
truth so vniuer sally suppressed and trodden as it were under the feet of men
as mire in the streets: and the falshod reign as a queen* what christian
heart or lover of the truth could endure to behold this, and let this usurper
alone, if in his hand there was any power to pluck her out of her thrones we
can not (says the apostle) do any thing against the truth, but for the truth.
If at all times then we are to contend for the truth, by speech, 2. Cor. 13. 8.
by writing, and by every good way as their shall be cause, yea to do any
thing for the truth, the manifestation and publishing of it, and the inducing
of men to receive it: much more when the truth is impugned* and this is our
present case.

And that it may be more manifest that heerin I have performed a necessary
duty, such as without sin against god I could not have omitted: we must
remember that we are commanded to publishe the works of god whereof any of us
be witnesses, as appears by Psalm 105. 1. 2: and 107. 8. 21. 31. Mar, 5. 19
persuaded thereunto by reasons or arguments, as appears by Psalm. 78, and
111. 2. 3. 4. Math. 10. 32. It is commended unto us in the practice and example
of the servants of god: as appears by Psalm. 9. 1. and 66. 5. and ^1. 17.
and 78. 4. Luke 2. 17. mar. 5. 20. Act. 12. 17. and 14. 27. we are threatened
if herein we fail as appears by exodus 20. 7. math. 10. 33. If now every eye
or ear witness of the works of god is to publish and make known the same to
others, much more the principal witnesses, and such a one was I: and most of
all they whom god has given and called to suffer for giving testimony to his
works, ^s 4. 20.
as he has done me. Such above all others must with Peter and John say: we can
not but speak and publish the things which we have seen and heard. And if at
all times we ought to testify, make known, and justify the great works of
god, much more then, when such a work is not only gainsaid, but an evil name
and vile report brought upon it, and him whom the Lord used theirin: and this
is our present estat and condition.

When the holy ghost fell upon the Apostles in visible manner, so as they
begane to speak with other tongs, ^^. 2. 11.
as the spirit gave them utterance: some mocked and said, they are full of new
wine. Against this vile slander of the wonderful work of god, and his most
righteous servantes, Peter stood up and made an Apology saying: ye men of
Judah these are not drunken, ^th. 9. 33. 34, 12. 22.
as ye suppose, since it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that
which was spoken by the prophet Ioell etc. as it follows their until verse
37. (...) 11. 14.
In like sort dealt our blessed Savior in this very work we have in hand.
when he cast the devil out of some which were possessed, the people in deed
were a^^ased thereat, and wondered saying, the lik^ was never seen in Israel.
But the Pharisees said, he casts out devils through Beelzebub the prince of
devils. Against this blasphemous speech and report given out by the pharisees,
against this great work, and Christ him self whom theirein they counted for a
coniurer, and bare the people so in hand, Christ Jesus makes a de^ence and in
the same by sundry reasons convinces them: the which also is written for our
learning. And what are we to learn out of these scriptures? surely by their
examples and practice, to do the like in the like case, and when such occasion
is offered. That is, when any great work of god is wrought in our eyes, and
that some shall go about to mock at it: and bring up an evil name of it:
that then and in such a case we must not be silent, and content our selves with
this, that we our selves conceive well of the work, and profit by it: but we
must open our mouths wide in the defense of it, labouri^g to our uttermost to
stope the mouth of the gainsayer, and to wipe away the slander, least others
also receive hurt thereby, and that God may have the glory of his work of
allme^, if it be possible. And as all the beholders of such a work are upon all
occasions to bear witness thereunto, and to justify the same when it is denied
or slaundered, as they are able as shall hereeafter further appear: so those
specially upon whom the work has been wrought, or have been principal
witnesses theirof If then I desire to walk in the steeps of S. Peter, yea of
Christ Jesus himself, and to practice that which the holy ghost in their
examples and practice in the like case with ours, does commend unto us: how
could I do otherwise then make this Apology? And if I should have abstayned
from the publishing theirof, I see not but that theirin I should have failed in
the performance of a necessary dewtie, and so sinned against god: and
preferred my own quiet before the glory of god, and good of his people.
Neither let any man think that it would have suffised to have done this
inspeach: for to speak all that might be said in a corner to some few would
not avail, seeing this vile slander and evil report of the works of god,
and my self whom god used theirin, has spread it self far and near, even
throughout the whole land to the obscuring and drakening yea annihilating of
them, if it were possible* it was necessary therefore that that which should be
said for the convincing thereof and in iustificati^n of these works should go
as far and wide, which could not be without printinge. This I say considered it
were not sufficient for me, or a sufficient discharge of my duty, to wysper
that which follows in the ear, or speak of it in a corner: but rather to
speak of that in the light, which I have seen in darkness and what I have
heard in the ear, and beheld in secret places, to preach on the houses.

Moreover, if it be so that the doctrine of possession, and of dispossession,
and of the means thereof, etc do lie in a manner hid and not known nor
acknowledged almost by any: Is it not high time it were revealed and brought to
light? Is it not part of the counsel of god, to the revelation of all which
we are debtors? And when can any thing be done more seasonably then now to
treat both of the general doctrine, act. 20, 27.
and particular works we speak of* what can come in better season then even
now a treatise concerning William Summers his possession, when the ears of all
men are opened, to hear what can be said as touching the said Summers? how
many are their not only of the common sort, but of those which are noble,
wise, and learned, which are very desierous to be informed in the truth of
this matter? and could this possibly have been done but by this course I have
taken? And by whom should this latter be performed, but by my self,
considering I only have been a chief witness of the possession and
dispossession of all these persons controverted, and called by god thereunto? I
ran not to any of my self: wherein, and in calling me to suffer for the same,
the Lord seems to me to have singled me out though most unworthy, and more
vnfite then many others, to this special work. It stood me then upon to
perform this service whereunto god has called and appointed me, otherwise I
should have my reward with the unprofitable servant: If either for fear or
slouthfulnes I had failed theirin. Hereunto I might add, that I see many
erring exceedinglye herein, and greatly mistakinge this matter both in the
general and particular, and hereof I am most sure, and able also to make that
evident unto them. should I then have done well to let them alone?

And for as much as many not only of the irreligious, but of such as profess
the fear of god (as in experience I have observed,) regard not these works of
god: either receiving the false report that is give^ out against them, or not
earnestly considering of them, to the stirring up of their own hearts to
praise god for the same, and make their use of them: whereupon it comes that
the best of these are unable to de fend and clear these works from that evil
name of counterfeitinge which is cast upon them, and stope the mouth of the
adversary: and that non of them contendeth according to his place for them,
and the convincinge of the adversary: that these (I say) may see their sin
and be provoked with others to hear and consider of that which follows: they
must remember, that all the works of the Lord are great, and ought to be
s^ught out of all them that love them, ^al. 111. 2.
and theirfore this: that it is the property of a wise man to observe the
works of God, and therefore of foo^es to neglect or not regard them. When the
prophet had throughout the 107. Psalm made mention of the manifould works or
the Lord, and often moved men to confess before the Lord his loving kindness,
ver. 8. 15. 21. 31
and his wonderful works before the sons of men, he concludes thus: who is
wise that he may observe these things? In the 77. Psalm the prophet in the
name of the Church says: I remembered the works of the Lord: I did also
meditate in all thy works, and did devise of thine acts. And David thus* I
meditate in all thy works, I do meditate the works of thine hands. This is
the end of the Lords great works: He has made his wonderful works to be
had in remembrance. When the Lord then does any great work, we must remember
and observe it, v. 11. psalm. 143, 5. ps. 111. 4 ps, 91, 4 psalm. 105, ^
yea meditate theirin, that so we may the better behold the power, the wisdom,
the Justice, and mercy of God, and praise and magnify him for the same. Thou
Lord (says the prophet.) have made me glad by thy works, I will rejoice in the
works of thine hands. O Lord, how glorious are thy works? And again: declare
his works among the people: singe unto him sing praise unto him, and talk of
all his wonderful works. And as thus we are to observe, meditate, and
remember the works of God, and praise him for them: and not only so, but to
others also talk^ of his works, and declare or publish them to his people: so
it is the duty of all the Lords people to justify and defend them, when
there shall be a slander raised upon them, as partly is touched before. When
Christ had cast the devil out of one, and the pharisees had slaundered that
work of his, (as is aforesaid,) affirminge that he did it by the devil, he
did not only convince them: and show the haynousnes of their sin, that
theirin they had committed that sin which should never be pardoned, even the
sin against the holy ghost: but besides admonish those which by their
silence did approve that slander of the Pharisees, when they should have
justified the work, and defended Christ's innocence. Of these he pronounces,
that he accounts them also among his adversaries, math. 12. 30.
saying: He that is not with me, is against me and he that gathers not with
me, scatters. He that is not with me, etc. that is, he who is not on my side*
meaning: he who defends me not against the adversaries: my works against
the slanders they give of them, and my doctrines against their objections, he
is against me, that is, him I reckon in the number of my adversaries. VVherby
we may learn, (to apply this scripture more nearely) that it is not enough,
not to slander or impugn the works of God which have been wrought among us,
as some do: but that moreover we take heed that we approve not the slander
of counterfeiting given out against them by our silence, but open our movthes
in the defense and justification of them. Otherwise we shall be reckened by
Christ in the number of adversaries. And here unto tends that other saying
of our Savior: wisdom is justified o her children. As this teaches all of us
our duty, and that we ought to contend for these works of god, iustifiyng
them, to which purpose I allege it so particularlye my self, and has
(through the grace of God) provoked me to write the treatise following in
justification of these works, and another treatise for the taking away of that
slander of counterfeiting, which Satan has raised up for the obscuringe of
them. The Lord give those who profess them selves to be friends of Christ, and
to be of his side, to show it in taking part with him against his adversaries.

I. D.

THE HISTORY OF THE 7. IN LANCASHIRE.
At Cleworth in Lancashire within the parish of Leigh, there dweleth one
Nicholas Starchie gentleman who having only two children it went thus with them
in the beginning of februari 1594 first Anne his daughter being 9 Years old,
was taken with a dumpish and heavy countenance and with a certain fearful
starting and pulling together of her body* about a week after John Starchie
his son of the age of 10 years, as he was going to the school was compelled
to shout, neither was able to stay himself. after the waxed worse and worse,
falling into often and extreme fits, M Starchie seeking for remidy, after 9 or
10 weeks, heard of one Edmund Hartlay a coniurer to whom he repaired, made
known his grief, and with large profers craved his help. Hartlay comes, and
after he had used certain popish charms and herbs by degrees, the children
were at quiet, and so continued, seeming to be well almost a year and half.
all which time Heart. came often to visit them. at length he fained as thought
he would have gone into another country, but wether M Star. might not know:
when he begane to go his way, John fell of bleedinge, then presently he was
sent for again, who affirmed that if he had been 40 rodes of, no man could hau
stanched him. and thus it fell out at other tims

M Starchie hereupon feareing lest his children would be troubled in his
absence, and he uncertain where to find him, offered to give him his table to
tarry with them, and so he did for a certain spac^ but after couenaunted with
him to give him an annuel pension of 40s for his assistance in time of need:
which pension was assured him in writing, and began at Michaels day 1598.
wherewith Hartlaye not being satisfed, desiered more, an house and ground:
whereunto because M Starchi would not accord, he threatened in a fume ( M
Starchie being absent but in the heareing of diverse) that if he would not
fulfill his mind, he would make such a shout as never was at Cleworth and so
therwas indeed, not only upon the day and at the instant of there
dispossession, but also the day before: when 7. of them both the afternoon and
in the evening, sentforth such a strange supernatural, and fearful noise or
loud whupping, as the like undoubtedly was never hard at Cleworth, nor it I
think in England. this he said in September 1596. and one the 17 day of
November following they both began to be troubled again after so long rest.

On a certain time Hartlay went with M Starchy to his fathers house in Whally
parish, where he was tormented sore all night. The next day, being recovered,
he went into a little wood, not far from the house where he maid a circle
about a yard and half wide, deuidingit into 4 parts, making a cross at
every Division: and when he had finished his work, he came to M Starchie and
desiered him to go and tread out the circle, saying, I may not tread it out my
self, and further, I will meet with them that went about my death. when M
starchie saw this wreched The 1. or. 2. week of Lent Mistres Starchie required
them all. 5. to tell her how they were handled, that certain knowledge might
be had thereof to the preachers: this shows that the devil transformed
himself, and appeared unto them like an angel of ^ight
they all; answered, that an angel like a dove was come from god, and that
they must follow him to heaven, which way soever he would lead them, though it
were through never so little a hole, for he toulde them he could draw them
through, and so they ran under the beds, And Elizabeth Hardman was under a
bed making a hole, and being asked what she did? she said that she must go
through the wall for she on the one side, and her lad on the other would soon
make a hole. she would (on a time) have leaped out of the casement through the
glass window.

About a fortnight or. 3. weeks before their delivery, Elinor Hollande and
Elizabeth Hardman foretold how many fits they should have before they slept.
and to morrow quoth El. Hol. in the forenoone I must have a fit of 3 hours
long. when the time came she bad them set the hour glass. they set it behind
her out of her sight, her eyes also was closed. she was senclesse, and
speachlesse, save the noting of the time, which she truly noted: saying, there
is a quareter, the half hour, and as the glass was run out, she said turn
the glass, and thus did she 3. times or 3. hours. after coming to herself
she said Jesus bless me. which all of them usually said at the end of there
fites. In like manner did El. Hard. for 2. hours, who being demanded how the
knew this, answered that a white Dove told them so.

About the 19 of march the 4 youngest went on there knees all morning until
afternoon, ^ the fleed from all the familye and neighbors into other
chambers, calling them devils with horns creeping under the bed. when they had
the use of their feet, their tongues were taken from them.

when Master Hopvvood a Justice of peace came of purpose to take their
testimony against Edmond Hartley to Lancaster Assizes and had them before him
to that end, they were speachlesse, and that day he got no answer of them,
being called out of one chamber into an other, they sank down by the way
speachlesse. when they spoke they complained that Edmonde would not suffer them
to speak against him.

At the same time Jane Ashton a maid servant in the house (the. 7. possessed
person of the age of. 30. years) began to bark and houle when she should have
gone to bear witness against Edmund Hartley. whereupon one of them in her fit said
ah Edmond do thou trouble her now when she should testify against thee? This
was the second time that she was troubled. Almost a year before, it first
took her in her throat, as if she had a pyn sticking there, whereupon she
strayned her self so sore that she got up blood, and for two days was very
sick, Mistirs starchie jest gly said, Jane is sick of the hook, nay quoth
Hartlay I assure you it is no hook for if your own daughter or any other had
been in the same place the had been so served. As I remember I hard them say
that Jane Ashton had gone into Hartlays chamber and looked into his chest.

About the 21. of March El. Hol. and El. Hard. for 3 day and 3 nights to
gether could nether eat nor drink, nor speak to any except it were on to
another, and to there lads. save that their lads gave them leave (as the said)
the one to eat a toast and drink, the other a sower milk posset. And it.
notwiihstanding that permissio^ they said he was angry that they had eaten. and
told them that thie should not be quiet, until the had cast it up a gain so
the vomited saying, take it to thee, here it is again, for thou gave us
lisence to eat it, and now thou art angry. and if the went about to swallow a
little drink the were so taken by the throat, that the pict (...) up again. The
3 night about 8 a cloak El H^l: being asked when she would or could sleep,
answred, that there were 4 houers it to come. before she could sleep. about an
hour and half of that time she took a distafe, and spane both faster and
finer then at any tym before. when she had done spinni^g she said unto them,
now shall I work you all. and thencforth was so extremely handled, that tvo
could scarcely rule and hold her. at lengh reuerting she said I have been
sleeping 3 days and 3 nights, and now I faint with hunger.

About a week before there deliverance some of the youngest used these kind of
speeches: thou naughty lad, thou make us sick. for thou know the
preachers will come shortly.

This generally was observed in the 5 youngest, that when the gave themselves
to any sport, the had rest and were pleasant though the time was long. their
parents report being at a play in a neighbor gentleman's house many hours
together, the were quiet all the time ( Hartlay boested that he had kept them
so long quiet) but one the contrary as soon as the went about any godly
exercise the were trobled. And thus much brifly touching those 6 at Cleworth,
and the strange accedents which fell out there, as also how in all probability
it came to be so with them. now let us return to Marg Byrom of Salford, who
came to be vexed in like sort, by the appointment of God, and by the same
mediat hand, the devil, and Hartlay the coniurer.

The 10 of January (being the 4 day after her trouble begane) as she sat by
the kitchyne fire, she was thrown toward the fire, lyinge alonge hard by
the chimneye bars as though she should have been roasted. Thence the drwe her
and having continued a long time in the fit and recouerynge, about half an
houer after, as s^ee satte in a Chair, she was thrown headlonge under the
boarde but had no harm, and thus was she suddenly and violently cast sundry
times after.

She being desired to tell how her fits held her, said that she thought,
something rouled in her belly like a calfe and lay ever on her left side and
when it rose up from her belly toward her heart, she thought the head and nose
thereof had been full of nails, wherewith being pricked she was compelled to
scrike aloud with very pain and fear. when her belly was swolle^, it lift her
up, and so bounsed that it would pick of the hand of him that held her down,
and sometime the parti himself that held her far of. when her belly slaked
there went out of her mouth a could breath, (that made her mouth very could)
which caused her to bark and houle, then plumpte it down into her body like a
cold long whetstone on her left side when her belly was small, then was the
rest of her body be numed with cold, wherewith she so quaked, that her teeth
chattered in her head, and if she went to warm her, she was presenly picked
backward.

About the end of January from M Starchies, hom she went to Salford, a town
adjoining to Manchester, accompanied with Hartlay and on other. the next
morninge as Hartlay prayed over her in afite, came one M Palmer a preacher of
Manchester, who asked him what he was doing: he answered prayinge thou pray,
thou can not pray, quoth he. what prayer can thou say, none said he, but
the Lords prayer. say it, quoth he the which as I remember he could not say.
he then as a private man examined him, and after had him before two Justices of
peace: from whom he brought him by there appointment to Marg. Byr: to hear what
she could say against him: but as soon as she saw him she straightwaye became
speachlesse, and was cast down backwardes, and so did the 2 time. and 5. times
was dumb when Hartlay came in her sight, this morning as she came to the fire,
she saw a great black dog, with a monstrous tail, a long chain open mouth
coming apace tawardes her, and running by her left side cast her on her face
hard by the fire, houlding her tongue for half an hour, but leavinge at
liberty her eyes and hands. a little after a bygg black catt staringe
fearfully at her came runinge by her left side and threw her backward taking
from her the use both of her eyes and hands, which with yes king were ever
losed. about half hour after that fit: it came like a bige mouse and lept
upon her left knee, cast her backward, took a way her tongue, eyes, and
senses, that she lay as dead, and when she came to any feeling, it puffed up her
bellye as a fore. these visions and fites ordinarely troubled her for 6 weeks
every day on the day time as is said. and commonly everi night it sat (as she
though) on her head very heavi laying (as it seemed to her) 4. great figers on
her brows, that she was not able to open her eyes. otfe^ times she cried to
her mother, that the should sit from of her Head, asking who it was that held
her ^oe straight. and though she could not ster her head, it her kerchefe was
pulled of her head thrice commonly, she notwithstandi^g lying still as a stock
from 9 to 3 in the morning, about which time it departed in departing sometimes
gave her a great thumpe, on the hinder part of her head, that it was very
sore for 2 Days after.

Six times within those 6. weeks the sperit would not suffer her to eat or
drink, it took away also her stomach. if she offered to drink (at the
earnest motion of others) it cast her and the drink down to gether. At other
times she did eat greedily, slossinge up her meat like a greedy dog, or
hog, that her mother and her freindes, wear ashamed of her. still she was
hungrye and cried for more, saying she had nothing, though she spared no kind
of meat: allwas fish that came to nett. After abundance of meat her belly
seemed never the fuller, that she marueiled which way it went.

The 10 of febuari it pulled her as she thought in an hundred pieces. there came
out of her mouth such a stinking smoke, and breath that she could not endure
it her self. her voice and crying were quite altered, and so continued till
night. But her breath stank so ill a day and a night after, that her
neighbors could not enduer to come near her.

Often her senses were taken a way, and she maid as styfe as iron, and often as
dead even breathless. it made her speak sharplye, hastily, and by snatches:
sometimes it made a loud noise in her bellye, like that in the bellye of a great
troting horse.

The two next nights before the day of her examination concerning Hartlay,
appeared the devil in the liknesse of Hartlay requesting her to take heed what
she said, and to speak the truth, for the time was come promissing her siiluer
and gould. she answered (thinking it to be Hartlay) that the truth she had
spoken already, and that she would not favor him neither for silver nor gold:
the 2 night he departed saying do as thou will. the day before Hartlay his
execution was a sore day unto her, after which every day she went to morning
prayer, and was never troubled in the Church save the 1 day, whereon it took her
about the midst of the sermon, in heaving up her shoulders, depriving her of
her senses after the recovery of her senses, it took away the use of her
legs: and thus it molested her in the Church, to the admvration of the people,
about an hour and half.

At the a^^ices at Lancaster was Hartlay condemned and hanged the making of his
circle was chefly his overthrow which he denied, but breaking the rope he
after confessed it.

After this time she had more ease in the day then she was wont, but in the
night she lay stif and stark quaking and trembling, till the day she came to
Cleworth.

It going thus with the. 6. at Cleworth and the. 7 at. Salford, M. Starchye
according to the counsel before given him, procured first one preacher then an
other to see them: but they knew not well what to say to their affliction.
After having intelligence by D. Dee his butler of the like grievous affliction
of Thomas Darling his uncles son, an recovery upon the advice given by my self,
he requested D. Dee his letter unto me (though unacquainted) and obtained it,
wherewith he sent his own also, which prevailed not with me.

Thervppon he procured other letters whereof one was from a Justice of peace
thereby, and sent the second time unto me. Then I crauinge first the advice of
many of my brethren in the ministry, met together at an exercise: yealded to
M. Starchyes request, and about 3. wekes after went thither.

On the 16. of March. 96. M. George More pastor of Cawlke in Dar byshire, and
my self, came to Cleworth. VVhither when we were come M Starchy told us, that
his son had been well, about a fortnight, and his daughter 4. days: and
surely to se to they were at that instant as well and free from any possession
by Satan, as any other: which we suspected to proceed, from the subtilty of
the devil, and so it proved. Shortly after our coming, as we sat at dinner,
came in Margaret Hardman and her sister, and El: Holland on after another like
players to bid us welcome: forasmuch as no body sent for me said one of them, I
am come of my own accord. And having thus spoken she was thrown backward on
a form, and so all 3. were frangely and greuosly tormented. Their faces (as I
remember) were dis^igured, their bodies (I am sure) greatly swelled, and such a
sensible stiring and rumbling within their bodies, as to ones sight and feling
they had some quick thing within each of them: and not only so, but such a
violent moving there was also in their inward parts: (especially in M. Hardman)
as was easily hard of us that were present. I remember also among the manifold
pleasant speeches they used, one or more of spoke iocondly conscerning Edmond
Hartlayes hanging, who was the^ newly executed, and it was to this effect. Do
they think they could hang the devil? I wis no: they might hang Ed: but they
conlde not hang the devil: no marvel though the rope brake: for they were two
Ed: and the devil. By that which I hard of his fits (whereof we have partly
hard before) I for my part then thought, and do so still that in the end he
who had so sweetly (by kisses forsooth) sent the devil into so many, had by the
just judgment of god, the devil sent into him.

Then hard we Jane Ashton howling, and perceiueing it was supernatural, and
hearing also other strange things concerning her, especial ye that which was
new fallen out of the swelli^g of her belly whereof you shall hear: we affirmed
that we thought that she also was possessed, which neither the family, nor the
maid her self mistrusted or feared. and it there was cause. for besides her
first taking with the hoke and the words Hartly used thereupon, and kisses
before with promis of mariag (which all were perhaps forgotten) she was taken
with barki^g as the rest were, when M Hopwoode came to examine them. again the
children said no less in their fits, for when she came in their sight they
would say, come and help us for thou art one of our company. And though they
neither knew nor speak to any other, yet Jane they knew, and speak to her
only in these words, thou will shortly come in amongst us. And she her self
acknowledged that some times as shecarien up hot Ianoks, she thought that she
could ihaue eaten up a Ianoke, and often did eat much by stealth, being passing
hungry like M Byrom, and the children, who likewise were sometimes exceedinglye
greedye of meat. This day also an hour or two before we came, her belly began
to swell greatly, so that she compared her bellye to a woman's great with child.
when it abated a little, a breath came up her throat, which caused yelling,
after it fell down into her body like a cold stone, as it did with M By. and
as soon as tidings came that we were come, presently her belly was fallne, and
as little as in former time and so continued.

Not long after our coming all 7. being had into a chamber, the one of us
applied his speech according to the present occasion: and then behold all of
them even Jane Ashton, and M Starchies children were presently most greuiously
tormented* Yea, Satan in John Starchie exceeded for crueltye.

And thus they continued all that afternoon. 3. or 4. of them gave themselves
to Scoffing and Blasphemy, calling the holy Bible being brought up bible babble,
bible babble. and thus they did a loud and often All or most of them joined
together in a strange and supernatural loud whupping that the house and ground
did sound therewith again by reason whereof we were dryven (as I may say) out
of the chamber and keept out for that day.

This evening we did use some words of exhortation, for the sanctefiyng of our
selves and the family, against the next days service: immediately before which
they all sent forth as they had before) a supernatural loud whupping and
yellyng, such as would have amassed one to have gone into the room where they
were, but as one of us opened his mouth they were presentlye silent and so
continued.

The next morning all 7. being had into a fair larg parlor, and laid thereon
couches, M. More. M. Dickens (a preacher and their pastor) and my self with
about. 30. more assembled together, spent that day in prayer with fasting and
hearing the word, all the parties afflicted remayninge in their fits the said
whole day. Toward the end whereof, they all of the sudden began to be most
extremely tormented, beting up and down with their bodies being held by
others, crying also (6 of them) aloud in strange and supernatural manner, and
after they lay as dead. wherewith they which were present were so affected:
that leuing that good order which all the day had been kept, confusedly every on
with voice and hands lifted up, cried unto god for mercy in their behalf, and
the lord was pleased to hear us, so as. 6. of them were shortly delivered,
wherein we with them rejoiced, and praised god for the same.

The first that was dispossesed was M. Byrom, then all the residu (save Jane
Ashton) one shortly after an other, between. 5. and. 6. at night. she began to
be vexed by satan about. 4, or. 5, in the morning and never had rest until
her deliverance. All that day she hard only a humming and a sound but knew
nothing what was said: she could thus hear but not see. Sometime she saw and
then marueyled what the company did there, and how she got thither: howbeit she
heard every idle word that the children possessed had, she was more extremely
handled that day then any before, though she had had many sore days. She was
ever full of pain, and it seemed to her as though her heart would have burst*
she strayned vpmuch fleamy and bloody matter Lastly she lay as dead for the
space of half an hour, taking no breath. Then start she up most joyfully,
magnifying god, with such. a cherefull countenance and voice, that we all
rejoiced with her, but were somewhat amazed at her suddayn lauding of god, with
such freedom and earnestnes in speech and gesture.

John Starchy the next was so miserably rent that abundance of blod gushed out
both at his nose and mouth. As the day before, so that day he gnashed fearfully
with his teeth, he also lay as dead about the like time, so that some said to
us, he seems to be dead. Then start he up likewise on the sudden, and praised
god in most cherful and comfortable manner. And so did the rest, who also made
sundry times great show of vomyting and now and then vomyted indeed,
something like fleam thick spettle. These. 4. especially. 3. of them used much
light behauinur and vayn gestures, sundry also filthy scurrilous speeches, but
whispering then for the most part among themselves, so as they were no let to
that holy exercise we then had in hand. Sometimes also they spoke blasphemy
calling the word preached, bible babble he will never have done prating, prittle
prattle

M, Hardman why lest M. More was praching used these words, I must go I must
away: I cannot tarry, whither shall I go? I am hot, I am too hot. I will not
dye, iterating them all. which words did greatly encourage us.

When these 6 were delivered, some desired to know how they assuered
themselves thereof, and they answered as follows. M Byr: said that she felt it
come up from her bellye toward her breast, thence to her throat: in like sort
William Summers had asore throat after the departur of the spirit:
when it left her throat it gave her a sore lug, and all this while a dark
mist dazeled her eyes. Then she felt it to go out of her mouth, but it left
behind it asore throat and afilthy smell, that aweke after her meat was
vusauary. It went out in the liknes of a crows head round, (as to her seemed)
and sat in the corner of the parlor, with darkness about it a while. Then went
it with such a flash of fire out of the window, that all the Parlor seemed on
fire, to her only.

John Starchie: said it went from him like a man with a bulch on his black
very ill favored. and presently he returned to have reentered, but he withstood
him strong in faith. the same in effect said M Hard. Anne Starchy said, he went
like a foul ugly man, with a white beard and a great bulch on his breast as big
as a man's head. and straitway returned to have reentered, but she faithfully
resisted, Even so said El. Hol. the whit beard excepted.

El. Hard said, it was like an vrchin, and went through a very little hole (as
she thought) out of the parler, but out of hand returned a gain in a very
foul shape promising her gold, and whatsoever she would desire, if she would
give him leave to enter again, but she yealded not. then he threatened to cast
her into a pit, saying sometime thou will go a lone. he said also, he would cast
her into the fire, and break her neck, but she resisting he departed like an
vrchine.

And thus the first days work was happily ended. But behold the slight of the
wyly serpent, for when we were all at rest, the sperits set upon the 5 little
children, like so many wulues the seely Lambs. the poor children being newly
recovered, and suddenly invaded, wereso frighted that they clasped fast about
their middles that lay with them and hid their faces with there bed clothes. M.
Dickons was called down who coming saw them resisting, and encouraged them to
standfast never to yeald, but to pray and resist with faith. and shortly they
were well and fell a sleep.

The next day we inquired how the were assalted. M. By. said it came to her like
an ugly black man with shoulders higher then his head, promysing her enought if
she would consent, and that he would lie still when she utterly denied him and
prayed against him, he threatened to cast her into apitt as she went home. But
when she resisted he cast her to the ground, and departed twice as byg, and
foul as he came, with two flashes of fire, one before and another after him,
making a noise like a great wynd among trees. She was not assaulted at midnight
with the 5 but after supper before she went to bed.

John Starchy said he came in the former likeness, making many large proffers,
baggs of gould etc. But when he saw he nothing prevailed with sugared words,
he used terrible menaces, saying he would break his neck etc. Anne Starchy said
he came in the former likeness.

M. Hard. said he came in the same form he went out proffring gold but she
refusing, he threatened to break her neck, cast her into a pyt, and drown her
and so departed.

El. Hard. said he came like a bear with fire in his mouth wherewith she was so
terrifyed that she lept quite out of her bed, and rann from him, she wist not
whither: but one of the company stayed her. Then he desired her to open her
mouth, as he opened his, showing her two bags, one of silver an other of
gold, promising her 9 times as much but not preuayling he ran away as a bear
that breaks loose from the stake when she was laid down and prayed, he came
again like an ape, promising her gold etc, at her pleasure. Then he menaced to
cast her out of the window, and into the fire if ever she stood near it, and
so departed: very foul and with an horrible scryke.

El: Hol. said he came like a great bear with open mouth upon her, and
presently turned it self into the similytude of a white dove: but she
resisted, and it departed.

Thus we have hard of the dispossession of 6. and what things fell out
therein, as also presently after the same: it rests that we convert our
speech to Jane Ashton the 7. Satan upon the aforesaid day toward evening put
her to extreme pain, and continued the same long very near 2. hours after
their deliverance, intising her to say he was gone and to make show of welfare,
promising that he would not molest her at all. She to be at ease consented, and
pretended in words to be as well as the rest, but we thought otherwise,
because the signs of dispossession were wanting. After she had herein yielded
to the devil (which she concealed until after her deliverance) she was as
free from any vexation by him as the rest: notwithstanding we prayed or she
prayed: whereas before for 3. hours together, her fyt being ended the shortest
prayer that might be being used, she would be in an other most grievous to
behold.

All night she was very well, the next morning also, until we 3. (who were to
be leaders that day also, in that holy action we had in hand* having shut our
door) had cast down our selves before the throne of grace, to crave the
direction and assistance of gods spirit in the work we were to enter upon
this) I say) we had no sooner don, but behold the chamber where we were, yea the
whole house did ring of her a gain, whereby we were not a little comforted and
encouraged, to enter the second tym into the field. for thereby we were assured,
that we were not deceived, and that satan was certainly in her. after we can
down into the parlor, whether many more resorted that day then the other to
the number of about 50. we all being exercised as the day aforesaid. This
morning she was sore tormented. she often seemed, to vomit up all, and it got up
only alitle, fleame. and when she hanged down her head to vomit, often the
sperit would all to shake her as an angry mastife a little cur dog, so that
after her delivery she was very hoarce and weak. About on of the clock she
being very extremely tormented, fell a wepi^g that tears, trickled down, and
after lay as dead alitle space reuerting she said, he is gone, and gave thanks
for her deliverance. it went out like a great breath, ugly like a toad, round
like a ball and within an houer after it returned like a foul big black man,
but she resisted, and it departed. when we saw clearly that she was
dispossessed, we asked her why she dissemled the other night. she told us that
the said evening it was com up from her belly to her breast, thence to her
throat, where it held her as at her first taki^g, thence to her head. then she
said, it desired her to tell us that he was gone, and promised her not to move
or hurt her, and that she should lack nothing, why said we, would you harken to
the devil? because (said she) I was very sore, and he promised me ease, but he
has deceived me. quoth M Dickons believe the devil again. beware of lying, he
teaches to lie, and you are taught for lying.

This day and 2 or 3. following, the unclean spirits returned ever and anon
in visible forms upon all 7. throwing some of them violently down before us
all, depriving others for a little space of the use of so^ member of their
bodies, as arm or leg: seki^g also both by godly promises, of silver, gold,
silks, veluit, which they thought verily they saw) and such like, and fearful
threats their consents to ree^ter, without which it should seem satan cannot
reenter, though he cane first enter. But from giving such consent and yealding
unto satan therein god in mercy keept 6. of them: who since that time (praised
be God therefore) were never more nor less, they nor any of them molested by
satan until this day, neither it the 7 Jane Ashton until a good space after,
when she leaving M Starchies house, went and dwelt in a place of ignorance and
among papists, Luke 11. 26.
and became popish herself, as I have hard. for which opertunitie and adua^tag
the devil watching, and noe doubt compasing, he then recovered her, and now
dwells their whose last estat with Kat: wrights and Will. Summers, shall be
worse then their first.

Here follows, the story of William Summers.
THE HISTORY OF SUMMERS.
William Summers of Nottingham. now about the age of 22. years, son in law
to Robart Cowper of the said town, and by trad of life a musician: about 8 or
9 years past, as he iournyed from Bellyn in the county of wigorn, (where he
then dwelt with one M Anthony Brackenberie to Bramsgroue, a market town in
that shire accompanied with an old woman dwelling in the said Bellyn, found an
hat with a copper band. the woman requiering the same, he gave her the hat
though unwillingly, but the band he utterly refused to give, suppossing it to
be of gould. where upon she threatening him said that it had been as good for him
to have given it her. After this in the night he saw a strange light in the
chamber where he lay, which cast him into a great fear. and thus he continued
frighted for a time. shortly after M. Brackenberic his master removed to
Holme, near to Newark upon tre^t in the county of Nottingham being there sent
about his masters business unto Newark in the way as he went thither, he was
sudde^ly thrown into adicth, some 8 yards dista^t from the high way where in he
went. after he had layen there a certain tim, he got up and went forward in his
journey, but by that he had gone a very little way further he was taken again
and cast into a throne bush about 60. yards dista^t from the high way: but how
he came into it, or the ditch he knew not. in these two places he lay for the
space of some 4 hours, as he perceived after by the time of the day.
notwithstanding this let, to Newark he went. when in his return he drew nere
Holme he begane to be sick. from sickness he came to carry himself after that
strange manner by fyts, that his master supposed him to play the counterfeite,
and theirvpon he whypped him. But notwithstanding all the whipping was used
(which he felt not at all) he continued after that same manner, and was more
stranglie handled every day then other. at length it well appeared to be some
strange visitation and hand of God whereupon his master procured on in the
ministry to come to him, he being for the space of 3 weeks or there abouts a
continual trouble, and his master not knowing by what meaines to procure his
amendment: sent him accompanied with 3 persons to Nottingham to his mother
being then a widow. whilste he was at Holme he hard somthinge say unto him,
that upon such a day he would leave him, and not com unto him (so far as I
remember he said) until the end of 6 years. Now after he had been about 5
weeks at Nottingham afflicted after his accustomed and strange manner, and that
the said appointed day was come, he indeed amended in the judgment of man, and
so continued: insomuch that shortly after he was bound prentise to one Thomas
Porter of Nottingham a weauer and musition: who after gave over his trade of
weavinge* and betook himself wholly to the other, from whom the said William
Summers did twyse rune away.

About the 20. day of March. 1596. his aforesaid master Thomas Porter sent him
to Walton in Darbyshire the now dwelling house of Sir William Bows to asister
of his wifes there named Mary Milwood. In his going thither there met him in
Blakewell more at a deep colepit hard by the high way side, by the manner of
meeting the 2 time, and words uttered to him the 2 time, it should seem rather
to be the devil in the liknes of an old woman
an old woman (as he thought) who asked him where he dwelt and whithor he was
going, without any more words. About a mile and half further (he having gone
forward a iournying pace without stay) * she met him agavn, and passed by him
with out any words. The next day he retorning from Walton homewardes. she met
him at the aforesaid pyt, and asked him how he did? saying further, I must have
a penny of thee. he answered, that he had no monney, Thou have (quoth she) Mary
Millwood gave thee. 2. pence, I will have a penny of it or I will throw thee
into this pyt and break thy neck. Hereupon for fear she giving him 2 pence he
gave her 3 pence which indeed had been given him by the said Mary. After this
she put her hand to a bag she had about her, and taking thence a piece of bread
with butter spread on it, bad him eat it. He refusing she threatened him again,
to throw him into the pyt, and break his neck, if he would not eat it. This
Kath Wright is a young woman dwelling at a place called Bridgway lane not far
distant from Blackwel more who about 14 years past being possesed was by prayet
delivered but is since repossesed
whereupon (greatly against his will and for fear) he did eat it, and in the
eating it seemed to him as sweet as any honney. She said moreouervnto him Do
thou not know Katheryn Wright? no quoth he, she is my neighbor (said she) and
she and I will come to Notingham one of these days, and see how thou do.
Then a catt (as the boy thought) leapt up into her bosom, the which she
embraced, and with her arms claspt it unto her, and thus they parted each from
other. About the beginning of October. 1597. the said Summers (being at
Nottingham in the house of his master Thomas Porter did use such strange and
idle. kind of gestures in laughing, dancing and such like light behavior,
that he was suspected to be madd: sundry times he refused all kind of meat for
a long space together, insomuch as he did seem thereby to pyne away, sometimes
he shaked as if he had had an ague there was hard a strange noise or flapping
from within his body he was often seen to gather himself on a round heap
under his bed-cloathes: and being so gathered to bounse up a good height from
the bed, also to beat his head and other parts of his body against the ground
and bedstead in such earnest manner and so violentlye that, the beholders did
fear that thereby he would have spoiled himself, if they had not by strong
hand restrained him: and yet thereby received he no hurt at all. In most of his
fitts he did swell in his body and in some of them did so greatly exceed
therein, as he seemed to be twice so byg as his natural body. Often also was he
seen to have a certain varyable swelling or lump to a great bigness swiftlye
running up and down between the flesh and skyn through all the parts of his
body: and many times when that swelling was, these or the like words were hard
out of his mouth. I will go out at his eyes or ears or toes at which speeches
the said swelling evidently appearing in such parts, did ymediatly remove and
vanish away. This swelling did not only run from eye to eye, from cheke to
cheke, and up and down along still in the body: but besides being now in the
one leg presently it would be in the other, and so of the arms in like manner:
and look in which arm or leg it stayed (as often it did for a certain space)
the same member was innexible and excedingly heavy as it had been so much iron.
Thus it went with him though not in all, yet in mani of his fits wheri^ouer and
besides these things, he was strangely handled: for suddenlye (if he were
standing when the fyt came) he would be cast he^dlong upon the ground, or fall
down, drawing then his lips awry, gnashing with his teeth, wallowing and
foming. In sundry of his sits he did utter so strange and fearful scriking as
cannot be uttered by man's power; and was of such strength as sometimes 4 or 5
men though they had much advantage against him by bynding of him to a chair,
yet could they not rule him: and in showing that strength he was not perceived
to pant or blow, no more then if he had not strayned his strength, nor
strugled at all. Sometimes he cried extremely, so as tears came from him in
great abundance: presently after he would laughe aloude and shrill, his mouth
being shutt close. And being demanded concerning those accidents, he
protested he knew of no such matter, neither felt he any pain. Moreover, he
was often times cast into the fire some bare part of his body also lying in the
fire: and yet was not burned, and sometimes cast violently against the ground,
and against the wall or poastes of the house without any hurt of his body, and
did many ways seek to destroy himself: by reason whereof they were driven to
take away his knife, gyrdell, garters etc. yea with the sheet of his bed he
had like to have strangled hi^mselfe. whereupon as also through the increasing
of his fits they were constreyned to watch hi^ continually even day and night.
His behavior generally toward all that came, was very pleasant, most
impudent also and shameless with much uncleanness. His speeches were usually
vain, delivered in very scoffing manner, and many times filthi and unclean,
yery unfit once to be named, (...) like in my own hearing^ did Kat. Wright
^eing possessed.
or blasphemous swearing most fearfully, using one blody oath after other:
sometimes saying I am god and sometimes there is no god. Being moved to say the
lords prayer, when he came to these words lead us not into temptation. he
would say lead us into temptation: diverse fond speeches did he use to
interrupt them that prayed for him. Many strange speeches also were uttered by
him, not in his own name, but as spoken by an evil spirit possessing him:
upon occation of some question or speech used by some in there simplicity and
ignorance: as that his dame had sent him, that his name was Lucye, that he was
king, that he was prince of darkness. you think I have no power of him, yet I
can use his tongue, his teeth, lyppes, hands, legs, his body and all parts
of him. and as the spirit named each part, he used it. and this speech with
the action was very common. was I? (said he to one John Wiggin) never in
heaven? yea quoth he, but God for thy pride thrwe thee down into hell there to
remain. One John Sherwood charging him to tell who sent him thither, he
answered a woman. he charged him again to tell where she dwelt: he answered
in Worcester shire. whether is she living or dead? dead said he. wherefore did
she send thee? for a hatt and hat band. Then the boy when the fite was done
was questioned with, concerning these things: whereunto he returned for
answer that which is set down in the beginnynge of this storye, which he had
concealed until that time. Hereunto I might add certain direct answeares he
maid in lattyn to those speeches, which in lattin were used unto him, a little
greek also he speak, being ignorant in those Languages, altogether in the
one, and understanding little or nothing in the other.

In going thus with the boy, I was importined in his behalf, first by two
letteres, after by another from the Mayor, and theirevpon I went unto him. As
when and about the time I condisended to go (being 14. miles of him) he
speak theirof to them which were about him: so when I was come to Nottingham,
he instanstlye told the same, and foretold my coming unto him when I drew
near the house, as he had also foretold M Aldridge (the preacher of the
town) his coming at sundry times.

Toward that evening I came being the 5 of November, he seemed to be sick,
and his sickness greatly to increase upon him, so as they feared he would have
dyed, or had been dead, for he lay an hour with his face and hands black,
cold as ice, noe breath being perceived to come from him. whereupon I was noe
sooner light but tydinges hereof was brought to me, by one of they neighbor
women Ioahn Pie by name, who came purposlye from him to signifye the same unto
me: to whom I answered, yt was the mere act or operation of the Devil, and
that the boy was nothing less then either dead or in danger thereof.
Forthwith with her I went to him, whom we Found very liulye and in one of his
accustomed Fytes, many being present with him.

My speech I carried for a season doubtfullie* but after a while perceiving how
it was with him, I did assure him that he was Possessed, and had in that body
of his a devil, and withal did so frame the words of my mouth, as might
best serve to prepare and stir him up to a sperituall fight against satan, or
resistance of him in faith. This euen^g he acted many sines, by signs and
gesturs most liuly representing and shawdoing them out unto us: as namlye
brauling, quarriling fighting, swaring, robbing by the high ways, picking and
cutting of pur^^es, burglarie, whordom, pride both in men and women, hypocrisy,
slugishnes in hearing of the word, drunckennes, glotinye, also dancing with
the toys thereunto belonging, the manner of antique dances, the games of dicing
and carding, the abuse of the viole with other instruments at the end of
sundry of these he laughted excedingly, diverse times clapping his hands on
his thighs for joy: and at the end of some of them, as killing and stealing,
he showed how he brought them to the gallows, making asigne thereof. during
this time which continued about an hour, as he was altogether silent, so was
he most active, though his eyes were closed, and in many things he did, there
was great and necessary use of sight. In a word, these things were in such
liuly and orient colors painted out (as I may say) unto us that were present,
being to the number of some 60. that I for my own part (and I am persuaded the
rest of the beholders are of my mind) do verily think, that it is not in the
skile and power of man to do the like. whilst we were recommending him and his
greuious estate to the Lord, and entreating his majesty in his behalf, he
uttered these words, I must begone.

The next day being the Lords day I came not at him until about 3. a clock
in the afternoon, (finding company with him) at which time I used some speech,
wherein I endeavored to prepare both him and his masters familye, as also his
parents (whom that judgment principallye concerns,) unto the holy exercise
the day after to be performed. Toward evening much people resorted to the
house, then some words of exhortation were used by my self, for the
sanctifiyng of so many of us, as whose spirits god should stir up, to join
in that solemn service and worship of god to be performed on the day
following. as the night and day before he had little or no rest from satan
aff^cting him: so this evening and all the night long he hand led him more
extremely then before at this time among other things the spirit retorted his
tongue into his throat. and this he did often, whereupon many looked with a
candle into his mouth, where the could se no tongue nor part of it, only in his
thoat they beheld the root thereof. he uttered often these words, for corn, for
corn, with a few more thereunto appertaini^g, noti^g the insatiable desire of
gain or r^aysing the price of corn in corn me^. this night was spent by some
well disposed people in reading and praying. this evening I requested the
minister of that congregatio M Aldridge and with him on M. Aldred and M. Halam
Pastors of 2 seuera^l towns near adjoining unto Not. to join with me on the
morrow, in the ministratio^ of the word and prayer, whereunto the condiscended.
And this I did the rather, that thereby I might proclayme and make known unto
all men, that as I have no special or greater gift herein then the rest of my
brethren: so neither do I arrogate, or challenge any such thing to my self.

In the morning (being the 7 of November) many of us were assembled together in
the next convenient and seemly room to the place of his abode. The boy was
brought with strange and fearful scrikings by. 6. or 7. strong men, who had all
of them enough ado to bring him and laid on a couch in the midst of us. M.
Aldridg began and after prayer proceeded to the interpretation of the. 4. of
Hos. the two f^ste verses. when he had finished, my self entreated of that
story set down in the. 9. of Mark, from verse. 14, until the 30. where the
father bringing his possessed child to christ to be cured, had him healed
accordingly. All this day he was continually vexed and tormented by Satan,
having little or no rest at all, so as the same for vexation by the spirit far
exceded any of the days before. His torments in his fittes were most grievous
and fearful to behold, wherein his body being swelled, was tossed up and
down. In these fits his strength was very great so as being held down wi^h 5.
strong men, he did notwithstanding all their strength against their wills, rise
and stand upright of his feet. He was also continually torn in very fearful
manner. and disfigured in his face: wherein sometimes his lips were draune awry,
now to the one side now to the other: sometimes his face and neck distorted, to
the right and to the left hand, yea sometimes writhen to his back: sometimes he
thrust out his tongue very far and big, and sometimes turned backwardes into his
throat, gaping so wide that we might afar of perceive it: now he gnashed with
his teeth: now he fomed like to the horse or boar, roping down to his breast,
notwithstanding there was one purposely standing by with a cloth ever and anon
to wype it away, not to say any thing of his fearful staring with his eyes,
and incredible gapinge:

This day notwithstanding he was so held as is aforsaid, he went about to
have choked and so destroyed himself: speeches he used non, save once in a
great voice, corn, and when I applied that speech of our Savior, all things
are possible to him that believes he used these words thou lie. Diverse times
he scriched or cried aloude in astrange and supernatural manner: sometimes he
roared fearfullye ly^e a bear, and cried like a swyne.

Toward the evening as I was treatyng of these words, then the spirit cried,
rent him sore, and came out, and he was as one dead, insomuch that many said
he is dead, the boy was rent sore indeed, cried and that a loud. Then they
people which were present, as men astonished and with the greuyoues sight and
cry unspeakable affected in the boweles of compassion toward him, breakyng
there hitherto continued silent, cried out all at once: as it were with one
voice unto the Lord, to have mercy upon him: and within a quarter of an hour
(they and he still cryinge aloud) he held down one a bed by 5 men, and
offering as though he would have vomyted, was one the sudden violently cast,
and his body therewith turned, so as his face lay donwards to the ground and at
the beds fete, and his back upward with his fete on the beds head, and thus he
lay as if he had been dead for a season. Thus we have hard not only how it went
with Some. in the tim of his possession, and at and a little before his
dispossio^, but also how and by what means I came unto him, and being there,
carried my self in this present action.

According now to that in the gospel, when the unclean spirit is gone out of
a man, Math. 21 43.
he says to himself, I will return into mine house from whence I came, etc.
it fell out here, for the unclean spirit being gone out of Someres, returned
and sought to enter again into him. And as for the compassing of his former
habitation with the 7 in Lanchashire he visiblely appeared unto them, and for a
season molested them in thire bodies: even so did the spirit with Summers. The
same night he was dispossessed, as he lay in his bed, a thing like a rat patted
one his mouth, and after crept down along on his body, until it came to his
priuye parts, from whence it vanished away. Thus did the spirit many times and
sundry ways, and about a quarter of a year after, recovered him and entered
again, as appears by the signs of possession, whereunto some of the 17.
witnesses after mentioned have deposed, as appears by the depositiones of
diverse, if the time when the things wear done which they deposed be observed.
After this satan drew the boy also upon whom the work was wrought, to confese
and affirm that he had dissemled. And to bring this to pass (which passes
whatsoeeuer else could be imagined, to persuade the world that he
counterfeited) the old serpent so ordered the matter, that he was charged to
have be witched on Sterland to death, and brought theirvpon into the towns haul
before the magistraits, by the meaines and procurement of M. Freeman, Sterlands
wife and some of her neighbors came with an accusation of witchcraft against him,
to wit, that upon such a day in Not. market Some. should tread on the hele of
the said Sterland whereupon he should presently fall sick, and dyed 4 or 5
days after. Her neighbors they witnesed, that Starland being dead, his heel
locked black, or some such thing: Hereupon Some. was committed to prison, but a
little after bailed. Not long after this, these magistrates, (under color to
fyn^e out this counterfeting) took this witch (forsooth) and it percase a
counterfeyte, from his parents, and committed him to their house of correction,
called St. Jones, and their to the costody of 2 most lewd fellows: which no
sooner had him, but forthwith about thire work the went: the one John Couper
threatening to whyp him, the other Nich. Shepard to pinch him with pincers,
thereby to draw him (indeed) to confess, that he had counterfeited, as
appears by thire depositions. besides, the above named Not. magistrates
promised him 10. l. and that he should set up any trade, so that he would
confese his dissemling, as M Iakson Alderman confessed in the town haul before
many, but this said he, they did in policy. Lastly the devil himself
visiblie appeared unto him (as experirence has taught he does usually to those
that he possesses) promisyng and threatening, and all to compase his
confession, which by these meaines he effected.

When Some. had been at St Jones under the custodi of his said kepers, about 3
days, and all those means you hereof used* for the compasing of a confession
of counterfeiting, he acknowledged that he had counterfeited, and therwithall
was freed from all vexatio^ in his body by the devil, (then repossesing him)
which immediately before and till then all the tym of his repossession he had
tasted, and many others beheld.

The case being thus, my self with others thought good, to procuer a
commission from the Arch B. of York, for the examining of such as had seen So.
do or suffer, sundry things impossible to be counterfeted, for it was thought,
that the depositions of men would be auailable to overthrow this wretched
confession of his, when percase the bare assertions of men would not. to this
end a comissio^ was granted and directed to Io. Therrald esquire (then) high
sheriff of the counti^ of Not. S. John Byron knight, Io Stanhop, Rob Markham,
Rich. Perkins Esquiers, Pet Clerk May of the town of Not. M Walton A^chdeacon
of Darbishire, Miles Leigh official of Not. Io. Ireton, Io Brown, Rob.
Evington, and Tho. B^ulton, ministers and preachers of God word. These
comisioners upon the 20. of march 1597. exami^ed 17. every of which deposed
more or les to some thing don or suffered by So. which nether nature nor art can
compase* as apeareth by there depositio^s now in pri^t. this don So. himself
was caled before the comissioners, and he who for the space of a month before,
even from the tym he said he counterfeited until that present, who because he
was an aduersari, was made a com^issione^ and. with him 2 other, Pet. Clerk
Ma^or, M^es Leigh official.
had not at all ben vexed by satan in his body, as if he had had no such guess
nor inhabita^t no more then any other, (which came from the subtelty of the
diuil, was viol^tli thrown down, even as he was facing out his
counterfeiting* and so often and miserably tormented by the diuil, until both him
self to the comssio^ers acknowledged, that he had not counterfited and the
greatest conte^der for counterfeiti^g, and enemy to the said work of god, M
Wall. Arch. of Dar. and a comissio^er, that it was the finger of god. the diverse
fits he had in the presence of these comissioners, besides the great violence
offered unto him, he was in the first of them, thruste deep into the hand and
leg with pins, but stirred not thereat, neither did any blood issu at either of
the places so pricked. The said fit ended being demanded what he had done* as
also what had been don unto him? he knew not of any thing, more or less. At
this time also his two kepers were enamyned, who for all their minsing
acknowledged that on of them threatened to whypp him, the other to pinch him
with pincers, which he called knipknaps. Thus the matter being manifest to the
comissioners, partly by the depositions of men, partly by that themselves saw
and partly also by the confession of Some. himself, they surceased to examine
any further, and shortly after together with the said depositions, returned to
the Arch: B. of York, no counterfeyti^g. Now was Some. taken from his aforesaid
kepers, and committed to the custody of one Edmond Garland where he was
continually tormented of the devil, and that more fearfully then ever before:
whereby his repossession and the lurking of the spirit was evident.

Confessing now that he never counterfeyted, (which also was manifest to those
that beheld his vexation by satan) and being thereupon demanded, why he had
before affirmed the contrary? as in words he rendered the reason thereof, so in
writing himself set down the same in these words following: which under his
own hand is yet to be seen.

Being at Saint Jones there came unto me a thing like unto a dog, and said
unto me, and if I would consent unto him and say that I was a counterfeite, he
would give me a bag of gould, say I counter feited.
and if pieces: and if I * would I should do any thing that I would tak in
hand, and he would com to me lik a mouse, and help me. And then came to me a
thing like an ass, and said that if I would not say that I was a counterfeyt,
he would cast me into the well, and so went away, And Nicholas Shepherd said
and if I were in a fit again, he would fetch a pair of knipknaps and a rope,
and he would make me confese, or else hang me, and John Cowper and Shepherd
said, and if I would say that I was a counterfeyt, that Master Mayor and the
Aldermen would give me ten pounds and I should set up any trad that I would
and I had better say, that I was a counterfeyt and live like a man, then to
have nothing: for if I should say that I were not a counterseyt, and go into
the clergies hand, I should hau^ nothing.

Summers being at Edm. Garlands was daily in grievous manner tormented by the
devil, often cast into the fire, but not burnt: and to let his other vexations
go, was of extraordinary strength and supernatural knowledge: wherewith was
made manifest that he was reposessed notwithstanding no such thing had appeared
for the spa^ce of a monneth before. But by that he had been about, 10. dais at
Ed: Garlands the Mayor with some of the* Aldermen and M, Will: Gregory the
town clarke who at satan's discovery before the, 12. commissioners were greatly
abashed and confounded in them selves gathered heart to themselves and
encouraging one another, they sent and procured that whereby they got Summers
into their own possession again, and this doubtless they did the more
speedily, for that (as I take it) they hard that we were purposed now to have
used the meaines for his dispossession publicklye in the Church, which they
sure feared would have turned to there great shame, who had so hotly and openly
contended for counterfeyting, They noe sooner had him but he was at quiet, as
if he had been a counterfeite indeed, and nothing less then a devil within
him. About a week after, (the assyses being at Not.) before the Lord
Anderson, Summers was called, said he had counterfted, and being commanded by
my Lord Anderson to do his tricks as some call them, he thrwe himself down:
and then the spirit trifled, and so carried himself, as might best make to
persuade those present that he counterfeited: and it so as theirin (through the
ouerruling hand of God, their was sufficient to keep man from that persuasion.
for since twife in open court at Lambeth, by two no main adversaries then
present, it has been said, although to another end, that one of his legs were
as heavy, as if it had been irone. shortly after to London he went, and dwelt
with a barber in Eastsmithfeild, from whence he went to the Bishope of London:
where after he had been about a month, and my self somewhat longer in the
Gathouse for herisie, he proceeded further, and added this to his former
iniquity, that I had taught him to counterfeit: which accusation has been in
such sort pursued against me, as is showed in the several treatises published
by some friends to the cause* the other charge of herisie for which I was sent
to prison *as appears by the warrant' lyinge in the dust, never word being
spoken thereof until this day, no not so much as the herisie or heriticall
opinion once named, that I should hold and maintain.

FINIS
THE DOCTRINE OF THE POSSESSION AND DISPOSSESSION OF DEMONIAKES OVT OF THE WORD
OF GOD. PARTICVLERLY APPLIED UNTO SUMMERS, AND THE REST OF THE PERSONS
CONTROVERTED TOGETHER. with the use we are to make of the same.
We have hard in the former treatise of 8. Persons that wear vexed with evil
spirits, viz. 7 in Lanchashire, and one at Nottinham: and of diverse strange
actiones or passions done or suffered by them. Now that the glory of God, and
the edification of the christian reader, (which two things only I have aimed
at: in the publishing of this story,) may be the better furthered thereby. I
have thought it necessary to treat of these 3 things. 1. that all those
persons were indeed possessed with unclean spirits, and did not counterfeit
apossession, as is affyrmed by some. 2. That they were all (undoubtedly)
dispossessed, and that by prayer and fasting, the meaines which God has
thereunto appointed. 3. what is the holy and right use we should all make of this
rare and great work of God: which every on should specially in the reading
hereof aim at, though it can not be attained, without the certain knowledge
of the two former points.

1 That they did not counterfeite a possession, but were verily possessed with
unclean spirits.
I do not say with the poet, felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas he is a
happy man, who can find out the causes of things: but this I affirm, it is
the part of a wise man, to search out the cause of a thing. He therefore yea he
only shall carrye himself wyslye in the present controversy we have in hand,
and judge aright therein, who shall labor to find out the true and proper
cause of those strange accidents, whereof a true report has been made in the
former treatise. I will not stand here to iterate and heap up those strange
things which are before specyfyed, all which may be referred either to there
extraordinary and supernatural strength, or their supernaturally knowledgd, or
their extraordinary and supernatural actions or passions of their bodies: only
in the spirit of meeknes and with all humility, Such effects ac have bine down
by these parties possessed cannot proceed from the nature or skile of man
I demand of them which deny and call in question or doubt of their possesion,
whence or from what cause the actions or passiones acted or suffered by them
came? can their any natural cause be given of them? or is there any thing in
nature that might send forth such effects? verilye, though yt might be granted
of some of them, yet undoubtedly it cannot truly be affirmed of all: but that
some of them are not humian * but it came from some other thing then the nature
or industri of man And what should that be but wicked spirits within them,
according as in times past it has been with others in the like case? except we
will be so gross as to imagine, either that God wrought them immediately,
without the ministry of any creature, or by the service of an elect Angel:
neither of which can possibly be, considering their vanities toys and
fooleries, the distorting and dissiguring of there faces, with other accidents
of that kind, and the unclean and blasphemous speeches above mentioned. On the
contararie side they all well be ^ee^e the unclean spirit, and suit exelentlye
with his nature, and therefore make greatly for confirmation of their
possession.

If any granting that these things were done by wicked spirits, shall say
that it follows not theirevpon that the spirits were in them and so
possessed them. how spirits being with out man do vex him
* I answer that a spirit without man may diverse ways greatly trouble and
afflict him, as by sightes and visions, yea even in his body, as he did Job. So
likewise after the deliverance of the above named persons (as also of on Thomas
Darling aboy not long since dispossesed, Job. 2. 7.
dwelling in Burton upon Trent, in the countye of Stafford) they spirits in
their return to repossese them, did many times and sundry ways (that by
fearing, astonishing, and threatening of them they might prevail) mightily
molest and trouble them.

* But that the diuil being without man, It is impossible for Satan being
without man to have the whole rule and disposition of the body.
can rule and dispose of the whole body of man, and every part thereof according
to his pleasure, as he did with these, and does with all those he posseseth, it
is absurd to affirm. For what more can satan do to the body of man, then
rule and torment it thus in the inward and outward parts, and in every parcel
and member theiro^ according to his lust and pleasure? the which if he could
do being without, he would never desire nor seek entrance into man to posses
him the which no man will deny but he does. for what would his said entrance
advantag him to the hurting or tormenting of man in his body, more then his
being without him. Secondly satan being without man, can not cause or send
forth those effects (which are indeed signs of possession) whereof we have hard
before, and more shall be spoken afterward, because then god should have left his
church destitute of all meaines, whereby to discern of possesion which can not
be, the wisdom of God considered on the on sid, and the necessity of man to be
directed herein, on the other. Again if it were true that the evil spirit
could so torment a man on every sid being without him only, how could the
common people among the Jews have known when men were possesed, as it is
evident by the * gospel they did? math 15. 2 2.
for it is certain that by no other meaines but the manner of their handling,
mark 9. 22.
or vexation by satan they knew it, as a^ may partly appear out of the 9.
verse 17. 18. 22.
Cha^t. of Mark. now might not this same objection as well have been objected
unto them: as it is against us at this present, The devil by some outward
operation can do all that which leads you to think that such and such are
posesed, you may therefore err and be deceived in so thinking and affirming.

But it has been objected that these things came, though not from nature, yet
from the corruption of nature, Against the filie shift of pretended
counterfeiting.
in that they were counterfeytes. I answer, that he which well considers of
the strange accide^ts whereof we have hard, may easily perceive that there are
many particulers there mentioned, which can not possibly be done by any art
or skill of man* but that they far surpas his cunni^g and all huma^ power. It
can not be then that they counterfeyted. If any man shall doubt that the history
is not truly reported by me, let him consider that there has been that course
taken in these treatises, which has been ever thought best, and most likely to
procure credit to any story. For herein we have observed all necessary
circumstances, the persons which were thus afflicted, the time when, the place
where, and hereafter sundry of the witnesses before whom these things fell out
shall be produced. If I only had been a witness of these things* though I might
happily have made report of them to some of my acquaintance who knew me to be
one that through gods mercy have learned to make conscience of a lie: yet
should I have been afraid to have put them in print, for so many to read and
unto whom I am altogether unknown. But seeing that these things have not been
done in a corner, but in places that are populous and famous enough, not
beyond the seas, but in such parts of our own land as any man that is
desirous to search out the truth in this matter, may either go to the^ him
self, or receive certain intelligence from thence without any great trouble,
before such witnesses of whom mani are well known to be of such integriti, as
they would not be corrupted, and of such wisdom as the could not be deceived,
specially using so many means as they did to try and boult out the truth:
further that not the witnesses only but also the parties themselves which were
so possessed are alive and lastly that there are such a cloud of witnesses,
even hundreds, whereof so^e 30. upon their corporal oaths have deposed the
impossible things to be counterseyted, which we have reported of Summers: If
any man (notwithstanding these helps against his incredulity herein) shall
still either deny or doubt whether this matter of fact has been truly
reported. I see not why he may not as well deny or doubt, whither any thing be
true that is written in other stories: yea much better may on call in question
almost any other human story: considering that those parties whom histories
past conscerne are dead, but these alive, and their histories are not deposed
unto, at least by so many witnesses as (...) and no marvel for they were
possessed with a legion of devils, and this child with one only.

The 14. 14 there fits they deprived of (...) senses, ^h internal ^d external.
mark of one possessed is, that they are deprived of their senses, internal
and external. The first is evident by this that the man out of whom the
devils were departed is said: to sit at the feet of Jesus clothed and in his
right mind: he was therefore out of his right mind when he was possessed,
which is further confirmed in that he did wear no clothes in that he did shun
the society of men abydinge in no house, ^a^k. 515. ^k. 8. 35.
but in the graves, in that both night and day he cried in the mountains, and
in the graves, as also by the speeches which upon the sight of Christ, he or
rather they being two (as appears by Mtthew) uttered saying or crying with a
loud voice: what have we to do with thee Jesus the son of god? I charge thee
by god that thou torment me not which they would never have said, 6. 27.
had they had the use of their understanding. And least we should imagine that
it was thus only with these two posessed with a legion, 29.
we must remember that these and such like speeches or exclamations arguing a
deprivation of understanding, 7.
were uttered by some other also possessed, which for the sa^e reason were
likewise deprived of their internal senses. Even so it was with these persons
for had they in Lancashire been in their right minds, they would never have
spoken so malepertly in their fits as usually they did to those that were then
present, especially to Master Starchy (whom commonly they called goodfellowe,
all their speeches also in a manner suting with that title) and Mistres
Starchye whose own child called her whore: neither would they ever in the
presence of so many, and even then when the holy scriptures were in handling
have spoken so filthily as it is a shame to name: or so blasphemously of the
holy, bible, calling it often times and that aloude bible babble, as they did:
nor 3. or 4. of them in their whispering speeches actions gestures, and
countenances, have at that time and duringe that holy action carried themselves
so wonderful vainly as they did and John Starchy sometimes (as we have heard)
in biting, or snatching at every one that was near him, throwing what came to
his hand at whomsoever, showed himself therein for the present to be mad.
Here we may remember to the same end, the monstrous blasphemy of Summers and
his strange and unnatural vndeannes especially in acting the syn of whordome
in that manner he did, and that in the presence of so many: also his filthy and
abhomynable carriage of himself with a bitch before diverse, which he did after
his repossession. Hither also refer the vyolence he did to his own body, and
the light behavior he used in the beginning of his possession in dancinge
laughing etc: wherevp^n he was suspected to be out of his wits. Finally it
is hereby evident that neither they, Darling, nor Katheryn Wright had in their
fits their understanding, because they knew not what they said or did, nor what
was said or done by others. Indeed out of their ^its those which are possessed
have the right use of their minds, but in, and during the same they are
altogether ordinarily de priued thereof, as has been showed. If it be said
that these actions and speches came from the devils within them I answer that
that is most true: yet forasmuch as it seemed to men otherwise, and so they
seemed to be out of their right myn^es thereupon they are said so to be.

The second conscerning the external senses, Mark. 5. 5.
and namely that of feeling, may be gathered likewise out of the aforesaid
scripture in that the man which had an unclean spirrit is reported to have
stricken himself with stones, which if he had had his ^ee^ng, he would never
have done, especially in that vyo^ent manner that he did, so it was with the
above named 10. (...), and thereof trial was often made in Summers and as
otherwise, so by pricking of pyns, whereat he never styrred though a pyn being
somewhat great and crooked was thrust up to the head: and in Th. Darling this
was manifest above any, in that in his fits his shoulder bones, and other bones
o^ his arms (to the sight and feeling of others) were thrust out of their
ioynets and in again, he not complaining thereof. As touching the other
outward senses seeing hearing etc. it is not indede manifest by the scriptures,
that they which had unclean spirits were in their fits depryued of them. yet
from thence it may well be coniectured so to have been: for seeing some were
altogether blind and deaf through the devil within them, causing the same, and
generally were deprived of their inward senses and that outward of feeling: why
may we not in all probability ymagine that they were without the^ use of these
other senses also? and as touching our demoniaks, they in their fits nether
heard nor saw (though their eyes were open) as themselves reported. Further and
more certain knowledge herein we cannot have, neither need we desire
considering the number of persons reporting this, also that sundry of them
were far distant one from another, dwelling in several shires and almost all
of them children. 15 They utter such speachs as most fitlye agree to an evil
spirit. and favor not of the spirit osman


The 15. sign of satan's possessing is, when such speeches are uttered by the
mouth of one, as sauoure not of the spirit of man, but most fitly agree to a
wicked spirit. Thus we read in the gospel, that the possessed when they saw
Christ began to cry out, saying: Jesus the son of the mofl high god, Math
829. 31.
what have we to do with thee? art thou come hither to torment us before the
time? Mark ^. 24 and 5. 7.
art thou come to deflroy us? I charge thee by god that thou torment me not.
Hither apperteyneth that answer that his name was legion, Luk 8. 28
and that request, that if he cast them out, he would suffer them to enter into
the heard of swyne: for we cannot doubt but that those speeches were uttered
after the same manner the former were, that is by the mouths of the parties
possessed, and it is plain by Luke. 8. 30. After this manner M. Hardman. said a
little before the spirits egresse, I am hott, I must go, I must away, I cannot
tarry, whither shall I go? I will not dye. In like manner Summers or rather the
devil in him said, that he was god, meaning percase the god of this world that
he was the prince of darkness, that he was sometimes in heaven: and when he
caused that lump or swelling in his eye, or toe, I will go out at his eye,
I Will go out at his toe: and upon saturday at night before his dispossession in
the time of prayer I must be gone: with many more speeches as appears before:
the like hereto he did also upon his repossession but specially upon the 20.
day of February, 1597. which was about 4. days after he was repossessed) when
lying in a trance he uttered many sententious speeches of this kind, which
were written from his mouth in the presence of diverse persons of good credit.
For instance and a taste these: I bayted my hook often, and at last I caught
him. Here I was before, and here I am again, and here I must stay, though
it be but for a short time. The speeches which Summers uttered after his
repossession or rather the devil in him.
I lead them to drinck, carouse, and quafse, I make them to swear. I have
leave given me to do what I will for a time. What is wightier then a king in
his own land? A king I am in whom I reign, here I am king for a time. In
like sort Darling upon the day of his dispossession uttered words of this kind
with his mouth wide open: Brother Radulphus I will go to my master Belz^bub,
and he shall double there tongues, and again, let us go out of him, and enter
into some of these here: Darling his speeches or the devil in him.
with diverse others as appears by the history of him in print, many such like
speeches also I well remember by Ka: Wright.

The 16. sign of possession is, when men offer vyolence to their own bodies,
so in the 5. of Mark: it is said of the man which had an unclean spirit,
that he did strike himself with stones: the devil indeed was the striker, and
the man a mere patient, but because it was done by his own hand, 16 The offer
violence to thire own bodies.
and so seemed to do it himself, therefore it is ascribed unto him: and thus
many times those things are attributed to the possessed, which were indeed
done by sathen the possessor. And in like sort have I my self often done in
this treatise.

According to this, we have haerd before of Summers 'who howsoever he did not
strike himself with stones, yet did he beat his head and that with great
vyolence against the ground or floare of the house, and against the bedsted and
throw himself against the walls.

The 17. 17 Not hurt by all the^ torments
sign of one possessed is, that he is not hurt by all the vyolence that the
devil does to his body, nor all the torments that he puts him unto, so as
(notwithstanding all his rage and crueltye) not a bone of the possessed (as I
may say) is broken. This appears by the 4. of Luke. where when Christ had
commanded the dyuell to come out of the man possessed, it is said, Luke. 4. 3^
that then the dyuell throwing him in the midst of them, came out of him, and
hurt him nothing at all.

It is as much as if it had been said: the dyuell upon Christ's commandment
to go forth of the man, cast him violently and headlonge among the people, and
there rent him sore and extreamely^ tormented him, so as one would have
thought he had utterly spoy led the man, or at the least greatly hurt him,
(which appears also by the first of Mark, where the same story being
reported it is said that the unclean spirit tare him) but says the
Euangelyste Luke it proved not so: for notwithstanding the dyuells rage and
all the torments he put him to, yet he hurt him nothing at all. Even so it
was with these: tormented they were most grievously, especially at, and a
little before the egresseof the spirits: Summers also did offer great vyolence
to his body, beatyng his head and face (sometimes a quarter of an hour
together) to the ground or bedsteade, (as is before said) so as one would
have thought he should have bruised himself greatly* and yet had he no hurt
at all or any of the other by the like grievous torments they endured. The same
is as true of Kath: Wright and Tho: Darling, which latter had in his fitts his
arms and shoulder boanes thruste out of their ioynctes, and set in again: and
yet hereby was made ^euer a whit less unable to use them then before. As
strange also is that which is deposed concerning Summers that he was not burnt
though some bare parts of his body lay in the hott fire.

The reason hereof I take to be this, that satan having leave from god to
enter into man, has not withal leave, or is forbidden to hurt him: for
otherwise it were not possible his nature considered, but that he should
greatly harm him: and yet notwythstandinge this prohybytyon of the lords, he
will be attemptynge to spoil or hurt those he possesses, though he cannot or
dare not do it, because by nature he is inclyned thereunto. For every
creature (as well invisible as visible) is as it were vyolentlye carried to do
according to his own nature and kind. In the manifoulde vexations of satan
there fore and manner of using them he possesses, we may as in a glass
bebold: the malice, rage, cruelty and insatiable desire of the devil (as a
roaring lion) to devour and destroy man: and in his restraint from hurting or
not performing it (notwithstanding his great and manifold offers that way,) we
may se, as the power of god over these principalities and powers I meaine the
diuils, and the awe and subjection they are in unto the Lord* as well as the
least or weakest of his creatures so lhe great mercy of god toward man,
remembering mercy even (...). And here this is worthy the observing, that
howsoever they which are possessed receive no hurt at all by that which the
spirit does, though it be never so much, and never so fearful to behold but
are as well (notwithstanding the same) after their fits as before: yet if any
man do but wrest or strain their little finger (which is as nothing in
respect of that is done by the spirit) though for the present they complain
not thereof, 18 (...).
as being then without feeling yet after the fit they ^oe and this was often
seen in Summers.

Hereunto we may add for the 18. sign of possession, extraordinary and
supernatural strength. This is evident by the 5. of Mark, where it is said of
one possessed, that no man could bind him, noe not with chains: that being
often bound withfetters and chains, he plucked the chains asunder, and brake
the fetters in pieces, neither could any man ^ame him. verses 3. 4. ^uk. 8. 29.
And by the 19. of the Acts, where the man possessed over came and wounded 7.
men. After this manner it was with these we speak of: their strength was
extraordinary and supernatural, insomuch as two or three strong men could
scarcely hold one child of the age of 10. or 11. years: but specially this
was seen in Summers who in sundry of his fits did show such strength, as
sometime, 3. 4. or 5. sometimes 6. or 7. men, though they had great advantage
of hi^ (as bound to a chair, or lying upon a bed could scarcely rule him and
though they labored hard that they swet therewith, yet he was not perceived to
pant or blow, no more then if he had not strayned his strength nor strugled at
all, as is deposed. The like strength was perceived to be in Darling as is
noted in the printed book: who being a boy of 13. years of age was of that
strength that 2. strong men could not hold him down or rule him. Of such
extraordinary and supernatural strength also was Kath: Wright. True it is that
there is great difference betwixt his strength mentioned Mark. 5. and the
strength these showed: and noe marvel. For the man there mentioned was
possessed with a legion of diuils, these each of them with one only as I
suppose no marvel then though his strength and his rage and furye exceeded
theirs. And hence I take it to be, that of all those mentioned in the gospel
to have been possessed, we read not of on that was of like strength and rage,
Math. 8. 28.
with him or them possessed with a legion. 19 The (...) of super natural
knowledge.
For besides that already has been said of their exceeding great strength
and vnrulynes, it is recorded by S. Matthew, that they were very feirce, that no
man might go by that way.

The last sign of possession that in the holy scriptures I observe is ex
traordinary and supernatural knowledge: which appears by the 5. of S. Mark,
where one that was possessed as soon as he saw Jesus a far off, verse. 6. 7.
said of him, that he was the son of the most high God. Now if we consider
that this man had neither heard of Jesus, his doctrine, miracles, nor seen his
person at any time before, as may appear by this, that he was not only, a
Gadaren, but had besides his abidinge among the graves, and in the mountains,
and not amongste men, verse. 3. 5. ^5. Luk 8. 27.
and consider also that he was not in his right mind: and 3. that he had * had
devils a long time, as St. Luke notes: we can not but see and confese, that
this knowledge or acknowledgment of our blessed Savior was supernatural. This
is further confirmed by the 16. of the Acts, where it is not only said of a
certain maid of Philippi which was possesed, that she followed Paul and Silas
crying and sayiug, these men are the servants of the most high God, ver. 16. 17.
which show unto us the way of salvation: but that which for this purpose is
much more, that she had a sperit of divination, so as she could divine and
foretell some things to come, whereby she got her master much vantage. Such
supernatural knowledge (as well as strength) have all those had, whom I
affirm to have been possesed with unclean spirits. For hence it came to
pass that those in Lancashire foretold there fits, the number, manner and
continuance of them. John star. could tell whether it was clean water they
brought him, and two other of them, having their eyes closed and there faces
from the glase told directly when the sand in the hour glass was rune out:
and thus hour after hour. as for Th. Darling, his supernatural knowledge
plainlye appeared by the book written of him. and touching Kath. Wright, I
say this as in the presence of God, that she told me of diverse things which
no earthlye creature knew besides my self. Also I sent Th. Wright her brother
2 miles of, to one M. John Beresford, and she declared what he said to the said
messenger before he returned: and the day after I going from her with the said
gentleman, and leaving her with many about her, at my return she told some of
the speeches which had secretlye in the feildes passed between us. But this
supernatural knowledge was most manifest in Summers, who told of sundry
things which were done and spoken diverse miles of him, and that at or about
the same instant they fell out and to diueres strangers coming unto him he
made known such secrets, as thereat both they and others upon the
acknowledgment of the truth the of wondered greatly. From hence likewise it came
that divinlike (save that he intermingled one or two errors) he continued his
speech in expounding the Creed for an howere together, A Bridwell house.
and sometimes also speak of other misteris. Hence also it was that he did
divine and foretell things to come. For shortly after his repossession in a
trance he uttered these words: I must go to St. Jones, at St. Jones Darrell
must not come nor never ablacke coat of them all: it is as I would have it,
they are mine enimyes. At s^es I must be, before the judges, the judges must *
see. Summers 3. or 4. days after he spoke these things among many more
(whereof some are set down before, Note this word, how fattlye the d^ill can
speak he tel^eth not what the Judges shall see.
which all were written from his mouth in the presence of diverse credible
persons) was accordingly * carried from his fathers house (where then he was)
to S. Ioanes, whither neither my self nor yet any in the ministry who would
have rebuked him sharply (when once that was perceived) might be admitted to
come unto him. This was done by the mayor and Aldermen under Pretense to find
out Summers counter fe^ing which ^s the (...) secret to themselves so no man did
ever dream of any such thing, until they going about it, it and appear^.
And at the Assizes (which was about 7. weeks after) he was sent for before
the Judges: where my Lord Anderson: and the other Judge did see him indeed in
a deluding fytt. Now it is almost an odyous thing to dream of any deceit in
these predictions of Summers considering they were magistrates which had a
chief hand in these things, and were the causes of them: for the two first of
these, viz: the remouinge of him to S. Jones (forcibly against his fathers
will) and the denying of the ministers to come and see him: were done by the
Mayor and some of the Aldermen of Nottingham: and the last by a Judge of Assise.

Here we must remember that as they which are possessed are not themselves of
any extraordinary and supernatural stength, so neither have they themselves
any such knowledge indeed, but only seem so to have. For whatsoever they
utter tending thereunto, comes merely from the spirits within them, using
their instruments of speech and not at all from the parties possessed who when
they are come to themselves have no such knowledge, neither know any such
thing as before they uttered.

Besides these tokens or signs which holy scriptures gives, certain signs
which my self have observed in experience.
whereby we may know and discern of one possessed with the devil, I have in
experience seen these, 1 ^ostfull sights and (...) appa^t^ones.
1 that the devil does mightily molest and afflict them whom he possesses by
sights and visions, (for the most part fearful) appearing in the likeness of a
cat, bear, dog, dragon, lion flames of fire, and such like fearful creatures
whereof you may at large read both in the narration before, and in the history
of Thomas Darling. This was common to all the 10. possessed persons above
named: 2. that they have by fits on the sudden a great swelling in the body
and stirring or moving of the intrals within the body. 2 Sudden swelling
This also was seen in all those 10. persons. And this the King of Scots
sets down for one Symptom of the possessed* terming it very aptly the
boldning up of the patients breast and belly with an unnatural sturring and
vehement agitation within them: 3 Inflexiblenes and weight of the body, or
members thereof king of Scots Demonoleg^e, book: 3 chap. 4.
3. That in some fits the parts of the body possessed, as arm or leg, now
one, forthwith an other, and some times the whole body are inflexible, and
withal as heavy as so much iron. And this the King of Scots most excellently
describes in these words: an ironie hardness of his sinows so stiflye bended
out, that it were not possible to prick out as it were the skine of any other
person so far. 4 senslesnes or want of feelin^
4. that howsoever they are so misserablye vexed by Satan, as they beholderes
would judge them to be, in most extreme and intolerable pains, yet they
feel noe pain at all. yet I doubt not but that satan can so order the matter
as that the possessed shall have pain: when he shall see it serve for his
purpose and this has been seen in some of our Demoniakes: for when the diuill
in Jane Ashton went about to make her lie by pretending that she was
dispossessed, to that end in her fits he put her to extreme pain: and Marg.
Byrom felt vsuallye very great pain. I remember also that Summers shortly after
his repossession, and a little before he made that curssed and lyinge
confession of counterfeiting groned most pitifully in sundry fits, and when
they were ended, and he com to himself, said that in them he felt extreme
pain. which it may be the spirit therefore did, thereby to draw him to make the
aforesaid confession, which being made, his fits ended, and theirwith the
greuyous pains he had before endured. In like sort when one took in hand to
heal Darling, and applied something to his legs, he felt then a pricking
which put him to great pain. Thyreus de Do^moniacis, chap. 3. sect 2. et chap.
10. sect. 6.
Thus then it may be, sometimes and in so^e fits: but I take it that ordinarily
he which is possessed feleth noe pain in his fits. Hereunto we may add, the
running swelling which was so often seen and felt in Some, 5 strange Voices
which Thyreus the Jesuit also witnesses to have been seen in persons
possessed, 5. strange and unnatural voices, like to a bull, 6 Disfiguering of
the face
bear, swine, 6 the fearful disfiguri^g of the face: which have likewise in
experience bine observed in others that have been possessed. 7 Also the speaking
without the instruments of speech, Thyreus de doemon. cap 3 sect 2. et cap. 25
sect. 2. 3.
the mouth being wyd open, as did both Some. and Darl* with sundry other such
strange and supernatural accidents, whereof we have hard before.

Thus we have seen 1. how and after what manner the possesed in the tim of
Christ Jesus and his apostles, 7 speakinge the mouth being wide open
even those of whom the holy ghost says were possessed, were handled or vexed
by satan. 2. these persons we speak of, were handled or vexed just after the
same manner: what leteth the^ that these should not be possesed with diuils as
well as they? for sei^g the like or the same effects were found in both, why
should not the like or the same cause, from whence those stra^g effects (we
have hard of) proceeded, be in both? Imagine 2: sick persons to be handled
alike the one has such a pain in his head, the other has the like: the one
complains of a pain in his back, the other of the very same in his: this is
pai^ed thus and thus in his belly, in his left side, in his arms, legs, feet,
and the other even so: they are within of an extreme heat like fire, and it
either of them outwardlye quakinge with cold: their vrimes are alike, their
pulses they beat a like. who will not say, that these two have the same
disease? and that if it be certain that the on of them has such asicknes
there is no doubt but that the other has also the same? because it cannot be,
neither was it ever seen, that in such a consent of effects so many I mean,
there should be a dissent in the causes: why then should it not be so here?
and why may we not infer and conclude so in this our present case? Those
mentioned in the gospel, on the sudden and by fits, were grievously vexed,
cried, gnashed there teeth wallowed, fomed, were thrown into the fire, were
feirce and cruel, offering much vyolence to themselves and others, out of
their right minds, uttering dyabolicall speeches, of extraordinary and
supernatural strength, and of supernatural knowledge: and after the same
manner were all the 10. persons spoken of before handled, as has been show ed,
and specially William Summers: but the former were possessed with the devil:
why then shall not we affirm that the latter were possessed likewise? Touching
the former it is certain, that all the vexation inward and outward, their
crying, gnashing their teeth, foming, wallowing, casting into the fire, the
dyabolicall speeches they vtered. their supernatural strength and knowledge,
with the rest of those things we have heard of, came from the devil, not being
without but within them: why now should not we think that the crying or
scriking gnashing, foming, wallowing, casting into the fire, the diabolical
speeches supernatural strength and knowledge, which were in Summers and the
other persons, came not only from the devil, (whereof there is no question or
doubt at all) but from him being within them? yea how can we otherwise think.
or how can it otherwise possibly be, except these effects (all or most of them)
might proceed from some other cause, the which I have heretofore showed cannot
be?

In natural diseases and in other cases we reason from the effects to the
cause, and gather or conclude the cause by the effects: neither does it at any
time deceive us, though it may be so^times we deceive our selves. The physician
if he perceive in his patient that he has a cough, stich, and that his sickness
began with an ague, knows thereby as by signs or effects, that he has the
plurisy. In case we see one every other day quiuering and shaking for cold,
presently and truly we say, he has a tertian: and who is so simple that when
he sees smoke ascendynge up out of a chymney, knows not that there is fire?
why then should we doubt when in the strange handli^g and torments of a man
(such as have been described) we se (as I may say) the smoke of a spirit, that
is, the operationes and effects of an evil spirit but that there is in that
man a wicked spirit? Is there any disease of the body wherein men are so
handled as these persons were? must it not needs then be some supernatural
disease? and other then this it has been showed (I trust) in the begininge it
can not be.

Our Phisitianes if the have the pulse, vrin, and some two or three other
signs of a disease, straightwaies they affirm, it is such a disease and we
believe them, though they receive their skill from the wrytings of men, which
are subject to error. How much more ought we to believe that the aforesaid 10.
persons were sick of the disease we treat of, to wit possessed with devils:
seeing we have not 3. or 4. but so many signs thereof, and those not taken out
of the books of men: which may yea often do err and deceive, but out of the
book of god the word of truth.

And here this I affirm, that the spirit of god in descrihing at large the
manner of their handling and vexation by satan who were possessed in Christ's
time according to that we have heard, does not set it down only as a matter
of fact, but in reporting the same did besides thereby purpose, (as I conceive)
to give a rule and leave a direction, to his church, whereby to discern of
possession in the time to come, to the end of the world: implying therein thus
much, that when we shall see one handled after the same manner. that thereby
we learn and from thence gather, that the said party is possessed with an
unclean spirit. And for confirmation hereof serves excellently the question
of Christ to the father of the possessed child, after he had seen his son
in one of his fits: Mark 9. 2^
how long time is it since he has been thus? for it is as if he had said:
Indeed thou say true, thy child has an evil spirit in him, for whosoever
is thus handled has the devil in him causing the same: but how long has he
been possessed? where we see that instead of asking the father how long time
his son had been possessed he says thus handled thereby secretly teaching us
that they which are handled after that manner there mentioned, are possessed.
Again if it be so that Christ Jesus has left a medicine for the cu^ing of
this supernatural disease, that is a means for the casting of satan out of
those he possesses, and the same perpetual, as (I hope) is here after made
manifest, who can doubt but that the lord Jesus has left some direction for
the discerning of this disease? now all men will confess he has left none
other: It must needs thereforebe that he did it in setting down the manifould
effects and operations of the devil, which being in men he sends forth: from
whence he would have us (being reasonable creatures) when we shall see the same
effects in any to gather and assure our selves that there is the very same
cause, viz: an unclean spirit in the party so afflicted.

That which many object here, forasmuch as Thyreus has done it effectually
as he supposes: I will produce that which he says instead of all: who
although I doubt not but if he understood how it was with our Demonyacks: as
well as the papists among us do, he would say with them, that there is no
question but they were possessed: yet because in his book of Demoniakes which he
has very satly set forth, and is in the hands of many, he says something
against this first reason of mine and the certainty and sufficiency of the
aforesaid signs, which I have gathered out of the gospel: I will therefore
labor to answer him and weaken that he obiecteth, that so my aforesaid reason
may still stand and remain in his full strength: And therewithal I will say
something of the signs which the papists principally rely upon and trust un to
for the discerning of their possessed.

His words be these followinge. Thyreus de doemoniac^s, cap. 22. sect. 15.
Addo quod nec ipsa signa etc. I add that neither the very signs which are
found in those possessed of whom the gospel makes mention, are certain and
sufficient tokens of men possessed Some of them were blind, some dease, others
dumb, some of them were cruel to themselves, some to others. They seemed to
be the works of such as were possessed, but they were not the signs of
possessed persons. unless per adventure we will have all that be blind, dumb,
and deaf, and also all feirce, and cruel men to be possessed. And in the 25.
Chap: having spoken newly before of the exceeding great strength of possessed
persons, even such as passes all humane strength, ^ect. 9.
and of their casting into the fie and water: he says of them that they be not
certa et indubita signa: certain and undoubtful signs his reason is Quoniam
non doemones tantum, verum etiam praeter doemones, alios authors et causas
habere possunt. Because these things or signs may have not only the dyuels,
but al so besides the devils some other authors and causes: which he further
confirms by examples as of Maximinus the Emperor, and Iunius, who were of
extraordinary and supernatural strength, as he shows there at large: non
tamen ( says he) pro obsessis habiti sunt: and yet notwythstanding they were
not held to be possessed. Thus we se Thyreus flatly denies and argues against
that which has been so much insisted upon, and pressed by me.

To pass by that absurdity of his, (...) appears by (...) 26 chap ^ct. 11.
where granting these things to be the works of the possessed, that is of
satan possessing, he yet deny eth them to be signs thereof: as though the
several operations of satan in any were not so many several signs of his
inhabyting the sa^e person, or the proper effect was not always a sign of the
cause which seems to be his first reason.

To pass by that I say let us come to the main reason he uses against the
signs mentioned in the gospel, whereupon only as the foundation my former
reason whereby I endeavor to prove Summers the 7. in Lancashyre, and the other two
were possessed, rests and is buylt. Against which argument of mine for proof
of their possession, thus out of Thyreus it may be Objected. The Evangelical
signs whereupon I ground and infer the possession I contend for, are not
certain sufficient, and undoubted signs of men possessed with satan: and
therefore notwithstanding the said signs were seen and known to be in Summers
and the rest: it may well be that they were not possessed. That the
Evangelical signs are not such Thyreus proves thus: if to be blind dumb,
deaf, to be feirce and cruel toward himself and others, to gnash the teth,
foam, to be of supernatural strength, and so of the other signs, be certain
and sufficient signs of satan his possessinge of ^n an then all that be
blind dumb, deaf, be feirce and cruel toward themselves and others, or
gnash the teeth, or foame, or be of supernatural strength, and so of the other
signs, are possessed with satan: but that is most falce, therefore the other
also.

To the proposition or first part of this reason I answer, that to be blind,
or to be dumb, or deaf, or to be feirce and cruel toward him self and
others, etc. without any further trouble or vexation, is no token of
possession: but if any of these meet with other signs of this supernatural
disease, it greatly confirms the same unto us, and is a good sign thereof. As
for instance of foming: when foming is alone and severed from other marks, it
is no sign of one possessed: for in the falling sickness a man fometh, and yet
has not an unclean spirit in hi^. But let it meet in the same person with
diverse other tokens of one possessed, though not all: so as the same man which
fometh, do also gnashe his teeth, wallowe, be cast into the fire be of
supernatural strength and knowledge, then and in such case (I say) it is a
very significant sign thereof. And this may be made plain by the like. An ague
cough, and stich, are the signs of a plurify: seauer these, so as a man has
only one of them, and that which of them soever it is, can give no assurance
to the sick person or physician of the plurisy: but let them concure and mete
together, and they signify that, and as it were proclayme him to be sick of
the said disease. Even so it is in this case: if Thyreus had said that no one
of the signs mentioned in the gospel, was a certain and sufficient token or
argument of possession, I for my part would have subscribed unto him: but to
say as he does indefinittely and in the plural number, that the signs there
spoken of are not certain and sufficient signs of satan his possessinge, I
hold it to be most false* and derogating to the honor and high estimation and
accounte we should have of gods sacred word. For shall the signs or any of the
signs given by men in their writings of this or that disease be certain and
sufficient signs: and the signs given by the Lord himself in his holy
writings of this supernatural disease or of any other thing, be vncertai^e
and insufficient? or shall the signs given by you Papists of ^n possessed, forged
out of your own brain, and set down in your books be undoubted, certain,
and suffitient, as you affirm: and the signs given by god himself thereof, and
set down in his book, be uncertain and insufficient? Thyreus chap. 26. sect.
4 and 9.
O monstrons impiety, Is not the Lord Jesus (trow we) much beholding to this
Jesuit in this doctrine of possession, as he is to the rest of that generation
in all their other doctrins? who places the signs which Christ Jesus has
given in his holy word of one possessed, among those which are uncertain and
doubtful signs, as appears further by the title of his 22. Chap: yea among
those which are not true signs, although they be so accounted by some? ^or
mark what his words be in the beginning of this said chapter: Reijciemus hoc
loco primum illa, quae etc. we will first speak in this place of those which
are not true signs of men possessed, Thyreus chap. 22.
although they be held for true signs of some: (in the conclusion of which
chapter he uses the words before conscerning the Evangelical signs) then
afterward we will asigne those which truly prove devils to be in men. But what
are those which are such true and in^allable signs wherewith the signs set
down in the gospel are not to be compared? forsooth these: Popish signs of
possession. Thyreus chap, 26. sect. 1. 3.
If they refuse to call upon the name of the lord, or any of the saints, to
pronounce the name of Jesus, to rehearse a psalm or some godly prayer, or if
they tremble, and quake for fear, break forth into clamors, or outcryes,
become impatient, blaspheame, and make show to do vyolence unto themselves,
when the relics of saints are applied unto them, or an Agnis Dei is applied,
or besigned on the forchead with the sign of the cross, or sprinkled with
holy water, or have the most holy body of Christ given unto them in the
sacrament of the Eucharist, or shall have these words whispered into their ear
in a strange tongue, which they understand not: Deum qui te genuit
derelinquisti, et oblitus es Domini Creatoris tui, thou have forsaken god which
made thee, and have forsaken the lord thy creator. Finally if they cannot abide
the charges given in the exorcismes, or at least most ympatiently endure them.
Whereunto after he adds the touching of holy men. His (says the Jesuit) et
similibus signis Demones prodi dubium nullum est. That the devils by these and
such like signs are descryed or known to be in men, there is no doubt. And
this he goes about to confirm partly by examples, ^hyrens cap. 26. sect. 6.
and partly by reason, which consists of two parts. * This (quoth he) is
manifest, if we consider first, haec ipsis inuisa et molesta esse, doemones
illo far non posse: that these things ar hateful and grievous unto the
devils, and that they are not able to abyd the^ Secondly: non posse fieri etc:
that it cannot be that either a christian man should tremble, when these things
are used, or show himself troubled, if he be commanded to use them religiously
or to rehearse certain prayers. ap. 26. sect. 8.
And a little after vt vero homines haec horreant, quis credat? horrebit
forsitan christianus homo, si psalmum Miserere, vel dicat, vel dici audiat etc.
That men should be afraid of these things, who can believe? will a christian
man tremble, if he either say the psalm (called) Miserere, or hear it said?
if he rehearse the lords prayer, or any other that is godly? if he see or touch
relics of the saints? sect. 9.
if in his presence exorcismes be read? if to the devil it be objected, that he
has forsaken God his Creator, when therefore the possessed tremble at those
things, when they reprove them of lyinge which use and apply them: quis
dubitabit (says he) quin trepidatio, et quae mox audiuntur blasphemiae,
latentes doemones prodant? who will doubt but that the trembling and the
blasphemies which are heard, do be wray the dyuels lying hid in men? Hence it
came that one Palin of Tom worth in the county of Warwick a recusant, came to
Summers at Nottingham, and laid in his hand, a purse with an Agnis Dei and
relics in it to discover satan thereby (whereat indeed Summers began to be
some what troubled such is the subtlety of satan to keep the papists in their
blyndnes) whereupon this recusant being apprehended confessed his intent: who
for the relics found about him was indeed committed by the magistrate to the
sherifs house: but after a few days the mat ter was so ordered, that the
papist went quietli home again or to those who had sent him to do that worthy
service: wherein the devil for his part was not wanting, so to entertayne and
welcomme him, as might make most for his advantage.

But to return to Thyreus against whom and all papists touching these
feigned signs of theirs I argue thus: That the Popish signs of possession be
not certain and undoubted signs but may be counterfeited.
If these be certain and undoubted signs of possession, then it is not
possible but that all such shall be possessed, in whomsoever all these signs may
or shall be found: but all these may be in one that is not possessed: therefore
are not certain and undoubted signs of possession. The proposition or first
part of this reason cannot be denied: and the truth of the assumption (or
second part of this argument) appears by this: that all these signs of
theirs may be counterfeyted, and done in dissimulation by whomsoever will
feign himself to be possessed with the devil as Summers says he has done. For
howsoever Summers could not easily by counterfeytinge foam wallowe etc.
especially in so great measure, and that manner we have heard, nor yet
possibly be of such extraordinary and supernatural strength and knowledge, as
he was: whereupon we forbear not to say, but most confidently auoucg, that it
is vmpossible for him to be a counterfeyte, and for the signs of possession
given us by the holy ghost in the gospel, to be dissembled or to be done by
art of man, or humane power yet we fear not to affirm, yea your selves will
scarcely deny but that he might feign, and in deep dissimulation do, all
those you give for certain and undoubted signs of one possessed. For who sees
not that it were no hard thing for him or any other that would attempt such
an impiety, but most easy, to abstain and refuse to invoke the name of god,
or some of the saints, to pronounce the name of Jesus, to rehearse a psalm, or
some godly prayer, to shake and tremble as it were for fear, to be ympatient
(in show), to blaspheme, when relics are applied unto them, or an Agnis Dei,
or be signed with the sign of the cross or sprinkled with holy water, and to
show or carry ones self according to all the other signs whereof we have
heard? Seeing then all these signs may fall into a counterfeyt, who is one not
possessed, but faininge so to be: it follows therefore necessarily that these
signs of the papists are not only uncertain and doubtful signs, but lying
also and de ceiuable signs, as like as may be to the authors of them.

Again if these be certain sufficient and undoubted signs of possession,
then may one certainly discern satan his possessing one, without any help or
direction from the scriptures, for none of these are mentioned there, but
without help and direction from the scriptures we cannot certainly know when
satan possesses one: therefore these are not such signs as is affirmed. For
who can assure us that the devil is in such a man really, if the lord himself
by his word does it not? cannot the devil deceive us by his cunning and
subtlety, and make us believe that he is in man when he is without him, by
molestinge him by some external operationof his, if the lord permit him so to
do? or is any mortal man of himself without any help and direction from god
(which he gives in his word) able to match the subtle serpent so as he shall
not be able to deceive him? so it should seem by the papists, and the signs
they give out of their own brain. How then is it said that satan by his
subtlety deceyueth all the world? ^^uelation, 12. 9.
And who that has an eye to see with, sees not, how herein the deceuour
deceaueth them mightily? making them believe, that he cannot abide but is
tormented with their foolish, ridiculous* and superstitious toys as their
consecrated or hallowed things holy bread, holy water, hallowed oil, hallowed
brimstone burned in the fire, etc. holy relics an agnis dei. and above all
the signing of them with the sign of the cross: whereby the devils are not
only discovered, but also (which is more) cast out of men, as the Jesuit
teaches his scholars at larg throughout his 24. ch: whereof that is the title
and argument. If the dyuell can so ill away with a cross, sect. 7.
to let the rest go, if as Thyreus says and alleges out of some: Crux be
timor doemonum: a cross be the fear of the devils, and that: That the devil
is not afraid at the sign of the cross.
timor et tremor cadunt super doemones cum signum crucis viderint, that the
diueles fear and tremble when they behold the sign of the cross: yea
quamuis nullo piaetatis studio haec crucis arma etc. although, this weapon of
the cross be used with noe care of godlynes, yet notwithstanding it will vex
the devils, and geeatly torment them: How comes it to pass that Coniurers in
their coniurations use and make crosses as appears by that is said before of
Edmund Hartlaye the coniurer, who in his coniuring and raising up of the
devil, divided his circle in to 4. parts, making a cross at every division?
and how falls it out that the devils then show them selves, and that they can
abide and endure to be there present, in the presence and view of so many
crosses: It may be it is thus, that when the coniurers call upon and invoke
the devils, having made first so many crosses, Merigus in fug* Doemonum.
the devils dare not but come and present themselves, though alas in much fear
and trembling, whence comes it also that coniurers have as well good store of
crosses in their books of co^iurations, as the papists in their exorcismes?
Surely by that art of theirs which they learn and get out of their said
books so becrossed they attain by virtue and store of the said crosses some
power and authority over the devils, which they after exercise over them so
that the papists only have not power over the devils, as they affirm whereof you
shall hear hereafter. Here we may behold the just judgment of god upon them:
who because they will not receive and trust to the signs the lord has given
in his word, which are the only certain and sufficient signs to signify
satan his possessing of men: such as who soever trusts unto them, and will
be directed by them cannot error be deceived herein: such as in whomsoever they
are, the same person is for certainty possessed, and such also as without which
we can not certainly know when satan possesses man: therefore I say because
they will not believe and receive these signs, the Lord sends them strong
delusions, that they should believe lying, foolish, and ridiculous signs, showed
forth or given by satan in all deceiuablenes.

Thus have I sufficiently proved out of the word of god the possession of the
parties we entreat of, and disproued what is or may be objected against it.
There are besides some other reasons which may further confirm the same unto us:
As first, in that they were delivered upon the prayers and fastes which were
used for that purpose: we may thereby be the rather persuaded that they had
evil spirits within them* where we must remember that it was not thus once,
but sundry times, not with one person alone, but with diverse. Now whence came
it that such certain and present deliverance came to the above named parties
so afflicted as is aforesaid, upon the vsinge of this said means? Surely
hence, because they being sick, of this supernatural disease* I mean having
unclean spirits within them, had the supernatural meadycyne applied unto
them, which God himself for the cureynge theireof has left and ordeayned:
which being so, it is noe marueyle though they were presentlye healed. For
what meadicyne is so sovereign, as that which is of the Lords own
appointment? had they been sick of any other disease, and namely had they been
vexed by some outward operation of satan, as of necessity they must if they
were not possessed: they had not undoubtedly all of them been so presently
delivered as they were.

For howsoever god has appointed us to fast when we are in any affliction of
body or mind, neither shall it be done in vain: yet he has no where promised
that the same shall prosper to the delivering of us from the said affliction,
math 17. 21.
as he has in this case of possession, in particular and by name. This kind
(says our savior) goes not out, but by prayer, and fasting: therein secretly
promising, that prayer and fasting being used, evil spirits do and shall go
out. Again how came it to pass that we in our prayers instantly calling upon
god, that he would be pleased to cast satan forth of them who lay so
miserably vexed, by the devil before us, (that their bodies might not be
receptacles for the unclean spirits, but temples for the holy ghost to dwell
in) that they were thereupon, and even then delivered according to our requests
and supplications so made, if they were not possessed?

These things considered, I se not how any can doubt or once call in question
the possession of these 7. in Lancashire and of Will: Summers of Nottingham, as
also of those other two we have spoken of by the way to wit, Kath: Wright and
Tho: Darling, unless he be either like unto Thomas, and with him say, except I
had seen these things that are here reported, and had made trial of them with
my hands, I will not believe them, or be of this judgment, that men in these
days cannot be possessed. The former of these may remember for their
humblinge that by the sentence of our savior himself, this is to be
faithless: as touching this work of god, I mean and that it is a blessed
thing to believe that the truth we see not. 2. that before God and men they
shall be the more inexcusable, because these things have been done not beyond
the seas, but here at home in our own country, and that in diverse parts
thereof, and some of them in the midst of the kingdom, so that we need not
go far either in our own person, or by our letters to inquire into the truth
of this matter: neither have they been done in a corner, and before some few
only, but openly and in the sight of all those that for sundry wekes would come
unto the^, which I dare be bold to say were for number (in a manner)
innumerable whereof diverse were very learned and wise, cheef men in the
magistracy and ministry, not easy to be abused, and about 30. also have upon
their oaths given testimony hereunto.

As touching those who therefore reject that is said, That there are possions in
these days
and whatsoever they hear conscerning this matter, because they judge that none
either are or can be now possessed, as I cannot but wonder that an^ especially of
the learned should be of this judgment, consideringe there is neither jot nor
title in the scriptures for them, but much against them nor yet in any writer
old or new that ever I red or heard of, so I demand of them how they dare
affirm the same, for it is in effect all one as if they should say, god can
not now send devils into men, or god cannot in these days plague and correct
men, by sending satan into them to vex them in their bodies, which I thinck
they would be loath to avouch: Titus ^. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 1^.
for it is more then bouldnes to say of the almightye that he cannot do this
or that, except it be such as is either contrary to his nature, or his revealed
will: which cannot be said of this. To say it is against his nature is most
absurd, and if we will have it against his will, we must show where that part
of his will is revealed, which is a thing imposible, for as much as the
contrary, that men may now be possessed, appears by daily experience which
cannot fall out contrary unto the will of god, and by the word of god in Deuteronomy:
28. it is written, If thou will not keep (says Moses) and do all the words of
this law that are written in this book and fear this glorious and fearful
name the lord thy god, verse 58
then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed,
even great plagues and of long continuance and every sickness, and every plague
which is not written in the book of this law, will the lord heap upon thee
until thou be destroyed. Seeing the^ god threatens to bring upon the
disobedient and sinful people wonderful plagues of which kind this is one,
Deuteronomy 29. 20.
and every plague or curse he has, whither it be such as is written (as is
expressly set down in the chapter following) or not written: 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy
3. 1. 2. 2 Pet 3. 3. Jude. 18.
under one of which kinds this curse, to be possessed with the devil must
needs be comprehended: and that in these last dais there shall be perilous and
sinful times, wherein iniquity shall abound, so as the son of man when he
comes, shall scarcely find any faith up on earth: How can it be denied but
that the lord may smite some with this judgment, yea and (as I conceive of
this scripture) will also, which is more. And lest we should understand this of
the Jews only and restrain it to the time of the law, (either of which is
absurd) we must remember that we have the same or like threate renewed upon us
by the spirit of god in the time of the gospel, and expressly against every
man, as well Gentile as Jew, as all men will grant. I protest (says the
spirit) unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this book,
Reu. 22. 18.
that if any man shall add unto these things, god shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book, and if any man shall diminishe of the
words of the book of this prophecy etc Seeing then that it cannot be denied,
but that there are in these last and evil days, both which add to this book,
and dyminish from it, and that this plague of possession by devils is written
in the same: we must needs acknowledge and cannot doubt but that god may send
this plague also in this last age of the world. Again seeing possession is a
punishment or correction of the lord, laid up ^n a man by the ministry of
satan for his sin: and that men are now as grievous sinners as ever, Justin
Ma^^ I (...) 16 (...) Orig in 17 (...) A (...) Tertul ad Sea palam. et de co^
M^. cap. 11. Capr. ad de me^^ (...). Hieron in vita Hilar. Chrisostom 5. Homil.
4. de incomprehensibili de^natura. Theodoret in historia sancti patrum sect.
13. in Maced. August. de v^^litate credendi, cap. 22. et liber de beati vita et
liber 4 de ciuitate dei cap. 34 et lib 21. de ciu. dei cap. 18. Pet. Ma^tir com
Io. part. 4. cap 9. sect. 13 Philip. Melanct. lib epist. Chemnit de sac^amento
ordinis, parta 2. Beza Homi 26. in histor Passionis. Vogellius in thesau.
theologico page 980. King of Scots in his Doemono logie lib 3. ca. 4 Chass. lib
1 cap. 17 Demonijs cap 3. 6. 7. 8. 10. 11. 12. cap 8 Thyreus de doemoniacis.
the lord also in like sort affected now toward sin and sinners as
heretofore, as ready every way to chastise men for sin in these days as in
former: it cannot be but that men may be possessed now, if the lord think
good that way to correct them* yea even as well and usually as in former time.

Lastly it is to be remembered: that as all churchs, so al righter ancient, and
latter, christians and papists, which have spoken more or less of this matter,
give their full consent heereto, and many examples from age to age are given
hereof. Here might be brought in, a multitude and great heap of testimonies,
to prove that men may be now possessed but I will let them alone, and only
coat them in the margent, because I think it a needelesse thing in so plain
and evident a matter to use so many words, specially seeing hereafter I
allege the most of their testimonies, for the confirmation of dispossession
since miracles ceased, which is far more doubtful then this other of
possession, and co^prehendeth in it this also. For if men have been and may be
now dispossessed, ergo possessed. Wierus in the beginning of his 4. book de
prestigijs doemonum speaks of many that have of late years been possesed
with devils: showing at large their strange, admirable, and most grievous
vexations by satan: and among others he makes mention of about 70 damsells
which together in one night 1555. in an house at Room where Orphans were
kept, became Demoniacks: whereof says he, not one of them was recovered two
years after yea it may be not at all, which sure is more strange then their
possession: considering the great power and authority the Romanists have over
devils, even the same with the Apostles if you will believe them: as hereafter
you shall hear. Also of later time and nearer us, even at Amsterdam a great
town in Holland Anno 1566. there were as he declares at large 30 children or
thereabouts in 8. or 10. weeks possessed with devils.

But to let the dead and their writings go, let us inquire of the living: Ask
of our trauailers what they have seen and credibly heard in other countries,
beyond the seas, and you shall hear what they will say demand of the papists,
and they with one consent will tell you that me^ may be possessed, and that among
them there daily are such. Thyreus (a man now living) in a book lately written
of this argument names a great many that (long since miracles ceased) were
possessed with devils whereof some were great and honorable personages,
children to Emperors and kings. Shall we say of them as it is said of our
possessed persons in England that they were counterfeyts? their calling of
Exorcists also, and forms of Ezorcisme, proclaim their judgment herein to all
the world, yea who knows not how they greatly vaunt of the power that in
their Church they have to cast out devils? This brage of theirs is answered by
D. Fulk, and diverse others* but neither he nor any other returns in answer,
that men cannot in these days be possessed, which had it been a truth they would
never have omitted.

But why does it seem so incredible and impossible unto some, for one to be
now possessed? Object.
Because miracles are ceased. It should seem then to be possessed with the
devil is a miracle, and not a disease sometime by miracle cured. For the
ceasing of miracles puts an end only to miracles, and not to the diseases
which miraculously were healed: else we should have none sick of feauers,
palsyes, and other infinite diseases: none dumb, deaf, blind, halt, or maimed.
Notwithstandi^ge then that miracles are ended, possession with devils may
remain, seeing it is certain it is no miracle, ver. 16. 18.
but a sickness or supernatural disease which sometimes miraculously was healed
by Christ and his Apostles, as appears by the 17. ver. 42.
of S. Matthew, where the father bringing his possessed child, says thus to
Jesus, I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not heal him: and
presently after it follows: and Jesus rebuked the devil and he went out of
him: and the child was healed at that hour. math. 15 22 28. compared with
mark. 7 25 29. verse 25. Luke. 4. 36.
In like manner it is said in the 9. of S. Luke: that Jesus rebuked the
vneleane spirit and healed the child, and delivered him to his father And for
further proof hereof serves excellently, that in the 8 of S. Luke: verse: 2.
where it is said, that certain weomen were healed of evil spirits and
infirmityes, How castinge out of the deuell is a miracle.
as Mary which was called Magdalen, out of whom went seven devils, where by
the word healed, we may learn, that possession is a disease, to wit
supernatural, and that the miracle is when the dguell by rebuke, that is, by a
charge or commandment to depart, is cast out, in which case the party is
healed, or made whole of this unnatural disease. For thus it is written in the
9. of S. Mark: when Jesus etc. he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying unto him
thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee come out of him. Then (it is said)
the devil came out: the very same we have in the first of S. Mark verse 25.
and a little after it follows: verse 27. he commands the foul spirits
with authority, and they obey him. And in S. Luke, with authority and power he
comaundeth the foul spirits and they come out, In these cases we all know
Christ, wrought a miracle: now what did he? he commanded the dyuells that were
in men to come out of them, and they came forth.

The miracle then is by aword, or command to cast the devil out, and this
is ceased with other miracles, but to be possessed of the devil is noe
miracle: no more then to be blind, sick, or lame: which are judgments of god
upon man for his sin: whereupon possessyon with dyuelles is often brought
in among other plagues of god, and namely in the 4. of Math: where it is
said: They brought unto Jesus all sick people that were taken with diverse
diseases and grypings, and them that were possessed with devils, Math 8. 16.
17. Mark 1. 32. verse 24.
and those which were lunatic, and those that had the pa^^y and he healed them.
The like we read in the 8. of Luke: And at that time he ^ured many of their
sicknesses, and plagues, and of evil spirits, verse. 21.
and unto many blind men he gave sight freety. Seeing then it is no miracle to
be possessed of the devil, but a disease, as is the lunacye palsy etc. the
miracle consisting in casting out the devil by a word: notwithstanding
miracles are ceased, possession may remain: for as notwithstanding this
miraculous healing here spoken of is ceased and gone, yet men still are sick,
and taken with diverse diseases, and some are lunatic, some have the palsy etc.
so also some are or may be possessed with devils, and for my own part I will
as sone hold that me^ cannot now be sick ^unatick, have the palsy, be blind,
deaf, lame, as this other, that men in these days cannot be possessed, which
many me^ yea some otherwise of great learning have presumed to maintain. yea
who is so simple that by these few words sees not, that the ceasing of
miracles proves not the ceasing of possession by devils? and yet if you ask
these men who will have no possession in these days, the reason thereof,
forthwith they will tell you that miracles are ceased: then which answer nothing
can be more absurd. And whereas some affirm that men were possessed, Obie^t. 2.
to the end that the divinity of Christ might appear and show it self, so the
casting forth of the spirits, and the gospel be confirmed, and get the better
entertaynement, by the eiectyon performed by the apostles, and for no other
cause, (for otherwise they say nothing, as shall forthwith appear) and
therefore the deity and gospel of Christ being now sufficiently confirmed,
possession with devils must needs cease: I desire them to send me to some
part of gods word for my information therein. If they can not (whereof there
is no doubt) then they must needs confess, that the reason is because herein
they know or understand not aright, howsoever otherwise their knowledge may be
great. For so says the holy ghost: to the law and to the testimony: if they
speak not according to this word, Isa. 8. 20.
it is because there is no light in them. I marvel at men especially of
understanding, that they will open their mouths to speak where god is sylent:
and that they will be so bold to render a cause or reason of the lords own
fact, where he himself has not done it. You take too much upon you my
brethren, 1 Cor. 4. 6. Romans 12. 3. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
in presuming to understand above that which is written, and meet for you to
understand, and do not understand according to sobryety. Know you not that
things revealed, belong only to us and our children? why then will any take
upon him to render this for the sole reason or cause of possessyon which god
(we all know) has not reveled: but in truth the contrary. But what leads men
to say that men were therefore possessed that the godhead of Christ and his
almighty power might be seen in the castinge out of devils, and the doctrine
of the gospel be confirmed? Suerly this: because, it is evident that by their
eiection these things were performd By the same reason I may infer, that men
were therefore sick, had the palsy, lunatic, lame, blind, deaf, and dumb,
for the divinity and gospel of Christ were confyrmed as well in the myraculous
healynge of the persons so afflicted, as in the dispossessinge of devils. And
yet not withstanding no man is so absurd as thence to gather and conclud, that
there are or can be none sick now, none having the palsy, none lunatycke, blind,
lame, etc. and yet I am sure this follows as necessarily, and ineuuitablye of
the former ground, as that of the ympossibility of possession in these days:
we see then that it being granted that me^ were possessed to that end the
deity and doctrine of Christ, I mean the gospel, might be confirmed by the
healynge of those which were possessed, which I deny not: yet that lets not
but that men may be possessed in these days.

To speak more plainly therefore, as in the bodilye diseases and infirmityes
of those men which our Savior cured, a cause of the same was, that in the
curing of them it might be euydent that he was the Messiah, as appears in
general by math 8. 16. 17. in particular by the man that was borne blind: and
yet notwithstanding there was some other cause or causes thereof, and namly
there sine, as apeareth by christ's own speeches in the cureing of diverse,
saying to such, thy sine are for given thee, sine no more leest a worse thing
come unto thee: the which cause remaining, the diseases and other infirmities
of man's body do remain: so though of this supernatural affliction in those
which were dispossessed by Christ a cause thereof was, that the divine power
and mercy of Jesus Christ might appear in their cureinge, as is plain by the
aforsaid place of matthew, yet that was not the alone cause, but the sin also
of the parties (as is evident by that aforesaid) without which they could never
have bine so miserably vexed by satan as the were: John 9. ^ Math 9. 2. John ^.
1^.
which sin in man remaininge, it is plain that the said disease does or
may remain, cha^ ^. 16. (...)
and shall or may so long as sin remains in man. Indeed if for this cause
only men had bine possessed, that in the expulsyon of the spirits by Christ and
his Apostles the diuinitye and gospel of Christ might have been confirmed, it
had been something, yea very much they had said, and I for my part would have
joined with them therein: but for this cause only men were not possessed, for
then there must never have been any possessed but such as were by Christ and
his Apostles dispossessed, or some other indewed with that Apostolical guift^
the contrary whereto appears by Math: 12. 27. and Act: 19. 13. The which as
these two scriptures prove, so by them also it is manifest to the advised
reader, That (...)
that men were possessed before Christ's time, and under the law: yea this
disease was common before the incarnation of our blessed Savior, so as many
were sick thereof: otherwise how could the rude and common people have so
readilye and truly discerned thereof, as by the gospel it is evident they
could and did? master (says one of the people to Jesus) I have brought my
son unto thee, (...)
which has a dumb spirit: yea not only the men, but the simple weomen also
were acquainted with this disease: (...) 15. 22. chap 7. 25.
have mercy on me Lord, said a poor Canaanitish woman unto Christ: my
daughter is miserably vexed by the devil. And least we should ymagine either
that this child was not possessed, or that the mother knew not so much Mark says
plainly, this child had an unclean spirit, and that this woman besought Christ
that he would cast the devil out of her daughter: whereby it appears that she
knew or at least took it, and that rightly, that the devil was in her child:
Seeing then (I say) that the common people were so well acquainted with this
disease, and could so truly discern the same, it must needs be that both many
were possessed, and had so been of long time: for otherwise the vulgar sort (as
we all in reason and experience know) could not possibly have attained to that
knowledge Hence it follows that many were possessed under the law and before
Christ was manifested in the flesh, into whom it cannot be that god sent
unclean spirits, to the end that the divinity of Christ might appear in their
myracalous eiection, but for some other cause or causes best known unto his
majesty: Gen ^2. 1. ^ob. 1, 11. and 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. ^am 12. 3. 13. 1 pet 1: 6.
7: and 4 12. Reuel^ 3. 10.
and namely to chastise them for their sins, (as is manifest by that we have
alleged before out of Deuteronomy: 28. and 29.) which is the cause of all judgments,
though god always respect not that principally, but sometimes (besides his
own glory John: 9. 3.) some other thing best known to himself: as we see in
the example of Abraham, Job, with others, and by sundry testimonies of holy
scripture.

To return therefore again to speak of those parties we entreat of If any
object against this possession that in all these things we were deluded by
satan, Obi. this which you would have a possession, was nothing but an
illusion of satan.
by whom our senses were deceived, so that we seemed to see that which we did
not see indeed: To such I answer, that if any such thing were, then not our
sight alone but all our senses were deceived, our tasting only excepted: for we
did not only see and look upon with our eyes strange and impossible accidents,
but heard also with our ears, and handled with our hands, yea sundry smells
there were, some times most sweet and delectable, at other times most noisome
and stinking, no man knowi^g from whence they came, as is to be deposed by
many. Now it is hard that so many senses should be deceived. But what is more
against sense then to ymagine and object that here? He fomed as white as the
snow, as thike as that which comes from the horse or boar. About 150. of us
beheld this offt and many times, and sometime for an hour together ropinge
down along on his breast. It was to be felt. It was wiped away, and the cloth
wett therewith in the sight of us all. shall we now say he seemed to foam, but
did not foam? he was of that strength, that diverse times 4. or 5. though they
had great advantag of him could not rule him: what is there more against common
sense, then to affirm that he seemed only to be of such strength, but was not
so? and which of their senses I pray you, and how many of their senses were
deceived, which tried their strenght with his? and whither was there not
something else deceived besides there outward senses? If herein my senses were
deceived, I will trust them the worsse whylst I have them, yea I assure you if
the case were so, I could not tell when or wherein to trust them, lest they
should deceive me, as they did then, all the witneses hereof (if they will speak
according to their knowledge and consiene) and I doubt not but are of the same
Judgment with me. Again thus one might have objected against the possession of
those which had evil spirits in them, when Christ and his Apostles were upon
earth, as well, and with as good color and appearance of truth, as against the
possession of such as we speak off. But if one should have done so, had he not
spurned against the truth, and by consequence been in great fault? yes verilye:
so suerlye do they, and are no less faulty which object this against us, and
the possession we strive for. Take heed therefore good christian reader, I
beseech thee, lest whilst thou stand for the delusion of satan, he delude and
deceive thee. And thus much for proof of the possession of they persons above
named.

The end of the First Part.
HERE FOLLOVVETH THE SECOND PART.
The 2. part. That they were verily dispossessed, and of the means whereby the
same was wrought.
Having sufficiently proved even by the testimony of holy scriptures those
persons we treat of, were verily possessed with the devil, with such
unanswerable reasons, as may suffice any indifferent man, that is not
ouercarried with prejudice or partiallity against the cause, so as it is
altogether needelesse to speak any thing further for proof thereof: now it
follows that we prove likewise with such invincible arguments the
dispossession of them: in handlinge of which point we must remember, that
whatsoever shall make for proof of their dispossession, the same also
confirms further their possession: for how can a man be dispossessed of the
dyuell if he was never possessed thereof?

That this may the better appear let us look into the dispossession of those
mentioned in the gospel and therewithal see what thence may be gathered for
confirmation of their dispossession we speak of. Of the dispossession of
Doemoniaks
In the aforenamed place of Mark it is said, chap 9. 36.
that Jesus having charged the unclean spirit to come out of the child, then
the spirit cried etc. that is: ymediatly after the charge or commandment
given to the spirit, and thereupon, the spirit cried, rent him sore, and came
out, and he was as one dead, insomuch that many said, he is dead. Now after
this very manner it went with the aforesaid Doemonyakes at the instant of
their deliverance or amendment.

First it is said, Signs of dispossession.
the spirit rent him sore and came out: whereby is insinuated, the greatness and
extremity of the childs torments, 1 rentinge sore.
ymediatly before the egresse of the spirit, above that which is ordinary: for
before it is said, verse 35.
he tare him, here that he tare or rent him sore, notinge by this addition, an
increase of pain. The like we read Luke. 4. where Christ commanding the
devil to come out of a man, it follows imediatly, then the devil throwing
him in the midst of them, came out of him, and hur^ him nothing at all. whereby
it appears that the possessed some little time before the egresse or going
out of the spirit, Dan. quoest. 38 in Marc. ^sod. lib 3 de Summo Bono cap. 5.
are excedingly tormented. As Danaeus notes upon this place of Mark: when
Christ comes and approaches near us (says he) then does the devil tear
and torment us more eagerly as he did that child at that time. F^r (as Isodorus
writes) then the devil does more cruelly rage against him wh^me he
possesses, when he knows that by divine virtue he is to be expelled out of
him. Surely they that were eye witnesses of this matter in conscience must
needs confess they never beheld any in such torments as these eight were a
little before their deliverance: what else meant those great and unnatural
swellings, such strong and violente casting up and down of their bodies
forwards and backwards, such scriking or crying? It can not be denied but that
they were manifest arguments of the horrible passions and torments which they
incured No doubt but the beholders were all of them greatly dismayed and
astonished thereat, as men at their wits end, not knowing what to do, nor
which way to turn them. And here I ask not only of them at Cleworth but
those also at Nottin. which were present the day of Some ers his dispossession,
whither by reason thereof, whereas all the day long before one had been their
mouth to god, they having that good order, did not disorderly and confusedly
all in common pray and cry aloud unto the lord, every one according to that
himself liked, as me^ not able to contain themselves: but must needs cry out
upon that fearful sight. Yea I demand further of M. Starchyes household, and
W. Some. his master, and the rest of that famili, whither all the time ^o
their and his possession they ever saw them so grievously tormented as he and
they were a little before their deliverance.

Secondly where it is said the spirit cried and came out, 2 the spirit going
out, cries.
and in the first of Mark of another the unclean spirit tare him, and cried
with a loud voice, verse 26. verse 8.
and came out of him: and in the 4. of Luke that the dyuelles came out of many
crying: yea in the 8. of the Acts indefinitly of those that were dispossessed
that the spirits crying with a loud voice came out of many that were possessed.
I report me to those that were present whi there ymediatly before the
dispossession of the aforesaid persons, they heard not (for the space of a
quarter of an hour or thereabouts) the most fearful, strange, unnatural,
and loud cries, that ever came to their ears: and to them at Nottingham
whither they eue^ then crying out as men mightily astonished at that they heard
and saw, Summers was not heard far above them all, although they were in
number some 150. Tormented they were in their fits all the time of their
possession, more extremely the day of their deliverance, and most of all a
little before. In like manner cries or scrikings they sent out many, in the
time of their possession, 3 after the torments and egresse of the spirit, the
possessed lies as dead.
but never of that loudnes and continuance, to those went from them at the
instant the spirits went forth.

Thirdly I demand of the same persons (which were to the nober of some 40. at
Cleworth: and 150. at Nottingham) whither according to that is said here in S.
Mark, they did not ymediatly after the end of their torments and crying, ly as
dead, and so continued for a good space. The reason hereof I take to be this
for that the spirit, at his last farewell (as I may say) tormenting the party
to his utmost: the body after those grievous torments lies at rest, as it
desiereth and thus lying, the party seems to be as dead: wherein the cruelty
and malice of satan does notably appear: who when he sees that he can not
continue in man to torment him still after his accustomed manner as he
desiereth, will yet do what he can to vex him at his departure or going out.
These 3. tokens or signs of dispossession were often seen and hard in K.
Wright, who being not only possessed, but by her own defalt, in that the
vcleane spirit returninge, found her empty, swept, and garnished, and so
prepared and ready to receive and entertain him, so far was she from resisting
of him) repossessed, and that sundry times, at her several dispossessions, was
ever extremely tormented, schriched fearfully or cried out, and then lay as
dead.

Hence I collect the dispossession of these Demoniakes: for as when we see one
handled after the same manner as they wear, who in the scriptures are said to
be possessed with satan, we must needs confese, that the same party is verily
possesed, even so, when we see one so affected and used as they were, who are
said in the scripture to be dispossessed, we cannot chouse, but say that they
also being so affected are dispossessed in like manner, for Desimilibus idem
sit Iudicium. And no doubt but the holy ghost, in the particular describinge of
the manner of possession and dispossession, did leave aspeciall doctrine and
direction to the Church in succesciue ages, how to discern and to be assuered
in the like cases. Thus do I the rather Judge, because otherwise (if the
party now dispossessed wear not so affected, as they were, who are mentioned
in the gospel) when the people of God have only prayed, or fasted and prayed,
a long time together, they cannot know that the party is delivered, although
it be so: For the ease of the party will not suffice, because that is usual
with Demoniaks, seeing the diuill vexes them, but at certain times only, being
otherwise out of their fites, as well as any other body. so^e special cases
excepted, where the spirit make eth them blind, dumb, deaf: or gathers them
all of a heap, so as they go * bowed together as we read in the gospel, Luke
13. 11.
or lame (as in experience has bine seen in Th. Dar, who was lame and deprived
of the use of his legs for 13. weeks together or their abouts) wherefore it is
evident that if in the dispossessing of a man, the spirit should not cry
aloud, rent him sore, and cause the party to lie as dead (which are the only
apparent signs of his egresse) then could not the party possessed be discerned
to be dispossessed, and so God should not have that praise, nor man receive that
profit by such agreat work, which othewise by the certain knowledge thereof
they should. But now that God in his infinite wisdom, has recorded these signs
in his word, and left them for a direction unto his Church herein, he has
provided a remidi for our weakness, and furtherance of his own glory.
furthermore I have in experience observed this sign also of Satan's goi^g out
of him who^ he possesseeth, to wit, when the Demoniak does either se
something going from him, or sensibly feel something to come from within him.

Thus Darl. saw something like a mouse go out of him, as he supposed and of
those in Lan. 4 Seeing or feelinge somthinge to go from them,
on of them felt and saw somthi^g go out of her (as she thought) lik an vrchin,
another in this, and a 3 in that form, and so of the rest, according as it is
set down in the stori. W. Some. also though he saw no visible shape, at the
egrese of the spirit, it he felt somthi^g com from within him, which he thought
would have plucked away his throat (as M Byrom had before him) whereby he and
those in Lan. were fully perswad ed, that the diuil was gone out of them. which
we must not so understand, as though the spirits had bine and continued in them
in such bodies assumed unto them, or that the spirits could not come out of
the^ but must needs be felt, or it could possibly be felt or seen: but that the
spirits by there operation caused something which was felt and did appear in some
visible form or shap. All or most of which shaps we have hard were ugly, and
no maruil co^fidering the were represented by the foul spirit. Hereunto we may
add the vomiting used by Some, at the very egres of the spirit, and not long
before (as it were foretelling the same) both in those in Lan. and Th. Darling.
but the scriptures making no mention of these signs, 5 vomyttinge
they are to be regarded accordingly. Seeing then it is so, that the outward
notes and signs of deliverance from Satan's possessi on, precedent and
subsequent, were found to be seen in these persons: why shoud we doubt but that
the thing signified by those signs was also truly, though not to the eye
performed? especially consideringe that out of the aforesaid signs
accompanies (as I may say) the very egresse or going out of the spirit, for
the spirits criyng. go out, and that another is not until he be gone forth,
for we read that when the spirit was come out of the child, then he was as one
dead.

Again we called upon God: that it would please him to cast the unclean
spirits out of the persons afflicted before us, so as their bodies might be
temples for the holy ghost to dwell in: and god hard our pray ers uttered in
such terms, and to that end, and we visibly did see the work accomplished
after our desiers. Furthermore we are to reme^ ber: that howsoever Satan in
the time of these possession, did usually in visiblye shaps appear unto them,
yet did he never seek to enter in to them, until after that time they were
dispossessed, which then he eger lie attempted both by promises and threats, and
that with every one of them, which greatly confirms their dispossession. for
the holy scripture tells us that the unclean spirit is cast out of man,
before he seek to enter in again. When they unclean spirit (says our
savior) is gone out of a md^, he walks through dry places, seekinge rest:
and when he finds none, Math 12. 43, Luk 11 24.
he says I will return into mine house whence I came out etc. True it is that
this return we speak of, and seeking of the spirits to enter again into
them we receive by report from the parties possessed, and that no other is
privy to the same: but it consider^nge it has been so with all and every of
them, as they hauc witnessed and that many others (I mean they which were
present at the said assalts of Satan to enter into them, as the parties
afflicted aff^rme) though they neither saw Satan nor hard him, it both saw and
hard them suddenly and strangly disquieted, and most eger in resisting the
devil, whereupon those which were present did also assist them theirin and that
it was not so with any of them all the time of their possession in the
apparitions of satan: the^e things (I say) considered, and that they agree so
with the scripture, I cannot se why any should ^eiect and not credit that is
here said of the unclean spirits returninge, and seeking to repossesse them.

Now this return of Satan, and indeuoring to enter in again, (recovering some
of them also) as it argues both their possession and dispossession, so
likewise their expulsion of the wicked spirits by the finger of God, in his
appointed meaines. Greatly therefore do they for get themselves, and that which
in holy scripture is written concerning this matter who hereby are offended,
taking hence occasion to think and to speak, that Summers was not possessed,
but that he was a very counterfeite, or that he was not dispossessed, because
he cane do the same things again. Know we not that the devil being gone
out of a man, if returninge (which he will certainly do) he find him emptye,
sweept and garmshed, it is impossible to keep him out, but he will enter in
and dwell there, yea with more and worse then himself? or cane we be ignorant
hereof, that Some. is empty, swept, and garnished, if we consider of his
intolerable ingratitude, for that mercy of God received, his abominable
lyeing, slaundering, and obstinacy therein, to speak nothing of those lewd
prankes he played in the Bishope of Londons house viz. stealing, whoring,
running away etc. as I have been credibly informed, Seeing then that these
things agree and fall out just according to the scriptures, and that herein
we se still the scriptures fulfilled: why are we not rather hereby confyrmed,
then stumble thereat as a rock of offense? neither is it to any purpose to
object here as some do, that this scripture is to be understood of asperitual
deliverance out of the po were of the devil. For howsoever that is said here,
is most true being understood spirituallye, I mean of the spritualll
deliverance from the power of Satan: yet it is certain the Lord only
speaks of a corporal deliverance, which is confirmed partlye by the occasion
and co herence of this scripture, arising of the eiection of Satan out of one
whom corporallye he had possessed, (and not sperituallye more then other men,
Luk 11. 4 and 23
) as is noted by Luke: but chiefly by the text it self: where in the unclean
spirit is said to go out of a man, secondly, to enter in again: verse 25.
both which speeches are never used in the spiritual sense: but often, yea
usually in the other. And because that is and has been said by me concerning
Satan return to repossesse the party out of whom he is cast, is so unsavory
unto many, even as if there were noe such thing reueiled, but was some conceit
of mine. Let us therefore add to this scripture for further proof thereof, and
confyrming of this truth, that speech of the Lord in the 9. of Mark: I charge
thee, thou dumb and deaf spirit, come out of him, and enter no more into him.
which charg of entering no more into the child, our Savior would never have
given, had not he known that Satan would have attempted it, and other wise
have entered into him if he could: as being the property of the diuill, to
seek to enter into them again, out of whom he has been cast. And surely how
can it be otherwise consideringe the nature of Satan, and his extreme malice
toward man, especially toward such as have been taken out of his power:
whereupon it is said before, that seekinge rest, after he is cast out one, that
is, seekinge ot pray upon and spoil men, for that only brings rest and
quiet unto him. he finds none, that is, none does please or satisfy him, in
respect of the recovering that man out of whom he has been cast, such and so
insatiable is his malice toward him he has lost, and hither does it carye
him. We may likwyse observe for the further confirmatyon of the former
exposition, that in this place of Mark, (where we cannot deny but that Christ
speaks of dispossession, and coporall possession) is mention of the spirits
goinge out, and entringe in, as in the form: scripture: and therefore the
premises well wayed, and these saying of the Lord in Mark and Mathewe
compared together, there is great reason we should understand that of the
unclean spirits return according to the letter. The *want of this return of
the spirits, does among other things induce me more then to suspect the
dispossessions in the Papacy, Some papists hold quod semel etc. that spirits
being once gone out of men, they cannot enter into the sam men the second
time. Thyreus de Doem. cap. 50. sect. 3.
that the are not by the power of God, and so noe eiection or expulsion of
Satan, but a voluntary departure, for the further strengtheninge and confirming
of them in their false worshipe of God: but of this more hereafter.

Lastly forasmuch as all those we have spoken of (they excepted who are
repossest) are, and have been for so long time even two years, altogether free
from that strange and grievous manner of handlinge or vexation in their bodies,
whereof we have heard at larg: why should we doubt of their dispossession?
especially seeing the strong man armed, keeps not their houses: seeing they
carry not themselves as he desires (as Summers does) during which time, and in
which case only there is peace. Luk 11. 21.
If you require more time for confyrmation thereof, you have it in Th. Darling,
who has continued well and in his former and pristine estate, for the space of
five years and above, (blessed be god therefore) and whose house it is
manifest the strong armed man does not keep, seeing god has not only given him
(with the rest in his condition) to confess, declare, and bear witness to the
great things the Lord has done unto him, and how he has had compassion of
him, but also to suffer for the same.

Here it will be objected generally against all dispossessions in these days,
Oli^cton
that to cast out Satan is a miracle, and therefore miracles being ceased there
can be no dispossessions at all.

For answer hereunto we must know, that devils are cast out two manner of
ways either by absolute authority, answer. Math 10. 1 Luke 10. 1.
as by Christ being God: or by *an authority committed and given of Christ to
men: as (...) Though Bell Zabub the prince of Diuelles, and with him Legions had
been in him, yet had you cast them out: for if you can believe, nothing shall be
impossible unto you, howbeit this also you must know and understand that the
spirit wherewith this child was possessed, is on of the worst kind of spirits.
because in the ordinary means which my father has left to his church, he will
not be expelled by prayer alon, without fasting thereunto adjoined. Now your
faith being weak, and the spirit on of the worst ki^d, and therefore hardly to
be removed, what marvel is it though you cast hi^ not out, yea, how was that
possible, I deny not, but notwithstanding the weakness of your faith, had you
fallen upon another spirit on of that kind which in the ordinary means that is
in the church may be cast forth by prayer (you might happily have expelled him:
but take the case as it is, your faith weak and the spirit one of the worst, it
could not possibly you should have removed him. although the^ the lord attribut
it) cheif^i to their unbelief, that the had not cast forth that diuil, yet he
signifies by these words that their was a cause or impediment, also in the
spirit: so that the answer of christ, is double, consisting of two parts,
wherein he shows his Disciples that for two causes they had not cast the evil
spirit out the one and chief was in them selves, to wit, their incredulity,
set down in the 20. verse the other in the spirit possessinge the child, for
that he was one of the worst kind mentioned in 21 verse Now this second cause
is not set down in plain and exprese words as is the first, but thereby made
known to the Apostles, because he was on of that kind which in the means that
ever was and shall be in the church, would not be expelled by sole prayer,
without fasting annexed thereunto, and this is it that Christ meant in making
mention of prayer and fasting, and not that the Apostles should have fasted
and pra^ed to any end whatsoever.

This being the true and natural sense of this scripture. I further affirm,
that howsoever the scope and drift of Christ in these words was to make known
to his Apostles, that the unclean spirit wherewith the boy was possessed, was
one of the worst kind of spirits for as much as it was on that would not be
removed: without the strong and chief, of those means, which were orcinarie
and perpetual, to wit: pra^er and fasting and that thence partly, it was that
they did not cast him forth: yet hence we may gather and Christ Jesus secretly
gives us to understand as much, that the worst kind of devils and therefore
much more others, may be dispossessed by the means of fasting and prayer: And
from these words a man may as well conclude, that christ would have prayer
and fasting used as a means for the disposse ssing of Diuils, as one may
gather that the ph^s^tion would have phlebotomie or letting of blud used for
the cure of him that has the plurisie, who affirms that a plurisie can not
be cured but by phlebotomi this kind says (christ (goes not out but by
prayer and fasting, therefore by prayer and fasting it goes out. which might be
confirmed by a thousand such like speeches: one says to a trauailer at
Doncaster iourneinge toward York, you can not get to York but by
Feribridge: Is there any so simple that vnderstande^ not thereby thus much, that
by that way he may pass thither, though some other way by reason of the
waters or some other ^ett, he can not pass: considringe then that our Savior
mentions this as an effectua^ means for the casting out of Diuills, and that
there is neither scriptur. nor sound reason, which appropriateth the use of
this meaines unto that age, or to the persons of the Apostls and others indeued
with the myraculous gift, as shall be showed hear after. I can not see why
the same means should not stand and remain at this day, and why fasting and
prayer should not be held the effectual ordinance of christ for the castinge
out of Diuils.

That there wear certain dispossessed in christ's time, besides those which
were dispossessed by Christ himself, his Apostes and others, in dewed with the
gift to work miracles, it is manefeste by the 12. of Math. and Acts 19, but
how and by what means that was don, apeareth only by this place of scriptur we
have in hand, which was either prayer alone or prayer and fasting according to
the kind of spirit possessing the party, verse 27. verse 13.
which we do not so understand as though it wear requisite that they which
dealte or at this day do deal in the dispossessinge of satan by this meaines
should or did know with what kind of spirit the party possessed was vexed,
which can not be: but that one being possessed and dealt with for their delivery
from Satan by this ordinary and perpetual means in the church, if by prayer
for an hour 23 or more he be not deliuerd, undoubtedly (that being performed
aright because of the kind of spirit possessing: then let fasting thereto be
joined, and that certaynlye (if the Lord think good to bless his said
ordinance (shall be mighty and effectual to the casting out of the spirit of
what kind soever he be, indeed this course we did not take with the aforsaid
persons but at the first proceeded to fasti^g and prayer, which we therefore did,
because we much desired that our labor might not be in vain as touching their
delyuerance, and thus also thought and believed that what kind of spirit soever
were in them, we vsinge prayer and fast ing, the said holy means would be
effectual, through the mercy of God to expel and drive them out had they been
or were the spirit of the worst kind, much more the^ others. saying that I
dealt otherwis with Kath Wright whose dspossession was by prayer with out
fasting being upon the day of her dispossession delyuerede by noone, and no
fast not so much as intended either by her self or any other in her behalf, or
she once advised theirvnto.

If any shall approve of the aforesaid exposition, so far forth as it does or
may agree to they apostles, and otherwise reject it, affirminge that of they
Apostles soely this scripture is to be understood, to whom it was spoken, and
some others which had the gift of miracles, and so power to cast forth Devils:
I answer, that to appropriate this speech and tie it to the persons of they
disciples, as meerlye and peculiarlye belonginge unto them, is more then the
text either in express words, or by necessary consequence will bear. and
therefore considering also theris no other scripture to help in this case) it
is more then any man can for certainty affirm, and such as we may as well
deny, as others confidently avouch. Yea certain it is that it can not be
understood of the Apostles, as meant and directed to them (otherewise then has
been said, thereby to signify unto them: that it was one of the worst kind of
Devils wherewith the child was possessed, whence partly it came to pass that
they had not cast him out) and others indewed with the gift of miracles: for
as much as Christ speaks exper slye and by name of an ordinarye meaynes to
cast forth Devils, and therefore in these words of such as by they said means:
had* or should cast them out: not of they Apostles theirfore and their
dispossessyng of unclean spirits, who not by any appointed or ordinarye
meaines (in which case their can be no miracle) but without all meaynes, by the
power and gift they had to work miracles, did cast forth diuils.

But it will be said, that howsoever they Apostles indeed by virtue of that
gift and power they had received from Christ to work miracles, could and did
dispossese wicked spirits without meaines, yet this was not generally true of
all spirits for that there were some kind of Devils (imagine the worste) which
for all the power they had receued without prayer and fasting would not be
expelled: and that this is it that Christ means when he says, these kind
can by no other means come forth but by prayer and fasting, as if he had said:
your faith is little and wavering and thence partly it is that you have not
helped the child but besides you must know that their is a kind of eue^
spirits of which number is that where with the child was possessed which
without prayer and fasting can not be cast out and therefore consideringe that
meaines by you was not used it is no marvel thought you dispossessed not the
diuill, yea it could not so be and of this mind is traitorous Stapleton a
popish proselite, though otherwise learned, whose words of this scripture are
these. nunc autem alam causam adsert etc. Now he aleadgeth an other cause, why
the Apostles could not cast out this Diul which had so long time possessed the
man even from his insancie: for it was necessary they should have prayed and
fasted: where we see that howsoever he does not appropriat this speech to the
Apostles but acknowledges (as in the same place appears that prayer and
fasting is now a meaines for the casting forth of Devils. yet he affirn^eth
that necessarily the Apostls should have prayed and fasted and that for the
want or neclect thereof, it came to pass that the diuill was not cast ^ut: and
with him agrees Thyreus: who writes thus: hoc genus Demonorum etc. Thyreus de
Demoniacis, cap. 51. sect. 3.
this kind of Devils says Christ, is not cast out but by prayer and fasting
surely the Lord does insinuate that the Apostles need not fasting and prayer
to drive away other Diuils, but was sufficient to call upon the name of Christ
but here besides they need them, meaning fasting and prayer, because this
spirit is hardlyer expelled then others.

If this exposition were true, then there should he a certain sort orkind of
devils which the Aposts by all the faith they had, or could have: were not able
without further help to subdue. the which in ded Stapletone further grants
and affirms, saying presetly after the former words thus, sit fides quantum
cunque feruens etc. let faith be never so fervent as a grain of mustarde seed,
yet must prayer and fasting be used, as a most strong meadicine to drive away
Devils of this kind and this he understands of the Apostls* as is plain by
these former words he says of them. necessarium quippe fuisse orare et
idinare. for it was necesarie for the Apostls to have prayed and fasted. Now
this seems very strange unto me, and such as nether can nor dare believe, and
receive for truth. for when I consider of the manifold and great signs and
wonders the apostls wrought whereof we read in the history of the Acts. acts. 3.
12. 6. 16. and 4. 10. 30.
of the Apostls, and that (as Peter says) thy did them not by their own power
or godliness, math. 28. 18.
but as they prayed for, and also professed by the name or power of Jesus
christ, (to whom all power was given in heaven and in earth) who had committed
also and given part of his power and authority unto them: I se not how any
infernal power could be able to resist and hold out against this divine power,
eue^ the power of the Lord Jesus they came in if their faith was strong, and so
this power present with them, though they had no other help by prayer or
prayer and fasting, foralbe it the apostls somtims used prayer in the miracles
they wrought (thou gh never fasti^g and prayer that we read of) yet they need
not so to have done, I meaine their was no necessity theirof, their faith being
strong muchlesse to have prayed and fasted for then in all their miracles they
must and would have used prayer, acts. 9. 40. acts. 28. 8.
which they did not. Yea very seldom did they pray: only twysse as I take it:
once * Peter in restoring Tabitha to life again, and an other tim " Paul in
healing the father of Publius of a fever. which they did doubtless, either in
regard of themselves, to stir up and increase their faith: or else because of
those which were present: that the beholding and heareing them to call upon
another, when they were about to do the great work they had in hand, might
theireby know, that, that which they did, was not done by their own power,
but by the power of him whom they did inuocat. In whether now of these respects
soever they Apostles used prayer in the miracles they wrought whatsoever they
were, it is clear that there faith being strong, much more being so strong as
might be, they need not to have used prayer. if then the Apostles says being
great, they need not to have prayed, as in the doing of other miracles, so
neither in the casting out of satan, but as they saw it profitable to others:
much less need they to have used prayer and fasting. And if their faith
being strong, they could and did work miracles, and namlye cast out devils
without any prayer at all, and some of the worst kind in all liklihood, there
were in that great number they cast forth: much more their faith being such*
they could and did work miracles and cast out diuils of they worst kind
without prayer and fasting. That therefore, which Stapleton and Thyreus here
affirm can not be true.

Again the words of our savior are against this interpretation. math. 17. 20.
If (says he) ye have faith as a graene of mus^ara seed, ye shall say unto
this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove: and nothing
shall be impossible unto you. except we will have these words, how be it this
kind goes not out: verse 21. to contain in them: a particular exception out
of the general, which I take to be very unsound, and con trary to the meaning
of Christ. For under the word nothing, notwithstanding the words following
ver 21. I would rather include specially and chieflye, that very work they
were questioned about, the^ because of the words ve. 21. exclud the same. As if
Christ had said: if your faith be as agraine of mustard seed: ye shall not
only be able to do the same. that I now have done, and you through the want
of faith could not do: but any thing else whatsoever, though it were as
difficult and impossible a thing as it is to remove a mountain. They Apostles
then by virtue of their miraculous faith could do any thing, and therefore cast
out any diuill.

Moreover when we consider of the power and authority that Christ gave they
Apostls over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and how ac cording to the
same, they prevailed so mightelye against the devils, which were so subdued
unto them, as that the cariynge of kerchefs or handkerchefs from their bodies,
caused they evil spirits to go out of men: we cannot se how their faith not
failyng them, Beelzebub should be able to withstand their liulye voice and
command given in the name of Jesus Christ, though no prayer and fasting were
used by them. Finally, we must remember that this power of they Apostles over
un clean spirits, Acts 19. 12. chap. 9. 1.
was not thus bounded and limited by Christ who gave it them, but reached it
self further, even to and over all evil spirits whatsoever, as Luke
witnesses saying. then called he his twelve disciples together, and gave them
power and authority over all diuils, and to heal diseases: so that if he were
adiuil they had power to ^^st him out. And lest this pretense should be left
unto us, that they had power over all wicked spirits, in that by fasting and
prayer (though not otherwise) they were able to cast out the worst kind of
spirits, as others without that means: we must remember that with this power
over diuils yea all diuils, Christ joins the healing of diseases: as
appears also by the 10 of Math. verse 1.
when it is said that Jesus calling his twelve disciples unto him, gave them
power against unclean spirits to cast them out, and to heal every sickness
and every disease. and in the 8. verse following, Christ says unto them: heal
the sick, cleanse they l^apers, raise up the dead, cast out the devils. from
whence we may learn thus much, that as by ver tue of the aforesaid guifte and
power, they were able and did with a word, withont any more ado, heal the
sick, cleanse they, leapers, re store sight to they blind, etc. even so by
virtue of the same gift and power, with their word or command in the name of
Jesus, (without any further adoo by fasting and praying,) they were able to
cast out all devils, and did as occasion offered, if their faith failed not,
which is further confirmed out of John 14. John 14. 12.
verily verily I say unto you, he that be leeueth in me, the works that I do,
he shall do also, and greater then these shall he do. But this scripture is
thus expounded and understood by many. that Christ having showed his disciples
in they words before, that it came through the defect and weakness of their
faith, that they had not cast forth the devil, now tells them how and by
what ^ ea^es their weak faith might have received increase and strength, even
by prayer and fasting, whereby their faith being strengthened, they might have
expelled Satan.

Herunto I answer, 1 that our savior speaks of the miraculous faith, as
appears plainly by the text: if (says he ( ye have faith as is a grain of
mnstard seed and shall say unto this mount ayne remove hence to yonder place
and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Now this kind of
faith as it was given without meaynes to certea^ne men, and God appointed no
means for they begetting of it: so neither did he ordain and establishe any
meaines for the increase of it. which if any will contradict, I would know
where God san^^i ieth any ordinary meaines to be used, for they increase of that
he ^iueth with out meaines. You will hapily say, that Paul for they increase
of those graces of the spirit which without mea^nes he received, used the
ordinarye means of study and meaditation. I grant that Paul did use ordinary
meaines for the increase of grace received. And no maruile. For as by meaynes
of heareing, readinge, and meditation, he had received diverse gifts of the
spirit, so why should he not by means ^eek the increase of the same? be it
also granted that he used meaines for (...) suspect. then for the reason
aforesaid, I can not but dissent from them therein

Thus we see that the former expositiones which are given of this place of holy
scripture can not stand, and that the truth will not bear them out. that this
scriptur can not be so meant, that the Apostls should have fasted and prayed,
for then either it must have been that theare was a kind of spirits, which for all the power they had received would not be, cast out by them, except bes^des
they used the means of pra ier and fasting, which is directly against the
scripture, as we have heard or else, that thereby their weak faith should have been strengthened that so they might have cast him forth, which al can not be as
has been she wed. it remains then that the interpretation here given is sond
and true, and therefore that it ought to be received, and suerly I do not see
what should let or hinder any there from, seeing the occasion coherence and text
or letter of this scrptur make al and every of them for it* and that it is not
against the analogy of faith, what impieti or great absurdity is there in
this, that prayer and fasting is a means ordained of Christ for the castinge
out of Diuils: or what great danger is there to the church by embracing it for
a truth being so in deed, and this is all the euel fruit you can gather of
the former exposition. Isa 22. 1^.


He knows nothing in holy things which understands not this that if on be
now possessed and by prayer recover not, prayer and fasting ought to be used.
that in the said judgment God calls him, who is thus corected to this
humblinge of himself and afflicting of his soul first and chefly, verse, 17.
18.
then those which are spetially and above others afflict ^d in him, as the
father in his child the husband in his wife, so as they sin if they fail
therein secondly that prayer and fasting being used aright, will certainly
prosper either to the removing, or sanctifiing of the said judgment. if now it
so fall out (as it may as well as otherwis that the iudgmente thereupon be
removed, I mean the Diuill be cast out of the possessed, as it did with the
former ten, and diverse others also even of late in our own land, (yea when,
by, and for whom has this medicine been used, and the sick party not cured)
it cannot be denied, but that prayer and fasting was the means thereof.

In the 20. of Genesis it is said, Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed
Abimelech, and his wife, and women servants, and they bare children. Who will
deny but that as the sin of Abimelech (intaking Sarah, Abraham's wife unto
him) had shut up every womb of the house of Abimlech, Judges. 20.
so the prayer of Abraham was the mean, whereby they were opened, and that
judgment taken away? and this, the 7 ve^s of that Chapter, further confirms.
The 11. Tribes about the monstrous whordome and Villanye committed in Gibeah of
Benjamin, gathered themselves togeathere i^n Arms, and did fight against
Benjamin. They Israelites wear discomfitted the First, and the Second time,
and many of them slain, notwithstanding that after the first overthrow, they
had sought Earnestlye unto the Lord by Prayer. Prayer alone not preuailynge so
far with the Lord as they desiered, they assembled themselves in most solemn
manner the second time, and joined fasting thereunto, and therein they spent a
day. After going foreth against they Beniamites, the Lord delivered them into
there hands: shall we not say that their prayer and fasting was the
meaines, whereby they Israelites removed the hand and judgment of God which was
upon them, (in smiting them by Benjamin) and and obtained victory against
them? yes verilye.

Even so it is in this case. Katherin Wright was possessed, and prayer being
used dispossessed. May not one well say, that prayer was the meaines whereby
Satan was cast out of her? prayer and fasting being used for Thomas Darlinge
one likewise possessed, he was there upon cured: may it not be truly said,
that the said holy exercise was the meaines theirof? The 7. in Lankashire
being sick (as I may say) of this supernatural disease, wear healed upon
the using or appliynge of this supernatural meadicyne. Why may not I now as
saflye say that this was the meaines of their cureynge, and castyng out of
the spirits: as the physician applyinge anaturall meadicyne, for the healing
of a natural dissease, it having also prospered to the recouerye of the
parties health: say, that his said medicine was the means theirof? In like
sort William Summers being possessed, and the sovereign meadicyne of fasting
and prayer being used and applied, he also was healed. To what means now
shall or can we ascribe this health and dispossession of his* but to this holy
exercise? And this me thinks should somthinge persuade and prevail with us
herein, in that God not once, or twice, but sundry times, not upon the person
of on alone, or two, but diverse, has from heaven put a seal here to,
ratifiyng and confirmyng this to be a means effectual (through his blessinge)
to the casting out of Satan, in that he gave health to such as were possessed
with the Devil, upon the using and applyinge of this medicyne. When Saint
Paull his Apostleshipe was by reason of the false Apostls among they
Corinthians called into question, his defense for himself, or proof thereof was
this: that by him they were converted, 1 cor. 9. 1. 2. 3.
and called or brought to the faith. are not ye (says he) my work in the
Lord? you are the seal of mine Apostl^shippe in the Lord, as if he had said:
verse. 26. 30.
in that some of vow by my ministrye have been call ed to the felowshipe of
Christ Jesus as he shows Chap. 1. that, (vf I had nothing else to say for my
self) proves me to be an Apostle this (says he) is my defense to them that
examine me, and call into doubt mine office. Even so I say to them that deny
or call into question, whether prayer and fasting be means to cast forth
Satan: that the dispossession of the several persons before spoken of (to
pase by others which might be named) is a ^ea^e and confirmation thereof.

Admit then that these words ( this kind can by no other means com forth, It
is plain that praie^ and fasting ^e means etc. though no such ordinance cold
be proved out of the scriptures
but by prayer and fasting:) do not contain in them an ordinance of Christ,
for the healing of the possessed by prayer, or prayer and fasting, and that
neither here nor else where in holy scripture, there is any such ordinance
mentioned: yet notwithstanding the same may wellbe (and indeed is) a means
ordained of God to that end. For as the medicine applied by the Physician for
the healynge of one sick of this or that dissease, or the plaster of the
Chirurgian for the healinge of a wound, and prospering to that end the are
applied, we all know that the same are meaines appointed of God thereunto: and
when we see that the have the same effect with many, that they are ordinary
meaines leading thereunto, all be it nothing less then such meadicines or
particular ordinances of God are mentyoned in the scriptures: even so when we
see that by prayer, and fasting and prayer: Satan is cast out of some, and
they thereby delivered from all their vexations and torments which before from
him they had endured, and that not some few but sundry at this time, and many
heretofore in former ages, as in Turtullian, Criprian, Chrysostom, there
times: we may hence gather and assure our selves, that God has appointed
prayer and fasting, and prayer, as means (and that ordinarye) to cast out the
diuill of the bodies of men when he is in them, and as a supernatural
meadicine to heal this supernatural disease, whereunto the body of man is
subject as well as to othere diseases, although there were in holy scripture no
mention of any such ordinance. The thing it self then, (although there were
nothing said as concerning this matter in the holy scriptures) I mean, the
deliverance of persons thus affected by Satan, which in experience we see
performed before our eyes and others before us, manifests and proclaimed to
all men, this to be the ordinance of God in his secret counsel, even as it
does in natural diseases, and in infinite other cases.

And what lets that we should not be persuaded hereof, Objection 1
and receive it for a truth? if this, that we read not in the word of God of
this ordinance: Ans.
besides that we have hard it is otherwise, that hinders not, because many yea
infinite things are decreed in the secret and eternal counsel of God,
Objection 2
and known so to be man, which are not set down in his reueiled will. If
this, that Christ and his Apostls when they cast out Diuils wrought miracles,
Ans.
and that miracles are ceased. we may remember that so likewise they healed
feauers, palsies: and other diseases and infirmity of man's body by miracle,
and yet notwithstanding together with the diseases, Origin in 17 Math. Tertul.
in apolo et ad scapulam, cap. 3. Cyprianus ad Demet^^anum^ tract. 1.
means remain for the curing of them. And why it may not likewise be so in
this our case, in the healinge of this bodily disease supernatural by this
supernatural medicine, I desire him that is contrary minded to show. That
common objection therefore taken from the ceasing of miracles, makes no more
(indeed) against the eiection of Satan, and healynge of the 10. possessed
persons we speak of done by an ordinary means, then it does against they
healing of other diseases: which diseases were sometime cured by miracle. The
different manner of curinge is wislye to be considered off. As all curinge of
natural diseases is not miraculous, although some be or rather was even so all
healing of this supernatural disease or eiection of Satan is not by miracle,
all be it some be, but of this more hereafter. and here for the further
confirmation, both of the general point, I now entreat of, which is: that men
in these last days may be dispossessed of Diuills. which to sundry among us
seems very strange: and in credible as also to show the means which since
miracles ceased, have by the most learned and godly, in the church of god from
time to tim been used for the expellynge of Satan out of such as be possessed:
and is by their example parctise and counssell commended unto us in the like
case to be used. to this end and purpose I say: I will in this place set down
certain testimonies of some writers, both in aun^ient and lattet times
testifinge the same: Origin writing upon the 17 of Math 1 21, howbe it this
kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting has these words, si aliquando
nos oportuerit circa curationem, if at any time it shall behoue us to deal a
bout the curinge of them who suffer such a matter (uz. are possessed) we may
not adjure them nor ask them questions, nor speak any such things, as to the
unclean spirit hearing us. but conti nuing in prayer and fasting, we may
obtain help from god for the afflicted and shall drive forth the wicked
spirits by fasting and prayer. Tertullian. says, Daemones de hominibus
expellimus sicut plurimis notum est, we expel Diuils out of men as is known
to many Cyprian. writing unto, Domitian uses these words, O si audire velles
et videre vz. oh that thou woe uldest hear and see. when the diuills are
adiu^ed by us. and tormented by spiritual scourges, and by torments of words
are cast out of bodies possessed, come and know that these things be true
which we affirm. Now how soever I do not justify, Ciprian as touching his
adiuringe of evil spi rits: yet hereby it is manifest, and this use we may
make of this speech of his, that men were not only possessed and dispossessed of di
ils in those days, when miracles were ceased,) but that the same was common
and usual then: for otherwise he would never have used these words: come and
know these things to be true which we speak therbye prouokinge Demetrian
Proconsell of Africa to make, trial of that he said. the same is also manifest
by Turtullian his words saying, Chrysostom. Tomo 50 (...) Dei (...) homil. 4.
we daily expel Devils out of men but most excellentlye does this appear by
Chrisostom who lived about 200 years after them his words be these hinc ita
que ad solitam veniamus admonitionem, therefore let us come to our accustomed ad
monitian and what is that accustomed admonition? that we frequent the worthy
prayer with a sober and watchful mind, for when I spoke of this ma ter of lat I
saw all of you willingly obaying, wherefore in truth I should deal very ill if I
should not blame you when you are necligent, (...) that is, possessed with the
devil, for so this phrase or manner of speech is used, math. 15 22. acts 5.
16., from whence no doubt this holy father did ^^ke it.
or not comend you when you do well and according to your deuti, this day
therefore I will prais you and thank you for that your obedience, but I will then
give you thanks when I shall first hauc taught you why that prayer before al
other was wont to be made and why the Deacon does command the men that are
vexed with the Diuill and moved with most cruel fury to be brought in at that
time and bow down their heads, for what cause it is done I will thus de
clare. the vexing of Diuills are bonds most wicked and greiuous, for they are
bonds, more strong then iron, therefore as at the very instant, when the Iudgge
is wont to come forth and to sit upon the judgment seat, the iaylor brings
forth all the prisoners and set them at the bar, before the seat of judgment,
consider how it went with our demoniaks the days of there dispossession, and we
cannot but perceive the time of disposses sion to be such and so fearful as
is here said and the sight, I. And hence it came that the day of Soniers his
dispossession, two made confession of there sines with many tears in the
presence of us all. I, and the sight such as may well terifie one.
loathsome filthy, over grown with heaire and al too tuttred with rages. so
the fathers hanc appointed, that when Christ was presently to sit as it wear
upon his tribunal, and to appear in the sacraments, those men that were vexed
with the diuill, as being fettered with certain bonds should be brought forth,
not to be examined for the things which they ha ue done, after the manner of
prisoners nor yet that they should be punnished but that the people and all the
city being present, publigue prayers might be made for them, that al with one
accord might entreat the lord of all in there behalf and might strive with
strong cries that the lord would have merci upon them but as the^ I was
displeased with those that neclected such a prayer, and wear abroad at the time
so now presently I judge, that I am to be very sharp with those which stay
within, not for that they tarry with in, but that tariing in the place where
they ought, they are nothing better affected, then they who gadd abroad, for
they are talking among themse lues, (and either jest or co^fer about there
business in the most fearful time, o^ man what do thou. when thou see thy
brethren present before thee in so mamany bonds? thou talkest about things
which nothing concern thee, can not the very sight terrify the sufficiently,
and draw thee to some compassion and pity? thy brother is in chains, and yet
thou art drowsy, and carlesse, how can thou be pard^ned when thou art so
hard hearted so far from humani tie so cruel? fear thou not least whilst
thou talkest omitest thy dewtie and art carles, some diuill leaping out from
the possessed finding thy soul idle and swept clean should conuaye himself
into it, and with great easiness enter into the house thus set wide open? how
well does it beseme every one at that time, According^ (...) that is said (...)
it was with the people at (...) the day and time of S^mers, his dispossession,
among whom (being about 150) therewas searcelye seen one dry face, (...)
they which were present can witness.
to be swallowed up of grief, to pour out rivers of tears, and none but
watered eyes, to be seen round about. and all the Whole congregation to weep,
to sighe and sobbe. can thou not shed tears? what purginge can these thy
horrible sins receive? if thou will not lament the state of thy bro there, yet
at least fear thou for thine owneselfe and awake, if thou shall see thy
neigbonrs house al on fire although that negbour be to thee very hatful will thou not run with as possible speed to heelpe to quench it, least that the
fire creping by little and little, enter into thy house also? consider thou the
same thing in those which are possessed, with the diuil, the tormenting of
Diuils is a fire and a burning, and consuminge flame take heed therefore and cas
further follows there.

Thvs we see Chrysostom, in this pathetical homeli of his, shows the
ordinary custom of the church in his time, for the dispossessing or castinge
out of Satan by the pulicke prayers of the church. where in no doubt was
vsuallye great weepinge mourninge syghinge and strong cryinge unto the Lord
by all the people present, beholding the torments of the possessed, and their
deliverance, though now when Chrisostom spoke these words, some of his people
(by reason hap pely they wear much accustomed to these dispossessions, and
those things which fell out in the same) failed to be after this manner
affected. whereupon he reprehended them for the sam: which is so set down as
if Chrysostom, had described that which has fallen out in all sorts of
beholders of these late dispossessions, so much now in controversy as they can
witness.

Peter Marter in his book of common places, Peter Martyr part 4. cap. 9. sect
13.
has these words, concerning this matter, Quid ergo faciemus arreptitiis etc
Therefore what shall we do with those that are possessed, when they are vexed
with wicked spirrits: shall we forsake them? they are in no case to be forsaken.
yet notwithstanding* we will not by adiuerations command the unclean spi rit
to go forth, seeing we know: we are not endued with any such gift, as that
we should by our commandment cast out diuils, we will then use faithful
prayers, I say prayers most vehement, and supplications, for their recovery. In
a word, this should be the most laudable and wise course, that exorcismes at
this day be turned into prayers.

Chrysostomiet Prosperiaetate etc. In the time of Chrysostom and Prosper
(says Chemnisius) they possessed were brought into the Church, and were often
delivered by the common supplicationes of the assembly. Chimnitius de sacram,
ordinis
And Philip Melancton having made mention of diverse which were possessed, and
nam lie of a Damsel in Marchia, who had been healed of that disease, by the
prayers of the godly, of whom he says, et adhuc viuit sana, and it she lives
(...) times living and ioyninge with them therein, a miracle was wrought if a
miracle, miracles wear not ceased then, which all learned men know to be
false, 2 if a miracle, who wroughte those miracles? if those ancient and
learned fathers, why did others, yea often times their wholl congregations join
with them in those miraculous works, and not themselves without their help,
do the same as did the Apostles and others which had the gift of miracles:
why did they not also by prai er give syghte to the blind, heal the sick,
and do other miracles? was there ever any man heard of, who indewed or guifted
of God to work one only kind of miracle, and had no guifte or power to effect
any other? yt is manefest the^ that for as much as those fathers assist ed with
others, did by prayer cast diuills out of the bodies of men and it there in did
no miracle: that expulsio^ of satan by prayer is not miraculus or at least that
Satan may be so expelled and no miracle wroughte. It is no miracle that is
dove by means.


Thirdly, the expulsion of Satan by prayer, or fasting and prayer is no
miracle, because it is brought to pass by means ordained to that end, even
the instant prayers of the servants of God. sometime long continued in
humiliation of fasting, for what soever is brought to pass by means appointed
thereunto is no miracle, Daneus opusc. page 270. 1 c.
though it be other wise and in it self never so wonderful. for this is one
thing among others, necessarily required in every miracle, I say. 6. 7. 8. Romans
10. 8: 14 17: 1 cor 1: 18: 21 Ephesians. 4. 11: 12:
so as without the same it is non, that it be done and brought to pass without
any set and appointed means of God thereunto, as that learned and reverent
Daneus testifies otherwise the number of miracles should grow to an infinite
number: above those that here tofore wear taken to be such, and we shall have
many miracles daily and continually wrought before our eyes, which all men will
deny, for then should the couersion of a man be a miracle (and so look how
many men wear converted, so many miracles should be wrought) for it is a
wonderful work and not only above and besides nature, but against nature even
as it is to see, the Wolf dwell with the Lamb and the Leoparde lie with the
Kide, and the calfe and the Lion, and the fatt beast together, and a little
child to lead them, yet not withstanding forasmuch as it is brought to pass
by an ordinary me anes that God has thearunto appointed even the preachinge
of the word, it therefore cease to be a miracle, for admit there were a man
in Turkey or among the Pagans in the faith and that without al mean es it is
certain that that man's conuertion was miraculus: and yt when one in the church
is brought to the faith by the ministri of the word, his conversion is not
miraculus. That a child should be conceived and so framed in the womb of the
mother as it is and after brought forth aliuinge creature, indewed with reason
and understanding, is a thing greatly to be wondered at, yet forasmuch as the
same is brought to pas by a mean ordained of God to that end, no man counts
it a mi-racle for then look how many children wear borne, we should have so
many miracles. but imagine a child conceived without the knowledge of man: as
the conception of our Savior was, then every on will grant such conception to
be miraculus. The like may be said of the contin uance of man's life, man
taking that food which God has thereunto appointed, if his life be continued
and hold out from year to year there is none that wondreth at it. But if it
wear possible that any one should live without any sustenance at all that
wear miraculous. So Moses Elias and Christ living but 40 days, without eatig
and drincki^g any thing, Exodus 34 2^ 1 kings 19. 8 Math 4: 2.
it was by miracle. The corn that grows in our feildes, wherein of on grain
comes not only mani, but also the ear and stalk, is an admirable thing, yet
no man counts that miraculus: and why, because god in nature has so appointed
it, that the means leading thereunto first being used, as plowing and sowi^g
there should follow an harvest or increse of corn but if we should behold a field
replenished with corn where no plow came. nor seed was cast, then would the
simplest plowma^ that is, say, behold a miracle: thus we se on and the sam work
miraculus and not miraculus a miracle when it is effected without means no
mira cle when it is don by mea^es. eue^ so it is, in this our present case. to
cast out diuils without mea^es, as christ and his apostls did, who only spak
and it was don coma^ded and they obaied is a miracle, the 1 objection to prou^
that miracles we e done by means
but to cast forth devils by a mea^es ordai^ed of god to that end as prayer and
fasti^g, is no miracle at al. But it will be objected that some outward things
or actions, have as means been used in the working of sundry miracles. Elijah:
and Elisha divided Jorden, by smiting the waters with the Cloak of Eliiah. The
oil was increased to the widow, by the means of the oil in the pit cher.
mark. 7. 22: and 8: 23.
Naaman was sent to wash himself 7 times in Jorden, for the heal ing of his
leprosy. Ye Christ himself sometimes used means in the great works he did:
in the healing of on that was dumb and deaf, it is said of him: that he put
his fingers in his ears, and did spitt, and touched his tongue. and in the 9.
of John in giving sight to him that was borne bli^d it is written. Ans: 2:
kings: 2: 8 14 20 21: and 3 15 and 4, 2: and 5 10 14. The outward things (...)
which (...) were used (...) w^^king (...)
that he anointed his eyes with claye, and sent him to wash them in the poole
of Siloam. Hereunto I answer, that these and such lik were used as signs:
whereunto the Jews were much acustomed: and happily to try their faith thereby,
or to imprint the work wrought more deep lie in the mynds of the beholders,
and those which were thereby healed, or for some other purpose best known to
the lord, and as they which used them saw them most profitable: and not as
means serving to the work they were about, in which case they must
necessarily have been used, so as without the same the miracle could not have
been: for when the Lord apointeth a thing to come to pase by such or such
means, the same means must be used, otherwise that thing shall never be. Now
I trust we are far from thinkyng* that without these outward things, the said
great works, could not have been effected or wrougt. could not Elisha, if he
had pleased, as well have healed, Naaman of his leprosy, by his word alone,
as have smitten, Gehazi his servant there with? yes verily, 2 Kings. 5. 27.
he enjoined him then that washingein Jorden not as a means of curinge him,
but thereby to try the faith of Naaman and was it not so triede thereby that it
was shaken, so as had it not been for the counsel of his servants, he had
gone into his cuntri back again a leaper as he came? the same is to be said
much more of our Savior Christ, and of the outward things he used in some
of his miracles in the 7 of Mark, a deaf man is brought to our Sauiuur
Christ to be cur^de, where it is said that when he had taken him aside some the
multitude, verse, ^3.
he put his fingers in his ears, and straight ways his ears wear opened, now
it can not be denied, but that Christ could have don that cure, if he had
pleased, though he had nor moved a finger, yea by his very nod or beck, and
admit that Christ in stead of puttinge his fing ers into his ears, had only
beckned unto him, and that thereby he had received his hearing, would we say
that Jesus had used the said beck as a means to restore him his hearing, or
rather there by to have made known to the party and multitud, that his will
was, that he should hear, and be healed of that his deafnes.

The like may be said of the former blind man, that our Savior in anointing
his eyes with clay, and sending him to Siloam to wash them did not use the same
as a means to give him his sight, and work that miracle. but thereby to tempt
him and try his faith, for thus through in fideliti he might have reasoned, in
himself, I thought he would pre sently have given me my sight, by his divine
power. but I now perceiu it is otherwise as al his power, whereby it is said he
does such great works, com to this? that mine eyes must be anointed and
that with clay, which if I had my sight, would rather put it out then help to
re store sight to the blind? and must I wash also, and that in the poole of
Sil^am before I can see^ what virtue has that water above other waters? are
not other waters, and is not the water of the poole of Beth seda as good as
that of Siloam? may I not wash in some other water and have my sight as well as
in that of Siloam* I will not wash for this cause: thus to prove his faith,
and partly also thereby to prove the faith of others, the Lord Jesus in curinge
him anointed his eyes with cla^e and sent him to Siloam, and did not this as a
means effectual through his bessinge, to help him to his sight to the same
end he put his fingeers into the ears of the deaf and used also sometimes
spittle in restoringe sight vnro the blind and speech to the dumb, mark 7.
33. and 8. 23.
for what in reason, or in nature is more unlikely to effect so great a work
then a little spit^le? most excellenttly therefore thereby did Christ Jesus try
the faith of men: and not use the same to the end it should be a means to
effect that he was workinge, and yet I know and forgett not, that god can, and
often does bring most mighty things to pass, by smal^ and weak means.
John. 11. ^1. 2 objection. Christ and p^ter with others prai ed in doing
miracles. Acts. 9 40.


And where it is said that Christ prayed in the raising up of Lazarus and Peter
in restoringe Tabitha to life, we are to vndrstand that they did not this, as a
set and appointed means leadinge thereunto: (which is also to be understood of
others prayinge in the like case:) For then without prayer the miracles could
not have been wrought, which we must be far from imagining: but in regard of
the people which were present, as they saw it profitable for them and this is
exprslye noteed by our Savior, for it is said, that he prayed because of the
people that stood by, 1 kings 18. 36. 37. and 2. 4: 33 Acts 28: 8:
that they might believe that his father had sent him. Peter also by his
prayinge would have the people more fully understand then they could by the
charge he commonly used, that that he did, was not by his godliness or power,
but by the power of him one whom he called. It is to be observed also: that
howsoever they used some short prayer before, to the end aforsayde, yet when
they came to the doing of the work, they did not supplycate: but command
such a thing to be done, as having power and ahthoritie thereunto. (the one
from his father, the other from christ.) Lazarus come forth: Tabitha arise: and
it was so. But in our case we continued still in intrating and beseechyng the
Lord: who in his good time was plased to do according to that we desiered:
whereby we witnessed unto men, that we have received no gift or power to cast
out diuils, as the Apostles had, and that we do no miracle, but only desire
Christ sittinge at the right hand of his Father, to have compassion upon the
party in misserie, and according to his promise to help him: which was never
held for miracle in the Church of God. The which if we had taken upon us to
do, then we would not have desiered the assistance of any Minister, or private
per son therein, nether would we always have made intercession to christ, in
the the behalf of the person afflicted: But if not at the first, yet at
length, when it came to the point of deliverance, we would have charg ed and
commanded the evil spirit in the name of Jesus Christ to have gone out, which
is so far from us and our practice, that we condemn the same holdinge
itvnlawful to be used of any in these days, except God should raise up some
extraordinarily, which must be also in the founding or planting of a church
and not in a church established, and such as has receved the ghospel as ours
has, for. howsoever the Lord has no where said that there shall be no more
miracles or miracle workers and therefore is at liberty in this case. yet if we
well consider of the end of miracles, and wh^ the lord added them to his
word, even to get intertainmente to his ghospel among the Gentiles* which
otherwise wise being foolish (not in it self* but in the corrupt judgment of
men) would never have been received by them and withal remember that which we
well know, that it is already believed in, by the Gentills, we may thereby well
conjecture: yea in a manner assure our selves, that mi racles have an end,
espetially in a church established, wherein also we are confirmed, by the long
time in which for the reason before said they have been wantinge. verse 13.
objection, 3. the apostles used oil as ameanes in the ^ealinge of the ficke.


In the 6 of Mark. it is said that the Apostles anointed many that were sick
with oil and healed them.

I answer: and return this upon him that obiecteth it thus, if in the working
of any miracles there were means used: then undoubtedly in the curing of those
sick persons which by the Apostls were anoyn ted by oil and so healeed: for
what was there used in miracles, which in all reason was more likly to be a
means then that oil and the anoi ting of the sick therewith? and yet all
learned men against the papists and their exstreame unction agree in this* that
the same was only a sign or ceremony which the Apostles used in there
miraculous healing of men: none say that it was a means to effect the said
work or cure, for then in truth it shonld have been no other then a medicin
and by consequent their healing natural and not miraculous: if then that oil
used by the Apostles in the doing of some miracles, was no means: but only a
sign, by the consent of al deuines: much less was the clay spittle or any
such like thing used by Christ or the Prophets in some of their miracles a
means thereof, but only a sign whereunto that people of the Jews were much
accustomed.

But admit that herein I wear deceived, and that this expelling of satan by
prayer and fasting is a miracle. as well as that by word or com maunde,
performed by Christ and his Apostles. yet that makes not against me (my error
herin excepted) nor the counsel I gave or what soeur I did, objection, we se
others are not cu^eed of the^e supernatural di seases by prayer and fasting.
so long as it is certain that the aforesaid persons wear possessed or
other wise afflicted: and that in either of those cases it is: not only lawful
to humble our selves by prayer and fasting: but also^a dewtie and worshipe in
such case and time to be performed to God if any demand why we can not cure
other supernatural diseases by this spirtuall medicine as such whom we save
are bewitched, mark. 9. 29.
that is af licted in there bodies through the malice of a witch by her
samilier spi rit, I answer: The counsel I have given to such as I have seen
bewitched* and in their bodies greatly afflicted by sa^^an being without them.
that if we had the like scripture for the curinge of them by prayer and
fasting, as we have for the healing of those Satan posses seth, then we would
not doubt: but that they also by the said mean might be helped as well as the
other, yet notwithstand^ng we counsel all thus afflicted: to be often and
dilligent in vsinge this holy exercise for how shall we prevail against Satan
and remove that hand of his wherewith God does smite us, but by earnest prayer
unto God^ Is there any other mean or way to heal such, as by Phisicke^ or
help to be had from any creature? no verily: except we will go to the De uill
and request him to spare us now, and be good to our bodies for the present, and
upon that condition be contented, that hereafter he take his fill both of body
and soul: as many (in effect) do, seeing then ease to such: can noe otherwise
be had but by prayer, let them in any case pray, and never faint nor give
over, until they have received a comfortable answer from the Lord. and seeing
none for a tempo rall judgment have more cause to be humbled then they, for
as much as god has sent an evil spirit, that vile creature of his, most
malicious also and cruel toward man, to smitt and whyp them with: and that
fast ing is a mean ordained of God to humble us, and further the humb ling and
afflicting of man's soul. ^evit, 23. 29. 1 Kings, 21, 27 29. Isa. 22, 5, 12, 1
Timo* 4, 5,
who should fast if not these? by fasting then and prayer, let these seek the
removing of the heavy hand of god which lies upon them, and otherwise will
not be removed, but to there further hurt. and if this they obtain not thereby,
yet there labor and service they performed to god shall not be in vain. for
besides they receive comfort theirby in the discharge of that deutye they owe to
God, who when he lays affliction upon any, does thereby call and as it were
summon them unto weeping and mourning, Isa. 22. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 5.
to baldnes and girding with sackcloth: they shall also obtain this thereby,
that the said affliction shall be sanctified unto them, and made means of much
good to their souls: so as though in their outward man, I mean in their
bodies, the be still afflicted, it in their inner man they shallbe renewed daily
more and more: which of the two benifits that com by the exercise of humili
atio^ is the better, though we rather desire the other, deliverance from the
present misery, because of the grese it carries with it. But suppose that
herein also I were deceived, and that theris no such ordinance of christ as I
affirm, heb, 12. 11,
and that fasting and prayer is not a medicine appoint ed of god, and in mercy
left to his church, for the healing of those which are possessed: yet seeing we
are commanded to resist the diuill, not only his temptations, but also his
person. (for so did christ Jesus our example. avoid satan, James 4* 7, math,
4, 10: 1 Peter. 5, 9.
says he) and so not only tempting, but also possessing: and have also a
promis that we resisting, the diuill will or shall flee. seeing also (as Peter
tells us) we must resist strong in the says. for as much as the enemy is
strong, ephe, 1, 2^.
even a principality and power: and the way to streng the^ and stablish our
weak and wavering faith, is prayer and fasting: who sees not that there was
good and just cause to take up this said holy ex ercise, and sufficient in
scripture to warrant the same? Indeed these scrip turs are directed to them that
are set upon by satan, but it that leteth not but that others also in a fellow
feelinge of their misseries, as being members of the same body with them, might
and ought by way of help and assistance join with them therein. in the
sightinges we have with our bodily enemies one brother will be sure to fight
with and for another, especially if he see him ouermatch ed, and in danger to
be hurt, and shall not brethren in Christ in the spiritual sight with the
enemies of there souls and salvation do as much in the like case? But be it
further granted, not only that prayer and fasting is no such means as I
affirm: but also that non of the af^resayd persons were possessed. yet there is
notwithstanding sufficient to justify the advice I gave, and the work of our
hands, because it is euidente that they wear vexed by Satan, if not with in
them (as we verily beleu and constantly affirm) yet by some external
operation of his* or at least wear otherwise afflicted, if not so, that the
hand or iudgmente of God (I say) was one way or other upon them, it cane not
be denied. Now when God sends any judgment thereby he call eth men, verse. 12.
verse 14.
and therein secretly commands them to fast and pray as is plain by Isa 22
and the 1 chap of Ioell pra^er also and fasting is the only means to remove
the hand of god from of us, if that shall seem good in the eyes of the Lord,
verse. 18. 19. 20.
as apeareth by the 2 of Ioell, and by the practice of the church in all ages,
and the fruit or success thereof, for the people of God in the day of their
affliction, contynually betoke them selves thereunto. and the same prospered and
prevailed mighteli with God, Judges. 20. 26. and 36. 1 samuel. 7. 6. 7. 10.
11. 2 chro. 20. 3. 15. 22. Ezi. 8. 23. Est. 3 13. and. 4. 3 16. and 5. 2. Ion.
3 4 5. 10. Neh. 1. 4. and. 2 6.
as may appear by the testimonies of scripture quoted in the margente. Herupon
it follows that it was not only lawfnll for the aforesaied afflicted persons,
and us also being requested and that instantly in a ioynt-feling of their
misery to take that course we did, but also our bounden dewty (being
espetially present with them) and that we could not but advise and do as we
did if from the heart we desired their delyuerance from the said judgment of
God. so that this if there wear nothing else besides, does sufficiently justify
and wa rant, Act. 12. 6. 7. 12.
our councellinge of them to humble and cast down themselves before the Lord
under his mighti hand, and to seek reconciliation and attonment with the
almighty by prayer and fasting, who by this strange plague of his, did
testify to there faces that he was angry with them, and our joining with them
in the said exercise of humiliation.

To conclude and infer somthinge of the premises, and so to pro cede to the 3
part of this treatis. if it be true not only that men in these last days may
be possessed with Devils and dyspossessed and that prayer and fasting be
means appointed by God, for the disposs essing of them but also that the 7 in
Lankasheire and William Summers with the other two viz. Darling and Katherin
Wright were in deed possessed and being so, dispossessed by the finger of God:
in that they were healed by the means which Christ Jesus has sanctified to
that end as is made manefest by the pr^mises* then judge (good Christian
reader) whether they in the general do not err who hold that men can not now
be possessed: and those also which grauntinge that: deny that me^ can now be
dispossessed. and whether they likewise be not faulty in the particular, which
not only deny: but can not with any patience en dur to hear of the possession
and dispossession of the persons aforesaid and rather then that shall be
admitted, will by all means possible, contend for a most vain and impossible
thing: I mean that Summers and Darling and Kath, Wright were counterfeits, and
I there Instructor: Thereby also intimating to all men, that the 7 in Lancashire
were such, and as it were desiring the world so to judge of them. but yet they
let them alone, least happily they should, be overwhelmed by them, or rather by
the truth it self: well howsoever all men will not receive this truth, and
acknowledging the work of God, give the Lord the glory and praise which is
due to him for the same, and endeavor to profitt and make there right use of
it, which is a thing rather to be wished, then looked for: yet some few do
and will for wisdom shall be justified of her children.

Here follows the third Part.
OF THFVSE THAT EVERY ONE IS TO MAKE OF THESE WORKS OF GOD.
We have manifestly proved that these persons we speak of, were possessed
with devils: and that they were dispossessed by prayer and fasting. Now lest
all this should be to us in vain, (which God forbid:) It remains that we
consider of the fruit, and profit which we may and ought to make to our
selves thereof. For as in the ordinary works of God, if we only look and
gaze upon them with out making any further use of the same, and do not
withal: behold and consider the invisible things of God, as his power, wisdom
Justice, mercy, our beholding of them is in vain to us: and not only so, but
we theirby also take the Lords name in vain: Roman^^ 1. (...).
even so shall it go with us, if in this extraordinary work of God, we look
only upon it, as some new and strange thing, without any further proceeding to
profit theirby. Yea if we be bound by the law of God: to profit and receive
good by every ordinary work of the Lord, much more by that which is
extraordinary: for an extraordinary work calls for an extraordinary use,
and it is adouble sin to fail therein. The use we are to make of this
extraordinary work either concern^th the glory of God and the stirring of us
up to magnify his great name, or the benefit of man, and good he may receive
thereby First herein as in a glass we may behold the justice of god in pu
nnishing or correctinge sin, This work (...) the glory of God and (...) of
the same for (...) are to be (...) the (...) of God.
whereby the Lord teaches us to take heed of sinninge against him, least
either the same or a worse thing come unto us.

Secondly we see the omnipotency and power of God 1 in the powere and strength
of the devil which God permits him to exercise a ga inst sinners 2 in
subduing those principalities and powers Satan I mea ne, the power of God.
treading him under his feet: yea under the feet of his servants. who then that
is wise, will serve the Lord in fear and trembling.

Thirdly* the mercy of God is to be seen in this work in delivering them,
the mercy of God,
and that at the humble entreaty of others in there behalf, they being
disabled by satan to supplicate for themselves. This being well considred
magnisieth greatly the mercy and compassion of the Lord. who can choose but
love him because of his mercies? and why should any despair of his mercy
saying he is so ready to show mercy even at the entreaty of others. How much
more when man shall sup plycatt for himself. This use Christ Jesus him self
makes in saying to the man whom he had dispossessed: mark 3. 29,
go show how the Lord has had compassion on thee.

Fourthly, the wisdom, and immutabil^tie of God, acts 4. 13, 1 cor 1: 27:
we may here behold the wisdom and immutabilite of God as being the same who
never changes: In that (as he has been allwa yes accustomed to do) he
brought this rare and great work to pass by small and weak means, base and
contemptible men, yea such as be vile and odious in the eyes of the world. That
thereby the power of God might be the better seen: man in his wisdom be
confounded and the name of God the better praised: In a word that he which re
ioyceth in the behalf of this work, the fidelity of God, mark, 9, 29,
might not reiovce in man but in the Lord. To him therefore to whom of right it
belongs, be the praise and glory of this work ascribed.

Fifthly, The saitthfulness of God in the performance of his promise offers it
self here to our consideration. These words this kind goes not out, but by
prayer and fasting: secretly contain in them this promise, that if any be
poss^ssed and we in the humiliti of our souls by fast ing, will entreat the
Lord to cast the sperit out, he will do it for us and deliver the party from
being any further vexed by Satan, This the Lord has promised, the
accomplishmente whereof we have seen with our eyes let us* herby learn to
trust to the least and most close and secret promise God ^ath made us in his
word: and save in our hearts, and with our toungs: God is not as man that he
should lie and be unfaithful: neither as the son of man that he should
repent, and not perform that he has promised. Nomb. 23. 19. Rom 3, 3. 4.
Has he said and shall he not do it? and has he sp^ken, and shall he not
accomplish it? Has he promised and will he not perform it? And thus much
briefly concerning the glory of God de cleared in this work now follow the
several uses concerning man, and the profit he otherwise is to make hereof. 1
It serves to com^^ince the papists, touching of the power they only hau in
there church to cast forth de^les.


First, this great and wonderful work of the lord serves to convince and
stope the mouths of the papists, who as they are always boastinge of their
miracles, and vpbraiding us with the same: so espetially with this miracle of
theirs, (as they term it) of casting out of diuils whereupon it has come to
pass, that some of this bragging generation in Staffordshire in the time of
Th. Darlinge his possession, as also in Lanca shire in the time of the
possession of those 7. there, have broken forth into these and such like words
of challenge: Let us see one of your ministers cast out these diuils: If we
might bring a priest, we are sure he could do it.

And in a book latelye written by one of their side, wherein some of there
exorcists and priests pretend to have dispossessed 3. here in England, I read
these words: Now (says the author) let me see wether they protestants can
avouch any such thing to be done in their congregations. And in another place
thus: they protestants have small means to make trial, whether there be any
possessed among them or no: less judgment to discern there case, and much
less remidie (if any such be found) other then to bind, beat, and send them
to Bedlem if the be poor, upon matthew 17, 19.
or to beg their livings if they have any. And in their annotationes of the
Rhomes testament, upon these words of they disciples to Christ, why could not
we cast him out? they give this note. Noe mareuill if they exorcistes of the
Catholic Church which have power to cast out Deuiles, yet do it not always
when they will, and many times with much ado: whereas they Apostles having
receiu ed this power before over unclean spirits, yet here could not cast
them out. But as for heritickes they can never do it, nor any true miracle, to
confirm their false faith.

Thus we see they do not only deny that Deuilles are so vsuallye cast out by
us, as it is with them: but which is more, most peremptorilye they affirm,
that we (whom they term heritickes) can never do it, spetiallye to confirm
our false faith.

To pass by the dispossessiones of others: even of late veares, which might
fitly be here objected against them: what say they to the (...) ssession of
Kath. Wright, of Tho, Darling, and finally of they other (...) persons we have
so largly entreated off? That they were all (...) unclean spirits, and that
the same were cast out of them, I (...) die been so evedentlye sheewed and
confirmed: by reason out of the scriptures, that neither papist, nor athist,
can without blushing gaynsay the same. And that those whom they call
heritickes, were the instruments the Lord used therein, it is also most
manifest. How then say they Rhemists, that heretics can never cast out
diuils. But (to examine the truth of this their annotation a little further) be
that granted which they papists so much contend for, viz. That their Exorcists
only have power to drive out diuils, and that we are to weak thereunto: yet why
do they challenge an equal power herein with the Apostles, as is plain by
this their gloss, Thyr. de Doem. ^^p. 33. sect. 5
if it be well considered of? yet least I should be thought to^ mistake or
slander them, I will set down Thyreus his words concerning this point.
Speaking of the power to cast out diuils which was give by Christ, and to whom
it was given, he says thus: Docent sacrae literae omnibus fidelibus to. the
holy scriptures teach, that the power over unclean spirits was comunicated to
al bel^uers but yet chief ly to the Apostls and disciples of christ, ^ct. 8.
Mark. 16. 17.
and a little after he adeth. this power which was given to the Apostles died
not with the Apostles but rema^ned in the ages followinge, for it does not
appertain to the Apostles only, that which is said. these signs shall follow
them which believe. in my name they shall cast out diuills, sect. 10. cap. 35.
sect. 4.
this speech of Christ comprehends all beleuers, this authority given by
Christ shall continue so long as there shae be any which profess the faith of
Christ. and again in the end of the same chapter he has these words in our
times also in tie church of Christ amouge the Cath ^licks this power is, and
the very same which at the first was given by christ to his disciples and
continued in the ages followinge. And not much after he says: But Christ's power
over unclean spitits, although in the beginning it was communicated chiefly to
the Apostles, yet notwithstanding wholly to all believers: and such only are
they, if you will believe them.

Truly it was not possible for them thus palpably to err, if the god of this
world had not blinded their eyes. They say, that in their church only, theris
power to cast forth diuils, and out of it non, which if no other way, yet by
experience is known to be falfe. But to let this pass, what can be more
false and absurd then that which this Jesuitical Doctor adds, that they have
the same power and authority over wicked spirits that the Apostles had, that
the same is committed and given to them now by Christ, which sometimes he gave
to they Apostles? we have already hard out of the holy scriptures, that Christ
did give and com mit unto his Apostls, such authority over all diuils, as by
virtue there of they no sooner spoke, ^, 19, 12.
but they spirits went out of men: they noe sooner commanded, but forthwith
they departed: yea sometimes be fore and without so much as their command, as
by the kerchises and handkercheifes: which were carried from Paul's body.

if now the papists or there Exorcists have the same authority over vndeane
spirits with the Apostles how comes it to pass that having among them some
daily possessed: they show not forth the same power, and with a word cause the
spirits immediately to go out: and that the devils are no more subdued unto
them? they command the wicked spirits inde^d being in men to go forth of them
as the apostles did, and therein take a little too much upon them: but they all
of them either do or may know that the devil goes out at his best leisure
And hereof as they have experience daily among themselves, so the same was
lately seen in some of there dispossessio^s in England: as may appear by the
same book lately written by a great clarke of their fact ion and copied out by
one M. Rober: Barens now prisoner in the Kings Bench, for notwithstanding there
was one of there Ezor^istes busied about that worthy work, the exorcists
conten^ed themselves with these names as if without all doubt they we^ so
cal'ed iudce^ and no maruil^ they being of this mind as it should (...), that
the p^rite^ being (...) da^e ^ot he to them if this (...) of ther^ which is so
carfully written from hand to hand were in the hands of all men I am persuaded
that nothing which the will of man could devise, would make their exorcising of
spirits redicus lous and odious as it would.
and to assist him 3 priests: and that they did not only adjure and command
the spirits in the name of Jesus as the Apostles also did (and namely among
many other things) to tell them how long they had been in the party which
was in one of them, just two^ years, and how many there were of them which
were in the same person, just two thousand: likewise what were their names,
which were Hoberdi-Dance, Lusti Iolly-Ionkin, Lusti-Dicke, and^t. lusty
companions I warant you every one, the like whereto we read not of the
Apostles: but had besides their sacrifice of mass, their B. Sacra meant of the
altar, with many other things applied to they possessed parties, giuyng them
hallowed bread, drink, siguinge them with the sign of the cross, applyinge
holy relickes, as the b^nes of S. Brian, S. Campian, putting one the party
possessed holy garments (all which are according to Thyr^us his direction)
with more of this kind, which they Apostles never used: yet notwithstanding
all these helps above the Apostles, and their equal authority to there is,
they commanding from day today, and from time to time, ^very stubbornly the
diuil disobeyed them and their authority, and went out (happily) at his own
leisure caryinge himself in the mean season very saucilie toward them,
beingmen of such authority telling them that they were traitors, etct. as
appears by their said story.

And lest any should take exception against the dispossession I speak of, we
must know that by all their books written of this Argument, and namlye Mengus
his fuga Doemonum it does plainlye appear, that usually they are a day or
rather days, Mengur
exorcizing, adiurige charming, again and again, and performinge the worthy
rites and Ceremonies (whereof we shall by and by hear) before the devil will
be pleased to g^e out. Yea this no papist, who herein understands any thing,
can or will deny. which being so, it should even hereby seem that they have
no such authorytie over spirits as the Apostles had, and that the Devils are
not in any such subjection unto them, as they were to the Apostles. Again, if
they have, eaudem illam potestatem, the very same power over devils which was
by Christ given to his dis ciples, as they affirm whereby they work this
miracle daily. how comes it to pass that they do not ordinarily (for
extraordina^ilie as they say so it may be they do in their lyinge wonders,
wrought by the effectual workinge of Satan) as well work other miracles as
that* restore sight to the blind: speech to the dumb, heal the sick and raise
up the dead? For these were joined together in the same commission, as is
expreslye noted by 3 Evangelists Jesus (it is said) called his twelve
disciples unto him, 2 thessalonians* 2. 9,
and gave them power against unclean spirits to cast them out, m^th 10. 1. 8.
mark 3. 15. ^uk. 9, 1*
and to heal every sickness and every disease. And again a little after he
says unto them: heal the sick, clens the leapers, raise up the dead, cast
out the devils. whereby it appears that Christ has coupled and inseperably
joined these things together. so as whosoever shall have the same power with
the Apostles to cast out devils, that is with a word, shall also have power
with a word to heal diseases and raise up the dead. yea who can be so deuoide
of reason as to doubt thereof if withal he remember, that to cast out devils is
of miracles the greatest: as appears by that speech of the 70 Disciples,
Lord, even the De uills are subdued unto us through thy name. Luke 10. 17.
as if they had said Lord by virtue of that power which thou have given us,
we have not only healed the sick made the blind to see, raised up the
dead, and done other great works. but that also which is above and surpasses
them all: we have cast the Devils out of men whereby we see that they are
subject unto us. This considered, who sees not, that forasmuch as ne there
their exorcists, priests nor any other in the popish church, have the same
power with the Apostles, by their anoyntinge to make the sick whole, to make
the halt to go, the blind to see, the deaf to hear the dumb to speak to
raise up they dead etc, that therefore also they have not the same power, with
them to cast out Devils.

And where the Jesuit* affirms that, al beleuers have the same power over
wicked spirits with the Apostles, if it be so: why do not every one of there
beleuers exercis that power when occasion: is offered, but only there exor cistes
again, 1 cor, 12, 29,
were this so, all the faithful should have power also to work othere miracls,
as appears by the premises. Now I think Thyreus will not say, de Doemo, cap
33. sect. 5.
that every beleuer has power to work miracles, considering that of S Paul
are all doers of miracle? have all the gifts of heal inge? The which if he
grant, then must he lykwise confess, that all believers have not the same
power to cast out devils with the Apostles. But says he, sacrae litera docent
omnibus fidelibus t^. the holy scrip turs teach this, for it is written: Signa
eos qui crediderint, haec sequen tur ct. these signs shall follow them which
believe, in my name they shall cast outdeuils. If this scripture comprehend al
beleuers. and the power here given shall continve, as long as there shall be any
to profess the faith of christ as the Jesuit affirms: then shall every
beleuer have likewise the gift of tongues, and be able without study to
understand and speak any language, mark 16. 17.
and power also to work miracles: for it is not only said of these beleuers,
that in Christ's name they shall cast out Devils: but besides, that they shall
speak with new tongus, and shall take away serpents and if they shall drink
any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them* they shall lay there hands on the
sick, and they shall recover: but this latter is false as the Jesuit himself
must needs confess, and is euidentalso by the a foresaid place of scripture (
do al speak with tongus?) and therefore the first also. we are not then to
take those words, them that believe so ge nerally: and to understand thereby al
them which have faith in Christ as this Doctor does, but more strightly of
those only which were indewed with the miraculous faith: which gift and number
of beleuers co^ tinued in the church but for a time, until the gospel and
doctrine of Christ crucified, act. 17. 18, 19 20. 32: 1 cor. 1, 23,
which was to the Gentiles both a new and foolish doctrine, had got among them
intertainment.

But to return to the Rhemists former gloss. It is there to be obser ued
also, that they accounte there castinge forth of devils for a miracle. and why
so I pray you, seeinge by their own confession their Ex^rcists cast them out
by the mean of fasting and prayer, either in the same page, or in their
annotations upon mark 9.
besides sundry toys and fooleries of their own coining they add thereunto.
Are you that stand so much upon your miracles, building as it were your faith
and religion thereon, ignorante herein: that it is no miracle, be the work
never so wonderful, which is done by an ordinary means ap pointed of God
thereto? If hitherto you have been ignorant hereof, disdain not to learn it
now at the length, out of that has been said before in this behalf

If it should be granted, that to dispossess devils by the means of prayer
and fasting is a miracle: and that you only have power as to work other
miracles, so to cast forth devils: yet why affirm you so confidently, that
heretics can never do any miracle (you mean I am sure such as yours are) to
confirm there false faith? is it not plain by the 13 of Deuteronomy. that false
Prophets may and shall work miracles, and that to the end to bring men from
the true worshipe of God to Idolatry, and therefore to confirm there false
faith and religion? If there arise among you (says Moses) a Prophet or a
dreamer of dreams, and give thee a sign or wonder 2 and the sign and the
wonder which he has told thee com to pass, saing, let us go after other Gods,
which thou have not know on and let us serve them: 3 thou shall not harken unto
the words of the Prophet but that prophet or that dremer of dreams shall be
slain, because he has spoken (and given his signs and wonders) to turn you
away from the Lord your God, to thrust thee out of the way, wherein the Lord
thy God commannded thee to walk. And Christ does foretell us, that before his
coming to judgment, their shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets and
shall show signs and wonders, mark, 13. 22. math, 7. 22, math, 24, 27,
or as Matthew says great signs and wonders. And that they should work these
miracles to cofirme there false and antichrstian says appears by the words
following. to deceive (says Christ) if it were possible the very elect. As it
he had said: great miracles shall false Christ's and false prophets work before
the last day that so they may confirm their false and antichristian doctrine
and make semblance that they are true and of God, thereby to perswad men to be
leave the same, and so deceive them, even the very elect if it could be. Yea in
the 2 epistle to the Thessalonia^s it is set down for a mark to know and
discern Antichrist by that his coming is with all power, chap, 2, ^.
and signs and lying wonders: and that this he should do to confirm his
false faith appears by the words followinge. where it is said that he
should do these miracles in all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness: and again God
shall send them strong delusions that they should believe lies that is, lying and
false doctrine. the very same with this we read in the 13 of the revel, where
the beast which came out of the earth meaning antichrist is said to do great
wonders so that he made fire to come down from heaven on the earth in the
sight of men and deceived them that dwell on the earth by the signs which were
permitted him to do. How then say ^he Romanists and with what truth that
heretics to confirm their false faith can never do any miracle? that false
prophets and false Christ's are heriticks, that I know you will not deny: that
Moses in the law, and Christ in the gospel speaks of such true miracles as
you do, and such it is clear, you by these words mean, it is most sure.

And here by the way what cause has the church of Rome thus to vaunt of the
miracles wrought in her aledging the same as a migh tie confirmation of the
truth of her doctrine and some singular priui ledge bestowed upon her? surelv
no more then the roge has cause to bragg of the hole in his ear, or the
theife of his burnt hand. For as these be certain and infallible signs of a
rogue and thief: so miracles wrought by satan and such are the papists
miracles) are a most certame and infallible mark of the adversary to Christ,
whom we call Antichrist. As he then is rather out of his wits, the^ in his
right mind, that being for his theft burnt in the hand, will boast thereof: so
had not Satan bewytched that whore of Rome, and deprived her of her iudgmente
and understanding, she would never boast of her miracles: considering they
make much against her: even to wytnese that their Pope is that Antichrist which
should come, and their religion false and Antichristian. Rhem. test, upon
mark. 9* 38.
And where you intimate here, and else where affirm, that howsoever heretics
may happily be able, to work mira cles to some other end as to confirm some
article of the faith, or truth of God wherein they agree with you: yet not to
confirm their false faith thereby, that you see will not avail you:
consideringe that the former testimonies of scripture, directlye in express
words (as we have heard) affirm and teach the contrary.

Howsoever then heritickes can not prove their false and erroneous doctrines by
the scriptures, yet they may work miracles to confirm the same. whereby it is
evident, that whilst they papists stand and contend for the priuiledg of
dispossessing of unclean spirits, the which they arrogate to themselves as
pecularly belonging unto them, and deny to all others: they show themselves
in the mean season to be possessed with a foul spirit of error.

And how soever Thyerus has likewise this aforsaide addition saying, nunquam ab
hominum corporibus ^t. heriticks shall never be able to expel diuils out of
the bodies of men, whenever and as often as ever they shall assay it, to
confirm their doctrine which they profess: yet by the, argument he presently
adds, he seems to prove the general without any such restraint. Thyreus de
Do mon. cap, 40, sect. 4.
For first says he, Signa cos, qui crediderint ct. These signs shall follow
them which believe: In my name they shall cast out diuiles. But heriticks are
not in the number of beleuers therefore they are not able to drive away
devils, by any power of Christ communicated unto them. a second argument is,
we never read them to have expelled devils. And a third is, It is reported in
histories that they have often been deluded when they have gone about to cast
out devils. whereby it is clear that they deny to us, all expulsion of devils
to what end soever and mean that if at any time in our church spirits be cast
out of some, it is by the power of Satan: as appears in the end of the said
chapter.

These things well considered, who sees not that they mighttilye friend the
papists, and strengthen them in this gross error and brage of theirs, which
contend for the counterfeitinge of Summers, Dar ling, K. Wright, and confidently
deny the 7. in Lancashire, to have been either dispossessed, or yet possessed with
devils? do not such do them as great apleasure theirin as posible men can? de
Doemon, cap 40. sect. 6,
and give them occasion to sport themselves about our dispossession of devils,
as Thyreus does full swetly concerning Luthers dipossessing? may not they with
some face of honesty and truth, publishe in their writings, that our former
possessed persons did meerlie counterfeite apossession, and were not possessed,
much less dispossessed? seeing the same is openly mayntained among Us, even
in our Courts, and that by great Prelates, one of the persons possessed (I
mean Th. Darling) impr^^oned, and such as god used in the dispossessing of
them, suspended, imprisoned along time, theere also used more strightlye then
other pri^oners: then felons, murderers, trators in a word so handled and
dealt with as no table deceivers and malefactors. whereas on the other side, had
we acknowledged this work of God wrought diverse times, and upon sundry
persons among us, and labored withal to have manifested the truth thereof,
insteade of obscuring it, as in deutye we ought. then would undoubtedly the
papists have herein been ashamed and confounded in themselves, for the great
vauntes and arrogant bragges they have here about in many o^ their books, given
out and scatte^ed.

But seeinge the Romanists glory so much in the dispossessing of devils, let us
a little examine the same, and see whether it be altogether with them, as they
bear the world in hand it is. where they must first know that it is not denied
or doubted off by us, but granted, that by their exorcists and exorcising the
possessed, among them have ease and deliverance from the evil spirits
formerlie vexing and possessing them: but the doubt and question is, whether
the cast and drive out Satan. For my own part I will not deny, but that a
true deliverance of the possessed may in the papacy. For when I consider that
possession with Deuiles is a temporal Judgment, And that the humiliation of
Ahab an Idolater, 1 king. 21, 29.
a man also that had sold himself to work wickedness, prevailed so far with
the Lord, to spare him and his son concerning the temporal Judgment, which
the Lord had be fore threatened and pronounced by his prophet to bring upon him
and his posteristie: I cannot see why the like humiliation performed by a
papists an Idolater, may not obtain the like, I mean a corporal blessinge
of the Lord, or the removing of a temporal Judgment. Yet notwithstanding, when
on the other side I turn my eve to the means they use, I cannot but think,
that when their possessed are helped, they spirits are not cast out, but of
themselves go forth, as seruinge greatly for their own advantage, and
vpholdinge of there kingdom of darkness amongst them. But what are the means
they use in the dispossessinge of evil spirits? even these as appears by
Thyreus. Thyreus de Do mon. cap, 41. 42
First, the Inu^cation of the name of Jesus: whereby he does not meaine
Invocation or pra^er, but the often mentioninge of the name Christ, specially
Jesus. which bare name is greuious to the diuil, and has great power in it
says he. 2. the use of holy r^licks. 3. using the sign of the cross. 4. the
use of consecrat things, as holy water, hallowed salt, bread, drink ct. 5.
exorcismes. Now how can one imagine that these or any of them should be of
force to expel Satan, seeinge they are not only such as wear not appointed
of God theirvnto, but also in his word condemned, as offensive to his
majesty, and unlawful at all to be used, and are besides in themselves most
vain, and such as in the vsinge whereof the devil cannot but take pleasure, As
touching the 4. First meaines here specified, I doubt not but that all men of
found Judgment will with one consent and voice say with me, that they cannot
possible be effectual to drive out Satan, howsoever they may (peradventure)
serve to intise him out. The question then is of the Fyste, their exorcismes,
which is also the chief, and that which they most trust unto, and rely upon.

To pass by the unlawfulness of their adiuringe the spirits, in that they have
no such giufte nor authority over unclean spirits given them, as the
Apostles had, (from whom they fetch it,) as has been showed, and also the
unlawfulness of the continual speech or communication which with the diuils they
have when they exorcize: contrary to the practice of the * holy Apostle, act.
16, 18. mark, 1. 25. Luke 4. 35, 41.
yea of Christ Jesus himself, who when the diuill speak, bad him * hold his
peace, and com out of him. To pass by these I say, and not to alledg them
aginst their exorcizinge: I affirm that there exorcismes are so palpable
impious, vain, foolish, and ridiculous, that it cannot be imagined that
theirby, the diuils are, or cannot be compelled to go out of men. And that
every on may be the better assured hereof, I will set down the titles of
sundry of their adiurations in there Exorcismes, every of which contains the
sum or effect of the whole adiuration following and therefore must needs be
suitable to these, yea nothing but the same set down at large and in more
words. Mengus fug^ Do^monum 103. etc.


Hic Exorcista ponat manum sacram super caput vexati, ect.

Hic aspergatur aqua benedicta super obsessum. etc.

Here let the exorcist lay his holy hand of the head of the posssseed, and when
he has tied the stole to the neck of the possessed with 3. knottes say, etc.

Here let holy water be sprinkled upon the possessed.

Here let him say certain gospelles, with his hands upon the head of the
possessed.

Here let the exorcist command the diuils, that with their knees bowed, and
head, they worshipe the holy trinity, thrice, smiting the footstool or ground
with their head, without hurting the possessed. which being done, let him
begine to adjure them. And whersoeuer in the exorcismes he shall find the sign
of the cross he must always sign the possessd in the forhead.

Here let him ask their proper names, ct. if he will nor answer, or refuse to
obey, let the exorcist with very sharp words, commaund^ments, and adiurations
iterated, require obedience: threatninge to thrust him down into hell,
presently upon his goeing forth of the body.

Here must the exorcist anger the diuils as much as he can with reproaches,
injuries, all which with grief the endure.

Here let the Exor. compel the diuils to go out, but if they will not obey,
let him write their names, and their fellows in alike scroule of paper, and
burn them in fire that is blessed, For these things are very grievous unto
them: because the are to their shame, and to put them in mind of hell fire.

Here if the spirit will not obey, take fire and brimstone being both blessed
and hallowed, and cause the possessed will he, nil he, to beheld in the smoke
over the said fire and brimstonc until he tell you the truth in all things
which are nedfull for the deliverance of the possessed.

Here let the Exor. go about to know their names, and the properties of the
diuils which are in the body possessed.

Here why or for what cause they do not depart.

Here demand for what cause the did enter in.

Here if they will not goeout, put rue into the nostrels of the possessed.

Here let the Exor. endeavor to get out the truth from the diuill possessing,
as well by an oath, as by severe threats.

Here let the Exor. learn of them, with what words they are most tormented,
that so he may the better know to apply fit remedies against them.

Here let the Exor ask the proper names of the diuils. if so be that he can
not know them, let him give them scornful names, which are most grievous to the
diuils.

Here mock them with reuilinges, ^hey will smoke ^he devil forth, ^ut they
will ^aue him out.
Injuries, and the remembrance of thire salvation.

Here demand how the diuils may thence be expelled by the power of God. and if
they will not tell the truth, make a * smoke of stinking things.

Here let him put salt into water in the form of a cross, saying.

He that thinks that by the aforesaid rites and ceremonies satan can be
expelled: as by burning their names in hallowed fire, by houlding the possessed
in the smok over fire and brimston b^ing blessed and the rest of those we have
heard, and such others. He I say that thus thinks and is so ignorante and
sottishe or brutish in his understanding, let him be so still, ^e 2. use
teach^h us, how we ^ay know if (...) be possessed.
neither will any thing avail with him. and to the rest who see the
unspeakable follye and vanity of them, it is needless to say any thing more.
I will therefore leave the Papists, and proceed to some other use.

For a second use, we have here to inform our judgment in the discerning of
the possessed If we desire to know whether such a on whom we suspecte to be
possessed, be so or not: we have before in the report and handlinge of this
work, to satsfie us therein. For give me a man of whose possession you doubt,
and if it be so with him that he is greuosly vexed, and often times and that on
the sudden, by fits, or at certain times, and yet not hurt thereby, though he
offer much violence unto himself: and do that which in reason and nature
should greatly hurt him, but is as well presently after as before the fit:
speaking in his said fytts (if he use any speech at all) he knows not what,
nor can after wards call to mind, and vtteringe some times such speeches as
savor not of the spirit of man, but excellently suit and agree with the nature
of a wicked spirit: who gnasheth also sometimes with his teeth, walloweth,
fometh, is often cast into fire, and water: and shows in some of his fits
extraordinary and supernatural strength, and knowledge: then in such case you
have not so much man, as the scriptur and God him self who can not deceive you,
resoluinge your doubt, and pronouncinge him possessed with an unclean spirit.
But if it go not thus for the most part (though not altogether) with your
suspected party, then judge you otherwise, and free him of the suspicion
thereof.

Besides if the parttie be troubled with strange sightes and visions, if in his
fits he have in his belly very strange and supernatural swellings* yfsom times
his arms and legs be as stiff, inflexible and heavy as iron. his body as
heavy as so much lead: his mouth drawn awrye to his eareth is tongue thrust
strangly out: or retorted backward speakinge so, or at least without that
instrument of speech or lips, with his mouth wide open. if his eyes stare
fearfully his face set behind his bones thrust out and into their proper
joints: if he be deprived of his senses, now saying now blind. now hearing
now dease: if he be ordinary in his fits without feeling: also some times
speachlesse some times likewise eating and drinkinge unsatiably, at other times
taking no food at all for certain da^es together, and if other such strange
accidents besides and against nature fall out, whereof we have heard at large.
Then forasmuch as in experience these things have been seen in those which
were possessed, you may thereby be further confirmed in his possession. the 3.
use to instruct us, concerning the means of dispossession.


Thirdly out of the premises, we are to learn what to do in case we seon
possessed what counsel and advise to give when any such thing shall fall out,
that for the curinge of this unnatural or rather supernatural disease: for it
comes not from nature, but somthinge else, even asuper natural power within
on, I mean the diuill, no herbs, potions, or other natural medicines must be
used or applied, which God has appointed for diseases of another kind, but the
supernatural medcine of prayer. and if that preuail not for the curinge of the
party thus diseased, we must tak another of the fam kind, but more sovereign,
which is fasting and prayer: and thereby we doubt not but that the patient shall
be healed, if God has appointed that the party so diseased shall recover: as
certainly as one sick of a natural disease by the applyinge of the best
medicine: Because it is the means or medicyne which the Lord himself the
best physician has ordained thereunto.

Fourthly, The bates Satan ordinarily uses to catch men with, are here to be
observed by the way: which either are some fare promis, or fearful there at. To
Evah he said, (...) are here to make the (...) whereby the do^^^^ usually
catches us, that so we may the better avoid them. genesis 3. 5. (...). h, 4. 10.
* eat, and your eyes shall be opend, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
evil. and hereby was Evah snared, as appear eth by verse 6. And to Christ he
said, All these will I gine thee, if thou will fall down, and worshipe me. One
the other side to Cain he sugested, that his punishment was greater, then he
could bear. And to Judas, that he had sinned so greuiouslye in betrayinge
innocent blood, that it could not be pardoned, whereupon he went and * hanged
himself.

Thus he dealt with these possessed persons, making them fair promises of
silver, genesis 4. 13. math. 27. 4. 5.
gould, etc. so that he might enter, and threatninge to to destroy them if they
would not consent: and after this manner he deals with us all in the
temptations wherewith he continually assalt eth us: sometimes yea usually
settinge before our eyes the pleasure of that sin he intiseth us unto: if
that will not serve his turn, (as for the most partit does) then goes he
another way to work, by calling to our remembrance our sins past,
aggravating them every way he possiblye can: as by the innumerable multitude
of them, the greatness of them, in that they have been committed against God so
great and worthy a person. after knowledge. yea after some repentanc and vows
made to God to the contrary, and by other such like circumstances. of these
baits let us in the fear of God, and love of our own souls take heed: for
as these children if they had given their consent upon the persuasion of the
spirits, undoubtedly they had entered into them, and possessed them corporally:
so sureli if Satan thus assaltinge us, we yield and give assente unto him, he
then enters into us and possesses us spiritually for mark what is said of
Judas: the Devil put in the heart of Judas to betraye Christ there is Satan's
suggestion, John, 13. 2.
and that this motion might the rather preuaille, together withal (no doubt)
he set before him (being covetous) the reward would be given him for the
same: also, how acceptable a thing yet would be to the scribes and Pharisees,
who were the chief among the Jews and there governors. and what great favor
and grace he should thereby obtain at thire hands: and the pleasure of both
these. Judas considered of these things, and in the end (being alured by
these baits) resolved to betrave Christ Jesus. and there it is said Satan
entered into him. John 13. 27.
And th^s as it is a more common, so it is a worsse kind of possession, then
this, of the childrens, and not so easily and quickly cured: Let us therefore
so much the more beware of it, and of giuinge consent to Satan's tempting,
whereby only it is compassed. for let Satan tempt never so much and often, yet
if we yield not to his temptations, math 4. 4. James, 4. 7
but as Christ did, by the word resist them, he can not enter. For being
resisted as says James * he will flee. This also is shadowed out unto us, and
to be seen in this work of God. for the spirits bejnge resisted and not
consented unto, they after a while gave place and vanished away.

And here not unfitly we may remember the lyinge and deceit of the devil. here
is the subteltie of the devil to be observed.
he bare the above named possessed persons in hand, a little after there
dispossession, that if they would consent unto him in that he desired, he
would give them what they could desire. silver, gould, etc. in abundanc: and
made as it were a tender thereof, unto them. On the other side, if they denied
him his request, he would then surely destroy them. Now who sees not that
Satan herein did but lie and deceive? for though in appearance, yet in truth
there was neither silver nor gold silks nor velvet, and has a bone of any of
them since that time been broken? or so much as an hear of, one of there
heads perished? no verily. Thus he Lied unto and cozened our Grandmother Euah
making her believe, gen, 3. 4, 9
that * she should not die at all and that if she did eat of the forbidden
fruit, she should be equal with god and of as great knowledge and
understanding as he. In like manner he lied to our blessed Savior, and would
thereby have deceived him, John, 14. 1^ Luk, 4. 5.
if it had layen in his power, but he had naught in him, When he had showed
Jesus all the kingdoms of the world in the twinkeling of an eye, he said unto
him: all this power will I give the, and the glory of these for that is
delivered unto me, John, 12. 13. 2 cor, 4. 4.
and to whom soever I will, I give it. If thou there fore wilt worship me they
shall be all thine. wherein the Devil lied: for though he be * priuce and God
of this world, ephesians. 2. 2. heb, 1. 2. 1 cor. 3, 22, 23. Tit. 3. 3.
because the greatest part of this world, yea all the world, a little flock
excepted, are ruled by him, and as his subjects do homage unto him, being the
children of disobedience: yet has he not of his own so much as a pile of
grass for Christ is * heir of the world. In like sort he deals conty^ually
with us, always lyinge and cogging unto us tellinge us this pleasure will come
by this sin and this pleasure by that sin, thereby entising us to commit
that sin, wherein he does nothing but lie and deceive for oftentimes when a
man has committed the sin, he is frustrated and disapoynted of the pleasure
he set before him, and where by he was drawn unto that sin: as Absalom went
without the pleasures (...) a kingdom, Rom, 6. 21, 23.
which Satan had tickled him with, and promised upon (...) against his father.
and all the theifes which upon their (...) apprehended and han ed, but if he be
not, yet the fruit (...) will be death. In that pleasure the heart either is or
has cause to be sorrowful, because * the end of that mirth is heaviness. So
that still he deals craftily with us and like a cozener and deceauour as he
is, Prou. 14, 12, 13 Revel, 12, 9. and 20, 23 Rom, 7. 11.
S Paull says of himself. that * sin deceued him: and thereby slew him the
same may be as fitly and truly said of the Diuill, that by his subtilti he
deceives and enticeth us to the commitinge of sine and thereby slays us.
Saying then it is so, let us beware of Satan his intisments, and labor to spy
out his deceit in the sin he persuades us unto, let us neither be enticed
with his vain alurements, nor terrified with his threats: so shall we together
with the sin, escape the deuouringe and destruction, Pet. 5, 8:
he therein meerlye intends and aymeth at.

Fifthly, here is shadowed out unto us the great diligence satan uses to
recover such as be once delivered out of his power. ffor presently after his
eiection out of those in Lancyshire and their delyuerie out of his hands, we
are to observe the great diligence satan uses to recover us being snatched
our of his hands thereby to ptouoke us to use the like for our defense against
him.
he was so eger and busy about them, that fot a time we (that then lay in the
house where they were) could neither eat without interruption, nor scant take
our rest, and no diligence day nor night, (save that he stayed some tims for
his best opportunity) nor yet means was wantinge, until he had recoured
Summers. The reason why he did so for a little season only, and has not
continued his solycitinge them in that manner until this day, and so forward:
is not through any slougthfulnes in him, or for want of any will or desire in
him as though he regarded not greatly the inhabitinge and vexing of man in his
body spetially them out of whom he has been cast, for the contrary is
evident by "holy scripture but because the time of his returning in that manner
and sencible molestinge of them out of whom he has been cast, is limmited and
set down unto him, which he may not pass, If Satan so diligent (all the time
arotted unto him) in compassinge an entrance into the body: and will he use no
diligence and take no pains, for the winedinge of himself into the souls of
men? yes verily, yea by how much more he desires the tormentinge of the body
and soul of man in hell for ever, ^ath 12: 43,
then the vexing of him in his body in this present life for a little season,
which is more then I can express: by so much more desires he the possessinge
of man's soul and continuance therein, which leads thereunto, above the
corporal possession. how frequent then and dilligent, is he in temptinge or
mouinge of us to evil all the time granted unto him of God to that end which
is duringe our life? Can his diligence and watchfulnes be expressed, peter.
or the manifold assaltes and times where in he so salteth us be reckoned up? no
verly. And this the word of God leth us a little more plainly, when it says, *
the Devil our adu^ a roaringe Lion walks about, seeking whom he may deuour^
he walks about us, yea as the Lion after his pray. The Lord said sometime
unto Satan whenc come thou? from compassinge the earth (said he) to and fro,
Job. 1, 7.
and from walking in it. V^hersoeuer then we are whilst we remain upon earth,
Satan compasses us, and besetteth us on eve ry side, that he may wound us
when and where he sees us naked and unarmed and as thus he does with all men,
so spetially with those he has lost, and have been taken out of his
possession, whether corpo rall or spiritual: on them he rages, and fometh,
against them he is stark mad, to recover them he will bring out al his pack
of subtilties. Si mon Simon said our Savior Satan has desired you: Iuke. 22.
31.
to winowe you as wheat. And we be once disciples, espetially if we be of the
Apostles sucessors, though not Apostles, then Satan putte^h up his request unto
Gods that he may have the siftinge of us. Thus we see what the de uill our
adversary does for his part what care what watchfulnes what diligence, what
pains he takes to bring us to destruction, and will not we endeavor the like
to preserve our selves from the same? Is Satan continually aslalting us (which
is shadowed out unto us in this work of God) and will not we continoally
resist, seeinge * resisted he will fly? when Peter tells us of the
diligence and nature of this our aduarsarie, Iam, 4, 7. 1 pet. 5. 8:
he thereupon infers this, * be sober the fore and watch. By how much more
malicious, strong cruel, subtle, and watchful to take us at advantage the
enemy is: by so much the more had we need to be circumspect and watchful,
that the enemy get no advantage. All men had need day and nikht to watch and
pray, math, 26, 41, ^pet. 5. 9. ^ph, 4, 26, 27. act. 26, 18, 2 Timothy 2, 26.
lest they enter into tentation, *ever resistinge strong in the faith, and
never consenting, no not in heart, for then * we give place to the diuill but
espetially and above others, they who have been delivered out of the power and
possession of Satan: and translated into the kingdom of God, and Christ Jesus.

Sixthly, Hereby we may perceive whereunto they diuils are naturally ginen: 6. we
may hereby p^^tly know the nature of she (...) and therw^^h whether we be his
children.
or carried by the instinct of their nature now corrupted, even to blasphemy
against God, to swareyng, lyiuge, uncleanness, deceit, and generally to all
manner of iniquity: which accords excellently with that is said of them in
holy scripture, and the titles given them their: where they are termed
blasphemous spirits, *lying spirits, *unclean spirits, Revel. 2. 9. John 8, 4.
math 12. 43. mark 5, 2. 8. 13, Re^el, 12. 9. and 20. 2, 3, 19. act 19, 12. 13.
ephesians, 2, 2.
*subtle spirits, (in that the devil is called the old serpent) and *wicked
spirits. 1 And this, because they are thereunto given, and whole (...) carried of
themselves by there nature. 2. because of the effect and eration they work in
men, sturringe up and temptinge them to and all other sins continually, and
bringing them daily forth ^hildren of disobedience. And hereby we may easilye
know ^e belong, and whose children we are, whether we be the sons of God,
or the children of the diuill. For does not nature it self teach us, that
theiris a certain similitude and liknes between the the father and the child?
and this is not only true of the natural father and child, but much more true
of the spiritual father and his child, as appears by the holy scripture. And
therefore it is that this speech is so often used by the Lord himself: * be ye
holy for I am holy. And that S. John says, Lev. 11, 44, and 19. 2. and 20. 7.
1 pet, 1, 16. 1 John. 1. 7. and 2. 29: and 4, 7: 8. 16: math 5, 44. 45. 48.
* If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that he which does righteously,
is borne of him. And again * God is light. If then we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship with the father, and with his son Jesus
Christ, and again, * every on that loves, is borne of God, and knows God.
for God is love. And Christ says, * love your enemies, do good to them that
hate you, that ye may be the children of your father that is in heaven: for he
makes his sun to wise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the
just and unjust. And presently after, ye shall be perfect as your father which is
in heven is perfect. And on there side, concerning the other spiritual father.
It was to this purpose to some of his children, said sometimes by our savior
Christ: ye do the works of your father: ye are (therefore) of your father the
diuil, and the lust of your father ye will do, John 8. 41, 44. 1 John, 3, 8.
John. 8: 38:
because also of this John says: * he that commiteth sin is of the Devil:
and why? for the Devil sins from the beginning. Both these our Saiour
teaches in two words: I speak that which I have seen with my father, and ye
do that which ye have seen with your father intimatinge this for the reason
thereof, that so it is and otherwise can not be: 2 pet, 1. 41
Because the spiritual child follows and can not but follow the disposition
of the spiritual father so as look how the father is affected and given,
whether it be God or the Devil, even so is the child and must needs be:
because being a child he is partaker of his fathers nature, whether it be
divine or diuilish? and otherewise he is no child: and therefore being of the
selfsame nature, they must needs be affected alike: so as what and whom the
one loves, hates etc. the other will do so likewise. Here upon it necessarily
and ineuitably follows, that as they are the sons of God, who as God
(infinitely) so they (according to there measure) are holy, righteous: in the
light: in love, yea louinge there enemies, and doing good to them which hate
them ct. striuinge also daily to be more holy, righteous ct, that so they might
be perfect, as is there heavenly father: As such I say which have this image:
similitud and stamp of God set upon them and shininge in all there speeches:
actions and thoughts* are the ch^^^dren of God: yea all such: and none but
such: because of his chil^ onl^ he bestows this spirit: Romans 8: 14. Romans 8. 1.
2. 5: 9 10: 11: 13.
that is these gifts of the spirit: a^ to that of the Apostle * as many as are
led by the spirit of (...) the sons of God. so as they deceive them selves:
which (...) spirit of god and Christ to lead them into the holy and righteous
ways of God: are yet notwithstanding persuaded that God is there father: and
they his children: even so they who in there speeches: actions and thougths
represent the diuil and have his stompe orimage upon them, being together with
him given to blasphemy, swearinge: lyinge. uncleanness: deceit in a word to
the commiting of sine are the children of the devil: ephesians, 2, ^.
and have him for their father: and they do greatly deceive themseues which
doing the same works with the devil. and being ruied by his spirit: do
nevertheless hope that god is their father.

Let every on of us then compare our selves with another, and seriously
examine our selves and consider whom we are most like, whom in our works we
most resemble, God, or the diuill: for certain lie to him we belong to whom we
are likest, and he is our father.

But here you must not so take me, as though I meant that whosouer makes a lie,
uses an oath, commiteth any uncleanness, at any time deceives his neighbor in
bargainning, is the child of the diuill. God forbid. For Noah, Lot, David, and
Peter sinned grievously against God and yet were his children* and there are
amongst us no doubt which have there s^^ppes, and falls, and yet are Gods
children. It is not then the commitinge of a sin, although it be a heinous
sin, which argues the child of the Devil: But the * scruing of sin and
obaying it in the lusts thereof. Romans 4, 14, 16, 2. pet: 2, 19, Rom 9. 12.
when satan stirs up in man a lust after lying, swearing, adultery,
deceit, and other transgressions of the law: and he forthwith willingly and
very readily falls to put the same in practice and thus not only once or
twice, but usually does the works of the devil such a one says christ, is of
hi^ father the devil. And yet howsoever the fallinge into some heinous
transgression, proves not one to be the child of the diuill, John 8, 41.
yet such slipe or fall gives the child of God just cause not only of weeping,
but with Peter * to weep bitterly. In that he after so great grace received.
(even the spirit of God, I mean the spirit of adoption, and sanctification,
*which God bestows upon his children only) shall so highly offend him, Luk
22. 62* gal: 4 6. Romans 8. 14. 15
who has been so good and gracious unto him: recompencing him with evil, for
his unspeakable good, and thereby also greatly dishoneringe God, and causinge
his holy name to be blasphemed and evil spoken off.

Neither must any so understand me as though I meant, that all those which are
now the children, and under the power of the devil, should certainly go unto
the devil, and have the lake which burns with fire and brimstone for their
portion, and by consequent all such as are before described: For he who is the
diuils child, and captive unto Satan to day, may be to morrow the son of
God, and delivered out of that sprituall bondage: yea very sure it is, that in
his inward and spiritual estate and condition this happy change shall be,
if he change and alter his conditions, and * be a new creature, so as old
things being passed away, 2 cor. 15, 17.
all things become new with him: having a new mind, and a new heart, (which is
when he has new thoughts and new affection.) which will carry with them the
body, and all the members thereof: and make them new likewise: so as he shall
have new eyes: new ears: a new tongue: new hands etc: every one of these and
the rest of the members, according to his several office or duty performing
new: that is other and better things then in former times he did: man
changing or being thus changed: he is therewith translated from satan unto God
and from being his child to be adopted into the number of the sons of god:
having * this privilege and dignity bestowed upon him in Christ: whom by
faith he has received: or as S. Paul says he is turned from darkness into
light and from the power of satan (under which we are all by nature and until
this turning be) unto god: John, 1, 12: act: 26. 18: 2: tum. 2. 26,
and elsewhere to the same effect delivered * out of the snare of the devil of
whom we are taken prisoners to do his will: into the glorious liberty of the
sons of god. So as henceforward he is no more a bondeslaue unto satan: and a
stranger and forriner unto god* and aliant from the common wealth of Israel:
but one of the household of god: and a citizen with the saints: even of the
great and holy City new Jerusalem: into the which enters none but these new
and holy creatures for whom only god the builder and maker thereof has
prepared it.

If any object: All the children of god shall certainly be saved accordig to
that scripture: If we be children we are also heirs enen the heirs of god and
heirs annexed with Christ: therefore whosoever be the devils children (and so
they before described to be such) shall certainlye be damed I answer: ephe. 2:
12, 19. Revel. 21, 2 10. Revel. 21: 5: 27: heb. 11: 10: 16: Romans 8: 18.
that if man being the child of the devil, could not possibly become the child
of god, as he who is once the son or daughter of god, can never after be the
child of the devil: then the reason followed: and whosoever is the child of
the devil should be condemned: but that being most false the other follows
not thereof at all. This then I affirm: that whosoever are the devils children
(which are all they who are given to blasphemy: swearing: lying: cursing:
filthy comunication: to speak evil of them which are: in aucthority: to
raylinge: slaundering: to hatred especially of the brethren: to adultery:
fornication: uncleanness: deceit defrauding one an other in bargayning: and
other works of the devil: and continue therein: living and dyinge such)
shall indeed go to the devil their father: and with him inherit hell fire
prepared for the devil and his angels. herein we may behold how e^till minded
the devil is toward man.


Furthermore in observing the nature of the devil we are to consider how he
stands affected toward men. how in his nature he is who ly carried to hate
man* (for when he has lost him* he is not at quye^ until he he have recovered
him if it be possible) to torment him and to destroy him. Now who that is wise
will not be afraid to fall into the hands of such as one or rather of god
whose executioner the devil is.

If the devil deal thus with man being sent forth of god to chastise him for
his amendment: How will he entreat him when be shall fall upon him to execute
the vengeance to come? that is the punishment which in justice is due unto man,
and answerable to all the dishonor he has done upon earth to the lord of
glory. If in the former case he cause such crying, gnashing of teeth, and
tormenting as we have heard: what crying, what gnashing of teeth, what
tormenting shall there be in the latter?

Thus we see what an agreement there is betwixt the word and work of god, head.
10. 11:
as coming both from the same author* and tendinge to the same end, even to
make men afraid to fall into the hands of the liu^go God. They both teach the
same thing, the one more obscurely, the other more plainly. Why now will not
we rather take forth this and such like lessons out of this work, and so make
our use and profit thereof: then impugn and deny the work, as many of us do?
when the lord knowing man's dulnes and backwardnes to learn, shall in regard
thereof be content to instruct him not only by his word, but also by his work
(which sometime preuayleth a little with man when his word will not) and that
man is so far from being taught and instructed thereby, that he rejects such
kind of instruction: will the lord or can he possibly take that in good part?

Seauenthly it serves excellently to confound our athiests, This. work is of
singular use to confound the atheist. psalm. 14. 1.
whose say not only with the fool in their heart, that there is no god. but go
somewhat further, affirming with their blasphemous mouths out of that
unspeakable folly and brvtishnes of theirs, as King Pharaoh their praedecessor
did: Exodus 5. 2^
who is the lord. that I should obey him? These lusty galla^ts who will have
no heaven, nor hell, no god, nor devil what say they to this work of that god
whom they deny? That there is a devil. how can they deny it seeing the work
and effects of the devil in and upon the body of Summers: (to let the 7. in
Lancashire and other go) the running lumpes, his supernatural strength
knowledge, wayght in his body and members thereof, his speaking without the
instruments of speech, throwing into the fire without being burnt, his lying
as dead could as ye, his face and hands black: no breath coming from him,
and thus sometime by the space of an hour with many more of this kind, will
infore them to confess the work of the devil and by consequent that there is
a devil, considering that these things can not posibly come either from
nature, or be done by art, and that some cause of these effects there must
needs be, when they have done what they can, except they will leave this
matter undecided: (whereunto the devil and the corruption of their nature will
be ready to perswad them) they must in the end say will they, nill they, and
others also with them: that the said strange accidents and ympossible to be
done by man, came and were done by the dyuel: there being no other cause to
be found, and that Summers therein was a mere patient.

For to deny the matter of fact, that these things were done or rather suffered
by Summers, It is a most shamfull and odious thing to the the matter effect.
is plain english to say, that the 17 persons which have deposed the same are
periuered. and not only they, but about 13 more deposed after, in the whole
about 30 whereof 7 be preachers: the which if some shamles body should not
spare to affirm yet that will not help. seeinge there are hundreds more ready
to auouche the same upon there oaths, and to be so for sworn as are the
former. remember also that I delivered to the commissioners a bill of about 60
Persons, who were ready to be deposed A^udicient number (I think) for the
prouinge of any cause. concerning either, God or man. if inoughe have not
witnessed this matter upon their oaths there are yet good store remaininge: if
they were but called thereunto: and in the mean season some credit would be
given, to the bare affirmation of christians. or else it goes amiss with all
our historiographers, and there books. yt is then a most shamfull and odious
thing for man to call the matter of fact into question, espetially consyderige
the same has been done in our own land and in the midst of us: so as we need
not go beyond the seaes for full inquiry into it, and the circumstances
thereof, as time, place, persons possessed others dealing in there dispossession.
and private christians witnessinge the same, the commissioners also at.
Notti^gham: with whom or some of them. who list when he please may conferr:
which are able to constrain a man to receive this for a truth-yf reason can
prevail with him. neither do I doubt but that other nations and kingdoms
about us. will not only give credit to the matter of fact, when they shall
hear thereof: and that the same has been witnessed upon the oaths of so many:
but also receive the possession and dispossession we so much gaynfaye. Blushe
then O England and be thou ashamed of this thy incredulity, which is such as
the like thereof has not ben redd or heard of before. for others have yet
acknowledged the work which have been done in them. but thou have not gone so
far, but denied the same.

In these straits whither will the Athists turn him? must he not needs be
confounded in himself? or can it be otherwise but that the diuil is entered
into him and he spiritualy possessed with the devil, if now he perceive not
that there is a devil? As herby we may sentibly and palpablie perceive that
there is a Devil so as we may in a manner grope him: as this proves there is
a d^uill so that che^o is a pod stron (...) then he.
even so we may look upon and behold the Lord himself in this work,
deliueringe the party or parties from there most grievous vexation, and
torments by Satan, upon request first made unto him by his servants, according
to his own appointment in this behalf.

When that cruel decree of Haman was gone forth for the destroyinge of the
jews. Mordecar giuinge Queen Hester to understand thereof. and withal
vsinge diverse reasons to persuade her to do what lay in her according to her
place for the preservation of her people, the church of God: Amongst and after
others, uses one in these words. Est. 4, 13. 1^
who knows whether thou art com to the kingdom for such a time? As if he had
said, who knows whether the Lord has therefore lyfted the up so high, even
into the throne and seat of the kingdom that so thou might be a fit means.
for the deliverance of the church from the affliction and danger it is in at
this time? And did not he guess well as apeareth by the stories? yes verily.
for thereby it is euiden that God had therefore, and for no other cause exalted
her from base and low degree. into the royal seat of A Queen. even so say I
concerning this our present case. who knows whether God has therefore sent a
evil spirits into sundry English persons to vex them in there bodies, that
thereby he might confound the. Atheysts in England? And either make them more
inexcusable, or else bring them to a better mind? whereof in deed there is
small hope. For they which can not be led (as it were by the hand) from the
creatures to the creator. which will not hear neither the works of creation
and administration. nor yet Moses the Prophets and Apostles tellinge them that
there is a god suerly neither will they be persuaded there of, It is very liklie
that in these days of athisme, the lord hath^ent devils into men thereby to
comoun^ ath^me.
though a Devil be sent from hell to preach the same unto them. This I say
may well be that which god principally respected herein. For some spetial thing
no doubt there is mouynge the Lord more at this time, then in former times, to
send devils into men, yea into diverse* Is it not likely to? be cause at this
time him self is denied, called into question whether he is, Luke 16. 31.
and has any being: which in the time of our forefathers has not been or at
the least not by so many, and with so high a hand as even now and at this
day, May we not well therefore say: who knows whether God has sent this
strange judgment for this time? that is. the sin of this time? there by
himself reproving this sin (as such as he can not endure) when man holds
his peace. The 8 use is, to commend unto (...): and fast in g^, and ^e eby to
(...) thereunto.


Eyghtly it commends the holy exercise of fasting and prayer, and se^ rueth
to provoke us to a diligent practice thereof: Is prayer and fasting of force
to cast out devils: though they be principalityes and powers. and shall not the
same if it be undertaken in the faith and obedyence of god be auayleable, if
not to remove yet to sanctify and bless what soever judgment of god is upon us
in generalty, or any of us in parti^ culer? Lev. 23, 27. Isa 22, 12. Toel. 1,
14. and 2. 15. 16, math. 6. 16, and 2. 16
If we look into the book of god, besides that west al find a necessity of
fasting and prayinge to ly upon us, when any judgment of god is either present
or imynent and ready to overtake us: in that we are then in such a case
commanded to fast and pray and humble our souls: for our further
encouragement to the performance of this dvty and part of gods worship, we
shall there read that not only the people of god from time to time have in all
their afflictions taken this course and used this as a means for their good
and deliverance also from theirs affliction if so it should seem good in the
eyes of the lord: but also that the same has vsualy prevailed so fair with
god, as that thereby they have obtained deliverance from there praesent
affliction. The Philistims having entered the Israelytes coasts: and
inhabitinge the same: 1 Samuel 7. 5, 6. 10. 13. 14.
the children of Israel for remooual of that judgment and recovery of their
cities through the counsel of Samuel gathered themselves to Mizpeh, and then
fasted and prayed for a day. The effect and fruit thereof was, that the lord
fought for them, from heaven: for it is said, that the lord thundered with a
great thunder that day, upon the Philistims, and scattered them: so as they
were slain before Israel: and that the philistines were brought so under, that
they came no more again into the coasts of Israel. In the 20. Chap. of the 2.
book of Chron. we read of a great multitude of the children of Moab. Amon,
and mount Seir, coming against the Israelites with purpose (no doubt) to have
spoiled and destroyed them thereupon Iehoshaphat the king proclaimed a fast
throughout all Judah: which was so blessed unto them and praeuayled so mightily
with god that even in the same fast when they were all assembled together, the
lord sent his spirit upon one Iehazael to comfort and assure them of their
safety and deliueranc from their enemies, Thus says the lord unto you (said
he) fear you not neither be afraid, for this great multitude: for the battle
is not youres but gods. ye shall not need to fight in this battle: stand still
move not, neither be afraid to morrow go out against them and the lord be
with you. And so it fell out after, for god sent such a spirit of discord among
them, that they slew one an other, so as none escaped. Yea further it is said
that the fear of god was upon all the kingdoms of the earth, when they had
heard that the lord had fought against the enemies of Israel, So the kingdom
of Iehoshaphat was quiet, and his god gave him rest on every s^de, Look in the
8. of Ezra and there you shall find, that those which returned from the
captivity in Babylon with Ezra, being in great danger least they, their wiuss
and children should be destroyed of the enemy which lay in wait for them in
their way to Jerusalem: did there upon betake themselves to this exercise, as
the only way and means for their safety, as appears by the speech of Ezra:
At the river (says he) I proclaimed a fast that we might humble our selves
before our god, Est. 3, 13. Est. 4. 3. 16. and 5. 2. 3. 4. and chap. 7. and 8 9.
and seek of him a right way for us and our children, and for all our
substance: for I was ashamed to require of the king an army and korsmen to
help us against the enemy in the way* and so indeed it proved: and a safer
means then an army and horsemen: for it is said, that this fast being
proclaimed, they fasted and besought their god for this: and he was intreted of
them. And in the 31. ver. it follows, and the hand of our god was upon us and
delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as laid wait by the way.
When proud and envious Hamman had obtained of Ahashuerosh that wicked decree,
to kill destroy and root out all the Jews upon such a day: it is said that
not only Esther the Queen with her maids did fast: but that in every province
and place whither the kings charge and commission came, there was among the
Jews fasting wepinge, and mourning: and many lay in sack cloth and in ashes
which humily a^ion of theirs prevailed so far with the lord as that thereby
they did not only escape the execution of that bloody decre. but also upon the
day appointed thereto, took vengeance themselves upon their enemies, and had
Hamman hanged with his 10. sons. And that they used fasting and prayer was
the means of the reuersing of that cruel decree and preuentinge of that
fearful iudgmente of god which was ready to break out against them it
appears by the speech of Es^her Chap. 4. 16. The Niuiuites also we al know
escaped the destruction that was thteatned within 40. days to have come upon
them, Jonah, 3^ 4.
by the true fast they kept unto the lord.

And as thus the people of god in all ages have in the day of their adversity
assembled themselves in prayer and fasting, and god has greatly blessed the
fastes which they have in public and in common kept together in their solemn
and open assemblyes. So and in like manner the servants of of god have in
secret, and apart from others fasted and pra^ed, and god has likewise greatly
blessed the same unto them: whither they humbled themselves before his majesty
for and because of some common calamity, either present upon the church or
imminent and hanging over it: or private affliction or want of some good thing
public or private: which also is a kind of misery. Thus N^hemyah vnderstan^ng
that the jews which were in Ierusal^m and in Judah were in great affliction
and reproach and that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, Nehe. 3, 4. 11.
and 2. 4. 5.
and the gates thereof burnt with fire: fasted and prayed because thereof*
which was so blessed unto him and that people that by his means shortly after
the walls and gates of Jerusalem were built up and the Jews delivered from
that great affliction and reproach they were in. Dan. 9 3. 4. 20.
I will not stand here to speak of Danyels afflictinge his soul in prayer and
fasting for himself and his people, and to show how that his humiliation was
blessed of god unto him far above that he desired and expected: but refer you
to the 9. of his prophecy, where that is set down at large: Neither will I use
many words about Cornelius. who praying and fasting had (as Danyel in the like
case had before) an angel sent unto him to assure him that his prayer was
heard and come up into remembrance before god: and to direct him to such a one
( Peter by name) who when he was come, act 10 30. 31 32 act. 11, 14.
should not only resolve him of that doubt he was in concerning the Messiah,
whether he were come or no) as it should seem, and for which cause it is
probable he then fasted: but also speak such words, as whereby both he and
his house should be saved. Only this I will give an instance or example, (the
better to provoke us hereto) where prayer with fasting has praeuayled with
god, when prayer without fasting would not priuaile: and it is in the 20. of
Judges where we read that when the children of Israel had sustained an
overthrow by the Beniamytes 22. thousand of them being slain, they assembled
themselves together because thereof in prayer: and after that they set their
battle in array against the Beniamites the second day, but had an other
discomfiture and overthrow even of 18. thousand all valyant men, whereupon
they assembled then in fasting and prayer: the fruit and success whereof was
this, that goi^g out against Beniamyn the lord smote him before Israel: even
as he had said and promised them upon the day of their fast, that on the
morrow he would deliver them into their hands. That they fasted not on the
first day of their assemblyng in the house of god, as they did on the second
day, may apeare by comparing the 23 verse of the chapter with verse 26. for all
that is said in the 23. is that they went up and wept before the lord unto the
eueninge, but in the 26. verse ws read thus: then all the children of Israel
went up and all the people came also unto the house of god, and wept and sat
there before the lord, and fasted that day unto the evening. Where we see it
is expressly said of the latter day, that the fasted and not so of the former.
Again by the conferringe of these it is plain, that the second days assembly
was far more general and solemn and with longer contynuance then the other:
and such were their assemblyes at fasts always: for first it is said of the
latter day that all the children of Israel went up: and again that all the
people came up to the house of god. 2. that they sat then before the lord.
whereby is noted, there long continuance in that meetinge: neither of which is
said of the former day.

Neither is there cause why we should marvel at this I mean that the fasting
and prayer of a faithful man or men, is so auayleable with god, The reasone^
why prayer and fasting is so available with god. the 1. reason. James 5. 16.
the 2.
that it will as it were have no nay: but even then prevail when prayer without
it cannot: considering it is written, that the prayer of the righteous avails
much, if it be fervent, and that fasting is a means to bncrease and continue
feruency of spirit. 2. Consideringe the singular promise god has made
hereunto, which he does insinuate by the tytles or names he gives to the day
of fast, caling it a day of reconciliation, a day of atonement, Lev. 23. 27.
28. and 16. 29. 30. Isa. 58. 5.
the acceptable day of the Lord. whereby the Lord does secretly signify and
promise to so many of us as shall exercise our selves herein, that howsoever
before for our transgressions he has been angry and offended with us, which
also he has testified to our faces either by laying some judgment upon us, or
threatninge so to do, or by with holdinge some good thing from us, yet if
herein we will exercise our selves aright, and keep a true fast unto the lord
afflictinge our souls as well as our bodies, rentinge not our garments, but
our hearts, with compunction and sorrow for our sins weeping and mourning
and making great lamentation over all the in iquities whereby we have
dishonored god, and caused his holy name to be evil spoken of, and justly
provoked him against us, and to avenge himself upon us as he has begone:
cryinge also unto the Lord in the name of Christ Jesus, for pardon and
reconciliation: and withal turn unto the Lord with all our hearts, forsaking
our evil ways, and the wickedness that is in our hands: then and whenever
this we shall perform, notwithstanding his anger be kindled and broken out
against us, yet will he be reconciled, and at one with us, accept of us, and
receane us into favor, and give us that we have entreated him for, if not
above the same. 3. It is to be remembered, that this holy exercise seems
greatly to humble us, Joel 2. 18. 19. the 3, reason.
and to make us think and account vylie and basely of our selves. as dust and
ashes, and most unworthy of the least of gods mercies: as partyle appears
by that which here follows of Ahab. Lev, 16. 29, 31. and chap. 23. 27, 29.
32. nomb. 29. 8.
and may also be gathered by that it is so often said to the Jews being
assembled together upon the 10. day of the 7. monueth, ye shall humble your
souls, meaning thereby, that upon that day they should fast and pray: and
again every person that humbles not himself that same day, shall even be
cut of from his people, which speech with the former being spoken not only to
every person in particular, but also to those among them, who were to see this
part of gods worship duly kept, it is thereby plain that the Lord meant by
those words, that every one who joined not with the people of god in fasting,
should be cut of from the people: for how they stood inwardly affected, for
either humble or proud spirit, men neither cold nor yet were to judge. Now
why are these words of humhlinge our souls used by the spirit of god insteade
of fasting, but because the hu^bling of our selves is both professed,
endeavored, and furthered by fasting? And this is confirmed by that saying of
Ezra, At the river by A hana I proclaimed a fast, chap. 8, 21:
that we might humble our selves before our god. And heerevpon it is that a
fast is called (and that rightly) the exercise of humiliation: not only because
we endeavor and profess therein the humbling and submitting of our selves to
god. and under his hand but also for that it helps forward our humilyation.
Seeinge now that fasting helps to humble us, and that this subiecting and
base account of our selves is a thing much pleasing unto god. and greatly
mouinge him to be gracious and favorable unto man: for says the scripture god
resists the proud, prou. 3, 34: Iam. 4, 6, 10. 1 pet, 5, 5, 6:
and gives grace unto the humble, again: humble your selu; under the mighty
hand of god that he may exalt you in due ti^e: cast down your selves before
the lord, and he will lift you up, and again, submyt your selves to god,
draw near to god and he will draw near to you. As if it had been said, In
humility and great submission go ye unto god and ask that ye want and so
god will come (as it were) unto you, Iam, 4, 7, 8,
in giving you that you desire and lack: it is no marvel though the fastes of
gods people prevailed mightily with god, and obtain that or above that they
desire: yea this humbling of our selves under the hand of god, is so pleasing
unto his divine majesty, and of that force with him: that the very shaddowe
thereof even a shrincking under the same hand or casting down and humbling of
the body with out the truth thereof in the soul, has prevailed so far with
the lord that it has procured a temporal benefit both to ones self and his
posterity. the soul in this case is hu^led, but it is corrupt lie, as is
showed after. 1 king, 21. 21. 22, 24.
Thus Ahab having this iudgmente denounced against him by Elyah that the lord
would bring evil upon him, and take away his posterity, and cut of from Ahab
him that pissed against the wall, so as the dogs should eat him of Ahabs
stock, that dyed in the city: and him that dyed in the feilds, should the
fowls of the air eat: though he was a most wicked man, one that sold
himself to work wickedness, and therefore could not humble himself aright before
god: neither yett join to the outward and bodily exercise of fasting the
inward and spiritual of prayer, so as might be accepted of god and avail with
him for the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto the lord, and the
prayer of the righteous avails with him: yet notwithstanding humbling him
self by fasting, prou. 15, 8.
he obtained thereby thus much, that that evil came not upon him nor yet of his
son Ahaziah, ver, 27, 28, 29.
for thus we read when Ahab heard the former words, he rent his clothes and
put sackcloath up on him, and fasted, and lay in sackcloath, and went softly:
whereupon the word of the lord came to Elyah saying, See thou how Ahab is
humbled before me? because he submits himself before me, I will not
bring that evil in his days but in his sons days will I bring evil upon
his house: where we see this given by the lord himself for the reason why he
would be good to Ahab. 1 timothy, 4, 8. eccl. 4, 17.
If then the bodily exercise of fasting, which profits but little, alone
without prayer (for there is no mention of any prayer that Ahab made, and if he
did it was but the sacrifyce of fools which the wise god abhors) avail
with god: how much more more will the same prevail with him when it it is nor
only joined with true but fervent prayer? And if the casting down and
humbling of the body or if of the soul, yet not for sin but some temporal
punishment of sin: the rentinge of the clothes, the lyinge down in
sackcloath and ashes, which is the fast the lord has not chosen, be of force
to pacisye the wrath of god at the least for a time and in part and to
procure some good to man: Isa 58. 5,
what will it do when thereunto is adjoined the casting down and humbling of
the soul, the afflicting and renting of it, with sorrow for sin? Shall it
not then be much more effectual to pacify gods wrath though kindled or broken
out against us, and move him to be good and gracious unto us? Moreover if the
performance of this outward and bodily service to god by sinners, his enemies,
be auayleable with the Lord for their good much more shall the same prevail
when not only it, but also the inward and spiritual worship is performed by
the righteous, the friends and children of god: finally if these things apart,
if the outward and bodily service alone: if fervent prayer alone if the true
humbling and casting down of man under the hand of god alone, be of power to
prevail with god: how much more shall these three when they do meet
together, as they do in a true fast, be of force to prevail with god to that
end and purpose for which they are used?

Thus we see that the fasting and prayer of the faithful is mighty with god:
gen, 32, 24, 26,
and that as it is said of Iaacob wrestling with god: that he would not let
him go until he had blessed him: so it may fitly and as truly, be said
hereof: that it wrestling as it were with the Lord will never let him alone
until such time as he has blessed the party or parties for whom it is used.
Which well and dulye considered, what man is there fearinge god, and
vnfeynedlye desirous of the welfare of himself and the church of god, which
will not apply himself to the practice thereof, when and as often as god shall
give just occasion. Is there any evil of sin or punishment, either upon or
toward us, our husbands, wives, children, parents, or the church of god,
either do we or it stand in need of some good which we hunger and thirst
after? then let us humble our souls in fasting and prayer: for we see that
the same having been used in the like case by the people of god, has prospered
and prevailed mightily with the Lord. yea if we be desirous from the heart to
be freed from the said evil, or to obtain the good is lacking: how can we but
take up and use this holy exercise in such a case considering it is the best
and surest means that god himself has ordained to such end and durpose. No
maruayle then though the hand of god lie and remain upon us, or many of us and
many blessings be wanting unto us: when we are wantinge and come short in the
performance of this duty: for who knows not that as the papists are too
common and super stitious herein on the one side so we on the other are too
short and profane: It sauoreth of precisenes, and of the spirit, to be given
much to fasting and prayer. Is not this the fasting that god has chosen to
loose the bands of wickedness, Isa 58, 6. 7,
to take of the heavy burden, and to let the oppressed go free? Is there any
better abstinence then this? And is not this the true fast? (say some) to fast
from sin? why then require you any more? Again this fasting or precise
abstaining from all meat and drinck, and other comfort of this life for a day
(so much urged by some) was commanded to the Jews and they indeed by virtue
of that commandment were bound thereto: but it reaches not it self to us in
that being ceremonial, with other ceremonies it was abrogated by Christ. Thus
far we are (even we that profess to worshipe god aright, and according to
his word) from the practice of this part of gods worshipe, that we dispute
and plead against it. yea some stay not there but proceed further: to
contemn, scorn, and reproache nor only men's persons, but the holy exercise it
self. But what spirit possesses these men, trow we? Surely not that spirit
that moved the people and holy men of god before spoken of, act. ^ 9, and 10.
30 and 13. 2. and 14, 23,
to the practile thereof: nor that spirit that moved the holy Apostles, and
others after, to the practis of the same, even in the time of the gospel and
after that abrogation by Christ they speak of: nor the holy spirit of god, or
the lord himself by his spirit, who of his mercy, and not for the merit or
desert of the work has so greatly blessed and rewarded them that have
exercised them selves therein, math, 9, 14, 15 and 6, 16, 17, 18,
and performed that service unto him. Finally, not the spirit of Christ, who 1
in foretellinge that his people should fast 2 in directinge them touching the
manner thereof (in the outward carriage of themselves toward men) 3 in
promisinge a reward to them that shall be obedient therein: does therein and
thereby not only require fasting of his. people as a duty or service to be
done to god, but also (as being a singular part of gods, worshipe. and
making much to his glory and our good) labors to persuade us to the
practyse thereof. far therefore is that spirit from the condemninge and
reasoning against it, yea from the neclect of the same. yt remains then that
the unclean spirit, possess and rule them, at least herin: who as when he
possesed the bodies of them 7 in Lancashire did some time by the howlings and
outcryes he sent forth, what lay in him, to hinder them and us from vsinge of
prayer and fasting, because he well knew how it avails much with God for
the expellinge of him both out of the bodies and souls of men and makes
greatly for the subduinge and overthrow of his kingdom, and the kingdom or
power of sin so he possessinge the souls of these men, does by there wits
toungs, and otherwise, to the uttermost of his power, keep and hinder, not
only them whom he thus rules in all disobedience (herin at the least) but
many others also by there means from the practice hereof.

Well, as it is a fearful thing for a man to use his wit, or tongue, or both
to the disgrace of this holy exercise, for it is a sign that satan possesses
his soul, which is much worse then the corporal possession so it is an evil
thing to be negligent and careless in the performance of this duty, as the
most, yea almost all men are. For where is he, even of those that profese the
fear of God, that does in any measure so often perform this duty and
service to god as he should? that when the lord smites him either in his
soul or body, or those that be near and dear unto him, as his wife, child,
parents, or the church of god at hand or a far off or threatens the same: or
when god withdreweth and keeps back from him or any of the aforesaid some
corporal benefit, or spiritual blessing: does forthwith betake him to fasting
and prayer as to a duty or service god therein calls him unto and he is to
perform and the best means to obtain that at the hands of god which he
desires. There be some amongst us (blessed be god therefore and the lord
increase the number) that make concience of other parts of gods worship
public and private: that be swift and ready to hear the word, to receive
the sacraments as often as they be administered, to pray in church and chamber
no doubt? and yet those even those I fear, (for the most part) are slow and
backwarde in the performance of this part of gods worshipe. the which comes
to pass either through our ignorance here in, for that we know not that God
as well requires this service of us, when he gives occasion thereof, as the
other above specified and such like: or through our inconsideration and
forgetfulness of this duty, if we know it: or rather hence that we are given
too much to spare and pamper our bodies, and can not abide to tame them, and
bring them into subjection by fasting

If through ignorance we have not done this service unto god hitherto either
not at all or more seldom then we should as I trust, so I desire the Christian
Reader that that which has been said in this behalf may help a little to
remove that le^t, and further help, you may have, if you will take the pains
to peruse the learned treatises which even in our mother tongue are written of
this argument. If in a self love to our flesh and fear of weakening our
bodies to much we have heretofore been kept and hindered from this so
necessary and profitable a deuty, let us set before us 1. the example of the
holy Apostle herein, and strive to walk in his steps who knowinge the
pampering of the body to be an enemy to the health and salvation of the soul
as in effect he affirms: says of himself that he did beat down his body
and bring it into subjection: the which was not so much done by an abstayninge
from the more dainty meats, ^ cor, 9. 27
or a sober and moderate use of all kinds of meats, either of which yea both
which may be performed by one, without any great taki^g down of the body: but
rather by his often fasting, the which whosoever shall use in that manner the
scripture requires and as Paul did shall by his own experience find that it
is effectual to beat down the body, and bring it into subjection. 2. the
examples of the false Apostles and their followers in times past and the
papists in these days, not for our ymitation, in all things herein: but to
provoake us to the same in a better kind. For is it not a shame for us that
others in their false and ydolatrous worship shall voluntarilye and of
their own accord, not spare their bodies: and that we in the true worshipe
of God will not do the like, col. 2. 23.
though the lord himself require it of us? yes verily. Let us therefore
hereafter in obedyence to the lords ordynance or commandment herein,
exercise our selves in prayer and fasting, public and private, when and as
often as god by giuinge just occasion shall call us thereunto: and bewaylinge our
former sin and negligence therein, labor to recompense the same (as much as
in us lies) with a future diligence. And to this end and purpose I beseech,
and that in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, the mynisters of Christ and
disposers of his misteryes: that they would be instant herein, and amongst
other of their doctrines entreat upon this of fasting, showing both the
necessity thereof, as being commanded of god, and a part of his worship, and
the profit that comes to those which shall exercise themselves therein,
whereof we have heard: likewise the threatninge denounced against the
contemners of it, that such the Lord will have cut of from his people: that
such he will destroy from among his people: and that this iniquity shall not
be purged: that by this strong and threefoulde coarde, Levit. 23. 29 30 (...)
^3. ^4.
the people of god though backward and unwilling, may be drawn thereunto: for
I thinck it meet to stire you up my brethren by puttinge you in remembrance
hereof, though ye have knowledge far above my self, and be stablished in
this truth. And this I do so much the rather for that (as I take it) the sound
of this doctrine is not heard so much in many of our churches, as some other
of no greater truth, necessity, and use then it is: whence partlye it comes
to pass, that many Christians do so seldom perform this holy and special
service of God, and that among them some are scarcely well acquainted with the
same.

Nynthly this rare and great work of god makes greatly for the conformatiou
of the authority and truth of the holy scriptures: 9. It confirms the truth
and authority of the scriptures. this appears as by the ^lde testament so by
infinite places of the new.
the scriptures rell us that there are wicked spirits called dyuels: and this
we which were eye witnesses have as it were with our bodily eyes seen for
though we saw them not indeed, neither possibly could, because they are
invisible creatures, yet we beheld them in their operations and effects.

In the holy scriptures we read that these spirits are given to blasphemy to
lyinge, to deceit, indeed not only because by their nature they are
carried headlong thereunto (as to all manner of iniquity, where upon they are
called wicked or ^uyll spirits) but also for that they move and stir up men to
the committinge of these sins now that the devil is such. Reu. 2. 9. Ioh,
8, 44. Revel. 12. 9, and 20. 2. 3. 10.
and that the scriptures herein says true we see by the former story: act, 19.
12, 13
wherein we have heard of the horrible blasphemies, and unspeakable deceit
of satan and might also have heard of infinite lies. the lying spirits sent
forth.

In the holy scriptures these spirits are often termed unclean spirits part
lie, to noate their natural inclination and disposition to all uncleanness:
math. 12, 43, mark 1, 23* 26 act. 5, 16 and 8, 7.
and partly in regard of the effect and operation they have and bring forth in
the children of disobedience. How the scripture has herein been verifyed, to
pass by some of those in Lancashire who the day of their deliverance in the
presence of many uttered most filthy speeches: the shameful and unnatural
uncleanness of W Summers or rather of the spirit in him, does bear witness. who
in the presence of many acted in most unclean and vile manner the sin of
whore dome: and after his repossession when he had committed such uncleanness,
first with a dog, then and specially with a bitch, as is not fit once to be
named, he then got the bitch into the bed with him, and there would have
committed you may ymagine what abomination: and this also he did before
diverse. mark 9. 17. with many others through out the gospel, as has (...)
sheweed before.


The Scripture affirms that these spirits sometimes enter into men, that
being in them, they miserably vex them in their bodies, and that often and on
the suddayne, that the same notwithstanding the possessed are not hurt at all,
although by the vyolence they sometimes offer unto them, one would thinck they
should spoil or greatly harm them: that they cause them to wallowe, some,
cry, ^nash with the teeth, throw them into the fire and water, and seek to
destroy them or take away their lives, that they make them dumb, deaf,
blind, sometimes deprive them of the right use of their wits, Finally that
they show forth in the parties whom they possess, extraordinary and
supernatural strength, and supernatural knowledge: now the most of these have
been found true in the parties above named but all and every of them in W.
Summers

The scriptures say that when a strong man armed keeps his palace the
things that he possesses are in peace: but when a stronger then he comes
upon him, Luke 11. 21.
then that peace being at an end there begins war, as I may say, for that
seems to be insinuated. The truth of this has appeared in their extreme
vexation, and continuance therein the whole day of their dispossession: at
which time Christ Jesus the stronger came upon the strong armed man, overcame
him, took away his armor, and divided his spoils. Secondly in Summers
continuinge quiet from satan's vexation although he be in him, the reason
whereof is because the strong man armed keeps the house, and has quiet
possession, all things being according to his desire: for the young man
denies that he was possessed, yea affirms that he counterfeited and the world
also says the same: and thus lies and falsehood are embraced for truth, almost
of all men, and the truth indeed rejected, and the lovers thereof hated,
scorned, despised, slandered, and some of them worse entreated: It going thus
it is not against, but according to the scriptures, yea herein the scripture is
fulfilled in that Summers is quiet and free from all molestation by satan,
notwithstanding he is in him, because the strong man armed says the scripture
keepinge the house without resistance, there is peace: but let Christ Jesus the
stronger come upon him in the means he has sanctified for the recovery of
this house to himself the right owner, and the expellinge of the usurper, then
undoubtedly there will be an end of this unjust peace, James, 4. 7. ephesians. 6.
17. 18.
and therein likewise we shall see the scripture fulfilled.

In the holy scriptures it is written that if we resist the devil, he will
fly understand this not only of satan's temptations, but also of his person.
and then affirm I that this scripture has been fulfilled. In like manner the
scriptures tell us, that the way to resist Satan so as we may put him to
flight and overcome, is to use prayer and the word of god, which is the sword
of the spirit. Understand this as the former, and herein this scripture also
has been verifyed.

The holy scriptures show how that great things even incredible has been
brought to pass by prayer and fasting: this has been showed before out of
the 2. chr 20. and other pla^^ of scripture.
more particulerly, that even devils thereby have been and are to be cast ovt
of men: herein the scripture likewise has been fulfilled.

In the scriptures it is recorded, that when the devil goes out of the man
whom he possesses, he renteth him sore. c^yeth aloude the possessed after
lying as dead: now many of us even hundreds have seen with our eyes, mark. 1,
26. and 26. act. 8, 7. math. 12. 43. Luke 11. 24.
and heard with our ears this scripture fulfilled

In the holy scriptures we read that when the vucleane spirit is gone out of a
man he will return seeking to reenter. Besides the reports of all and every of
the parties possessed, the sudden and unspeakable frights and terrors which
many of us have often beheld in the spirits assaites to reenter, do greatly
confirm this return upon our Demoniackes all which was done that the
scripture herein might be fulfilled. The scripture says that if the devils
find the house empty swept and garnished that is the party out of whom he is
come, prepared to receive him, which is when he is empty or void of the graces
of the spirit, and garnished or replenished with iniquities: (for the furniture
must be suitable to the ghest, the unclean spirit must be interteyned in all
uncleanness) that then he reentreth and recouereth his pray, as otherwise
although he would feign yet he cannot. Now who sees not the case to be so
with W. Summers for were he not empty. swepte, and garnished he would never deny
the work of god which has benshewed on him? and give forth to the great
dishonor of god, hurt of many and danger of his own soul, that he had
counterfeyted: not to speak anything of his open and notorious lyinge and
doublinge with that false tongue of his, nor of his charging me with the
instructing of him, neither of his fearful perjury sometimes betaking himself
body and soul to the devil if he counterfeyted: at other times protesting as
depely that he did counterfeyt: In the repossession then of Summers it is
evident that this scripture is fulfilled: as on the other side this scripture
considered and his present estate and condition, I mean that he is empty? how
can it otherwise be but that he is reposessed? further the scripture says,
that the unclean spirit retorning and reentering he does it with 7. other
worse then himself. Now this has been found true in Kath: Wrights
repossession: and I doubt not but that the truth thereof will one day appear
also in Summers when he shall come again to be dispossessed: if so be at any
time it will be granted, that the means for the discovery of satan, and
after for the casting of him out may be used.

Finally in the holy scripture it is said, that if the unclean spirit
retorning find the party out of whom he came, empty. swept, and garnished:
that he will not only enter in and take up his lodging there: as it were for a
night as a stranger does in an other man's house, and away in the morninge, as
he does (as I may say) in his first possession: but will now as having
further interest there then he had before, make (...) scriptures speak truly
in and concerning the matter of possession dispossession, and repossession. and
not according to the truth in other things? wi^ any be so absurd, as to
think and confess that the holy scriptures speak most truly as touching
the tormenting here on eard^e of the bodies of those men the devils enter into
and will they not as well believe the same writings tellinge them, psalm 11. 6.
(...) 3. 10. 12 and 25 (...). 24, 14,
that after death and in an other world the devils shall torment the works of
iniquity in hell fire, which never shall pe quenched, and of which torments
there will never be an end. And saying the substance of this book (I mean
the holy bible) is spent in reportinge things incredible to flesh and blood,
such as the reason of man re^ecteth, and scorneth, among which these concerning
devils, their nature, power, entrance into men etc. are some: and that this is
it which lets man from embracing it as a word of truth: and that sundry of
these incredible and impossible things to reason, we evidently see with our
eyes, and our selves of our own knowledge know to be most true, why should we
not be fullye persuaded or the divine and certain truth of the other
incredible thiugs there reported? and that all those also in their time we
shall as certainly see fulfilled, as we have already in part senee these? Thus
me thinks the fulfillinge of many sayings in the scriptures in this work of
god, should be a mo^ue and inducement to many, to give that credit unto them
which percase before they did not: yea surely if man will but give ea^e to ^is
reason wherewith god has endued him, and discuss or debate hereof after this
said manner it will persuade him hereunto.

I do not say that this is effectual or of Power, and sent of god to that
end, to work sauinge faith in man: ffor I know faith comes by hereinge and
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14. 17.
But this I mean, that he which before thought basely and ga ue no regard or
credit to the holy word of god, by this rare work of his and serious
^meditation thereof, may well be brought to think more reverently of the
word, and to be persuaded of the truth thereof, where before he doubted, and so
brought to the historical faith as we call it, where being happily he will
not rest, but there by be drawn to give ear unto the word preached, and so
be brought to that faith, 1. cor. 1. 18. 21. 1. peter. 1. ^.
the end whereof will be the salvation of his soul: whereof if this work of
god be an occasion to any, oh how will such bless God for the same, and joy
in this that the sound there of came to his ear.

Thus we plainly see how this work of god sarueth to confirm the authority
and truth of the holy scriptures I mean how it some what helps to persuade
us incredulous men to believe, or more steadfastly to believe that the are divine
and certainly true: in that we see many things spoken of in them, and very
incredible to flesh and blud, as well as others there mentioned, fulfilled
before our eyes and to be most true.

Saying then no hurt, but mnch good as we have heard comes by this work, why
should any be offended with us, for bearinge witness to this work? and why
do any stand up and set them selves against this work indeuoringe to
annihilat the same? Certainly in fo doing, they are not only injurious to man,
hindering him of the good. fruit he might reap thereby: but also adversaries
to god. and his glory, prophaninge and not hallowinge or sanctifiinge this his
name Christ Jesus to such as he cured was wont to say: math, 9. 2. 29. mark. 5.
34. Luke. 7, 50. John, 5. 4. math, 8. 4. mark. 5. 43, and 36. and 8, 26, 3
math. 17: 19: mark. 8. 5, 19* Ink. 8. 39.
be it unto thee as thou beleuest: thy faith has made thee whole: go in
peace: thysinns are forgiven thee: sin no more, least a worse thing come
unto thee: and to many, see thou tell no man of this I have done unto thee:
yea sometimes he straightly charged others that they should tell no man what was
down. But to him out of whom he had cast out the dyuell he said goeshewe
what great things the Lord has done unto thee: and how he has
compassion on thee. It is also to be observed, that we read not the same or
like speech to this, this work is mongest and boue some otl works of go to be
publish the greateris there sin w^ go about to smother it.
used to any besides of all those that Jesus healed: whereby it may seem that
the Lord Jesus would not have this work in any case smothered and kept close
no not for a time, but rather set as a candle in a candlestick upon the table
that it may give such light unto men as we have already seen: and no marvel
considering the words followinge of our Savior: go slew (says he) what
great things the Lord has done unto thee. Are there great things to be
looked upon in this work we speak of: even by the testimony of Christ
himself? who then and where is he if Summers, the 7. in Lancashire and the
rest were possessed, and dispossessed, that dare stand up to darken and obscure
the said work, whereby the people of god be kept from behouldinge the great
things of the lord and so hindered from the great good they might reap
thereof, and god from his glory? If it be evident that upon these persons this
work of god has been wrought: who sees not how contrary minded such are unto
Christ?

Of the 70 desciple whom Jesus sent forth by there preachinge and miracles to
prepare and make away for him self, and his ministry, it is said: that when
they had accomplished this work, they returned again with joy saying, Luke,
10. 1^ 18. 19.
Lord even the devils are subdued to us through thy name. In this subjection
of the spirits unto them, above all the great works and miracles they wrought
they rejoiced: wherein how so ever they exceeded, whereupon Christ reproves
them saying In this rejoice not that the spirits are subdued unto you, (...)
but rather rejoice be cause your names are written in heaven. yet mark that
he does it so as that he denies not but that they might rejoice there in, but
rather indede aloweth and commends the same, so that we keep a measure: and
make it not our chief joy, the which should be that our names are written in
heaven. whereof the other gives no assurance, for as much as it may fall into a
reprobate. (...), 7, (...).


And truly how can they which hear of the aforesaid work of God but
rejoice, (...) we ought, so ^e can not but ioce in this ^orke, if we ^ill
consider of In great fault ^en are they ^ho malig^e it.
when they see the Lord Jesus subduinge Satan unto men. when we see by prayer
and fasting deuylls cast out of men: when: we see God perfourming his promise:
the scripture before our eyes fulfilled, and our christian brethren also
delivered from the torments of Satan. If we turn our eye either to God, or
man: can we choose but rejoice and bless God for such a work? greatly then
are they to blame, and far from that affection they should have, who are
disquieted and offended here with: and most faulty of all shall they be, who
when the work shall be made manefest to there conciences, (as I trust by this
treatise it is,) shall yet notwithstanding lift up there heel against it.

Through the want both of a corrector and of the author, their be very many
faults in the printing (among which these following be some) (...) with I
desire the reader with patience to bear.

page 6, chair open, for chai^e and open. p. 7. departed in for departed 8
(...) for st^e caned. p. 10, fleamthicke for fle^n c and lhiere, p 13. (...)
for her: p 1, 2 pence read 3 Pence, p, 33, the diverse for diverse: ib, wherewith
(...) p 22: derelinquisti for derellquistr, ibi fortaken for forgotten. p. ^5,
(...) p, 49, learn for leave, p 51. continancy for continuance he had in: p 57
(...) for with all possible p 60: who endued for who was indu^^. p 91. the
(...) and prayer for the fasting and prayer they used.


