A Monumentall PYRAMIDE TO ALL POSTERITIES: Erected to the everliving memory,
and perpetual Honor of the All-vertuous and Euer-glorious Prince, LODOVVICK,
late Duke of Richmond and Lenox: Earl of Newcastle, and Darnley, etc. Lord of
Torbolten and Methuen, Baron of Settrington, etc. Knight of the Noble order of
the Garter. Lord high Admiral and great Chamberlain of Scotland: Lord high
Steward to the Kings most excellent Majesty's most Honorable Household:
Gentleman of his Bedchamber: and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council for England and Scotland, etc.

Who departed this transitory life at his Chamber in White Hall, on Monday,
being the sixteenth day of February, 1624. betwixt six and seven of the
clock in the morning, to the great grief of many thousand people of sundry
Nations.

AT LONDON Printed by Edw. All^de for Nathaniel Butter. 1624.

TO THE JLLVSTRIOVS PRINCE ESME, Duke of Lenox etc. Earl of MARCH and DARNLEY
etc. Lord of AVBIGNY, Terboten And Methuen, Baron of Settrington etc. And to
the learned Princess KATHERINE his Gracious DVCHESSE
NOt to draw any more tears from your eyes do J publish under your Graces
Protections, this FUNERAL ELEGY. J could not have thought it worthy your view,
but that it aims at the conservation of the glorious fame of that lamented
Duke your noble Brother, which is to you most dear. J know none can set truly
forth his divine Virtues, for his praise is a high-going Sea, that wants both
shore and bottom: J do only show my duty in my broken English, both to
awaken and encourage Great Britains Poets, who were struck into a Lethargy by
this Princes sudden ascension to Heaven, to lament (in singing his due praise)
their irreparable loss, until I can honor France (desolate for his death)
with the bright Pattern of his matchless life, more fully in my native
Language.

Your Graces devoted, A. Darcie

TO THE NOBLE FRIENDS of that lamented Prince the deceased Duke of Richmond and
Lenox.
THe friendliest office used to the dead,
Is their illustrious Virtues for to spread:
That though their MORTAL Parts interred lie
Their MEMORIES may last Eternally.
And to discharge my far obliged Breast
These saddest FUNERAL LINES I have addressed
Which as I hope shall due Acceptance find
With those who keep his VERTVES in their mind.
To show my small skill in Poetique vain,
I have not undertook this willing pain,
But to make known the gratitude I owe
For Courtesies which undeserved did flow
From his full-handed Bounty, unto me
WHO RAISED THIS COLVMNE TO HIS MEMORY.
And if (Great Lords) this Muse may but obtain,
Your gracious eye, my labor is not vain.
A Monumentall PYRAMIDE TO ALL POSTERITIES: Erected to the everliving memory,
and perpetual Honor of the All-vertuous and Euer-glorious Prince, Lodowick,
late Duke of Richmond and Lenox,
RISE MOVRNEFVLL MUSE MELPOMENE, Relate
The woeful Story of a sudden Fate,
Which on a great and Noble DVKE befell;
No age can this Disaster parallel;
Imperious Death his cruel arrow flings,
Into the palaces of mighty Kings,
Transfixing sometime with impartial hand
The highest Nobles of a glorious Land.
(...) A Funeral Elegy.
His corpse returned to earth from whence it came
But from his acts does rise his worthy fame.
Jmmortall Prince! whose name shall never dye;
But shall survive to all eternity:
How can the memory of such a spirit,
Whose deeds of very Envy got his merit,
Ever forgotten be? whom to just praise
The worthy actions of his life did raise.
All you the Worthies of our present days,
Whose judgment and experience knew his ways
Conuersed with his actions and intents,
Jn private and in public managements.
To your true understandings it is known,
That he might claim all honors for his own.
But you thrice noble Princess, late the Wife
Of this brave Hero now deprived of life,
Who can prescribe a bound unto your moan,
Now that your second dearest self is gone?
He was the pattern of a perfect man,
His singular endowments ever wan
A general liking, and a full applause
For his upright sincerenes in each cause:
How quickly do all earthly joys decay,
Forsaking their possessors; In a day,
An hour, a minute, hard misfortunes fall,
Which from our mirth do unto mourning call!
O let your brinish tears without all end
From th'inexhausted fountains still descend.
(...) England lament thy loss of such a Peer,
And France, thy Ebon Robes of sorrow wear:
But the praiseworthy actions he has wrought,
Till the worlds Fabrique be to Chaos brought,
Shall live perpetual in each ages story,
As the due Trophies of his matchless glory!
O cruel Tyrant, how can thou repair
This ruin? though hereafter thou should spare
All mankind, break thy Dart and Ebon spade,
Thou can ont cure this wound which thou have made;
Achilles falls, and Hector he is slain,
When as base Peasants do untouched remain,
Beams which shall break forth from his hollow tomb
Shall stain times past, and light the time to come:
There is no man, though he before were glad,
But when he thinks that we his Hero had,
And now have lost him, Though he be divine
Made by his death, yet will his eyes drop brine;
All men are sorry, all do weep their turn,
All in their hearts, though not in habits mourn,
The gener all land ore-whelm'd in sorrow lies
Exclayming on the cruel destinies,
What accident fallen in a 1000. years,
Has from his friends drawn forth more store of tears?
Since the first man that in the world was borne,
A fuller number was not known to mourn:
But for our selves, not him, let us lament,
Whose happiness is grown our punishment.
(...) And is the Pattern of true courtesy,
Both humble and repleat with majesty;
May his proceedings from above be blessed
With fortunate success and happy rest.
And may his Duchess with their Princely Line
All live long, and in Sun-bright honor shine.
For these my worthless lines, let it be said,
J hasted till I had this tribute paid
Of my poor service; let the speed excuse
The zealous error of my sudden Muse:
Yet though his praise here bear so short a wing,
England has Poets that his praise will sing
In sweeter tunes, and that will make his Hearse
To be remembered, while men live or verse.
FINIS.

