TO The Nobly minded and worthily disposed Gentleman JOHN TREFERY Esquire.
SIR, the particular favors I have often tasted as Arguments of a greater
love, then any service of mine can deserve; Challenge from me a larger debt of
duty and acknowledgement, then any endeavors of mine can by possibility
acquit: yet to instance a gratitude somewhat above my fortunes or ability; I
have adventured to tender an humble thankfulness, in presenting to your
judicious view a Nouelty, which I presume will be as acceptable to your
particular knowledge, as it is to the Christian world ingenerall: being the
Conversion and Baptism of a lew, written formerly in sundry Languages, lately
in French, and now by me Translated into English, which task falling within
the compass of my ableness to discharge, I have made bold under your
protection to expose to the public view, and in all humbleness offer to your
Patronage: that it may be some living (though slight) testimony, of that love
and duty which has, and ever shall publish me to the world as I am in heart:

Your Servant, and lover of your virtues, THOMAS DREW.

Daniel Ben Alexander, heretofore a Jew by Religion, but now a Disciple of
JESUS CHRIST.
To the dispierced JEWS.
The Grace of God the Father, the Peace of Jesus Christ his Son, and the
Charity of the holy Spirit, be amongst you all, now and evermore. AMEN.

MY dear Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Friends, and Allies, of the seed
of Israel, according to the flesh: I profess truly unto you, and that without
dissimulation, my conscience and soul bears witness with me, that I could
say with the Apostle Saint Paul, I suffer for you so much affliction in soul,
that I could almost desire to be separated from Christ for you my Brethren:
for you I say, that are of the seed of Israel, you to whom has been sent and
Prophesied, the glad tidings of the Blessed Messiah, promised to our
Forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also unto holy David, You Brethren
of whom according to the flesh, is borne Jesus Christ, which is God eternally
blessed. Amen. Romans 9.5.

I doubt not but this my conversion to the Christian Faith, does much astonish
and afflict you: But my dear Brethren, that you may understand I have done
nothing lightly or without premeditation: But with careful heed, constant
faith, and assuredness in soul, having built my foundation upon Gods eternal
word, which cannot fail; I have this day manifested to you and the world, my
confession of Faith, which if you shall please to read, though you find it
brief in regard of my scarsity of time, yet grounded upon the proof of the
Prophets and Old Testament, verified in the History of the New. God assist you
and me, and may he be so pleased to hasten my return amongst you my Brethren,
that I there may manifest his great mercy and grace to me, and that I may
likewise be a light and guide unto you, to lead you out of that darkness
wherein you are; insomuch that you know not the right hand from the left.

First, I would entreat you understand, that though I have utterly abandoned
the Jewish Religion, yet am not become enemy to their persons, nor to the name
of Israel, which is now so much the more available into me, in regard I can
call my self of the house of Israel, not only according to the flesh, but
principally according to the Spirit.

Therefore dearly beloved, I thought it fit to give you some testimony of my
charity, thereby to make you partakers of that grace which God has bestowed on
me, plucking me forth of darkness and error, to the light of his holy word,
out of the way of death and destruction, into the way of eternal salvation.

I know for these things I shall be hated of you, and if it be in your power,
persecuted; yet being in your blind zeal transported, as the Apostle Saint
Paul, before he was called to the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
persecuted those that believed in his name. But when that shall happen, may it
please God so to strengthen me, that I may as a Christian appear like one of
his, and so suffer for him that suffered and was crucified for me, which I
shall account exceeding great gain.

And thus far understand, that all worldly respect whatsoever, I cast beneath
my feet, and do utterly renounce and disobey all Injunctions which shall be
contrary to his service, that has made me of a Saul a Paul; of a Persecuter
and Blasphemer of his name, a man ready (by his grace) courageously to
confess him and his name; that of an enemy has adopted me a child; for which
I cannot sufficiently render thanks: And I beseech him to make you partakers
of the same grace and mercy.

Wherefore (beloved) wash your selves in clean water, that ye may be clean,
and turn yet from your evils. Alas! how long will ye vex God? stay for no
other Messiah then he that is come, and shall again undoubtedly with glory
come to judge both the quick and the dead. Then those eyes shall see him that
have pierced him, and those that cried, Deliver the Thief, and crucify the
just: Then shall they cry to the hills to fall upon them, and the mountains to
cover them, but it shall no whit avail them.

But howsoever you have persecuted the Prince of life; and spilt his innocent
blood; yet notwithstanding he prayed for you, that it would please his Father
to pardon you, in regard you knew not what you did: you may be yet restored by
him, provided you will acknowledge him, and leave to blaspheme his name, and
fly from misbeliefe: for God has not forsaken his people whom he formerly
knew. Bear in mind the calling of the Gentiles, toward whom the Messiah
turned, being by you rejected, of whom he was borne, and to whom he was
promised and sent: Woe be unto you that are wise in your own conceits, seeing
many things, and taking heed to none; hearing much, and understanding nothing.

Think not (brethren) that I reproachfully write this unto you, but in
charity, and for it is the truth which I will always witness unto you as to
my beloved brethren, and better it were that I reprove you, then God should
reproach you with this saying, The Ox knows his Owner, the Ass the Manger of
his Master, but Israel has no knowledge, my people has no understanding.
Behold here the eternal which knocks at your door, it is the voice of the
beloved that knockes, saying, Open my sister, my dear, my Dove: Seek the
eternal now when he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near: kiss the
Son left he be angry, and ye perish in the way.

Think with your selves, the days are few and evil: Redeem the time, the
day of the Lord is at hand, you know not at what hour he will come, then
shall we not be able to open our mouths against our Master, the work shall
not dispute against him that made it.

Wherefore (dear Brethren) search diligently the Scriptures, take in hand the
key of the Kingdom of heaven, the Lord in his mercy will show you the door.

Receive this in good part and briefly, because of the shortness of time that
I have to soiourne here: but if it please God to grant me the grace, to
return into this Country amongst my brother Christians, after having travailed
into mine own Country, to see those of mine own Nation, I shall (God assist
me) take pains to do something more amply for your benefit, and the
advancement of your souls health.

You my Father and Mother, whom I love equally with mine own soul: I humbly
beseech you in the bowels of Gods mercy, think with your selves that you must
once come to judgment, and render an account of all your proceedings, before
the King of Kings, holy and blessed, stop not your ears, and be not void of
understanding.

God which is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, be pleased to open the eyes
of your understanding, and to manifest unto you the knowledge of the Messia^
which has suffered for our sins, and is risen again for our justification,
and having given you this grace as unto me, he has strengthened us together
in the same by his holy Spirit, to the end we may persevere constantly in the
confession of his holy name in this life, and dying in his love; we may be
received into his peace, and made pertakers of everlasting life which has
been dearly bought for us, by the precious blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
to whom with the Father, and to the holy Spirit, one only God eternally
blessed, be all glory and praise throughout all worlds. Amen.

Your Son Daniel Ben Alexander, heretofore a Jew by Religion, but now a
Disciple of Jesus Christ.

In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, one only GOD
Eternally Blessed, AMEN.

I Daniell Son of Alexander, borne a JEW, and made Partaker of the
Circumcision in the Flesh according to the same. Do render thanks to GOD,
which is the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that of his Mercy and Grace he
has brought me to the knowledge, that heretofore I was in the way of Perdition
and everlasting Death, in not having known the Savior of the world JESUS
CHRIST the Eternal Son of GOD; and now having revealed unto me by the virtue
of his holy Spirit in the reading of his holy Word, that I could not attain to
everlasting life, unless I were made a Member of his Body, I believed that I
ought in his Name, and for the health of mine own soul, to receive according
to his Institution in his holy Church the holy Sacrament of Baptsime, of which,
and of the Graces that do accompany it; has in diverse places of the Old
Testament been Prophesied by significant Figures and spoken of in the New
Testament in clear and manifest terms: for Example, God speaking by Ezechiel
in the 36. Chap. 25. Verse. says: Thenwill I pour clean water upon you, and
you shall be clean: yea from all your filthiness and from all your Idols will
I cleanse you.

This figure of Baptism, likewise is manifested in the 7.th of Genesis,
alleged by St. Peter, chap. 2. verse. 20.21. Which were in time passed,
Disobedient, when the long suffering of God waited in the days of Not, while
the Arc was preparing, wherein few, that is, Eight-soules were saved in the
water.

Verse. 21. Whereof the Baptism that now is, answering that Figure (which is
not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God) saves us now also, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

This very Figure in many other places is presented unto us, as Exodus 13.21.
and the 14.22. of which the Apostle St. Paul makes mention in the 1. Cor. 10.2.
And were all Baptized unto Moses, in that Cloud, and in that Sea.

Zachary, in the Name of the Eternal has Prophesied of the graces of
Baptism, in the 13. Verse. 1. In that Day there shall be a Fountain opened to
the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for
uncleanness.

And this Fountain was figured in the 1. of King. 7.3. By the Sea or great
Caldron, which Solomon placed in the Temple of God in Jerusalem, which was
borne upon twelve Oxen, figuring the twelve Apostles, which should Preach the
Baptism of Repentance, of which they received the Commandment by our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, which speaks to them in the 28.th of St. Matthew: Go therefore,
and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.

The virtue of which Baptism I verily believe to be powerful to Salvation,
since our Savior CHRIST himself says, 16. of St. Mark. He that shall
believe and be Baptized shall be saved, but he that shall not believe, shall
be damned.

And in St. John, Chap. 3. Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
except that a man be borne of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God.

By these words it appears clear, that the Figures in the Old Testament,
are fully accomplished in the New by the searching of Jesus Christ which is the
true Lamb of God without any spot, that takes away the Sins of the world.
Being also the true promised Messiah and Son of David, of whom nothing has
been spoken in the New Testament, which has not formerly been Prophesied by
Moses and the Prophets. Neither ought we to look for any other then he that
is ascended into Heaven, even Jesus Christ, which shall come to Judge the
quick and the Dead.

And further examining the particulers of the Messiah, touching his Person,
Office, Nativity, Doctrine, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascenton, I
have found them all to belong and appertain to Jesus Christ only, who is the
undoubted Messiah and Son of the Eternal God, as appears Psalm. 22. Verse.
7. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. And it is of him also that
is spoken in the 3. of Matthew, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased.

Touching the time of his Birth, and entrance into the world, it is Prophesied
in the 49. Chap. of Genesis: The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiver between his feet, until Shilo come, and the People shall be
gathered unto him.

And in the 24. of Nom. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter
shall rise out of Israel.

Christ is the Son of David according to the Flesh, he is the seed of the
Woman, as is Prophesied in the 3. of Genesis The seed of the Woman shall bruise
the head of the Sespent.

The Messiah ought to be borne of a Virgin, Isaiah, 7. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and she shall call his name Emanuell.

Christ was borne of this Virgin, to whom the Angel speaking (that she
should be Mother to the Savior of the world) said, his Name shall be JESUS.
And the Evangelist St. Matthew says, All this was done that it might be
fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet Isaih.

This Messiah is true Man, and so likewise true GOD, and bears Name Jehovah
the Eternal. Jeremiah 23. and the 5. Behold, the days come, (says the Lord)
that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth.

This could have relation to none but our Savior Christ, who is sprung from
David of the Tribe of Judah, as it has been Prophesied.

So then that the Messiah ought to have come from the Tribe of Judah, and that
at this present no Jew can distinguish the Tribes of Israel one from the other,
since they were Captives in Babylon, which is above 2. Thousand years, how can
they now have knowledge of the house of David, and consequently their Messiah
which they look for?

This persuades me verily to believe, that he that was borne of the Virgin
Mary, proceeded from the royal house of David, as teaches the holy history,
the true Messiah of the Tribe of Judah.

The Messiah ought to have been borne in Bethelem, as foretold Micah: in the
5. Chap. 2. Verse. And thou Bethlem Ephrathah, art little to be among the
Thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me, he that shall be
the ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from the Beginning and from
Everlasting.

Now Bethelem is long since destroyed, and no mark or memory of it remaining;
So then it follows, that he that was borne in Bethelem, to wit, Jesus Christ
must be the true Messiah, according to the Prophets.

The Messiah ought to come to Jerusalem in the time of the Second Temple, as
spoke Agge. 2.8. Zach. 9.9. Mala. 3.1. Jesus Christ came in the time of the
second Temple, as the Gospel makes mention, which assuredly persuades me, to
believe him to be the true Messiah to us promised.

And now seeing that Jerusalem is destroyed, and the Temple likewise destroyed,
so that no Stone remains upon another.

It is mere folly for the Jews to look for any other Messiah above 1500.
after the Destruction, then he that came at the time Prophesied and appointed,
and which shall come again to Judge the quick and the Dead, as it has been
taught by the Apostles of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Item the Messiah ought to have taught a Doctrine of Grace and Mercy, whereas
Moses gave the Law, and denounced a Curse against the transgressors thereof,
this is that which Esa, Prophesied in the ^^. Chap. He has sent me to Preach
good tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to Preach Liberty
to the Captives, etc.

The Messiah, ought to be that great Prophet promised in the 18.th of Deuteronomy: I
will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, etc.

The Messiah ought to work Miracles, as says Isa: Chap. 35. Then shall the
eyes of the Blind be lightened, and the ears of the Deaf be opened, then
shall the Lame man leap as an Heart. and the Dumb man's tongue shall sing.

The Messiah ought to be a high Priest, Psalm. 110. verse. 4. The Lord swear and
will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the ^^der of Melchizedeck.
And the Apostle St. Paul applies that, to our Savior Jesus Christ, in his
Epistle to the Hebrews.

The Messiah ought to suffer and Dye, as the Prophet Daniel teaches us in the
4. Chap. of his Prophecy, the 26. Verse. And after Three score and two weeks
shall Messiah be slain, etc. He ought then to have Dyed but not for his sin,
for he was without sin, and called by Daniel, the holy of holyes, he has
done wrong to no man, nor has any deceit been found in his mouth.

The manner of his Death has been foretold by David, Psalm. 22. They have
pierced my hands and my feet.

And Zacha. 12.10. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and
they shall lament for him as one mourns for his only Son, and be sorry for
him as one is sorry for his first borne.

And speaking of the Person of Jesus Christ in the Apocalips, it is said of
him; That when he shall come in the Clouds all eyes shall see him. Namely
those that have pierced him.

The Messiah ought to suffer for our Sins, to take upon him our infirmities
and miseries, by his sickness to give us health, and to endure himself all
reproach and disquiet to bring us peace. As says Isa. in the 53. Chap. very
amply. Which is likewise aleadged by the Evangelists in diverse other places.

The Messiah ought to be our high Priest, not that he offered the Blood of
Beeues and Rams, but himself for the Sins of the people, as says Isa. in
the 53. Chap. He shall make his soul an Offehing for Sin. And St. Paul to
the Hebrews the 9.th Chap. says. Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves,
but by his own Blood, entered he once into the Holy place, and obtained
Eternal redemption for us.

The Messiah ought to be an Intercessor for Sinners and transgressors, Isa.
53.12. So did our Savior Jesus Christ do in the 23. of St. Luke, he says;
(praying for his persecutors) Father pardon them they know not what they do.

The Messiah after his Suffering ought not to remain amongst the Dead, but to
rise again, David fore-speaking of him, says in the 16. Psalm. For thou will
not leave my soul in the Grave, Neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption: The time of his Resurrection was figured by Jonas, and our Savior
does apply it to himself, in St. Matthew, 12.40. For as Jonas was three days
and three nights in the Whales belly; so shall the Son of man be three days
and three nights in the heart of the Earth.

The Messiah was not promised to be a King or temporal Prince, or to have an
earthly Dominion, as the Jews imagine, that think he should come accompanied
with an Earthly glory. But his Kingdom was foretold to be Spiritual, and
his coming into this world full of humility, ignominy, and contempt.

His eternal and spiritual Kingdom was foretold by Daniel, his Kingdom is
an eternal Kingdom, and in the second of Daniel and the 44. And in the days
of these Kings. shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed, and this Kingdom shall not be given to another people, but it shall
break and destroy all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. And the
Angel Gabriell speaking to the holy Virgin Mother of our Savior Jesus Christ,
says, That he shall reign over the house of Jacob eternally, and there shall
be no end of his reign. Then this Jesus which is come in the fullness of time,
is the Messiah, which now reigns over a spiritual not temporal Kingdom, and
there shines in glory, who contrariwise in the earthly Kingdom was
contemptible. First, he was reputed borne from Parents of mean condition,
foulded in cloutes, laid in a Manger, in a loathsome Stable, Luke 2.7. For his
familiar company poor Fishermen, knew no place where to lay his head, he was
mocked, injured, persecuted stricken, they have stricken the King of Israel
upon the cheek with a Rod, then wished they him to prophecy, Matthew 26.68.
Prophecy unto us, O Christ, who is he that smote thee. His defection was such
that Isaiah says of him, chap. 53. he has neither form nor beauty, when we
shall see him there shall be no form that we should desire him: and David in
the 22. Psalm, calls him a worm and not a man, the shame of men, and the
contempt of the people: And verse the 7. All they that see me have me in
derision, they make a mow and nod the head, which is likewise verified in the
Gospel. Our Savior speaking of himself, says, His Kingdom is not of this
world, which though it be to them a scandal yet it might suffice, the Jews
that hoped and yet do vainly hope for a reestablishment of the temporal
Kingdom of Israel: and which believe that the Messiah should come for them
only, and not for the Gentiles, altogether against that which Ezekiel speaks,
Chap. 37.22. I will make them one people in the land, upon the mountains of
Israel, and one King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more two
peoples, neither be divided henceforth any more into two Kingdoms. And our
Savior Christ in Saint John Chap. 10. calls them one Shepherd and one
flock. And the Apostle to the Ephe. 2. who says, Christ Jesus has made both
one, and has broken down the pertition wall.

Now Christ having finished and suffered all things, that we have understood to
have been foretold to be done by the Messiah: we assuredly believe, that he
is the true Messiah, which not only came in the flesh, and in that suffered
death, but has triumphed over death, and the pains and punishments due to our
sins, and after his resurrection ascended into heaven, there to be a Mediator
for us, Romans 8.33. Heb. 9.24. And Saint John says, If any man have sinned, we
have an advocate with the Father, namely Jesus Christ the just (...) he that
made the propitiation for our sins, and also of all the world.

Applying my self then in the search (...) reading of the Old Testament, I
know that the (...) must be come long since, seeing that the Scepter has been
taken from Judah many hundred years past, as it was foretold in 49. Genesis seeing
the (...) ore and ten wee^^ of Daniel, which make four hundred, (...) years,
be long since passed three times and better, seeing the predictions of Messiah
do iumpe with the time of our Savior Christ in the Gospel.

I am bound to confess from the bottom of my soul, as my conscience does
bear me witness, that Jesus the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, is the true
Messiah promised to the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he is come
in the flesh, that he is the true Son of God, true God, and true man, who
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and that there is
no salvation but through him.

I receive the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, and them, believe to
be the true word of God, as are also those of Moses and the Prophets, and that
the doctrines of the one and the other, are to instruct men in the true faith,
and consequently, to bring them by the grace of God, to the inheritance of the
Kingdom bought and purchased by Jesus Christ, in whom he that believes, shall
be saved, as he himself teaches in the 6. of Saint John, He that believes in
me shall have everlasting life: Now, for as much as the Christian Church is
blemished with many Schisms and Heresies. I render hearty thanks to God, that
of his mercy he has brought me to the resolution to demand my Baptism, and
join me to the confession of the faith and doctrine of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and reformed Church, which I believe only to be of the
Jerusalem, which is above, which is mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.

And in this place I think my self bound to manifest unto you, the admirable
means, though weak in appearance, by which it pleased God to draw me out of
the servitude of Iudaisme.

The manner how he came to be converted.
SOme four years since, or there abouts, being at Prague (the capital City
of the Kingdom of Bohemia) where there are many Jews inhabitants,

Walking up and down the City; a very poor Scholar altogether unknown to
me, makes up toward me, and being met, with an earnest look fixed in my face,
he demanded of me some small charitable alms: at the first I refused to give
him any thing (and I now freely confess) my reason was because he was a
Christian, nor did only deny him, but for that cause inwardly reuil'd him.
He looking upon me, and shaking his head, said, Master revile me not, but if
your charity be cold, lintreate of you to buy this book of me: at which time
other Christians gathering about us, and hearing me so churlish to him, began
likewise to talk, for fear of whom I threw him some small (...), and took
his book with an evil will, for I then said, I take no delight in any of the
Christians Books; which he hearing, said, Courteously, Sir I pray you read it,
and if you carefully read it, it may show you the way to your salvation: at
which I smiling went joy way, and coming home, as carelessly threw it into a
Chest, not thinking further of it.

But some twelve month after searching for something that was in that Chest,
this Book presents itself to my view, which at first I had utterly forgot,
nor could I call to mind whence or where I had it, but suddenly opening of it,
and looking into it, (with no religious intent as then) I espied (...) Prophets
drove me into a curiosity and desire to read. Then proceeding, I found it to
be a New Testament, when comparing some places of it to others of the Old
Testament, I was on the sudden so sensibly touched in soul, that I resolved
to read it through: and after a while reading, God I humbly thank him by
little and little opened the eyes of my understanding, so that I began to doubt
that I and those of my Nation were in some error: of which to be resolved, I
addressed my self to some of the most learned amongst us in Prague, desiring
of them to expound unto me some of those places which I had read in the
Prophets, still concealing that I had a New Testament: which had they known, I
might have been rudely handled by them: Their answers gave me no
satisfaction, but on the contrary bred in me more difficulties, and if I
pressed them to any material point, they then answered me, Sthouma: that is,
they are things concealed; but being desirous to know those things which were
concealed to them and my self also, I departed from Prague, and took my way
into Poland, hoping from those Rabbis there to have had more instructions; but
their answers were all one: And moreover, I was by them enjoined to silence.
Then continuing my reading, and conferring the New and Old Testament together,
neglecting the Talmud, wherein before I spent my time in vain, I became
resolved, utterly to forsake the Jewish Religion, and to become Christian: for
which cause I retired my self to Damsik, where Jews are prohibited to live,
and from thence I embarked for Amsterdam, and so was resolved to go for Rome,
which City I had heard to be the Mother Church of Christendom, and that there
the Pope caused Sermons to be made weekly for the conversion of Jews. Thus to
bring my soul to rest, I travailed my body, and passing on, intending to take
my course through France and so to Rome: My journey was by accident stayed, God
in his pity not suffering me to fall from one evil into a worse: for by the
way having a desire to converse with some religious man that could speak the
high Dutch or low, and hoping by that means to get some letters of
commendations, wherewith I might have presumed of a welcome in Rome, and
meeting with one by chance after Communication, and that I had directly made
known what I was, as also what I desired to be, he forthwith gave me counsel
to be Baptized, which I with some time of pausing refused: but he desiring to
know my reason, I gave him this, that I would know my foundation ere I began to
build, and likewise have more sound knowledge in Christianity, ere I altogether
forsook that faith that I was bred in.

He willing to do me courtesy, conferred with me touching many and main
points of his Religion, which I could by no means believe: whereupon
demanding of him, if the Church of Rome taught the same Doctrine: he answered
me, yes, it does, I finding it disagreeing both to the New and Old Testament,
could not imagine that to be the true Church which taught such false Doctrine.

I then more troubled in mind, intended to find out some Minister of the
Reformed Church, whom having sought, I found (Gods name be blessed for it) the
heavenly food, the spiritual Manna, of which he that feeds, shall never
more hunger.

And here (beloved) give me leave according to promise, to give you my
reasons for forsaking the Church of Rome.

First, for that contrary to the express will of God in the second
Commandment, Exodus 20. They make to themselves graven Images, they prostrate
themselves before them, and worship them, giving them the glory belonging to
God only, who says: I am the eternal, that is my name, I will not give my
glory to another, nor my praise to graven Images.

2. Because they do adore and worship others then God, contrary to the saying
of our Lord Jesus Christ, Math. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve.

3. For that they believe that they may be saved by the name of other
creatures, contrary to that, Acts 4. so spoken by Saint Peter, touching our
Savior Christ. Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men there is
given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved.

4. Because they take from the Merits of our Savior in his Death and Passion,
and teach that men are justified by their own works. Gal. 2, 21. For if
righteousness be by the Law, then Christ dyed without cause. And in the 16.
Know that a man is not Justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of
Jesus Christ. And Ephas. 2.9. Not of works, least any man should boast
himself.

5. Because in the Church of Rome, the men of the Church as they say, have
power to forgive Sins, But God speaks, Isa. 43. I even I am he, that
puts away thine iniquitias for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
Sins.

6. Because the Church of Rome confesses, with the Christian reformed Church,
That our Savior took Flesh only of the Virgin, and yet make they to
themselves out of Bread, a Jesus Christ of Flesh as they say, to be their
daily Sacrifice.

7. Because the Church of Rome offends, in saying that they Sacrifice the
Son of God for the sins of the Living and the Dead, against that which St.
Paul says to the Heb. 9.14. which through the Eternal spirit offered himself
without spot to God.' And 10.14. For with one offering has he consecrated for
ever, them that are Sanctified.

8. Because in the Romish Church, they have taken from the Sacrament of
Baptism, which is for the remission of Sins in Jesus Christ, and teach in
the same Church a remission of Sins, by Fastings, Pilgrimages, and the like,
which I neither believe nor find warranted by any place of Scripture.

9. Because in the Church of Rome, they hold some Meats (created good by God)
for some certain times poluted and unclean, against the saying of St. Paul 1.
Tim. 4.4. For every Creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused,
if it be received with Thanksgiving.

10. Because the Church of Rome prohibiteth people to Marry, which God has not
forbidden, and St. Paul calls that a Doctrine of Devils* 1^ Tim. 4.3. Forbidding
to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Mea^es which God has Created, etc.

11. Because in the Church of Rome, they teach other Purgings then by the Blood
of Jesus Christ, against that which is spoken, in ^. Heb. 12. By his own Blood
entered he once into the Holy plac^ and obtained Eternal remission for us. And
John. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleaseth us from all Sins.

12. Because I believe a man ought not to worship what he Eats, nor to eat
that he worshippeth, nor that any thing we eat can be God; This appears
unto me not only impious but horrible in the Church of Rome, which teaches
that a mortal Man eats his Creator.

These reasons with many more hindered my Journey to Rome, or to take my
Baptism from that Church or Ministers thereof, who teach, things so repugnant
to the word of God.

Neither would I join my self to the Anabaptists, my reason was; Because they
deny the true humane Body of our Savior Jesus Christ, saying, he took no
part of the Flesh of the Virgin Mary; But only past through her Body as water
through a conduit, without participating of any of the substance. And so
consequently sinning against the Article of our Belief, which says that he
was borue of the Virgin Mary, so that taking away his Humanity, they make him
not alike unto us in all things, Sin excepted: as the Apostle has auerred
him.

I therefore utterly renouncing all Impieties, and all Doctrines contrary to
the word of God, embrace the holy Christian Faith, to live and dye according to
Gods holy word, not the traditions of men. For which cause, I know I shall be
abandoned of Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, and hated of all my Nation for
the Blessed name of Christ, who has Prophesied, that the Father shall be
against the Son, and the Mother against the Daughter.

But that threatening of his does astonish me, when he says; He that shall
love Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that shall
deny me before men, I will deny him before my Father which is in Heaven.

My souls desire is for those of my Nation, that it would please God in the
bowels of his great mercy, to take from them the vale that hides the Truth
from them, to open their eyes, to change their blind zeal which is without
understanding, and to be as merciful to them, as to me he has bin, to the
end they be not condemned before the Throne of his Majesty, that they may
cease to Blaspheme his holy Name! O redeem them O Lord, that are the lost
Sheep of Israel, for thou have not forsaken thy people for ever; There are
amongst them many that have not bended their knees to Baal.

Wherefore O Lord convert them, that are to be converted, not looking upon them
in thy Justice, but in thy great Mercy, for thine own sake, for thine own
promise, for thy Covenants sake, to the end thy Name may be everlasting
Blessed. Amen.

Well-beloved Christians, whom I believe to be the assembly of the Faithful,
and of the house of God, I am heartily sorry that I cannot in your own Tongue,
make known to you this my Confession, I have writ it in the Siriacke, and it
is translated in my name into your Language. I protest, not only before you,
but before God, that knows the secrets of all hearts, and hears this my
protestation, that his Grace assisting me, I will live and dye a Christian, and
so be it unto me in his great day of Judgment, as I believe what I confess
before his holy Assembly, whom I humbly beseech that in Christian charity they
would receive me for a member of them, as one of the Disperced sheep of the
house of Israel, and that my name may be written in your memories, as I
verily believe God has registered it, in his Book of Eternal Life. Amen.

ROMANS 11. Verse. 26.27.28. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, The deliverer shall come of Sion, and shall turn away the
ungodliness from Jacob.

27. And this is my Covenants to them, when I shall take away their Sins.

28. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: But as
touching the Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes.

This Confession being thus made, the said Daniel was Catechized by the
Minister, who answered in his own person, as follows.

A Catechism.
Question. WHAT Demand you in the Christian Church?

Answer. I demand the holy Baptism for remission of Sins.

Quest. In name of whom will you be Baptized?

Answ. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Quest. Do you Believe that JESUS CHRIST, is the Eternal Son of God, true
God, and true Man?

Answ. I do believe he is.

Quest. Believe you him to be the Messiah promised in the Old Testament?

Answ, Yes, I believe it.

Quest. Do you understand the Confession of Faith in the Christian Church?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. Repeat it?

Answ. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Quest. Do you promise to remain constant in this Confession all the Days of
your life.

Answ. Yes, the grace of God assisting me.

Quest. Do you renounce the Jewish Religion, their Ceremonies and errors as
also all their heresies?

Answ. I renounce them with all my heart.

Quest. Do you receive the new Testament, as a fulfilling of the Old, and the
Doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles for the word of God, as also those of
the Prophets?

Answ. Yes, so I believe.

Quest. Do you renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil?

Answ. I do.

God of his Grace make you able to fulfill all this for his Glory, and your
own souls health, Amen.

There is more Joy in Heaven for one converted sinner; then for Ninety and
nine, that never went astray.

This Confession of Faith, was made in the presence of the Christian reformed
Church of Roane, the 12.th day of April. 1621. at Queuilly.

Witnesses hereunto, we whose Names are hereunder written, in whose presence
it was done.

Samuel de Lecherpiere. John Maximilian de Langle. Peeter Erondell. Ministers
of the Word of God in the Reformed Church of Roane.

FINIS.

