A TREATISE OF THE CHVRCH. WRITTEN AGAINST them of the Separation, commonly
called BROWNISTS. Wherein the true Doctrine of a visible Church is taught, and
the Church of England, proved to be a true Church. The BROWNISTS false doctrine
of the visible Church is convinced; their shameful perverting of the holy
Scriptures discovered, their Arguments to prove the Church of ENGLAND a false
Church answered.

PROVE. 13.10. Only by pride does man make contention: but with the well
advised is wisdom. PROVE. 14.15. The foolish will believe every thing: but the
prudent will consider his steps. LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in
Red-crosse street. 1617.

TO THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND GRACE AND peace from God our Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is not unknown to them that are acquainted with the writings of the
Brownists, how every where they charge our Church to be a false Church, an
Antichristian Church, and consequently the Synagogue of Satan: and our
particular or parish assemblies, false visible churches. They apply unto us,
and that often, 2. Cor. 6.14.15. and Revel. 18.2.4. and so equal us, with as
gross Idolaters as ever were, heathen and Antichristian We are darkness it
self, wherewith the light has no communion: We worship Belial, not Christ: We
are if not a root of miscreants, Counterp. in the Epistle defense of the
Church and Minist. of Engl. 6. Counterp. 266. and in the Epistle. Paralleles
26. Apology 209.
yet a misceline multitude of believers and infidels: We are the habitation of
devils, the holds of all foul spirits, and the cage of every unclean and
hateful bird: We are Vr of the Caldees, Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom, out of
which they must go that will be saved. They tell us further that Rome is our
mother, and our Church one of her daughters: And as is the mother, so is the
daughter: both harlots. Shall we hear our Church which is the mother of us
all, nay, the Churches of Christ, thus blasphemed and evil spoken of, and that
not in a corner, but upon the house top, as Absalom abused his fathers
Concubines: so as all men may hear; the present world; and the ages
succeeding: and hold our peace? God forbid. So doing we shall show our selves
rather bastards, then natural children. Can a son endure to hear his mother
standered, and reviled, and his bowels not be moved within him, and his tongue
also to speak in her defense? Verily he that is such, honors not his
mother, as the law of God, and nature does bind him. And this is it my dear
mother, reverend, and holy, that has thrust me forward to write this Treatise
in thy defense. I thought indeed with my self a long time that this would
better beseem some of my elder brethren. I considered the strength, skill, and
forwardness of the adversary to fight without wearisomnesse: and mine own
great weakness, M. Johnson, Ainsworth, Smith, Ro^inson, for against all these
I deal in this treatise.
that they with whom I was to have this conflict were b diverse: my self but
one, and that a little one: but such (through the grace of God) was my love to
this part of his holy truth, and hatred to error, that I was able to stride
over them all.

And beginning first with a little Treatise against them of the Separation in
the defense of our Ministry, Liturgy, and Discipline, (moved thereunto by
the continual grief and vexation my soul was in, to see so many round about
me to separate) I considered that they keep much ado about a true visible
Church, and a false, accusing us ever and anon to be a false Church. Hereupon
I thought it very requisite rather to examine their doctrine of the Church,
(which I found to be the very foundation of all that they have written in this
question) and to make trial whether that were true or false.

I know that many will be apt to imagine, that I have said little or nothing
against the Brownists and their Separation: because I do not in this book
answer their objections touching our Ministry, Liturgy, and Discipline. But
these men forget, that the maine point of controversy betwixt the Separists
and us, is: Whether our Church be a true, or a false Church. If the Church of
England be a true Church, as we confidently affirm: Then is the Brownists
separation (by their own confession) sinful: the Scriptures alleged by them
to that end perverted; their speeches against our Church blaspheamous; and all
their arguments concerning our Ministry, Liturgy, and Discipline, so many
sophistications. Then also, is their ealling upon men, to separate from us, and
to go out of Babylon, no more to be regarded, then the barking of dogs in
the street. But if our Church be a false Church, which they contend for: then
we acknowledge their separation to be lawful, and their reasons concerning our
Ministry, Liturgy, and Discipline, to be found and substantial. Hereupon
then all does rest, as a house upon the foundation: which being ouerturned,
the whole house (we know) fales to the ground. To this end I have in this
Treatise endeavored two things principally. First, by diverse arguments I prove
that the church of England is a true Church, and our parish assemblies (as they
are constituted by law) true visible Churches. Secondly, I have answered their
Arguments, whereby they would prove it to be a false church, and namely those
which lately and at large are by M. Ainsworth enforced against us in his
Count^rpoyson.

Let none of my elder brethren be offended at this I have done. What though
this cause be not by me so well managed as it deserves. Accept of it
nevertheless. I have done my best: and God requires but according to that a
man has, and not according to that he has not. Let not man desire more. If
any demand of me, why I, the most unfit and unable of a thousand, in the
midst of so many great Divines, famous for learning, have undertaken the
defense of our Church, which had well beseemed the chiefest of them: I answer,
that seeing them silent, I could not hold my peace. And that I being by the
providence of God cast into the midst of these Separistes, that (toward the
Northen parts) did lately spring up, had thereby many more occasions to move
and prick me forward to this business, then other of my brethren have had.
Thus God who in his secret counsel had purposed and appointed me to this
service, made a way thereunto. And it will abundantly content me, if that
whatsoever it is I have performed, be approved of God, and acceptable to thee
my reverend and gracious Mother: whose next to my Father, wholly I am, devoted
to thy service.

JOHN DAYRELL.

TO ALL SVCH AS PROFESSING THE FAITH AND OBEDIENCE of Christ have separated
themselves from the Churches of ENGLAND.
HAVING just occasion of late to look into your books, I found that there are
four causes alleged for your Separation, and that the principal of them
all, concerns the confusion, and mixture of good and bad in our church. We
forsake (say you) your Church for this maine corruption, Counterp. 3.
that all sorts of profane and wicked men, have been, and are, both they and
their seed received into, and nourished within the bosom of your Church,
contrary to the first covenant of our Redemption: contrary also to the example
of all Gods Churches since the world began, who always were separated from the
ungodly as the Scriptures show. Thus speaks M. Ainsworth: and M. Robinson
after this manner. Answ. to a Censorious Epistle 35.
In these two respects principally, your Babylonish confusion of all sorts of
people in the body of your Church without separation, and your Babylonish
bondage under your spiritual Lords, the Prelates, we account you Babylon, and
fly from you. Hereunto add that which M. Smith says, in his Paralleles: Page
23.
All Churches or assemblies of men, whatsoever professing Christ, and not
separated from worldlings are false Churches, and so without: only the
separated Churches are the true Churches, and are within. And in another place
thus. A false worship, Daral. 14.
ministry, and government may be in a true Church, through ignorance and the
like occasions: Which thus he amplyfieth. Ibid. 15.
A true man may have a wooden leg, an eye of glass: so a true Church may
have a false ministry, and worship, or government. Having therefore a desire
to reclaim you (if it be possible) and bring you back again to our Churches,
I thought I could bestow my pains no way more profitably, then in discovering
unto you how weak and insufficient this is to ground your Separation upon. And
this I have endeavored to do in this Treatise.

I have therein also both discovered and convinced sundry errors of yours, and
your frequent and horrible perverting of the sacred Scriptures for the defense
of them. And now I heartily pray you to consider, That the soul of man is in
very great danger by embracing error, as well as by yielding to profaneness.
That error in the mind, does greatly hazard the salvation of man's soul; and
that it is as fearful and dangerous a thing, to be carried about with every
wind of doctrine, as to consent to sinners when they entise us. Hence it is
that we are not only exhorted, that we sholud not believe every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they are of God; 1. Ioh. 4.1: 1. These 5.21.
that we should try all things, and keep that only which is good: but often
bidden to take heed that no man deceive us; Mat. 24.4.5.23, 24.
to beware of false Christ's, which if it were possible, should deceive the very
elect: and to beware of false Prophets, meaning false Teachers: Mat. 7, 15.
which though they come in sheep clothing, with a show of truth and
holiness, that they may the rather deceive: Act. 20.29.
yet inwardly they are ravening wolves. I know this (says Paul) that after my
departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Whereby we learn, that as grievous and ravening wolves do prey upon and
destroy the carkases of the silly sheep: so do false Teachers the souls of
men. From hence also it is, that our Lord Jesus has as well forewarned us to
take heed and beware of false doctrine, Mat. 16.6.12. Luke 12.15.
as to take heed and beware of covetousness. In both of these he uses a
double caveat, because both of them are very dangerous to the soul; so as we
have as great need to beware of the one as of the other. If the Lord had only
said, Beware of false doctrine; he had thereby intimated that there is danger
in believing such doctrine: but he iterating and doubling the caveat. Mat.
16.6. Mark 8.14.
Take heed and beware of false doctrine (which is also noted by two
Evangelists) does thereby imply the danger is very great. It is also to be
observed that Jesus compares false doctrine to Leaven, Take heed and beware
of the Leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces: teaching us thereby, that as a
little leaven sowreth the whole lump of dough, so a little false doctrine the
whole mind. We need not go far to confirm this by examples. Who knows
not that many among you, from Brownisme have fallen into Anabaptisme? Your
self M. Johnson do acknowledge this in your answer to M. White: And I my
self do know that M. Smith and those of his Church, at the first received
only some few small and petty errors in comparison, holding still communion
with us: but after in process of time grosser errors growing upon them they
departed and separated from us, and are now by little and little fallen into a
gulf of errors, as plainly appears by sundry of M. Smiths books lately
published, and namely the Paralleles; The differences of the Churches, of the
Separation; and the Character of the beast. We may also remember, that error
in the mind, is by the Holy Ghost compared to a Gangraine or Canker: 2. Tim.
2.17.
which being in any part of the body, stays not there, but by little and
little spreads it self further, and pierces into the bones, not ceasing to
enlarge it self until it has brought destruction to the body. Even so it is
with the soul, when error inuadeth it, Tit. 3.10.
Reject him (says the Apostle) that is an Heretic, after once or twice
admonition: knowing that he that is such is perverted, and sins being
damned of his own se^fe. As if he should say: There is little or no hope of
reclaiming heretics; such as be contentious and obstinate in their errors,
but that all labor used to that end is in vain and lost. Their disease is
almost incurable. For say that they be convinced, and in themselves do
condemn that which they contend for: Yet are they usually so perverse and
obstinate as they will continue still in their sin, maintaining their opinion
against conscience. Yet notwithstanding says Paul, let them be admonished once
or twice, if hapily they will amend: Which if they do not, after admonition
thus given, have nothing to do with them. And do we not in experience see,
how hard a thing it is to draw men from error, to the love and embracing of the
truth? Be they Turks, Papists, Anabaptists, Familists, or whosoever that be
wrapped in error? Certainly it is as easy a matter to draw covetous men from
the desire of riches, voluptuous men from the love of pleasure; the proud man
from his pride, and the drunkard from his drunkenness: as to bring a man
entangled in error, to receive and acknowledge the truth. Of the former sort
of these, if they have continued long in their sin, the Prophet says thus:
Can the Blacke-Moore change his skin? Ier. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
evil. The same is no less true of all such who have dwelt and abide long in
their errors. Beware therefore and fear (my dear brethren and countrymen)
to continue still in your schism and errors, and hearken to the counsel of
Solomon: Pro. 19.27.
My son hear no more the instruction that causes to err from the words of
knowledge. Go not, I beseech you in the name of Jesus, one step more forward
in the way you are in. For I call heaven and earth to record, that it leads to
destruction. And why will ye die, O ye children of men? It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: for our God is a consuming fire.

I know you persuade your selves of better things, and such as accompany
salvation. You think that the way you now are in, is the only way to life. But
what if you mistake it? Christ tells us, that many shall seek to enter in at
the straight gate, Luke 13.24.
and shall not be able. Which cannot be understood of men minding earthly
things, whether it be their profits, or pleasures. For they neither desire, nor
seek after any such thing. But of heretics, Schismatickes, and sectaries.
You will say (I know) that you are no schismatickes: because you separate from
a false Church only, and join to a true, in deed if that which you teach of
the visible Church were true, then were all our congregations false Churches.
But hear and mark well what I say. Such a visible Church as you require, and
pretend to be, there is not in the world, neither ever was: You teach in this
point that which is repugnant to the Scriptures, and a thing impossible in it
self to be. Such a society as you say a true visible Church is, is not
visible, cannot possibly be seen or discerned.

But some of you will say: are not our Ministers learned? Yes. That lets not
but that both they may, and indeed do grossly err in those things wherein
they dissent from us, and from all the learned in the world. Who knows not
that among the Papists there be many of great learning and gifts: which have
very great knowledge and skill in the arts, in the languages, are of excellent
utterance, expert and ready in holy Scriptures; can speak and write truly,
agreeing with the Scriptures, of sundry of the secrets of the Kingdom of
heaven: as of God, his nature, persons, attributes: Of Christ Jesus his
incarnation, his birth, life, preachings, sufferings, coming to judgment, of
the Resurrection, of the life to come, with many more of this kind: and yet
notwithstanding in those points wherein they differ from the Church of England,
and all other true Churches: they are blind as beetles.

But you will object further, that what you of the Separation hold is proved
plentifully out of the word of God, I acknowledge indeed that you abound and
superabound in your allegations of Scripture, Never any men contending for
lies, did therein go beyond you, nor equal you neither. If hereunto we add
their external holiness: we may safely say, that in no faction or schism
that ever yet was in the world, Satan did more transform himself into an
Angel of light then in this. But what? Their Scriptures being perverted, as
the truth is, and so tending to the destruction of the Reader: all this is but
sheep clothing, Mat 7.15.
whereof Christ bids us to beware. Horrible and fearful is your abusing
and wresting of holy Scripture, and to some incredible. It had been well for
you if you had been more sparing in your quotations: then had ye less taken
Gods Name in vain: who will not hold you guiltless for the same, except ye
repent.

And now dearly beloved: behold, Christ Jesus stands at the door and knockes
aloud, tarrying and abiding there, as one very desirous to come in, and loath to
be kept out He that has the keys of the house of David, who shuts and no
man opens: and opens, and no man shuts: open the door of your soul,
that you may let Christ enter in. And to that end open I humbly beseech you the
eyes of your mind, that you may be able to discern between things that
differ, and know truth from falsehood: and rejecting and abhorring the one,
which is from the Devil; may embrace the other, which is from God.

And here my dear countrymen, who lately are gone out from us, and become
Anabaptists, I beseech you, consider of this one thing with me. When you first
separated from the Church of England, did not you highly esteem and reverence
the Church of Amsterdam, even as the dear spouse and body of Christ? I mean
the Brownists Church there.
Would not you then gladly have had communion with them if possibly you could,
when you refused the same with us? Did not then all of you assure your own
souls that that way which then and still we call Brownisme, was the only way
to life whereupon in that way you would needs walk, come on it what would,
imprisonment or banishment; life or death? Did not then some of the chief of
you in my hearing, magnify M. Fr. Johnson, and their books specially the
Apology, above all books next to the holy Bible? And in all this you rejoiced
exceedingly. How comes it now to ^asse, that so quickly, not only our
Churches, but the aforesaid Church at Amsterdam, is likewise become an Harlot
and Babylon? That you abhor now as much to have religious communion with
them, as with us? How comes this (I say) to pass, but because that which the
Apostle says generally of all deceivers, is and must needs be in the
particular true of you, your selves being deceivers: That you wax worse and
worse: deceiving, and being more and more deceived.

Thus have I in few words, by way of commination, exhortation, dehortation, and
supplication endeavored to persuade you my brethren of the Separation,
(speecially my countrymen, who are lately entered into this way,) to renounce
your errors, and to break off by repentance your grievous sin of
separating, and all the sins accompanying it. If this I have published
prevail not thus far, (though not with all, yet with some of you) as to
bring you to the sight and acknowledgement of your erroneous doctrine
concerning the visible Church, and your perverting of holy Scripture for
confirmation thereof, as my hope is it will. I for my part do confess that I
utterly despair of doing any good of you: and say to you as I have learned
from the Apostle to speak in this case: If any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. I shall also hold it vain, to contend any further with you. 1. Cor.
14.38. and 11.16.
If any lust to be contentious, (says Paul) we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God: And so I end, leaving the success hereof, both with you and
others to the Lord: whom in Jesus Christ I beseech, to accept of this my poor
and weak service, and to grant that it may prosper to that end, whereunto by
me his most unworthy servant it is intended: even to the glory of his great
Name, and edification of his Church, Amen.

JOHN DAYRELL.

A SVMMARIE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
OF the Church: triumphant and militant. And sundry Titles in holy Scriptures
given to the same, specially to the Militant Church. Chap. 1. page 1. The Use of
the former doctrine. Chap. 2. page 14. Of the Visible Church, and the diverse
acceptations of the Word Church. Chap. 3. page 20. The visible Church is a mixed
company, compounded of Christians true, and false: the greatest part being the
worst. Chap. 4 page 23. Of Religion: what it is, and how distinguished. Chap 5.
page 32. That the Profession of Religion, makes one a member of the visible
Church. Chap. 6. page 3. That the Church of England, is a true Church: and our
parish assemblies, true visible Churches Chap. 7. pa. 41.
THE SECOND BOOK.
A Confutation of H. Barrow his description of a true visible Church. Chap. 1.
page 51. A confutation of another description of the true visible Church, given
by the Brownists: Where much is said concerning the first gathering of a
Church; and commixture of good and bad in the Church. Chap. 2. page 60. Of the
matter and form of the visible Church. Chap. 3. page 161. Whether thc Covenant
of life and salvation which God made with Abraham and his seed, where made
with the visible, or invisible Church. Chap. 4. page 186. The titles which the
Separists ascribe to the visible Church, are to be understood of the invisible
Church only. Chap. 5. page 197. The Churches of the Brownists by their own
doctrine are false churches: and therefore men ought to separate and come out
from among them. Chap. 6. page 215. The controversy between us and the
Brownists concerning religious communion is here debated. Where is showed.
First, that we may lawfully join in divine worship with them which are not
members of the Church: Secondly, with the open wicked: And that thereby neither
the faithful, nor the holy things of God are polluted. Chap. 7. page 217. The
Arguments of the Brownists whereby they would prove our church to be a false
church: and the answer unto them. Chap 8. page 229. How the Separists to
justify their separation from the Church of England, do shamefully pervert
the holy Scriptures. Chap. 9. page 257.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Church Triumphant and Militant, and of the sundry titles in
holy Scripture given to the same.
THe word in the original (...), translated Church, signifies an assembly, or
company called out from other: and in the new Testament thereby sometimes is
meant, The company of the Elect, 1. Cor. 1.10.
even that whole company that God has chosen and called, and will call out of
mankind, unto the fellowship of Jesus Christ, in him to have life eternal. And
this is manifest by the fifth to the Ephesians: Husbands love your wives, even
as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, 26. That he might
sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the Word. 27. That
he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle,
or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blame. And a little
after: No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it,
Verse. 29.32.
even as the Lord does the Church. And again: This is a great secret, but I
speak concerning Christ, and concerning the Church. All this must needs be
understood of all the Elect, which society is four times here called the
Church. For first, those which be here called the Church, Christ is said to
Love: But on the Elect only Christ's love is set, as on his spouse, them alone
he nourishes and cherishes, as a man does his own flesh. The company of the
Elect are meant therefore by the Church. Again, it is said, He gave himself
for the Church: thereby also it is clear by (Church) is meant only and all
the Elect: since for them alone, and for all them he died, and not for the
reprobate. And whereas Christ is said here, John 17 9.20.25. compared with
John 10.27.28. and Mat. 25.33.34.
to sanctify the Church, and cleanse it, etc. And the Elect only be thus
sanctified and cleansed: this sanctification being begun only in them in this
life, and perfected in them alone in the world to come, at which time they shall
be without spot or wrinkle, their vile bodies being made like to Christ his
glorious body, and their sinful souls like to his most holy and glorious
soul; and so a most glorious Church or company: it follows necessarily
thereupon, that by (Church) here the holy Ghost means the congregation of
the Elect, which is, that we call the invisible Church, and not the visible
Church, (which consists as well of Reprobate, Matthew. 16.8.
as Elect) as the Separists will have it. Of the invisible Church also our
Savior Christ speaks unto Peter, saying, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
I will build my Church, By him understood Christ Jesus.
and the gates of hell shall not overcome it: Meaning that in him, and upon
him, the Elect (whom here he calls his Church) should be so rooted and
grounded, that no enemies, no not Angels, Principalities nor Powers, with all
their power and subtlety, should be able to prevail against them, or any of
them. But the visible Church is and has been from time to time shaked and
battered in her parts, yea sometimes made even with the ground. Of it therefore
this Scripture cannot be understood, as some affirm: but of the invisible,
which is nothing else but the communion of Saints, that are, and shall be.

Of the Church we have again a description, together with a distribution in
the 12. to the Hebrews: where, Verse. 22.
for the better understanding of the Doctrine we have in hand, we may observe
the several titles that be given unto it. First, it is called the City of
the living God, Romans 12.2.
because they of this society (when they be called) live not after the laws,
customs and manners of this world, (whereof they be not, though they be in
it, but are therein as foriners and strangers) but after the laws, statutes
and ordinances of God set down in his word: John 15.19. and 17.14. 1 Pet.
2.11. Psalm. 119.1.2.
so that in life and conversation they differ from other men, yea, from that
themselves did sometime lead. Secondly, it is called the celestial Jerusalem,
as whereof that earthly Jerusalem was a figure. Also, because the Citizens of
this City seek those things which are above, Col. 3.1.2.
setting their affections chiefly on heavenly things, not minding (in the
first places) earthly things, as they do, whose portion is this world, Phil.
3.19.20. Psalm. 119.57.
and not God. And thus as they of this fellowship are clean changed, and
differ from all other in outward carriage, and from that themselves were
before; so in inward affection and disposition. Thirdly, it is called the
Church of the first borne, because they are that company which was figured by
the first borne of the Jews, that were by Gods appointment to be sanctified to
the Lord: Exodus 13.2.
and are they which out of mankind are of God sanct^fied, and put apart to an
holy use, that is, the service or worship of God: the rest of mankind attending
pro^ane and worldly affairs. Also, Exodus 4.23. Psalm. 4.6. Matthew. 22.5. Esa.
49.15.
because they of this Church or company, are as dearly, nay more dearly
beloved of God, then the first borne children are of their parents. Fourthly,
this Church is said to be written in heaven: because all of them are chosen and
appointed to life eternal, and their names written in the book of life,
enjoying, or hereafter to enjoy it in heaven. Lastly, he makes mention of the
spirits of just and perfect men, meaning the souls of the faithful, which are
now in heaven. Whereby we learn, that part of the Church is now in heaven,
and the other in earth, and hereafter to be on earth, both these making the
Church.

This Church or company then contains all Gods Elect, that ever have been,
are, and shall be in this world, from the beginning thereof to the end. Whereof
part (we see) is in heaven triumphing, as having got the victory over their
enemies, and praising God, and is therefore called the Church triumphant: and
part on earth, (and hereafter on earth to be) warring or fighting with their
spiritual enemies, the flesh, the world, and prince thereof the Devil, called
therefore the Church militant. This Paul teaches likewise in the 3. to the
Ephesians. saying: I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Verse.
14.15.
of whom is named the whole family in heaven and in earth. By whole family, he
means the whole Church: one part whereof, says he, is in heaven with God,
the Lord and Master of this Family, magnifying him; and namely for his goodness
toward the^; the victory that by him they have obtained, Exodus 4.23.
and the glory, honor, and immortality he has bestowed upon them: the other on
earth for a time, atto^ding the business he has appointed them, which is, to
worship him. This the Apostle likewise teaches, Ephesians. 1.10. and in the first
to the Coloss. verse. 20. In both which places, he affirms that God has
reconciled to himself in Christ, all things, which are in heaven, and which
are in earth. By the word (Things) he means Men, as Revel. 21.27. where John
speaking of the new Jerusalem, says, There shall enter into it no unclean
thing, meaning no unclean man or person. By all things then (both which words
be used in either of these places) the holy Ghost means, all the Elect, (for
of these the Apostle speaks in both places) of which society part he tells
us (now three times) is in heaven, and the other in earth: (none in purgatory)
and that each part, and every member thereof, is in and through Christ
reconciled God, and such only be the Elect. This whole company of the Elect, is
the Church, which Ephesians. 1.22.23. proves: Christ is appointed the head to the
Church, which is his body, the fullness of him, that fills all in all things.

As the parts of a man, soul and body, make but a man, not men; and the
several parts of the body, one body, not diverse: so the societies whereof I
have spoken, in heaven and on earth, make but one Church. We do not then
believe two Churches, not two Spouses of Christ; but we believe only one, yet
considered diverse ways. One as she is in the blade, growing, and to grow
together with the tares in the field, or in the flore, mixed with chafe:
another as she is in the garner; one in the mine, and another purifi^d: one
yet wrapped in the confusion of this world and wicked men; another before her
Spouse without spot or wrinckle. But leaving the triumphant Church, which is in
this pure and perfect estate: we will now entreat of the Militant.

The militant Church is universal, or particular. Ephesians. 4.13.16.
Universal, are all those throughout the world, who believing in Christ, are
by the spirit united to him, and by love one unto another. In a word, the whole
company of the faithful. Hereof Paul speaks. 1. Cor. 12.28. God has
ordained some in the Church: first Apostles, secondly Prophets, etc. And Ephesians.
4.11.12. where the very same (in part) is laid down, but in other words. He
therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. for the gathering
together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification
of the body of Christ. In stead of the word Church, he first uses Saints,
because the Church is nothing else but the Congregation of Saints. Secondly,
The body of Christ, meaning that part of his body which is on earth: the whole
being set for a part by a Synecdoche. And of this is that to be understood in
the Creed: I believe the holy Catholic Church.

A particular Church, is the whole company of believers, that be in a Country,
City, Town or Village. Such was the Church at Jerusalem, Rome, Corinth, the
Churches of Galatia, etc. as after in the ninth chapter of this Book is
proved. Paul an Apostle, 1. Cor. 1:2. Gal. 1.2.
unto the Church of God which is at Corinthus. Paul, unto the Churches of
Galatia. And thus rightly we do, and may call, all the faithful in England,
in Scotland, in France, the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, the
Church of God in France; and all the true believers (be they more or less) in
Islington, the Church of Islington. Thus have we many Churches, and yet but one
Church: many particular Churches, and yet but one Catholic or universal
Church.

1. Pet. 2.9.
To the Militant Church, Peter speaks saying: But ye are a chosen generation,
a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people: that ye should show
forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness, into his
maruailous light. Where he speaking to the Elect and believing Jews tells
them, that they need not to fear, nor be dismayed at this, that God has
ordained some to destruction, whereof he had spoken in the two next verses
before: for as much as they were not of those, or of that Generation, whom God
to glorify his Justice, and to show his anger against sin, has appointed to
condemnation: but were of that Generation and stock, which out of mankind God
has chosen, and ordained to life everlasting, that so he might declare the
riches of his glory and mercy in saving them. Of this society, the believing
Jews, whom Peter speaks, were part.
And therefore it is that the Apostle uses this particle (but) saying; But ye
are a chosen generation. Those that Peter calls here the chosen Generation,
are the same which the Scripture often calls the Church, and Divines usually the
invisible Church. And it is that company of men, which God out of all mankind
has chosen in Christ, to give or bestow upon them eternal life, as is
aforesaid. For which cause, as the Church is here called the Chosen
generation, Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14. and 24
so often in Scripture the chosen, or the Elect: Many are called, but few
chosen: which is in effect the same with this: Many are in the Church, but few
of the Church: If it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. And
Tit. 1.1. the elect of God, or Gods elect: According to the faith of Gods elect.

These elect and believing Jews, or Church of the Jews, are here called,
first a royal Priesthood, because all of them (and not all of the visible
Church as the Separists do teach) and Kings and Priests unto God: as Revel.
1.6. and 5.10. where those which Christ has redeemed, loved, and washed, from
their sins in his blood, which are the Elect and Church invisible, he is
said to have made them Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father. 2. Cor.
10.45.
As Kings and conquerors in this life they subdue and cast down holds, Romans
8.10.13. Gal. 5.24.
casting down the imaginations; and every high thing that is exalted against
the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ: and do kill sin, which before as a King reigned in them, Romans
6.12.14.21.23. and 7.11.
and had dominion over them, and else would have slain them. These as Kings
overcome also this world, and the Prince thereof, treading him under their
feet. 1. John. 5.4. Genesis 3.15. Romans 16.20. Ephesians. 6.12. Romans 8.37. Hebr. 1.2.
Psalm. 8.6.7, 8.
Thus are these Conquerers not only of flesh and blood, but of principalities
and powers, yea more then conquerours through him that loves them. They of
this chosen generation and royal Priesthood, as Kings, are in and through
Christ heirs of this world, and of the things therein, as of the fish of the
sea, the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the earth; having a right to
that which they inherit and possess, so as they may say, it is their own, and
are not usurpers, as men of another generation be. 1. Cor. 3.21.22
And in the world to come, all of this chosen generation and royal Priesthood,
as Kings and Conquerors shall reign, and inherit a Kingdom that is eternal,
2. Tim. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.11. 1. Pet. 1.4.
reserved for them in heaven. Rightly therefore are all of the Church, said to
be royal persons and Kings.

These Kings are also Priests, and are therefore called a eoyall Priesthood. As
Priests they offer sacrifices, the spiritual sacrifices whereof we shall hear
forthwith: and in the life to come the sacrifice of praise and thanks to God
and unto him that sits upon the Throne, for the victory and conquest he has
given them, and for all his goodness and loving kindness toward them. Revel.
5.9.10.


The Church of the Jews (to whom Peter writ) is likewise called an holy
nation, and in the fifth verse; an holy Priesthood: because all the members of
the Church be holy, and none of them unholy or profane. Among these there is
no unclean person, neither whosoever works abomination, that is, no sinner
or worker of iniquity. But as all their names be written in the book of life,
of which we have spoken: so are they all Saints indeed, their hearts being
purified by faith, and they sanctified and made holy by Gods holy Spirit, Act.
15.9 Romans 8, 9.10
dwelling in them. Holy are they in this world, but more holy in the world to
come. In part here, but hereafter perfectly holy and without blame, not having
spot or wrinckle. Holy in regard of their renewed righteousness, Ephesians. 5.27 2.
Cor. 7.1 1. Pet. 1.15 1. John 3.3 2. Cor. 6.21
which is begun in this life, and perfected in the life to come. And holy,
because of Christ's holiness, which being without them, is imputed to them, and
becomes theirs by imputation, as their sins were his.

This society is further called a peculiar people, or a people or company,
which God claims to be his own, in a special and more principal respect,
that is, by right of redemption: as being that society or part of mankind which
Christ Jesus has bought, and delivered out of that spiritual captivity and
bondage to sin, Satan, and condemnation: not with gold or silver, or any such
corruptible thing, but by his own precious blood: in another and more general
respect, all mankind being his, that is, by right of creation, Exodus 19.5
or as he is their Creator. Of this People we read, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall
call his name Jesus for he shall save his people from their sins. Hereby are
meant those whom God the Father has given to Christ Jesus, in him to have life
eternal, that is, the Elect: which Christ means by these words so often
repeated by John, John 6.37.39 and 17.2.24
Those which my Father has given me. And this is confirmed by the Syriake
translation, where for peculiar people, we have the Congregation redeemed.
Jesus then in dying, paid not a ransom or price of redemption for all men, but
for a certain congregation or company of men, Act. 20.28 Costerus cap. de
Iustificatione, de causis et modis Iustif. Apology 44. Conterpo. 158 A true
description of the visible Church, page 1.
even that we call the Church. I say, not for all men, as the Papists hold,
nor for the visible Church, as the Brownists, in understanding this Scripture
of the visible Church (unawares) do teach, and in plain words, in their
Confession of faith, Art. 17. and Master Robinson, in his Justification 115.
where he says, That all of the visible Church are purchased with the blood of
God.

Moreover, of this society it is said here, that of God they are called out of
darkness, into his maruailous light: that is, out of sin and ignorance,
(wherein they remain until the time of their calling) to knowledge and
holiness. To the same effect are those words, Act 26.18. where Paul is said to
be sent to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, that they might turn from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. As all of the Church,
Ephesians. 14
in the eternal decree and counsel of God, are chosen and appointed to life
everlasting before all times, even before the foundation of the world was laid,
as we have heard: so between this decree and the execution thereof, in this
world are they all in time, even in their appointed season effectually called,
and translated from the kingdom of darkness, and the Prince thereof the Devil,
Colos. 1.13
into the kingdom of God his dear sons, to be from thenceforth governed by
his spirit and word, and do walk in the light. And this the Apostle teaches
in the eight to the Romans saying: whom he predestined, meaning to life, them
also he called. Ve^s. 39
Lastly, Peter shows, wherefore God has chosen out of the stock of mankind,
some to life, whom in his time he calls to be Kings and Priests unto him,
and sanctifies or makes holy, that before and till then were profane, and
from under the power of Satan and his slavery brings into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, bestowing his free spirit upon them: All this God
does to this end, that they might show forth the virtues of him who has chosen
and called them hereunto, that is praise him for his exceeding rich mercy and
goodness toward them.

As in the aforesaid ninth verse, so likewise in the fifth verse of the said
Chapter, this our Apostle in the believing Jews, does yet further describe and
set forth the Church, or rather part thereof, the Militant, whereby we may the
better understand the same, and who be of it. And ye (speaking of the elect
and believing Jews) as lively stones, are made a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. First the company of true believers, (all which be the Militant Church)
are called lively, or living stones, as having spiritual life, or the life of
God in them, from that living stone Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.18
mentioned, verse. 4. who is also the chief corner stone of this building. As
these before the time of their calling, and until they do believe, are as
stones, without life, Romans 6.13 Ephesians. 2.1 2. Tim. 5.6 John 5.25 Matthew. 7.22
dead in sin: (like to the widow, who living in pleasure, was dead while she
lived: and to those of whom Jesus speaks, The dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, meaning in the Ministry of the Word; and again, Let the
dead, bury the dead) and being thus dead, have no more power or strength to do
those actions which are pleasing unto God, (which we call good-workes) then a
dead man to perform the actions of life, as to eat, drink, talk, walk,
etc. So as soon as they be called and believe, and ever from that time
forward, they have a power conveyed into them from God, whereby they are
quickened, and made able to do the works of God: whereupon they are called,
living, or lively stones. And it comes thus to pass: I speak of the inward
and effectual calling.
When God calls a man, which is, when he receives grace to believe in Christ
Jesus, then he bestows his Spirit on him; according to that of Paul, Ephesians.
3.17
Christ dwells in your hearts by faith: meaning that in all which do believe
Christ dwells by his Spir^t; which is confirmed by that other speech of the
Apostle to the Romans, Chap. 8.9
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his. This Spirit
being the Spirit of life, as it is called, Romans 8.2. kills and subdueth in
whomsoever it is, sin, so as though it remain still in man, yet it has not
that dominion and command that before it had, and quickneth or inableth them in
some measure, to lead an holy and righteous life: As is taught Rom 8.10. If
Christ be in you, to wit, by his Spirit, or if the Spirit of Christ be in you,
the body (meaning the body of sin, as Romans 6.6.) is dead because of sin;
and the Spirit is life for righteousness sake. From hence (I say) it is, that
the faithful (who be the Militant Church) are called living stones.

1. Cor. 3.16.17
Secondly, they are said to be a spiritual house, and elsewhere, the Temple of
God, as wherein God dwells by his Spirit, whereof the Tabernacle, and
material house or Temple built by Solomon, were a type and figure. Of this
inhabitation of God by his Spirit, we shall hear more hereafter.

Thirdly, as in the ninth verse they are termed a royal Priesthood; so here
an holy Priesthood. They are said also, to offer up spiritual sacrifices. As
the Priests under the law were to offer sacrifices, so these royal and holy
Priests, both under the Law and Gospel, did and should offer, not Lambs,
Calves, young Bullockes, Psalm. 51.17. Psalm. 4.5 Heb. 13.15
or any earthly or corporal sacrifices, as the Leuiticall Priests did, but
sacrifices of another kind, spiritual and heavenly: the sacrifice of a
contrite spirit, and broken heart; the sacrifice of righteousness; the
sacrifice of praise, or the calves of the lips, yea themselves for a
sacrifice, consecrating themselves wholly to God, throughout the whole course
of their lives in all their actions studying to please him. It is said further,
that the sacrifices which these Priests do offer, are acceptable to God by
Christ Jesus. Wherein are implied two things: First, Though all the sacrifices
of the Leuiticall Priests were not pleasing to God, and accepted of him* yet
all the sacrifices which these Priests offer, that is, all the good works they
do should be accepted of God. Secondly, That these sacrifices be not
acceptable to God, for any perfection or worthiness that is in them, but in
and through Jesus Christ, Confession of faith, 6. and to Communion of Saints,
248 and 470. Apology 44. Counterp. 198. Description of the visible Church, p.
2.
his mediation and intercession. These two places of Peter, viz, the fifth and
ninth verses, and likewise Revel. 1.6. and 1. Cor 3.16, 17. our brethren of the
Separation understand of the visible Church, and members thereof, as hereafter
we shall hear. I trust by that is already said, this error of theirs is
manifest. Yet have we something more to say thereunto in his due place.

Finally, of this blessed company that is to be understood in the Creed, I
believe the holy Catholic Church. Where every true believer, not only
professes that he believes, and is persuaded that there is such a blessed
society as is aforesaid, to whom only the benefits and privileges following in
the Creed, do belong, (to wit, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and life everlasting) but that he
himself is one of them. This Church is said to be holy, for that it consists
of persons holy: but of this we have spoken already. It is termed likewise
Catholic, that is, Universal, because of this fellowship, there are some
here and there through the vn^uersall world; as also, for that it contains
in it all the Elect, and such as are, and shall be saved, from the beginni^g to
the end of the world; so that out of this Church there is no salvation. Lastly
it is to be observed, that we do not say, I see, but I believe the holy
Catholic Church: whereby we know that this Church is rightly said to be
Invisible, Heb. 11.2
because faith is of things which are not seen. We believe this Church, it
must needs then be invisible. And it is called Invisible, having reference to
men, who can neither sound the secrets of God, nor yet, (which is less) the
heart of man: because (I say) we can do neither of these, much less both, and
so cannot see or know who be Elect, of which alone this Church stands,
therefore it is said to he Invisible, 2. Tim. 2.19 1. Cor. 2.11
and of some secret, inward, or hidden. The Lord only knows who are his: And
no man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him.
2. Tim. 2.19
By departing from iniquity, and other infallible tokens, a man may be certain
for himself, that he is one of this Church, in Christian charity also, he is
to hope well of others, and to judge rashly of none; but no man can be sure of
the election of another. This society then is visible and known to God alone,
invisible and unknown to men: and is therefore called the Invisible Church.

Thus unto the Church, many sweet and glorious titles, are every where in the
Scriptures given, and most joyful and excellent things of it spoken. It is
called (as we have heard) the City of God, the celestial Jerusalem, the Church
of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, the family or household of God,
a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Priesthood, being all Kings
and Priests unto God, an holy Nation, a peculiar people-redeemed and called by
God out of darkness, and the kingdom of darkness into his marvelous light,
a spiritual house; the Temple of God, to be Ephesians. 2.22
the habitation of God by the Spirit, and the body of Christ. It is also called
a 1. Cor. 14.33
Church of Saints, John 10.27
the sheep of the Lord, 1. Pet. 5.3
the heritage of God: to be short, Christ his Sal. Song. 6.8
Dove, his Sal. Song. 6.8
undefiled, who is Ibid. 4.7
all fair, and no spotte in her, his Ibid. 5.2
sister, his Ibid. 5.2
well-beloved, Ibid. 6.3
his love, his Ibid. 5.1
Spouse, his Psalm. 45.9
Queen, the joy of the whole earth. This Church is the Lords Exodus 19.5
chief treasure above all people, (though all the earth be his) and they in
whom he delights, as men do in treasure. Behold, they are Isa. 49.16
graven upon the palm of his hand, he that Zachar. 2.8
touches them, touches the apple of his eye. All of this society, and only
these, Jesus will Matthew. 1.21
save from their sins, and from the Romans 8.1
condemnation that is due unto them for the same: and John 10.27
will give unto them eternal life. So that of all men, these with David may
say, Psalm. 8.4
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that thou
visitest him? for thou have made him a little lower then the Angels, and
crowned him with glory and honor. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name
in all the world. To this Church are made the promises of Reu 1.13
God his protection, presence, of peace, Ier. 31.3
of love, Prou. 1.23
of his spirit: and to this society is that gracious Gen 17.7
covenant of life and salvation made. In conclusion, this Church, though in it
1. Cor. 13.11
infancy it be Song. 1.4
black, yet is it comely, as the Tents of Kedar, and as the Curtains of
Solomon: and when it comes to Ephesians. 4.13
perfect age, it shall be most Song, 6.3
beautiful, and Ephesians. 5.27
glorious, without spot or wrinkle: yea most wonderful, and even Song, 4.9
rauishing men to conceive, much more to behold, what then to enjoy so blessed
a communion. And thus much concerning the doctrine of the Church, which we call
Invisible: Let us now proceed to the use thereof.

CHAP. II. The use of the former Doctrine.
John 3.3 Romans 8* 9 If the flesh or sin bear rule, and be the Lord and
master of the house, commanding soul and body, then man is, and to be called
carnal, of a sinner. But if the spirit have the dominion or rule, as he has
in all those in whom he is, though not at all times, and in all actions, the
flesh sometimes prevailing against the spirit, then and from thenceforth, such
are indeed Saints, or spiritual men, and so to be called, and ought not to
deem themselves sinners or wicked men, nor so by others to be accounted. Exodus
4, 25 Matthew. 26.41
BY this we have heard, we may see, what a holy and heavenly society this is,
and that blessed is the man who is one of the Church, holy and righteous are
they in this life, but more holy and righteous in the life to come. When once
the Spirit of God regenerateth and dwells in one of these, (which in the
appointed season he does in them all, and only in them) then cease he to be
profane, and begins to be holy; and forthwith becomes of a carnal, a
spiritual man; and a Saint of a sinner, and is from thenceforth so to be
called: man having his denomination of the more principal, or of that which is
in him predominant. Every one of these, from the time of this new birth, or
regeneration, and this great and admirable change and alteration, gives to God
that which is his, that is, worship, living holily toward God: and to man that
appertains to him, living righteously toward him. Every one of these is
careful to perform all duties to their superiors, equals, and inferiors:
Neither will they wrong their neighbor in his person, goods, or good name, or
do that to another, which they could not be contented should be done to them.
When through humane frailty (for the spirit being willing, the flesh is weak)
they fail in any duty to God, or man; by either omitting the good they should
do, or committing the evil they are forbidden to do: then their hearts smites
and wounds them for the same, and they have no peace within, nor their wound
healed and bound up, until both they have obtained a pardon from God in Christ
for that sin, and a settled purpose and full resolution never (by the grace of
God) to commit it again. He that has received the Spirit of God, knows that
these things I write be true. Who sees not that these are an holy people
indeed, and holy Priesthood, as the Scr^pture calls them? These are Saints
indeed, though on earth, By this holiness thou may know thou art of the
Church, one of Gods elect, and heir of salvation. If this be begun in thee in
truth, though in great weakness, then it is certain that thou art one of this
society. John 9.31 James 3.2
and shall all of them be Saints in heaven. All other the Scripture calls
Sinners, but not these, though in many things they all of them sin. Is not
this an holy and heavenly company on earth, before they come to heaven? Holy
here in part, though they shall be perfectly holy without spot and wrinckle
only in heaven: whereinto this holy nation alone shall enter, and no unclean
thing. These are blessed and sweet companions for him that is iourneying from
earth to heaven. By how much the longer and more dangerous the way is we have
to travel, by so much the more desirous and inquisitiue are we after company;
because it makes greatly for our safety and comfort, and helps much against
the tediousnes and wearisomenesse of the way. Thou therefore (my dear brother)
who as a pilgrim and stranger on earth, art wandering in the wilderness of
this world, toward that heavenly Canaan, a way long and dangerous, wherein do
lie in wait many thieves and robbers; full also of crosse-wayes and bypath,
and none almost to direct thee, except thou will ask of the beasts of the
wilderness: inquire, and seek out some of these that are traveling, as well
as thou, to Canaan, to be thy associates. And this shall be sweet and
comfortable both to thee and them. Thus did David, a pilgrim, as all our
Fathers were. Psalm. 119.63
I am a companion (says he) of all them that fear thee, and keep thy
precepts. And that which is more: All his delight, next to that he had in God,
Psalm. 16.3 Prou. 12.26
was in the Saints that were in the earth, who are more excellent then their
neighbors, and consequently their society more to be desired. It goes well
with that woman, who makes choice of such an husband, whose company she
cannot avoid: and with that man, which has such a wife: and with him that has
such neighbors, or out of them can and does cull out such to be his companions
and acquaintance. It is good being in the company of these: for with the godly,
thou shall learn to be godly, Prou. 13.20
or being godly to increase in godliness. But it is much better, yea a blessed
thing, to be one of this society. For is it not (I pray thee) an happy thing to
be beloved of God, and in special favor with him? David so accounted it, and
therefore prays thus to God: Psalm. 4.6
Many say, who will show us any good? but Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us. And professes that herein he had more joy of heart, then
worldly minded men have, when their wheat and wine does abound. Now all of the
Church, are dearly beloved of God. They are (as we hear) the Congregation of
the first borne. Romans 1.7
No first borne child is so tenderly beloved of his parents, no not of his
mother, as these be of God. For it may so fall out, that a woman may forget her
child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb, Isa. 49.75 Psalm.
27.10 Ephesians. 15.25 John 10.11.15 John 15.13
but this cannot fall into God. Though father and mother forsake one of these,
the Lord will take him up. This Church and company of men, Christ so loved,
that he gave himself for it, that is, laid down his life for it. And greater
love then this, to dye for his friends can no man have. O love unspeakable. As
by his deeds, so by his words, Jesus does witness his love to this Church, Cant.
2.14.15. and 4.2, 7, 8. etc. and 5.1.2 Mat. 12.49.50
in calling it his Well-beloved, his Dove, his Spouse, his Love; and in
accounting every one of this society, his Brother, and Sister, and Mother. If
then thou be one of this fellowship, (O man,) thou art in grace and special
favor, not with thy King and Sovereign on earth, but with thy God and thy
Lord, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords and with him whose love is
the fountain of all man's happiness. Of this love (I say) every one of this
Church and company may be assured. Happy therefore are all they, and only they,
who be of this society.

Their happiness and dignity, their excellent estate full of majesty and glory,
may yet further appear by sundry of those titles which are given unto them in
holy Scripture. They of this society are called a spiritual house, the
Tabernacle of God, the Temple of God, and are said to be the habitation of God
by the Spirit, because the Spirit of God dwells in them. What a grace and
honor is this, that the King of glory should cohabite with us? And what a
rebel is he, Reu. 3.20
who though this King stand at his door and knock, will not open that he may
enter in? Happy, and thrice happy is he, who has the presence and fellowship
of God. For who shall harm him, with whom the Almighty is always present to
defend? He needs not be afraid of the fear of the night, Psalm. 91.1.
nor of the arrow that flies by day: nor of the pestilence that walks in the
darkness: nor of the plague that destroys at noonday: that dwells thus in
the secret of the most high and abides in the shadow of the Almighty. Though a
thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, yet shall not
the evil come near thee. In all perils thou may be secure, lie down in
peace, and take thy rest, when others fear and tremble. Gal. 5.22.
Where this Spirit is, there is peace toward God, with men, yea with all men
as much as is possible. There is also love to God, to men for Gods cause,
loving our enemies, praying for, and doing good to them that hate and persecute
us: John 15.26,
all maliciousnes, envy, and evil speaking being laid aside. If thou have this
spirit, it will lead thee into the truth, and preserve thee from error. This is
the holy Spirit, and therefore having it, it will sanctify thee, and make thee
holy. And is the Comforter, giving that joy to man, John 15.26. and 16.22.
which the world cannot take from him. Where he dwells, there is a continual
feast. He makes the children of men to rejoice in afflictions, taking away the
bitterness of them. If it fall out so, that thou be in prison, in close prison,
and so want the company of men, suppose of Angels too, though that is not
possible, yet art thou not alone, but have one with thee, to whom thou may
make thy moan, and in whose society thou may solace thy self. He will lead
thee, when thou walk; watch for thee, when thou sleep; and when thou
wakest, talk with thee; and comfort thee in the hour of death, when others
dying, shall be in heaviness. Is not he now happy, that is one of the Church?
And yet hear what further I say unto thee: All of the Church, for as much as
they have the Spirit of God are the children of God, and so^eires of God, and
coheires with Christ. Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are sons (says the Apostle) God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts. And again, As many as are led by the Spirit of
God, Romans 8.14.
they are the sons of God. Then he adds, If children, also heirs, even the
heirs of God, and coheires with Christ. For this cause, all of this fellowship
are most happy, and of all persons under heaven, the most honorable, in truth,
though not in the account of the world. We account of all men, next to the
King, his children most honorable and happy, especially his son and heir,
that is to inherit the Kingdom. Hereupon the servants of Saul speaking thus to
David, Behold, 2. Sam. 18.23.
the King has a favor unto thee: be now therefore the Kings son in law:
DAVID answered, Seems it to you a light thing to be the Kings son in law;
seeing that I am a poor man, and of small reputation? What then may it seem
unto us, who are but dust and ashes, nay worse then so, by nature the children
of wrath, and of the Devil to become by grace the adopted children of God.
Ephesians. 2.3. John 8.41.44.
It is a matter of great honor and dignity to be the son and heir of a
Noble man, specially of a King. And is it not a much more glorious thing, to be
the son and heir of the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings? All men bestow,
and leave unto their children, according to that themselves be, and have. The
mean man, an inheritance or portion, according to his ability, be it more, or
less. The Gentleman leaves to his children, according to his estate and worth.
The nobleman after his, and the King according to his greatness. Even so it
is betwixt God and his children. What and how great then shall be the portion
and honor of these children, seeing it shall be agreeable to the greatness of
their heavenly Father, and that which beseems the children of such a Father?
It must needs be such as neither eye has s^ene, nor ear has heard, nor ever
came into man's heart; in a word, incomprehensibly glorious. Because of this,
the estate of these in the world to come, is not only called a glorious estate,
Romans 8.18.21. and verse. 17.30 1. John 3.2. Phil. 3.21.
and the glorioas liberty of the sons of God, and they then said to be
glorified, and to be like unto Christ, partaking with him in glory, both in
soul and body, their vile bodies being made like unto his glorious body: but
is also enlarged thus, that they shall then have a most excellent and eternal
weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.
To set forth also the excellent an glorious estate and condition of these in
the world to come, it is often said in the Scriptures, that they shall have a
Kingdom. Fear not, little flock: Luke 12.32.
for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Matthew. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for there is the Kingdom of heaven. And to
the same end it is called the kingdom of God, and of heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9. Heb.
12.28. 2. Tim. 4.8. 1. Cor. 9.25. Mat. 5.3.
and said to be such as cannot be shaken. On the heads of these Kings shall be
set a crown of righteousness, yea an incorruptible crown of glory. Happy
then, and a thousand times happy are all of this Church and company, that shall
have such, and so glorious a kingdom, whereof also there is no end, but they
shall reign for evermore. These, 1. Pet. 1.4. and 2.1.11.
howsoever they be not borne, nor come by descent to this heavenly kingdom and
inheritance, Ephesians. 1.4.5. Act. 13.48.
yet are they of God chosen and ordained thereunto, before the foundation of
the world was laid: as appears by that sentence of Christ, (the Judge of all
men) which he shall one day pronounce upon them, Come ye blessed of my Father,
Matthew. 25.34.
take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of
the world. And therefore they, who in their minority, and nonage, have not yet
received this inheritance and kingdom, are as sure of it, as if they were
inthronized, and in possession thereof. Because, as God himself, so all things
in God, and namely, this election of part of mankind unto salvation, is
unchangeable. So that heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then any one of
this chosen generation perish. Are not they now happy, who are sure to inherit
this Kingdom, albeit they yet have it not? What though in this world, and for
the present, 1. Cor. 15.19.
they be of all men the most miserable: yet nevertheless, if we have respect
to their future estate; Heb. 11.26. 1. Pet. 1.4.
to this great recompense of reward, and inheritance immortal, by the power of
God reserved for them in heaven, they are of all the children of men the most
happy, and those only who be happy, all others being in a most accursed estate
and condition. And thus much concerning the Church, or that we call the
Invisible Church, the knowledge whereof we refer to God, the searcher of
hearts: proceed we now to entreat of the visible Church, which men can know
and discern, and is therefore called visible: into which all they must retire
themselves in this world, that will be gathered with the invisible Church into
heaven in the world to come: according to that saying; Act. 2.47.
And the Lord added to the Church, from day to day, such as should be saved.
For this cause, it stands us upon diligently to search and enquire into this
matter: and so for thee, Christian Reader, to give good ear to that which
follows.

CHAP. III. Of the visible Church, and diverse acceptance of the word Church.
AS sometimes this word (Church) must be taken in that sense I have already
spoken of, that is, for all the elect, or some special company of the elect,
as is manifest by the premises: so in many other places of holy Scripture, it
cannot possibly be so understood, but must of necessity have some other
signification. Verse 3.
In the 8. of Acts, Luke reports of Saul, that he made havoc of the Church.
And no l^sse does the Apostle say of himself, 1. Cor. 15.9.
I am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of
God. In these places, and very many more, by Church we cannot understand the
Elect, except we will imagine, either that Saul knew whom God had elected, or
that all be elected who are persecuted, both which are very false. How then
must we understand this word (Church) here? And what may we do to find out
the true sense and meaning of this word: in these and such other like places,
where it cannot be taken in the former signification? Surely it may easily and
and safely be done by conference of Scripture, as we shall see. Verse 3.
In the 22. of the Acts, Saint Paul has these words of himself, I was zealous
toward God, as ye all are this day: verse. 4. And I persecuted this way unto
the death, binding and delivering into prison both men and women; And Galath.
1. Thus he likewise speaks of himself, Verse. 13.
ye have heard of my conversation in times past, in the Jewish religion, how
that I persecuted the Church of God extremely, and wasted it; 14. And profited
in the Jewish religion, above many of my companions of my own Nation, and was
much more zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers. In both these places the
Apostle delivers one and the same thing, but in different words: which
helps greatly to the understanding of both. In either of these places, and in
the words next following these, Paul relates his conversion to the Christian
Religion, and calling to the office of an Apostle, and in these words here set
down, he declares his zeal (before the time of his conversion, and calling
to the Apostleshippe) to the Jewish Religion, and hatred to the Christian, and
the professors thereof. This hatred he sets forth, by an effect thereof,
to wit, his persecuting. I persecuted (says he) this way, that is, this
Religion, (to wit, the Christian Religion) which now I embrace and profess. As
if he had said, when I was of the Jewish Religion, I persecuted this Religion,
whereof now I am, and could not away with it. Religion, he terms way* and so
does he use it in Acts 24.14. After the way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers; It is likewise so taken in the 22. verse of
the same Chapter, and in diverse places besides. And it is rightly called a way,
Because it only shows the way to salvation. Also because that as he that is
in a way goes on therein, and stands not still: so he which is religious
indeed, stands not at a stay, Prou
but is every day more religious then other: Being like unto the light which
shines more and more unto the perfect day. I persecuted (^a^th he) this way;
why, but he could not persecute the Religion it self. By these words then he
vnderstande^^ those (...) were of this way or Religion, meaning the (...)
R^^^gion. When then in this place of the Ga^^^^ (...) former it is said that
Saul persecuted the Ch^^ (...) meaning is, that he persecuted the (...) of
men, which professed the Christian Religion, which here is called the Church.
And so it is called twice in the 8. of the Acts. And at that time there was
great persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, that is, the
Christians there. And a little after: But Saul made havoc of the Church: That
is, of the professors of Christian Religion, whereby we learn (and that from
the holy Ghost) to define the true visible Church thus: It is a company of
people professing the Christian or true Religion: or thus, It is a company To
wit, from the rest of the world. Romans 16.5.23.
called out of the profession of Christian Religion. And thus we are to
understand many other places: Greet the Church (says Paul) that is in their
house, meaning by Church, the professors of Christianity, or Christian
Religion. And again, in the same place: GAIVS mine host, and of the whole
Church, (that is, of all the Christians) saluteth you.

This word (Church) thus understood, is taken either largely, or strictly;
largely, for all men that throughout the whole world profess the Christian or
true Religion, as in 1. Cor. 10.32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews,
nor to the Grecians, nor the Church of God: that is, nor to any of the
Christians, or people of God. In the same sense it is used, Act. 8.3. 1. Cor.
15.9. Gal. 1.13. In which places it is said of Paul, that, he did persecute the
Church of God, that is, them that professed the Christian Religion, wheresoever
he came. And even so it is used, Act. 2.47. And the Lord added to the Church
(that is, to them that embraced and professed the Christian Religion) from day
to day, such as should be saved. In this respect or sense we may say, the
visible Church is Catholic or universal, not tied (as sometimes it was) to
the Land of Judah: nor visible in one people alone, as under the Law it was, in
the people of Israel: But comprehends under it all Nations or people
professing true religion: being now visible in one country, and now in another,
sometimes in a few, sometimes in many. Lord of Plessis of the Church* c. 20.
This universal Church comprehends under her, all the particular Churches
gathered together in diverse Countries, and sundry parts of the world, the which
likewise we call Churches. So learned men speak of the East Church, and the
West Church, the Greek Church, and the Latin Church. In like manner say we at
this day, the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, the Church of France:
none of these or the like are Catholic or Universal. This is said after the
very same sort, as when we speak of some parts of the Ocean sea; we call them
the Sea, as the South sea, the North sea, the British sea, etc. And we give
them all the name of Ocean: although we know that there is but one Ocean, and
not many: of the which, by these names we make many distinctions, because it is
but one uniform body, from which the unity may be distinguished, but not
divided: And so also must the unity of the Church be acknowledged. When
therefore we speak of all the Christians and professors of true religion in a
Nation, as in England, Scotland, France, etc. we may rightly say the Church of
England, the Church of Scotland, the Church of France: yea thus meaning, we
cannot properly, and fitly say, The Churches of England, etc. in the plural
number.

Thus you see what we call the Catholic or Universal Visible Church: even the
Congregation of all those that do profess true Religion, throughout the whole
world: distinguished (as has been said) into many particular Churches: All
which together make but one body. And in this sense, the word Church, is diverse
times used in the sacred Scriptures, as partly appears before we call it
Catholic, because, as one says, it is vbique diffusa, spread every where,
scattered far and wide over all the world. And visible, it is said to be,
quia rationabilis, because it is conceaueable by reason: It is not so much
seen with the eye, though it be called visible, quam intellectu, mente,
ratione: as with the understanding, the mind, and the reason, as is well said
by one.

When this word Church is taken strictly, and not in so large, and general
sense as before: it is used either more, or less strictly, when it is taken in
the strictest signification, and for the least company, thereby is meant either
the Governors of the Church, and so it is used twice in one verse, Matthew.
18.17. If he refuse to hear them, tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse
to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a
Publican: Or all the Christians in a family or one house. And so it is used in
these places following, Collos. 4.15. 1. Cor. 16.19. Philip. 2.
and such like; Salute Mimphas, and the Church, which is in his house: Aquilla,
and Priscilla: with the Church that is in their house, salute you greatly in
the Lord. To Archippus, and to the Church that is in thine house.

Less strictly, and then it is taken, for all that company which in a City,
Town, or Villages cohabiting, profess the Christian or true Religion, and do
ordinarily meet and join together in the exercises of Religion. This
particular Church we call a Parish, and being met together to ioyn in prayer,
in hearing of the Word, and receiving the Sacraments: A Parish assembly: which
is a company of Christians, dwelling in such a circuit as we call a Parish
assembled in one place, for religious exercise. And in this sense is this word
(Church) often taken in the new Testament, and namely, in these places
following: Romans 16.1. 1. Cor. 1.17. and 14.23.
I commend unto you Phebae our sister, which is a servant of the Church of
Cenchrea. As I teach every where in every Church. As if a Minister of the
Gospel should now say thus: This is my opinion, and so I teach every where, in
every Parish wheresoever I come. If therefore, when the whole Church is come
together in one: and all speak strange tongues, there come in they that are
unlearned: it is as if one should speak now, when the whole Parish is come
together: Act. 14.23. and 27.
And when they had ordained them Elders by election in every Church, that is
(as we say) in every Parish, and prayed and fasted, they commended them to the
Lord. Behold then many Churches, and one Church; many particulars, but one
universal.

Thus we see that the word (Church) in holy Writ, is often taken for a
company of men professing Christian Religion: whether that company be great or
small, that is all one. Sometimes in the Scripture, the whole company of men
that professed Christian Religion throughout the world, that is, the universal
Congregation of Christians, is called a Church: Of that company of Christians,
that ordinarily joined together in the exercises of Religion; and sometimes the
Christians that were of the same family. And from hence, by very good reason,
we may well call all that profess Christian or true Religion in a Nation, or
all the Christians in a Nation, the Church of that Nation whatsoever it be. Let
no man therefore hold that it is unlawful to say, The Church of England, the
Church of Scotland, etc. as some of late have done. And thus much concerning
the Church, what it signifies, and what it is. It remains that we be further
instructed touching the visible Church, that so we may the better know it, and
be able to discern between a true visible Church, and a false; betwixt the
Church of God, and the Sinagogue of Satan: That so to our further comfort, or
discomfort, we may know to which of these we do belong.

CHAP. IV. The visible Church is a mixed company, compounded of Christians, true
and false: the greatest part being the worst.
TO this purpose we have a very good place in the 11. of the Acts, verse. 26.
And it came to pass, that at Antiochia Barnabas and Saul were a whole year
conversant with the Church, and taught much people, in so much that the
Disciples were first called Christians in Antiochia. Where we may observe that
this word (Church) is explained by three diverse words, People, Disciples,
Christians: By all which four words, the holy Ghost means one and the same
society. For where it is said, they taught much people, it is all one, as if it
had been said, they taught the Church: And in so much that the disciples, in
so much that the Church, or they of the Church, were first called Christians.
In that the Church is called a people, we learn that one Disciple or
Christian, is not, neither can be called a Church: But to that end there must
be a company more or less, as I have noted in the beginning, out of the
signification of the word. Secondly, in that by the word Disciples, is meant
the Church, and that by these two different words, is meant one and the same
company, we learn that the Church visible is a people (much or small) hearing
and learning those things which are taught them from God, or seeming so to do.
In a word, that it is a company of Disciples; whereof some few only are Which
be they who yields obedience to the word of God. Ma^th. 20.16.
Proficients, and do learn aright the heavenly instructions: the other being
now Proficients, or trewants, yet coming to this School of Christ, do only
occupy a room there: according to that saying of Christ, Many are called, but
few are chosen. Last y, in that the Church, or they of the Church, are called
Christians, and that by these two several words, the holy Ghost means one
and the same society, we are taught that the visible Church is nothing else but
a company of Christians: which has been further confirmed by the former
testimonies of holy Scripture, and might be by more, if need did so require.

Christians now are all they to be accounted, who profess the Christian or
true Religion: A company of which make a Church, as we hear; and these be of
two sorts: Christians indeed, and Christians in name only. Christians indeed,
be such, who professing true Religion, be withal religious indeed, leading a
religious and holy life. Or Christians indeed, James 1.27.
be they, which partake with Christ in that holy anointing, whereof the Apostle
(entreating of Christ) speaks in the first of the Hebrews, Verse 9.
God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness, above thy
fellows: 2. Cor. 1.21.
And to the Corinthians, It is God which has anointed us, who has also sealed
us, and has given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Such were those 5.
John speaks of in his first Epistle, Chap. 2.20.27
But ye have an ointment from that holy one. And a little after, But that
anointing which ye received of him dwells in you, and ye need not that any
man teach you, but as the same annoynting teaches you, of all things, and it
is true, and not lying. As if he had said, what it teaches is true, and no
falsehood or error in it: which must needs be, because it is the Spirit of
truth, and therefore breaths and inspireth nothing into any but truth. The
Spirit of God, and of Christ (that leads all them which have it, into all
truth, needful to be known to salvation) dwells in all these Christians, so
as he that wants this spirit, is no true Christian; Romans 8.9.
According to that of PAVL, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same
is not his. From whence also it follows on the other side, that he who has
Christ his Spirit, and he only is Christ's, that is, a member of Christ, or true
Christian. As he only was a Jew, which was one within, Romans 2.29.
circumcised in the heart, and in the spirit, not only in the letter or
circumcision done by the hand: so he only is a Christian, which is one
within, baptized with the holy Ghost, and not alone with water. 2. Tim. 3.5.
John 8.12.


Christians in name, or false Christians be they, who professing true Religion
or godliness, have denied the power thereof: Or professing Christianity, 1. John
3.3. Romans 2.28.
and themselves to be Christians, walk not as Christ (after whom they are
called) walked. As Paul says, He is not a Jew, which is one outward
circumcised only in the flesh: so say I, he is not a Christian, who is one
outward, Baptized alone with water. And as in the same place, the Apostle says
thus of one and the same man, Thou art a Jew, and yet thou art not a Jew: A Jew
before men, but not a Jew before God: So may we say of these men, that they are
Christians, and yet are not Christians, Christ^ans before, and in the
reputation of men, and yet not Christians before God, and in his account. A
little before, Romans 2.17.
to these kind of Jews the same Apostle speaks thus: Behold thou art called a
Jew, and restest in the law, and gloriest in God: 18. and know his will, and
triest the things that dissent from it, in that thou art instructed by the Law,
19. and perswadest thy self, that thou art a guide of the blind, a light of
them which are in darkness, etc. Yet for as much (says he) as thou breaking the
law dishonorest God, thou art no Jew. So to these I do say, ye are called
Christians, and glory in the Lord, that he is your God, and ye are his
people, not Heathens, or Infidels, and seem to your selves to know his will,
instructed by the Law, and persuade your selves many good things of your
selves: yet for as much as through breaking of the Law, ye dishonor God, and
cause his name, and that holy Religion you do profess, to be blasphemed and
evil spoken of, you are indeed, and truth, and in the account of God, who
judges according to truth, no Christians. All Christians of this kind be
Hipocrites, which of all people be most hateful to God: Nay, our Savior
says, they be Blasphemers, Revel. 2.9. and 3.9.
and therefore sinners in a very high degree. I know the blasphemy of them,
which say they are Jews and are not, but the Sinagogue of Satan. And mark how
our Lord Jesus does threaten these Hipocrites, and deep dissemblers with God
and men, in matters appertaining to God. Behold I will make them of the
Sinagogue of Satan; which call themselves Jews, and are not, but do lie.

And here we must remember, that usually the greatest part of the visible
Church are Christians in name only, Hipocrites, wicked, and ungodly men,
reprobates, which though they profess Christian Religion, are in truth
irreligious; and though they profess holiness, are indeed profane: the
lesser part of the visible Church, having that faith in Christ, that piety, and
holiness, whereof all make profession. And this is confirmed by the parable of
the seed. The This parable does not only teach that in every place where the
seed is sown, ordin^rily these four different kinds of ground are to be
fou^^. But besides that the greatest part of hearers, and consequently of the
visible Church, is the worst.
field where this seed is sown, is the visible Church, three parts whereof
Jesus tells us is bad ground and only a fourth part good and fruitful:
whereby our Savior teaches us, that ordinarily the greatest part by ods, and
as it were, three parts of four in the Church visible, be bad and unfruitful
hearers, like to the barren ground which is near unto Hebr. 6.8.
cursing, whose end is to be burned: and but a small part thereof good. We may
not understand Christ just according to the letter: For as at sometimes, and in
some Churches, there may be happily some more then a fourth part that receive
the seed of the Word into good and honest hearts, where it takes root
downward, and brings forth fruit upward: so at other times, and in some
other Churches, it may so fall out, that nine parts thereof be bad, and only a
tenth good, nay, why may not nineteen parts or more be naught, and but the
twentieth part good, and yet be Churches of the Saints, 1. Cor. 14.33.
(as Paul speaks) and so to be called of the better part, though it be far
less, as a man is called a reasonable living creature. Secondly, this is
manifest by that other speech of our Savior, Many are called, but few chosen.
Matthew. 22.14.
All that be and remain under the voice and call of God, (that is, the
Ministry of the Word, whereby God stretching forth his hands, cries aloud,
and calls upon the children of men, that they would repent and believe, and
so be saved) be of the visible Church. Of this Church Christ tells us, the
number being great, that yet few therein be good, and such as shall be saved. Me
thinks that none of understanding should deny that the former of these
propositions (Many are called) is to be understood of the visible Church, and
the latter (But few are chosen) of those of the invisible Church, who are in
the visible. This latter none will deny, and the former is no less true: which
both the coherence or dependence of this verse with that which goes before,
and also the very words do euince, and it is as if in more words it were thus
said. That society and company of men, whom God the Father inuiteth to the
Marriage of his Son, to partake with him in his glory, and the joys of the
Kingdom of heaven is very great, they be not a few, but many, to whom God
makes this offer and tender of salvation: nay calls upon, and is instant
with them, rising rarely and late, (first by Patriarchs, then by Priests and
Prophets, afterward by Apostles and their Successors, Pastors and Teachers)
that they would be saved. But in all ages among this great multitude of Jews
and Gentiles, a few only be of Gods election, and such as shall be saved.
Hereupon (considering they who have and enjoy the external calling, are the
visible Church) it follows ineuitably, that the most or greatest part of the
visible Church are Reprobates, and such as are appointed to just condemnation.
For if few in this great number of the visible Church be elected, many are
rejected. If now the most in the visible Church be reprobates, then are they
wicked and ungodly, how holy a profession soever they make. This short speech
(Many are called but few are chosen:) our Lord uses diverse times, as Mat.
20.16. and 22.14. not so much for the certainty thereof, as that we might the
better learn, and remember the same being iterated, but chiefly that the
faithful might not be offended, and stumble at the multitude of the wicked,
and paucity of the godly in the Church: seeing it is no new or strange thing,
but the very state and condition of the Church, so as seldom or never, it does
or can go otherwise with the Church. Well and truly therefore says In
Ecclesia etiam mali sunt imo bonis multo plures, vt in eorum comparatione pauci
sint, cum per seipsos considerati in gentem numerum faciant. August. de vnitate
Ecclesiae cap. 12.
AUGUSTINE, In the Church there be also evil men, yea many more then good,
that the good compared with the evil, are but a few, though considered in
themselves, they make a very great number. And Greg. in Euang. hom. 38. Sancta
Ecclesia bonos and malos indiserete nunc suscipit etc. Idem in expos. motal.
lib. 13. cap. 4. Ecclesia intra sinum, etc.
another thus, The Church comprehends both good and bad, and more bad
oftentimes then good, more goats then sheep, great store of cockle, Reprobates
without number.

And here observe we the difference betwixt the invisible and visible Church.
The Invisible, is considered from the first elect until the last, bringing all
the Chosen of all ages into one body or society. The Visible, according to
certain places and times, for as much as she is not visible universally and
all at once, but according to times, and in her parts. The Invisible contains
none but the good, the Matthew. 3.12. and 13.25.
Visible contains both the good and the bad: that only the elect, this as
well Reprobates, as elect: Chafe as well as Corn; Tares, as well as Wheat:
yea more Reprobates then elect, for Many are called, but few are chosen. The
Invisible Militant has in it only the faithful; the Visible, all that
profess faith in Christ, though many of them have no better a faith then the
Devil. In the Invisible, there be many sheep which are never gathered into
the visible (especially) assembly or particular Congregation. In the Visible, a
great many Goats and Wolves which shall never be received into the Invisible.
Matthew. 10.16.
Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of Wolves. This is spoken of the
visible Church, which then did swarm with Wolves, Matthew. 3.7. and 23.33.
Goats, Serpents, Vipers, fat Bulls of Basan, and other such like beasts. This
is carefully to be observed against them of the Separation.

By that which has been said it is manifest, that a true visible Church
consists of both kinds of Christians aforesaid, of Christians true and false,
of Christians indeed, and of Christians in name only: no better indeed then
rebels against God, and blasphemers of him after whom they be called: and is a
confused and mixed company of Elect and Reprobates, good and bad, holy, and
profane, nay many times it is so ouerspread with wicked, that the righteous
can hardly be discerned, no more then the wheat that lies all hid under the
chafe: So that there is sometime a Church without any show of it. So was it in
Eliah his time, who though a Prophet, 1. King. 19.10.14.18.
and therefore such as to whom the godly should have been known, yet knew he
not so much as one: And this was then, when the state of the Church was such,
that God could not be visibly served any where, but among his people Israel:
But of this we shall have just occasion to speak more hereafter. These things
being so, what mean those men, who sometime were of us, to condemn our
Churches, and public assemblies for false Churches, because of this mixture;
and for this cause chiefly, to withdraw themselves from us; and our
Assemblies. It will not help them at all to say as they do, that many of our
Congregations be known wicked, as shall hereafter appear.

CHAP. V. Of Religion, what it is, and how distinguished.
FVrthermore, we are to remember, that in our description of a true visible
Church, I do not say that it is a company of people professing the pure
Religion of God, but a company professing true Religion. For the better
understanding whereof, and so what a true visible Church is, we must know what
Religion is, and how it is distinguished. Religion is the way, or manner of
worshipping God, which men do use: whether it be of the true God, or a false
god. As it has been in all ages past, even so it is now. Some Nations worship
the true and living God, which made heaven and earth, who is blessed for ever,
and only to be worshipped. The people of other Nations worship false and
fained gods: some people worship after this, another after that manner: some
one way, some another way. The Pagans, and those we call Infidels, have their
form of worship: such as the Devil (whom indeed they worship) and the wit of
man has forged. 1. Cor. 10.19.20.
The Turks worship God according to their fashion and way. The Papists
worship God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, after their fashion. And we called
Protestants, worship one and the same God in Trinity, after another manner.
This is that we call Religion: and it is either true, or false.

False Religion, is when either a false or fained god is worshipped, which in
time past the Gentiles did, and Infidels do at this day: or the true God is
worshipped falsely, not in some matters of circumstance only, (which may fall
into them which worship God truly, and be of the true Religion) but in the very
substance and body of worship. Of a false Religion, and false worshippers, are
not only the Turks, (which none but themselves deny) but the Papists
likewise, which some men gainsay: because their worship is not only in matter
of circumstance, but in the substance false, and not commanded in the Word.

True Religion, is that Religion, which teaches the true way and manner of
worshipping God, so as whosoever walks in that way, and worshippeth God after
that manner may be saved. And it is either pure, or corrupted. James 1.27.
Pure and undefiled Religion, is, when the external worship of God is in all
things such as the Word requires: both in the matter and manner of worship; as
well in every circumstance, as in the substance. Or, that is pure Religion, when
God is worshipped in all things as he has appointed, without adding any thing
thereto, or taking any thing from it. This is the Religion men should be of, and
this is the worship we should give to God. But alas, partly through the
blindness that is in man, and partly through his corruption otherwise: it
comes seldom or never to pass, that men attain to this sincerity in
Religion and worship. After this purity, notwithstanding we must strive at the
height and perfection of Religion and worship: and if we cannot attain unto
it, let us yet draw as near it as may be; knowing that by how much the nearer
we approach thereunto, by so much the better is our Religion and worship: and
by how much the further off we be removed from it, by so much it is the worse.

True Religion is then corrupted, when the body and substance of Divine worship
remaining sound, some thing or things notwithstanding, be either wanting
therein, which God has commanded, or used, which he has not appointed, or
when both these are to be found in divine worship. Such was the Religion and
worship of the Jews, when Christ was upon the earth at which time, contrary to
Gods appointment, they had two high Priests, Annas and Caiphas. And where the
high Priests office was to continue during his life, they now held it but for a
year. To say nothing of their exceeding great corruption in doctrine and
manners: yet was the Religion and worship of the Jews at that time, the
only true Religion and worship, but not a pure Religion and worship. The
same is true of the Church of Corinthus, of the Churches of Galatia, and of the
seven Churches in Asia. And such is the Religion we profess in England, and
the worship we give to God, a true, but not a pure Religion and worship. And
of this kind also, we may assure our selves, is the Religion of the Churches
in Scotland, in France, in the Low Countries, yea even of all the reformed
Churches in Christendom, though not all corrupted in the same degree.

True Religion is corrupted less or more. And that is according as in divine
worship, is omitted more or less of those things which God has appointed, or
added and mixed therewith more or less, which God has not commanded, or both.
As when any thing in Divine worship is wanting, which God has ordained, it is
not pure Religion and worship, but corrupted, though it may be a true Religion
and worship: so when with Divine worship are mixed, Quaere de circumstantiis
loci, temporis, habitus, gestus, etc.
or thereunto added some ceremonies (more or less) and ordinances of man's
devising, which we call humane inventions: Religion then and worship are
thereby corrupted, and cannot be said to be pure and undefiled. The reason
whereof is, because God has not left it to the liberty and will of man, to
serve and worship him as he pleases, and thinks good: but as he alone will
be worshipped, so in that manner as he (not man) has appointed, and no
otherwise. Nothing is left here to the wit and will of man: he may neither
add, nor omit any thing, Deuteronomy. 12.32. and 4.2. Prou. 30.6.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall not add unto it,
nor diminish from it. Hence it came to pass that Leuit. 10.1.
a fire came out from the Lord, and devoured Nadab and Abihu, even for offering
strange fire before the Lord, which he had not commanded them: And that the
Lord did slay 2. Sam. 6.16.
Vzzah, holding up the Ark of God, when it was shaken and in danger to fall.
Hereby the Lord did show how highly he is offended with this corrupting and
defiling of his worship: To teach the sons of men to beware thereof.

Thus you see the difference between pure Religion, and the pure worship of
God; and true religion and worship, corrupted. Also that a people may be of a
true Religion, and have the true worship of God, and so be a true Church: and
yet not of that Religion which is pure and undefiled, nor have the sincere
worship, As one believing in Christ is a true Christian, though he has many
infirmities. So a company professing true Religion, is a true Church, though it
has in it many corruptions.
and be a pure Church. As a man believing in Christ, though he ought to be
free from all impurity of soul and body, and abound in all grace, as much as
is possible, is a true Christian, notwithstanding he attain not to this
perfection, but have many infirmities: so a Church or company of men professing
true Religion, though in the worship of God, it should be free from all humane
inventions, and have all the ordinances of God, as much as is possible,
notwithstanding it attain not to this height of purity or perfection, but have
therein many corruptions, is nevertheless a true Church.

CHAP. VI. That the profession of true Religion, makes one a member of the
visible Church.
Having now prepared and made a way to the Readers better understanding, I
return to my former description: willing thee again to remember, that I do
not say that a visible Church is a company of people professing the pure
Religion of God, but a company professing true Religion. Add thereunto if you
will, and enjoying a true worship of God, though not a pure worship. And here
fitly I may frame another description of the visible Church: That it is a
company of men enjoying and submitting themselves to the true worship of God.
Let there be an assembly joined together in prayer, in hearing the Word, and in
receiving the Sacraments Touching the substance thereof, though not in every
circumstance, and in that purity which ought to be.
according to Christ's institution, and it is a true visible Church.

If thou will soundly understand (Christian Reader) what a true visible Church
is, and be preserved from that error and Schism, into which many of late have
fallen, thou must carefully observe and remember these two things. First, The
difference between pure Religion, and true Religion corrupted: betwixt pure
worship, and true worship corrupted, whereof we have spoken. Secondly, That to
the making or being of a member of the visible Church, a profession of true
Religion, and an outward submission to true worship suffices. From whence
these conclusions do follow. First, That an Assembly may be a true visible
Church, though it profess not the Religion that is pure and undefiled, nor
live under a pure and sincere worship of God, but such as is partly impure and
corrupted. Secondly, That a man may be of the true visible Church, though he be
not religious and godly but indeed and in truth irreligious and profane, so
that he profess the true Religion. And that such may be, and are of the
visible Church, who only outwardly submit themselves to the true worship of
God, though they be not true worshippers, and do not worship God in Spirit and
truth. This profession of the true Religion, and submission I speak of, is all
in all in this case. It is that which gives life and being to every member
united to his body: so as whosoever makes this profession, and uses this
submission, being knit to this body, and not cut off by excommunication, is in,
and of the visible Church. The matter of this Church is a company of men: not
one, but a company, less, or more. And yet not a company of Angels, or
Spirits, but of men. The form is the profession of true Religion, or
submission to the true worship of God. As therefore it is in all other cases,
that where the matter and form of a thing is, there is the thing it self:
even so it is in this particular.

Ainsw. to Master Stone, page 18. Mark. 1.24. Act. 16.16.
In a Pamphlet set forth (by Master Ainsworth, as it is reported) against Master
Stone, we have to the premises this answer. That this profession is not
wanting in the Sinagogue of Satan. For (says he) as the Devil himself
professed some true and sound doctrine, so do his Instruments, as witness the
writings of Papists, Anabaptists, and other Antichristians, wherein they also
make profession of these things. But we have learned of the Apostle, Titu^ 1.16.
That there are some who profess they know God, but by works deny him, and
are abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Seeing
then a company of Reprobates may profess all doctrine needful to salvation,
yet practice such things as will bring them to damnation: We cannot be
persuaded though all your three marks were granted to be in your Parishes,
that therefore they are true Churches of Christ; for we know they do the
works of Antichrist.

I reply, Neither Papists, nor Anabaptists, nor any false Church, or Sinagogue
of Satan, profess true Religion. They profess indeed some true and sound
doctrine, yea the Devil himself did so; but it is another thing to profess
true Religion, and enjoy and submit our selves to true worship. But say you: A
company of Reprobates may profess, not only some but even all doctrine
needful to salvation, and yet practice such things as will bring them to
damnation: we cannot therefore be persuaded, that a company professing
Christian Religion, make the Church of Christ. You speak you know not what,
for hereby you imply, and secretly teach, that A true visible Church is a
company of people professing and practicing such things as will bring them to
salvation. Whereupon it follows, that there is no Hypocrite in the visible
Church: for whose practice is answerable to his holy profession, he is no
Hypocrite. Hereupon also ensues, that in the visible Church there is no
Reprobate or any that shall be damned, and that it is a company of Elect on^y,
and such as shall be saved. For all that practice such things as will bring
them to salvation, shall be saved. But this practice of holiness, over and
besides an holy profession, do you require in all the members of the true
visible Church: condemning them as no members that want it, and which making
this profession, do practice those things which lead to damnation. Therefore
by your Doctrine, all of the visible Church shall be saved, and none therein
damned. And thus unawares you confound the visible and the invisible Church;
but that is usual with you. In effect you affirm, that those mentioned Titus
1.16. were without. But that is more then you or any man can prove. It is more
probable that they were in the Church; for they were professors. They profess
(says the Apostle) that they know God. Under the knowledge of God,
comprehending also their professing to fear God, to love him, and to believe
in him, and to obey him. And I am very sure, that notwithstanding their
extreme wickedness, they might be of the visible Church, which only makes you
think they were not of it. Whether those Professors were in the Church, or
without, it mattereth not. I am sure, that if not these, yet infinite others,
as abominable as these, have been in, and of the visible Church, as hereafter
shall be made manifest. Seeing then in many members of the visible Church, as
Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, Absalom, the Scribes and Pharisees, with innumerable
more, there was no practice at all of godliness, but only a profession thereof,
being no better then Atheists, denying God, in their works abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work Reprobate: why do you necessarily require
practice in all the members of the visible Church, so as without it one cannnot
be a member of the Church, and for want of practice condemn our Parishes for
false visible Churches? Behold here men delivered up to a reprobate sense,
that were of the visible Church. Are any in our Parishes worse and more vile
then these? Were these because of their outward profession of the true visible
Church, notwithstanding their profane lives. And may not they in our Parishes,
making the same profession, be likewise members of the true visible Church,
albeit their lives be profane, so long as by excommunication they be not cast
out of the Church? Your Parishes (say you) we cannot be persuaded are the true
Churches of Christ: because they do the works of Antichrist. Be it that we
are guilty of this trespass; that we do some works of Antichrist, (that is)
that some such things we do, or yield unto, as Antichrist has brought into
the Church. Does it thereupon follow, that our Parish assemblies are not the
Churches of Christ? Answ. to Master Stone, about the 2. page
Verily no, Except every abomination of Antichrist, make a Church to become
false and Antichristian, whereunto your selves answers negatiuely, and renders
thereof a good reason in these words: For the best Churches are subject to
error, and some abominations of Antichrist were crept into Christian Churches
while the Apostles lived. By this reason of yours, and your own confession,
the Primitive Churches were not true Churches. In the eight chapter of John,
Jesus says to certain Jews, Verse. 41.44.
Ye do the works of your father. And again, Ye are of your Father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. If these, notwithstanding
they did the works of the Devil, were of the true visible Church, as the truth
is: then sure may we be of the true visible Church, notwithstanding we do some
works of Antichrist: except Antichrist, and the doing of his works, be worse
then the Devil, and the doing of his works.

But the Answer to Master Stone proceeds, If you teach your people, that
profession without practice, is sufficient to salvation, you are but a deceiuer
of their souls. Who amongst us teaches such diabolical doctrine? The Lord
knows, and his people know, that we teach the direct contrary; that it will
not suffice to say Lord, Lord, but we must do the will of our heavenly Father,
if we will enter into the Kingdom of heaven: yea, ye your selves know this.
What mean you then to use these words? whereby you would either intimate to
the Reader, that we use this cursed doctrine, and so slander us; or at least,
that you doubt thereof, whereas you certainly know the contrary. Take heed your
selves prove not the deceivers of souls: Nay, as sure as the Lord lives, you
are such.

But let us come to Master Ainsworths last answer concerning this point of
profession. Again, Counterp. 21.
I deny that your Parishes do truly and rightly profess these things, and
would hear your proof; we know that your Parishes profess not aright,
neither Law, nor Gospel, neither repentance from dead works, nor faith in
God, but lie dead in trespasses, and sins, idolatries, and many other heinous
abominations.

I reply, We know that among us some few do rightly profess, being the same
in deed, which they profess, and make show to be: and that is as much as is to
be looked for in the visible Church: Seeing all in the visible Church, a few
excepted, are Hypocrites; and that no Hypocrite can, or does rightly profess
Law, or Gospel, faith or repentance. And what though many among us, yea the
most be dead in trespasses and sins. Does that hinder us from being a true
Church? Be ashamed of your gross ignorance. Know ye not that the greatest
part of the visible Church are Reprobates, as is manifest by this speech of our
Lord, Many are called, Matthew. 22.14.
but few chosen, and consequently dead in trespasses and sins. Are not all
natural men dead in trespasses and sins? The Apostle says they be, but all
Reprobates are natural, not spiritual: therefore all Reprobates are dead in
trespasses and sins. Is there any Reprobate, who being dead to sin, is
alive to God? In the twelfth Psalm, David, because of the iniquity of that
time, complains, and cries out to God after this manner: Verse. 1.
Help Lord, for there is not a godly man left. And Isaiah thus, Ah sinful
Nation, a people laden with iniquity, etc. And a little after, Isa. 1. v.
2.3.4. and verse. 10.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye Princes of Sodom, hearken, ye people of
Gomorrha. Tell me now, Master Ainsworth, whether the people of the Jews, in
the days of these Prophets, were dead in trespasses and sins, and many heinous
abominations: and whether they did rightly profess the things you speak of. I
hope it may be as truly said of them, as of us, that they professed not
aright, neither Law, nor Gospel, neither repentance from dead works, nor
faith in God: and yet were they at the same time a true visible Church. We
therefore may be, and are a true visible Church, notwithstanding, our people
generally fail in the practice of that holy Religion we do profess. And thus
much of the visible Church; yea, generally concerning the Church, visible and
invisible, wherein (godly Reader) if thou will take the pains to inform thy
self thoroughly, thou shall not need to fear those rocks whereon others have
fallen, and made shipwreck.

CHAP. VII. That the Church of England, is a true Church, and our Parish
assemblies, true visible Churches.
WE will now come to apply the aforesaid Doctrine of the visible Church, to
the people of En^land in particular: and thereby we will prove the Church of
England, to be a true Church, against all gainsayers, Papists, Brownists, etc.
but especially against Brownists, who only have caused this Treatise of the
Church, against whom chiefly it is intended: And this is the first use we
will make of the said Doctrine.

The Brownists every where, in their books, with open mouth affirm, that our
Church is a false Church, and our particular Congregations, or Parish
assemblies false visible Churches. To take away this vile report and evil
name, which they have brought upon us the people of God, I will reason against
them, and prove the contrary, first generally, and then particularly: Generally
thus,

Whatsoever People or Nation is within the daily voice and call of God, calling
upon them to repent and believe, that so they may be saved, the same is a true
visible Church.

But the people generally of England are within the voice and call of God,
daily calling upon them to repent, and believe, that they may be saved:

Therefore the people of England are a true visible Church.

The Proposition, and first part of this Argument is proved by the speech of
Christ, Matthew. 22.14.
Many are called but few chosen: by the first part whereof, Many are called, is
meant the visible Church: and by the latter, contained in these words but few
are chosen, those of the invisible Church, that are in the visible. All that
live under the voice and call of God, that is, who submit themselves unto the
Ministry of the Word, and do hear it, whereby God calls upon them (by his
servants the Ministers) that they would repent and believe, and so be saved,
all these (I say) are the visible Church: among which (says Christ) few are of
the Elect, and Church invisible. This is the meaning of our Lord, in these
words. As that people which has not this external calling by the Word, is not
a visible Church, or so much as within the visible Church, but without, as Paul
speaks, 1. Cor. 5.12.
What have I to do, to judge them that are without? So that people which has
the external calling, whom God vouchsafes to call upon to be saved, and
outwardly submit themselves thereunto, albeit few of them be effectually called,
and have the internal calling, is a visible Church.

Against the Assumption, or second part of this Argument, there lies no
exception, it being true that our Pastors and Teachers are true Ministers, even
the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God: which as some of
the learned among us of late have proved, to the stopping of your mouths,
though never so wide: so God himself, by the calling and conversion of many
among us, 1. Cor. 9.1.2.3.
does confirm, and thereto from heaven set a scale: and therefore it mattereth
not, though a thousand fool^sh men on earth do deny the same.

From the latter description of a visible Church, That it is a company of
people enjoying and submitting themselves to the true worship of God, I argue
yet further for our Church.

Whatsoever people do enjoy* and outwardly submit themselves to the true
worship of God, they are a true visible Church:

But the people of England do enjoy and outwardly submit themselves to the
true worship of God:

Therefore the people of England are a true visible Church.

The Proposition has sufficient confirmation from the aforesaid description of
the visible Church, and needs not to be strengthened any further; besides you
will not (I know) deny it, and therefore in vain it were to use many words
about it.

The Assumption you will and must needs deny, that our divine worship, is true
worship. For if our worship be true worship, then is our Church a true
Church: This you know full well. Hereupon you as confidently affirm, that our
worship is false, as that our Church, is a false Church. Counterpoys. 209.
Should we say (quoth Master Ainsworth) that a visible Church is a people that
falsely worship Christ? Indeed, if so we held we might well return to their
Church of England; for there is false worship more then enough. If we can prove
now that our worship is true worship, then and thereby it will be manifest that
our Church, is a true Church: and so the foundation of your building, will not
only be shaken, but utterly overthrown, and fall to the ground, and
consequently the whole building. That the worship we enjoy, and give unto God,
is true worship, I thus prove.

If such, as both in their life time, and at their death, served God with the
very same worship as we do, have in that worship been saved, then is the
worship we now have, true divine worship.

But the first is true:

Therefore the second.

Both the Proposition and Assumption of this Argument, will be made evident in
and by the prosecution of the following Argument: where I prove that our
Religion, is true Religion. If that forthwith following, which is said of true
Religion, thou will (Reader) apply unto, and understand of true worship, then
thou shall plainly see that the same argument, whereby we prove our Religion
to be true Religion, makes as strongly to prove our worship to be true
worship. For if the Religion we profess be true, then needs must the worship
we give to God be true: seeing Religion is nothing else, but the manner after
which men worship God; and that true Religion, and true worship, as false
Religion, and false worship; cannot be severed: But the Religion, which we in
England profess, is true; as shall be proved: Therefore the worship we give to
God, is true worship. I now proceed to a third Argument.

Whatsoever people, all the Churches of God in the world, do acknowledge to be
a true Church, the same to be a true Church, and so to be accounted:

The people of England, all the Churches of God in the world, do acknowledge
to be a true Church:

Therefore the people of England are a true Church, and so to be accounted.

The Proposition I thus make manifest. we speak of a visible Church and so I
mean by Church in this Argument. Now if it cannot be discerned, and known by
others, it is not visible. If it can be discerned, then by the visible Churches
that are: to the members whereof we cannot but grant this gift and ability, to
discern and know a true Church. It is absurd to yield this gift to them, that
are without: and therefore to be granted, to them that are within the Church:
unless we will deny it to all men, which is most absurd of all.

The Assumption I prove by this induction. The Churches of Scotland, France,
Heluetia, Bohemia, Saxony, and so of the rest, do acknowledge our Church for
their Sister, and give unto us the right hand of fellowshippe; Therefore all the
Churches in the world. If any true Church do judge otherwise of us, do you
instance the same, and prove it accordingly. Until then, we will hold the
Assumption to be as true, as the Proposition, and the conclusion to be no
less true then they. Thus much generally concerning the Church of England: now
I will prove our particular Congregations, or Parish assemblies, to be true
visible Churches: and first thus;

If the Mother, all the people in England professing true Religion, be a true
Church, then are her Daughters, the particular Congregations, consisting of
such people likewise, true Churches: for as is the Mother, so are her
Daughters:

But the Church of England, the Mother, is a true Church (as has been
proved)

Therefore the particular Congregations her Daughters.

Secondly thus: If our particular Congregations, have the matter and form of
true visible Churches, then are they true visible Churches.

But the first is true:

Therefore the second.

The Proposition is for this reason true: because, where the matter and form
of any thing is, there is that thing. The assumption I thus strengthen.

The matter of a true visible Church, is a company of men, and the form of it
is the profession of the true Religion.

But our particular Congregations, are companies of men professi^g true
Religion:

Therefore our particular Congregations, have the matter and form, of true
visible Churches.

That the matter of a Church, whether true or false, is a company of men, none
I think, of judgment will deny, or once doubt of: sure I am, he may as well
and truly deny, that water is moist.

Touching the latter part of the Proposition the form: Who can with any face
or color of truth deny, That a Congregation, joining together in the
profession of true Religion, is a true visible Church? In the 14. of the Acts
we read thus: And when they had ordained them Elders, Verse. 23.
by election in every Church, and prayed and fasted, they commended them to the
Lord, in whom they believed. Certainly these Churches were diverse particular
Congregations, each of which did join together in the profession of Christian
Religion. Now I would know, what made these several societies, Churches, (even
by the testimony of the holy Ghost) but their profession of Christian Religion?
whereby they were distinguished from all other societies, as usually things are
by their forms. At this time, there was little or no Ecclesiastical
Government in these Churches, which some make the form of the Church: because
there were no Elders, by which the same should have bin governed. Not this
then, but their holy profession gave the form and being to these Churches.

Concerning the Assumption, that our particular Congregations be companies of
men, professing true Religion, the proof thereof follows forthwith.

Church, which is demonstrated by the word of God, to be a company of people
professing true Religion. I argue thus.

All particular Congregations which do profess the true Religion, are true
visible Churches:

Our particular congregations, do profess the true Religion:

Therefore our particular Congregations are true visible Churches.

Likewise thus:

Whatsoever Assemblies profess the true way to salvation, the same be true
visible Churches:

The Assemblies in England, do profess the true way to salvation:

Therefore the Assemblies in England are true visible Churches.

The Proposition (or first part) of both these reasons, is manifest by the
former Doctrine, and description of a visible Church: the truth whereof has
been made evident by sundry testimonies of holy Scripture. The Assumption of
the three last Arguments, (being the same in effect) I thus confirm:

If men professing the same Religion, and way to salvation, that we do, have
living and dying in that profession been saved, then is the Religion and way
to salvation, that we profess, the true Religion, and the true way to
salvation.

But men professing the same Religion, and way to salvation with us, have
therein been saved:

Therefore the Religion, and way to salvation we profess, is the true
Religion, and true way to salvation: and consequently, we are a true visible
Church, and our Congregations the Churches of Christ, and not the Sinagogues of
Satan, as these men blasphemously say.

The Proposition is very manifest, and needs no confirmation: In the printed
letters between M. Jacob, and M. Johnson passim.
the Assumption is true by your own confession: For you confess, that those
who died for Religion in Queen Mary's time were Martyrs, and usually you so
call them, and therefore are they saved, and now in heaven: and they professed
the very same Religion, and way to salvation with us, and therein lived and
died; yea, died for that Religion we at this day profess: Men therefore
professing the same Religion, and way to salvation with us, have therein been
saved by your own acknowledgment.

All that you here say for your selves, or can say, is this; That the Martyrs
saw no further. I reply, You herein acknowledge, that so many among us, as in
these things see no further, are in the same estate with the Martyrs, saved, I
mean, as well as they, if they walk according to their profession, and that
light is revealed unto them, as they did. Which being so, the Assumption
remains firm and sound. That many of the Martyrs did in these things see as
far, as many thousands of private men do at this day; nay, a great deal
further, we cannot deny or doubt of, if we compare the knowledge of private
Christians (for the greatest part) in these things, with the said Martyrs
knowledge, shining in sundry speeches of theirs, recorded partly in the Acts of
Monuments, and partly in some of their own books. And yet did they not
separate from the public assemblies, being as corrupt as ours: until Popery
came in, whereby the substance of divine worship was corrupted, and abominable
idolatry erected. And therefore men seeing and knowing many corruptions in our
worship and Ministry, and yet not seperating from that worship, because of
them, may notwithstanding be saved: walking according to the rules of our
Religion, and in that way to salvation we profess. Otherwise I am sure these
men were not saved, which I hope you will not affirm; nay in effect, you all
teach the contrary, in that you acknowledge them to be Martyrs: and especially
Master Francis Johnson: who almost every where in the printed letters between
Master Jacob and him, calls them Martyrs; and page 75. and 77 holy Martyrs:
who could neither be Martyrs, nor Saints, if they were not saved, and now in
heaven. Much more then may they among us be saved, who walking in this way,
are ignorant of these corruptions, though they do not separate: and therefore
men professing the same Religion, and way to salvation with us, may be saved.

And whereas they acknowledging them that died in Queen Mary's time, to be
Martyrs, deny us to be Christians, so many as stand members of our Parish
assemblies, which generally we do all; and granting to them salvation, deny it
(in a certain respect) to us: that these cannot stand together, it shall
appear: Master Johnson in the defense of his second Exception against Master
Jacob, page 16. has these words; Defense of the Churches and Ministry of
England. 16.
These men and assemblies, thus holding, professing, and practicing, cannot in
this estate be deemed true Christians; and Churches. Against this I argue thus:

If the late English Martyrs, professed, and practiced the very same Religion,
we now profess, and yet were in that estate true Christians, and so saved;
then men at this day professing, and practicing our Religion, are true
Christians, and in the estate of salvation:

But the late English Martyrs, professed, and practiced the very same Religion
we now profess, and in that estate were true Christians, and so saved:

Therefore they who at this day profess and practice our Religion, are true
Christians, and in state of salvation.

The Proposition must needs be true, except we will make God mutable, or an
accepter of persons.

The Assumption (consisting of two parts) is likewise true; for all the
Christian world knows, that they professed the very same Religion, that we
now do; and that they lived and died in our Religion, and for it; and
therefore to deny this, is extreme impudency. The latter part of the
Assumption, themselves confess to be true, in calling and acknowledging them
for Martyrs, as is aforesaid.

If here they roll over again the same stone, and having nothing else to
say, object the second time the ignorance of those times, that the Martyrs knew
not the corruptions that then were, and still remain in the worship,
Ministry, and Church government; as all we either do, or may know; I return
for answer, that howsoever this is true of some of the Martyrs, yet it is not
true of them all. And what say they to them? were they Martyrs, and saved, or
no? Master Hooper, Latimer, Bradford, with sundry others, had more knowledge,
and a deeper insight, into the present corruptions, then many private
Christians have at this day: nay it is not to be hoped that many among us,
illiterate, simple ones, of slender capacity, bad memories, as old men and
women, etc. have that knowledge of Church corruptions, as these and some other
Martyrs had; who were learned men, Ministers, and such as spent their whole
time and days at their studies. Shall we now deny Christianity, and salvation
to all these simple ones, and grant the same to the former, notwithstanding the
ignorance of these persons in the corruptions (and that not wilful ignorance)
is greater then of the others? Were the former saved, not seperating from the
corruptions in the worship of God, and Ministry, though they knew them very
well to be corruptions: and must all these, notwithstanding their faith in
Christ, needs be damned, having less knowledge in the same corruptions,
because they do not separate? Verily, thus to judge of this latter sort,
living and dying in this estate, argues not only want of charity, but besides,
great impiety. But tell me, I pray you, are none of these capable of true faith
in Christ, because of their ignorance in the corruptions? Or if they be thereof
capable, is it by their ignorance herein extinguished? Nay, I would know of
you, why they that have knowledge and good understanding in the corruptions*
and condemning them do not separate, may not as well be saved, as Master
Latimer, Hooper, and Bradford: answer me this one Argument; and so I end:

If Master Hooper, M. Bradford, with others, knowing the corruptions then in
worship, and Ministry being the same also with ours now, were, notwithstanding
this knowledge and not seperating, saved: then men at this day, notwithstanding
their knowledge of the corruptions, and not seperating because of them, may
likewise be saved.

But the first is true:

Therefore the second.

The Proposition must needs be true, considering that God is immutable: also no
accepter of persons. And the Assumption is true; as may be showed by the parts
thereof. He that shall read the Acts of Monuments, may easily see that sundry
of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, had good knowledge and insight into the
corruptions we speak of. That the corruptions then in worship, Ministry, and
discipline, were the same with ours now, as many and great; their public
worship, also the very same we perform to God now; and that notwithstanding
those corruptions, and their knowledge of them, they did not seperat and
withdraw themselves from the public assemblies, until such time the Mass,
that abominable Idol, and gross Idolatry, crept into Gods worship; so as the
body and substance of worship was defiled: That these things (I say) are true,
no man can deny, but with shame enough. That they also were saved, you in
effect acknowledge, in calling them Martyrs, and holy Martyrs, as before we
have heard, and your books every where declare.

Now that we have been informed in the doctrine of the Church, and applied the
same: seeing there are diverse gone out from among us, whom we call Brownists,
contrary minded: who both reject the aforesaid doctrine, as erroneous, and
condemn our Parish assemblies, for false Churches: it remains we hear what
they likewise teach concerning the Church; and their Arguments whereby they
would prove our Church, to be a false Church: that so we may more clearly see
on which side the truth is: whereby the lovers of the Truth, shall be preserved
from error, and Wisdom justified of her children.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. A confutation of H. BARROW his description of a true visible Church.
WE have spoken in the former Chapter, of the first use we make of the
aforesaid Doctrine of the visible Church: And there we have seen how fitly it
seems to justify the Church of England, and to prove her to be a true
Church: now by it we will also convince the Brownists false doctrine of the
visible Church. And that shall be the second and l^st use of the Doctrine
aforesaid.

For the better understanding of the Brownists doctrine concerning the true
visible Church: let us hear how it is described by them. It is (says BARROW)
a company and fellowship of faithful and holy people, gathered in the name of
Christ Jesus, A true description of the visible Church, page 1.
their only King, Priest and Prophet, worshipping him aright, being peaceably
and quietly governed by his officers and laws, keeping the unity of faith in
the bond of peace, and love unfeigned. General^y concerning this description, I
affirm, that Apology 44. Counterp. 115. Princ. and Infer. 8. and 10.
as all the rest of the descriptions or definitions of the visible Church which
they do give, so this likewise, is rather a description of the invisible Church
militant, then of the visible. That which is h^ere set down, is true only of
the Elect, and cannot properly and truly be spoken of any Reprobate, whereof
a true visible Church may in part consist as well of the Elect: for as the
Elect only are faithful and holy indeed, and effectually called: so Christ
Jesus is their only Though Christ Jesus be in diverse respects King of the
visible Church, yet he is not King, Priest, and Prophet of the visible, but
only of the invisible Church, he cannot be said to be Priest of the visible
Church, but with relation had to them that be of the invisible Church.
King, Priest, and Prophet: they alone do worship him aright, are governed
by his laws, keep the unity of faith, in the bond of peace and love unfeigned.
But let us brifely consider of the several parts of this description: That
your meaning is, the visible Church consists only of faithful and holy
persons, it is hereafter made manifest, and appears also by the last page of
H. Barrow his book entitled, A true description of the visible Church: where
he says, that into the visible Church there enters no unclean thing or
person, but all such are without: how true this Doctrine is, we shall anon
hear, as also of the gathering here spoken of. And that the visible Church,
and consequently all the members thereof, have not Christ Jesus to be their
King, Priest, and Prophet; in the end of this book it is made manifest.
Omitting therefore these things, we will come to that which in the description
follows.

In it you add, that the visible Church consists of a Company that worship
Christ aright, and to prove this, you send us to three places of Scripture, the
two first, viz. Exodus 20.7.8. Leuit. 10.5. speak never a word for you. The
last and only testimony you have, is Ioh. 4.23. where Jesus says, That the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth, and that the
Father requires such to worship him. And hereof our Lord rendereth a reason,
in the words next following, saying: God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and truth: which in effect is this: that God
being of a spiritual nature, requires a spiritual service agreeable to his
nature. Of a company of such kind of worshippers (say you) does the visible
Church consist. But how can this possibly be true? seeing Christ Jesus speaking
to some of the visible Church, Matthew. 15.7.
says thus, O Hypocrites, Esaias prophesied well of you; saying: this people
draws near unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me: but in vain do they worship me. These were no
true worshippers, worshipping God in Spirit and truth, but only outwardly and
Hypocritically, whereupon Jesus calls them Hypocrites, and yet were these
worshippers members of the visible Church. And whereas of the visible Church
the greatest part are Hypocrites, or hypocritical worsh^ppers, by this
description and doctrine of yours, there can be no Hipocrites in it: for you
teach that the visible Church is a company that worship God in Spirit and
truth; but no Hypocrites worship God in Spirit and truth: therefore (by your
doctrine) no Hypocrites are of, or in the visible Church. That no hypocrites
do worship God in spirit and truth, (which rests only to be proved) it is
hereby manifest. First, because they do not worship God with a true and
sincere affection of the heart. Secondly, Because this worshipping of God in
spirit and truth, is that worship which God requires to be performed to him by
men, accepts of, and is well pleased with: but the worship of hypocrites God
forbids, rejects and abhors: Hypocrites therefore do not worship God
in spirit and truth. Thirdly, As many as thus worship God in this world, Heb.
11.6. Psalm. 19.11.
he will honor in the world to come; and for their poor service done to him on
earth, he will abundantly reward them in heaven, now woe be to Hypocrites,
says Christ. And again, give him his portion with Hypocrites. This is the
hypocrites reward.

Where you say, that the visible Church is a company peaceably and quietly
governed by Christ's officers and laws, considering the greatest part of the
visible Church are reprobates, and so rebels against Christ, taking part with
Satan against him: how can this be truly said of the visible Church, and
consequently of all the members thereof? Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, Absalom, the
Scribes and Pharisees, were all of the visible Church. These and thousands more
such in the Church, have been so far from being quietly governed by Christ's
laws, that with them in the second Psalm they have said: Verse 3.
Let us break their bonds, and cast their cords from us. The visible Church
therefore is not a company of such loyal and obedient subjects to Christ, as
these men affirm. How peaceably and quietly was Saul governed by the laws of
God and Church officers then, when he caused the Priests of the Lord to be
slain, and eagerly persecuted David, thirsting after his blood, and that all
his life time. The same may be said of Cain, killing Abel, of Ismael mocking,
or (as the Apostle says) persecuting Isaak: of Absalom when he killed his
brother, rebelled against his father, lay with his Concubines, and usurped the
Kingdom: of the Scribes and Pharisees traducing, blaspheming, mocking, and
putting to death the Lord Jesus: and lastly, of all the domestical enemies of
the Church, who have reviled, slandered, imprisoned, banished, and murdered
the Saints. All these were of the visible Church, and yet were none of these
peaceably governed by Christ's officers and laws, but were rebels against
Christ, transgressors of his laws, and despisers of his officers. You speak
therefore most untruly, when you say that the visible Church is a company and
fellowship peaceably and quietly governed by Christ his officers and laws.

Finally, in requiring love unfeigned in all the members of the visible Church,
seeing this love is an effect of faith unfeigned, as Paul shows, 1. Tim. 1.5.
Do you not therein also require of them that be of this society, that faith
which works by love, 1. Pet. 1.9.
even the true and justifying faith, the end whereof is the salvation of man's
soul? Whereupon follows that the visible Church is a company of faithful
indeed, and consequently of such as shall be saved. This that I inserre, how
false soever, you fear not to teach, saying, They keep the unity of faith in
the bond of peace. This love unfeigned they only have which love the brethren,
not in word and tongue, but in deed and truth, as appears also by their
quoting of Ioh. 13.34. But this love whosoever have, are translated from death
to life, and thereof may assure themselves: The whole company therefore of the
visible Church having this love as you teach, are (by this doctrine) sure of
life and salvation. Do you not blush to tell us (in effect) that that love is
to be found in every member of the visible Church, which, the holy Ghost does
give us for an infallible mark of the child of God, and heir of salvation?
Another place of Scripture that in the margent is quoted, for the proof hereof
is 1. Cor. 13. 4. Can that love (trow you) the Apostle there speaks of, fall
into the reprobate, and be found in any but Gods elect, considering the
heavenly effects it has, in whomsoever it is? Among other things of this love
it is said, that it thinks not evil it rejoices not in iniquity, but
reioceth in the truth, and that it does never fall away. In which respect it
does excel faith and hope, as is said in the last verse, now abides faith,
hope, and love, but the chiefest of these is love, What mean you to require
this love, which is proper to the elect, in all the members of the visible
Church, of the which the most are reprobates? Cain slew his brother, Ismael
persecuted Isaak: of Esau it is said, That he hated Jacob, Cen. 27.41.
because of the blessing, wherewith his father had blessed him, and therefore
purposed to slay him. How deadly Saul did hate David, and hunt after his life,
as one would hunt a Partridge, the holy story makes mention. And as for the
Scribes and Pharisees, their extreme hatred against Christ, and all that
confessed him, is manifest in the history of the Gospel; their crucifying of
Christ, and persecuting of his members, did show the hatred that was in their
hearts.

Hereunto we may add, the persecut^rs and murderers of the Saints that have
been in the Church, almost in all ages, many whereof were of the visible
Church: yet were they so far from loving the brethren, that they did hate
them with a cruel hatred. We see then men have bin of the visible Church, and
therefore may be at this day, who have not this unfeigned love of the brethren:
nay, are as far from it, as hatred from love, and darkness from light. How
then do you truly describe the visible Church, that it is a company of men,
who love one another unfeignedly.

Thus in effect you teach, that the visible Church consists of a company and
fellowship of people, who as they are at peace with God, and among themselves,
so have they vnf^ined love one to another. Whereas the most of the visible
Church being reprobates, wicked and ungodly men, as they have no peace with
God, according to that of the Prophet, Isa. 48.22.
there is no peace, says the Lord, to the wicked; so neither are they, nor can
be at peace with men, I mean, the rest of the Church, which are the elect:
Except you will have peace between the Serpent and the woman, and both their
seeds. The Scriptures tell us, there is and will be no peace nor love, Genesis
3.15.
but perpetual enmity and war betwixt these. You tell us in effect, nay,
that these meeting together in the Church, they are peaceable and kind, loving
unfeignedly one another: you should add, as Ioab did Abner and Amasa, 2. Sam.
3.27. and 20.10.
whom under the pretense of brotherly love, he killed with the sword. As Ioab
kissed Amasa, and Judas Christ: so usually do some members of the Church kiss
some others. Prou. 29.27.
Solomon says, That the righteous are an abomination to the wicked, and the
wicked to the righteous: but in the visible Church there are righteous and
wicked men: therefore in the visible Church there are some that abhor, and
have others in abomination. You say, nay, they are all tied together by the
bond of peace and love. Jesus says of himself, That he came not to send peace
into the earth, Matthew. 10.34. Luke 12.49.51.
but rather debate and a sword; nay, fire, and what is his desire, but that it
be kindled. Is not this sword and fire, the separation also and enmity that our
Lord further speaks of, which comes through the preaching of the Gospel,
to be found in the Church, and between the members thereof? But only betwixt
them that are in the Church, and those that are without? If any be thus fondly
conceited, let him look back to the premises, and his error will be
corrected.

As the aforesaid members of the visible Church, Ismael, Esau, Saul, the
Scribes and Pharisees, had not this love unfeigned, so neither had they, the
other essential properties which you require in all them who be of a true
visible Church. They were not faithful and holy indeed, nor yet holy in the
face and outward appearance, which you require at least; nor otherwise
faithful and holy, then the most open wicked of our Land: They had not Christ
to be their King, Matthew. 1.21.
Priest, and Prophet. They were rebels, and none of Christ's subjects or people,
all which he will save. The Devil was their father and king, and they his
children and vassals, doing the lusts of him their father, in stead of the will
of God. As he was a murderer from the beginning, so were they all murderers
in their times. The like may be said touching Christ his not being their
Priest, nor Prophet. Worshippers of God they were indeed, but hypocritical,
not true and sincere worshippers: of many of them Jesus said, Ye worship God
in vain; Matthew. 15.9.
not one of them worshipped God aright, in spirit and truth: neither did they
live after the laws of God and Christ; but after the laws and customs, and
fashion of this world, whereof they were. When men spoke to them of peace, they
were bent to war; and in stead of love unfeigned, they did bear a perfect
hatred to the Saints. These men then were not such as be here described; yea,
none of them had any one of these properties, which you necessarily require in
every member of the visible Church, much less all of them: And therefore by
this description, none of them were of the visible Church: and yet by the
Scripture it is plain, that they were all of the visible Church. Thus we see
your description accords not with the holy Scriptures, neither has warrant
from thence, but by them is easily convinced: notwithstanding you allege for
confirmation thereof six and thirty testimonies of holy Scripture. But a
thousand more so perverted, will not make good your description, nor any other
of your errors. And because I know you will hardly leave this hold, and for
that if this be battered down, and made even with the ground, you must needs
betake your selves some other way: I will therefore again assault you by the
force of another Argument.

If the visible Church be a company of faithful and holy people, that worship
Christ aright, are peaceably and quietly governed by his officers and laws,
keep the unity of faith in the bond of peace and love unfeigned: Then none
have been at any time of the visible Church, but such as have been faithful
and holy, did worship Christ aright, etc: as follows in your description:

But some have been of the visible Church, who were not such as be here
described, as Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, Doeg, Ioab, Absalom, the Scribes and
Pharisees, with infinite others:

Therefore the visible Church is not a company of faithful people, worshipping
Christ aright, etc.

The Consequence of the Proposition, I do illustrate and confirm by the like.
If the visible Church be a company of people professing the true Religion, then
none have been of the visible Church, but such as have professed the true
Religion. If the invisible Church be the company of the elect then none have
been or are of the invisible Church, but such as were and are elect, and their
names written in the book of life. The assumption your selves will grant.
Again, I reason with you on this manner:

If this be a true description, then no reprobates ever have bin, are, or shall
be of the visible Church, but only the elect: for none have been, are, or can
be such as are here described, but the elect:

But many reprobates have been, are, and shall be of the visible Church:

Therefore this description of the visible Church is false.

The Proposition must needs be true, except Christ Jesus be the King, Priest,
and Prophet of Reprobates, and that Reprobates worship Christ aright, in Spirit
and truth; be governed by his laws, as their only King; keep the unity of
faith in the bond of peace, and do unfeignedly love the brethren.

Matthew. 22.14.
The Assumption will not be denied, and it is manifest by that short speech of
Jesus, Many are called, but few chosen.

This description being heretofore found fault with by some, and Master
Ainsworth justifying the same, it shall not be amiss to hear what he says
in answer to them, and in defense thereof: C^unterpoys. 208.
They cavil at our description of a Church, when we say, that it is a company
of faithful people that truly worship Christ, and readily obey him: this say
these Ministers is utterly untrue, if it be understood of the visible Church.
This is strange: What would they have us describe the Church to be? A company
of Infidels; or a company of faithful and of infidels together: when Paul
teaches that there is no communion between such, 2. Cor. 6.14, 15. or should
we say a people that falsely worship Christ? Indeed if so we held, we might
well return to their Church of England for there is false worship more then
enough. The Apostle writing to the visible Church of Ephesas, calls them
Saints, and the faithful in Christ Jesus. Will they say that this also was
utterly untrue? Their own articles of Religion in England A^no. 1562. A^t. 19.
say thus: The visible Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful people,
etc. And is this also untrue?

I answer you, having respect to your own words: A visible Church, is a
company professing true faith, or a company professing the true worship of God:
some whereof have faith in Christ, I mean, true and justifying faith; and
worship God indeed, even in spirit and truth; the rest (being the greatest
part) are hypocritical worshippers, void of true faith, having only either the
temporal, or historical faith, or no faith at all, but very Atheists. Yet
profess they the true worship of God, and faith in Christ Jesus; and in this
respect may be called faithful in Christ Jesus, and Saints: because whatsoever
they be, their profession is holy, and he holy, in whom they would seem to
believe and whom they seem to worship truly. And in this sense, our Church
says, A visible Church is a Congregation of faithful people, that is, of such
as profess faith in Christ Jesus. Of this sort of Infidels and counterfeit
Professors, were Cain, and for a time Ismael, Esau, also Saul, Absalom, Judas,
Simon Magus with infinite more. Understanding Infidels thus, as they may well
be called Infidels or unbelievers, who have not true faith. Then, I say, the
Church is a company of saithfull, and of Infidels. 2. Cor. 6.14.
But if by Infidels you mean the same the Scripture usually understands by
this word; such as worship a false god, and do not so much as profess the
worship of the only true God, or faith in him, then it is true that a visible
Church is not a company of faithful and Infidels together. And the having
communion with such Infidels as these in their false worship, is that which the
Apostle condemns. He does not forbid to partake in divine worship with such
Infidels, as formerly I have spoken of, wicked and ungodly men, void of true
faith, as every where very fondly you tell us: nor yet to communicate with these
Infidels he speaks of in true divine worship; but this he condemns and
argues against. That the children of God may not have communion with Infidels
and Heathens in their false and Idolatrous worship, as some of the Saints at
Corinth (as it might seem) did, repairing to the Idols Temples, and joining
therewith their neighbors that were Idolaters, in their idolatrous worship.
This they thought they might lawfully do, so long as in their hearts and
inward affections they condemned it, and kept them pure, as may be gathered
from 2. Cor. 7.1. And this is it that Paul reproves, and nothing less then
that which you do from hence usually collect and urge against us.

CHAP. II. A confutation of another description of the true visible Church,
given by the Brownists. Where much is said concerning the first gathering of a
Church; and commixture of good and bad in the Church.
But omitting this description of H. Barrowes, we will proceed to another of
theirs laid down in their Apology. Apology 44.
It is (say they) a company of people, called and separated from the world, by
the word of God, and joined together by voluntary profession of the faith of
Christ, in the fellowship of the Gospel.

If this be a true description, then whosoever is not called and separated from
the world by the word of God, etc. is not a member of the visible Church: for
of such a company, so called and qualified, it does consist, as you affirm.
But some not called and separated from the world, etc. have bin, are, and shall
be of the v^sible Church, as is evident by that which follows: this therefore
is not a true description of the visible Church. It is a company of people (say
you) called by the word of God; whereby you mean, that by the power and force
of the Word only, in the Ministry and preaching thereof, men are brought to be
of this society, that is, of the visible Church; and not by the call,
persuasion, or commandment of the Magistrate, or any mortal man. And this you
put down in your description, that thereby you might prove our Parish
assemblies to be no true, but false visible Churches: because in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, the people then living were not called by the
Word, and gathered by the preaching thereof, but all brought in at once by her
commandment, and proclamation. Hereupon it is, that in the former description
of the visible Church they say, It is a company gathered in the name of Christ
Jesus. And Master Johnson applying this to us, says, We were never rightly
gathered together according to Gods ordinance: Defense of the Churches and
Minist. of Eng. 86.
that is, as here he speaks, not called by the word of God, meaning the
preaching thereof, as appears by his quotations of Scripture in the margent.

We answer, If we speak of a Church when it is first planted, I mean of a
Nation when first it comes to embrace and profess the Gospel and true
Religion, the people of such a Nation for a great part there of are called by
the word of God, before they come to be a visible Church. By the power and
truth of the Word, and divine majesty shining every where therein, the
children of men be brought to forsake their false Religion and worship, and to
join together in the profession of true Religion, whereby they become a
visible Church. And this is confirmed throughout the whole story of the Acts of
the Apostles, both in the conversion of the Jews, or gathering visible
Churches of them, set down in the nine first Chapters; and likewise of the
gentiles: continuing from the beginning of the tenth Chapter to the latter end
of that book. In the second of the Acts, where mention is made of a great
increase, or addition to the visible Church, (that before that time was among
the Jews) of about three thousand souls: and in the fourth of the Acts of a
further increase to about five thousand: Act. 2.14. and 4.4.
in both these places the means is specified, whereby this was brought to
pass, and that is said to be, the hearing and and receiving of the word of God
preached by Peter and other of the Apostles. In the eight chapter of the Acts,
we read of a Church gathered in the City of Samaria by Philip his preaching
Christ unto them: and in the eleventh Chapter of the Acts, of a great Church
gathered by the preaching of certain Prophets and Evangelists in Antiochia in
Syria. In a word, where in the Acts we read of the conversion of a people to
God, as in Antiochia a City of Pisidia, in Iconium, Listra, Derbe, Philippi,
Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, Corinthus and Rome, in the same places we hear
that they were called, and the said visible Churches gathered by the preaching
of the word. But mark, all these Churches were now first planted, and these
people newly converted from Iudaisme, or Gentilisme, (that is, either from the
Jewish Religion, or false Religion of the Gentiles) to the Christian Religion.
In such a case, to the gathering and being of a Church, the preaching of the
Word is absolutely necessary, so as without it a company of people cannot be
brought to be a Church. But if we speak of a Church established, or of a
Country, where for some time true Religion has been professed, and God truly
worshipped, though sometimes interrupted, broken off, and discontinued, which
is our case, then this holds not. As under the Law both Jews and Gentiles
(professing the Jewish religion) by Circumcision, so by Baptism. Christians
under the Gospel are incorporated into the visible Church, and made members
thereof. Are not the children of the faithful by Baptism received into the
visible Church; and thereby made members thereof? And not by the call of the
word, the sound whereof many of them do not hear, and if they do they cannot
understand it? And what lets, why some of these when they be grown men,
may not thorough hypocrisy continue in the Church; though in the hardness of
their hearts they never were affected and touched with the word: many such
hypocrites and hard-hearted men, dead in their sins and trespasses, and that
have consciences seared with a hot Iron, have ever been, are, and shall be in
the Church, who never by the call of the word, and power thereof, would have
become members of the Church, nor have felt any touch that way, but only
because they were borne and brought up in the Church, and not cast out: either
through the want of due execution of discipline, or else through their deep
dissimulation and hypocrisy, they being like painted tombs, which appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and all
filthiness. Surely, it is not to be thought, that Cain, Ismael, Esau, with
others; that many of the fat Bulls of Basan, that many of those who in Israel
killed the Prophets, and stoned them which were sent unto them; that many of
the Scribes and Pharisees were affected with the Word, or so much as tasted of
the power and sweetness thereof, and yet were they all of the visible Church.
How were these then called by the word of God? Again, that without this call
by the word, men may come to be of the visible Church, it is yet more evident
by the scripture. In the twelfth chapter of Exodus, where mention is made of
the departure of the Children of Israel out of Egypt; it is said, That a great
multitude of sundry sorts of all people went out with them: Verse. 38.
now all or most of these, we may assure our selves, were Proselites, and of
the Jews Religion, and so of the visible Church; and yet undoubtedly they came
not to be such by the call of the word; or by the power and operation thereof:
but by beholding the great and wonderful works which the Lord wrought by the
hand of Moses and Aaron, and the freedom of the Jews from those plagues which
fell upon the Egyptians. When Haman was hanged, and Mordecai exalted, and
comfortable letters sent to the Jews, that they should be ready on such a
day, and avenge themselves on their enemies: so as unto the Jews was come
light, and joy, and gladness, and honor, it is recorded in that story, Ester
8.17.
that many of the people of that Land became Jews, that is, turned to, and
professed the Jews Religion, and so were joined to the Church: and then
immediately is showed how that came to pass: not by the call, power, and
operation of the Word, but because the fear of the Jews fell upon them. This
is manifest, likewise in the Gospel, where many are said to believe in Christ,
that is, to profess faith in Christ, and so were of the visible Church, of
whom it is plain, they were not drawn thereunto by the word, but some by the
report they heard of Christ, as Ioh. 4.39. some for their belly sake to be fed
by him, as Ioh. 6.26. and some by his miracles, as Ioh. 2.27. Seeing then this
is not necessary, and generally true of all the members of the Church, that
they are called by the word of God, very unfitly was it placed in the
description of a visible Church: which if it were good, would be true, and each
part of it, of every member thereof: If it be true that a visible Church is a
company of men, then thus is it also true: whosoever is not a man, is not, nor
can be of the visible Church; and therefore no Angels, no spirits or souls of
men can be of this Church; even so it is in this case. If this be true, that a
visible Church is a company called by the word of God, then this is true also,
that whosoever is not called by the word, and has not felt the force and power
of this mighty word, is no member of the visible Church.

Moreover, suppose that one of the visible Church have children and servants
that be Papists, and that he, after other persuasions, commands and threats,
shall say unto them, except ye forsake your idolatry, and worship God
according to his word, and not after the traditions and devises of men, ye
shall be no children, nor servants unto me. And that thereupon they frequent
the Church assemblies, and in process of time do in policy outwardly seem
to be religious, renouncing Popery, and p ofessing the true Religion, when in
the mean season they continue Popish still. And not those to be accounted of
the visible Church? Yes verily, for what though they have a heart, and a heart:
that is nothing to man: we must leave that to God. Yet these children and
servants came not to be of the Church by the call of the Word. And herein this
Father and Master did nothing but what in duty to God, Genesis 18.19.
and love to men, he ought to do. For I know him, says the Lord, that he will
command his sons, and his household after him, that they keep the way of the
Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
that he has spoken unto him. May and ought the Master and Father of a family
do this, and may not or ought not the Father of the Country according to that
authority which God has given him likewise do the like by his family? If he
may, why do you condemn (as it should seem) the proclamation and
commandment given in this behalf by Queen Elizabeth, not long after she
came to the Crown; whereby the gathering of our Churches was hastened? You
ought rather to have commended her for it. When Judah was fallen to Idolatry,
whereby it became a false Church, the Lord raised up certain Kings of Judah to
restore and purge the Religion and worship of God, then greatly corrupted,
whereby it became again a true Church. And this that they might the better
effect, they 2. King. 23.21. 2. Chron. 14.4. and 33.16.
commanded the people to serve the Lord, in that manner that he had appointed
them, and not after the fashion and appointment of men, as they had done. Of
Josiah it is said, That 2. Chron. 34 33.
he compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their God. Yea
some of them to this end, 2. Chro. 30.5.6.10.
made proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, and
accordingly sent forth the posts with the said proclamations or letters: and
(that which is more 2. Chro. 15.12.13.
) calling a Parliament, made this statute or law, That whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel, (that is, serve him according to his word, as it
is expounded, 2. Chron. 14.4) should be slain, Concerning this also, they
caused the people to take an oath. Then it follows in the text, And the Lord
gave them rest round about. Whereby is intimated, that God approved of this
compulsion to serve him, and therewith was well pleased.

Ye now that so greatly condemn the gathering of our Churches, and teach that
all who are of the visible Church, are called by the word of God; and thereby
only made members of that society: That God here must persuade the heart of
man; Counterpoyson 72. and 170.
That Christ's Church (to wit, visible) is a people begotten of God, with the
word of truth; that Gods people (meaning the visible Church) are a voluntary
people. And thereupon condemn all force and compulsion used herein by the
Magistrate: Tell me, I pray you, whether all the Idolaters in the days of Asa,
Hezekiah, Manasseh, and Josiah, that reformed themselves touching their outward
profession, were by the force and power of the word of God, then preached,
brought to profess the true Religion, and to join with others in the true
worship of God, and so to be of the visible Church. If you answer
affirmatively, he is a fool that believes you, and such a one sure, that if
you say, the crow is white, will likewise believe you. If negatiuely, we need
no more to convince you. For it some have come to be of the visible Church, who
before were not, and not by the call of the word, which in giving this negative
answer, you affirm: then is not the visible Church a company of people c^lled
by the word of God, as you define it. Secondly, I demand of you, why
commandments, proclamations, threats, force, and compulsion being used by the
Kings or Queens of England, in the restoring or purging of the Religion and
worship of God, should not as well now b^e lawful and pleasing to the Lord, as
the like proceedings used by the Kings of Judah were in the like case.

You answer thus. M. Ainsworth, Counterpoyson, 229.
The examples they allege of reformation by the Kings of Judah, fit not their
turns: for Judah was a true Church, (though some corruptions had crept in, as
will easily do into the best.) Ab^j^h the Predecessor of Asa, maintained Gods
true Religion, and worship, against idolatrous Israel, both by word and sword.
So Asa found not his Kingdom a false Church, as King Edward and Queen
Elizabeth found England. Afterward, when abominations had ouerspread the Land
Hezekiah labored a godly reformation, and opening the doors of the Lords
house, he brought in the Priests and Levites, not the Chemarims or Baals
Priests, as the Popish Clergy were brought in, or rather retained still in
this Church. 2. Chron. 30.6.
Hezekiah sent over all the Land to convert the people from idolatry; who
laughed the messengers to skorne and mocked them: howbeit diverse submitted
themselves and came to Jerusalem. Finally, Josiah purged the Land of idols and
false worship, and reduced his people unto the true service of God.

Observe this man's evasion, and what shift he makes to help himself in a
strait. They will seem to answer, when they do nothing less. For the
justifying of this, That Christian Princes may and ought to command their
subjects, being Idolaters, to forsake their Idolatry, and worship the Lord, and
consequently to join themselves to the true Church. We allege the examples
and practice of certain Kings of Judah, and namely of Asa, Hezekiah, Manasseh,
and Josiah, who did the like. For answer to the first of these examples, you
tell us, that howsoever the Religion and worship of God was corrupted in Abijah
his time, the predecessor of Asa, yet was it true Religion and worship that was
then maintained, and a true Church which Asa found when he came to the
Kingdom: but such was not our estate and condition, when King Edward and
Queen Elizabeth entered upon their Kingdoms: The case therefore is not alike.
But we desire you to prove, That in the days of Abijah Judah was a true
Church, and that Abijah maintained Gods true Religion, and worship. I confess
that in Judah God had a Church and people in Abijah his reign, who were of the
true Religion, and worshipped him truly, yea, I add, that at this time in
Israel, under Jeroboam, the Lord had his Church, and people that were of the
true Religion and worship, as is plain by 2. Chron. 11.13, 14, 16. But I deny
that Judah was then a true Church, and that Abijah maintained Gods true
Religion and worship; and affirm that Judah was now Idolatrous, as well as
Israel, whom your self calls (and that truly) idolatrous Israel: though both
these Kingdoms were not idolatrous in like degree. That this is so, it is
plain by the holy Story of these Kings and times. For mark what Asa Abijah
his son and successor, is said to do upon his entrance into the Kingdom. He
took away the altars of the strange gods, 2. Chron. 14.3, 4, 5.
and the high places, and brake down the Images, and cut down the groves:
Here is mention of the altars of strange gods, of Images, to wit, of false
gods, of the high places, where they offered to these gods, and of the groves,
which were dedicated unto them, which Asa, succeeding Abijah, forthwith
destroyed. Do not these things evidently declare, that in the reign of Abijah
Idolatry was set up, and maintained in Judah, and therefore ABIIAH maintained
not Gods true Religion, and worship? If you object that these Altars, Images,
and High places, were not erected and set up by Abijah, but by Rehoboam his
father, only through want of zeal he let them alone, and did not abolish them,
and that this only was his sin, and the sin of Judah: I answer, the
contrary is manifest, 1. King. 15.12. where thus we read: And Asa took away
the Sodomites out of the Land, and put away all the Idols that his Fathers had
made. By Fathers, here must needs be understood Rehoboam and Abijah. If further
you object, that howsoever Abijah was an Idolater, yet the Kingdom was not
fallen to idolatry, but the people generally worshipped God truly: I answer,
this cannot possibly be true, for evermore it went thus with the Jews, like
Prince, like People. If the King were religious, then the People and State
embraced and professed true Religion, and worship: and if the King was an
Idolater, and false worshipper, then generally the people were such. Besides,
this objection is answered and convinced, 2. Chron. 12.1. And here I reason
thus with you:

That King and people which set up and maintain the worship of a false god, or
gods, is a false Church:

But Abijah and his people set up and maintained the worship of false gods:

Therefore Abijah and his people, were a false Church.

The Proposition none will gainsay; and the Assumption is proved by the
aforesaid testimony of Scripture.

Again, that ABIIAH did not maintain Gods true Religion and worship, and
consequently Judah in his days was not a true Church, it is confirmed by the
fourth verse of the former Scripture: 2. Chron. 14, 3, 4.
And Asa took away the altars of the strange gods, etc as is aforesaid, and
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do according to
the Law, and the Commandment. In that Judah is here commanded by Asa to
worship the Lord according to the Law and Commandment of God, given in that
behalf, for this is the meaning of the words: thereby is insinuated that
before, and in Abijah his time, they did not worship God after his Law and
Commandment but otherwise, even after their own inventions, which is
idolatry and false worship. Lastly, I reason against you thus: Judah was an
idolatrous and false Church in Rehoboams time: Therefore in Abijah his days.
The Antecedent I prove by 1. King. 14.22, 23, 24. compared with 2. Chron. 14.3,
4. and 1. King. 15.3. also by 2. Chron. 12.1. And when Rehoboam had established
the Kingdom, and made it strong, he forsook the Law of the Lord, (that is, to
worship the Lord according to his Law, which is true worship) and all Israel,
meaning all Judah, with him. The consequence is corfirmed, 1. King. 15.3. And
Abijah walked in all the sins of his Father, which he had done before him:
but his Father set up, and maintained a false Religion and false worship:
Therefore the son.

You tell us that ABIIAH maintained Gods true Religion, and worship, against
idolatrous Israel, both by word and sword. How can this possibly be true,
seeing Abijah maintained in Judah a false Religion and worship, as well as
Jeroboam in Israel, and was an Idolater, as Jeroboam was. Suppose there were
now war between the King of Spain, and the Pope, about some Civil matter;
some Territories, or other commodity, that each of them make claim to. If
because of this I should affirm, that the King of Spain maintains Gods true
Religion and worship, against idolatrous Rome: would not you and all men laugh
at me for my folly and falsitie? No less ridiculous and false is that you
affirm of Abijah. True it is that Abijah had war with Jeroboam King of
Israel, but Religion was not the cause thereof, but this. Abijah being valiant,
would have brought back again the Kingdom of Israel, which Jeroboam had
taken (as Abijah said to the whole army of Israel) by rebellion, from his
father REHOBOAM a child, and tender hearted and one that could not resist him,
as Abijah says of him. Abijah his love then and desire after the Kingdom of
Israel, was the cause of this war, as is plain by 2. Chron. 13.5, 6, 7. and
not his zeal for the true Religion, and hatred of the false, as your words
pretend. A man that reads these words of yours, would likewise imagine that
Abijah was religious, and worshipped God truly: whereas in truth he was a
notorious hypocrite, and gross idolater. In the shutting up of your answer
touching Asa, you say that ASA found not his Kingdom a false Church, as King
Edward and Queen Elizabeth found England. This also is very untrue. Nay, ASA
found Judah worse, then they did England. For Judah in Abijah his reign
worshipped false gods: whereas England in the days of King Henry and Queen
Mary worshipped the true God, though after a false manner.

But suppose that Judah in Abijah his time, was not a false Church, and that
Asa found it a true: that lets not, but that in Judah there might be idolaters
at the same time, worshipping either a false God, or the true God after a false
manner, as the Papists at this day in England do. Nay, we cannot but
acknowledge that such there were indeed, considering this is said of Asa in the
very entrance into his Kingdom, 2. Chro. 14.3.
That he took away the altars of the strange gods and the high places, and
brake down the Images, and cut down the groves. Verse. 4. And commanded Judah
to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do according to the Law and the
Commandment. Now these idolaters that in their high places offered to strange
gods, did ASA command to forsake their idolatry, and to worship the Lord God
of their Fathers, after the manner he had commanded: as is plain. First, By
the coherence and dependence of the two verses aforesaid. Secondly, ASA, needed
not to give this commandment to them, who did already worship God truly: but
to the idolaters that were in Judah, that either worshipped strange gods, or
the Lord after their own inventions, and not as he had commanded. Is it not
then plain in the example of Asa, That Christian Princes may and ought to
command their subjects being idolaters, to forsake their idolatry, and to
worship the Lord, and consequently, to join themselves to the true Church: say
it were true, that the Church of Judah was then not a false, but a true Church?
Yes verily, even al one, as if the Church in Abijah his time, had been a false
Church, as indeed it was. Specially if hereunto we add that which is set down
in the second verse: That herein Asa did that which was good and right in the
eyes of the Lord. But grant we that the dissimilitude you speak of, would
help you against the example and practice of Asa: yet is it no answer to the
other two examples of Hezekiah and Josiah: seeing they found the Church of
Judah every whit as false a Church, as King Edward and Queen Elizabeth did the
Church of England. Yea, false in a higher degree, worshipping false Gods,
whereas England in King Henry the eight, Nay England enjoyed the true worship
of God, part of King Henry his reign, especially during the time of Queen
Anne, and before the six bloody articles were urged. Act. and Mon. 999. and
1000. 2. Chron. 28.2, 3, 4. and 23. and 33.2, 3, 4, 5, 9.
and Queen Mary's days worshipped yet the true God, though after a false
manner. By the Scripture it is manifest that in the days of Ahaz and Amon,
Predecessors to the aforesaid godly Kings, Judah walked in the ways of Israel,
made molten Images, and set up altars for Baalim, sacrificed unto the gods of
Damascus, and of Aram, and worshipped all the Host of heaven, and served them:
nay it is said, Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did worse then the
Heathen, whom the Lord had destroyed before the children of Israel. This you
knew well enough, and saw, but would not see: for then you had answered your
self, which you had no desire to do. And this appears by your own words,
for you acknowledge that JOSIAH purged his Land of false worship. 2. That he
reduced his people unto the true service of God: therefore before Josiah his
reign in Amon his days, they had the false service and worship of God
established among them. Mark also how Master Ainsworth using many words
concerning HEZEKIAH his reformation, passes smoothly both by this, that Judah
in his entrance to the Kingdom was a false Church, and that he in his said
reformation, used his regal commandment and authority, sent forth his
proclamation throughout all Israel and Judah, and that by posts, for the more
speedy dispatch thereof. We have not a word of these things, that make as
directly against you as can be, and for the justifying of Queen Elizabeth's
proclamation in the beginning of her reign, which you spurn against so much.
But in stead thereof you say, That he opened the doors of the Lords house,
brought in the Priests and Levites, and sent over all the Land to convert the
people from idolatry, who laughed at the messengers and mocked them. It may
seem by these messengers, you understand, or at least would have your Reader
understand certain Prophets Priests or Levites. That such were sent by the
King throughout all Israel and Judah, to preach for the gathering, calling, and
converting of this people to God. But the Reader must know that these said
Messengers were the Posts that carried the Kings proclamations, or as it is
said, 2. Chro. 30.6.
went with letters by the commission of the King, and his Princes, throughout
all Israel and Judah, and with the commandment of the King: the sum of which
proclamations or letters is there set down. Who would ever imagine, that they
whom the King sent to convert the people from idolatry, (for these be your
words) were only certain Posts that carried the proclamations of the King?
Thus by cunning you deceive the simple. In like manner you deal as touching
Josiah. You tell us that he purged the Land of Idols, and false worship, and
reduced his people unto the true service of God: But in the mean season you
omit, how that to the end he might bring this to pass, 2. Chro. 33.16
he commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel. This which makes to the
very point in hand you pass by, and in stead thereof, mention that which is
nothing to the purpose. Let the Christian Reader judge of this kind of dealing.
But let us hear more of your answer.

These examples we acknowledge all Christian Princes should follow; having
equal power with these Kings of Judah, Counterpois. 230.
to abolish all idolatry within their dominions; yea, and to punish obstinate
idolaters, and not suffer any superstitious worship among their subjects: but
to procure their conversion by the word, yet not to compel them to be members
of the Church, because they cannot give them Faith and Repentance, which is the
only door into Christ Kingdom, and cannot be opened to any but by God alone.
And a little after: Your people should have yielded their own willing consent,
which they never did; but were, and still are compelled by law and penalty to
be of the Church and Religion established.

Reply.
If Christian Princes have equal power within their dominions with that the
Kings of Judah had in theirs, then are they not only to abolish all idolatry
within their dominions, which you confess, but also to command, and by law and
penalty to compel their people to be of the true Religion, and to worship God
according to his word, that is, to profess true Religion and worship, (for
further then the outward profession man cannot go) which makes a member of
the visible Church. But the former of these is true, by your own confession:
therefore the latter. The consequence of the proposition is grounded upon this,
that the Kings of Judah proceeded thus far, when they reformed the Church, as
appears by the premises, and namely by the 2. of the Chro. 34.2. which
Scripture is singular to this purpose. And Josiah did that was good and right
in the eyes of the Lord his God. 3. For he took away the altars of the strange
gods, and the high places, etc. 4. And commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of
their Fathers, and to do according to the Law and the Commandment. 5.
Therefore the Kingdom was quiet before him. Here we see that Josiah did not
only abolish idolatry and all false worship, but besides commanded his people
to worship the true God, (called here the God of their Fathers) according as he
had commanded, which is that we call true worship. And it is evident that
therein he did well. First, because this is rendered for a proof, or instance
of that which is generally said of him in the second verse, And Asa did that
was good and right in the eyes of the Lord: for he took away the altars, etc.
And commanded Judah to seek the Lord, etc. that is, to serve the Lord in that
manner he had commanded. Secondly, because for this very act of his God blessed
him with outward peace, as verse. 5. Therefore the Kingdom was quiet before
him. Are Christian Princes only to abolish idolatry within their dominions, and
to punish obstinate idolaters, and not to compel their subjects any further?
Then belike they may let their people be of no Religion even Atheists, and not
punish them, so long as they be not idolaters. But why may not Kings compel
their subjects to profess true Religion, and to submit themselves to the true
worship of God, which makes them members of the visible Church? Because they
cannot give them faith and repentance, which is the only door into the Church,
and cannot be opened to any, but by God alone. It is true indeed, that Princes,
though their power is great, yet are too weak hereunto. But we must know that
profession of faith and repentance suffices to the making of a member of the
visible Church, and thereunto the Magistrate can compel. That which you say of
the visible Church is true of Heaven: faith and repentance is the only door
into it, and God in Christ only can and does open it: But is very untruly said
of the visible church: especially considering your quoted Scriptures for
confirmation thereof, require faith and repentance indeed, and speak of true
repentance, and saving faith. It greeueth me to see how many places of
Scripture are here perverted by you, as namely Ioh. 6.44. No man can come to
me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at
the last day. And again, verse. 65. No man can come unto me, Note here their
abuse of holy Scripture.
except it be given unto him of my Father. That which is here spoken of the
members of the invisible Church, when they are inwardly and effectually called,
and endued with faith in Christ Jesus; That it is God, and he alone, who gives
them to believe, meant hereby by coming unto Christ: you ignorantly understand
of, and apply to all of the visible Church, whereof the most have only the
external calling: and will by these Scriptures prove, that no man can be of
the visible Church, except God call him, and draw him, and by his Spirit
persuade him. Counterpoys. 134. Cant. 1.3.
For which purpose also (as I remember) you allege elsewhere that speech of the
faithful: Draw me, and we will run after thee. He that sees not this your
abuse of Scripture, it is because he wants some of that eye-salue mentioned
Reu. 3.18. to anoint his eyes with. The rest of your quotations for breuity I
pass by, together with this your doctrine, the falsehood whereof, shall
hereafter be made evident, in a more convenient place.

You tell us that Christian Princes are to punish obstinate idolaters, yet not
to compel men to be of the Church: First, Because in such a case they must
yield their own willing consent. Secondly, Because they cannot give them faith
and repentance, which is the only door into the Church, and cannot be opened
to any, but by God alone. Suppose I. N. an idolater, by the Kings authority be
for his idolatry punished with imprisonment, or loss of goods, or some such
like punishment: and that he remaining still an idolater, in the love to his
liberty, or goods, pretends great hatred to idolatry, and love to the true
worship of God: whereupon after profession of his faith and repentance made, he
is received into the Church. Ye cannot deny, but that this man is a member of
the visible Church: for against such a one you cannot shut the doors of the
Church, and all in the Church are members thereof. Tell me now: First, whether
this man became not a member of the Church by compulsion: and whether by
punishment men are not after a sort compelled to do the contrary to that, for
which they are punished: and whether this is not intended and aimed at in
punishments. And so here, that I. N. being punished for his idolatry, should
forsake that, and worship God according to his Word: which makes one a member
of the visible Church. Secondly, whether this hypocrite and deep dissembler
do this of his own willing consent, or rather against his heart, and will,
compelled thereunto by law and penalty. Thirdly, I demand, whether this man
has faith and repentance, and has passed through this door into the Church.
Fourthly, Whether God moved the heart of this man, and by his Spirit persuaded
him to join with others in the external worship of God, or the love of
prosperity, and freedom from misery. And let this suffice, for a reply to your
answer, whereby the insufficiency and vanity of it is made manifest: as also
of this following speech of Master Iohnsons, A^swere to M. Jacob. 199.
tending to the same purpose. It is (says he) the work of God only, to add
to his Church such as he will save. And therefore it is not in the power of
Princes, or any man whatsoever, to persuade the conscience, and make members of
the Church: but this must be left to God alone, who only can do it. Princes
may, and ought, within their dominions, to abolish all false worship, and
establish the true worship appointed by God in his word, commanding and
compelling their subjects to come unto, and practice no other but this: yet
must they leave it unto God to persuade, and to add to his Church, from time
to time, such as shall be saved. I answer this man further, That the Lord add
to the Church such as he will save, and none other: yet (the visible Church
being the Barn wherein his wheat must be threshed, before it be gathered into
the garner of Heaven, Mat. 3.12.) Satan (the father of all Hypocrites) adds
many unto it; and such may come to be of the visible Church, and often do, by
the Commandment, counsel, or persuasion of man, and yet that be true, you
say, and by many testimonies endeavor to prove, that God alone must persuade
the conscience, and that it is his work only to add to his Church such as he
will save. But tell me, Master Johnson, whether those who not only come unto,
but also practice the true worship appointed by God in his Word, be not members
of the Church? You cannot deny they are members, and so to be accounted. But
Princes (say you) in their dominions may command, and compel their subjects to
come unto, and practice the true worship appointed by God in his Word:
Therefore Princes in their dominions may command, and compel their subjects to
be members of the Church But leaving this man, I return to Master Ainsworth,
and that which follows in his Counterpoyson.

You add, that this doctrine opens a door in the Church, Counterpoys. 224.
to all the profane in the world, contrary to the Scriptures.

If by profane, you mean those that are inwardly and secretly profane: We
answer, they cannot be kept out of the Church; for we know not who be such: if
openly profane, as I think you do, then this doctrine opens not the door
of the Church to such. But you will prove it: for if a Prince (say you) may
compel some of his subjects to be members of the Church, he may compel all;
and if one Prince may do it, all may. So if there were such an Emperor as
Augustus, that commanded all the world to be taxed, he might also command and
compel all the world to be joined unto the Church. All this we grant, seem
it to you never so strange and absurd: and tell you that if ever God should
grant such an Emp^ror, as would command and compel all the world, Jews and
Gentiles, to worship God, as he has commanded; and should make a law, and
see it executed throughout the whole world, as Asa did in Judah, That whosoever
would not worship God in that manner, ^ Chro. 15.12.
he has commanded whether he were small or great, man or woman, should be
slain: that such compulsion by law and penalty, was very pleasing and
acceptable to God, and a most blessed and memorable act; Yea, this which you
seem to deny and to deride, I will confirm by your own words. We
acknowledge (say you) all Christian Princes have equal power with the Kings of
Judah, Counterpoys. 230.
to abolish all idolatry within their dominions; yea and to punish obstinate
idolaters, and not suffer any superstitious worship among their subjects. Thus
by your own confession a Christian Emperor may lawfully punish idolaters:
wherein what does he else but compel men to worship God after his word, I
speak of external worship, which kind of worshipping alone, without the
internal, makes one a member of the visible Church.
which makes them members of the Church. The Magistrate in punishing men for
theft, whoredom, murder, and the like faults, compels them thus trespassing,
and all others by their example as much as in him lies: to live truly, chastely,
and peaceably. Even so in this case: the Magistrate that punishes idolaters,
and men for false worship, does thereby compel men to worship God truly,
whereby they become members of the visible Church. Thus what you build here,
in another place you destroy and pull down. But mark what he infers upon
that goes before. Thus the world and the Church, between whom there has
been perpetual war, might soon be reconciled. If ever it should fall out
so happily, that there should be an universal command and compulsion to
worship God according to his Word, so as the bounds of the Church reached to
the utmost parts of the world, yet I warrant you, fear not, the enmity
between the Serpent and the woman, between his seed and her seed would
remain, and no such reconciliation could possibly be made, as you imagine
might soon and easily be. Indeed, if in the visible Church there were none of
the serpents seed (whereunto all your doctrine of the Church in a manner
tends) then in case the whole world were the Church, this war and enmity
would be at an end. But were you not stark blind, you might by the Scriptures
learn, That in the true visible Church, the old Serpent the Devil, has many
of his children, as well as God some of his: betwixt whom is the perpetual
war you speak of. Notwithstanding, then the whole world were the visible
Church, this war would be perpetual, and no reconciliation. You forget that
many cruel persecutors of the Church, who have shed the blood of the Saints,
have been of the Church, yea, principal members thereof. Description of the
visible Church, page 1.
Else sure you would never deny that this war and enmity, were in the Church,
and tell us that all in the Church are tied together by the bond of peace, and
do unfeignedly love one another. I would know of you, whether they without the
Church, can possibly hate the godly more, then many of those do that be within
the Church. The Scripture says, Prou. 29.27.
that the righteous (that is, the godly) are an abomination to the wicked: Now
it is plain, and after proved, that there be very many wicked, yea notoriously
wicked in the church: The godly therefore have at home, in their Fathers own
house, mortal and irreconciliable enemies enough. As in the days of Christ,
so at this day, and to the end of the world there will be in the Church
generations of Vipers: Math. 3.7. and 12.34. and 23.33
who notwithstanding their show and profession of holiness, are as full of
malice and hatred toward the godly, as a Viper of poison. Moreover, where you
say, Thus the world and the Church, between whom there has been perpetual
war, might soon be reconciled: in this or such like speech, by (the world)
we are to understand the men of this world, that is, worldly minded men, such
as whose hearts and affections are set upon this world, and the things thereof,
whether they be in the Church, or out of it: and by (Church) the company of the
faithful, members of the invisible Church, for these alone, together with
their head, are meant by the Woman and her seed. Betwixt these (the World and
Church thus taken) is the war or enmity you speak of, foretold by God
himself, saying, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, Genesis 3.15.
and between thy seed and her seed. In stead hereof, by (World) you understand
them that are without the Church, and by (Church) the visible Church. Whereby
it appears y^u speak you know not what, such is your ignorance and rashness.

Lastly, (say you) if this be a lawful and orderly course, Counterpois. 224.
it is strange that Christ sent forth poor fishermen to convert souls by
preaching, and set not Princes, to make Disciples by compulsion and penalty.

We answer, he has done both; and this latter he has done by giving Kings
to be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to his Church. These by
their authority compel men, otherwise vnwil^ing to submit themselves to the
outward worship of God, whereby they come to be members of the Church, or
Disciples, and so some of them by Preaching to be converted to God. Thus the
Magistrate in causing men to hear the Word, helps forward (and so herein is
a nursing father) the conversion of souls by preaching. You seem to confound
the converting of souls, and the making of Disciples: which are things
different. It is one thing to be turned and converted to God by true and
unfeigned repentance, which is proper to the elect and invisible Church: and
another to be a Disciple, that is a Christian, or professor of Christian
Religion, or member of the visible Church, which is common to the reprobate
with the elect. There have been many Disciples, whose souls were never
converted by preaching.

compulsion to the service of God in the new Testament, not one in all the
Acts of the Apostles, where mention is made of the first planting or gathering
of many Churches; partly among the Jews, but chiefly the Gentiles. All which
were gathered only by the Preaching of the word, as your self have formerly
showed: and the gathering of none of them any way helped or furthered by the
Commandment and authority of the Magistrate.

of Israel. It is not therefore to be imagined that they would make edicts and
decrees, send forth their royal commands and threats, for the erecting and
setting up; or for the peaceable and well governing of this commonwealth. But
is rather to be thought, that being jealous of their own crowns and
dignities, and upon some causeles fear that their own common wealth could not
stand with this, they would set themselves with might and maine against the
Church, as indeed they did.

the untaught people in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign, suddenly
receiving the Gospel by commandment, not by hearing, could not believe at the
first, though they prof^ssed, and therefore at the first were no true
Christians, nor Churches, and that such we continue. I answer, that not faith,
England, in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign were true visible Churches,
seeing they all made outward profession of Faith and Christianity, and had
among them some true believers and Christians in their assemblies: that
generally they did make an outward good profession, is manifest and notoriously
known to all Christian nations: and that there were then some true believers
and Christians in their assemblies we cannot doubt, as touching very many
assemblies in this land, and in charity (which believes all things, and
hops all things) we may conceive so of all. Considering the Religion and
worship of God was not then hear first established, but restored again and
purged, which had been discontinued and corrupted in the days of Q. Mary,
which were not many. For this cause we cannot deny true Faith and Christianity
to all these assemblies. Shall we think that the fire had devoured and eaten
up all the faithful of the land? No verily, Exodus 3.2.
No more then the bush in Horeb being on fire, was consumed by the fire.
Whereby was signified that the Church is not consumed by the fire of
afflictions. Nay, we are rather to think, that as it was with the Hebrews,
that the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied: so it was with the
Israel of God at this time in England: the more they were persecuted for
Christ's sake, the more they increased in true Christianity. So as out of the
ashes of the Martyrs there did spring a multitude of believers, besides the
faithful that were in the land before. Whereof some having fled beyond the
Seas, did now return home with joy: others having hid themselves, as it were
in caves, and holes came forth. These were scattered throughout the land, and
it is to be thought there were many thousands of them which never bowed the
knee to Baal, And these mixed with others who came unto them, and joined with
them in one and the same profession, made true visible Churches. Whereby we see
that albeit many received the Gospel for the Commandments sake: yet not all.
Some there were that hungered and thirsted for the Gospel before it came, and
groned under the present superstitious and idolatrous worship: sighing and
crying unto God day and night because of it, and they not a few. And tell me I
pray you; had they not in King Edwards the word of God read in their mother
tongue in every Congregation throughout the land? and preached also here and
there, according to the number of Preachers then? Besides, they had the holy
Bible in the English tongue in their houses: wherein no doubt many did meditate
day and night. Also many godly Books, specially against papistrie were, in
their hands: whereof they were daily scattering and reading all the days of
Queen Mary. In her time also many in the land had their secret meetings,
sometimes by day, sometimes by night, wherein they joined together in the word
and prayer, and administration of the Sacraments. Tidings and letters went
daily on every side, concerning the patience and alacrity of the Martyrs in
their sufferings; their constantie, their grave and learned answers and
Apologies: and of the rude and unlearned replies, the savage and cruel dealing
of the Prelates with them on the other side. The blood of the Martyrs likewise
shed before the eyes of all men, preached aloud unto them that saw and heard
thereof. Add hereunto the manifold conferences, consultations, and disputaions
used about Religion, and the right way to salvation, whether this or that were
the way, specially in the entrance of Q. Elizabeth to her throne: and that
there was From the 17. of November until Midsommer.
more then half a year for the people to hear, learn, and consider before
the Commandment came: and we cannot be so void of understanding as to think
that mere force and co^pulsion brought all to the holy profession universally
made; nor of charity as to conceive, that they all generally wanted all
knowledge, and all faith, and were assemblies consisting only of ignorant
persons, and unbelievers. But suppose that only the proclamation and royal
commandment had brought in all: And that none had had knowledge and faith in
God, but Q. Elizabeth, who caused that proclamation, and gave that
commandment, and whose memorial for that act, is and shall be blessed in all
ages succeeding. Be it granted I say, that all parish assemblies then in this
land* were Congregations of ignorant persons and unbelieving, and no true
Churches indeed, at least in Gods account: yet it does not follow thereupon
that our assemblies be such now, but this notwithstanding may be, and indeed
are the Churches of Christ: seeing that ever since, above 50. years we have
been pertakers of the true word of God and Sacraments, and submitted our
selves thereunto, and many of us effectually called thereby, as witnesses our
lives unblameable, even our enemies being Judges. There are many men in a
house: but gotten into it, not through the door whereby is the ordinary
passage into it, but by some back door, or through the window, or happily at
some breach violently made into the said house. Were it not extreme folly, or
rather madness, because of this manner of entrance, to deny the inbeing of the
aforesaid men in the house? Thus unwise are the Brownists in denying our
inbeing in the Church, which is the house of God, because the manner of our
entrance, or passage into it at the first, was not such as it ought to have
been, as they affirm. Apology, 24,
If you should find (says Doctor Hall) a company of true Christians in utmost
India, would you stand upon terms, and enquire how they became so? Whiles
they have that is necessary for that Heavenly profession; what need your
curiosity trouble it self with the means? Against the true^h of our Church
therefore to object as they do, that it wa^ not at the first rightly gathered
by the sound of the word, but rather of the trumpet, is nothing, if it were
true: much more is it nothing and of no validity, that being false.

And here before I end this point let us yet further mark, how the first
gathering of our Church, as touching the time when it was, they ascribe to the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign: and as concerning the means whereby it
was gathered, to the proclaimation then made: but both untruly. For the first
conversion of our land to the faith of Christ was long before, and that by the
preaching of the Gospel, as is plain by ecclesiastical stories, and by the
persecution and martyrdom of the Saints, Act. and Mon^m passim.
from time to time recorded therein. At least who can deny, that the Church of
England was a true Church in King Edward his days: during whose reign many
were by preaching so effectually called, as the truth which they then embraced
and professed, they after sealed with their blood. And by the same means an
infinite company more were then converted and brought to the faith, that by God
were delivered and preserved from the rage and malice of the adversary. Very
untrue and slanderous therefore is this saying of Master Ainsword: Cou^terp.
64.
The gathering and planting of your Church has been by the Magistrates
authority; not by the word of Christ. Here also (as in a glass) we may
behold the falsehood and vanity of that speech of H. Barrow: D s^ouery of the
falsechurch 10. Iustific^tion. 275.
All the people were in one day by the blast of Queen Elizabeth's Trumpet, of
ignorant Papists, and gross Idolaters, made faithful Christians, and true
professors. With these men agrees M. Robison: If the body of the land in the
beginning of the Queens reign were good, and holy at all the Magistrates
compulsion wrought it in men, and made them of persecuting Idolaters, true
Christians: for other means in tearming or coming betwixt their profession of
the Mass, and of the Gospel had they none, saving the Magistrates authority.
How truly is said that all the people, and inhabitants of this land were
ignorant, and without the know-of God: Secondly, Papists and gross Idolaters:
Thirdly, That no other means did intermine and come betwixt their profession
of the Mass, and the Gospel, but the Magistrates authority: do thou reader
judge by the promises. Observe here their slandering of the people of God,
which is a sin a thousand fould more heinous, then the slandering of one man;
also their uncharitableness: but chiefly their gross ignorance, who secretly
here emplies, that a true visible Church, is a company of faithful and true
Christians, and true Professors: agreeing with their description of the visible
Church, whereof before we have heard. This ^s taught in the parable of the
sower. Math. 13.2. etc. and matt. 22.14.
Whereas the holy Scriptures teach us that the most in the visible Church are
such as have only the name and outward profession of Christianity, being
nothing less then that they profess and seem to be; Christians in name
only; called Christians, but no Christians indeed. These men tells us that all
in the visible Church are faithful and true Christians, and true Professors:
and because in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and likewise at this
day, our parishionall assemblies are no such societies as consist of such
only: but had and now have in them many false and counterfeite Christians and
Professors: Therefore at the first they were, and so continue, false visible
Churches. Is there any so blind, who sees not that hereby they shut out of the
Church all Hypocrites? For true Professors, are opposite to false and
counterfeite Professors, which are those we call Hypocrites. A true Professor
is he who is the son in truth, that he professes and makes show to be. Who
professing godliness, is godly. Directly contrary to this man is the
Hypocrite: The like may be said of a faithful and true Christian. But a true
visible Church, (said those Schismatics) is a company of true Professors and
Christians, and not a mixed company of true and false Professors: Therefore in
the visible Church by their doctrine there are no Hypocrites.

With Barrow and Robison does Master Ainsworth accord, Counterp 72.
as being led by the same spirit. The Apostle (says he) shows, Iam 1.18 1.
Pet. 1.23. That Christ's Church is a people begotten with the word of truth,
that is, the Gospel: but your Church was first begotten, gathered,
constituted, ordered, and is still continued by the Magistrates word and
authority; which if it did not enforce the people, the estate wherein you now
stand, would soon be changed, and your Church dissolved. And where you
learned so to enforce faith, and constrain men to be members of your Church,
Alcoran chap. 18. and 19.
I can not tell, unless you would follow Mahomets doctrine, who taught that
men should be compelled to the faith by the sword.

Before you teach* that a visible Church is a company of people that do repent
and believe the Gospel, and here you term it a people begotten by the Gospel,
and borne a new, nor of mortal, but of immortal seed: and so all are
regenerated that be in the visible Church, and consequently shall inherit the
Kingdom of heaven. For can he dye, that is begotten and borne of immortal
seed, whereof both these Apostles speak? This doctrine and all of this kind
hereafter following, take it as it is by you delivered, and it is palpably
false, so as it needs no confutation. But your meaning it seems is that.
All in the true visible Church live so holily, righteously, and soberly
touching their outward carriage before men, that we cannot in equity nor
charity account otherwise of them then faithful, and such as have repented and
are converted to God, and are begotten and borne a new, Principles and
Inferences 7.
yea, Elect; as M. Smith says. And for this cause, (as these men suppose) all
in the visible Church are called Saints and Faithful. As Ephesians. 1.1. Paul* an
Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. But herein it must needs be they are deceived:
seeing there have been true visible Churches in former times, wherein some
members, and those not a few have been so vile, and abominable, as the
faithful then living could neither in equity, nor charity judge so of them
as you speak. Except they should have judged otherwise of the tree, then
according to the fruits, nay clean contrary to it; whereas our Lord says,
Ye shall know men by their fruits, Mat. 7.16.
even as the tree is known by the fruits thereof. That which M. Smith here
affirms I have answered here after, in the next Chapter, and thither I
refer the Reader for further satisfaction. Observe besides the abuse of
scripture here. Note here their perverting of Scripture.
The words of James be; Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth,
that we should be the first fruits of his Creatures. By (us) who are said here
to be begotten by the Gospel; the Apostle means himself and the rest of the
faithful members of the invisible Church: and not himself and the rest of the
visible Church, as you fondly imagine, and bear the simple Reader in hand.
Romans 6.13. and 12.2.
As the first fruits under the Law were dedicated to God, and offered unto him:
so all the faithful consecrate and give up themselves wholly to God, a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto him, which is their reasonable serving of God;
and not all of the visible Church (as you in the application of this Scripture
tell us) the most whereof give themselves and their members as weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin: wherein they walk according to the course of this
world, and after the Prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience. Of true believers and none others S.
Peter also speaks: For they only are borne a new of that immortal seed he
mentions, which John 1.12. proves: As many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. Again,
these that are thus borne a new, as 23. verse. are said to be redeemed, verse.
18. to believe in God, verse 21. To have their souls purified by the Spirit,
verse 22. But such as be of the invisible Church only are redeemed, believe
in GOD, Counterpoys. 158.
are purifyed by the Spirit: Of such therefore the Apostle here speaks.
Hereby it is plain that you speak untruly when you say, That places setting
forth the invisible Church, are not by you brought to set forth the visible
Church. Yet Ainsworth in slandering and blaspheming our Church is worse and
more intolerable then Barrowes, whereof we have heard before. He says not
only that our Church was first begotten and gathered, but adds, and is still
continued by the Magistrates word and authority, excluding the words of GOD,
as if our Church were neither begotten at first, nor continued now by the
Ministry of the Word. And where learned ye, say you, so to enforce Faith,
and constrain men to be members of your Church? I answer, Not out of the 18.
and 19. Chapters of Alcoran, which you by your Cotation in the margent imply,
but out of the sacred scriptures. Not from the example of Mahomet, but from the
commended examples of the godly Kings of Judah, as I have showed. Thus much you
cannot tell, or see. The greater is your ignorance and blindness. A spirit of
error has put out the eye of your understanding. But where learn you to
compare the doctrine of God to Mahomets doctrine: and the examples and practice
of the good Kings of Judah (which you acknowledge all Christian Princes should
follow) with Mahomets example and practice? Counterpois. 230.
Cursed is that zeal which carries a man beyond all bands of truth and
sobriety. Paul being very zealous spoke yet the words of truth and soberness.
The Lord lay not this blasphemy to your charge.

To that which has been said I only add this: That if a visible Church were
a company of men truly and unfeignedly: religious (as you in your whole
doctrine of the visible church pretend: then thus far you had rightly
described the Church. For no man can be ordinarily religious indeed, except
(as you speak here) he first be called by the Word of God. Here the counsel,
persuasion, commandment, and threat of man will not avail. No human force
and compulsion will serve the turn: it must be divine and from God, whereof we
read Luke 14.23. Salomons song 13. John 6.4. Act. 16.14.
Compel them to come in. God himself by the Ministry and preaching of the
Word, his Spirit accompanying the same, must persuade and draw, else we hang
backward, and continue still irreligeous and profane: as we see in the example
of Lydia: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which
Paul spoke. Neither can we without this calling by the Word, be assured that
we are of the invisible Church. This is that we call the internal and
effectual Calling, and is proper to the invisible Church. All that have this
calling, may assure themselves of their election and salvation. This the
Apostle confirms, Romans 8.30. and 11.29.
and of this calling speaks, where he says: Whom he predestined them also
he called, and whom he called them also be justified and whom he justified,
them he also glorified. And again, the gifts and calling of God, are without
repentance. And thus are all of the invisible Church called in their appointed
time. But concerning the visible Church this calling by the Word, is not
necessary, so that without it we cannot come to be of this fellowship. Which
we cannot choose but see, if we call to mind that which we have been taught:
That a visible Church is a company professing true religion. To join in which
outward profession (whereby we become members of the visible Church) one may be
drawn by the commandment and threat, counsel and persuasion of man, the Word
of God never coming near his heart. And so I leave the first part of your
description and proceed to examine that which therein follows.

A visible Church, say you, is a company of people, separated from the world.
This do we also hold and teach, rightly understood, that is, touching their
profession of the true religion: and so are we separated from Heathens,
Infidels, Turks, Papists, Anabaptists etc. But thus you understand not these
words: you mean hereby that a visible Church is a company of faithful and
righteous men only, or Saints, not mixed with, but separated from the open
wicked of the world. That this is your meaning, it is plain by your own
Treatises, as forthwith we shall hear: and namely where you say, Defense of
the Churches and Ministers of England. 71.
that a visible Church is a separated company of Righteous men from the open
wicked of the world, and cannot consist of all sorts of people, good and bad.
And for the proof of this point, and part of your description, you send us to
John 17.14. I have given them thy word, Apology 44. Mark here their
perverting of Scripture to the end of this Section, and the three next
following.
and the world has hated them, because they are not of the world, as I am not
of the world. Whosoever shall advisedly read this Chapter may easily see, that
these words are meant of the eleven Apostles, being parcel of that part of
Christ's prayer he made for them in particular. That Jesus speaks here of his
elect Apostles it is manifest both by the words going before this 14. verse,
and specially by verse 12. as also by the verses following after, and namely by
verse 18. and 20. what is this at all then to purpose? Surely no more for the
proof of the point, then if you had produced the first words of Genes. In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Frame your Argument, and the
vanity of your proof will appear. If that the Apostles members of visible
Churches were separated from the world, then all the members of a visible
Church must be separated from the world. But the first is true: Therefore the
second. To this effect you must mark your Argument, or none at all. Give me
leave now to argue after the same manner. If the Apostles members of visible
Churches, were preachers of the word, and had the gift of miracles: then every
member of the visible Church must be a preacher of the word, and have the gift
of miracles: But the first is true: therefore the second. Thus could I prove
that the members of visible Churches must have no certain abiding place, but
go from place to place, from one country to another throughout the world, for
the Apostles did so. Therefore in vain is this testimony alled^ed by you, and
you therein take Gods name in vain. I do not deny but that many things spoken
of or to the Apostles, or required to be in them, are likewise required, and
happily found in every member of the visible Church. The Apostle prayed, and
heard the word: so it may be do all the members of the visible Church. Some
of the Apostles Jesus commanded that they should fast and pray, lest they did
enter into temptation: the same he requires of all in the Church. But this is
it I say and mean. That it follows not necessarily, that because this or
that quality or gift was or ought to be in the Apostles, therefore it is and
ought to be in every member of the visible Church.

But happily you will not understand this scripture of the eleven Apostles, but
extend it further. Seeing by the Text it is evident that Christ spoke and meant
it only of them, without falsifying the Text, you cannot stretch it an hair
breadth further. But suppose the words might be understood more largely: the
utmost extent must be to the Elect. First, because Jesus speaks of them for
whom he prayed: and these be only the Elect. Secondly he speaks of those
which are hated of the world, and of such as being in the world, are not of the
world: and such alone be the Elect. Now this makes not at all for you, no
more then the former. For what though the Elect which are in the visible Church
be separated from the world, (which is true as Christ here means) does it
thereupon follow, that all in the visible Church are separated from the world?
Judge your selves. So one may prove that all of the visible Church shall be
saved, because the Elect which be in the visible Church are heirs of Salvation.

Another fault which in alleging this Scripture you commit, is this, that you
mis-vnderstand these words of our Savior, are not of the world: whereby he
means, not separated from the world, in your sense, that is, from the open
wicked in the world: but that his Apostles were not worldly indeed, loving the
things of the world: or, that they were such as would not conform and fashion
themselves to the manners and customs of this world; would not follow this
world (as worldly minded men do) in that which is evil, therefore the world
should hate them. With this speech of Christ, agrees that of Peter: It seems
to them strange, 1. Pet. 4.4.
that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot: therefore speak they
evil of you. Suppose then that Jesus did not speak here only of the
Apostles, nor yet solely of the Elect, but that his speech was more general,
and reached event to the visible Church: yet would not this testimony prove
that for which it is by you produced, to wit, that a visible Church is a
company, not mixed with, but separated from the open wicked of the world: Much
less then understanding this Scripture aright, and as is before expounded.
Thus is to set the holy Scriptures not on the tenters, which is evil; but on
the rack, which is far worse.

No less faulty are you in alleging to this purpose the 20. verse of this
said 17. Chapter: I pray not for these alone* but also for them which shall
believe in me through their word. Where Jesus speaks of, and prays for the
Elect only and inuisisible Church militant, and not for the visible Church.
But grant it were spoken and meant of the Church visible, yet would it not
serve to prove that for which it is by you alleged. In like manner you here
pervert, Act. 19.9. Romans 1.6.7. and 10.14, 15, 17. Ezekiel. 36.38. which for
brevity I pass by contenting my self to have given you and the Reader a
taste only of your abuse of Scripture.

And here mark, I beseech thee Christian Reader, and forget not: that this
doctrine of these men is as contrary to the Scriptures, as darkness is to
light. They teach (you see) that a true Church is a company of people separated
from the world, that is, a separated company of righteous or godly men, from
all open ungodly or wicked, and cannot consist of these two sorts or kinds of
men: of godly and ungodly, good and bad, holy and profane, such a mixed and
confused company cannot be (say they) a true visible Church. This mixture they
condemn, and us for teaching it, and every where in their books cry out
against it with open mouth. Saying, it is a Confession of Faith, 6.10.11.
confused order, and such society, a confused and mixed people, that A^swere
to M. Stone 6.
lie scattered in the dust, mixed with the profane without separation, and it
is an Antichristian confusion. And tell us that a true visible Church is an
other manner of society. That it is A true des^ription of the visible Church
page 1.
a company of faithful and holy people, worshipping Christ aright, governed by
his laws, keeping the unity of Faith in the bond of Peace, and love unfeigned.
Again, that it is a company of Conuerts; of such as are Apology 37.
already converted to God. Moreover that it is Principles and inferences
concerning vis. Churches 7.
a visible communion of Saints, that is, Pri^c. and Ius. 10. Justification 105.
of men separated from all known sin; practicing the whole will of God
known: growing in grace and knowledge: and continuing to the end. Because of
this say they, the visible Church is Apology 44. A true Description of the
visible Church 1. confes^ion, Faith 6.
called a Church of Saints, a Kingdom of Priests, a Royal Priesthood, a
chosen Generation, and an holy Nation. And to make up the full measure of their
error in this particular, they assure us (if we will be so mad as believe
them) that a true visible Church has in it only such, as if none other:
affirming that A true Description of the visible Church, page vlt. Communion of
Saints.
into it enters no unclean thing, neither whosoever works abominations and
lies: but they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life. But without this
Church are Dogs and Enchanters, and Whorem^ngers, and Idolaters, and
whatsoever loves and makes lies: as if none such were within the church. And
to put this doctrine of theirs out of all doubt, and controversy, Illud
ostendere tentauerunt Donatistae ^rolatis multis testimoniis diu^narum
Scripturarum, quod Ecclesia Dei non cum m^lo^um hominum commiss one futura.
praed cta. sit. August. Tom. 7. collat. cum. Donatistis. Defense of the
Churches and Ministers of England. 7. Counterpois. 14. and 23.
they allege for proof thereof all most infinite places of Scripture. Thus
we see summarily what these men do held and teach, concerning the subject or
matter of the visible Church* and this part of their description thereof; even
the same with the Donatists. And applying this doctrine unto us, they affirm
that the Church of England is a false Church, and our parish assemblies false
visible Churches: because they are not separated from the profane of the land,
but remain still in confused assemblies. Let us now hear what God teaches us
in his word. Certainly that which is directly contrary unto this. In the holy
Scriptures we learn that as in the barne-floore there is Chafe mingled with
Corn, Mat 3.12. and 13.25.47.
and in the field Tares growing together with Wheat, and in the draw-net cast
into the Sea things gathered of all kinds, and as in a great house there are
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth, some for
honor, and some for dishonor. 2. Tim. 2.20.
So in the visible Church there are men of all kinds: Hypocrites and sincere,
good and bad, holy and profane, faithful and unbelievers. Nay by the
Scriptures it is manifest, By unbelievers I mean men void of true Faith.
that the greater part of the visible Church are Reprobates, Hypocrites,
ungodly men, profane, walking after their own lusts, as by that which
follows does appear.

In the 32. of Numbers, of the Church and people of God, Moses says, that they
were a company of sinful men: Verse 14:
and behold ye are risen up in your fathers stead as an increase of sinful
men, still to augment the fierce wrath of the Lord toward Israel: and in the 5.
of Deuteronomy. Ye have been rebellioas unto the Lord since the day that I knew you.

In the first of the Proverbs, we have wisdom, Verse 24.
(that is Christ Jesus, the wisdom of the Father) speaking after this manner,
I have called, (meaning by his servants in the Ministry) and ye refused: I
have stretched out mine hand, and none would regard. But ye have despised all
my counsel, and would none of my correction. And a little after: they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
counsel, but despised all my correction. These contemners, were profane and
ungodly persons, and yet were they of the visible Church: because they were
within the sound of wisdoms voice and call. Yea mark further, how some times
almost all of the visible Church are despisers of the Ministry and word of
God, and therefore profane and godless. For it is not said here that wisdom
crying and calling upon men to turn unto God and repent, they, meaning some
few of them, regarded not her voice, but that none would regard her voice, a
very few excepted for that is to be understood.

In the 12. Psalm David prays and complains thus: Help Lord, for there is
not a godly man left: for the faithful are failed from amongst the children of
men. First, they speak deceitfully every one, that is, almost every one) to
his neighbor, Chap. 7.1:
etc. And Micah cries out after this manner. Woe is me, for I am as the summer
gatherings, and as the Grapes of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat.
Secondly, the good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
righteous among men: they all lie in wait for blood: every man hunteth his
brother with a net. These and other like complaints of the Prophets, (which
here I omit) were made of the Jews, then the only true visible Church, and
not of the Gentiles and Heathens, who were without. Ver. 16.17.18.19.
When Christ was upon the earth he often complained of the great wickedness of
the Jews, as Mat. 11. Whereunto shall I liken this generation. It is like unto
the children which sit in the markets, Ver. 3.7.14.
etc. And Mat. 23. Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, etc. For which cause he calls them an evil,
and an adulterous generation: yet were they at the same time a true visible
Church. Jesus sending forth the twelve Apostles, and after the 70. Disciples,
to the Jews only (for he commanded them that they should not go into the way
of the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5.6.16. Luke 10.1.13.
nor enter into the Cities of the Samatanes, but go rather to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel) says thus unto the twelve: Behold, I send you as
sheep in the midst of Wolves: and to the 70. in like manner: Behold I send
you forth as Lambs among Wolves. Hereby it is evident that generally the
members of the vis. Church then, were affected toward Christ, his Apostles,
and the 70. Disciples, (notwithstanding the miracles they wrought, and great
good they received thereby, as that their sick were healed, and their blind
received sight etc.) as wolves are to sheep and Lambs. And therefore so far
from being an holy and righteous generation, as the Seperatists teach: that
they were a generation of murderers sucking up the blood of the Saints. Be it
then granted, that the faithful are failed, the good men perished, that, (as
few excepted) there are none righteous among us, and that we are an evil and
an adulterous generation: this general ungodliness notwithstanding, we may be,
(and indeed are) a true vis. Church, and our parishionall assemblies true
visible Churches, as the Jews were in those times.

Moreover, for the conformation of the aforesaid doctrine, which is directly
contrary to yours, serve excellently three other parables propounded by our
Savior Christ. One is that of the vineyard let out to husbandmen: Mat. 21.23.
who when the servants of the owner of the Vineyard were sent to receive the
fruits thereof, took them and beat one, and killed another, and stoned
another. And last of all sending his Son, they killed him. These murderers,
the Priests and Rulers of Israel, which as elsewhere Christ says, killed the
Prophets, Mat. 23.37.
and stoned them which were sent unto them, were profane and godless persons,
and yet were they of the visible Church. Therefore most profane and godless
men have been of the visible Church, and that society a true Church wherein
such have been, and remained. But the parable next following, concerning a
King, Mat. 22.2^
that marrying his son made a great feast, is singular to this purpose. Where
first we must know that as by the Invitors, or the servants that the King sent
forth to bid certain to the wedding, we are to understand the Ministers of the
Word, so by the ghests* and those that were invited, the visible Church and the
members thereof. The former of these will not be denied by any: the later is
confirmed by the 8. verse. For as there by those which were bidden to the
marriage, are meant the visible Church of the Jews: so by ghests after
mentioned; verse 9.10. and 11. are meant the visible Church or Churches of the
Gentiles, or the members thereof. Now what is said of these ghests? First, that
being bidden to this wedding, (that is, being called upon by the Ministers to
be saved, and to partake with Christ (who is the Kings son that is married)
in the joys of the Kingdom of heaven, they would not come. They, that is,
almost none, some few excepted, as appears by ver. 14. Were not these ungodly
men, who regarded not, but indeed despised the Ministry of the Word, and the
offer of salvation? And yet were they members of the visible Church, and it a
true Church wherein they were, and remained. I think you will not say that
Generally) our people be more ungodly. Secondly it is reported of these
ghests, that this King (who is God the Father) sending forth other servants to
bid them to the marriage; they made light of it and went their ways, o^^ to
his farm, and an other about his Merchandise, and another said, he had
married a wife, Luke 14.20.
and therefore he could not come. Hereby appears their profanenes: in that
they loved and preferred the profits and pleasures of this life, above that
eternal weight of glory. Heb. 12.16.
Let there be no profane person (says the Apostle) as Esau, who for a portion
of meat, sold his birthright: Seeing with Esau for a mess of Pottage, for a
Farm, Oxen, etc. they were contented to forgo all right, and title to the
heavenly inheritance, it must needs be that they were profane as he was: Men
then profane may be members of the true visible Church, as these ghests were,
and Esau, who for his extreme profanenes is by the holy Ghost set down for an
example of profanenes, by whose example all men are forewarned to take heed of
profanenes, and yet was he a member of the visible Church. Thirdly, of part
of these ghests, meaning the chief of them, in regard of outward things, it is
said, that they took the Kings servants, and entreated them sharply, and slew
them. You cannot deny that these were profane and godles. Profane men
therefore and notorious for their impiety, may be of the true visible Church,
and that a true visible Church, wherein such are, and remain. Neither can you
truly say, that there be worse in our Church, if any so bad. The wickedness
then of some in our Church, lets it not for being a true Church. Hereunto
may be added, Verse 9.10.
that this King commands his servants, to bid to the marriage, all that ever
they found both good and bad, which also they did accordingly. All which be
invited to this marriage, that is, daily called upon in and by the ministry of
the word, that they would be saved, and supp with Christ, eat and drink with
him in the kingdom of his Father, are the visible Church. Reu. 3.20. Mat.
26.27.
This cannot be denied. But good and bad are thereunto invited: The visible
Church therefore does consist of these two kinds of men, and not of righteous
only as the Separists do teach. Again, this mixture which we do hold, nay,
that the most of the visible Church are wicked, is manifest by that which Jesus
annexeth to this Parable, wherewith al he does knit it up: Verse 14.
for many are called, but few chosen. All that be under the call or voice of
God, calling upon them, in, and by the Ministry of the word, that they would
repent and believe, that so they may be saved, and yield an outward obedience
to this call, are the visible Church. Of these (says Jesus) that have this
external calling, and are the visible Church, Ne putatetur, sicut Donatistae
putant, quod velut vnus in turba latenter sui repsisset ignaris, continuo
Dominus in eodem ipso vno, quem ligatis manibus and pedibus in tenebras
exteriores ex illo conuiuio proijci Iusfit, multam societatem malorum esse
intelligendam, inter quos pauciores boni in conuivio Dominico viuunt,
significare non distulit. Nam posteaquam dixit, Ligate illi manus and pedes,
and proijcite eum in tenebras exteriores, ibi erit fletus and stridor dentium,
continuo subjecit, Multi sunt vocatj, Pauci vero and electi Quomodo hoc verum
est, cum potius vnus e multis suisset proiectus in tenebras exteriores, nisi
quia in illo vno grande corpus figurabatur omnium malorum ante Domini iudicium
conviuio Dominico permixtorum? A quibus se boni cord interim ac moribus
separant, simul manducantes and bibentes corpus et sanguinem Domini August.
Tom. 7. contra Donat. post collat. cap. 20.
there are many: but among those but a few good, and such as shall be saved.
And this is the scope and drift of the aforesaid Parable, as is plain by the
inference that he makes thereupon in these words next following the said
Parable: for many are called, but few chosen. Wherein Jesus shows how this
comes to pass which before he has taught in the Parable, to wit, that in
the visible Church there are so many wicked, and so few good: so many prophaine
and earthly minded men, and so few that do earnestly desire and seek after
heaven, and those things that lead thereunto, and namely faith and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. Because (says he) in the visible
Church their are few elect, who only can and do believe, and out of that faith
lead an holy life: the rest being reprobates and left in their natural
wickedness, cannot but be wicked. All in the visible Church these few elect
excepted are wicked, profane, unclean, and an abomination to the Lord. With
such faithful ones and converts, such Saints, righteous and holy persons as
these, does the visible Church abound and overflow. And this is no less
manifest by the Parable of the seed, wherein as the Minister of Christ it
compared to a sower, the word preached to seed, so is the visible Church
compared to the field where seed is sown, and to such a field whereof three
parts is naught, and a fourth only good. By that which has been said it is
manifest that in the Church visible there be not only wicked men, and
extremely or out of measure wicked, but that the most therein are wicked,
children of Belial, and few righteous therein to be found. Yea the aforesaid
cause and reason of our Savior considered, how can it possibly be otherwise?
If therefore this be the state of our Church at this day, as too true it is,
that in it there are many wicked, and few godly: yet this wickedness and
ungodliness of the people, and mixture of so many bad, with so few good, lets
not but that notwithstanding we may be (and indeed are) a true visible
Church.

Tell me now I beseech you, how the aforesaid lines of yours, for which you
pretend Scripture, and those that I have here delivered, which all men may
evidently see are grounded upon the holy Scriptur can possibly stand together?
You say that a true visible Church is a company of Righteous or godly men, not
mixed with, but separated from the wicked of the world. We say that it is not
such a separated company, but a mixed company of godly, and wicked, good and
bad, holy and profane. You say that in the visible Church there is no unclean
thing, that is, no wicked person: we say that in the visible Church the most
are unclean and wicked, yea sometimes almost all be such. And as this which we
teach has been confirmed, and your error herein convinced by the sacred
Scriptures, so may it be by your own writings, yea by the words next and
immed^ately following your description of the visible Church, wherein you teach
this false and erroneous doctrine. Having defined or described the visible
Church, That is a company of people called and separated from the world by the
Word of God, and joined together by voluntary profession of the faith of Christ
in the fellowship of the Gospel: Apology, 44.
You thereupon make this inference. And therefore no known Atheist, unbeliever
heretic, or wicked liver, may be received or retained a member in the Church
of Christ, which is his body. Now in that you say no known Atheist,
unbeliever, heretic, or wicked liver, you thereby imply and secretly
acknowledge, that Atheists, unbelievers, and wicked men may be received and
retained members in the visible Church, so they be not openly known to be
such. If then in the true visible Church, there have ever been, are, and will
be. Atheists, unbelievers, heretics, and wicked livers, as your selves
(according to the truth) acknowledge: then is the visible Church by your own
Doctrine a confused and mixed company of good and bad, holy and profane; and not
a separated company of Righteous men, Saints, and faithful in your sense:
except Atheists, unbelievers, heretics and wicked livers, be righteous men,
be Saints, be faithful. If you deny that your aforesaid inference does imply
so much as I affirm, I make it plain thus. He that shall say No known
Whoremonger may be admitted to the Lords supper, therein confesses that a
close or unknown whoremonger may be admitted to the Lords supper. Even so it
is in this case. These men being thus convinced, and yet not enduring (it may
be) to yield, I know what will be their shift and evasion even the same which
the Donatists in the like case used before them. Malos in ecclesia permixtos
esse confessi sunt Donatistae, sed oucultos cos esse dixerunt. August. Tom. 7.
contra Donatistas post. collat. Cap. 7. Defense of the Churches and Minist. of
Eng. 71.
They say that they deny not that there are wicked and ungodly me^ in the
church, but no known wicked men: no known whoremongers, drunkards, murderers,
blasphemers, etc. as it is generally in our Churches, and are therefore no true
Churches. Hence it is that they use the word known in the aforesaid
inference: And therefore no known Atheist, unbeliever, Heretic, etc.
Hereupon also it is that Master Johnson says. That the true visible Church is
a separated company of righteous men, from the open wicked of the world. He
says not from the wicked, but from the open or known wicked of the world. And
thus they all speak in all their Treatises.

We answer. Your several descriptions of the visible church, and doctrine
generally concerning the same, will not permit any wicked man, known or
unknown, openly or secretly wicked, to have any entrance into, or being in the
Church: this your answer therefore is very frivolous, and insufficient, if we
can show that in the visible Church there have been, are, and will be wicked,
though secretly wicked, which already has been done. You teach that the
visible church is Christ's sister, his love, Apology. 44. A description of the
visi. church.
his spouse, his Queen, and his body. If this be so, then are all the members
of the v sible Church dear to Christ, and dearly beloved of him. Does Jesus
love wicked men, though secretly wicked? either the visible Church and all the
members thereof, are not thus near and dear unto Christ; are no: his sister,
his spouse, etc. or else in the visible Church there be no wicked men. But say
you, all in the visible Church are thus near and dear unto Christ: Therefore
conclude I in the visible Church there be no wicked men. Thus by your own
doctrine there is no room or place for any wicked in the visible Church,
whether they be openly, or secretly wicked. Frivolous therefore and untrue is
this your answer to the premises: We confess there are wicked in the Church,
but no open wicked.

be in the Church, so that they be not open wicked, yet notwithstanding it is
false and erroneous: seeing by the word of God it is evident, that from time to
time in the ages precedent there have been, and remained many open wicked in
the Church, and that the abode of such in the Church did not nullify the same.
Psalm. 50.16.
Unto the wicked says God what have thou to do to declare mine ordinances,
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, 17. Seeing thou hate
instruction, and have cast my words behind thee? 18. For when thou see a
thief, thou runnest with him, and art pertaker with the adulterers, 19. Thou
give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou fordgest deceit. 20. Thou
sit and speak against thy brother, and slanderest thy mothers son.
Here is mention of open wicked men, contemners of the word haters of
instruction, or reprofe, thieves, adulterers, coseners, railers, slanderers: of
men committing these and such like sins, (whereof some were open) not of
human infirmity, but as they who did give up themselves to that which is
evil, and committed sin with greediness, drawing iniquity to themselves as
it were with cartroapes: and yet were they in, and of the visible Church. Not
Gentiles, to whom at this time God declared not his word, but Jews, which had
the word not only in their hands, but in their mouths, declaring and talking
much of Gods ordinances, and covenant which he had made with his people: though
thereby (as is the manner of Hypocrites) they would not be reformed in their
lives, but hated the word of reformation, and them that sought the reforming of
them; and despised the word of God as we do that cast behind us. Psalm. 69.7.
For thy sake (says David) do I suffer reproach: shame does cover my face, 8.
I am become a stranger to my brethren, even an aliant unto my mothers sons,
9. For the zeal of thy house has eaten me, and the rebukes of them that
rebuke thee are fallen upon me, 10. I wept and my soul fasted, but that was to
my reproof, 11. I put on a sack also, and became a proverb unto them, 12.
They that sat in the gate spoke of me, and the drunkards sang of me.

They that did thus hate and reproach David, and made a mockingstocke of him,
and powered shame and contempt upon him, were notorious wicked and ungodly men
as appears hereby, 1. In that they hated him, and sought his destruction
without a cause, and were his enemies falsely, as v. 4. And so hated,
persecuted, and sought to destroy the innocent, 2. Because they hated,
reproached, and mocked him for his godliness. For thy sake (says he) do I
suffer reproach, 3. By the prayer he makes against them. Let their table be a
snare before them, etc. as verse. 23.24, 28. Had they not been godless men,
certainly David would never have prayed in this manner against them, 4. That
they were ungodly men, and open wicked it is manifest, because they reproached
God himself, and were blaspheamers, as is plain by verse. 9. The rebukes of
them that rebuke thee, are fallen upon me. Now these open profane and ungodly
men were Israelites, and so of the visible Church, and not heathens, and such
as were without: which is confirmed by verse. 8. I am become a stranger to my
brethren, even an aliant to my mothers sons. And least we should imagine
there were but a few such to be found, and so shift off all, we must know that
the contrary is manifest by this Psalm, first by the 4. verse. They that hate
me without a cause, are more then the hairs of my head, 2. By the 20. verse.
Rebuke has broken mine heart, and I am full of heaviness: I looked for some to
have pity on me, but there was none, and for comforters, and I found none.
Here were open wicked in the Church: drunkards, scorners, railers,
persecuters, blaspheamers, all (I say) open sinners: and those not a few. If
now (as appears also by the 12 psalm) there were in the Church such store of
open and notorious wicked, and few godly in the days of David, a King of that
piety and zeal, that the zeal of Gods house did eat him up: can we once
imagine that the Church of God was void of all open wicked, and had in it only
righteous men in the ages following, when Kings of far less zeal and
godliness did reign? It is not credible.

That from time to time in the Church there have been wicked and ungodly men,
even openly wicked: yea many such, and in the church continued and nestled
there, there is nothing more evident in the Scriptures; as partly appears by
that has been said: but chiefly in and by the Books of the Prophets: who
every where almost cry out and complain of the wickedness of the people, not
so much without, as within the Church: and do therefore threaten and denounce
the judgments of God against them, as the pestilence, famine, and specially
the sword: and leading into captivity. Let the first chapter of the first of
all their prophecies suffice for all. Isa. 1.4.
Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity: a seed of the wicked,
corrupt children: they have forsaken the Lord, etc. And in the 10. verse. Hear
the word of the Lord O Princes of Sodom: hearken O people of Gomorah. Here
were men notoriously wicked, not without, but in the Church: and those not a
few, but almost all: a sinful nation, a people (not some of the people?)
laden with iniquity, and so were their fathers, whose seed they were: Princes
and people being like to them of Sodom and Gomorah. And if in the Church there
had not been open and known wicked, from generation to generation. How could
there have been in the Church in all ages so many despisers of the Word, and
of the Ministers thereof, the holy Prophets, Apostles, and their successors; so
many murderers, whoremongers, thieues, proud, covetous, idle, and malicious
persons: railers, slaunderers, and in a word given to all manner of
abominations; as is manifest by holy writ there have been. Yea, sometimes
swarms of these have been in the Church as Psa. 12.1. Isay 1. Ier. 9.2.
Micah. 7.1. do manifestly show. Isay 1. from v. 2. until 26.
And no better was the estate and condition of the Church in the days of
Christ. Whereupon our Savior calls the Jews an evil and adulterous
generation: Matthew. 11.16.
and compares them unto little children which sit in the markets, and call
unto their fellows and say, we have pip^d unto you, etc. declaring thereby
their universal contempt of his own and John's Ministry, which argues, the
general and open ungodliness of that people. In a word it is evident by the
Gospel, that the Church then did abound with open wi^ked.

But for the further confirmation of the point in hand, and the exemplifying
thereof, let us call to mind and consider a little more of that we have already
heard. It is clear that all the aforesaid despisers of the Word and ministry
thereof, all the aforesaid reproaches, and mockers of David, and blaspheamers
of God; all the above named murderers of the Prophets, and servants of God,
were open wicked men, their sins being (as it were) written in their
foreheads with great capital letters, so as he that did run might read
them: and yet were they in the true visible Church. In this manner, Ismael,
Esau, Saul, Doeg, Absalom, were known wicked men, openly and notoriously
wicked, and yet of the visible Church. But above all other, this is manifest by
the Scribes and Pharisees: who were as vile and wicked men as ever lived. For
fear of them men durst not confess Christ Jesus. If any did they
excommunicated them. They blaspheamed Christ and his works: Saying that he was
a glutton, a drinker of wine, a friend of Publicanes and sinners; a deceiuer, a
traitor, that he who delivered him was not Cesars, friend, that he was a
Coniurer* casting out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, wherein they
committed the greatest sin of all, even the sin against the holy Ghost.
They made the people that not long before had cried, Hosanna, save I pray; to
cry, Crucify him, Crucify him, Being upon the Cross they mocked him: Thou
that saved others, save thy self. Now these sins of theirs were not secret,
but open, being committed in the sight of the Sun. These men were as well
known to be wicked and abominable to Joseph, Mary, to the Apostles, to the 70.
Disciples, and generally to the faithful then living, as the Pope with his
Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and all that sinful and adulterous
generation, who are daily shedding the blood of the Saints, are now known to us
to be wicked and abominable: yet were these men nevertheless in, and of the
visible Church: Matthew. 23, 2.3.
yea principal m^mbers therein, as the eyes in the body, even teachers in the
Church, and such as Christ commanded his people to hear. In the visible
Church therefore, there have been, and remained open wicked. And therefore the
being and abiding of such in a visible Church does not nullify the same, and
so not ours by consequent.

Smith will thus avoid: That the Church of the Jews being but a ceremony and
tipe, moral holiness was not required of the members thereof but ceremonial
only.

proposition is so clear that it needs not any proof. The Assumption is
manifest by the first of Isaiah, Isay 1.11.12. and 16.3.4.
and the 66. of that prophecy, also by Psalm. 50.16. Where we learn that all
the sacrifices and service that the wicked Jews offered and performed to God,
was no less hateful unto him and abhord of him; then the service and
sacrifice of wicked men at this day. And who doubts but that in all ages the
sacrifice of the wicked was an abomination to the Lord. Pro. 15.8.


But come we now to the Churches of Christ under the Gospel, yea to the
primitive Churches, and purest that ever were. If in them we can show there
were open wicked, I trust this matter will be decided. The Apostle writing to
the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 12.21.
says thus: I fear lest when I come again, my God abase me among you, and I
shall bewail many of them which have sinned already, and have not repented of
the uncleanness and fornication, and wantonness which they have committed.
Here were men in the Church of Corinth, living in uncleanness, fornication,
and wantonness; of which sins Paul fears they will not have repented, when
he shall come again unto them. Now hereby we may perceive that the sins of
these wicked men had crept forth and were known, in that the Apostle had
intelligence thereof, whereupon he thus reproves them: as also for their
strife, 2. Cor. 12.20.
envying, wrath, contentions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings and discord.
And these sins (as it should seem) did reign among them, which occasioned
Paul often to rebuke them for the same: and sundry times to tell them that they
were carnal, 1. Cor. 1.11.12. and 3.3.4.
(meaning a great part of them,) and did walk as men, that is, live after the
manner of natural or carnal men which have not the spirit.

Ver. 4.8.10.11.12.13.
S. Jude tells us of certain that were crept into the Church who were ungodly
men, turning the grace of God into wantonness: of whom he says, that they did
defile the flesh, despise government, speak evil of them that are in
authority, and speak evil of those things which they knew not, and whatsoever
things they did know naturally, as beasts which are without reason, in those
things they did corrupt themselves. Whom for their hatred to the brethren, he
compares to Cain, and in other respects to Balaam, and Core. Also to clouds
without water, carried about of winds, corrupt trees without fruit, twice
dead, and plucked up by the roots, to wandering stars, and to the raging
waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame. These were open wicked men, and
yet were they of the visible Church as appears hereby. First, in that they
are compared to clouds without water, whereby is is noted their hypocrisy;
that they made a show of godliness, but were indeed without godliness: like
the clouds that make semblance of rain or water, but send down none.
Secondly, this is confirmed by verse 4. where Jude speaking of these ungodly
men says, they were crept in, meaning into the Church. And lastly by verse 12.
These are spots in your feasts of charity when they feast with you, without
all fear, feeding themselves: By these words it is evident that these
notorious wicked men were of the Church, because they frequented the love
feasts: Where these feasts were kept, the Christians only met: at which time
they received the Lords Supper, and had a f^ast, to witness and increase their
mutual love, which they called Agapae, love feasts, or feasts of Charity.

As open scandalous wicked men have eu^r been in the visible Church, so there
are such now, and hereafter will be, from whom usually the persecutions in the
Church do come. The first of these is already made manifest. Verse 2.3.4.
The later is evident by 2. Tim. 3. where Paul foretelling of the gr^euous
sinners that shall be in these last days, mentions some that must needs be
open sinners: as boasters, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unholy or
profane, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, etc. And least that we
should understand this of them that are without, in the end he shows that he
means this of the hypocrites in the Church; of them which have a show of
godliness, but have denied the power thereof. If now, Verse 5.
as in the first Church, there was a Cain as well as an Habel, and after an
Ismael as well as an Isaac; an Esau as well as a Jacob; and a Saul as well as
a David, Scribes and Pharisees as well as Joseph and Mary; there have likewise
been in all ages of the Church after until this day, and will be in the ages
succeeding open wicked, as well as godly: yea not only so, but many such, so
as sometimes scarce any righteous or known godly were to be found in the
Church, by reason of the abundance of open wicked: If (I say) these things be
clear and evident in the Scriptures, as appears by the premises: how far are
you of the Separation from the truth, who teach, That a visible Church is a
company of righteous and holy men only, sepertaed from the known wicked; and
that into it there enters not, nor therein abides any unclean thing neither
whatsoever works abominations.

Defense of the Churches and Minist. of Engl. 7.
And whereas the Seperatists contending for this, That a visible Church is a
company of Saints, do thereby require (though not true sanctimony, in every
member, yet) an external holiness, and such a carriage of the outward man, in
the duties of piety toward God, and justice toward man, as in Charity one
can deem a member of the true visible Church, no other then a Saint: I demand
of them what outward holiness the aforesaid Despisers, Scorners, Blasphemers,
and Murderers, which were notwithstanding of the visible Church, had above the
worst in our Church. Also whether the most profane and vile in our Church be
not as holy, and as good Saints, as murdering Cain, mocking Ishmael, profane
Esau, persecuting Saul, bloody Doeg, traitorous Absalon, and the blasphemous
Scribes and Pharisees, who were all members of a true visible Church. Know ye
not that all these were most horrible sinners? Some of them sitting in the
seat of the scorner: some persecuting and shedding the blood of the Saints:
others blasphemers, nay, committing blasphemy against the holy Ghost, and
therefore sinners in the highest degree? And the best and holiest of them no
better then Dogs and Swine; treading under their feet the holy and precious
Word of God, and all to renting them that did teach it. Neither can we be
ignorant of this, that the sins of these men were open, and notoriously
known to the Saints who lived in their times: And yet notwithstanding were all
these of the true visible Church. Men therefore wanting this external
holiness, yea most vile and abominable, and notoriously known to be such have
yet nevertheless been in the true Church, and principal members in the same.
And such undoubtedly are in the Church at this day, and will be to the end of
the world, according to the prophecy of Paul, 2. Tim. 3.

And here we may remember how notwithstanding there were such notorious wicked
men in the Church of the Jews, Verse. 1.2. etc. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Ps. 79.2. and 111.1.
and 149.1.
(whereof we have had but a taste) and often times store of them: yet
nevertheless they are cal^ed the people of God, his heritage, an holy Nation,
Saints; and there public Congregations, the Congregation of the Righteous, and
the assemblies of the Saints. The whole body being thus called in respect of
the Elect; having this Denomination of the better part, though the less: or
else because of their holy profession, or holy religion which they professed:
whereby they differed from, and excelled all other Nations, and them that were
without. Hereupon I demand, why in these respects we likewise may not be called
the people of God, his heritage, an holy Nation, Saints, and our Church
assemblies, the assemblies of Saints, notwithstanding there be many open
wicked among us?

Here we may see how untruly M. Fr. Johnson herein charge the forward
Preachers in England with false Doctrine: Defense of the Churches and Minist.
of Engl. 71.
who reckning up 14. points of false doctrine forsooth that they teach, names
this for one: That the true visible Church of Christ is not a separated company
of righteous men from the open wicked of the world, but may consist of people
good and bad. And to the increase of his sin, for confirmation of his gross
and palpaple error, he coteth above twenty places of Scripture. But tell me,
do not all the Preachers in England, nay in all Christendom teach, that there
is a mixture of good and bad in the visible Church, as well as these forward
preachers you speak of? You cannot with any truth deny it: Why then do you
spurn with the heel at these, rather then others? And this is our third point
of false doctrine: the fourth follows in these words. 4. That they may
maintain this error of their confused order, and mixture of all sorts of
persons together, they pervert the Parable of the Tares, Math. 13.24. teaching
that all are the Church. Which doctrine is against the truth of the Scriptures,
yea against our Saviors own interpretation in the 38. verse. who teaches,
that by the field is meant not the Church, but the world, in which his Church
is militant; And as therein there is the good seed, the righteous, the
children of the Kingdom: so there are also tares, hypocrites, the children of
the wicked, who as they are often espied in this life, by the righteous
servants of God, so shall they in the great day be perfectly severed from the
godly by the Angels, verse 38.43. This their doctrine also is against the
heavenly orders motioned, Mat. 18.8.9.15.16.17. 1. Cor. 1.26.29. etc.

H^re is our false doctrine, and your confutation. I marvel wherein this
fourth point of false doctrine differs from the third. I would have thought
that this were rather a confirmation of the former. Yea but then the number of
false Doctrines would not be so great. But letting this go, we answer you,
that as the aforesaid doctrine is true, so it is confirmed, as by other
parables of our Savior s^t down in the same Chapter, so by this. For says
our Lord, as in a field both Wheat and Tares or other weeds grow together, and
so are mingled that without danger to the Wheat, men can not sever the one
from the other until the ha^uest: even so (says he) in the Church, or company
of people professing true Religion, there is and will be such a mixture of
good and bad, godly and wicked; sincere and counterfeit professors, that
without danger to the godly, a full and perfect separation between them cannot
be made unto the end of the world, that the one sort be received into heaven,
and the other sent to hell. As by wheat we are to understand the godly, and by
tares the hypocrites or wicked that are in the Church, so by the field is meant
the Church. For by the field must needs be understood that place or those
places wherein the godly and wicked are most nearely joined together, growing as
it were together, so as the one touch an other: and such is the Church, or
visible Churches. They who are in the Church live not only together, buy and
sell, eat and drink as all men in the world do, but do besides join
together, and are as it were conjoined in and by one and the same profession:
worshipping one and the same God, after one and the same manner: hearing the
word of God together, praying together, and receiving the Sacraments together.
Again it cannot be deny I that by field is meant that place, or those places
or that society or societies in which are as well godly, as wicked, and that
visible, so as both sorts may be discerned and known to be such as appears
by verse 26. Now out of the Church, in all other parts of the world, or
societies therein there are no godly to be s^ene, but wicked. By field
therefore we may not understand the world, but those parts of the world,
where visible Churches be. And who that is well advised will say that at this
day Asia, Africa, and such parts of Europe as profess not Christian Religion,
are this field, or part of it, seeing therein the wheat blades spring not up,
and bring forth fruit, so as they appear, as is expressly said of this field.
verse 26. Moreover, as in the field here mentioned in the protases, or first
part of the comparison, good seed is sown by the servants of the houshoulder,
from whence the wheat does come or spring, as verse 24.27. So in that place or
society meant by the field, or compared to a field, the immortal seed of the
word by the Lords husbandmen the Ministers is sown, from whence does spring
that piety or godliness in men: But this immortal seed is sown only in the
Church, according to that in the Psalm: Psalm. 147.19.
He shows his word unto Iaacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel; He
has not dealt so with every Nation; meaning not with any other Nation
besides. And Paul tell^th us, that the Oracles of God are the preforment and
prerogative of the Church, and that the Church only is the pillar and ground
of truth: Romans 3.2. 1. Tim. 3.15.
the truth being to be found only in it, and preserved by it. In the Church
alone also are the Lords husbandmen, plowing, harrowing, sowing, and performing
other parts of sp rituall husbandry. The Church therefore (and not the world)
is the Lords field and husbandry, and consequently the field Jesus here
speaks of. And this the Apostle teache^h expressly. 1. Cor. 3.9. We (the
Ministers) together are Gods laborers: ye are Gods husbandry, or fie^d. And
thus also in the parable next precedent, this word field, (though not
expressed, yet necessarily understood) is to be taken. The sower went forth to
sow, Math. 13.3.
etc. Here is a sower, that is, the Minister. The seed, is the word preached:
and the field where this seed is sown, is and must ne^ds be, the visible
Churches, or assemblies of the Saints. Even so (I say) is this word field, to
be taken in this parable also.

De zizan^s and tritico dissentio n^tu est, propter mundo nomen, quod Don
^tillae nolebant intelligi Ecclesi^m quia scriptum est, ager est hic mundus
Aug. Tom. 7. collat. cu^ Donatistis. Verse 3.8. Answ.
Not say you (with the Donatists) by field, is meant the world, and not the
Church. And in the aforesaid place you allege three reasons for confirmation
thereof, and confutation of us. The first is taken from Christ's own words, who
interpreting this parable of the Tares, says thus: The field is the world What
can be more plainly and directly said (will some think) for you, and against
us?

I answer, whosoever wisely observes not, which be proper, and with improper
or figurative speeches in the Scriptures, cannot choose but err greatly in
understanding the same. May not, yea do not the Papists say as much as this
for transubstantiation? What words s^y they can be more plain and direct to
prove the sacramental bread to be the very body of Christ, then those of
Jesus, This is my body? And yet is nothing more false; and impossible to be
true. But to come to this par^icular. I answer you that these words of Christ
cannot possibly be understood properly, and therefore you are much to blame
that urge the letter, seeing the sense of the Scriptures, is Scripture. The
field is the world. So then it is as if Jesus had said: The field whereof I
speak in the Parable signifies the world, or is like the world; is an image
of the world. So the good seed, they are the children of the kingdom, that is,
signifies or resembles the children of the kingdom. The good seed, that is,
the men signified by the good seed. Even so we say, in the word (world) there
is a trope, to wit, a Metonymie of the subject. The world, for the visible
Churches wheresoever in the world, or dispersed throughout the world. Or, if
you will, a Synechdoche, the whole, for a part. And why I pray you may not this
word (world) be here taken figuratively, seeing it is frequently used in the
New Testament so, as appears by the Cotations in the margent, and seldom
properly, and in it native signification? John 3.16.17. and 12. and 19. and
15.19. and 17.9. and 14.16. 2. Cor. 5.19. 1. John 2.2. and 3.1.
And wherefore by this word (world) may we not as well understand the visible
Church, as the invisible Church? The faithful, that is, the professors of
faith in Christ, scattered throughout the world, as the faithful, that is, all
they which do (indeed) believe in Christ, of what Nation soever in the world?
The later of these is manifest by Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Why may not therefore the word (world) be
used likewise in the former sense: seeing in them both there is the same trope,
or figurative speech; and the same reason thereof? By the like or same argument
that you do hear use, I can prove that God in Christ has reconciled this
visible and material world unto himself: For says Paul: God was in Christ,
and reconciled the world unto himself.

Your second reason follows, which in effect is this, That is meant by the
field, wherein are besides the Righteous, Hypocrites, the children of the
wicked, compared to tares: but in the world besides the righteous are
hypocrites, the children of the wicked: Therefore by the field is meant the
world.

I answer that this reason proves as well the Church to be meant by the
field, as the world: for as much in the Church, besides the righteous and
children of the kingdom are hipocrites the children of the wicked: But that is
compared to the field wherein such are: Ergo, (by your own argument) the
church is compared to the field. If you will have this reason of any force:
prove that in the visible church there are no hypocrites, no children of the
wicked, but righteous men only, as every where you teach; and then I will
confess that by field is meant the world, and give you also the field, as one
vanquished by you

Your third reason is, that this doctrine or exposition of ours, is against the
heavenly orders mentioned. Mark their abusing of holy Scripture.
Matthew. 18.8, 9.15, 16, 17. 1. Cor. 1.26.29 Act. 2.4, 41.47. and 5.26, 27, 28.
and 19.9. and 5.4.7. 2. Cor. 6.17.18. Leuit. 18.29, 1. Tim. 5.6. 2. John ver.
6.11 Revel. 2. and 3. and 14. and 9.12. and 18.4. and 20.4.

field, for the Church, should cross and overthwart the heavenly orders you
speak of: so as they cannot stand together. I pray you make this to appear in
your next Book: Prou. 14.15:
else we shall think that this is a mere fiction of your own, serving only
to bleare the eyes of fools, who will believe any thing. But suppose it were
as you say: what need such a heap of testimonies for declaration of the
heavenly orders? wise men and such as tremble at the word* that is, with fear
and reverence, hear and speak thereof, Isa. 66.5.
would tell you that here a few of them would have susficed. Is the God of
heaven well pleased with this your taking of his name in vain? Thus we see
first, that the visible Church is a mixed company of good and bad, 2. That in it
there are open wicked, and so our doctrine true, and also that our confirmation
thereof by the parable of the tares is very pregnant.

If any shall say, that indeed by this parable it is evident that a visible
Church is a mixed company of good and bad, godly and wicked: children of God,
and children of the Devil; called here the children of the wicked, meaning
that wicked one the Devil: but yet it is not thereby manifest, that there are
open and known wicked in the Church. I answer, that even from this parable,
this latter may also be proved: and namely out of the 26. verse. And when the
blade was sprang up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.
Whereby we learn that in the visible Church there are visible, and to be
seen or discerned by men, both godly, and wicked. The blades of the wheat,
(that is the godly) and that shortly after they be such, are discerned to
spring up: and the tares also, that is, the hypocrites or wicked men in the
Church: they appear to be wicked. Mark that it is not said, then were there
tares also in the field: but then appeared the tares also. So that there are
not only wicked in the Church, but to men also they appear, and are known by
their fruits to be wicked. Which the particle ka^ translated also does
confirm: whereby is meant that the tares in like manner, and as well appeared
and seen as the wheat blades; from hence (I say) we l^ar^e, that even as the
tares or other weeds, are as easily seen and discerned by the eye of man, as
the good corn: so in the visible Church the wicked do as well appear, and
are as easily known to be wicked, as the godly by their lives are known to be
godly. The truth therefore is, that a spiritual man that judges all things,
and that can only discern and judge of men aright, can and does as well know
many of the wicked in the Church, as a man can know tares from wheat. Lastly,
that there are known wicked in the Church, known not to God only, but also
unto men, the 27. verse does manifestly prove. Then came the servants of the
householder, and said unto him: Master, sowedst not thou good seeds in the
field? from whence then has it tares? Here are some of the servants of the
family discerning the tares wh^revppon they move their master concerning the
present weeding of them out. These servants signify and resemble, either the
Ministers, or generally the members of the Church and family of God, knowing
and discerning the wicked in the church. There are known wicked therefore in
the Church. But suppose this conclusion could not be proved by this parable,
it greatly mattereth not, so long as it has so good confirmation from other
parts of holy Scripture, as is before showed at large. In conclusion answer me
I pray you: why do you place the tares and the children, that wicked one the
devil, out of the Church, and in the world. Be like such have no being in the
Church; Indeed thereunto all your doctrine (in a manner) tends.

I am very unwilling, considering how long I have been already in the
exposition of this parable to use any more words about it, yet am I more
unwilling to pass by Master Robison with silence, who of late has said so
much against our interpretation of it. He begins thus. The point is, Master
Bernard following (I confess) the most beaten way, makes the field the
visible Church, and the tares scandalous offenders, Justification. 116
seen and discovered.

That which Master Bernard calls the interpretation of learned and godly
Deuines universally both with us, Separatists. Schism. 87.
and beyond the Seas, Master Robinson not unfitly calls here, the most bea
en way: but with all we may remember what he says further of the said
exposition, that it is a profane gloss: Justification. 116. 117.
and again, that some are ashamed of the grossenes, and indeed of the
iniquity of the said exposition. But leaving your reproachful terms, come
we to the matter. You must first then vnd^rst^nd that by tares, we do not
mean scandalous and notorious offenders, Iustif. 118.
or open wicked men only, as diverse times you charge us: nor yet hypocrites
not so thoroughly discovered: but thereby we do understand both these sorts of
hypocrites and wicked men and so all the hypocrites and ungodly that be in the
Church whosoever: as well those that be not discovered, as those that be
discovered and known by their open wickedness to be hypocrites: as well those
ungodly, that having a show of godliness, are reputed godly, as those whose
wicked and lewd conversation declares them to be ungodly. For who can deny
but that by tares Jesus means all in the visible Church beside the godly
resembled by wheat? Again, Christ expounding the parable (says expressly)
verse. 38. That the tares are, that is, signify the children of that wicked
one, that is, the devil: the enemy who sowed them: but all hypocrites and
wicked men, both secretly and openly, such are the children of the devil:
Therefore by tares Christ means all hypocrites and wicked in the Church
whatsoever. Add hereunto that by tares are shadowed forth all that shall be
burned in hell fire, also all those which do iniquity, as verse. 41. That is,
all workers of iniquity: But all hypocrites and ungodly whatsoever, whether
openly or secretly, such shall be damned, and are workers of iniquity:
Therefore all those Christ means by tares. This being true, Iustif. 118.
these following lines of yours be untrue. Admit the field be the Church, which
Christ expounds the world, then say I by tares in the field are meant, not
notorious offenders, but hypocrites: not so thoroughly discovered, which by the
envy of Satan are foysted into the Church. These lines are false two ways, 1.
As they have reference to us, and our exposition of tares, 2. As they have
relation to the Separists, and their interpretation of the same word. But
proceed we now to the moved reason which you have against our exposition.

Iustif. 116.
Whereupon (meaning if the visible Church be the field, and the tares
scandalous offenders) it must follow, (say you) that as the Lord forbids the
servants to meddle with the tares, or with the plucking them up, but will have
them and the wheat to grow together in the field till the harvest: so
Ministers and people are straightly inhibited and forbidden any way to admonish
and censure wicked and scandalous persons in the Church, but must let them
there remain without disturbance till the last judgment.

I answer. Some of the learned Divines which you thus despise have prevented
this objection, and told you, that to collect and reason from this Scripture as
you do, is to abuse Scripture. Cauendum ne his verbis abutamur contra
doctrinam de disciplina Ecclesia, etc. Pisc^tor in hunc locum.
We must (says Piscator) take heed that we abuse not these words against the
doctrine of the discipline of the Church, by which offenses are to be taken
away out of the Church as much as may be. For Christ in this parable (as
appears by his exposion of it) aymeth at no other thing, then to comfort the
godly against the grieuances which they have by conuersing with hypocrites: in
the mean while he would have nothing minished from the discipline of the
Church: as which he himself instituted after, Chap. 18.17. By the like reason
the use of the sword should be taken from the Magistrate: which God would have
to be used, as Paul testifies, Romans 13. This parable then is not to be
extended further then the scope thereof requires.

Secondly I answer you: Jesus here speaks of a perfect separation between
the wheat and tares, that is, the godly, and ungodly: such as shall leave no
tares, not a tare (I say) among the whea^e. For he speaks of such a
separation as cannot be made without danger to the wheat: for which cause he
forbids it, as verse. 29. Secondly, of that separation which shall be made by
the Angels, in the end of the world, verse. 30.41. Now this lets not, nor
forbids a separation in the mean season betwixt the clean, and those be
apparently unclean, the holy and profane, the godly and notorious offenders,
which may be separated and taken away from the godly, without any danger to
them at all.

This reason likes you so well, Iustif. 120.
that you urge it the second time, and thereunto add two reasons more. And
that the Lord Jesus (say you) no way speaks of the tolleration of profane
persons in the Church, it does appear by these reasons. First because, (as
has been observed) he does not contradict himself by forbidding the use of
the keys in one place, which in another he has turned upon impenitent
offenders. Matthew. 18.15.16.17. 2. In the excommunication of sinners apparently
obstinate, with due circumspection, and in the spirit of wisdom, meekness,
and long suffering, with such other general Christian virtues, as with which
all our spiritual sacrifices ought to be seasoned what danger can there be of
any such disorder, as the plucking up of the wheat with the tares, which the
husbandman fears, verse. 29. Lastly, the Lord Jesus speaks of the utter
ruinating and destruction of the tares, the gathering and plucking them up by
the roots, verse. 28.29. And to this end they are reserved by the husbandman,
verse. 30. (ever presupposed, they so continued) but excommunication rightly
administered, is not for the ruin, and destruction of any, but for the
salvation of the party thereby humbled.

Your first reason (in effect) is this.

If Jesus speak here of the tolleration of profane persons in the Church,
then here he forbids the weeding out, or censuring of them, whom in another
place, vz. Matthew. 18.15. He commands to be weeded out, or censured:

But Jesus does not contradict himself:

Therefore Jesus speaks not here of the tolleration of profane persons.

This reason being the very same with the former, has received answer. The
second argument is this.

Christ speaks of, and forbids such a separation, as wherein there is
danger of plucking up the wheat with the tares.

But in the excommunication of sinners apparently obstinate, or seperating such
from the Church, there is no danger of plucking up the wheat with the tares:

Therefore of the excommunication of sinners apparently obstinate, or
seperating such from the Church Christ speaks not, nor forbids.

Your third argument follows.

Jesus sp^aketh of the utter ruinating and destruction of the tares.

But excommunication (rightly administered) is not for the ruinating and
destruction of any.

Therefore of excommunication Jesus does not speak.

We now see clearly that these two lat^er arguments do conclude and prove the
same thing. But what? not that which your first argument does, as you pretend,
and bear the silly reader in hand, but in stead thereof this, that in the
parable of the tares, Christ speaks not of excommunication or censures of the
Church: which we not only confess, but teach and urge against you. But
suppose, they did soundly prove that proposition for which the are produced:
to wit, that in the parable of the tares, Jesus does not speak of the
tolleration of profane persons in the Church: yet did they not at all make
against us, for by profane persons you mean, 1. Scandalous offenders, or open
wicked, 2. Such only, deny either of these if you will. And so by your own
proposition (which forsooth you will prove by three arguments) you imply that
we teach, that by tares are meant scandalous offenders, or known wicked only.
The contrary whereunto is manifest by the premises. You commit then here two
foul faults besides the former. One is, you pursue your own shadow, in stead
of an adversary, 2. You abuse the reader in making him believe we hold that we
do not.

But to proceed, say you: It may be some will answer, Iustif. 117.
that Christ does not here forbid his Disciples the use of the censures
against the wicked, but rather acquaints them before hand what will be the
state of the Church, and how the wicked will be suffered to continue in it
uncensured. This is indeed our answer, and I will maintain it against all
gainesayers. You add: and if this were so, it made nothing against me, nor for
Master Bernard. No, Master Robinson. If there will be and continue wicked in
the Church uncensured, if this will be the estate of the visible Church by the
testimony of Christ Jesus, then for as much as all that be and continue in the
visible church, are of it, even members of it: it must needs be that the
visible Church is a mixed company, consisting of good and bad, godly and wicked.
Now this makes as much for us, and against you as can be. You write before
thus. Here is no such mingle mangle as Master Bernard would make of good and
bad, but all good, Iustif. 115. 112. 113.
and so auowed by the holy Ghost. And again, that if all the Divines in the
world should with Master Bernard say, that the visible Church is a mixed
company, yet the divine Scriptures speak otherwise, which you will clearly
manifest. And yet once more: It is profane divinity to make ungodly persons
true matter of the visible Church. These speeches of yours, with this here do
agree together, as light and darkness. Again, if to the worlds end there will
be and continue wicked in the Church uncensured, If (I say) this will be the
estate of the visible church, as the truth is, and to foretell, and comfort the
godly against it, is the very scope and drift of our Savior in this parable:
why do you then condemn us for a false Church, because of the wicked that are
among us, Answer to a censo. Epist. page 35.
and for this cause chiefly separate from us? In these two respects
principally, (say you) your babylonish confusion of all sorts of people in the
body of your Church, without separation: and your Babilonish bondage under your
spiritual Lords the Prelates, we account you Babylon* and flee from you. Show
us how this speech here, and your accounting our Church to be Babylon, for the
reason aforefaide, and flying from it, can possibly accord.

Iustif. 117.
You add, It were the Churches sin so to suffer them (that is, the wicked to
continue in the Church vnsensured.) And I deny not (say you) but Churches
usually are too negligent and remiss through want of zeal and faithfulness
to the Lord in this duty. This is it we teach, it were well for you ye had
learned the same. If you have, as you here pretend, why do you account our
parishionall assemblies, because of the wicked that be in them, false Churches,
and Synagogues of Satan; you acknowledge here ecclesiastical assemblies may
be true Churches, notwithstanding there be, and continue wicked in them
uncensured: And yet the truth is, you all hold, that where there are, and
continue wicked uncensured, the same are false Churches.

Iustif. 120.
Finally say you, The Lords field is sown only with good seed, though by the
malice of Satan, and negligence of such as should keep this field and
vineyard, and house of God adulterate seed, and abominable persons may be
foisted in, yea and suffered also, which the Scriptures affirm, and we deny
not.

Such is the excellency and power of truth, that it makes sometimes the
adversaries thereof to yield and stoop unto it. For twice together you do
against your self bear witness to the truth. You here acknowledge, that
abominable persons may be in the Church of God, yea and suffered also, that is,
abide or continue there, and that this the Scriptures affirm. Now touching the
particular point we have in hand, this is the some and effect of that we say
and contend for, and you impugn and gain say. But answer me. Are there any
worse in our Church then this adulterate seed you speak of, and abominable
persons? 2. Can you add thereto any more or worse then this, that they are
suffered also, that is, let to continue in our Church uncensured? If
notwithstanding this great sin, a society may be a true Church, by the
testimony of the holy Scriptures: why do you for this very sin Judge, and
proclaim us to the world to be a false Church, and thereupon depart from us?
True it is that for this cause only you do not deem us a false Church, and
leave us: yet that you do it for this cause, yea chiefly for this very cause
you cannot without blushing deny: and this not only your self, but besides M.
Ainsworth and M. Smith, have published and made known unto the world, as I
have manifested in my Epistle written to you of the Separation. That which you
affirm here you contradict at least (I think) an hundred times. Omitting them
all, see how you thwart your self in the two last lines of this present
Section: Iustiss. 121.
And so except the Church of England had been sown with good seed without
tares since that general Apostacy, it cannot be the Lords field. In the
beginning of the Section in thesi, you affirm, that howsoever the Lords field
is sown only with good seed, yet there may be in it adulterate seed, or
Tares; and in the knitting up of the same Section in Hypothesi you say: That
the Church of England because it is not sown with good seed only without
Tares, but has tares or adulterate seed in it, it therefore cannot be the
Lords field. And where you happily imagine, that we think that the Lords field
is not sown only with good seed, Know ye that we are otherwise minded. We
are not ignorant, that this is expressly taught in this parable verse
24.27.36. and that the tares are from the envious man, the Devil; neither do
we forget that which else where is written to this purpose: Act. 2.47.
And the Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be saved. You
produce this as an argument against us, to prove that the Church of England, is
not the Lords field, that is, the Church of God: but by your own words before
it is plain, that it neither makes for you, not against us.

Thus we hear what M. Johnson says against the mixture of good and bad, godly
and wicked in the Church, also what M. Robinson says in Justification thereof;
and our defense, and answer thereunto: Let us now see what M. Ainsworth says
for the maintenance of the same, and conviction of us who be contrary minded.
In the end of his book called the communion of Saints, he teaches that there
are no open wicked in the Church, He grants there are wicked in the Church,
but says he, they are inwardly wicked, restrained by the terror of the Law,
from all open wickedness: but outwardly religious, increasing outwardly in
external righteousness: When the Scriptures says, 2. Tim. 3.15.
That the wicked wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Again,
open wicked, (says he) licentious and profane livers, be neither of the
Church, nor in the same: And again in the same place, There are three sorts of
men; open wicked, hypocrites, Saints: The first of these are without the
Church, the other two within: and this all of them do teach: But herein they
swerve altogether from the truth: He should rather have distinguished men into
two sorts: whereof one is without the Church, who do not so much as profess
the true Religion, and they all are wicked: the other within the church,
professing the Religion of God: of which some are religious, and holy indeed;
and such as they profess and seem to be: and they be but a few: others
wicked, only religious and holy in name, and in regard of their outward
profession: and of these there be many: Mat. 20.1^. and 22.14.
The first of these are Saints indeed, and so called: The latter hypocrites,
yet called Saints, because the religion they profess is holy; but are indeed
wicked and profane. And of these hypocrites, some be open wicked, and easily
known to be wicked: and some so close and secretly wicked, as they are hardly
discerned to be wicked; That this which we affirm is true; and that you teach
false, it is manifest by the 3. of Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 3.7 21.
Son of man I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore
here the word of my mouth, and give thou warning from me. 18. When I shall say
unto the wicked; thou shall surely die; and thou give not him warning, nor
speak to admonish the wicked of his wicked way, that he may live, the same
wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy
hand, 19. Yet if thou warn the wicked; and he turn not from his wickedness;
nor from his wicked way he shall die in his iniquity: but thou have delivered
thy soul. 20. Likewise if a righteous man turn from his righteousness, and
commit iniquity: I will lay a stumbling block before him, and he shall die
because thou have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin: and his
righteous deeds which he has done, shall not be remembered; but his blood will
I require at thy hand. 21. Nevertheless, if thou admonish that righteous man,
that the righteous sin not, and that he does not sin, He shall live because
he is admonished: also thou have delivered thy soul; Hear we learn first,
that in the Church there are wicked and godly, and so a mixed company of good
and bad, Saints and sinners: The godly are mentioned. The wicked in the verses
precedent: which is contrary to the Doctrine of these Schismatickes. Secondly,
that of the wicked some are open wicked; having not so much as an external
righteousness: Such are the contemners of the word, and Ministers thereof; the
persecutors of the Saints, the scorners, blasphemers, whoremongers, murderers,
thieves, drunkards, oppressors, extortioners, railers, slanderers, and such
like; wh^reof there have ever been, are, and will be store in the Church of
God. These are called wicked, not only because they are such, but because they
appear and are known to be such, (by them I mean that can discern between
things and persons that differ) and that as easily as darkness is known from
light. Such were Ismael; Esau, Saul, Absalom, the Scribes and Pharisees, and
the like. Of these the Prophet speaks, verse 18.19. Others be inwardly and
secretly wicked, but outwardly holy and righteous, having an external
righteousness and show of godliness, and because they appear and Iseeme to
men to be righteous or godly, they are therefore caled righteous. Such were
Judas, and Demas, with others, of these the Prophet speaks: ver. 20. And lest
we should shift of this by saying, these three kinds or sorts of men were not
all of them in the Church, but the open wicked without, as M. Ainsworth and the
rest of them tell us: we must remember that this admonition or warning
contained in the 18.19.20. and 21. verses was sent from the Lord by the Prophet
to the Jews, (who then only were the visible Church) as is manifest by verse
17. Son of man I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel,
therefore hear the word at my mouth and give them warning from me. Observe
here the repugnance and contrariety between the Prophet and the doctrine of
these Schismaticke: The Prophet tells us of three sorts of men in the Church
of open wicked, of righteous or godly in show only or appearance, and of such
as are indeed godly, even the same they seem and profess to be. M. Ainsworth
and his fellows say no; The two last sorts of men only are in the Church, the
first be neither of the Church, nor in the same. Choose now Reader to whether of
these thou will give ear.

But they will say; we acknowledge that there ever have been, are, and will
be hypocrites in the Church mixed with the godly, and such were the wicked
mentioned before that were in the Church of the Jews. Cain offered sacrifice
as well as Habel. The same is said of Saul: Also, that he worshipped the Lord:
so likewise did Doeg, Ismael, and Esau were circumcised: and had the sign and
seal of the righteousness of faith in and upon their flesh. And that the
Scribes and Pharisees were hypocrites; it is evident by the testimony of our
Savior: Mat. 15.1.7. and by that speech of his so often repeated. Mat. 23. Woe
be to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites: But the most of your assemblies be
open and known wicked men: some of them being known to be swearers, others to
be Prophaners of the Sabbath, Drunkards, Thieves, Whoremongers, covetous, and
malicious persons etc. and cannot therefore be accounted hypocrites. And your
self do confess that in the Church there are these two sorts of men only,
hypocrites or hypocritical professors, and sincere worshippers.

I answer, you well understand not who be hypocrites, and do wholly mistake
the matter in supposing that open wicked men cannot be reputed such, whereas
the open wicked, nay most vile and abominable men; notoriously also known to
be such; professing true religion, be hypocrites. Esau was very profane, and
as his prophanenes did (no doubt) show it self in the whole course of his
life; so in taking for his wives two women of the Hittites; but chiefly in
selling his birthright for a mess of pottage. Now these his sins were
known; specially the former to Isaac his family which then was the Church:
Hereunto add that he both purposed and said that he would slay his brother
Jacob, Genesis 27.41.42.
and that this was known to some of Isaacks family, who told it to Rebekah.
Yet was this notorious profane man, and known murderer, an hypocrite. Doeg
was an horrible murderer; his murder also could not but be known to the
whole Church of God, and an hypocrite. For it is said that when David came to
Nob, where the Tabernacle of God then was; Doeg was abiding or caused to tarry
before the Lord; 1. Sam. 22.18. and 22.7.
either because of the Sabbath, or some vow; or some such religious respect;
whereby is employed that he continued there for some days worshipping God; or
to that end. That Saul was an hypocrite: I need not to prove. He was so
forward in offering to the Lord: burnt offerings, and in the outward worship of
God; 1. Sam. 13.12.13. and 15.22.23.31.
That by Samuel he was diverse times reproved sharply for the same: Yet did
he so hate, and so openly and furiously persecute David to his death; as it
could not but be known to all Israel, and so was openly and notoriously
wicked: But this is more then manifest by the Scribes and Pharisees; who were
very wicked and vile men; hating, blaspheming, and persecuting Christ and his
members, and known to be such to the Saints then living, who tasted of the
fruit of their hatred: and yet by the witness of Christ Jesus they were
Hypocrites. Even so undoubtedly were all they which killed the Prophets, and
stoned them which were sent unto them, Mat. 21.35. and 22.6. and 23.37.
open wicked men and Hypocrites. Hypocrites also were they and yet known
wicked men of whom Christ speaks thus; They shall excommunicate you, yea
the time shall come, Ioh. 16.2.
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service. I omit to
urge that place of Paul to Timothy; where foretelling of the grievous sinners
that shall be in the last days, whereof some be open sinners, in the end he
knitteth it up thus: 2. Tim. 3.1.5.
They shall have a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof.
Whereby he shows that this he means of the Church, and hypocrites that
shall be therein; and not by them who are without. As if he had said: The
wicked persons I speak of, who shall be so grievous to the godly, specially to
godly Teachers, and cause the last times to be so perilous as ver. 1. be the
hypocrites that shall be in the Church. But I cannot pass by that Tit. 1. is;
They profess that they know God but by works they deny him; and are
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Hereby it is
evident that open wicked men, disobedient to God; yea such as be abominable,
and repr^bate to every go^d work, may be hypocrites: For the Apost^e speaking
thus of professors, They profess (said he) that they know God, it is thereby
plain that he means this of them; that were in the Church; and so of the
hypocrites therein, and not of them who be without for they make not this
profession.

Thus we see that very wicked and vile men; and notoriously known to be such
have been and may be hypocrites: And therefore the open scandalous wicked in
our assemblies may be and indeed are all of them hypocrites: Our assemblies
being mixed companies, of Saints indeed, and hypocrites: and such a company
has evermore the true visible Church been. It is a fancy and vain imagination
of yours, that the wicked in our assemblies are not hypocrites, and so to be
accounted, because their wickedness is not secret, but manifest and to be
seen of all men. Whereas, all that profess Christianity, and live not the
lives of Christians; are hypocrites: But such be the open and secret wicked in
our public assemblies: Therefore as well the open as the secret wicked in our
public assemblies are hypocrites. In Math. 15. our Lord uses these words to
the Scribes and Pharisees: O hypocrites: Esaias prophesied well of you; saying,
This people draws near unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their
lips: but their heart is far of from me: But in vain they worship me. Hence
we learn, that all they which draw near unto God with their mouths, and
honor him with their lips, having their hearts far off from him; be
Hypocrites. But such be both the open and secret wicked in our assemblies:
Therefore both the open and secret wicked in our assemblies are hypocrites. I
am assured you will greatly marvel at me, and it may be some of you be ready
to hiss at this, that the open wicked in our parish assemblies be hypocrites.
Your ignorance herein has been one principal cause of this false doctrine of
yours. In the true visible Church there are no open wicked, but it is a
separated company of righteous men: upon which false ground you condemn our
parish assemblies to be false Churches, and thereupon have departed from us:
which has also caused me to insist so long upon this point. You confess
there be hypocrites in the Church according to the Scriptures: But you suppose
them to be such as have an outward holiness, and such as in charity we
cannot but account Saints or holy ones: whereas those that make profession of
godliness, though they have no external righteousness, nay be notoriously
wicked are hypocrites, until such time as by excommunication they be cut off
from the Church. And for the better satisfying of you herein, you must
understand there be two sorts of hypocrites: First, close hypocrites, which
are such as go in sheeps clothing, when as indeed they be goats. These are in
appearance, Saints. If you look upon the outside of these men, (and further
for certain we cannot go) I mean, the carriage of themselves toward God,
and sometimes to man, specially to godward in the parts of his worship: you
will think they be Saints indeed. Such a one was Judas, whom none of the
Apostles did discern to be an hypocrite; and so like to be the traitor Jesus
spoke of: And Demas unknown for a time to the Apostle Paul: And all those it
is probable John speaks of 1. Ioh. 2.19. such as these you account to be
hypocrites, and none other, as appears by M. Ainsworth, who describing
Hypocrites says they be such, As are outwardly religious, Commun. of Saints
in the end.
but inwardly wicked, such as ashamed of their nakedness, cover it with
Fig-leaues of their own external righteousness. And again, Hypocrites
(says he) are they, who restrained by the terror of the Law from open
wickedness, do increase outwardly in righteousness. This kind of hypocrites
you only acknowledge: Whereupon it is that Master Ainsworth in the same place
permitting Hypocrites to be in the Church, does yet clean shut out of the
Church open wicked, licentious and profane livers: which cannot stand
together, if any open wicked may be Hypocrites. But you must know that there
is another sort of Hypocrites, which be not close Hypocrites, and hardly
discerned to be Hypocrites, and consequently wicked: but open or manifest
Hypocrites, easily known to be Hypocrites, (and therefore wicked) as b^acke is
known from white. These are the open wicked in the Church, wherewith it has
ever abounded, does, and will unto the worlds end. Of this kind were these
hypocrites often mentioned before, Ismael, Esau, Saul, Absalom, Ioab, Doeg, the
Scribes and Pharisees; and usually they who in all ages have murd^red and
persecuted the Saints, specially among the Jews before the coming of Christ.
Of such Hypocrites as these Paul speaks. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4 5. verses, and
Titus 1. verse. 16. These you may as easily discern to be Hypocrites, as know
a Goat, from a Sheep; and tares from wheat. And of this kind of Hypocrites
be the open wicked in our assemblies: whom had you known to be Hypocrites,
you would never have denied our Parish assemblies to be true Churches, because
they consist partly of them: or because of the mixture and confusion you so
much speak of, and condemn in our Church. Considering a tru^ visible Church
is a mixed company of Saints indeed, and Hypocrites: and that such companies be
our p^r^shioners assembles, and therefore true visible Churches. Of both these
kinds of Hypocrites the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 5.24. Some men's sins are
open before hand, and go before unto judgment: but some men's follow after.
Of the latter sort or kind in these words: Some men's sins are open before
hand, and go before unto judgment: of the first in these, some men's follow
after.

Cor. 14.33. God is not the author of confusion, but of peace: Apology. 44.
as we see in all the Churches of the Saints. By Churches (say you) he means
visible Churches, the members whereof he calls Saints Again say you, the
same Apostle writing to the Church at Rome, at Corinthus, Ephesus, Phillippi,
etc. Writes to visible Churches, in the beginning of which his Epistles he
calls them Saints. To the Saints which are at Ephesus. To the Saints which
are at Philippi. Are not all the members then of the visible Church, Saints?
and such as have at least an outward holiness?

Paul writing to the Church of the Thessalonians, begins thus. Paul unto the
Church of the Thessalonians which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.
2. We give God thanks for you all, 3. Remembering your effectual faith, and
diligent love, 4. Knowing beloved brethren, that ye are elect of God, 6. And
ye received the word in much affliction; with joy of the holy Ghost. Now by
this reason of yours (if it were good) can I prove that all of the visible
Church are in Christ Jesus, (to whom is no condemnation) have this effectual
faith, Romans 8.1.
diligent love, and joy of the holy Ghost: nay, are the elect of God: because
the Apostle writing as you say to the visible Church of the Thessalonians says
thus of them: yea of them all, as it might seem by verse. 2. Again thus
arguing can I prove that all in the visible Church are beloved of God, because
Paul writing to the Church of Rome, says of them that they all are beloved of
God, called Saints: And consequently there are no wicked in the Church, neither
openly nor secretly wicked: seeing God hates all such. And whereas the most in
the visible Church are the children of the Devil, Psalm. 5.5. Romans 1.7.
one may prove by this kind of reasoning, that they are all the children of
God: because Paul writing as you affirm to the visible Church at Rome says:
Rom 8.16.
Ye have received the spirit of adoption: And to the visible Churches of
Galatia: ye are the sons of God: And that which is more: ye are all the
sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. From this ground also it follows,
that all in the visible Church are Saints indeed, and have the spirit of God
sanctifying them, and making them of profane, holy: and that there is no
carnal man, and by consequent no Hypocrite in the Church, for all hypocrites
be carnal: Because Paul writing to the visible Church at Rome, says thus of
them: Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit: (that is, ye are not
carnal, but spiritual) because the Spirit of God dwells in you. Romans 8.9.
And writing to the Church at Ephesus, Ephesians. 1.13.
says of them, ye are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise: and to the
Church of Galatia: Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries,
Abba, Father. Thus also can I prove the contrary hereunto; that all in the
visible Church are carnal, and none spiritual; because Paul writing to the
visible Church of Corinthus as you tell us, says of them, that they are
carnal: 1. Cor. 3.13.
And I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal:
for ye are yet carnal, for whereas there is among you envying, and strife,
and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? He says not only that
they were carnal, and this often, and that without any limitation or
restraint; also that they walked as men, that is, lived after the manner of
natural or carnal men, but besides all this, proves that they were carnal,
by certain works of the flesh, whereunto they were given, and wherein they
lived. Hereby we may plainly see that this is a deceitful kind of
reasoning: and that this they object is of no mom^nt. In the second of Haggai,
the Prophet has these words: If a polluted person touch any of these, shall it
be unclean? and the Priests answered and said, it shall be unclean. Then
answered Haggai; and said so is this people, and so is this nation before me
says the Lord. As here notwithstanding the visible Church and people of the
Jews are said to be unclean, yet there were then in the Church many Saints,
Zerubbabel, Iehoshua, Haggai, with many others, as appears by chap. 1. v.
12.13, and chap. 2. v. 5, 6. Even so albeit in holy writ the members of visible
Churches, are called Saints, yet were there undoubtedly in the same Churches
not a few that were polluted and unclean. Neither is there any more force in
this latter allegation to prove that all in the Church are outward^y holy, then
in the former to prove that all in the Church in the Prophet Haggai his time
were unclean. This might well suffice for an answer: I will notwithstanding
add more thereunto, that if it be possible your mouths may be stopped.

But to come to a more direct answer. I deny that Paul indicted and writ his
Epistles for, and to, the visible Churches in Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. But
to the several and particular Churches, that is, societies of the faithful in
those and other cities, and so framed his style accordingly unto this blessed
and holy people, many wicked and unbelievers (void I mean of true faith)
joined themselves in the profession of the same faith, and in holy Communion
worshipping the same God after the same (external) manner with them. These
latter and bad sort (being all of them Hypocrites) were in the Church, but not
of it, no more then the chafe that is mixed with wheat, is wheat: the first
and good sort only making the Church, so much commended unto us in holy writ:
and the confused and mixed company of both these, that we call a visible
Church. They went out from us (says John) but they were not of us: 1. John
2.19.
for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. Now to the
Churches, (I say) and not to the visible Churches the Apostle meant and writ
(at least chiefly) his Epist^es, as the inscriptions of the most of them,
besides many sayings in the same do manifestly declare: whereof we have had a
taste in the precedent section, of which some I will repeat, and add some
others. To all that be at Rome, beloved of God; unto the church of God which is
at Corinthus, to the^ that are sanctified in Christ Jesus. To the Saints which
are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus. To them which are at
Colosse, Saints and faithful brethren in Christ. In like manner does Saint
Peter. Peter an Apostle to the strangers that dwell here and there, elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, unto sanctification of the
Spirit. And in the second Epistle thus; Simon Peter to you which have obtained
like precious faith with us.

And as in the inscriptions, so in the Epistles themselves, the Apostle usually
speaks as to the Church, and not to the visible Church. To the Romans Romans
8.9.15.
to whom he writ thus: ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because the
spirit of God dwells in you. Again, ye have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear again, but ye have received the spirit of adoption. To them
he writ at Corinthus: 1. Cor. 1.7. and verse. 26.30.
ye are not destitute of any gift: waighting for the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 8 Who shall confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless
in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 9 God is faithful, by whom ye are called
unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. Brethren you see your calling:
how that not many wise men after the flesh, etc. But ye are of him in Christ
Jesus. Your bodies are the members of Christ Your body is the Temple of the
holy Ghost, ye are bought for a price, 1. Cor 6.15:19.20. and v. 27. Gal.
3.26. and 4, 6.
ye are the body of Christ. To the Galatians thus. Ye are all the sons of
God by faith in Christ Jesus. Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts. These speeches with infinite more of this
kind are true, and can properly be said only of the Churches, and members
thereof, and improperly of the visible Churches: and therefore me thinks it
is very hard to understand them of the visible Churches and members thereof,
rather then of the Churches themselves. Neither can I conceive, what there is
in religion, or reason to lead us from the litterall sense, to your tropicall
exposition: specially considering these kind of speeches be so frequent in the
Epistles, and few or none to be found in them which can properly be said of
the visible Churches.

This is further confirmed by, 1. Cor. 12.28. but more plainly by Ephesians.
4.8.11.12. Where the ministry and Ministers are said to be ordained for and
given to the Church, and Saints, and body of Christ, which body the Church or
that we call the invisible Church, is, and not the visible. And here I reason
thus. To what Church or society soever the ministry and Ministers of Christ
were given, to the same the canonical Epistles were written: But to the Church
militant the ministry and Ministeis were given: Therefore to it the Epistles
canonical were written. The proposition is in it self clear: the assumption
the former place of the Ephesians does manifestly prove. Whatsoever things
are written, Romans 15.4.
and therefore the Epistles of Paul, and of the other Apostles, are written for
our learning or instruction who be of Gods election: that we the elect of God,
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. These things
(says John) have I written unto you that believe in the name of the same God,
1. John 5.13.
that ye may know that ye have eternal life. If John write to the faithful,
and to those who might assure themselves of eternal life, which Faith and Life
only the Church militant, and elect that be on earth have then undoubtedly the
Apostle Paul did write unto the like: seeing they were both guided by the same
spirit, and as pens in the hand of the same Writer.

Finally as the Apostles whiles they were limited and confined to the nation
and people of the Iewee were sent by Jesus to Preach to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, that is, the elect Israelits: Matthew. 10.6.
so undoubtedly when the Apo: commission was enlarged, and they to Preach to
all nations, and some of them to write, they were of Jesus sent and inspired to
Preach and write to the lost sheep, that is, the elect of the Jews and
Gentiles. And as the lost sheep of the house of Israel, were they whom Christ
in his first sending and preaching of his Apost^es respect^d, and of whom he
had care and pity, and not generally the Israelites, or visible Church
consisting of them: so the l st sheep of the Jews and Gentiles are they whom
Christ in his second sending of h^s Ap^stles, and in their pr^aching and
writing respected, and of whom he had care and pity, and not the visible
Church or Churches among them. And this is further confir^ed, yea cleared (as I
think) by that speech of Paul in his Se^mon to them of Antiochia in Pisidia:
Acts 13.26:
Ye men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever
among you fear God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. All they to
whom Paul spoke this, profess^ the fear of God: and therefore by them that are
here said to fear God, we cannot understand such: seeing he pu^s a
difference betwixt those in the Congregation that feared God* and the rest. It
is one thing to fear God in deed, and another thing to profess the fear of
God. This profession all in the Church do make, and so many of them as have an
external righteousness, we are to judge thus of them, that they fear God:
yet only they who be of the Church d^e indeed and truth fear God: the rest
making a show of that they do or have not. For the fear of God is a grace or
gi^t of Gods sancti^ying Spirit, which God of his grace gives to all, and
only to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus It is proper to Gods Elect,
and them who be of the invisible Church, and to be found in none other. And
this the Scr^pture teaches where it s ith. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wis^dome. Prou. 9.10. And again, Blessed is them an that fears
the Lord. Psalm. 112.1. Now to these who have this fear, the word of salvation
is sent, and therefore the Apostolical Epistles: whereupon i^ follows
necessarily that the Epistles were not sent to the visible Churches. If i^ be
so that the Apostles write their Epistles to the Elect members of the invisible
Church: then, that they in their Epistles do ca l them to whom they write
Saints, I add, sanctifi^d ^n Christ Jesus, fa thfull, a chosen Generation, a
royal Pri^st o d, an holy Nation, ^iuely stones, a spiritual house, the Temple
o^ God, the hab^tation of God by the Spirit, the Body of Christ, etc. makes
nothing at all to prove this, That a true visible church is a company of
Saints, sanctified in Christ Jesus, faithful, the Body of Christ, etc. Neither
do these titles, nor any oaths of this kind, scattered every where throughout
the Epistles, which be attributed to them of the invisible Church, hinder this.
That a visible Church is a company of holy and unholy, faithful and
unfaithful: and so your objection is frivolous, making nothing against us.

But grant we that the holy Apostle meant and writ his epistles to the
visible churches at Rome, Corinthus, etc. Neither will that help you, though
you imagine it does greatly. And then I answer: that Paul calls the members
of a visible Church Saints, not because they were all holy and righteous men,
either in deed or outward appearance, and caryage of themselves toward God
and man, as these men fondly imagine, and very confidently affirm, expounding
thus this word Saints, but in one or more of these senses following.

In the 5. of Leuit: those are called holy things that were consecrated unto
the Lord: Verse. 15. Verse. 9.10.21.
and in the 27. of the same book the field which was dedicated unto the Lord,
is said to be an holy field: and the beasts that were offered in sacrifice are
called holy. Even so all of the visible Church are or may be called holy ones,
or Saints, because in baptism they be all dedicated unto the Lord, and given
or resigned up into his service.

Secondly, Paul calls or might call all of the vis. Church Saints or holy ons
because they above all people that are upon the earth are of God called or
commanded to be holy. Heb. 12.14. 2 Thessalonians. 4.7.
God says the Apostle has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto
holiness. Hereunto belongs that speech so often repeated in the Law, and after
by Peter: Leu^t. 11.44. and 19.2. 1. Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. And that Exodus 22.31. Ye shall be an holy people
unto me. And again Leuit. 11.45. I am the Lord that brought you out of the
land of Egypt, to be your God, 1. Cor. 1.2.
and that you should he holy, for I am holy. For confirmation of th s
exposition serves, that Paul terming them Saints; adds by calling Paul unto
the Church of God which is at Corinthus* Saints by calling: Romans 2.7. Psalm.
79.2. Deu^. 7.6. and 14.2.21.
and in his Ep: to the Romans, To all you that be at Rome beloved of God,
called Saints. And in this sense the Nation or people of the Jews are called
Saints, and said to be an holy people: because the Lord has chosen them to be
such.

Thirdly all of the visible Church were or might be called Saints, because of
their holy profession, or holy religion, which they professed. Whatsoever they
were their religion was holy, and he whom they (in the midst of heathens
and infidels) confessed and professed was holy, even that holy One. Luke 1.35.
In this respect because they professed holiness, and themselves to be holy,
all of the visible Church may fitly be called Saints, that is, holy ones. Even
as they are called faithful, and that with the same breath, yea faithful in
Christ Jesus. Paul an Apostle to the Saints which are at Ephsus, Ephesians. 1.1.
and to the faithful in Christ Jesus; not that they all had faith in Christ,
which is true and justifying faith, but because they professed faith in him: in
which sense we describe the visible Church, to be a company of faithful
people. When therefore Paul says, To the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to
the Saints which are in Phillippi, it is all one as if he had said, To the
Christians (or professors of the Christian religion) which are at Ephesus and
Phillippi. And so in the inscriptions of his Epistles to the Romans and
Corinthians where he says. To all you that be at Rome, called Saints: unto the
Churcb of God at Corinthus, Saints by calling, it is as much as if he had said
called or by calling Christians. And thus th^s word Saints is often taken in
the Epistl^s, as else where in the New Testament, as Romans 16.14. Phil. 4.21.
Acts 26.10. compared with Act. 9.1. and 22.4.

M. Bernard teaching that men are called Saints, because of the profession of
faith in Christ, who makes all true believers holy and Saints: M. Robinson
answers thus. Iustif. 110.
It is true you say that Christ makes all true believers holy and Saints, but I
deny that every profession of faith in Christ argues a true believer. A false
dissembler is he and no true believer, that in word pretends faith in Christ,
and in deed denies him.

This is your full answer, and that a worthy one. Hereby you imp^y, That none
are in Scripture called Saints, nor may lawfully be so called, who be not true
believers, holy and Saints indeed, their hearts being purified by faith. But
all in the visible Church be in holy Scripture called Saints, and may lawfully
therefore be so called: Ergo, all in the visible Church (by your wise answer)
be true believers. And consequently they shall all be saved: John 3.16.
For whosoever believes, shall not pe^ish, but have everlasting life. If you
deny that your words imply that I say, then to what purpose serve they?
certainly they are then idle, and have not so much as the show of answer in
them, which makes as little for your credit, or cause. But grant we this, it
mattereth not much, seeing but in the lease before in plain words (you in
effect) teach the same. Iustif. 107.
The scriptures (say you) do call men Saints, because they are Saints, and not
for any other cause. Your reason follows. For what is it to be a Saint, but
to be holy? We may well therefore think, that you meant as much as I affirm.
I deny (say y^u) that every profession of faith in Christ argues a true
believer. So do we A false dissembler is he, (say you) and no true b^leeuer,
that in word pretends faith in Christ, and in deed denies him. The same say
we. What of all this? what makes this for you, or against us? Nothing at all.
But besides the former implication it shows, that your fing^rs itched to be
scribbling against the profession of faith: wh ch for as much as it may and does
often fall into dissemblers, ^iues you no content: and therefore in every one
of the visible Church you will have besides this profession, true faith in
Christ, and all the members thereof true b^leeuers, and consequently no
disse^blers in the Church. Thus you shut out of the visib^e Church all
hyp^crites, and yet both a little before and after, confess that there be
such, yea many such in the Church. Reconcile. But tell me M. Robinson, why may
not they that profess faith in Christ, that holy one, be therefore called holy
or Saints, notwi hstanding they have no part of Christ his holiness, nor his
holy Spirit dwelling in them: as well as be call ed Christ ans, of Christ though
they partake not with him in that holy anointing? Again, the profession of
Christ an Religion, or of faith in Christ, is an holy and glorious th ng: and
therefore vvhatso^uer the persons be that thus profess, be they holy or
profane, worthily and fitly an holy and glorious name, to wit, Saints, ^ay be
given to such.

This (says M. Robinson) is all one as if you should say, The Scriptures do
not call men Saints, because they are Saints but for some other causes known
to you. For what is it to be a Saint but to be holy? Iustif. 107.
And what to be holy, but to be of a sound judgment, pure affections, and
unblameable conversation?

Reply. It is one thing to be called a Saint, and an other to be a Saint: one
thing to be a Saint by nomination, an other to be such in deed and verity.
All that be Saints indeed, are Saints by nomination, so called, and to be
called and accounted: But all that be Saints by nomination, so called by the
holy Ghost, are not Saints indeed, and so to be reputed, as you will needs
have it. For then all in the Church of the Jews were Saints or holy indeed,
forasmuch as they by the Holy Ghost are so called: and consequently they were
all saved, which I trust you will not say. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2. this is rendered
for a reason why the Israelites should not conform thems^lues to the Nations
about them, neither in their religion or worship, nor yet in other things of
less moment, as in cutting themselves, in making baldness between their eyes
for the dead: For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. And Deuteronomy.
14.27. Ye shall eat of nothing that dies alone, etc. For thou art an holy
people unto the Lord thy God. Again, Iam. 2.7.
Do not they (even those blasphemers) says James) blaspheme the worthy name
after which ye be named? Hereby it is plain that we are sometimes named or
called, not according to that which we be, but in some other respect, or as you
say, for some other causes: else all of us should always be such as our names
pretend, then which nothing is more false. The blasphemers here spoken of were
named or called Christ^ans, yet sure you will not say they were Christians
indeed. They who at this day are baptized into Christ Jesus, and prof^sse
faith in him, have the worthy and glorious name of Christians from Christ,
after whom they be so called: yet all such be not true Christians: even so all
of the visible Church are called Saints, and such by nomination, and yet be not
all Saints indeed, not all of a sound judgment, pure affection, and
unblameable conversation, as you t^ll us.

Lastly, the Apostle might well call all in the visible Church Saints, having
respect and relation to those in it that were Sain^s indeed, sanctified by
the Spirit of God and faith in Christ Jesus: the visible Church having this
denomination of the better part: by a Synecdoche all being called Saints,
because part of them are so indeed. With this exposition makes, that those he
names Saints are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, Paul an Apostle to
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling. And why might not
Paul in this titl^ (Saints) respect only the true Saints and Elect of God, as
well as in some other speeches of his in his Epistles? 1. Cor. 12.27. and
6.11.19.20.
and namely in these: Ye are the body of Christ: your bodies are the members of
Christ, your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you. Ye are
bought for a price: Romans 8 15. Gal. 4.6.
Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of our Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption.
Ye are the sons of God, with infinite more such like. We see a man is said
to be a reasonable living creature of the better part, the soul, wherein alone
is both the reason and life, the body (which is another part) wanting both.
Thus we use to say: Go winnow the wheat in the barn: not naming the chafe,
though there be more chafe then wheat in the heap, and that the wheat
cannot be well seen for the chafe. Even so the visible Church may be called
Saints, in respect of the better part, though the lesser and fewer in number be
many: the scripture therein ascribing to all, that which is due properly and
belongs only to some: which is usual in the holy scriptures as appears
by the aforesaid testimonies, and by 1. Cor. 3.1.2. 3. Mat. 18.17.18. and by
comparing. 1. Cor. 6.11. with 2. Cor. 2.21. and with 1. Cor. 5.1. Often you
tell us the Apostles speech. 1. Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a
royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, etc. is to be understood of the visible
Church. Well, if this be so, I am sure the vis. Church ^s cal^ed, a chosen
generation, in respect of the better and more principa^l part thereof, those
which God has chosen to everlasting life, opposed to the generation of
Reprobates. verse 8. Why then may not likewise in this respect visible Churches
be called the Churches of the Saints. Hereunto M. Robinson answers thus. The
Scriptures never ascribe holiness to a people for some fewes sake, if the rest
be unholy and profane. This is soo^er said, then proved. And why I pray you
may not the scriptures call those of the visible Church holy, for some fewes
sake in it which be indeed holy, as well as give this witness of the twelve
Spies which were sent to search out the land of Canaan, That they brought word
again, and said it is a good land, Deuteronomy. 1.25.
which the Lord our God does give us, where but a few of them, two of the
twelve thus reported, the other ten saying, Number. 13.31.32
we be not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger then we, a
land that eats up the inhabitants thereof. And so brought up an evil report
of the land which they had searched. But I will disprove you by your own
words. Not three leaves after, Iustif. 115.
you write thus: Here (speaking of the vis. Church) is no such mingle mangle
as M. Barnard would make of good and bad, but all good and so auowes by the
holy Ghost, though without doubt many of these were masked and hallow hearted
hypocrites.

If all in the visible church be good men and so auowed by the holy Ghost,
though many Hypocrites be in it, and consequently many bad men, then all in
the vis. Church be Saints, and are or may be so auowed by the holy Ghost,
though there be in it many unholy and profane.

But the first is true by your own confession:

Therefore the second.

Notwithstanding all this that has been said, I do not mean that notorious
wicked men are to be suffered in the church, and not to be cast out, except
they repent. God fordid; But this is it I say and mean, that albeit there be
not (through the default of the church governors) a due execution of the
church censures upon the openwicked, but that through their negligences or
remissenes there remain in the church many open wicked uncorrected, that this
impunity makes not a nullitie in a church, as they of the separation do
teach. Secondly I do mean, and out of the premises do learn: That albeit
the church of God is to labor to preserve it self pure from these spots, yet
it seldom or never attaineth to that beauty and perfection: but that some,
more or less, be in the true visible church, who ought rat^er to be spued
out, then to have any place there. Which comes to pass either because these
wicked persons cannot be convicted by manifest evidence, or for want of that
severity in discipline which ought to be in the Church.

Christ Jesus knowing this, that through the corruption of man, and wickedness
of this world, there will be in the church a mixture of good and bad, holy and
profane: he has thereupon not only foretold this, and taught it, by
compa^ing the visible church to a field, wherein grows wheat^ and ta^es; and
to a draw-net that gathers things both good and b^d: but therewithal seems
to comfort the faithful against this mix^ure and miserable co^pou^d; assuring
the e^ect that howsoever they shall be thus mingled with the wicked, Matthew.
13.30.
and enemies of God for a time, even as the wheat and tares be that grow
together, yet it shall not be alwai^s so with then: but that there will come a
time of separation, when that as the tares are gathered into she^u^s, to be
burned, and the wheat into the barn: so the wicked shall be cast unto a
su^^ace of fire, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; and the just
shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father.

Apology, 45. and 61.
Hereby also another error of yours is convinced: That all the Church is defiled
by retaining open wicked in it. For if in the Church from time to ti^e, the e
have been many open wicked, as has been plainly showed: how can this
position of yours possibly be true? But you will prove it by Scripture, 1.
Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump. If a known wicked man in
the Church, be to the whole Church, as a little leaven in the dough is to the
whole lump: how comes it to pass that the Church of Corinth by the
incestuous person was not unsanctified, all that time tidings were carrying of
that notorious sinner, from Corinthus in Achata, to Paul at Philippi in
Macedonia: and the Apostles Ep stle carrying back from Philippi to Corinthus?
But tha^ notwithstanding all this sowring and defyling these men speak of, the
Apostle writes to them thus, To the Church of God which is at Corinthus, to
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling That the sin of
the incestuous p rson was known to the Church, it is hereby manifest, in that
the Apostle does so sh rpely rebuke them, for that they had not excommunicated
him, which otherwise he could not justly have done. That all this time
notwithstanding his sin was known, the Saints at Corinth held communion with
him, and he with them* and were all of the same body and society, it is
likewise manifest by these words of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 5.2.13.
Put away therefore from among your selves that wicked man. Hoar is an open
wicked man in the church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 5.2.13.
and not only he, but sundry more, as appears by, 2. Cor. 12.20.21. and by
diverse other places: and yet notwithstanding a true church. Concerning this
place of Scripture, A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, and some other
Scriptures perverted by you I forbear to speak here, because I have occasion
to say something of them hereafter.

If (...) shall think that I need not to have spent so many words, to prove
the mixture of good and bad in the Church, and that in the same there have
been and remained many open wicked: Albeit the Brownists deny such confusion
and mixture, yet thye make no great matter of it; neither do they from thence
conclude that our church is a false church, nor justify their separation,
setting down this for a cause and reason thereof: If any (I say) think thus,
they shall see by their own words here following, as partly also we have heard
before, that they do greatly mistake the matter and them; and that besides the
conuincing of this their error, there was just cause of the pursuing hereof, to
the full according as I was able. Defense of the Churches and Ministers of
England, 7. Counterp. 3.
Your people (says M. Fr. Johnson) are not separated from the world, but stand
in confusion with it; and therefore cannot be deemed a true church of God, and
the people of Christ: But leaving this man let us hear what M. Ainsworth says
thereunto in a book lately published, called the Counterpoyson.

We forsake (says he) your church for this maine corruption, that all sorts of
profane and wicked men have been and are, both they and their seed, received
into and nourished within the bosom of your church: contrary to the first
covenant of our redemption, wherein God with his own mouth pro^laimed a
perpetual enmity and war against the serpent and his seed, which the woman
and her seed should wage, though with the bruysing of the heel thereof. Genesis
3. Contrary also to the example of all Gods churches since the world began, who
always were separated from the ungodly, as the Scriptures show. Now that this
is a corruption among you your selves have taught, saying and complaining that
in the church are swarms of Atheists, Idolaters, Papists, sectaries, witches,
charmers, sorcerers, murderers, theeu^s, adulterers, liars, etc. This
testimony being true, I hope your selves now will be ashamed, to plead that
such a people are Christians, and to be communicated with, or deny that we may
separate from them in things concerning God. And a little after saying there
are, 4. causes of their separation, he tells us that the first of them
concerning the people, meaning because of the mixture of bad with good which is
among us.

Seeing the falsehood and vanit^e of these and the rest of the lines here
following do manifestly appear by the premises: I will not be so unwise as at
large convince you the second time: only, by the way as it were I will say a
word or two, as I shall see cause. That wicked men, that is, open wicked men
(for that is your meaning,) are not to be suffered to remain in the church, we
acknowledge; especially if they be very vile and abominable, dogs and swine:
and that where such a thing is endured, it is a corruption and the sin of
that Church.

We likewise confess, that in our church are many open wicked. So that in
proouing that which we freely confess to be true, (where about M. Ainsworth
has spent a great part of his Counterpoyson,) you deal very childishly But if
passing by this you hereafter prove that we deny, you shall quit your se^ues
like men: Genesis 3.15.
In the mean season we have two proofs or arguments from you, such as they
are. It is (say you) contrary to the first covenant of our redemption, I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and her seed;
he shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The next t^me you
write conclude from this Scripture, that the being of open wicked in the
Church, does nullify a Church, and give just cause to the godly of
separation. If this you cannot, (whereof I am very sure) you abuse both this
Scr^pture and the reader. You imply here and teach expressly else where, That
the covenant of redemption and salvation God made with the visible church: That
this is false, I have made plain hereafter, and will not therefore speak of it
here. Note their perverting of Scripture.
Where learn you by the woman and her seed, to understand Christ and the
visible Church? you have not been taught this of God. Besides you contradict
your self. For in your confession of Faith you understand this Scripture of
the invisible Church. Art. 5.
Where for proof of this that the Elect all and only are redeemed, you
allege, Genesis 3.15 I will put enmity, etc. You intimate also that the
perpetual enmity that is in the world for Religion, is between them only
that are in the Church, and them that are without: and that there is no
enmity, but all amity and friendship among those that are in the visible
Church. They all bear vnfai^ed love one to another, as in your description of
the visible Church you teach. You might be of the Fami^y of love; Familists,
and not Brownists, by this doctrine of yours. The holy Scriptures show us the
direct contrary. That even in the Church and between the members thereof,
there has been perpetual enmity and deadly hatred: whence it has always
been that that some of the Church have slandered, raised upon, and said all
manner of evil against the godly, and often times spoiled them, not only in
their good name, but also in their goods, banished imprisoned, and put them to
death. Caine belike had no enmity to Habel, nor Esau to Jacob nor Saul to
David nor the Scribes and Pharisees to the faithful then living. Your second
reason is, That since the world began, there was never in the Churches of
God, a mixture of wicked and profane with the godly, but the godly were
always separated from the vngod^y: And therefore ought to be so at this day.
Prove the Antecedent, and we will grant you the conclusion: Have I not showed
that this mixture was in the families of Abraham and Isaac, wherein the Church
was shut up for a time? Also in the Church in Moses time, in David's time, and
the ages succeeding him; and lastly in the days of Christ? Nay I have made it
plain that in David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Micah their times, there were not only
wicked men, and open wicked, but so many wicked and ungodly in the Church, that
there were scarce any godly to be found: Psalm. 12.1.
according to that complaint of David unto God Help Lord, for there is not a
godly man left. In like manner did the church swarm with wicked, yea open
wicked when our lord Jesus was on earth, as hereafter shall be made evident.
Counterp. 23.
How far are you then from the truth who teach, That there never have been
profane and wicked men in the Church, and that this is contrary to the example
of all Gods Churches since the world began, Observe their abuse of holy
Scripture.
who always were separated from the godly, as you say: and again in these
words: They cannot show any true church, since the beginning of the world, but
was of a separated people. Genesis 6.1.2. and 12. Leuit. 20.23.24. Ezr. 6.21. Act.
2.40.41. and 19.9. etc. If for confirmation of this gross and palpable error,
you should cote as many places of Scripture, as there be hears of your head,
it would do you no good: but only show that you fear not to pervert holy
Scripture, and to take the name of God in vain, no more then a fish to drink
water.

And here mark I beseech thee, Christian Reader, wherein we and these
Seperatists differ as touching separation. We acknowledge a separation of the
people of God and professors of true religion, from all those which make no
such profession, and so are without the Church. Thus the Jews until the death
of Christ, were separated from the Gentiles. Thus in the Apostles time, and
after, the Saints (that is, the professors of Christian Religion) in Rome,
Corinthus, Ephesus, Galatia, etc. were sep^rated from their neighbors, being
heathens and infidels. And thus are we separated from all Pagans, Turks, and
Infidels. Of this separation the Lord speaks Leu. 20. I am the Lord your God
which have separated you from other people, Ver. 26.24.
that ye should be mine. This separation agrees with the Scriptures, and has
good warrant from the same: and thus far you and we agree. But you rest not
here, but require besides a seperaration in the Church, and among the aforesaid
professors, urging and enforcing this, that the godly in this society must
separate from the wicked, and have no religious communion or fellowship with
them. Ephesians. 5.11. 1. Cor. 5.9.1^.11.
Herein we differ. Yet we confess that the godly must be separated from the
evil manners, customs, and fashions of the wicked; that they may not have any
fellowship with them in the vnfruitfu^l works of darkness, neither may they
have them to be their familiars: in these and such like respects, the righteous
must separate from the wicked in the Church, and have nothing to do with them.
But that they may not communicate together in divine worship, but must separate
in things concerning God, this separation is manifestly repugnant to the
Scriptures, as appears by the premises, and shall further appear hereafter.
In the mean season this I affirm, that if this doctrine of yours were true,
then for as much as in all ages there were abundance of notorious wicked men
in the Church of the Jews: the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles should have
had no communion with them, at least in their Synagogues: the contrary
whereunto you both know and acknowledge. Then also there ought to have been a
separation made at Corinthus, and in the Churches of Galatia, not only from the
Infidels and gross Idolaters amongst whom they lived, but also betwixt the
Saints and professors of Christian Religion: seeing among them there were
diverse known wicked men, as is in the next Chapter made manifest. But we read
of no such separation made or yet urged by the Apostle, either among the
Corinthians, or Galatians, or any other of the Churches to whom he writ:
Therefore there has not been in former times, nor ought to be such a
separation in the Church as you speak of, to wit, betwixt the godly and the
ungodly.

If any object here 2. Cor. 6.14. etc. I answer, that the Apostle persuades
the Christians at Corinth to separate from, and to have no communion with the
idolaters their neighbors in their false and idolatrous worship or idol
feasts, and not to a separation among themselves: The separation pressed by
Paul-was between them in the Church, and those which be without, which we
deny not: and not a separation in the Church betwixt the godly and the wicked
there, which is that you urge, and we gain say.

But I return to M. Ainsworth. Counterp. 133.
A third argument for confirmation of the point now in hand, he has in
another place, which may fitly be inferred here. Separation (says he) from the
ungodly unto this day is resisted, and pleaded against, and the holy scriptures
vnsufferably abused to maintain a confuse mixed multitude, of all sorts of
people to be a true Church. But Christ is no Mediator for such a mixture, as
himself said to his Father: I pray not for the world, etc. Ioh. 17.16. Your
reason is this. Christ is the Mediator of every true vis. Church: But Christ is
not the Mediator of any confused and mixed company, consisting of all sorts of
people: Therefor no confused and mixed company is a true visible Church. We
deny your Proposition, and say, That Christ is the Mediator of the invisible,
and not of the visible Church: but in respect of them in it that are of the
invisible. You tell us here secretly, and after in express words, That Christ
is the Mediator and Advocate of the visible Church, and for proof thereof
allege Ioh. 17.9.16. and afterward 1. Tim 2.^5.1. Ioh. 2.1. Act. 4.12.
Counterp. 131. Note their perverting of Scripture.
If this Proposition of yours be false, as in the last Chapter of this book is
made manifest, then are these Scriptures abused by you. The 9. and 16. verses
of the 17. of John are spoken and meant of the eleven Apostles. The same you
apply to the vis. Church: herein you abuse the Scripture, though always I
confess this holds not. In the former of these verses of the eleven
Disciples. Jesus says thus: I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for
them which thou have given me: for they are thine. Behold your proof, and how
you do use the Scripture, who tell us so often of our abuse thereof. Christ
prays for, or is the Mediator and advocate of the Apostles Ergo, he prays
for, and is the Mediator and Advocate of the vis. Church. By (world) here all
men of judgment understand the Reprobate, for thereby must needs be meant
those for whom Christ prays not, and such are the reprobate generation: you
say thereby is meant a confuse mixed multitude, wherein your selves acknowledge
be many of Gods chosen. I hope this also is an abuse of holy Scripture. The
words of the 16. ver. are: They are not of the world, as I am not of the world.
Where our Savior affirms, that to be in part true of his Disciples, which
was wholly, and altogether, and perfectly true of himself: that though they
were in the world, yet they were not of it, that is, worldly minded, affecting
and chiefly desiring and seeking after the things of this world. This
testimony of Jesus you produce to prove, That a true visible Church is not a
mixed company consisting of all sorts of people good and bad: or, That Christ is
no Mediator for such a mixture. For proof of whether so ever of these you
mean it, who sees not, that this Scripture is likewise abused by you. 1.
Whether you or we then do vnsufferably abuse the Scriptures, and namely
touching the mixture of bad with good in the Church, let the godly Reader now
he has heard us judge. Oftentimes you tell us of this abuse. The word, say
you, Counterp. 171.
page 171. is vnsufferably abused to the maintenance of the confusion that is
among you. This does as ill beseem you, as a common Strumpet to call an honest
and sober matron, Whore. But let us hear what M. Ainsworth says further
against this confusion or commixture of all sorts in the Church.

Your church (says he) has the essential note of a false church, Counterp.
14.
namely a confuse profane worldly people. Thus can I prove that the Church in
David's time, in Isaiah his time, and other of the Prophets, and the Church of
the Jews in the days of Christ were false Churches: for they had this
essential note of a false church.

The reformed Churches (say you) consist of a separated and voluntary people,
whereas yours are confused and compelled. Counterp. 16.
Fie M. Ainsworth. Are there no wicked men in the reformed Churches? He has
not reformed and taught his tongue to speak the truth that will say so. The
harmony of Confessions, Harmony 312. Beza in Mat. cap. 13. ver. 24. Amandus
Pola. Partit. Theolog. 311. Pisc. in Mat. cap. 3. ver. 12.
Beza, Polanus, Piscator with other learned Writers of the said Churches, in
the thesi affirm the contrary, which sufficiently disproueth this. There was
never I mean national churches.
Church in the world so thoroughly purged and reformed as you speak, nor shall
be to the end of the world. It is no marvel then though the Church of England,
be a confused people. Nay the truth is, It is not possible it should be free
from this confusion: For the Scripture must be fulfilled: which for this cause
compares the visible Church to a draw-net, and to a field, wherein be mixed
and grow together wheat and tares.

M. Crashawe asking of the Brownists, what fundamental heresy our doctrine
does maintain. You answer thus: Counterp. 245
The unlawful commixture of the children of God, and children of the Devil,
in one Church and communion; is a fundamental heresy being stiffely
maintained. All the Scriptures condemn it; all well reformed Churches avoid
it; nature it self teaches to abhor it: yet in such profane communion your
Church abides; and you will not endure to hear of a separation. To this
effect also you speak in another place; That this is a sinful commixture,
Counterp. 123.
and an high transgression, and that it is the overthrow of the maine ground of
the Gospel; which ever since it began to be sounded in the world, has
proclaimed a separation of the children of God, from the children of Belial.
What thunderbolts are these? Unlawful, sinful, an high transgression,
overthrowing the foundation of the Church, and Gospel. If you had consid^red
that the greatest part of the visible Church are Reprobates, as Christ teaches
us in the Parable of the Sower; and of the King marrying his son; Mat. 13.3.
and 22.1.14. Communion of Saints 1.2.
and in that short speech of his, Many are called but few chosen: and that all
Reprobates are the Devils children: you would never sure neither here, nor else
where have taught, as in effect you do, That in the visible Church there are
no children of the Devil, and that we may have no communion with them, but
must separate from them. If there be not a mixture of the children of God, and
the Devils children in the visible church, then the visible Church is a company
of Gods children only, having none of the children of Belial in it: Tell me
then (I pray you) whose children Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, and Absalom were:
and generally the people that lived in Isaiah his time, Isaiah 1.10.
to whom the Prophet speaking, says, O Princes of Sodom, O people of
Gomorrah: and generally the Scribes and Pharisees that lived in the days of
Christ. By your doctrine they were the children of God: For all of the visible
Church (say you) are Gods children; there is no mixture in this society of the
Devils children with Gods: But Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, and the rest above
mentioned were of the visible Church: Therefore the children of God. What your
evasion will be here, I declare hereafter, and show that it will not help
you. That we may have religious communion with the children of the Devil, is
likewise there proved, and your objections answered. In the mean season I must
tell you, That the open wicked in our Church may be accounted, and in the
judgment of charity deemed the children of God, as well as the aforesaid
members of the visible Church. That there is a commixture of Gods and the
Devils children in the visible Church we do stiffely maintain. This (say
you) is a fundamental heresy. If there be no other and worse fundamental
heresy maintained in our Church then this, as it should seem (to your
knowledge) there is not: then assure your selves that the foundation of our
Church stands steadfast and immovable, not only against you, who are but
flesh and blood, but even the D^uell himself. The commixture of the children
of God and Belial in the Church, and Church assemblies, neither ever was, nor
can possibly be avoided: and therefore you tell us that which is impossible to
be true, that all well reformed Churches avoid it. If the mixture of Gods
children and the Devils in the same Church assembly be a profane communion: I
fear there was never ye^ holy communion in the world. Counterp. 223.


These Ministers (say you) having missed at first of the question; the further
now they go, the further they stray; and run themselves out of breath in vain.
For neither the examples of Melchisedec, Job, Cornelius, etc. nor their reasons
following, of two other means of gathering the church the^ by the preaching of
the Gospel: Thirdly of the preaching of M. Wickliff etc. 4. and 5. of course
that Q. Elizabeth took for bringing the Gospel in again, etc. none of these
(you say) will prove, either that open profane wicked persons, may be received
and kept in the bosom of the Church; or that there be not multitudes of open
profane and wicked, members of the Church of England. There present lamentable
estate proclaims this latter to all men that have conscience; their own
writings also heretofore do strongly confirm it: and all the Scriptures cry
out against the former; and teach a separation; as before in this Treatise, and
in sundry other books is manifested. Thus these Ministers have passed by the
maine controversy. These are your own words without adding or detracting
from them.

We must understand certain Ministers among us having written something
against them of the Separation, in the defense and maintenance of our Church,
worship, and Ministry, for their own private use, and benefit of some few
others, that M. Bernard has published part of that Treatise, (part only I say,
as appears by the 164. page of his book called The Separatists schism) and
that thereunto M. Ainsworth has returned an answer. In this answer generally
he tells us, They have unity like a company of fools, Counterp: 225 Pro. 2.6.9.
applying to them that proverb of Solomon. A thorn gets up in a drunkards
hand, and a Parable in the mouth of fools. And particularly he confirms it
h^re. For they have missed the question, as he says; and passed by the maine
controversy. Now who knows not that there is great folly in this, and that
wise men do seldom or never so far forget themselves. That we may the
better judge between these opponents; betwixt this wise man on the one side,
and these fools (as he pleases to call them) on the other; and whether he or
they mistake the question and point in controversy, wherein there is indeed
great folly and want of wisdom, let us hear what it is which these
Ministers have written, whereupon this imputation is grounded.

The Separatists schism 181.182.183. etc.
The first thing (say they) which they of the Separation object against the
whole body of our Church, and of our parish assemblies is this: That it was not
gathered by such means as God in his word has ordained and sanctified for the
gathering of his church. And that thus you object, they prove by two
testimonies of your own, and then immediately return thereunto the several
answers here following. First (say they) we may esteem them a true Church,
(and so our own) of whose present profession and faith we are well assured;
though we cannot see, by what means they were first gathered. Else may we
still doubt whether Melchisedech, and the families of Job and Cornelius were
true Churches or members of the Church: because we cannot find how they were
first gathered and converted. Secondly, we might be rightly gathered to the
society and fellowship of the vis. Church, by other means then by the
preaching of the Gospel. Thirdly, our Church was gathered by the preaching of
the Word, which is the means God has appointed for the gathering of a Church,
as your selves do teach. And here they bring in the preaching of M. Wickl^ffe.
Fourthly. This (say they) being proved, that there was a true Church in this
land before her Majesty's reign; the question must not be whether the means
she used were the right means, for the first calling and converting of a
people to the faith; but whether she took not a lawful course for the
recalling and reuniting of her subjects unto those true professors, whose
fellowship they had forsaken. Fifthly, and lastly, though the solemn covenant
to renounce idolatry, and to cleave to the truth, be not absolutely
necessary: yet was that also required and performed in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. Tell me now M. Ainsworth: do you not hold and maintain
that our Church was not rightly gathered, to wit, by the preaching of the
word, and thereupon do condemn us for a fals^ Church? Yes have not these
Ministers thereunto returned a most direct answer? The indifferent Reader
cannot but by the aforesaid heads and sum of their answer see and
acknowledge it. With sin and shame enough then do you affirm, That these
Ministers have in their five several answers (as your self points them out)
missed the question, and passed by the maine controversy. No less
unconscionably and unhonestly deal you, in bearing your simple Reader in hand,
that these said Ministers endeavor to prove by the examples of Melchisedech,
Job etc. and the rest summed up before, both these points following, or at
least one of them: either that open profane and wicked persons may be received
and kept in the bosom of the Church; or that there be not multitudes of open
profane and wicked, members of the Church of England: whereas they intend no
such thing, neither have they a word tending this way: nay abhor with their
brethren to affirm either. Y^u do therefore slander us, when and as often as
you charge us to say, That the open profane may lawfully be received and kept
in the Church, and to deny that there be any such in ours. And in disprouing
both these, the one by the t^stimonies of our own men, the other by the sacred
Scriptures: what do you else but pull down that building, which your selves
with your own hands, not we, have erected and built up. Thus doing you have
bestowed a great deal of labor to as small purpose as he that casts stones
into the air: pursuing your own shadow, instead of our bodies. All that we
maintain here and by the grace of God will against men and Angels is: That the
being of open wicked men in it does not destroy a church, Against this you
should have argued, or held your peace, but we hear not a word to any such
pu^p^s^. I^stead thereof you prove the aforesaid positions which we in comm^n
hold with you. Whether you now, or the Ministers, have missed the question, and
passed by the maine controversy, (as in other cases, so here) a blind man may
see. It had be^n well you had first plucked out the beam that is in your own
eye, then should you have seen more clearly to pull out the mote out of your
brothers eye, if any be there.

More against this commixture of good and bad in our Church, who list and has
the Counterpoyson may read page 9. and 27. 28. and 60. and 70. 76. 101. 212.
213. And here by way M. Ainsworth, I must needs tell you, this book of yours
is falsely called Counterpoyson: for it is not a preservative against the
poison of false doctrine, as the title pretends, but indeed full of such
poison: the receiving and believing whereof is as dangerous to the soul of
man, as poison received is to the body.

Now that we have heard M. Johnson, and M. Ainsworth, we will likewise hear
what M. Robinson says, concerning this separating from the world, and the
causes of their separation. Separation (quoth he) from the world, and so from
the men of the world, Answer to a Censorious Epistle page 4.
and so from the Prince of the world that reigns in them, and so from
whatsoever is contrary to God, is the first step to our communion with God, and
Angels, and goodmen, as the first step to a ladder, is to leave the earth.

Before we have been taught (if we be so foolish as to learn of them,) that a
visible Church is a company of people called and separated from the world, this
man now instructs us in the meaning of this last clause: That by separated
from the world, they mean from the men of the world, that is, earthly minded
men, whose hearts and affections are set of this world, and the things thereof.
So that a true visible church is not a mixed company, whereof some does
chiefly desire earth, and earthly things: others heaven; some this world, and
others the world to come: but all of this society are rapt and ravished with a
desire and longing after the world to come, and the joys there: despising this
world, with the glory and pomp thereof: who though they be in this world, yet
are not of it. Thus you shut out of the visible Church all hypocrites and all
wicked men as well those which be separately as openly wicked for as much as
all hypocrites and men of this world: to whom you deny a being in the Church:
because a visible Church is a company separated from such. And whereas in the
visible Church there be some children of the devil, if not in appearance yet
in deed and truth, and are not all the children of God adopted in Jesus
Christ, you tell us that in the visible Church there are none of the devils
children: for the devil reigns in all his children: But you say in the
visible Church there be none in whom the Prince of this world the devil
reigns, for it is a company separated from all such: Therefore in the visible
Church, there are no children of the devil: and so by consequent are all the
children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. But these things you know and
acknowledge to be false: that therefore from whence they are inferred, which
all of you stiffely hold and maintain, to wit, that the visible Church is a
company of people separated from the world, is likewise false.

This generaall doctrine of theirs, he thus applies to us. Answer to a
censorious Epistle. page 5.
Which separation the church of England neither has made, nor does make, but
stands actually one with all that part of the world within the kingdom,
without separation: for which cause amongst others, we have chosen by the grace
of God, rather to separate our selves to the Lord from it, then with it from
him, in the visible constitution of it.

neither have made nor go about to make a separation from the men of this
world, and betwixt them whom Christ by his spirit rules, and them in whom the
Prince of this world reigns: This passes our skill and power, and is such as
is impossible to be performed by us. Our Lord Jesus only can and will do this
by the Angels in the day of his glorious coming to judgment. And where you
say, that we stand actually one with all that part of the world within the
kingdom, it is false and slanderous: For we only stand actually one with all
those in the kingdom that profess the same religion with us: which the Pap:
among us, (who be not a few) with whatsoever other heretics, or schismatiks,
do not, except it be in hypocrisy, which we cannot hinder, but must lean to
God: and therefore I say we stand not actually one with all in the kingdom:
except there be in our land no Papists, no Heretics or Schismatics. If you
object here our Church Papists, and say that we receive Papists into our
Church, and communion with us. It is answered already: and I add, They
profess to be of the same Christian Religion with us, and to forsake popery,
in coming to our public assembles, and pertaking with us there in the holy
things of God. If they do this hypocritically, what is that to us? But
especially mark that this is one cause of their separation, yea a principal
cause thereof, as he says in another place. In these two respects principally,
Answer to a censorious Epistle. page ^
your Babilonish confusion of all sorts of people in the body of your Church,
without separation, and your Babilonish bondage under your lords the prelates
we account you Babylon, and flee from you. And speaking of this want of
separation, Ibid. 43.
and confusion else where, he has these words: It is not by our sequestration,
but by your confusion, that Rome and hell gains. Your odious commixture of all
sorts of people in the body of your Church, in whose lap the vilest miscreants
are dandled, sucking her breasts as her natural children: is that aduantageth
hell. We see how this man condemns the mixture of good and bad, godly and
ungodly in the Church: calling it an odious commixture confusion, and
Babilonish confusion: that principally for this, and one other cause they
account us Babylon, and fly from us. And yet has this commixture of all sorts
of people, been ever in the Church, as has been manifested out of the sacred
Scripture. What age then could these men have lived in, wherein they might not
for this cause as justly have separated from the Church, and have accounted it
likewise Babylon? It cannot be denied but that in Saul's reign there were most
vile men dandled (as you term it) in the lap of the Church, considering he
himself the head of that people was so vile: Nay, by the book of the Psalms
it is evident, that in David's time there were store of lewd and vile men in
the Church. Psalm. 12. and 69.
And so were there in the days of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and other of the Prophets.
Yea what say you M. Robinson to the age wherein Christ Jesus lived and his
Apostles? The Scribes and Pharisees then were most vile miscreants, and they
being princip^l members in the Church, as the eyes re in the body it must be
confessed that they did sit in the lap of the Church and sucked her breasts
as if they had been her natural children. No less vile were those that had
crept into the church of whom Jude speaks. Yet notwithstanding this
commixture and Babilonish confusion as you call it, did neither the Prophets,
nor Jesus, nor his Apostles separate from the Church, but had religious
communion with this confused society consisting of all sorts of people. The
commixture then in our Church you speak of, is no just cause of separation,
and why you should account us Babylon. But r^turn^ we to M. Robison.

Ibid. 4.
The separation we have made in respect of our knowledge, and obedience, is
indeed late and new, yet is it in the nature and causes thereof as ancient
as the Gospel, which was first founded in the enmity which God himself put
betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent, G^n. 3.15. Which
enmity has not only ben successively continued, but also visibly manifested
by the actual separation of all true churches, from the world in their
collection and constitution, before the Law, under the Law, and under the
Gospel, Genesis 4.13.14.16. and 6.1, 2. and 7.1.7. with 1. Pet. 3, 20.21. and 12.
Leu 20.24.26. Neh. 9.2. Ioh. 17.14.16. Act. 2.40 and 19.9. 1. Cor. 6.17.
A^swere.


If we speak of practice among us, your separation is as ancient as Brown,
who first caused, or at least greatly furthered that separation and schism
from our Church: where upon you are called Brownists. But if you speak of the
doctrine, August. Tom. 7 contra. Cresco; Gram. lib. 2. cap. 34.
then is it as ancient as Donatus, after whom some were called Donatists, or
rather as some schismatics in Cyprians time, of whom Austen writing against
the Donatists makes mention. That the visible Church is not a mixed company,
consisting of good and bad but is a company separated from the world, that is,
from the men of the world, or a separated company of righteous men, which all
of you do hold: this I say is neither founded of the Law nor Gospel, nor any
part of Gods word, but in the bottomless pit by the devil the father of lies, I
mean, of all lying and false doctrines: and was long since publ shed, August
Tom. 7 Coll^ti^n^bus cum Donatists.
and contended for by the former heretics, specially the Donatists: who for
this cause separated from the Church of God in their times: and is now after
many hundred yees renewed by you. He that gives ear here to you, and to M.
Ainsworth before (brethren in error) where he says, Counterp.
That the mixture of all sorts, that is, good and bad in the visible Church, is
contrary to the first covenant of our redemption, wherein God proclaimed a
perpetual enmity and war against the serpent and his seed, cannot but
thereupon conjecture or col ect these two things. First, that this enmity you
speak of, is not in the visibl^ church, and to be found among the members
thereof; but betw^xt the Church and the world: and all in the visible Church
are at peace among themselves, and have mutual love ^ach to other: according
to your desc^ipt^on of the visible Church: That it is a company knit together
by the bond of peace, and love unfeigned. 2. That there are none of the serpents
seed within the visible Church, that is, none of the devils children; or no
wicked, neither secretly nor openly wicked: for the secret wicked be as well
his seed, as the open wicked: these conclusions necessarily follow of these
your premised lines, the scope and drift of them considered: which if you will
prove unto us, we will embrace the separation you contend for. In the mean
season know ye that we from our souls abhor both your doctrine and
practice, and condemn them to the pit of hell, where this and all false
doctrine was first founded. But tell me M. Robinson, whether that enmity
between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent, is not to be
seen, or as you speak visibly manifested in our Church, notwithstanding we
have not this actual separation you speak of. I hope you will acknowledge it
is so manifest, that a man cannot choose but see it, if he fear God feel it
also. Why then do you say, that this enmity is visiblie manifested by this
actual separation: Seeing it is to be found where this separation is wanting.
But let us hear M. Robinson speak once more.

Page 33:
How we would have behaved our selves in the Temple, where the many changers
were, and they that sold doves, we shall answer you, when you prove your
Church to be the Temple of God, compiled and built of spiritual hewn and
lively stones. 1. K. 5.17.18. and 6.7. 1. Pet. 2.5. And of the Cedars firres,
and thine trees of Lebanon, 2. Chron. 2.8. framed and set together in that
comely order which a greater then Solomon has prescribed: unto which God has
promised his presence. But while we take it to be (as it is) a confused heap
of dead, and defiled, and polluted stones, and of all rubbish, of briers and
brambles of the wilderness, for the most part, fitter for burning then
building, we take our selves rather bound to show our obedience in the
departing from it, then our valor in purging it, and to follow the Prophets
counsel in flying out of Babylon, as the he Goat before the flock, Ier.
50.8.

Here is another conviction of our Church, and confirmation of their Doctrine,
to wit, that a visible Church, is a company separated from the world, that is,
a company consisting of righteous men only, having in it none that be of this
world. This conviction is grounded upon the confusion or commixture of good and
bad in our Church. We are a confused heap of dead, and defiled, and polluted
stones, and of all rubbish, and few living stones: whereas the true visible
Church is built only of lively stones, spiritually hewn and squared.
Whereupon Barrow says, That the visible Church enjoys a most humble, meek,
obedient, faithful, and loving people, every stone living, Elect, and
precious, every stone has his beauty his burden, and his order.

This latter which we deny, to wit, A true d^scription of the visi^ Church.
page 2.
That the visible Church is built only of lively stones, you seem to your
selves to prove by 1 Pet. 2.5. and to that purpose you quote it very often. We
answer, that this place of Peter is true only, and to be understood of the
militant Church, or whole company of the faithful (members of the invisible
Church) who alone are endued with the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of
Life: whereby of dead, they are made living stones; that is, of men dead in
sin, able to live unto God. These only have the life of God in them, and so
only are these lively stones: Ephesians. 4.18.
of which life many of the visible Church are destitute, having no more power,
or ability to do those things which are pleasing to God, then a stone to
move it self. Such are all the reprobates, all the Hypocrites, and wicked in
the Church. Of the visible Church therefore this cannot be meant, seeing many
of it are dead stones. Observe also, that those who here be called lively
stones, are said to be made a spiritual house, as being that house or
habitation wherein God dwells by his Spirit: whereof that material Temple
built by Solomon, (wherein God did dwell, and was present after a special
sort,) was a type and figure. But the Elect only, or those of this society
who be effectually called, make this Spiritual house, for as much as in them
alone the Spirit of God and of Christ dwells: Therefore the Elect are meant
by these lively stones, and not the visible Church, in many of which the Spirit
of God does not dwell, But Satan by his Spirit. Moreover, those here called,
or compared to living stones, are said as an holy Priesthood to offer up
Spiritall Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: which many of the
visible Church neither do nor can do, their sacrifices being an abomination
to the Lord. By these lively stones therefore are not meant the visible Church
and the members thereof, as you every where do tell us.

But how prove you that the Temple built by Solomon, was a type and figure of
the visible Church under the Gospel, and those goodly carved and polished
stones, whereof it was builded, 1. Kin. 8.10.11.12.
of the members thereof? I for my part do think clean otherwise: that by
that glorious Temple, wherein God as in his house, and the place of his
habitation dwelled, and which the Lord sometimes filled with h^s glory, was
signified: First, Christ Jesus in carnate, and made man; in whom all the fulness
of the Godhead dwells bodily. Col. 2.9.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, 20. Then
said the Jews, forty and six years was this Temple a building, Ioh. 2.19.
and will thou rear it up in three days? But he spoke of the Temple of his
body. Secondly, that the invisible Church, and mystical Body of Christ, in
whom God also dwells by his Spirit: whereupon they are called the Temple of
God, the Tabernacle of God, the habitation of God by the Spirit, and in this
place of Peter a Spiritual house, and living stones. True it is M. Robinson
that in our Church, there are dead, defiled, and polluted stones, rubbish,
briars, and brambles of the wilderness, fitter for burning then building, nay
I grant you all that you vpbraide us with, and object against us, that we are
such for the most part: what then? Are we therefore a false Church? This is
that you do from hence infer and conclude. O foolish men, and unwise. Is
every one in the visible Church a lively stone, and all the matter thereof fit
for building, and none for burning? This you here imply, and Barrow plainly
affirms. Then in the visible Church there are no reprobates: for they I am
sure are fit for burning, and not for building. Prou. 16.4. Matthew. 13.40. and
25.41.
They are made (says Solomon) for the day of evil. And Jesus thus: The tares
are gathered, and burned in the fire. And again, depart from me ye cursed,
into everlasting fire. I hope the rubbish, the briars, and brambles in our
Church, are no more unfit for building, nor more fit for burning, then tares
be: which are so mixed among the wheat, that without danger to the wheat they
cannot be weeded out, nor separated from it until the harvest. But tell me I
pray you when the church was without this rubbish, briars and brambles you
speak of. It is clear by the Scriptures, not in the days of the Apostles,
nor of our Lord Jesus; not in Isaiah his time, nor Jeremiah his time, nor yet
any of the Prophets. Not in David's time, nor in Moses time, nor yet when the
Church of God was shut up in a Family: for in Isaac his family there was an
Esau, as well as a Jacob; and in Abraham's, an Ismael as well as an Isaac:
nay there was some of this rubbish to be found in the Church, when it
consisted but of eight persons, yea but of four. Nay, this will prove your
ancient Church at Amsterdam to be Babylon, at least if any credit be to be
given to the report of diverse who have been in, and of that Church; to the
printed books of M. White, and G. Johnson, and that of late set forth by
four: whereupon some have left and forsook that Church, and come back to
ours. It may be also M. Robinson that for this cause, you your self have left
both M. Iohnsons Church then and M. Ainsworths also. I will therefore say
nothing of their Congregations, but only ask you a question or two concerning
your own, Is your Church the Temple of God, compiled and built of spiritually
hewn and lively stones; and of the Cedars, Firrs, and thine trees of Lebanon?
Are there no dead defiled, and polluted stones therein, no rubbish, but all
lively stones, elect and precious? No briars, nor brambles, but all vines,
bringing forth pleasant Grapes? No wicked and ungodly men, but all Saints,
sanctified by the Spirit of God, who dwells in his Temple, gives life to
every stone thereof, and causes every branch of the Vine to bring forth fruit?
Surely then are not ye also a true visible Church: for it is a mixed company
consisting of good and bad; godly and ungodly, as has been proved at large:
But such a society is not yours, and therefore not a true visible Church. At
least this proves you not to be a true visible Church, as you imply it would
prove us one, if these things could be truly said of us. For as a visible
Church may be known and discerned by men, and thereupon it is said to be
visible: so it is known to be a Church, by such things as men can see, that
is, know and discern of. But that ye all are lively stones, none dead, none
defiled among you: and that in that vineyard of yours there grows no briars
nor brambles, but only the pleasant and sweet grapes, is more then men can
possibly know or discern: yea that any of you is a living stone: much less
that you all be such. They may hope well of you, giving credit to the
testimony you give of your selves, which is suspicious: but this is not
knowledge. This notwithstanding then, your congregation also may be no better
then a false Church, and a company of Schismatickes.

But you will say, if there were but some briars and brambles of the
wilderness in your Church, it were to be borne with, but ye are such for the
most part. Be it so: this notwithstanding we may be a true Church: for the
Jews in the times of David Isaiah, Jeremiah, Micah, and of Christ Jesus, were
for the most part no better then brambles, and briars, and yet then a true
Church. Micah. 7.1.5.
The good man (says Micah) is perished out of the earth, and there is none
righteous among men: they all lie in wait for blood: every man hunteth his
brother with a net. The best of them is a brier, and the most righteous of them
is sharper then a thorn hedge. And here I demand of you and the rest of your
faction, who condemn our Church for a false Church, because there be in it
many wicked, and few godly: whether the greatest part of the visible Church be
not Reprobates, Mat. 13.3.
and by consequent wicked, rubbish, briers and brambles, fit for nothing but
the fire. I know you will answer negatiuely, otherwise you are conui^ced. What
say you then to the parable of the seed, Mat. 22.14.
and to that speech of our Lord Jesus so often urged before by me, many are
called, but few chosen? Thus we see this allegory of yours is not worth a
bramble: or is as a bryer or bramble compared with sweet flowers: serving
rather to prick, annoy, and hurt, then to send forth a sweet savor.

For the above named cause you account us Babylon, depart from us, and say,
That you take your selves rather bound to show your obedience in departing from
our Church, then your valor in purging it. If we be Sion, then you slander a
whole Church, and Blaspheme in calling it Babylon: and your departing from it,
is so far from obedience, that it is rebe^lion, which is as the sin of
Witchcraft. But you are bound (you say) to depart from us. Who has obliged
you thereunto? Not God in and by his word, to whom only we stand bound, and
owe our selves and service: Romans 8.12.
but M. Johnson, and M. Ainsworth, or happily Brown or Barrow in and by their
writings. The holy Prophets, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles have given you
other example, whom you should have imitated. As they did not forsake the
Church because of the manifold corruptions therein, but continuing in the same
sought by all good means the purgation and reformation of it: so ought ye to
have done.

Lastly, you tell us, That as the he goats flee before the flocks, so do you
from our Church. If from our Church you had crept with the Snaile, you had made
two much have away. But hear and consider what I say unto you in the name of
the Lord. Repent you of your lies and errors, of your slandering, and
blaspheming of the Church of Christ, from which you have so hastily run away.
Least otherwise you one day stand among the Goats, and have that fearful
sentence pronounced of you, Depart from me ye cursed. I know (says Jesus) the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, Mat. 25.41. Reave. 2.5.
but are the Synagogue of Satan. As this is blaspemie, so assuredly to account
them Antichrists, Samaritans, Edomites, Moabites, Parall. 6.26.
Ammonites and Ishmailites, who are Jews: and those Babylon, Egypt, Sodom,
false Churches, Antichristian Churches, the Synagogues of of Satan, the holds
of all foul spirits, Defense of the Churches and Ministers of England 6.
and cages of every unclean and hurtful bird, which are the congregations of
Saints, and Churches of God, is likewise blasphemy.

Thus have I answered all that M. Robinson obiecteth in a little Pamphelet of
his entitled An answer to a Censorious Epistle: Let us hear now what he
says concerning the same point in a more large volume lately published, called
a Justification of Separation from the Church of England. And though you M.
Bernard say it never so often and all the Divines in the world with you, that the
visible Church is a mixed company, yet do the divine Scriptures speak
otherwise. And with the Scriptures I do affirm against you that the Church of
Christ is no such mingled m^slnie, Page 112.
or monstrous compound, but a body simple, uniform, and one, proportionable in
every member unto the head, informed by one spirit, and called in one hope. And
twelve lines after. We doubt not but the purest Church upon earth may consist
of good and bad in Gods eye, of such as are truly faithful and sanctified,
and of such as have only for a time put on the outside and vizard of
sanctity. And again, after that he has produced and perverted many
testimonies of holy Scripture to prove that all in the visible Church are holy
and good, and none other therein, he adds these words: Iustif. 115.
Here is no such mingle mangle as M. Bernard would make of good and bad, but
all good and so auowed by the holy Ghost, though without doubt many of these
were masked and hallow hearted hypocrites.

I will only fight against you here with your own weapons, for I need to use
none other. The purest Churches (say you) may consist of good and bad,
faithful and unfaithful, of holy and profane: (for are not they profane who
have only the outside of holiness, being within full of all filthiness.)
Also, that in the same there have been many wicked and hollow hearted
hypocrites, all which were wicked: But a company consisting of such as all
these, is a mixed company, and a monstrous or miserable compound: being
compounded of two sorts of men who be as contrary one to another, as light to
darkness, Christ and Belial: of Gods children, and the Devils children; of the
children of light, and the children of darkness: Therefore the purest Churches
consist of a mixed company, and consequently is not simple, uniform etc. as you
teach. If the purest Church that is be a mixed company, much more they that be
less pure. And who in their wits but would affirm, that such a body politic
were unmixed, simple, and one, specially that it were proportionable in every
member unto the head, and informed by one spirit? What every member M.
Robinson? What proportion and likeness is there between Christ; and
Hypocrites, many of which in the general you acknowledge to be in the Church?
Betwixt the sons of God, and the children of the Devil: some of which we
must needs confess to be in the Church? else all in the visible Church are
indeed the children of God, then which nothing is more false. If every member
be informed by the spirit of God, then every one in the visible Church has the
spirit animating him. Indeed this M. Smith teaches expressly, and all of you
implicitly: But how truly I have showed, in the next Chapter. If every one in
this visible Church, be informed by one and the same spirit, then if any in the
visible Church have the Spirit of God, all have. And contrariwise: If any in
the visib. Church be informed by the unclean spirit, all are. Moreover if
every member of the visible Church be called in one hope, then if any one in
that visible Church, have that hope, Romans 8.24.
the end whereof is the salvation of man's soul, all have it: and so on the
contrary, as before, Behold what conclusions do follow from your premises:
whereby we may know how orthodoxall they be. God forbid that all the Divines
in the world, should teach such positions as these. He has itching cares who
will rather give care to you, and two or three such more as your self, then
all the Divines in the world. Speak no more thus presumptuously. You may
remember what sometimes I said unto you mouth to mouth: The spirit of the
Prophets is subject to the Prophets, (that is) the doctrine (which all men
conceit is from the spirit) of the prophets, is subject to the judgment of the
Prophets.

The ground of this your erring is not, that you think, that there are no
wicked in the visible Church, for you confess that there are wicked in the
visible Church, yea men desperately wicked: but because in your conceit, the
wicked that be in the visible Church, are not true members of the visible
Church. That this is so, it appears by your words next following the former.
And for wicked, and ungodly persons so far are they from being the true
natural members whereof the body consists, as the whole of the parts,
Instif. 112. and 110.
as they serve indeed for no other purpose then to infect, and corrupt the
rest, and if redress be not had in time, to eat out the very heart of the
whole. Again: And for the church of the Jews, and of Corinth in which you
instance, as they were holy, so they were desperately wicked amongst them no
true members of the body, but as putrified and rotten parts to be cut off and
cast out from the rest.

I answer: as putrified and rotten parts of the body, are members of the body,
until they be cut of: so wicked men putrefying and stinking with spiritual
uncleanness, their sin^es, rotten and unsound at the heart, are members of
the visible Church, and that body politic, until by excommunication they be
cut of. And as a rotten tooth that is no way profitable but hurtful, serving
only to infect and corrupt the rest, is notwithstanding a part or member of
the body until it be plucked out: so the wicked and ungodly that be in the
visible Church that serve indeed for no other purpose then to vex infect and
corrupt the rest, are nevertheless members of the visible Church until by
excommunication they be cut of. The falsitie of this your conceit, I have
further discovered in the Chapter following, vvhereto I refer the Reader,
only in the mean season remember this, and forget it not: That all which be
in the visible Church are members of it, until by excommunication they be cut
of: But (by your own confession) wicked men are in the visible Church:
therefore wicked men are members of it. Which if it be true, all your doctrine
(almost of the visible Church is false.

But to put an end to this point and part of your description. By the premises
it is plain, that a true visible Church is not separated from the world, that
is, a company of righteous and godly men only, separated from the open wicked
of the world. For if a visible Church be a mixed company of good and bad, godly
and ungodly, for which cause it is compared to a barn floor, to a field, and
to a draw-net, as has been showed out of the holy Scriptures: again if from
time to time in the ages precedent, both under the Law and Gospel there have
been and remained in the true visible Church wicked, yea many wicked, and
open wicked, as has likewise been made manifest by the Scriptures: how can it
possible be true which you affirm, That a visible Church is a separated
company of righteous men, not mixed with, but separated from the wicked of the
world? If this doctrine of yours be true, the one of these do necessarily
follow: either the former persons of whom I have spoken so much, Ismael, Esau,
Doeg, Saul, Absalom* the Scribes and Pharisees were not openly wicked, and men
of this world: or not in the Church, but without: or else that the Church
wherein they in their time lived, was not a true, but a false Church. The
premises considered, it is very fondly done of you so often to object against
us, the mixture of good and bad in our Church. Calling it Cofusion, Babel,
Babilonish confusion, and our Churches because of it Babylon; and a mere
madness for this cause to separate from our Church. And thus much concerning
this clause in your description, separated from the world.

The rest of your description I omit, as not greatly to be found fault with,
though something might be said against it. For where you say, It is a company
joined together by voluntary profession, you should rather have said joining
together etc. We are joined and knit together by love, and do join and agree
in the same profession. And where you require a voluntary profession of the
faith of Christ, and tells us elsewhere, that a true Church consists of a
voluntary people, and that ours are confused and compelled, and so a false
church: You must know that a man may be of the visible Church, albeit his
profession be not voluntary, as has been declared before. Neither is that so
fit you add of the Faith of Christ, as if you had said of the true Religion.
The Papists profess the faith of Christ, and so do the Anabaptists, Families,
with sundry others: and yet are they false Churches. But whatsoever society
professes true Religion, is a true church. To conclude, Apology 44. Confession
of Faith. 11. Counterp. 133.
this I say, that understanding these words, separated from the world, as
Christ means Ioh. 17.14.16. and 15.19. Which testimonies you here in your
confession of faith, and in the Counterpoyson allege for the proof of this,
and therefore must so understand them, without manifest perverting of the said
Scriptures: then is this a description rather of the militant Church, or those
of the invisible Church that are effectually called, then of the visible Church.

CHAP. III. Of the matter and form of the visible Church.
AS these men do greatly err in their description of the visible Church, so
do they likewise in other points touching the same, and namely about the
matter and form thereof. Justification 88. and 82.
The constitution of the Church, (says M. Robinson) is the orderly collection
and conjunction of the Saints into and in the covenant of the new Testament:
wherein the Saints are the matter, the covenant the form, from which two
concurring the Church arises, and is by them constituted. And in another place
delivering the very same with this, he adds: And this is that which gives
true being of a Church, and nothing else. Because of this let us so much the
more carefully seek out the true matter and form of the visible Church: and
remember that if the Separists mistake the matter and form of the visible
Church, as the truth is they do, they cannot judge aright of the Church, and
therefore their judgment and account of our Church is to be despised.

We hold (as has already been said) men, not Angels, or any other creatures,
but a company of men to be the matter of the visible Church; and the profession
of true Religion to be the form. So that wheresoever there is a company of men
joining together in the profession of true Religion, the same is, and may
truly be called a visible Church.

The Seperators teach otherwise, and first that Saints are the matter of the
visible Church: forgetting that a company of Saints are a Church by the
Testimony of the holy Ghost as before has been showed in the third Chapter of
the first book: and therefore such a society contains in it as well the
form as the matter, without both which nothing can be.

But we must know that howsoever the Separists, even all of them agree in this,
That Saints are the matter of the visible Church; yet notwithstanding they
disagree (at least in appearance) about the matter: because they differ about
these Saints, who, Instif. 105. principles and Inferen^es 10. M. Smith in his
Answer to M. Be^n rd 27 28. Separatists, Schism. 83. Counterp. 174.
and what they be. Saints (say some of them) are a people forsaking all known
sin, doing all the known will of God, growing in grace, and continuing to
the end: and these (say M. Smith, and M. Robinson) are the only matter of the
visible Church.

This being convinced by some of our side, M. Ainsworth answers thus: This
position (meaning the aforesaid description of Saints, and that such are the
matter of the visi. church) I deny, and also disclaim the errors which be
gathered from it: and therefore will spend no time in answering it: but refer
M. Bernard to them that have so spoken or written, if any be. This we hold (and
let us see what M. Bernard can say against it) That Saints by calling are the
only matter of a true visible church. For confutation of this, that M.
Ainsworth and the more ancient of this schism do maintain, that little
which has been said may suffice: and the rather because but a little before,
M. Ainsworth accords with us, and is as contrary to himself herein as we be.
Counterp. 170.
To the constitution of a Church (says he) there belong 1. A people, as the
matter whereof, and 2. A calling, gathering, and uniting together, as the form
whereof the Church consists. Where observe how he contradicts himself. 1.
He expressly affirms, that a people, (which is the same that we teach, a
company of men) are the matter of the visible Church, and here that Saints by
calling are the only matter. In the one place he makes calling a part of the
form, in the other part of the matter.

But I marvel greatly M. Ainsworth that you scornfully reject this description
of Saints, seeing it suteth so well with all the writings, and namely that
whole book of yours, called, Communion of Saints. 66.
The Communion of Saints. In it you writ thus. All men and women called to the
faith of God, are Saints by calling; being sanctified by Christ Jesus, and one
with another are holy brethren. Saints by calling by your own exposition are
those, who, 1. by Faith are united to Christ, and 2. by love one to another,
and 3. are sanctified by Christ Jesus, that is by his Spirit dwelling in them.
He is very ignorant who thinks that these have not forsaken all known sin,
and do all the known will of God, that is, desire and endeavor it: and he
has clean forgotten that of the Apostle, If Christ be in you the body is dead
because of sin, and the Spirit is life for righteousness sake, which evidently
proves the same. Romans 8.10.
Moreover you tell us in the same book, communion of Saints in the end of the
book.
That in the Saints sin dies, and righteousness renueth daily, both
inwardly and outwardly: yea that in the Hypocrites which be in the Church,
righteousness increases outwardly. If these positions of yours be true, not
unfitly nor untruly do they teach, that saints are men for saking all known
sin, doing all the known will of God: and increasing in grace, Considering
they mean externally, and so far as men can judge.

You all teach that a true visible Church consists only of Saints; and by
Saints you mean such as have at the least external righteousness, and live
vnblameablie in an holy conversation before men. And because all in our Church
be not such Saints, but many scandalous in their lives, you condemn us for a
false Churse: This you cannot deny to be true. Is it not hereby manifest,
that all of you in effect, though not in the same words do likewise teach:
That Saints are men separated from all known sin, doing all the will of God
known? does not that external righteousness and outward sanctimony which
you require in all Saints, and memb^rs of the visible Church, imp^y as much as
these men here speak? can any be unblameable (which you require in all
Saints,) who forsakes not before men all known sin, and does not all the
known will of God? Why then do you disclaim this description of Saints? You
render this reason: because from this description diverse errors do arise, and
therefore it must needs be erroneous, and fa fe. All this I confess to be
true. Can you discern this position or description being taught by another to
be erroneous, and that from it sun^ry errors do grow, whereupon you disclaim
it and them: and have you not an eye to see, and an heart to abhor and
disclaim the same doctrine when it is taught by your self?

But though M. Ainsworth disclaim this abbortiue, yet M. Robinson being more
natural does take to it. Iustif. 105.
This position (quoth he) which you M. Bernard account error, rightly
understood, and according to his exposition from whom you received it, (meaning
M. Smith) is an undoubted truth. For of such only (externally, and so far
as men can judge) the true Church is gathered* and of them alone framed, as of
the subject matter. Seeing therefore you do fully agree about the matter of
the visible church, and that your selves and others mistake it, in thinking
that you do here abouts differ: know that that which follows against your
supposed matter of the visible Church, is meant and spoken against you all, and
that justly: because it makes as well against all of the separation, as any.

First, then I demand of you, who teach that Saints are a people forsaking all
known sin, doing all the known will of God, increasing in grace, etc. And
that such are the only matter of the visible Church: whether a company of
people thus qual^fied, and graced of God, be a Church: or to be held to be
without, and a Synagogue of Satan. Surely you will blush and be ashamed to
answer negatiuely. And if you answer, that such a society is a Church, then
have we a Church consisting only of matter, without the form for such a
people as these (say you) are the matter of a true visible Church, whereunto
the form remains to be added, which what it is you tell us after. Now you
know it is utterly impossible that a Church (or any thing else) should be
without the form: seeing the form gives being to a thing, but set down after
another manner.

Secondly, it cannot be denied but such Saints as these, are Conuerts; yea so
far as man can judge truly converted to the Lord. If the Church consist of
such persons only, it follows necessarily thereupon that men are converted,
not in the Church by the Ministry of the Pastors and Teachers thereof, but
without, I know not by whom, nor by what means: which is as false, as your
separation is sinful, and therefore is this your doctrine false from whence
this is inferred.

Indeed I know that this inference is with you orthodoxall: For in your
Apology among the Positions you were bold to tender to his Majesty this is
one: That discreet, faithful, Apology 45.
and able men though not yet in office of Ministry, may be appointed to
preach the Gospel and whole truth of God: that men being first brought to
knowledge and converted to the Lord, may then be joined in holy communion with
Christ our head, and one with an other. And for confirmation thereof you produce
seventeen testimonies of holy writ, and seven reasons. But to let your abuse
of Scripture, and of that reason which God has given you go: I tell you this
doctrine and position of yours is against Scripture, and therefore as
impossible to be proved either by Scripture or Reason. By the fourth of the
Ephesians it is plain that Christ ascending on high gave Pastors and Teachers
to the Church; as well for the gathering together of the Saints, that is, for
the calling of men to the faith, or converting them to God, whereby men before
profane and wicked, are made Saints or holy ones: as for the edifying and
building up of these Saints in the faith, and other graces of the Spirit, after
they be called. You teach now the direct contrary: that Christ has not given
his Ministers, Pastors and Teachers to the former of these ends aforesaid,
which is also the principal, but has (say you) appointed, that men not in the
Ministry, but private, (no Church officers) should convert men to the Lord:
and the Ministers of Christ are only to edify and build them up in grace. So
that private men they lay the foundation, Ministers do but only erect and
build further upon that which they have laid. These discreet private men they
alone are fathers, begetting men to the faith, and as for the Ministers they
are but nurses, to give suck, nourish and bring up men in it. Thus you do not
only cross this Scripture, and ordinance of Christ, who has perpetually
appointed Pastors and Teachers in the Church to the aboue-named ends: but do
also hereby prefer private men's teachings above Ministers. For is it not a
matter of great power and excellency to convert men unto God, then to confirm
them that be converted? and to beget men to the faith, then to nourish them
that are begotten? Consider what I say, and the Lord open your eyes that you
may see your error. But leaving this, hearken what further reasons we have
against your description of Saints, and matter of the visible Church.

Thirdly, I have in the former Chapter showed that many have been members of
the visible Church that have wanted, external holiness, yea being outwardly
and openly profane: this to a wise man may suffice for the confutation of this
description, yea of all that you teach concerning both the matter and form of
the visible Church. Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, Doeg, Ioab, Absalom, Judas, the
Scribes and Pharisees were all of the visible Church, and yet not thus
qualified. Nay as contrary to these Saints, as darkness to light, and as far
from this sanctimonie, as heaven is from earth. Such Saints then as you speak
of are not the matter of the visible Church: For then the aforesaid persons
were not of the visible Church, (seeing they were not such matter) which I
trust you will not affirm. And if such wicked and abominable men as these,
openly and apparently wicked, were matter of the visible Church, and were
Saints, to wit, by calling, or by profession, which kind of Saint-ship
suffices to make men members of the visible Church, how do you truly affirm,
That all Saints are men separated from all known sin, doing all the known
will of God, growing in grace, and continuing to the end: and that such are the
only matter of the visible Church? And with what truth do you teach, that all
the members of the visible Church have been, are, and of necessity must be
outwardly holy, having an external righteousness, for which cause they be
called Saints: so as if men be not thus qualified, they are not true matter,
neither of, nor in the Church. But proceed we now from the Church of the
Jews under the Law, to the Churches of the Gentiles under the Gospel, and
specially to the primative and purest Churches that have been: which you think
are so clear for you, and against us, as nothing can be more clear and
evident.

In the Church of Corinth there were many very corrupt men, some in judgment,
others in manners and conversation, or in both. To omit diverse of their
errors, some held 1. Cor. 6.12.13.
fornication to be lawful, or a thing indifferent, as to eat or to drink:
others that which was far worse, and more dangerous, that 1. Cor. 12.20
there was no resurrection, which caused the Apostle by many reasons to prove
it. In the same Church there was great 2. Cor. 12.20 and 1. Cor. 1.11. and 3.3.
strife, envying, wrath, contentions, back bitings, whisperings, swellings,
discord, and as about other things, so namely their Ministers, some depending
of one, some of other, some despising all, did call themselves the Disciples of
Christ, and would hear none. In it there were diverse whom Paul not only
calls 1. Cor. 3.3.
carnal, but by some works of the flesh whereunto they were given, proves
to be carnal, and to walk as men, that is to live as those who be more
natural men, not having the spirit. In the same Church there were not only
that 1. Cor. 6.1.6.8.
went to Law together, a brother (I say) with a brother, and that under unjust
and infidel Judges, but that did wrong and harm, even to their brethren. In
it there were which lived 2. Cor. 12.21.
in uncleanness and fornication and wantonness: yea there could not but be many
sornicators, considering they held fornication to be no sin: from whence it
is that Paul uses 1. Cor. 6.13.
sundry forcible reasons to dehort them from this sin, and those words chap.
5.9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle that ye should not company together with
fornicators: and least they should mistake him, he tells the^ that he means
not this of them that were without the church the Infidels, but of the
fornicators that were in the church, that professed the Chris. Relig: Nay, there
was 1. Cor. 5.1.
such fornication among the^ as was not once named or heard of among the
Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wise. And that which is more, the
delinquent for so heinous a sin was not at all censured: yea they were not so
much as sorry at so great a scandal in the Church, but this notwithstanding
and whatsoever things besides were amiss in their Church, they were puffed up,
and reioyed as though all were well, and nothing amiss. There were in this
Church that went to the Lords table, 1. Cor. 11.17.18.21.29.30.
not to their profit, but to their hurt, eating and drinking unworthily, not
discerning the Lords body, and so did eat and drink their own judgment: by
reason of the discentions among them, they would not tarry one for another, and
some being drunk went to the Lords Supper. In it there were also that called
1. Cor. 9.1.2.3.
the Apostle his office into question, despised and disgraced both him and his
preaching, saying, That howsoever 2. Cor. 10.1.10. and 11.6.
he being absent was very bold in his letters, yet when he was present, and
among them, he was base; his bodily presence weak, and his speech of no value,
nay, ruder in speaking. And thus they preferred their vainglorious and
eloquent teachers, and their Ministers who 2. Cor. 2.1.4.
came unto them with axcellency of words and in the intising speech of man's
wisdom, more like orators, then Preachers of the Gospel, above the holy
Apostle and his heavenly ministry. Moreover in this Church there were that
accused S. Paul of pillage, and to be a crafty and subtle man; that howsoever
he did not openly take wages and charge them, yet sor as much 2. Cor. 12.16.17.
he was crafty, he took some secretly and by guilc. Did I pil you says the
Apo: by any of them whom I sent unto you? as I am accused to have done? Thus
there were in the Church of Corinth who did not only deny S. Paul to be an
Apostle, debase his preaching, but that did besides touching his ^fe and
conversation slander him, and take away his good name as much as in them lay.

In the churches of Galatia, there were diverse false Apostles, who taught the
right^ousnesse of works that man is ^ot justified by faith only in Christ,
but by observing and keep ng the Law of God given by Moses; not the Law morrall
only, but the ceremonial also: whereupon they urged circumcision, as
ne^essary for Christians unto salvation. This was very dangerous doctrine and
pernicious, ouerturning (as I may say) the foundation, which made the Apostle
to write thus; Gal. 5.2.
If ye be circumcised, (as the false teachers which be among you would have
you) Christ shall profit you nothing, 3. For I testify again to every man
which is circumcised, that he is bound to keep the whole law, 4. Ye are
abolished from Christ: whosoever are justified by the law, ye are fallen from
grace. And because S. Paul had formerly in the planting of these Churches
taught Justification by Faith only in Christ without the works of the Law,
as also that the ceremonial Law given by Moses, was by Christ abolished,
which doctrine being true, theirs must needs be false: therefore they said
that Paul was no Apostle, but spoke of himself and preached man's doctrine, not
Gods: but as for them, they came not of themselves but were sent os the chief
Apostles. This doctrine so dangerous, these seducers did no more readily teach,
then the Galatians receive and believe, as appears by these speeches of the
Apostle: Gal. 1.6.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed away unto another Gospel, from him
that had called you in the grace of Christ. And again. O foolish Galatians,
who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth?

Ye now which teach glorious things of all the members of the visible Church,
answer me. Were all in the Churches of Galatia and Corinth such Saints as you
speak of? Were they that denied the resurrection; that were given to strife,
envying, wrath, contentions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings and discord;
that lived in uncleanness, fornication, and wantonness; that denied Paul to
be an Apostle, disgraced and despised both him and his preachings traduced and
slaundered him: Were these (I say) separated from all known sin, and did all
the known will of God so far as men can judge? Did these grow in grace, and
therein continue to the end: or (as M. Ainsworth says) Did righteousness
increase outwardly in these? Of the most of which the Apostle says thus: Gal.
3.3. and 4.92
Are ye so foolish that after ye have begun in the Spirit, ye would be made
perfect in the flesh' Also how turn ye again unto impotent and beggarly
rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning you will be in bondage again? Or
had these that external righteousness, and outward sanctimonie or holiness,
which you say all in the visible Church have? M. Robinson in a large Treatise
of his lately set forth, Iustif. 107.
has these words: It is all one M. Bernard as if you should say, the
Scriptures do not call men Saints, because they are Saints, but for some other
causes known to you. For what is it to be a Saint, but to be holy? And what to
be holy, but to be of a sound judgment, pure affections, and unblameable
conversation? That which this man here says, they all do hold, and this is
one special stone whereat they often stumble. I demand therefore of them all,
whether all the Corinthians and Galatians I speak of were such Saints and holy
ones as they teach all in the visible Church are: and namely whether they were
of a sound judgment, pure affections, and unblameable conversation? If they
answer affirmatively that they were; all men will cry, fie upon it: and then
the incestuous person in the church of Corinth, and the false teachers among
the Galatians were such, to wit, men of a sound judgment, pure affections, and
unblameable conversation. If they answer negatiuely, then (forasmuch as these
were in the Church) some are in the Church, who are not Saints and so to be
called, which is against their own doctrine; or then some are in the church
who are not such Saints, as these men say all in the visible church are and
must be.

And here we are to remember these things. 1. That many of the persons we
speak of were openly wicked. That these were godly men, and Saints indeed,
having their hearts purified by Faith, no man (sure) will affirm. If they were
not godly, then which must needs be true of some of them, I mean the false
teachers among the Galatians, because against them Paul wishes or prays
thus: Ephesians. 5.12.
Would to God they were even cut of, which do disquiet you: which he would
never have done had they been godly. And if they were wicked then openly
wicked, and known to be so, because their sins were open and known to men. 2.
We must remember, that these Churches when S. Paul writ unto them were true
visible Churches: which must needs be, because by the holy Ghost they are so
called and entitled: and this the Separistes do readily acknowledge, yea that
they were of the purest Churches that have been. 3. That all the members of a
true visible Church are Saints by nomination; so called in Scripture: and
consequently all these aforesaid in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia. This
also the Separistes will freely confess. 4. We must know that all which be
once admitted into the church, do remain members of the same Church (be they
never so wicked) until either they themselves depart from it, or else by
excommunication be cast out: and that consequently all the scandalous persons
aforesaid were in and of the Church, y^a the incestuous man till he was
excommunicated. This they of the Separation will likewise acknowledge to be
true.

Now from the premises these two conclusions do necessarily follow. 1. That a
society of men wherein be sundry wicked, yea openly wicked, may
notwithstanding be a true church. 2. That the open wicked and scandalous
persons in the church are Saints by nomination: and the Scripture do sometimes
call men Saints, not because they are holy, but for some other causes or
respects, whereof has been spoken in the former Chapter.

The Brownists teach conclusions directly contrary to these, which is the cause
of their erring so grossly in the doctrine of the visible Church, and the
principal cause of their condemning our Church to be a false Church, and
consequently of seperating from us. But whether they or we do herein agree
with the Scriptures, let the Christian Reader judge.

Some other arguments did I long since set down against your aforesaid
description, and this That such Saints as those you dedescribe, be the only
matter of the visible Church: which M. Bernard having thought of also, and
published, and M. Robinson lately answered: I thought it there fore best rather
to spend some lines about a reply to M. Robinson, then enlarging and pressing
those arguments. It is true that both M. Ainsworth, and M. Smith have likewise
answered that Book of M. Bernards, wherein the reasons I mean are contained,
The title of this book is, Separatists, Schism.
but we must know that there is nothing worth the answering in M. Smith, which
M. Robinson has not, and as for M. Ainsworth, he declaimes both the position,
and the errors that be gathered from it, as before we have heard, so that if M.
Robinson be answered, the reader may rest therewith satisfied.

Against this doctrine then of yours we say further: That this is rather a
description of the invisible Church militant, and members thereof, then of the
visible Church. Hereunto M. Robinson answers thus.

Iustif. 105.
All the true and lawful members of the visible Church, are to me members of
the invisible church, to me I say, which am bound to judge them to be in truth
as outwardly they appear: and so I am taught by the Apostle himself, who
accounts the whole visible Church and every member of it Elect, redeemed,
justified, sanctified, which are conditions competent to the invisible Church.
Act. 20.28. 1. Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.3.4.5. Gal 3.27. Phil. 1.4.5.6 7. And this is
your entire answer to this objection.

Reply. I confess that if the visible Church were (in your sense) a people
separated from all known sin doing all the known will of God etc. As you
teach: or a company having external righteousness, and increasing therein, as
M. Ainsworth and all Separists do hold, then were all the members of the
visible church, to us members of the invisible Church: because outwardly they
did appear so to be, and we must (as you say well) judge of men, as outwardly
they appear. But we must know that for as much as the visible Church through
the corruption of man, not by Gods appointment, has in it as well bad men, as
good; wicked as godly, and that in appearance and outward show, as well as in
deed and truth: that therefore even by your own reason we cannot deem all
of the visible Church to be Elect, and of the invisible Church. They that were
of Abraham's family, which then was the Church, could not well judge mocking
Ismael; nor they of Isaaks family, profane Esau to be Elect, and of the
invisible Church. The same may be said of Saul, Ioab, Absalom, the Scribes
and Pharisees whom to have judged to be of the invisible Church, had been no
better then to account them good, which were evil. Is this to judge the tree
by the fruits, whereunto the Scripture does direct us?

But this the Apostle has taught you. Nothing less. For the Apostle in the
titles and speeches you mention and quoate, and such like has respect and
reference to the Church, or faithful inde de, (not in pro^ession only,) for
whose sake he did write his Epistles, nay the whole Scripture was inspired. To
them he meant all the speeches he uses of this kind, and of them only he
would have them to be understood, of whom only they are true, for they alone
are Elect, redeemed, justified, and sanctified. And far was it from Saint
Paul's meaning, to have these speeches and the like to be understood of the
whole visi: Church, and of every member of the same: amongst whom he knew
very well, that there were many reprobates, many which were not redeemed, not
justified, nor sanctified. And this in the Chapter going before have I showed
more at large. Besides, the Apostle did not undoubtedly account the false
teachers in the churches of Galatia, (whom we cannot deny to be members of the
said Churches) members of the invisible Church: for then he would never have
prayed against them as he did: Ephesians. 5.12.
Would to God they were cut off which trouble you. You learn not this then
from the example of the Apostle, as you affirm. Thus we see the
insufficiency of your answer: the objection therefore remains go^d against
you, being yet unanswered.

Again we object, That this description of yours secludes hypocrites from
being true matter of the visible Church: and so there should be no hypocrites
in the visible Church, which is repugnant to the Scriptures.

Hereunto M. Robinson answers thus. And for hypocrites, Iustif. 106.
as they may perform all the conditions here required (visible or to us) as M.
Smith has answered: so do we take knowledge of none such in the Church, in
the particular, till they be known in their day by the out-breakings of sin,
and being so discovered, they are no longer to be retained in the Church, but
to bear their sin, except they repent, and then who can repute them
hypocrites? And this is your full answer.

Reply. If here you will have a full proposition without your parenthesis, to
wit, this: Hypocrites may perform all the conditions here required, then is it
so palpably false as it needs no confutation. But if you will have it part
thereof, then is your parenthesis idle, and superfluous: which is a fault
also, though a less then the former. You add, that you take knowledge of no
hypocrites in the visible Church in the particular, until they be known in
their day by the out-breakings of sin. I reply: If your Churches be such
holy and blessed socie^ies, as by your doctrine you bear the world in hand
they be; all of them separate from all known sin, doing all the known will
of God, increasing in grace, and abiding ever therein: it is no marvel though
you know no hypocrites in none of your Churches: but if we may give credit
either to men's reports or vvritings concerning your Churches, then we are sure
there be some in your Churches which may as easily be known to be hypocrites,
as Chaulke from Cheese. But leaving your judgment concerning hypocrites, and
your Churches; we must know, that other men in other Churches, have taken
knowledge of hypocrites in the particular, or at least might lawfully so have
done: as the Apostles, Zacharias, Joseph, with other faithful then living, who
did (no doubt) know the Scribes and Pharisees to be hypocrites, and so
accounted them. And here we may remember, that which has been taught before:
That there be in the Church two sorts of hypocrites. First, close hypocrites,
which being goats and children of darkness, do yet go in sheep clothing,
and are like to the children of light, having an external righteousness. Such
were Judas and Demas. Secondly, 1. Tim. 5.24.
open or manifest hypocrites, such as Ismael, Esau, Absalon, with others. The
first kind of hypocrites cannot be known in particular, until the Lord be
pleased to uncase them: but the other are at all times as easy to be discerned
in the particular, by them who can discern of spirits, and between things
and persons that differ, as it is to know tares from wheat, and goats from
sheep.

And where you say that hypocrites being discovered, they are no longer to be
retained in the Church, except they repent, and then who can repute them
hypocrites. I confess all this to be very true. But what if through the
corruption that is in men; their negligence, partiality, or remissenes, such
hypocrites be not excommunicated, but remain still in the Church: Is
therefore the said society because of this impunitie become no church, or a
false church? Answer us I pray you: for this question comes to the quick: If
you answer affirmatively, that such a society notwithstanding the wicked
that be in it is a true Church: you do at one push put down a great deal of
that rotten building you have been a long time setting up. If negatiuely, then
I will not fear to affirm, that neither the Church of Corinth, nor sundry of
the Churches of Galatia were true Churches, when the Apostle writ unto them,
which were blasphemy to affirm.

M. Bernard obiecteth further, that this makes David, Iehoshaphat, and the
Church of God in their days to be no true matter of a visible Church: for
there was marrying many wives, the continuance of the high places, the brazen
serpent worshipped, Ioabs murder permitted, the bill of diuorcement allowed by
Moses.

Hereunto this answer is given. Iustif. 106.
I do answer to this exception, first, that you cannot prove the holy men you
name to have sinned in all the particulars wherewith you charge them: much
less that they were convinced of sin in suffering these things, and yet
suffered them.

I reply. Be it they sinned not in all the aforesaid particulars, yet did they
in some of them: and what say you to them? David both sinned in suffering Ioabs
murder, and was in his conscience also convinced thereof: from whence it came
that in his last will (as I may say) he charge Solomon his son concerning
Ioab, that as he had shed blood, so he should cause his to be shed, 1. Kin.
2.5.6.
and not suffer his hoare head to go down to the grave in peace. But suppose
that in this deferring of Ioabs punishment David did not sin, (which no man
of good understanding will affirm:) yet without controversy he did, and most
grievously in the matter of Vriah, and lay a great while therein, during which
time his conscience did now and then check him for the same: for in this time
David was not a man dead in trespasses and sins, or like them whose
consciences are seared with an hot iron. Now M. Robinson answer me. Was David
in and during this time in the Church, or without? You cannot but acknowledge
that he remained at this time in the Church, and was a member thereof. But
David now was not separated from all known sin, did not practice all the
known will of God, increase in grace, and therein continue, for as much as at
this time he lived in known sins, and decreased in grace: David therefore
was matter of the visible Church, and yet not such a Saint as you describe: and
consequently your doctrine is false that such Saints as you here describe are
the only matter of the visible Church.

M. Robinson inlargeth his answer thus. But what countenance do the
infirmities of these holy men give to the profane and graceless multitude
against whom we deal? and whom alone we cast out of the account of Saints?
with what conscience or color can any man bring in the infirmities of Moses,
David, and Iehoshaphat to plead the Saint-ship of all the godless crew in the
English assemblies?

Reply. These examples were not instanced to countenance the profane among us:
but to disprove your description of Saints, and that such Saints are not the
only matter of the visible Church: and thereunto they serve very well, which
is all that was by M: Barnard intended. For thus in effect he reasons: David
and Iehoshaphat were matter of the visible Church: for they were true members
of a true vis. Church: But they were not such Saints as you define Saints to
be: Therefore such Saints as you define, are not the only matter of the
visible Church. But to draw little nearer unto you: even in David's time, Psalm.
12.1.
much more in worser times, there was no less profane and graceless a
multitude in the Church of Judah, then is in the Church of England at this day:
Whereupon David complains thus. Help Lord, for there is not a godly man
left: the faithful are failed from among the children of men: they speak
deceitfully every one with his neighbor, flattering with their lips, and
speak with a double heart. Which though it do not countenance the ungodly
among us, yet it manifestly disproueth your definition of Saints, and supposed
matter of the visible Church: and proves demonstratiuely that a people may be
a true Church, notwithstanding there be in it wicked men, nay a multitude of
profane and graceless men: as Judah was in the days of David, Vzziah,
Iotham, Hezekiah, and other Kings of Judah: Isai. 1.10.
For mark what Isaiah says concerning the people of the Jews, in the reign
of the Kings lest mentioned: Hear O Princes of Sodom; hearken O people of
Gomorrah. A profane therefore and graceless multitude, and if you will a
godless crew for the most part were the Jews in those days, and yet a true
Church. What lets it then, why we may not likewise be a true Church,
notwithstanding there are many wicked and very ungodly among us.

Our last exception is, That the Scriptures which for the conforming of this
your false doctrine you bring, are places speaking of the invisible Church
properly, or of the vis. figuratively. Justification 107.


To this you answer thus. It cannot be manifested that we bring one
Scripture meant of the invisible Church, to prove the holiness of the visible
Church. The vanity of this objection has been discovered in the exposition
of that your picked instance, 1. Pet. 2.9.

Reply. To prove the holiness of the visible Church, you quote Description of
the visible Church 2.
the 17. Chapter of John, and oftentimes sundry verses therein, Apology 44.
verse 14.20. and your self a little after this vaunt of yours Iustif. 115.
verse 16. Now what in all Scriptures is to be understood of the invisible
Church militant, (that is the Elect on earth, and hereafter to be on earth. If
not this 17. of John, which you frequently apply to the visible Church. This
Chapter contains in it only a prayer, which Jesus made for himself, and
men, a little before his passion, from whence it follows, that he speaks of
them for whom he prayed: but he prayed only (besides for himself) for the
Elect, as he himself says expressly ver. 9. of this Chapter: I pray not for
the world, meaning thereby the Reprobates of the world, therefore he speaks
here only of the Elect. Here is one Scripture, nay diverse several testimonies
of Scripture, which being meant of the invisible Church, you apply to the
visible. Nay your selves teaching that the invisible Church contains in it
all the Elect of God that have been, are, or shall be, do for proof thereof
produce Description of the visible Church. 1.
John 17.19.20.

To prove the holiness of the visible Church, you Ibid.
allege Ioh. 6.36. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me; and him
that comes to me, I cast not away. If this be not meant, and properly and
only to be understood of the Elect: I know not what is. Those here spoken of
are said to be given to Christ, of his Father. Secondly, to come unto him, that
is, to believe in him, as ver. 35. declares. Thirdly, none of these Christ
casts away, that is, reprobateth and condemns. But these things are true
only of the Elect: Of them therefore alone Christ here speaks: and therefore
not of the visible Church as you tell us: wherein be many that the father has
not given to Christ, and which believe not in him, and which he will cast away,
as a man does dross or reprobate silver.

Again, to the same end you Apology 44. Iustificat. 115.
quote Act. 2.47. where Luke speaks first of them that had singleness of
heart, which grace is peculiar to the Elect: Secondly, of such as should be
saved, and that I trust your self will confess, the elect only shall be.

Moreover you produce to the end aforesaid A true description 1.
Romans 8.34. where the Apostle speaking expressly and by name of the elect in
the verse precedent. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It
is God that Justifies. He adds verse. 34 Who shall condemn? meaning any of
the said chosen, whom God justifies. And this he further confirms in the
words next following, to wit, that none of this society shall be damned,
forasmuch as Christ died for them, rose again, and makes intercession. This
also all the verses following to the end of the said Chapter do confirm. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? It is hereby evident, and by verse
39. that Paul speaks of those whom God loves in Christ: But in Christ Jesus
God loves the elect only: therefore of the elect alone he here speaks.

All the places of holy Scripture which you allege concerning Descript. 2.
Apology 44.
the body of Christ, are so many abuses of Scripture in this kind, as Ephesians.
1.23. and 4.11.16. 1. Cor. 22.27. as I have else where made manifest in this
Treatise.

Nay your self M. Robinson have your part herein, if you be not the chief in
this trespass. To prove the holiness of this visible Church, you Answer to a
Censorious Epistle 33.
produce 1. Pet. 2.5. which in the end of the Chapter precedent I have showed
is true only, and to be understood of the militant Church, or whole company of
the faithful, members of the invisible Church: Furthermore but four leaves
after this you vaunt. That not one Scripture forsooth is brought by you to
prove the holiness of the visible Church, which is meant of the invisible: You
teach Justification 115.
that all of the visible Church were purchased with the blood of God; were all
partakers of the grace of God, having effectual faith, diligent love, and
patient hope in the Lord Jesus, growing in grace every one of them. And for
proof of these positions and a few such like you quote Act. 20.28. Phil.
1.3.4.6.7.8. 1 Thessalonians. 1.2.3. and 2. Epist. 1.3. Now all these Scriptures, with
many more, must be understood of the Militant Church, or if we understand them
of the visible Church, they must be taken figuratively, the whole Church being
set for a part thereof, by a Synecdoche, which in effect is the same.

Again in the same place to prove the holiness of the vis. church, Iustif. 115.
you tell us (m) that the visible Church be such and none other, as are not of
the world, but chosen out of it, and hated of it, as do receive the word, and
communicate al of the^ in all things gladly, as every one has need and that
in gladness and singlenes of heart, and have received testimony by the holy
Ghost himself that they were such as should be saved. And for confirmation
thereof you quote. Ioh. 15.18.19. and 17-16. Act. 2.41.42 46.47. I would as
soon believe you, if you should teach: that all in the visible church shall be
saved. For I pray you, are not they sure to be saved, of whom the holy Ghost
testifies, that they shall be saved? But this testimony of the holy Ghost (say
you) all and every one of the visible Church have. Therefore all and every one
of the visible Church shall be saved, and none therein be damned. Thus many
testimonies in holy Scripture, which are only spoken, are meant, and true of
the invisible Church, you understand of the visible Church, and apply to that
society: and yet spare not to say, that you bring not one Scripture, meant of
the invisible Church, and apply it to the visible. Let the Reader now judge,
whether herein you speak truly, or the contrary imputation of ours be just.

As touching. 1. Pet. 2.9. M. Robinson has four arguments to prove that it
is meant and to be understood of the visible Church, and therefore not of the
invisible, his first argument is this.

If Peter wrote to the visible Church of the Jews, Iustif. 44.
and not to the invisible among them, then in Cap. 2.9. He speaks of the
visible Church, and not of the invisible.

But Peter wrote to the visible Church of the Jews, and nor to the invisible
among them.

Therefore in Chap. 2.9. he speaks to the visible Church of the Jews, and not
of the invisible.

The proposition or consequence of this argument which we deny as being
palpablie false, he indeuoureth not to prove at all: to wit, that to whomsoever
Peter writ of them all that which he writ must be meant and understood: which
no man of understanding will grant.

The assumption he strengthens with sundry reasons; as first, Peter wrote to
that Church and society whereof he was the Apostle: But he was the Apostle of
the visible Church of the Jews: Ergo, Peter wrote to the visible Church of the
Jews, and consequently not to the invisible. 2. Peter wrote to that Church and
society which he knew. But he did know the visible Church, and not the
invisible, which is known only to God, Ergo, he wrote to the visible Church,
and not to the invisible. These proofs he inserts in his first reason: but not
content therewith, he confirms his assumption with two more arguments laid
down in his third and fourth reasons.

To that Church Peter writ wherein were Elders and a flock depending upon them.

But the visible Church had Elders and a flock depending upon them, and not
the invisible.

Therefore to the vis, Church Peter write, and not to the inuis.

Again to that Church which had the word of God preached amongst them the
Apostles did write.

But the word was preached to the visible Church:

Therefore to it he writ.

The sum of these three arguments, 1.3. and 4. is this, Peter writ to the
visible Church, Ergo: 1. Pet. 2.9. cannot be meant of the invisible Church; but
of the visible. By this argument I can prove, that the Epistles to Timothy,
Titus, and Philemon excepted: in all the Epistles of Paul, Peter, and James,
there is nothing meant of the invisible Church: Because the said Epistles were
written as you say to the visible Church. Also that nothing in the Epistles to
Timothy, and Titus, are spoken either, of the invisible or visible church, But
of Ministers. The foundation whereof is, that to whomsoever an Apostle writ an
Epistle, of them all in that Epistle is spoken, and to be understood.

Secondly, I deny your assumption, and affirm that Peter writ to the Church;
whereby I mean the same which we call the invisible Church, and even so did
the rest of the Apostles, those Epistles excepted which were written to some
special person. For the ministry is given to the Church, or Saints and Body
of Christ. Ephesians. 4.11.12. Which Body the invisible Church is, and not the
visible: And here I reason thus, as I have once before. To what Church or
society the ministry and Ministers were given of Christ, to the same the
Canonical Epistles were written: But to the Church militant the ministry and
Ministers were given: therefore to it the Epistles were written. The proposition
is manifest, the assumption Ephesians. 4.11.12. does clearly prove. We may
remember also, here how Peter in his first Epistle, writes expressly and by
name, to the Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father unto
sanctification of the Spirit: and in the second thus: Peter to you which have
obtained like precious Faith with us: which Faith only the elect have, and
therefore is the same in effect with the former, Peter to the Elect, etc.

In answering our aforesaid and last objection, Iustif. 107.
M. Robinson adds this: If you would grant, that only they are true members
of the Church, which by the word of God (which must be the rule of our
judgment) may be judged Saints, it would end this controversy. But all that
profess Religion may by the word of God be judged Saints, as before I have
showed: Otherwise Saul, Doeg, Ioab, Absalom, the Scribes and Pharisees, Judas,
Demas, with infinite such were not true members of the visible Church: which
with any truth you cannot affirm. See that you be now M. Robinson as good as
your word: let this controversy concerning the matter of the visible church
be ended. And thus much concerning the matter of the vis. Church: Let us now
hear what is the form thereof.

The form say we, is the profession of true religion. The Separists teach
otherwise, some that this is the form, some that.

M. Ainsworth writes thus: Counterp. 107. Ibid. 174.
To the constitution of a Church there belongs, first a people, as the matter
whereof, and 2. a calling, gathering and uniting together, as the form whereof
the Church consists. We must remember here, that a little after these words
he teaches, that Saints by calling are the matter of the visible Church. If
this be true, then calling is comprised under the matter, and therefore not
under the form; so that gathering and uniting together must make the form, or
else we have here none. That gathering now and uniting together are not the
form I do thus prove.

If a people be the matter, and gathering and uniting together the form of the
true visible Church, then every people gathered and united together is a true
visible Church.

But the latter is false.

Therefore the first.

The proposition is grounded upon this certain and undoubted truth, that
where matter and form of a true vis. church is, there is a true church.

The assumption, to wit, that every people gathered and united together, is not
a true vis. Church, is likewise true: otherwise the congregations of Papists,
Anabaptists, etc. be true Churches: for they consist of people, gathered and
united together. But leaving this man, let us hear what M. Smith says.

Principles and Inferences. 11.
The true form (says he) of a true visible Church is partly inward, partly
outward. The inward part of the form consists in three things. 1. the
Spirit, 2. Faith, 3. Love. The Spirit is the soul animating the whole body,
Faith unites the members of the body to the head Christ Jesus, Love unites
the members of the body each to other. The outward part thereof is, a vow,
promise, oath, or covenant betwixt God and the Saints. Every piece and parcel
hereof he seems to himself and to his Disciples to prove substantially, he
alleges no less then twelve testimonies of Scripture for the proof of one
point.

Reply. The form, (says he) is partly inward and partly outward. Then the
matter of the visible Church must be so too: except he will have a form
without matter, which I know you will not say. Tell us therefore, what is the
inward matter of the visible Church, and what is the outward: for assuredly we
know not. But let this go. The inward form is the Spirit, Faith, Love. One
would think that this was rather the form of the Church militant: considering
these three, Spirit, Faith, Love, are only to be found in the elect, and
cannot fall into any reprobate, whereof the visible Church consists for a
great part. And first as touching the Spirit, it is proper to the chosen, as is
manifest by Romans 8.14.17. Gal. 4.6. Tit. 1.1.
And for this cause Faith is called the Faith of Gods elect, because I say it
is proper to the elect of God: which is further confirmed by that in the Acts,
Acts 13.48. 1. Ioh. 3.14.
as many as was ordained to eternal life believed. And concerning Love John
tells us, that thereby we may know and be assured, that we are translated
from death to life.

The spirit, says he, is the soul animating the whole body. By whole body he
understands the whole visible Church: and his meaning is, that as the body of
man and all the members and parts thereof are animated, that is, are quickened
and receive natural or corporal life from the soul: so the whole visible
Church, and all the members thereof have spiritual life from the Spirit of
God. From whence this necessarily follows, that every one of the visible
Church has the Spirit of God, Romans 8.10.11.
quickening him to righteousness and holiness of life here: and to
immortality and eternal life in the world to come. For both these effects the
spirit works in whomsoever it is, and is there fore-called the spirit of
life. The which if it be true, Romans 8.2.
I mean, that every member of the visible Church has the Spirit of God, as
all of you do (in effect) teach, and namely as often as you do tell us that a
true visible Church is the body of Christ: then in the visible Church there
are none dead in trespasses and sins; no dead, but all living stones:
forasmuch as the whole body, and consequently every member thereof, is animated
and quickened by the Spirit, from whence flows spiritual life and motion.
Then in the visible church there be no hypocrites, nor carnal or natural men,
no wicked person, neither openly nor secretly wicked: for as much as every
member of the visible church has the spirit, Apology 44. Counterp. 127.
even the spirit of life, or quickening spirit: which in whomsoever it is
mortifyeth sin in them, crucifieth their flesh and natural corruption
freeing them from the power and dominion thereof: and quickneth or inableth
them to lead an holy and spiritual life. Lastly then in the vis. church there
be no Reprobates, none that shall be damned: for as much as every one in the
visible church has the Spirit of God, and so the spirit of life, wherewith
whosoever is endued has not only spiritual, but eternal life begun in him,
and therefore shall never die. And here we may remember that the spirit of God
is bestowed only upon Gods children, Romans 8.14.17.
all which be hears of salvation. Also that the Spirit is called the seal and
earnest of our inheritance: Gal. 4.6.
whereby we learn, That whosoever has the spirit, he has the earnest and
seal of God of his heavenly inheritance, and so is sure to be saved. But the
whole body of the vis. Church say you has this spirit animating it. Therefore
conclude I all and every one of the vis. Church are sure to be saved, and so
there be in it no Reprobates, nor such as shall be damned. This conclusion
follows also necessarily from that you do add: Faith unites the members of
the body to the head Christ. By body here you mean the whole visible Church:
and so teach first, that all the members of the vis. Church be united to
Christ, as to their head. Secondly, that every one of the vis. Church has that
faith, which makes this union, or unites him to Christ his head. Does it not
now from hence follow, that all of the vis. Church be heirs of salvation, and
that none of them shall pass into condemnation? Joh. 10.26. and 27.
For who can pluck from Christ, that is united unto him, and is as it were
part of him? Or can any member of his die, seeing to every one of them he
communicates life, both spiritual and eternal? Can any also endued with this
effectual faith be condemned? He that believes has everlasting life, Ioh.
3.16.17.36. and 5 24. Romans 8.1.
is saved already, and has passed from death to life: to him there is no
condemnation, That which he says here of the spirit animating the whole
body, (even as the soul does the whole body of man) if he had spoken and meant
it of the Church, without adding or understanding visible, the one of the which
you always do: and by body understood the mystical body of Christ, and by a
member an elect vessel, converted and brought to the faith, then had he
spoken truly: but understanding by body, the visible Church, and by a member,
one particular person of that society he teaches that which is very false.

There shift and evasion I know will be this, that they do not mean that all
the vis. Church have indeed the Spirit, Faith and Love, but only externally,
and so far as men can judge. This is absurd. For in this they secretly imply,
that there are some in the vis. Church which have not the spirit, nor faith,
nor love: and in this positive Divinity of yours directly teach the contrary.
For the spirit (say you) animateth the whole body. If the whole body then all
the members thereof, and consequently, there is no member that is destitute of
the spirit. This therefore you may not allege for your self, except you
will contradict your self.

After these men comes M. Robinson, and he fully agreeing with M. Smith
concerning the matter of the vis. Church, does yet differ from them both about
the form: and tells us, that the covenant is the form. Saints (says he) is
the matter, Iustiff. 88. and 82.
and the Covenant the form, from which two concurring the Church arises.
Hereby he and M. Smith (who makes it the outward part of the form) mean a
solemn vow, oath, promise, or Covenant made to God of those that be of years
of discretion, to renounce Idolatry, and to cleave to God, and to every part of
his truth.

For the discovery and conuincing of this your error, we must remember that
the oath and covenant which King Asa and his subjects made to seek the Lord
God of their Fathers, (from whence these men fetch this doctrine) was in the
15. year of Asa, as is said 2. Chron, 15.10. and that he reformed the Church,
and restored the true Religion and worship of God, in the beginning and
entrance into his kingdom, as appears by 2. Chro. 14. and 1. Kings 15.14.
This covenant therefore cannot possibly be the form of the Church, seeing
Judah was a true church in Asia his days before they made this covenant, and a
thing can not be or have existance without the form. And here we may remember
that this vow and promise (in effect) we make, and pass into this covenant in
baptism, when and whereby we are recciued and incorporated into the church.
Go not therefore about to deceive men in pe^swading them that we have entered
into no covenant with God to be his people, and to obey his commandments: And
are therefore false churches.

And here not unfitly might I produce four arguments of Iustif. 3.27.
M. Robinsons taken from the in-being of the vv^cked in our Church, whereby he
will prove our congregatio^s to be and re^aine unformed, and consequent y to
be no true Churches. First (says he) because godly and wicked men are
contrari^s, as being gui^^^ and led by contrary causes, the one sort by the
spirit, and the other by the flesh, which are contrary one unto other. Now two
contraries are not capable of one and the same form.

By this reason of yours (if it were ought) there is no vis. Church formed, and
consequently none at all: for you will not d^ny that in the vis. Church there
be godly, and by your own confession Page 106. there be hypocrites, all which
are wicked: now these be contraries, as being guided and led by contrary
causes, the one sort by the spirit, and the other by the flesh, which are
contrary one unto another, and two contraries are not capable of one and the
same form. The rest of your arguments being no less frivolous then this, I
for brevity omit. And let this suffice concerning the matter and form of the
visible Church.

CHAP. IIII. Whether the covenant of life and salvation which God made with
Abraham and his seed, were made with the visible or invisible Church.
TO this Society (meaning the vis. Church) say you, A true description of the
vis. Church 11.
is the covenant and all the promises of peace, of love, and of salvation, of
the presence of God, of his power, of his graces, and of his protection. And in
your Apology you have these words: How else should a true visible Church have
assurance of the promises and scales of Gods Covenant, presence, and blessing
to app^rtaine unto them. Apology 44.
This likewise M. Smith teaches in his Principles and inferences page 11. For
confirmation whereof, ye allege many places of Scr^pture but all in vain. By
many of them it is indeed evident, that God has made a cou^n^nt of life and
salvation with man: not with Angels, or any other creature, nor yet with all
mankind. Herein both you and we agr^e and hereunto all accord that be of
any understanding. But the question and doubt to be decided is, with wh^m God
ha^h made this Covenant. Seeing not with all mankind: with what part of
mankind. Seeing not with all m n, with what society and company of men,
which is that we call a Church. In a word: whether with the Church invisible,
or visible. We say with the invisible Church: you affirm with the visible
Church, and pretend to prove it by many witnesses. If you will have their
testimonies do you any good, you must not so much show that they speak of a
promise of covenant of life everlasting which God makes with his people, make
it appear, that by people is meant the visible Church, and the members
thereof. This none of you have attempted.

For the ending of this controversy, let us consider of Genesis 17. Where the
Lord makes this covenant with Abraham: a principal place of Scripture also
alleged by you. Moreover (says God) I will establish my covenant between
me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant to be God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. 8. And I will give
thee, and thy seed after thee the land, wherein thou art a stranger, even all
the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God. For
the right understanding of this Scripture, and of some other in Genesis and
else where, we must know that this part of the covenant on the Lord his part, I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed. Does conta^ne in it promises of this
life, and of the life to come. Touching this life, the Lord makes a covenant
with Abraham and his seed, that is all his posterity according to the flesh,
concerning the land of Canaan, (a land that flowed with milk and honey) that he
would give it unto them to inhab^te. Concerning the life to come, signified by
the land of Canaan, God also makes a covenant with Abraham and his seed, that
is, with all those whether Jews or Gentiles, that should be of the same faith
with Abraham. By the seed of Abraham then with wh^m this covenant was made, is
meant, partly they which were b^gotten of Abraham by carnal generation, called
in the Scripture children after the flesh, and said to be borne after the
flesh, that is, the people of the Jews, who until the death of Christ were
the only visible Church, which we may fitly call, the carnal Israel: partly
all that believe in Christ, as Abraham did, of what nation soever, Romans 9.8.
Gal. 4.23.29. Gal. 6.16.
called the children of promis, and said to be borne after the Spirit, and may
be termed, the spiritual Israel, called also the Israel of God. This
distinction of Abraham's children we have in Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Thus we see there
be two kinds of covenants, made with two sorts of men or different soc eties,
and yet all but Israel. The one an earthly, that is concerning the pleasures
and comforts men enjoy here on the earth: the other an heavenly, and touching
the joys thereof. The first of these God made with the natural posterity of
Abraham, the visi. Church for a time: The latter with the spiritual posterity
of Abraham, and Church invisible. These things being made manifest by the
Scripture, your error will thereby likewise appear.

That God made a covenant with Abraham, and his seed, nothing can be more
clear. That by Abraham's seed we are sometimes to understand his children
according to the flesh, and that with Abraham and them God made a covenant of
inheriting the land of Canaan that fruitful land, it is plain by the latter
of the former verses, viz. ver. 18. and by Genesis 13.15.17. All the land which
thou see, will I give unto thee, and thy seed for ever. Arise walk through
the land, in the length thereof, and breadth thereof: for I will give it unto
thee. And likewise by Genesis 15.18. In that same day the Lord made a covenant
with Abraham, saying, unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of
Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates, 19. The Kenites, and the
Kenizites, and the Kadmonites, 20. And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, etc.
Hereunto add Genesis 12.7. Act. 7.5.6.

That by the seed of Abraham, sometimes is meant, the faithful only, such I
mean as have justifying faith, of whom it may be said which was spoken of
Abraham their father: They believe God, and it is counted unto them for
righteousness, and so of the church invisible, or members thereof, Jews and
Gentiles, it is by the holy Scriptures as evident. In the 13. of Genesis the
Lord making a covenant with Abraham, says unto him, thus: I will make thy
seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the
earth, Genesis 15.5.
then shall thy seed be numbered. The like speech God uses unto him at another
time: Look up now unto Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able to
number them: and he said unto him, so shall thy seed be. If any, shall be so
simple, as to understand these Scriptures, of the carnal, and not (chiefly)
of the spiritual children of Abraham, his error is corrected, Romans 4.18. Where
these words of Moses, So shall thy seed be, are repeated, and we taught by
them to understand, those who are of the Faith of Abraham, of what nation
soever. For which cause, he is there called the Father of many nations, that is
the Father of all that believe of what nation soever: and had his name changed
from Abram to Abraham: and a little before is said to be the Father of us all:
as if the Apostle had said, the father of my self, and of all that believe.
This is confirmed and made more plain in the 11. verse. of the aforesaid
Chapter. Abraham received the sign of circumcision, at the seal of the
righteousness of the Faith which he had when he was uncircumcised, that he
should be the Father of all them that believe, not being circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed to them also. 12. And the father of
circumcision, that is, of the circumcised, or of the Jews, not unto them only
which believe and are of the circumcision but unto them also of the Gentiles,
that walk in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham, that is, believe
as he did, which faith he had when he was uncircumcised. And again, verse. 16.
Therefore it is by faith, (meaning the heavenly inheritance) that it might come
by grace, and the promise that God made to Abraham, might be sure to all the
seed: not to that only which is of the Law, that is, not to the Jews only
who believe, and were under the Law given by God to Moses: but also to that
which is of the faith of Abraham, that is, to the Gentiles, who believe as
Abraham did, alb^it they be not subject to the ceremonies of the Law: who is
the Father of us all, that believe, Jews and Gentiles; Here observe, that
Abraham is called, and that twice, the Father of the Faithful, nay, of all
them that believe. If Abraham be the father of all believers, then are they his
children and seed. Which is also expressly taught here, and enlarged by a
distribution of his children, or of all his seed: in one word, into the
believing Jews, and the believing Gentiles: and this is likewise set down
twice.

To this purpose serves that also Gal. 4.29. And if ye be Christ's, that is
believe in Christ, and by faith united unto him, and made one with him, then
are ye Abraham's seed. But above all other the 7. verse. of the third Chapter
clears this point: know ye therefore, that they which are of faith, the
same are the children of Abraham. To these children I say, and to this seed of
Abraham, that is, to and with the faithful, the elect of God, and Church
invisible, has God made a covenant or promis of grace, and of salvation: and
not with the Church visible, and the members thereof, as you all do fondly
imagine. And this the Lord himself, the author and maker of this gracious
promise teaches: Genesis 17.19.
Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son (says God to Abraham) and thou shall
call his name Izhak: and I will establish my covenant (meaning chief^ly the
spiritual covenant and of eternal life) with him, for an everlasting
covenant, and with his seed after him. 20. And as concerning Ishmael, I have
heard thee: Lo, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, etc. 21. But
my covenant will I establish with Izhak. Here the Lord secludeth Ishmael from
this covenant, and from having any part therein, denying that he made, or would
keep this promise with him, though in the visible Church, as Ishmael at this
time was, or with any reprobates of whom he was a figure. And restrains the
covenant to Izhak only, and to his seed, that is to them who should believe in
Christ, as Izhak did; to the Elect I say, of whom he was a figure. We must
here remember that Abraham his family was the visible Church. For from the
beginning of the world to the giving of the Law, the visible Church was shut
up in the families of the Patriarcks. This premised, I reason thus against you.
If the covenant of grace and salvation was made with the visi: Church, and all
the members thereof, then with Ishmael, because he was of the visible Church:
But it was not made with Ishmael, as this place of Genesis proves: Ergo, not
with the visible Church: but with the invisible as we affirm.

And this is further confirmed, Romans 9.6. Notwithstanding it cannot be that the
word of God should take none effect: for all they are not Israel, that is, t e
Israel to whom God made the promise of eterall life, which are of Israel, that
is defended of Jacob. 7. Neither are they all children, because they are the
seed of Abraham, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, 8. That is, they
which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of Abraham: but the
children of the promise, are counted for the seed. For the better
understanding of this Scripture, we must know that the Apostle being to speak
of the reiection of the Jews, answers an objection that would readily be
made against the same. If God have cast away the Jews, then is the promise
that God made to Abraham and his seed frustrate, and of none effect: which
cannot be so: Therefore God has not rejected them. This objection is contained
in these words: It cannot be that the word of God should take none effect.
Whereby the word of God is meant, the promise that God made to Abraham and to
his posterity: I will be God unto thee and to thy seed after thee. Paul
answers, It follows not that God is unfaithful and keeps not the promise
of grace and life which he made with Abraham and his seed, though his
posterity, the Israelits be rejected of God and damned: because this covenant
or promise of life everlasting, the Lord made not with those who should be
Abraham's children according to the flesh, not (I say) with that carnal Israel,
that is, the Jews who should lineally descend from Abraham: but with the
Spiritual Israel, or children of Abraham in a spiritual sense, that is, the
elect, or those that should believe in God, as Abraham did, whether they were
Jews or Gentiles. So long therefore as the Lord rejects not and damneth the
elect of the Jews and Gentiles the true children of Abraham, but receives
them to grace, and in his son Christ Jesus gives to them life eternal, he
is faithful, and keeps his promise and covenant made with Abraham, and his
seed: Albeit the rest of the children of Abraham, according to the flesh, or
people of Israel, and of the visible Church be rejected and damned. And here
observe that these children of Abraham are called, first, the children of
promise, as being such children of Abraham, that were not begotten of him by
the force of Nature, or by carnal generation: but such as should be borne of
water and the Spirit, and begotten by the immortal seed of the word, and
promise of the Gospel. Secondly they are called the children of God. They
(says the Apostle) which are the children of the flesh, are not the children
of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. Here the
same are meant by the children of God, the children of the promise, and the
seed, to wit, of Abraham. Whereby we learn, that God made this promise or
covenant of grace with those only, whom in Jesus Christ he adopteth into the
number of his children. But the elect and invisible Church only are Gods
children, they alone also are the children of the promise: Therefore with them
only God has made the covenant of grace: and not with the vis. Church, no
more then with Ishmael and Esau members thereof: as the Apostle shows here in
the verses next following. And for this cause it may be the elect are called
the children of the promise: because the promise of Grace and Life God made to
Abraham, belongs only to them. These Elect and true believers are they who
are counted for the seed of Abraham, with whom this covenant was made, as it
is said, verse. 8. and not the natural posterity of Abraham, as some Jews
imagined, and it may be, doc at this day: nor yet the visible Church as you no
less carnally conceive then these Jews. This controversy betwixt you and us,
one would think should now be ended, considering how clearly the truth
shines on our side: yet for fear it prove otherwise, I will add something
more.

In the third to the Galathians, verse 29. Paul says thus to them: And if ye
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise: As if he had
said: If ye believe in Christ, whereby you are made one with him, then are ye
indeed the seed of Abraham, and heirs of eternal life according to the
promise God made with Abraham. From hence I reason thus.

All they and only they who be Christ's, that is, are ingrafted into him by
faith, are Abraham's seed, to whom the promise of eternal life is made.

But all of the church invisible and only they are Christ's, ingrafted into him
by faith:

Therefore all of the invisible church, and only they are Abraham's seed, to
whom the promise of eternal life is made.

The Proposition is proved by these words of the Apostle: If Christ's, then are
ye Abraham's seed. The Assumption needs no proof. Again, I argue from hence
thus against you.

If the vis. Church be Abraham's seed, and they to whom the promise of
salvation was made, then the vis. Church, and consequently all the members
thereof, are heirs of salvation.

But this latter is false:

Therefore the first.

The Assumption you will not deny: and the Proposition is as clear by this
Scripture: and needs must be true, seeing God is faithful and constant in the
performance of his promise: which he could not be if any one of those should
go to hell, to whom he has made promise of heaven. God is not as man, Number.
23.19.
that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he should repent. Has
he said, and shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he not
accomplish it? No, no. God is true, Romans 3.4.
though every man be a liar. If therefore God have made a covenant or promise
of salvation with the vis. Church, as you all affirm, and specially M. Smith
ever and anon in his Parralleles, then all of the visible Church shall be
saved. But for as much as many of that society shall be damned, it cannot be
that to them this promise was made, but to some other company, even to the
heirs of salvation. And this latter may be confirmed, and so you convinced by
your own words. By faith (says M. Ainsworth) we are the seed of Abraham, (
and consequently heirs by promise of the blessed inheritance, and so do enter
into his rest. Com. of Saints 321.
Here you affirm that the company of the faithful, or true believers, are the
seed of Abraham, with whom God made this covenant) which manifestly
overthrows you: Secondly, that they who be the seed of Abraham, are heirs of
the heavenly and blessed inheritance. And here I reason thus from your own
words.

They only are the seed of Abraham, with whom God made that gracious
covenant of life everlasting, that be he^res of the blessed inheritance, and
do enter into the h^auenly rest.

But the elect or invisible Church only are heirs of the blessed inheritance,
and do enter into the heavenly rest:

Therefore the elect, or invisible Church only are the seed of Abraham, with
whom God made that gracious covenant of life everlasting.

The Proposition is your own: the Assumption I trust you abhor to deny:
embrace therefore the conclusion, whereupon necessarily follows, that God
made not this covenant with the vis. Church, as all of you do teach: but with
the invisible, as we affirm.

But you tell us, that 1. Tim. 4 8. does prove this. Bodily exercise profits
little: but godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of
the life present, and of that that is to come. Here is mention indeed of a
promise concerning life eternal. But to whom it is made? Paul answers, to
the godly. But such only are the elect and invisible Church: Therefore to
them, and not to the visible Church, is the promise made of life everlasting by
Christ. So that this Scripture makes against you.

Moreover, you allege here. 2. Pet. 1.3. According as his divine power has
given unto us all things that pertain to life and godliness. Peter here tells
us that all good things belonging to life eternal are given us of God: But to
whom? To the visible Church? We read no such thing, but clean otherwise. To
us, says he. As if he had said, to me and the rest of the elect. That by life
here, the Apostle means life eternal, no man will deny: Neither that life
eternal shall be given unto them, to whom all things appertaining to that
life are given. Seeing then the invisible Church only, have all things
pertaining to life given them of God, forasmuch as they only enjoy that life,
and that the Apostle speaks of them who are made partakers of this gift: it
follows necessarily thereupon, that he speaks only of the invisible
church. Observe besides, that he says not only that God has given us all
things that appertain unto life, but adds, and godliness. Implying thereby,
that they to whom this life is given of God, have first all things pertaining
unto godliness bestowed upon them in this life, before they enjoy that life
eternal in the world to come. But to the invisible Church only all things
pertaining to godliness are given: Therefore of the invisible Church the
Apostle here speaks, and not of the visible, as you affirm. And here mark
how M. Ainsworth applying this Scripture to the vis. Church, does convince both
himself, and his friends. Let us (says he) consider some principal of the
many good things, Communion of Saints 165. 168. 170.
that God does give us pertaining unto life and godliness. Among these he
names, Faith, And what faith? That (says he) whereby our fathers walked with
God, pleased him, wrought many good works, obtained good report, and in the
end, the salvation of their souls. It is the gift of God unto his chosen
people, which therefore is called the faith of Gods elect. And a little after,
The most excellent fruit that we reap of faith is our justification in the
sight of God by his grace in Christ Jesus. Hereby it is plain enough, though
there is much more serving to this purpose, that he speaks of justifying
faith. Another good thing pertaining to life and godliness that is given us of
God is, (says he) sanctification: Ibid. 177.179.183.186.
also, the fear of the Lord, love out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned: the love of God, and his love shed abroad in
their hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto them: with other graces of
this kind. From these words of your own I argue thus against you.

Of that Church or company of men Peter here speaks, to whom of God are
given justifying faith, sanctification, and the other graces before specified:

But the said graces are given only to the elect, and church invisible:

Of them therefore only Peter here speaks.

The Proposition is confirmed by your own words. The Assumption is so clear,
that it needs no confirmation. Thus we see that this scripture also makes
not for, but against you.

As the Lord has not made a covenant or promise of salvation with the vis
Church, and cons^quently with the members thereof, but with them only of the
invisible Church, as we have heard: so neither has he made to the vis church
and members thereof a promise of peace. For then there should be peace between
God and the wicked, seeing a great part of the vis. Church are wicked: which
there is not, as witnesses the Prophet: Isai. 52.22.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. This promise also belongs to
them of the invisible Church, and they only of this society have this peace.
Then being justified by faith, which the elect only are we have peace with
God, Romans 5.1.
says Paul, denying hereby this peace to all those that want justifying faith.
The Lord says, I have hated Esau. Mal. 2.3.
This is true of all Reprobates, of whom he was a fi^ure. Seeing the vis.
Church consists for the most part of Reprobates, and but few therein that are
chosen: it cannot be that to this society God has made a promise of love, bu^
rather to the company of the elect and Church invisible, where of Jacob was a
figure: of whom God says, I have loved Jacob: therein restraining his love to
the elect. And as for the promise of God his protection, Pro. 2.7.8. Mat.
10.30. compared with ver. 16. The whole 91. Psalm.
it is in the Scriptures restrained to them that fear the Lord, and put their
trust in his mercy; that make him their hope and fortress, and the most high
their refuge; to the righteous, that is, the godly, and to them that walk
uprightly: and therefore to the invisible Church, and the members thereof. And
when this promise is made to the v^sible Church, it is for their sakes that are
therein of the invisible Church.

Apology 44.
And where you say that a true visible Church (and consequently the members
thereof) has assurance of the promises of Gods presence, and blessing to
appertain unto them: I demand what assurance a man can have of enjoying Gods
grac^ous presence he^re on earth, and glorious presence in heaven, wherein
consists our happiness, by being a member of the visible Church: considering
so many of the visible Church, are sinners, and that sin does separate
between God and man. This is presumption, and not an holy assurance: and to
build on the sands, which house tempests at one time or other will blow down;
and not on the rock, that stands immovable. He that has no other assurance
of Gods presence, and blessing then this, that he is a member of the visible
church, may peradventure be as far from enjoying Gods presence, as they
which are in hell from entering into heaven: and from being blessed of God, as
they upon whom this sentence shall be pronounced: Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The Papists might
well reject our assurance and certainty of salvation, had we no better ground
for the same then this. Yet let no man so understand me, as though I denied
that God was present with, and did protect the visible Church. For I know that
our Lord, partly for the elect that are in the visible Church, and partly for
his own glory and names sake that is called upon among them, is in the midst
of the seven golden Candlestickes, Revel. 1.13.
protecting them by his Almighty power.

CHAP. V. The titles which the Separists ascribe to the visible Church, are to
be understood of the invisible Church only.
AS the description these men give of the visible church, and that which they
say is the matter and form thereof, is not a description, nor the matter and
form of the visible, but rather of the invisible Church militant: even so it
is with sundry titles they give to the visible Church. It is called (say they)
a kingdom of Priests, a royal Priesthood the sheep of the Lord, Appologie
44. communion of Saints 248. and 470. Descrip: of the visible Church page 1.
the Temple of God, a chosen Generation, an holy Nation, the peculiar people:
yea, Christ his Sister, his Love, his Spouse, and his Body. These titles which
in the holy Scriptures are usually given to the invisible Church militant, and
company of the faithful, and if at any time to the visible, it is because and
with respect had to the elect and Church invisible, to whom alone properly the
aforesaid titles do belong: they ignorantly apply and understand of the
visible Church, and company of professors, with diverse more of the same kind,
which for brevity I omit.

But let us briefly and in order consider of these or the most of them If the
visible Church be a kingdom of Priests, and royal Priesthood, then all of
this Church and company are Kings and Priests unto God: but the last is false:
therefore the first. To the proposition you as willingly subscribe as we. The
assumption which is this: All of the visible Church are not Kings and Priests
unto God, with open mouth you deny: which thus I prove.

All that be Kings and Priests unto God shall reign, and offer to God the
sacrifice of praise for ever in heaven.

But all of the visible Church shall not reign, and offer to God the sacrifice
of praise for ever in heaven.

Therefore all of the visible Church be not Kings and priests unto God.

The assumption is in it self clear. The proposition is evident by Revel.
5.6. Thou wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation. And have made us unto God Kings
and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Here we learn, that these
Kings and Priests shall reign and inherit the kingdom: and besides who be
these Kings, which shall thus reign, not the visible Church, as these men
teach: but those whom the lamb has redeemed to God by his blood out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, Confession of Faith, 29.
and nation: which are the Elect or invisible Church, as they themselves
confess. This is further confirmed and made more evident in the first of the
Revel. where John says that those whom Christ Jesus loves and washes from
their sins in his blood, are Kings and Priests unto God. But this Christ does
only to the Elect, and Church invisible: for them alone he loves; their
sins only he washes away: therefore they only are this kingdom of
Priests, or Kings and Priests unto God. 1. Pet. 2.5.7.9.
Peter tells us that the faithful are this royal Priesthood, and calling
them also an holy Priesthood, he says that they offer up spiritual sacrifice
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. But the invisible Church (of which society
the faithful are) only does and can offer such sacrifices: Therefore the
invisible Church, are this royal Priesthood, or kingdom of Priests, and not
the visible Church. If I should have said nothing, M. Ainsworth himself will
suffice for the conviction of this error. Communion of Saints. 248.
They whom Christ has made Kings and Priests unto God his father, being a
Kingly Priesthood, even a kingdom of Priests, and a holy nation: having part
in the first resurrection, the second death may have no power over them; but
sit with Christ in his throne, even as he overcame, and sits with his
Father in his throne. From your own words I argue thus against you. They who
are this royal Priesthood, that is, Kings and Priests unto God, have part in
the first resurrection, the second death has no power over them, but sit with
Christ in his throne: But the invisible Church only and company of the Elect
have part in the first resurrection, the second death has no power over them:
Ergo, the invisible Church is this royal Priesthood. The proposition your own
words do prove: The assumption needs no proof. And again in another place
he conuinceth himself and his friends. Seeing then (says he) we have
received such grace from God, Communion of Saints 487. 488.
(so many as believe in the name of his son Christ) as that we are through
his mercy made a chosen generation, a kingly Priesthood, washed from all our
sins in the blood of Christ, and reigning with him on earth by mortifying and
subduing our earthly members: what remains then but that we purge our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit. From hence I infer, that either
the visible Church, and consequently all the members thereof are washed from
their sins: mortify and subdue their earthly members, which no man will
affirm: or else the visible Church is not that royal Priestood whereof the
Scripture speaks: for they that are this royal Priesthood, are washed from
their sins, by your own confession. Judge now thy self (Christian reader)
whether this that M. Ainsworth writes here, does not convince that he says
else where. Communion of Saints 470.
And now that all Christians are made Priests unto God, even a Kingly
Priesthood to reign upon earth, and to have their power of Christ to judge all
that are within the Church, and cast out the wicked from among them: they ought
to retain and use their power. By Christians he means here the members of
the visible Church, and of all them he affirms, that the are Kings and
Priests unto God. And to increase his sin, after his and their accustomed
manner, he alleges three places to prove this his error: namely, 1. Pet.
2.9. Reu. 1.6. and 5.10. For the conuincing of which errors their are no
testimony in holy Scripture more excellent, as we may appear by the
premises. Whereby it is evident, they are strangely blinded in their
understanding: seeing in the midst of a glorious light they see not the
light, but grope as men in palpable darkness. And here fitly I return that
upon you, M. Ainsworth: which you falsely apply to us. The Reader may see how
your right eye is blinded, to bring Scriptures so plain against your selves.
Besides the three former testimonies you allege one another, that likewise
makes not for, but against you. If you will hear my voice indeed, Counterp.
79. Exodus 19.5.
and keep my covenant, then you shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests: but
the Elect only and they which are of the invisible Church do this which the
Lord here requires: Therefore they only are the kingdom of Priests here
spoken of. Again, the visible Church these few excepted in it which are of
the invisible Church, does not hear Gods voice indeed, but contemn it;
does not keep but break his covenant, and therefore is not a kingdom of
Priests to God. For what though this speech was spoken to the visible church?
They therein of the invisible Church only could and did keep the condition
here required. They therefore alone make this Kingdom of Priests. Thus your
own sword helps to pierce your side.

Neither is that so fit a title for the visible Church the sheep of Lord,
seeing in the Scriptures specially of the new Testament, ordinarily by sheep
are meant the Elect, and Church invisible: I am the door of the sheep, Ioh.
10.7.15. Matthew. 25, 33.
I lay down my life for my sheep, when the Son of man comes in his glory,
he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left. In a
word, If we would know who indeed are the sheep of the Lord, and rightly so
to be called, Christ himself tells us again in the 10. of John saying:
Verse. 27.
my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish. Thereupon M. Ainsworth says
well: such were not of Christ's sheep for then he would have given them life
eternal, and for confirmation thereof he quoteth this place of John. Communion
of Saints 58.
Whereby he imployeth that all Christ's sheep shall have life everlasting. From
whence it follows that this title Christ's sheep, or the sheep of the Lord,
appertains to the elect and invisible church, and cannot rightly be said of
the visible Church: except all the visible Church shall be saved. A great part
of the visible Church are so far from being like to sheep, that they may
more fitly be compared to wolves. Mat. 10.26. Luke 10.3.
Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. These whom Christ
calls wolves, were the visible Church of the Jews: In which Church, were but
a few sheep.

You teach further that the visible Church is in the Scripture called the
Temple of God, and this you will prove by 1. Cor. 3.17. Know ye not that you
are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 17. If any
man destroy the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is
holy, which ye are. I would desire no better place for the confutation of this
error, then this you allege for probation thereof. See you not that the
Spirit of God dwells in all those, who be this Temple of God? now God his
spirit dwells only in the Elect: They are of the Elect therefore and
invisible Church who are the Temple of God. That God breaths his Spirit only
into the Elect, it is manifest by Romans 8.14. as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the Sons of God. And by. Gal. 4.6. And because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his son into your hearts, which
cries Abba Father. Again the Temple of God is here said to be holy, which
must needs be because the Spirit of God dwells in him that is this Temple,
and it is holy, which is therefore called the holy Spirit, and the holy Ghost:
^^to o^e^y because in his own nature he is holy, or holiness its^l^e, but
also in respect of his effect and operation, for that all those in whom he is,
he sanctifies and makes holy. Hereupon it follows that if the visible
Church and members thereof be the Temple of God; Then are they sanctified by
the Spirit of God, and Saints indeed, and consequently such as to whom the
heavenly inheritance belongs. For the inheritance shall be given to all them
that are sanctified, as is taught, Act. 20.32. Besides we have heard that
profane Esau, and many more who have been unholy and unclean, disobedient,
yea abominable, rebellious, and reprobate to every good work, have been of
the vis. Church. We may here also remember that this Spirit (which dwells in
every one that is the Temple of God) is called the Spirit of Life, as Romans 8.2.
not only because in whomsoever it is it kills and subdueth sin, and
quickens to righteousness, as Romans 8.10. But for that he who has this
Spirit has life it self, even eternal life begun in him. This Spirit
likewise is called the seal and earnest of our inheritance. 2. Cor. 2.22.
Ephesians. 1.13.
Whosoever therefore has this spirit is sure to inherit the kingdom of
heaven; because he has God his seal and earnest thereof. For as much
therefore as the inuissible Church only and members thereof, have and shall
have this life, and inherit this kingdom: They therefore only have this
spirit, and consequently are this Temple. And this argument one may draw from
your own words, thereby to convince this your error, Christ (say you) dwells
in and governs by his holy Spirit his elect: Confession of Faith, 34.
which he having once given, never takes away from them, but still begets
and nourishes in them repentance, faith, and love, and all Christian virtues
unto immortallity. From these and some other lines of yours, I argue against
you thus. They whosoever they be which are the Temple of God, have the spirit
of God dwelling in them, whereby they are quickened, and have the life of God
in them, yea are quickened to immortallitie: But the Elect only have this
spirit as your selves affirm page 34. of your confession of Faith, whereby
they are quickened as page 26. of the same book: therefore the Elect only and
invisible Church are by your own doctrine the Temple of God, and not the
visible Church. Thus your own sword again helps to pierce your side. And
here this reason may be used against you. Those whom Peter calls a
spiritual house, 1. Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 222.
and Paul the habitation of God by the spirit, be here called the Temple of
God: but by the first are meant the faithful who are of the invisible Church:
therefore by the latter, the proposition is evident: And so is the assumption
to them who understand these places: it has also in part been cleared and
shall be further forthwith. Finally this is easily convinced by 2. Cor. 6.19.
Know you not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you,
whom you have of God? And you are not your own: for you are bought for a
price. Here we see that they who are the Temple of the holy Ghost, or the
Temple of God are said to be redeemed, or bought with a price: But the elect
only are redeemed, even by your own confession: therefore they are of the
Elect and Church invisible who be the Temple of God, and in whom God dwells
by his Spirit.

But it is no marvel though this and many other Scriptures which by the holy
Ghost are meant of the members of the invisible you understand of the vis.
Church, Description of the vis. church. 2
seeing you do the like by 1. Pet. 2.9. then which there is scarce a place in
holy writ, Confession of faith 6. Apology 44. Communion of Saints 248. and
470. Paralleles 61. Justification 44.
wherein the Spirit of God speaks more manifestly of the invisible Church or
those thereof who be effectually called, and that can worse be understood of
the visible. And this I have showed in the second Chapter where I speak at
large of this Scripture: So that it may seem altogether needless to add any
thing thereunto. Yet nevertheless I will: And the rather because you being
told of your mis-applying of this Scripture do justify it, and confidently
affirm, that it is meant of the visible Church, and argue for the same.
Counterp 158. Justification 43.
For the better understanding whereof, I will set down some verses going
before. Ye as lively stones, be made a spiritual house, an holy priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore
it is contained in the Scripture; Behold, I put in Sion a chief corner stone,
elect and precious: and he that believes therein shall not be ashamed. 7. unto
you therefore which believe, it is precious: but unto them which be
disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the corner. 8. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to
them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they
were even ordained. 9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him
that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.

In the fifth verse of this Chapter, they who are spoken of in this 9. verse are
there called: First, lively stones: Secondly, a spiritual house: Thirdly, an
holy priesthood: Fourthly, as Priests they are said to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Now these lively stones, this
spiritual house, and these priests offering sacrifices acceptable to God in
Christ, are such only as be of the elect and invisible Church as I have
plainly showed in the second Chapter: and every babe in knowledge may hereby
know, because the Reprobate cannot offer any acceptable sacrifice to God:
Therefore of the invisible Church, and not of the vis. Church Peter speaks in
this 9. verse, By the 6. and 7. verses it is plain that in this 9. verse he
speaks of the faithful, even such as do believe in Christ. And this alone
the elect do. In the 7: and 8. verses this our Apostle turning his sp^ech from
them that did believe, to them that were so far of from believing in Christ,
that they did stumble at him, so as he was to them a rock of offense, ends
the 8. verse thus unto the which thing they were even ordained, least now the
believing Jews, of whom he had newly spoken, should be terrified with that he
had said of reprobation, and some of them in their weakness fear least they
were of the number of the Reprobates, and such as God bad ordained to just
condemnation: he tells them in the 9. verse, that this he means not by
them, neither need they to fear this at all: for as much as they are not of
that generation, and stock of mankind which God has ordained to destruction,
as the former despisers of Christ: but of the generation which God has chosen
and appointed to life everlasting: which generation is that we call the
invisible Church. Why the elect be here called a chosen generation, you may
read further Chap. 1. And there also see that these titles, royal Priesthood,
holy Nation, peculiar People, which these men understand of the visible Church,
cannot be so taken; But are meant of the faithful or true believers, al which
are of the invisible church. Both by the words themselves then of this
Scripture, (^ mean verse 9.) and also by the coherence or depe^dance thereon
with that goes before, it is evident that this Scripture is pe^uerted by th^se
men and misapplyed. Nay this is evident by their own vvritings. And here with
me obs^rue a secret over ruling h^nd of God. M. Ainsworth having made a large
Treatise i^tituted the Communion of Saints, and there having spoken many
excellent and glorious things of the Saints, rightly understood, that is, of
Saints indeed, or the faithful sanctified by the Spirit of God and Faith in
Christ's who are so of the visible Church, as withal they be of the invisible
Church: but by him meant and misapplyed to all the members of the vis. Church,
Saints by profession; which shameth the whole Treatise, making it almost as
full of lies as lines: He, (I say) having done this ever and anon throughout
his whole book, behold how in a conclusion, which he affixeth to the said
book, he conuinceth himself of error, touching a great part of that he had
said before: and namely concerning this place of Peter, which Page 470.
before he understood of the visible Church, and members thereof. Thus
begins he his conclusion: 487. 4. 88.
seeing we have received such grace from God, (so many as believe in the name
of his Son Christ) as that we are raised up from the graves of sin, etc.
being through his mercy made a 1. Pet. 2.9.
chosen generation, a kingly priesthood, washed from all our sins Deuteronomy. 1.5.
in the blood of Christ, and Reu. 5.10.
reigning with him on earth, by mortifying and subduing our earthly members:
what remains but that we purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit. With your own weapons thus I fight against you. All they and they
only who believe in Christ, are by his blood washed from their sins,
mortify, and subdue their earthly members, are this chosen generation, and
royal priesthood: But only the elect and invisible Church believe in Christ,
are by his blood washed from their sins, mortify and subdue their earthly
members: Therefore the elect only and invisible Church are this chosen
generation, and kingly priesthood: and therefore not the visible church, as
these men do teach. The proposition is your own: the Assumption deny if you
will.

But M. Ainsworth by three reasons will prove that this scripture is not to be
understood of the invisible, Counterp. 158.
but of the vis. Church. The first is laid down in these words. This place of
Peter speaks of and to the vis. or sensible Church: for the Apostle wrote to
the vis. Christians the strangers that then dwelt in Pontus Galatia, etc.

In the tenth Chapter of this book I have answered this reason at large, and
showed the vanity of it: notwithstanding something I will add here.

Be it granted that Peter writ to the vis. church, though something might be
said against it: as that he writes to them that had obtained like precious
faith with him, which none but the chosen and of the inuis. chureh have: yet
this proves not that this 9. verse is true and to be understood of the vis.
Church, no more then it follows that these sayings of Paul are true and to
be understood of the vis. Church, and all the members thereof, Ye are bought
for a price; 1. Cor. 6.20. Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.20. and 3.26. Ephesians. 1.13.
ye have received the spirit of Adoption; ye are the sons of God, who has
sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts; ye are all the sons of
God, ye are sealed with his holy Spirit of promise, the earnest of our
inheritance, with many such like: because the Epistles wherein these are, were
written (as you affirm) to visible or sensible Churches.

The second reason follows in these words: This which Peter speaks chap
2.9.10. is as Moses spoke of old to the visible Church of Israel, Exodus 19.6. I
answer, though Exodus 19.6. was spoken to the vis. church of Israel, yet it was
in respect of them therein who were of the invisible church and of Gods elect,
and is true only of such, as I have showed before: even so it is here.

Your last reason follows. Again (say you) Peter mentions the end of their
calling to this dignity, (viz.) to show forth the virtues of him that has
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light; which whether it
appertains not to the visible Church, I leave it for every true member thereof
to Judge.

It cannot be denied but that Peter speaks of them who of God are called out
of darkness, that is, out of sin and ignorance, into his marvelous light,
that is, to the knowledge of God and holiness: for which marvelous mercy
received, out of the very sense and feeling thereof, they praise God, and
endeavor all the days of their life to walk worthy of it, which is here
called the showing forth of the virtues of him that has called them. But the
inuis. church only and company of the el^ct, are called out of darkness into
this marvelous light, being called therefore the children of the light; and
they alone out of a sensible feeling of this great mercy do praise and bless
God for the same, and endeavor to live to him who has thus called them. Of
the invisible Church therefore called hear a chosen generation, does the
Apostle Peter speak in this place. So this reason makes greatly against you.

Counterp. 158.
No less blameworthy are you, for maintaining this, That no places of
Scripture setting forth the invisible Church, are by you brought to set forth
the visible Church. The contrary to this appears plainly by this Treatise.
To prove that they who be of the true vis. church are called out of the world,
Apology 44. Counterp. 133.
or separated from the world, a separated company of righteous men, usually you
quote Ioh. 15.15.19. and 17.9.14 16.20. Tell me now, who be they that being
in this world, are not of this world: Are not the elect only such? know you
not that they who be not of this world, do belong to a better world? Moreover
does Christ pray for the vis. Church, or the invisible only, and company of
the elect? what mean you then to apply Scriptures concerning these things to
the vis. Church, seeing they be spoken and are true only of Gods elect, who
are the inuis. Church? And notwithstanding to tell us, That places setting
forth the invisible Church, are not by you applied to the vis. Church? And
where you say that the vis. Church is Christ's sister, his love, and his
spouse; how can this possibly be true, seeing the greatest part of the vis.
Church and sometimes almost the whole vis. Church is hateful to God, and
abhorred of him, as before has been made manifest? And by what titles I pray
you does Jesus declare his love to the invisible Church, if these be the titles
of the visible? Christ Jesus himself tells us, that whosoever does his
fathers will which is in heaven the same is his sister: But this do only they
who are of the invisible church: They therefore only are Christ his sister. If
the vis. church and members thereof be Christ his love, then none of them
shall be damned: For it cannot be that Jesus will condemn them whom he
loves. It is the elect likewise and inuis. church, which being contracted here
to Christ, shall be married to him the Kings son in the world to come, when
they shall partake with him in glory: And not the vis. church whereof the
greatest part shall be damned, and but a few thereof saved.

Lastly (say you) the vis. Church is the body of Christ: Whereupon all those
places in Paul's Epistles, where mention is made of Christ's body, you expound of
the visible, when they are to be understood of the invisible church, or the
whole company of the faithful, which is a part thereof. If the vis. church be
the body of Christ, as you tell us, then every one of the vis. church is a
member of Christ his body, and has therefore the same spirit abiding in him,
that is in Christ Jesus. For the very same spirit that dwells in Christ the
head, is from thence derived to his body, and all the members thereof. If any
man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. But if the spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that
dwells in you. Romans 8.9.11. Hereby we know (says John) that we dwell in him
and he in us: 1. Ioh. 4.13.
because he has given us of his spirit. From hence we learn that Jesus does
communicate his spirit to all his members: so as whosoever has not this
spirit, bringing forth the like or the same effects in him that it did in
Christ, the same is no member of Christ, nor part of his body; Christ dwells
not in him, nor he in Christ. As by love all the members of this body are
united together, so by the spirit of God this body with all the members
thereof, are coupled and knit together to the head Christ, whereby it receives
grace, and increase of grace, growing up into Christ; John 1.16. Ephesians. 4.15.16.
for the furniture thereof, according to the effectual power of this spirit,
which is in the measure of every part. Ioh. 15.1.
This spirit is as the juice that from Christ the vine, is conveyed into every
branch. And it is as the soul of this body, giving spiritual life, to all the
members thereof: even as the soul of man does animate the body, with all the
part or members thereof. But every one of the vis. Church is not a member of
Christ his body, forasmuch as the spirit of Christ dwells not in every one of
the vis. church: and therefore the vis. church is not the body of Christ: but
some other company of men there is, which make that body whereof Christ is the
head, and every particular man of that society a member thereof. Neither can
you deny that which I do infer hereupon, and necessarily follows upon the
former. Namely, if every one of the vis. church be a member of the body of
Christ, then every one of the vis. church has the Spirit of Christ dwelling in
him. Counterp. 128.
Nay, your self M. Ainsworth confess and urge this against us, saying, That
we cannot possibly be members of the body of Christ, nor have him for our head;
Being we are not partakers of his life and spirit. It rests therefore that
either you yield to the conclusion, That the vis. church is not the body of
Christ; or else affirm, That every member of the visible church has the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in him. Apology 44.
That every one of the vis. church is not a member of Christ's body, has
already been sufficiently proved: and is hereby likewise evident, because then
none of the vis. Church could be damned. For tell me I pray you, can a member
of Christ possibly be condemned? Every member of Christ, is (as it were) flesh
of his flesh, and a bone of his bones. We are members of his body, Ephesians. 5.30:
of his f esh, and of his bones. Does Christ hate his own flesh, or rather
nourish and cherish it? Will or can Christ the judge condemn any who is thus
near and dear, unto him? It is not possible. Again, Christ is life it self.
I am that way, Ioh. 14.6.
that truth, and that life, says he. Whereby we learn, that as without
Christ, no man can have spiritual and eternal life, so whosoever has Christ,
and is a member of Christ, the same has this life derived unto him a member,
from Christ the head. How then can such a one die, seeing he has already life
it self, and that life begun in him which is eternal, and whereof their is no
end. Hereupon the Scripture says; Romans 8.1.
That to them which are in Christ Jesus; members of his body, there is no
condemnation. And that to such Christ is made wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor.
1.30:
sanctification and redemption. Besides, what creature is able to pluck away a
member from this body, and to break that bond whereby one of these members is
tied to the head Christ Jesus. Who can s perate between Christ and his
members? Surely not principalities nor powers: much less flesh and blood. None
shall pluck these out of my hand says Jesus. Romans 8.35. Ioh. 20.28. Verse 23.
I do not deny but that as the vis Church in a certain respect may be called
the body of Christ: so Christ Jesus not in one but in diverse respects may fitly
be called the head of the vis. Church. This lets not but that which I here
affirm is true.
And hereof he renders a reason. My Father which gave them me, is greater
then all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers hand. I and my Father
are one.

But leaving this argument we will proceed to some others. In the 5. to the
Ephesians, Thus we read. The husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head
of the Church, and the same is the Savior of his body. 25. Husbands love your
wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. 26. That he
might sanctify it, and cleanse it, 27. That he might make it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle or any such thing: but that it
should be holy and without blame. Here be diverse reasons to prove that that
Church which in the holy scriptures is said to be the body of Christ, and
whereof Christ is the head, is the invisible Church, and not the visible, as
you do hold. For first, Christ is the Savior of that Church (or company of
men) which, is his body: But he is the Savior and gives salvation only to
the Church invisible: Ergo, etc. Secondly, Ps 55. and 11.5.
Christ loves the Church which is his body: But he loves only the elect and
church invisible, hating all others, as workers of iniquity: Romans 9.13.
Ergo etc. Thirdly, Christ died or gave himself to death for the church which
is his body: But he died only for the elect and church invisible: Ergo the
invisible church on ly is his body. Fourthly, that church which is the body of
Christ, Jesus by his spirit in this life sanctifies and cleanses in part, and
pe^fectly in the life which is to come, at which time it shall be without spot
or wrinkle, holy and without blame, and so a glorious church indeed: But this
only Christ does to the invisible church and all the members thereof: and not
to the vis. church, the greatest part whereof h^e leaves to the unclean
spirit, who leads them into all manner of uncleanness, and wickedness:
Therefore the invisible church only, and not the visible, is the body of
Christ: The several Propositions of these four arguments are evident by this
present Scripture. The Assumptions of them all are so clear that you neither
will nor dare deny: It rests therefore that you embrace the conclusion.
Ephesians. 2.22.23 and 4.12 15.16. Col. 1.18.24.
And here we learn how to understand those places of holy Scripture, where
Christ is said to be the head of the Churth, and the Church is called his body:
Not of the vis. church, as you do: but of the invisible church, or that
company of the elect which is by faith united to Christ, and by love one to
another, that is, of the faithful. These are they which are the mystical body
of Christ, whereof he is the head.

Counterp 127. Apology 44. A true Description of the vis. church. 2. page 1.
1. Cor. 12.27. 1. Cor. 6.19. and 7.23.
But you will say, does not the Apostle writing to the vis. church at Corinth
say, Ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part? What proof can be
more plain then this?

I answer, does not the same Apostle writing to the same church likewise say,
Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price? If this argument of yours
were ought, hence it would follow, that Christ Jesus has redeemed the vis.
church, and so by consequent Reprobates. When Peter teaches that only the
Elect or church invisible are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ; 1.
Pet. 1.2.18. Confession of faith 26.
which you likewise acknowledge. From hence also it will follow that all of the
vis. church are in Christ Jesus; and that Christ is unto them wisdom,
righteousness, sanct^fication and redemption: because Paul writting to the
Corinthians says, ye are of him in Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 1.30. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1.
who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. By this reason you may as well Prove, that all of the visible
Church are the Sons of God* and that therein is no child of the devil,
because Paul writing to the visible Churches of Galatia says thus: Ye are all
the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.26.
And that all in the visible Church have faith (in) Christ Jesus, that is true
and justifying faith: and an hundred more of most false positions will ensue of
this kind of reasoning, as has been showed before. To make this argument good
you must prove, that all the speeches of Paul in his Epistles written to Church
or churches were by him spoken and meant to all the members of the visible
Church, and are true of them. In the mean season for the better informing both
of you and others, we must understand that where the Apostle writing to a
Church, or certain Congregation, says that they are redeemed by Christ; 1.
Cor. 6.15.1*
are in Christ Jesus; that they believe in Christ; that the Spirit of God
dwells in them; that their bodies are the members of Christ; the Temple of
the holy Ghost; are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, the earnest of
their inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13.
that they are all the Sons of God, the body of Christ and every one a member
for his part, and he their head: We must (I say) know that these speeches
with many more of this kind, are not spoken and meant simply of the visible
Church, and so of all the members thereof: but of some certain persons in the
invisible Church, that is, the elect. These also are very probable the Apostle
respected and meant only in and by the title of Saints, so often used in the
beginning of his Epistles, as Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1, 2. Ephesians. 1.1. If by Saints,
we understand Saints indeed, that is, such as whose hearts are purified by
faith, and sanctified or made holy by the Spirit of God: which exposition these
two last testimonies favors much: then this title he used only in regard of
the elect that were in the visible Churches, whom solely or at least chiefly he
respected in his said Epistle^, and for whose sake he did write them: and not
in respect of the visible Churches with all their members. Which being so, as
it is very absurd to conclude from this title of Saints, that none are in a
true visible Church but Saints, I mean Saints indeed; so is it no less
absurd to collect from this speech of Paul, ye are the body of Christ, and
members for your part, that the visible Church is the body of Christ, and every
member thereof apart. Yea this latter the two next verses going before these
words, ye are the body of Christ, do manifestly convince: for in them it is
said and employed, that as the members of a man's body have care one for
another, 1. Cor. 12.25.26.
and such a fellow-feeling, as if one member suffer all will suffer with it:
and if one member be had in honor, all the members rejoice with it: so is it
with the members of the body of Christ. But this care and fellow-feeling, this
mutiall sorrow and rejoicing is only to be found in the faithful and Saints
indeed, members of the invisible Church, they therefore are the body of
Christ, or at the most, the visible Church is so called having relation to
these. These are they that weep, with them that weep: and rejoice, with them
that rejoice in the prosperity one of another. These alone remember the
affliction of Joseph, and them that are in bonds, as if they were bound with
them. But with the visible Church it is clean otherwise. The visible Church we
have heard is a mixed company of good and bad, Prou. 11.10.
nay, that in it there be men notoriously wicked: Now when these perish (says
Solomon) there is joy, meaning among the godly, And so on the other side, when
it goes hardly with the godly, (as it does always, more or less) the wicked
that be in the Church, they rejoice. Of the members of this Church, some
forget and mind not the affliction of Joseph, others clap their hands for joy.
Behold the care and fellowfeeling, the mutual sorrow and rejoicing, that is
between the members of the visi. church. Such it is, as was betwixt Cain and
Habel, of whom the one slew the other; between Ismal and Izhak, Esau and
Jacob, Saul and David, the Scribes and Pharisees, and Christ himself, with all
that acknowledged and professed him: whereof the one sort hated and abhorred
the other, as appears by the holy Scriptures. Remember also what in holy writ
is gene^ally said: that the righteous are an abomination to the wicked, Prou.
29.27.
and the wicked unto the righteous. This considered, how can the visible Church
be the body of Christ, and the particular persons of the visible Church,
members for their parts? and this is yet further confirmed in the very same
Chapter: 1. Cor. 12.13.]
when Paul speaking of the body of Christ, says, that by one spirit we are all
baptized into one body, and all (the members of this body) made to drink into
one spirit. Whereby we learn that all the members of the body of Christ, have
the spirit of Christ, by which they are quickened, and united to him the head.
But this spirit have only the memb^rs of the invisible Church, who truly
believe in Christ, and by faith are ingrafted into him: they therefore alone
are the body of Christ.

The error of these men in this particular springs from hence, that those
things which by the Apostle are spoken in a certain respect, and of a part of
the visible Church, they understand simply, and of the whole visible Church.
And that we may yet further and better see both your folly and sin herein,
remember we here: First that the visible Church is a mixed company, consisting
of diverse sorts of people good and bad, godly and wicked, Saints indeed, and
sinners. Secondly that from thence do arise different kind of speeches of and
concerning the Church, accordingly as God in his word directs and intends
his speech to the godly, or wicked in the church. When to the wicked God
applies and bends his speech, reproouing them, or denouncing judgment
against them, because of the multitude of such in the church, he speaks as if
they were all wicked and no godly in it. And this is frequent in the
Scriptures. The ox knows his owner, the ass his masters scribbe, but
Israel has not known, my people has not understood, 4. Ah sinful nation, a
people laden with iniquity, etc, Isa. 1.3 Hear O Princes of Sodom, hearken O
people of Gomorrah, verse. 10. Oh, that I might leave my people, and go from
them: for they be all adulterers, and an assembly of rebels. Ier. 9.2. Trust
you not in any brother, for every brother will use deceit, verse. 4, 5, 6. The
good man is perished out of the earth, and there be no righteous men: they all
lie in wait for blood* every man hunteth his brother with a net, etc. Micah
7.2. On the other side, when in his holy writ God applies and intends his
speech to the Godly, as either commanding, exhorting or comforting of them, he
speaks as if all in the Church were such: Of this kind are these. Ye are
all the sons God by faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.26.
Ye are sealed with the holy spirit of promise. Ephesians. 1.13. 1. Cor. 3.17.
The Temple of God is holy, which ye are: know ye not that ye are the
Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? You are the body of
Christ, and members for your part. 1. Cor. 22.27.
And where the Church is called Christ's Spouse, his Love, Salomons long
Counterp. 66.
his Queen, his Dove, his Sster, etc. And let us here remember a speech of M.
Ainsworths, and apply it to them. You may (says he) much abuse any man's
words, if what he speaks respectively, you will take and allege as spoken
absolutely. Thus deal you (my brethren) with the word of God. Those things
which in holy writ are spoken with respect and relation had to them of the
invisible Church, you take as spoken absolutely of the visible Church. Is this
by your own confession a great abuse and injury offered to men's writings: and
is it none (torwe ye) to deal in this manner with the holy Scriptures and
writings of God?

In your Apology you do not only tell us, that the visible Church is the
body of Christ, but who be the members of this body. Not the Elect, as one
would have thought, but say you, the Officers be members thereof. Apology 42.
and 53.
And some pages after: The Church Officers are members of Christ's glorious
mystical body: whereby Judas comes to be a member of Christ's mystical body:
for he was a Church officer. If such be members of the mystical body of
Christ, then to be in Christ, ingrafted into him, even a member of his body,
bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, is not a matter greatly to be
rejoiced in, (seeing it may fall into a reprobate) which I hope you abhor to
say. If you do not, speak it out. Then also reprobates may be members of the
mystical body of Christ. For some Church Officers are reprobates: and all
Church Officers (by your divinity) are members of the mystical body of
Christ. But I will let these go, and urge them no further. If the visible
Church be the body of Christ, then say I again, all of the visible Church be
members, and not Church Officers alone. And this you teach in understanding. 1.
Cor. 11.27, Ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part, of the
visible Church: and M. Ainsworth in the 128, 129. pages of the Counterpoyson.
In telling us now that the Church Officers are members, and therein
appropriating the being of a member to an Officer, and denying it to others,
and in another place and book, that all of the vis. church are members of
Christ his glorious body: what do you else but contradict your selves? But to
come nearer unto you. I confess the visible Church is or may be compared to
the body of man, and the Officers of the Church to the members thereof thus, or
in this respect: that as the body being one, has yet many members, and every
member his distinct office; the tie to see the ear to hear, the nose to smell
with, etc. Even so a visible Church as it were or like a body, has many
officers, every office having his distinct office. Will you hereupon collect
that the visible Church is the body of Christ, the mystical body (I say) of
Christ? By the same reason we may conclude that whatsoever in Scripture is
compared to a body, the same is the body of Christ. Such collection is very
absurd. And thus much concerning the titles which these men ascribe to the
vis. church, and that which is far worse with respect had to the whole
church, as appears by their writings: whereas by the holy Ghost they are
meant and given to the invisible church, or if to the visible, it is in respect
of the Elect which are therein; who only are the body of Christ, his Sister,
his Love, his Spouse, etc.

CHAP. VI. The Churches of the Brownists, are by their own doctrine false
Churches: and therefore men ought to separate, and come out from among them.
YOu measuring our Parish assemblies by this crooked line of yours, I mean
your false doctrine of the visible church, it is no marvel though they be not
right and straight in your eyes. Nay, mark what we say unto you. Prove your
description of the visible church by the word of God: prove that to be the
matter and form, and those to be the With respect had to the whole church.
titles of the visible church which you say confidently are, and we will
acknowledge all our Parishionall assemblies to be false churches; and as you
say holds of soul spirits, and cages of every unclean and hateful bird,
Defense of the churches and Ministers of England 6.
and whatsoever else you charge upon us and accuse us to be. But if this you
cannot do, as is evident by the premises, you are greatly in fault for
obtruding that doctrine of the people of God as true, which is false: to the
great disturbance of the peace of the church, and disquieting of many a poor
soul. Certainly if the description that you give of a true visible church were
true, and that you of the separation were such a church, he was a fool, and
worse then a fool, even a madman, and out of his wits, who would not separate
from us, and be of your society. Whether your doctrine of the visible church
be true, or false, it is easy to discern by the premises: Let us now consider
whethet your congregations be by your own doctrine true visible churches yea,
or no: that so we may the better see whether we be in our wits, or out of them
in not joining with you. To this end let us apply your doctrine of the visi.
church unto you, and measure your church by the same line you meat ours.

Every true visible church is a company of faithful and holy people, called
and separated from the world by the word of God, worshipping Christ aright,
governed by his laws, knit together by the bond of peace, and love unfeigned.

But your churches are not such companies:

Therefore they are not true, but false churches.

The proposition stands immovable, being grounded upon the foundation your
selves have laid, and (as you think) upon a rock. If you deny the
assumption, and avouch that each Church of yours is such a company as is by you
described: I reply then there are no Hypocrites, nor reprobates in your Church,
but all Elect: for the Elect only worship Christ aright, that is, in spirit
and truth, (as your selves do interpret it) are governed by his Laws, knit
together by the bond of peace, and love unfeigned: and therefore your
congregations are not true visi. Churches. Because in the true visible Church
there be tares and chafle as well as wheat, that is, reprobates, as well as
Elect.

Thus we see it is an easy thing to beat you with that rod, which you have
prepared for our shoulders: wherewith you have a great while lashed us
according to your strength. And thus much touching the description of the
visible Church, the matter and form, and titles thereof, according to the
doctrine of the Brownists, and the confutation thereof.

CHAP. VII. The controversy between us and the Brownists concerning religious
communion, is here debated, where is showed: First, that we may lawfully join
in divine worship with them which are not members of the Church: Secondly, with
the open wicked: and that thereby neither the faithful, nor the holy things of
God are polluted.
AMong sundry other errors of the Separists concerning the vis. Church (which
for brevity Iomit) this is one. Princip. and Infer. 9.
That no religious communion is to be had, but with members of a visible
Church. This is man^festly convinced by the practice of the Apostles in the
first gathering or planting of churches. Paul and Barnabas, and generally the
Apostles preached the Word unto the Gentiles, who then were Infidels here were
religious communions. When sundry men join together in any religious exercise,
or part of Gods worship, as the Apostles and these their hearers did, that is a
religious communion. Again, these were not civil communions; these societies
were not met together to be occupied about any worldly affairs, or matters
appertaining to this life: therefore they were religious communions. In these
religious communions, and in the worship of God, the holy Apostles did join
with those that were not members of a visible Church; not within, but without
the Church, and yet did not sin therein: Therefore a religious communion may
lawfully be had with those which are no members of the church. By this practice
and example of the Apostles, who did nothing herein but that which Jesus
commanded them, and therefore did not sin: we learn a Principle or Inference
clean contrary to yours, namely, that lawfully and without sin, we may
join in the worship of God with those that are without; and not in, or of the
church. How else except we would do evil, that good might come thereof,
should these that are without be added to the Church, and such be converted t^
God: seeing the preaching and hearing of the word, are the means which God
has appointed for the conversion of men, and that these are parts of Gods
worship? Hereby we see their must be a religious communion or joining together
in the worship of God, before those which are no members, become members of the
church. Now this communion, say you cannot be without sin: Now therefore say
I can be added to the Church, without the sin of him by whose ministry they
are added, besides the sin of others in the church joining with him therein.
1. Cor. 14.25.
If all prophecy, quoth the Apostle, and there come in one that believes not,
or one unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and judged of all men. And so are
the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face,
and worship God, and say plainly that God is in you indeed. Here was a
religious communion; here they joined in divine worship with him that was no
member of the visible Church. Did this congregation sin therein? If the
church would not have admitted him into holy communion with them, because it is
not lawful to have communion with such: how had he been added to the church,
and of an Infidel become a believer? But leaving these Corinthians I come unto
you. You will willingly preach in any of our assemblies, and in private also
pray with us, (though not so willingly) if one of you may offer up the prayers.
In either of these cases your selves have religious communion with those (as
you say) that are no members of a true vis. church: Do you sin thus doing? I
think you will say, no, show us then how this doctrine and practice of yours
accord. Do you think that the words of separation you use in the entrance
into prayer, makes this said communion of religious, civil: or if not so, yet
nullifies the communion: When you have proved this, we will yield it unto you.
Another thing to be observed here is this. If we preach you will not hear:
and if we pray in public or private, you will not join with us. And why? we
are not a separated company of righteous men, but a mixed and confused people of
all sorts; we are not members of a true vis. church, and therefore in the
worship of God and religious exerc^ses, you may have no communion with us. For
what fellowship has righteousness, with unrighteousness? And what communion has
light with darkness? and what part has the believer with the Infidel? Tell
me now I pray you: Is not the same company present whether we or you preach,
or pray? yes, how comes it to pass then that no communion may be held with
this company when we preach, and yet may when one of you does preach? your
words of sep^ration in this stra^t must help you: which when I see, I will
believe, else you will remain succourlesse.

But I know what you will say: that in the aforesaid cases both of the
Apostles, and your selves, there was and is no religious communion; because
there was and is no covenant made, first with God, and then mutually by the
Saints among themselves.

I answer you, when diverse join together, two, three, or more, in any
religious exercise or part of Gods worship, that is religious communion,
albeit they are not joined together in and by that covenant you speak of:
which thus I make plain. If any Christian should go to Mass, we condemn
that fact, though he enter not into covenant with them. And why? Beeause a
Christian may not have communion with idolaters in their idolatrous worship:
Here is a communion without covenant. If one of your church should partake with
us in divine worship, no such covenant as you speak of being made, you will
censure him for it. And wherefore? because he has had religious communion
with them which are no members of a true visible church. Here your selves
acknowledge a religious communion, where no covenant is made, but only a
partaking or joining together in religious exercises.

Therefore for the better informing of your judgment, and the Readers herein,
we must know in what case and with whom we may have religious communion,
and in what case not. We may have religious communion with all men in true
divine worship, be they what they may be: good or bad, as hereafter we shall
hear. But we may not have religious communion, or partake in divine worship
with Idolaters in their false and idolatrous worship, heathen, or
Antichristian: but must separate and come out from among them: and this 2. Cor.
6.16.18. Reu. 18 4. two Scriptures alleged here by you do manifestly prove.
But neither these, nor any of the other Scriptures quoted by you Mat. 18,
17.20. 1. Cor. 5.12. Act. 4.11.12. do make any thing for confirmation of this
your principle: No religious communion is to be had, but with members of a
visible Church, and are therefore perverted by you, happily you will prove it
from the afor^said place of the Corinthians, and of the Revelation thus. We
may not have religious communion with Idolaters, or those which are no members
of the Church in their false worship: Ergo, to religious communion with them;
The Argument is naught: concluding that which is general, from a particular,
well may one prove a particular by a gener^ll, either affirmatively, or
negatiuely: but not c contra. The general he^e is worsh p. The particulars of
this general be, true, and false worship. If thus one reason: we may not
have communion with idolat^rs in divine worship: Ergo, not in their false
worship: or, therefore not in true divine woe ship. Either of these Arguments is
good: and from the Antecedent, the conclusion follows necessarily. But
arguing as you do, we may have no communion with Idolaters, in their fa^se
worship: Ergo, not in divine worship: it is clean otherwise. This conclusion
(I say) follows not from the Antecedent. The Antec^dent being true, lets
not but that the conclusion may be false.

If we look into the reason set down in 2: Cor. 6.16. pointed at also in the
other aforementioned place of the Revelation, why we may not join with Idolaters,
(or false worshippers) in their false worship: we shall see that it makes
nothing at all against communion with them in true worship: and therefore not
against all communion, as you would have it, but against some, which we also
teach. The reason is this: Idolaters and all false worshippers in their worship
do not worship God, but indeed the Devil; not Christ, but Belial: what do
the people of God then communicating with these worshippers in this worship?
So doing, they worship the Devil, which no man can do, and the Lord too: If
therefore (says in effect the Apostle) you desire to worship God, join not
with your neighbors in their worship, no not with your bodies, (which he
calls flesh) reserving your spirits pure unto the Lord: 2. Cor. 7.1.
for then you shall be found worshippers of the Devil, and not of God. So
many of you therefore as are the sons and daughters of God come out from
among them, and separate your selves, meaning from their Idolatrous worship,
and all their pollutions whatsoever. He says not, let them not come among
you, or have communion with you in true worship: but, come out from among
them, that is, join not with them in their false worship* but withdraw your
selves. Thus Paul denies not all religious communion with Idolaters, but all
communicating with them in their false worship. Nay it is so far from being
vnlawfu^l to have religious communion with those which are not members of a
true visible Church, as you affirm, that in some cases to deny it unto them,
yea to the most gross Idolaters, that are, it is very vnlawfu^l. ^f Papists,
Turks, Heathens, or some Infidels should offer to join with us in the hearing
of the word and prayer, in which case there is a religious communion: we
should finne greatly in putting them back: no less then the Corinthians
should, if they had put back the unbeliever pressing to come to their
congregation.

By the premises it is evident, Communion of Saints 6. Ibid. 6.
that M. Ainsworth swarneth from the truth, when he says, The Saints must not
hold communion in the true worship of God with any but in the light, and in the
faith: meaning but with the children of the light, and the faithful. And
again. The children of God, of the light and day, are commanded to separate
from the children of men, of this world, of the devil, and of curse; and to
entertain and continue a holy communion among themselves. Mark how he
condemns all communion with hypocrites, for hypocrites are the children of
men, of this world, of the devil, and of curse: But with none such may we have
any religious communion: Ergo, with no hypocrites. And ^f we may not
communicate in the worship of God, neither with op^n and known wicked,
which every where all of you with open mouth cry out upon, as an execrable
thing; nor with close and secret wicked ones, hypocrites I mean, as here you
teach, then must we communicate with the elect only: and by consequent with
none at all: because we know not who be elect. The Lord only knows, who
are his. Again, we must entertain (say you) and continue a holy communion
with the children of God, of the light and day, the heirs of blessing, and
separate from all others: But all the children of God of the light, etc. are
elect: Therefore we must have religious communion only with the elect. The
Proposition is your own: The Assumption I am sure you will not deny.

But I know your evasion. That by children of God, of the light and day, you
mean not such only as are the children of God indeed, and the children of
the light indeed and truth: for all such you confess are elect: but all the
members of the visible Church: all which we are to account the children of
God, and of the light, yea, the elect of God. And so M. Smith teaches in his
Principles and Inferences: All of the vis. Church are to be accounted faithful
and elect: Page 7.
till they by obstinacy in sin and Apostacy declare the contrary.

I answer you, Christ in the parable of the seed and also by that speech of
his, Mat. 13.3. and 22.14.
many are called, but few chosen, teaches us, that few of the vis. Church are
elect, all the rest being Reprobates. Shall I now contrary to the truth, hold
and account all the members of the vis. Church elect? I have showed heretofore
that in the visible Church there have been, are, and will be to the end of the
world most notorious wicked and abominable men. How can one seeing such men
committing sin with greediness, and running headlong in the way to death,
account the same men at the same time elect, and to be of those few which are
ordained to life.

Nay but will they say. We do not deny such to be elect, as are obstinate
sinners, we only hold, that all the members of the vis. Church are to be
accounted elect, until they by obstinacy in sin and apostacy declare the
contrary.

But happily some will say. If we do not account all of the vis. Church Elect,
children of God, and of the light: this is against charity, which thinks not
evil of any, but believes all things, 1. Cor. 13.5.6.7
and hops all things.

I answer, that it is said likewise of charity: It rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. But to deem all of the visible church
elect, and therein as it were to joy, when the Scripture tells us clean
otherwise, that all of the vis. church, a few excepted, are reprobates: this
is not to rejoice in the truth, nor to judge according to the truth. And
therefore such judgment is not agreeing with charity: To account and so to
call them the children of God, whose works declare the contrary: and the
children of light that give themselves to the works of darkness is
iniquity: and no less, then to justify the wicked, which is an abomination
to the Lord: Pro. 17.15. Isa. 5.20.
and to think and speak good of evil, to put light for darkness; and sweet
for sower; Against whom the Prophet pronounces a fearful woe. The Scripture
teaches that this is rather hatred, then love. We must know therefore that as
charity is not suspicious, Pro. 13.24.
but believes and hops the best: so she is not a fool: but iuditious,
judging of persons and things wisely, and as near as she can according to the
truth.

But tell me M. Ainsworth, you I say who will have all of the visible Church
to be accounted the children of God: Tell me I say whether if you should see
such members of the vis. church, as those mentioned, Ioh. 8.44. of whom Jesus
says ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will
do: you would account such the children of God, or no. If you answer
affirmatively, the speech of Christ to their predecessors does evidently
convince you. If negatiuely, that such are not to be accounted the children of
God, you contradict your self, and therein acknowledge, that in the visible
church there are some children of the devil: and that therefore we may have
religious communion with the children of the devil: seeing by your own
doctrine we may have communion with all the members of the visible Church.

But leaving these, let us proceed to some other. If in the true vis. Church
you should see such as the Scribes and Pharisees; their right svccessors: would
you account and call them the children of God, of the light, etc.
Notwithstanding their palpable hypocrisy, and other their abominations, their
blasphemies, and daily persecuting of Christ in his members? these you must
account and call the chilldren of God, if your doctrine be true. For I trust
you will neither deny that the Scribes and Pharisees were members of the true
visi church, nor that there may be such in the true Church as well now as in
former time.

And here I must give you to understand, that M. Ainsworth in the margent right
against the aforesaid lines, has produced a full Jury of witnesses, and some
to spare to prove as at the first blush it might seem to some, That the
children of God (of the light and day) may not entertain an holy communion
with the children of the Devil. The simple Reader is overwhelmed with such a
cloud of witnesses. And thereupon doubts not of the matter: whereas the
witnesses when they come to speak, eleven of them say not a word to the point,
but only prove this, that of men some are named the children of god, of the
light and day, etc. Others the children of men of this world, of the devil,
and of curse, as is plain both by your own words, and by the testimonies
themselves. Now herein you might have saved your labor, and rather have
bestowed more pains in proving that we deny, then that we grant, But any thing
you think will serve to delude the simple.

Yea but the three last testimonies, 2. Cor. 6.17. Act. 2.42. Heb. 10.24.25.
speak to the issue: for they directly prove, That the children of God, of the
light and day, and the heirs of blessing, are commanded to separate from
(meaning in divine worship) the children of men, of this world, of the devil,
and of curse: and to entertain and continue an holy communion among themselves
only. Thus says M. Ainsworth in plain and express words.

It is true, that in the first of these places, to the sons and daughters of
God this commandment is given: Come out from among them, and separate your
selves. But who are those of whom the Apostle speaks and from whom he
commands the children of God for to separate, and not join with in divine
worship. It is evident they were the Corinthian Idolaters, that worshipped a
false God. The highest degree of Idolatry, and most gross Idolaters that can
be. What does Paul now require of the Corinthian Saints to whom he writ? this.
That they join not with these idolaters (their neighbors) in their idolatrous
and false worship, nor in any other of their pollutions. This hinders or
prohibiteth not, but that they might communicate with these Idolaters in true
divine worship public or private. But suppose that this place of Paul
prohibiteth all communion with all idolaters in their false and idolatrous
worship, whether they worship a false and fained god, or the true God falsely,
which is all that is forbidden in the word: that lets not, but that we may
have religious communion with idolaters in true Divine worship. If then we may
lawfully join together with idolaters in the worship of God in hearing the
word and Prayer, then certainly with the children of men, of this world, of
the Devil; and with them that are without, and no members of the church: For
such as these are all Idolaters. Thus we see this Scripture makes nothing for
you, and is therefore perverted by you.

Let us now proceed to the next testimony. Act. 2.42. And they continued
(meaning the members of the vis. Church) in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers.

This declares how greatly they of the Church were affected toward the word,
and worship of God, wherein they did daily exercise themselves, both in
public and private: but neither denies nor forbids all communion in divine
worship with them that are without, no more then this Scripture there
following: And they sold their possessions, and goods, and parted them to all
men (of the Church) as every one had need: forbids all communicating of our
goods, with them which are without. And as well may one from hence conclude,
that such as are of the visible Church may not minister unto the necessities of
them that are without: as this from ver. 42. that they of the visible Church
may have no religious communion with them that are without. F^ame your argument
when you please for the proof of this latter: and I will comp^se as good a one
for the former.

Your third and last testimony is. Heb. 10.24.25. Let us consider one another,
to provoke unto love and to good works, not forsaking the f^llowship that we
have among our selves, as the manner of some is: but let us exhort one another.

We answer, first it is not clear that the Apostle speaks here of the
public assemblies, but happily of the private meet^ngs the faithful had. And
this latter is probable for these two R^asons. F^rst, b^ca^se the private and
brotherly fellowship serves sp^cially to the increase of mutual love,
whereunto the fai hfull be here exhorted. Secondly, in the words immediat^ly
precedent and subsequent he exhorts to priua^e duties: we may well
therefore think he does the like also. If this now be so, this Scripture
makes nothing at all for you, no more then that of Peter: 1. Pet. 2.17.
Love brotherly fellowship. But be it granted that this is meant of the pub^ike
assemblies, against which I will not contend, notwithstanding it makes not any
thing against us. For who doubts but that the faithful, that is, the
professors of faith in Christ, or members of the vis. Church do usually, they
alone, and none but they, assemble and join together in hearing of the Word
and prayer. And that usually it falls out in the Church, that some playing
the Apostates forsake these assemblies of the Saints: either joining themselves
to some other assemblies, as being Heretics, or Schismatickes, or else with
Demas embracing this present world. This is it we here learn, and from this
latter only we are here dehorted. Does it now hereupon follow, that the
faithful may not admit unbelievers, and them that are without the Church, to
communicate with them in divine worship, and have religious communion together
with them? Nothing less. Here is no such thing forbidden: no more then in and
by this speech, Gal. 6.10.
do good to the household of Faith, (that is, to all that profess the same
faith with us, to wit, the members of the vis. Church) we are forbid, to do
good unto all, or to them that are without.

But besides these express and plain testimonies of Scripture, as you think,
you have a forcible reason, drawn from the word, for the fortifying of this
your opinion. We may not (say you) join with them that are without, or with
the open wicked in the worship of God, Communion of Saints 469.
or have any holy communion with them: For by their wickedness both the
faithful, Defense of the churches and M^nistery of England 70.
and the holy things of God are polluted. This doctrine (of your own) you
apply unto us. Into your assemblies (say you) do come many open and notorious
sinners, known drunkards, whoremongers, prophaners of the Sabbath, swearers,
etc. Whereby the holy things of God, and the faithfu^l are defiled: Reasons for
Separation.
for this cause we dare not have religious communion with you but separate.

We answer. It makes nothing for you, nor against us, that there are known
wicked in our assemblies, (which we deny not,) seeing by their presents,
neither the faithfu l, nor the holy things of God are polluted unto the
faithful: which thus we make manifest. If any sinners pollute the holy things
of God to the faithful, as the word, sacraments, prayer, then certainly do
notorious wicked Ministers, which in such special manner are occupied about
them. They are the mouth of God to the people, and the peoples to God: they
touch with their hands the holy elements. But notorious wicked Ministers,
defile not the holy things of God to the Saints: Therefore none be they never
so notorious wicked. That Ministers notoriously wicked pollute not the worship
of God, nor the faithful joining with them therein, it is manifest by Christ's
permitting his Disciples, and the people to hear the Scribes and Pharisees: The
Scribes and Pharisees, says he, sit in Moses seat, Mat. 23.2.
All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. Verily,
if it were unlawful for the faithful to join with open wicked men in the
worship of God, and that they did pollute it unto the faithful, as these men
do tell us: then had it been unlawful to have heard and prayed with the
Scribes and Pharisees: who were men notori^usly wicked. Which made John the
Baptist to greet them thus: Mat. 3.7. and 23.33.
O generations of vipers; who has forewarned you to fly from the anger to
come? And our Savior after many a fearful vvoe denounced against them, to
cry out to the same effect with John: O serpents, the generation of vipers, how
shall ye escape the damnation of hell?

This their wickedness also was open, and well known to the faithful,
neither could they possibly be ignorant thereof: Considering their open
persecuting of Christ, even to death; their open blaspheming of him, Matthew.
9.34. and 12.24. John 9 22.34. and 12.42.
and traducing of his works, and their persecuting of the Saints, insomuch that
many durst not confess Christ Jesus for fear of the Pharisees.

But your a^oresaid reason, concerning the pollution of the faithful, and holy
things of God by the wicked, you will prove by the Scriptures. M. Francis
Johnson charging the forward Preachers of England with 17. points of false
doctrine, sets down this for one, and the first in the rank: That though
the open notorious obstinate offenders be partakers of the Sacraments, yet
neither the Sacraments, nor the people that join with them, are defiled
thereby. Defense of the Churches and Ministers of England 70. Communion of
S^i^ts. 469. Par. l. 71. 72. 73
This doctrine (quoth he) is contrary to these Scriptures: 1. Cor. 10.17. Hag.
2.14, 15. 1. Cor. 5, 6. and 10.28. 2. Cor. 6.15.18. Gal. 5 9. with eleven more
there quoted. So that there is no want of witn^sses. But let us hear also,
what M. Ainsworth says. If in our assemblies (quoth he) the wicked partake
with us, neither we nor the holy things can sanctify them: but contrariwise
they defile us, and every thing they touch.

For confirmation hereof both these men and likewise M. Smith allege, Hag. 2,
13, 14. with diverse other places of the old Testament concerning ceremonial
pollution; whereby they will have it that this spiritual pollution is
signified and shadowed forth. If (says Haggai) one bear holy flesh in the
skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch the bread or the pottage, or
the wine, or the oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the Priests answered
and said. No, 14. Then said Haggai. If a polluted person touch any of these,
shall it be unclean? and the Priests answered and said, it shall be unclean?

I answer: prove and make it plain to us: 1. That by touching, is signified
our mutual partaking in these holy things, or in true divine worship, 2. That
this polluted person does signify an open wicked man in the Church. Prove (I
say) these to have this resemblance, as your interpretation and application of
them implies, and I will confess, that you do not misinterpret and misapply
these Scriptures, as you do the rest here. But if herein you fail: neither
this Scripture, nor any of this kind will avail you at all. Concerning the
first of these, you say: And this touching, figured our fellowship together in
the Church, as the Apostle shows: 2. Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Communion of
Saints 469.
I deny this, and affirm that this place of Paul proves no such thing. The
Apo: persuading the Saints at Corinth, not to join with their neighbors (who
were heathens and Idolaters) in their false and Idolatrous worship, nor in any
of their pollutions, no, not so much as with their bodies, though they kept
their spirit pure unto the Lord, uses this phrase in the Law, touch no
unclean thing: not meaning thereby to teach what this touching figured, but
the Corinthian saints that they might no way partake nor have any thing to do,
more nor less, soul nor body with the Idolatrous worship, or any other
pollution of theirs. Now what manner of proof and argument is this? We may not
at all partake with Idolaters in their false worship; not so much as touch it
with a finger: Ergo, not with the open wicked in true divine worship. If we
communicate with Idolaters in false worship, by touching that impure worship,
we our selves shall be made impure; touch it not therefore; come not at it:
Ergo, if we communicate with the open wicked in true divine worship, we and
that worshtp shall be made unclean. These two conclusions are your positions,
and the two Antecedents are Paul's: Let the Reader judge of the consequence.
But let us come to the other thing here to be considered: that is, whom the
man that was ceremonially unclean did signify. You will not say (I know) the
open wicked man, but the sinner, without any such limitation or restraint.
Whereupon (by your exposition) this follows: That the sinner, or man
spiritually unclean, defiles the holy things of God, Word, Sacraments, and
Prayer, and they that communicate with him therein are likewise defiled: as the
man ceremonially unclean polluted whatsoever things he touched, and they that
touched him were unclean. But this inference is false, because without any
such pollution we may communicate wi^h hypocrites, who be sinners, and
therefore this your exposition from whence it is inferred, is false. In this
strait, you have no other refuge but this. That by the unclean man under the
law was signified, the open wicked man, or known sinner. Which I desire, you
would hereafter prove unto us, for we will take nothing of your word. In the
mean season this I say unto you: that had you or should you yet consider, that
howsoever the wicked (whether openly or secretly wicked, for all is one)
polluted indeed the holy things of God, it is unto themselves only, and not
to others, according to this Scripture: unto them that are defiled, Tit. 1.15.
and unbelieving, is nothing pure: you would never trouble the Church of God
with this impure doctrine. This testimony of Titus you produce for your selves,
and it makes against you. Communion of Saints 133. Communion of Saints 464. 1
Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9.


Answerable hereunto be your other testimonies of holy writ, and namely this
so frequent with you: a little leaven leaueneth a whole lump. For the Apostles
meaning is not that a few, or one known wicked man, by his open sin does
pollute the Word, Sacraments, and the whole assembly, they be coming guilt^e
of sin, and so defiled: 1. Because they have religious communion with him,
Paral. 71 72. 73
2. Because by this communicating with a known sinner in d^uine worship, they
do approve of his sin, and thus consenting thereto become accessory unto
it. This Paul means not, when to the Corinthians he says; A little leaven
leaueneth the whole lump: but this, that the heinous and notorious sin of
one. (much more of diverse) when for the same the party is not censured, (as it
was for a time with the incestuous person) is enough by his evil example and
impunitie, to encourage and draw others to do the like. In this sense is the
open sin of one when it goes unpunished, in danger to spread and infect
others as does a little leaven sower the whole lump. And in this sense the open
sin of a man may be said to defile others, in being an occasion to others to
commit the like, then I say it may be said to defile. But we must know that it
is not only the sin, but the impunitie also thereof, that causes this
defilement we speak of. I do also acknowledge, that the open sin of a man,
and impunitie thereof, defiles them that have authority and power to punish
the delinquent, and do it not: that is, makes them also guilty of sin, or
to partake in that sin. If I should reason with you after the same manner,
and from the same or like ground that you do, sure you could not choose but see
the vanity of this your argument. In the fifth to the Gallathians the Apostle
has the verry same words that he has in this 5. to the Corinthians. A little
leaven leaueneth the whole lump: but in another sense. For in the Epistle to
the Gallatians by leaven, he means false doctrine: Whereunto Christ also
compares it, saying to his Disciples, Beware of the leaven of the Saduces and
Pharisees. He now that will argue as you do, Matthew. 16.6.12.
may from hence conclude, that one point of false doctrine in a Sermon sowers
the whole: and one false line in a book be it never so large, marreth and
defiles the whole Treatise, so as Christians should abhor to read it. And
why? Because a little leaven, that is, a little false doctrine, leaueneth the
whole lump. In the 5. of Matthewe the true Ministers of Christ are by our Lord
compared to salt, where he says to his disciples. Ye are the salt of the
earth. From hence one may as well prove, that such a Minister does sanctify a
whole congregation of wicked men: as a little salt seasoneth a pot full of
pottage. Thus do you argue when you s^y, that a known wicked man in a Church,
is to the whole Church, as a little leaven in the dough, is to the whole lump.
But cease I advise you in the fear of God to pervert this and such like
prouerbiall speeches. A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump: a little
colloquintida marres a potfull of pottage: Dead flies cause to stink, and
putrify the ointment of the Apothecary, Which are so usual with you: Thereby
to prove that all is polluted, all naught in our Church, worship, leyturgy, and
ministry: because some things therein are amiss. Thus one might easily prove
that in the Church of God, all things have been polluted and naught in all
ages precedent, for as much as some things have ever been amiss in the
Church. The rest of your testimonies for brevity I omit.

I will not proceed to show further the vanity of this your reason, but in
stead thereof will argue against your position. For if that be false, your
reason also is naught. Besides, the arguments I will use serve likewise against
your reason of pollution: if the Reader please to apply them that way: Thus
then I reason against you.

With all in the visible Church it is lawful to communicate in divine worship.

But in the visible Church there be open wicked.

Therefore with open wicked it is lawful to communicate in divine worship.

The proposition is manifest, and such as you your selves do teach.

The assumption I have already proved, and that at large: where I show that in
the visible Church there have been from time to time, and so will be to the
end of the world open wicked men, etc. My second argument is this. With such
as Christ has bid, or permitted his people to communicate in divine worship,
we may lawfully have religious communion.

But with notorious wicked men, to wit, the Scribes and Pharisees, Christ has
bid or permitted, his people to communicate in divine worship.

Therefore we notorious wicked men, we may lawfully have religious communion.

The proposition is clear. The assumption is proved in the 23. of Matthew:
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do. My third argument follows.

With such as Christ and his Apostles did communicate, the faithful may
lawfully communicate.

But Christ and his Apostles did communicate with open wicked men.

Ergo, with open wicked men the faithful may lawfully communicate.

The proposition, or first part of this argument needs no proof. The
assumption is hereby strengthened, in that Jesus and his Desciples had
religious communion with the Jews. Their Sinagogus they did usually frequent.
Luke 2.41.42. and 4.15. John 7.8.10.14 and 18.20. Acts 3.1. and 13.5.14.42.
Communion of Saints 328. Counterp. 9.
Unto their solemn feasts held at Jerusalem they did go, as the quotations in
the margent do show. This also your selves confess, saying: Christ often
visited the Temple, and Synagogues, and also his Disciples: And again, Christ
and his Apostles communicated with the Church of the Jews. But generally the
Jews at that time were openly wicked: with open and known wicked persons
therefore it must needs be, that Jesus and his Disciples had religious
communion.

That generally the Jews, even that whole nation, (though not every particular
person therein) was in the time of Christ, and his Apostles after him
notoriously wicked, it remains that I do prove. As the Scripture speaks,
Isa. 24.2.
so ordinarily it falls out: like Priest, like people. But the Priests then
were notoriously wicked, as often has been showed in the Scribes and
Pharisees. Therefore if not all, yet most of the people. This is also confirmed
by that speech of the Baptist: Matthew. 3.10.
Now is the axe put to the root of the trees: therefore every tree which
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. In
that he threatens present destruction, temporal and eternal to this people,
it does argue their intolerable wickedness; that they were altogether
barren, unfruitful, and rotten trees, fit for nothing but the fire: and that
their wickedness was such, so universal and so great, as the land could not
bear, but was ready to spewe them out, as a man does that which his stomach
abhors. Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? Ier. 5.9. What
were the things for which God must needs judge his people in Jeremiah his time?
The prophet declares a little before. Ye shall be torn in pieces, because
your trespasses are many, and your rebellions are increased. To the former
expostulation the Lord adds another, Shall not my soul be avenged on such a
nation as this? Whence we may gather, that the Lord then uses in judgment to
visit, and not to take vengeance of a people, when they are become such, and
so vile, that he cannot (as it were) endure or forbear them any longer. Which
is confirmed by the destruction of the old world; of Sodom and Gomorah, and of
the Cananites, Perizites, Hiuits, etc. Genesis 6.7. and 15.16. and 18.20.
Whom God did not judge till their wickedness was full. These things well
weighed together with the fearful destruction that befell the Jews according to
this denuntiation of John, not long after the death of Christ: we cannot deny
but that which is recorded of the people of Sodom and Gomorah may be truly
said of the Jews in Christ's time and his Apostles, that they were exceeding
grievous sinners, and their cry was come up before God into heaven.

He came (says John) unto his own, meaning the Jews, John 1.11.
and his own received him not. Here is an universal rejecting or contemning
of Christ by the Jews offered to them in his own ministry, in the ministry
of John the Baptist, of the 12. Apostles, and of the 70. Disciples. All which
preached thus: Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Matthew. 3.2. and
4.17. Mat. 6.12.
Notwithstanding this gracious offer of salvation, and kingdom of heaven by
Christ Jesus; so that they would r^pent and believe in the Messiah, by whom
they should have entrance into heaven, behold, they cont^nu^d in their sins
and i^fidelitie. Is not here a sinful nation indeed, and a people laden with
iniquity, that not withstanding the great and mighty means the Lord used to
convert and save them, by Preaching and miracles, would yet remain in their
sins? nay, is not here open wickedness, and that universally in this people;
in their general contempt of Christ, and love of earth above heaven? yea of
those that seemed to receive him; who professed faith in him; flocked after him
into the wilderness, and every wheere, so as he and his Disciples had no
leisure to take meat for them, as though they had forsaken all to follow him.
For mark what our Lord himself says of them: Ioh. 6.26.27.
Ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye eat of the
loaves, and were filled. If the best and holiest of this people, (here one,
and there one excepted) were thus profane, with Esau preferring a mess of
pottage, before the heavenly inheritance: how profane, how notorious vile and
abominable were the rest and worst of the Jews? And surely had they not been
such as I speak of, they had never killed the Lord of life: his life, doctrine
and miracles considered. The people thus generally being wicked, and f^w
righteous to be found: how can it be but in such a swarm of wicked persons,
where iniquity had over spread the land, there were very many, yea abundance
of open known wicked? whom those few godly at that time living, such as
Joseph, Mary, etc. knew as well to be wickd, as a man knows the right hand
from the left.

Hereunto add that which our Lord himself says of this people. Whereunto
shall I liken this generation? it is like unto little children which sit in the
markets, and call unto their fellows, 17. And say we have piped unto you, and
ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented, 18.
For John came neither eating nor drinking, Ma^th. 11.16.
and they say he has a devil, 19. The Son of Man came eating and drinking,
and they say behold a glutton, and a drinker of Wine, a friend of Publicans and
sinners: but Wisdom is justified of her children: Here our Savior by a
comparison declares that this people or nation of the Jews (a few of Gods
Elect among them excepted, called the Children of Wisdom) did not only
neglect or contemn his own ministry, and John the Baptist but did besides
blaspheame and speak eui l both of John and of himself. Of the one, that he
was a glutton, a drinker of wine, and a friend of sinners: and of the other,
that he had a devil. Here be horrible sins committed openly in the view of
all men, and with an high hand, and that not by a few, but generally by the
nat^on of the Jews, in the age and time wherein Jesus lived on earth. Were not
the Jews then generally in the days of Christ openly wicked? This considered,
was it possible that either Christ Jesus, or his Disciples and the faithful
then living, could either celebrate their solemn feasts in Jerusalem, or
frequent their Synagogues, and not have religious communion with open wicked?
And no less vile and abominable was generally this people after Christ, in the
days of the Apostles: did not they cause grievous persecution against those
few amongst them that confess Christ? did not they furiously run upon Stephen
and stone him, as men thirsting after his blood, and the blood of the Saints?
Who vexed the Church, killed James, imprisoned Peter, and would have slain him
also, Act. 7.57. and 12.13.
had not the Lord miraculously delivered him? Not Herod so much as the Jews.
For it is said, that what Herod did, it was to please the Jews. The Jews
also were they that persecuted Paul from City to City, 2. Cor. 11.24.
so as no where wheresoever he came he could be quiet for them, as
appears in the Acts of the Apostles. Of the Jews he was beaten with rods; of
them five times he received 40. stripes save one, by them also was he stoned.
But what needs more proof of this, seeing the Apostle says expressly as
much of them. The Jews have both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
Prophets, and have persecuted us, and God they please not, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
and are contrary to all men: 16. And forbid us to preach unto the Gentiles
that they may be saved, to fulfill their sins always: for the wrath of God
is come on them to the utmost.

Who sees not that the people generally of England at this day are not worse,
and more notoriously wicked then were the Jews in the days of Christ and
his Apostles: yea, God forbid they were altogether so vile and abominable as
they. Did Christ Jesus now and his Disciples communicate with the Jews in
divine worship, notwithstanding in their public assemblies there were
present, and could not otherwise but be present, many open wicked? and may not
the faithful communicate in divine worship with us, because there be some
open wicked in our assemblies? yea, consider further with me, that as in the
days of Christ and his Apostles, so in all ages the godly, have had religious
communion with the open ungodly: as Abraham and the Church in his house with
Ismael, Isaac, and the Church of God in his house with Esau, and so forward I
migh go. This is hereby manifest also, in that the faithful in all ages had,
and lawfully might have religious communion, with all the members of the
Church, whereof some ever were open wicked. Why then may not the godly at
this day have communion in divine worship with the open ungodly? in saying
that the godly, and the holy things of God are defiled, by communicating with
open wicked: do you not thereby condemn all the assemblies of the Saints in
all ages: and bring pollution upon them and the worship they offered to God:
seeing in the said assembles they did communicate with open wicked? Prou.
17.15.
If to condemn one man for doing that which is lawful, holy, or just, though
ignorantly, is abhominatin before the Lord: much more is it an abomination
before God to condemn the generation of the just, for doing that which is
lawful, holy and good, though it be done ignorantly.

Thus we see that these are two palpable errors. 1. That the faithful may not
join with the open wicked in the worship of God, or have any holy communion
with them, 2. That the faithful communicating with such, both they and the
holy things of God are thereby polluted: But answer me. Are none such as
these, no known or open sinner to be found in other reformed Churches? you
will not say it: if you do, you speak that which is notoriously false. Do
the open wicked leaven, and sower the Churches in England, as a little leaven
does the whole lump of dough, and at length because they are not cast out
nullify the same, and have not their presence and in being in the Church of
Scotland, France, and the Low Countries, the like effect? yes verily: So that
then all the r^formed Churches are false Churches, as well as ours. And
concerning this I challenge you all: if you gainesay it, I will prove it to
your reproach. Thus you condemn the living and the dead, and all men beside
your selves. Your Church and Church assemblies are holy, pure, and undefiled:
so in them there is not a known wicked man. But al other for as much as in
them there are some known wicked, they are polluted, unholy and profane, and
all religious exercises performed in and by them.

CHAP. VIII. The arguments of the Brownists, whereby they would prove our
Church to be a false Church, and the answer unto them.
WE have heard of sundry false doctrines and errors concerning the visible
Church, that they whom we call Brownists do hold, and the confutation of them.
And therein we have heard of two of their principal reasons which they use
against our Church, to prove that it is a false Church, and therefore not be
communicated with. Both the said arguments are contained in and grounded upon
their description of a visible Church: which foundation of theirs being already
overthrown, (I mean the falsehood of their said description being made
manifest) their arguments as the building erected thereupon must needs fall to
the ground. Your first reason concerns the gathering of our Churches, which
(say you) for

The second reason is this.

and not a confused and mixed company of people, consisting of good and bad:

The parish assemblies in England are not separated, but confused and mixed
companies, consisting of men good and bad:

Therefore the parish assemblies in England are not true vis. Churches.

Again thus you reason.

Whatsoever assemblies have in them as members thereof many open and known
wicked, the same are false visible Churches.

The parish assemblies in England have in them as members many open wicked:

Therefore the Parish assemblies in England are false visible Churches.

That these are your very arguments, it is manifest by that I have formerly
aledged and produced out of your own books. To each of which, and the several
parts of them I have already returned answer at large, the sum whereof here
follows.

Propositions, we have likewise heard, and an idle Tautalogie it were to repeat
the same in whole or in part. As for the Assumption of them both (being
likewise in effect the same) whereupon you so much insist, you had done well
to have saved your whole labor, and never have troubled the world with so
many idle lines, serving to no purpose. Who ever denied either of your
Assumptions? Why then do you prove, and at large, that which we deny not? If
these arguments of yours be ought: then are all the reformed Churches, false
Churches. For they are not separated companies of righteous or godly men,
wherein are not open wicked; but have in their Churches many known ungodly:
and this they themselves do and will freely acknowledge and confess. Nay,
hereby you condemn all the Churches that ever were in the world. For there
was never vis. Church wherein all the members thereof were so qualified as
you require and no open wicked to be found in it. Your third reason follows.



The Church of England has not a right Constitution:

Therefore the Church of England is a false Church. Prove this your Proposition
and we will grant you the conclusion. And that therein you may not err nor
wander out of the way: you must first know, that that is a right Constitution
which in all things agrees with the word: And that a Church rightly
constituted which is framed and ordered in all things to that straight rule.
Nothing concerning the Constitution must be wanting which God in his word
requires; nothing superfluous or redundant, but in every thing according to the
pattern. When ye have performed this, then I will prove that the Church of the
Jews in the days of Christ, and his Apostles was a false Church: and so by
consequent Christ Jesus himself, and his Apostles did communicate with a false
Church, and in a false worship. Beware therefore I advise you beforehand what
you do. To the aforesaid arguments, M. Ainsworth has added diverse in his
Counterpoison, which here I will set down, and return answer unto them. The
first is this.

Every true Church is the body of Christ, and has him for the head thereof:
for it is written, Counterp. 127.
God has appointed him over all things, the head of the Church, which is his
body. Ephesians. 1.22.2^ and again, to the Church of Corinth it is said, Ye are
the body of Christ. 1. Cor. 12.27.

But the Church of England is not the body of Christ, neither has him for the
head thereof.

Therefore the Church of England, is not a true Church.

This Argument M. Smith likewise uses against our Churches and Particular
Congregations: Your Parish assemblies have not Christ for their head: Ergo,
they be false churches. Paralleles 87.
Ephe. 1.22.23.

1. Cor. 12.27. Gal. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.23.
We answer that these and all other places of holy writ, wherein Christ is
said to be the head of the Church, or the Church is said to be his body, that
by Church we are to understand that societiee we call the invisible Church, or
company of believers, which be a part thereof: or if in any of them we may
understand the vis. Church, it must needs be spoken in respect of them therein
that are of the invisible Church, which comes all to one. And thus Christ
Jesus is the head of the church of England, and it is his body: and so your
Assumption is false. Surely it is admirable that all of you are so far
blinded as to teach, that Confession of faith 10. and 52. and 58. and 68.
Apology 44. Communion of Saints 6. and 455. and 475. Description of the vis.
church. page 1.
The visible Church is the body of Christ, and that without any limitation,
exception, resp^ct, or restrain. For show me one line in all your books
tending this way. And here behold the absurdity of your Proposition: Every
true Church is the body of Christ: meaning every true particular visible Church
or congregation: whereupon follows, that how many particular Churches there
be, so many bodies of Christ; and so you make a monster of Christ. But how
monstrous soever this is you will prove it, and that by Scripture. For it is
written (say you) God has appointed Christ over all things the head of the
Church, which is his body. Ephesians. 1.22.23.

I answer. You speak of every particular visible Church, and the Apostle here
of the invisible Church, which is Catholic or universal: part whereof is now
in heaven, and part on earth, as verse 10. For confirmation whereof also serve
these words* verse 22. God has appointed him over all things. How makes this
Scripture then any thing for you? The invisible Church and company of the Elect
is the body of Christ: Your proposition is: Every true particular visible
Church is the body of Christ. These are different propositions, and every babe
may see, the former of these is no proof of the latter: and that the former
being true, this latter may notwithstanding be false, That this Scripture is to
be understood of the invisible Church it is manifest by that has been said:
Also, by the words next following in verse 23. which is his body, even the
fullness of him that fills all in all things. Whereby we learn, that without
the Church here spoken of, Christ Jesus does not account himself full,
perfect, and entire: but as it were maimed, even as a head without a body. Such
is his love to this church, and high account of it. But this fullness to Christ
does the invisible Church bring: Of the invisible church therefore does the
Apostle here speak. And mark how neither of the first words of your
Proposition are used here by Paul. He says not every Church, as you do, which
might seem to have employed that he had spoken of the vis. Church or Churches:
nor true Church, which had made it clear on your side: For true cannot fitly
be said of the invisible Church, forasmuch as there is no false invisible
Church. Only the word Church, he uses without any such addition, which word
in holy writ is indifferently used for the invisible, and visible Church, as
before I have showed: and here for the invisible, as the reasons aforesaid do
manifest. This Scripture therefore is preuerted by you, and makes nothing for
you. But be it granted that Paul speaks here of the visible Church, and that
there is no abuse of Scripture: at least that if not here, yet 1. Cor. 12.27.
he speaks of the Church visible, yet neither will that help you: seeing the
visible Church cannot be said to be the Body of Christ, but in respect of
the Elect that are in the visible church: now this will not profit you at all,
for to understand these Scriptures of the visible Church, as you will have it,
mark how your argument must be framed.

Every true visible Church is the body of Christ, and has him for the head
thereof, in respect of the Elect therein:

The Church of England is not the Body of Christ, neither has him for the head
thereof in respect of the Elect therein:

Therefore the Church of England, is not a true visible Church.

Thus your argument should have been composed, and what is wanting, is to be
vnde^stood: and then we answer you, by denying your assumption, and do
affirm that the Church of England is the body of Christ, and has him for the
head thereof in respect of Gods elect that be in it. And in this sense also as
well as in the former, the same may be said of us that Paul said of the
Corinthians, Ye are the body of Christ and members for your part. And here I
cannot choose but wonder at the extre^me folly of this man: Who proving that the
Church of England is not the body of Christ, neither has him for the head
thereof, whereas he should direct his speech against the go^ly among us, and
prove tha^ they are not the Body of Christ, nor have him for their head, in
stea^ thereof he does direct it (to use his own words) to our profane people:
Counterp. 128
mockers and contemners of Religion, that blaspheame God and his holy name even
in the streets as they walk: such as call themselves the damned crewe,
Familists, Atheists, and all other sorts of miscreants and wicked livers. These
children of wrath, (says he) this sinful generation, cannot possibly be
members of the Body of Christ, nor have him for their head; seeing they are not
partakers of his life and spirit, nor called to his faith; neither admits he
any such unto him, until they repent: he has no concord with Belial,
therefore not with the children of Belial: the members of his glorious body,
must not be the dead, stinking and abominable members of Satan. Light and
darkness, heaven and hell, will as soon be united together. And in this
path do they all tread.

Thus can I prove that the church of the Jews, as in other ages, so namely in
David's time, and in Isaiah his time, was a false Church: for as much as the
Jews then were a profane people, Isa. 2.3^
mockers and contemners of Religion, etc. Of the Church in the one of these
times this complaint was taken up: Ah, sinful nation, a people lad^n with
iniquity, etc. And of the other this: Help Lord, for there is not a godly man
left, etc. These children of wrath, (might I now argue with you) this sinful
generation could not possibly b^e members of the body of Christ, nor have him
for their head: and therefore was not a true, but a false Church. And mark
here gentle Reader I pray thee, how this man affirme^h: first, That all of the
visible Church are members of the Body of Christ. Secondly, (but more truly)
that all the members of the body of Christ, are partakers of his life and
spirit: so as whosoever does not participate with this life and spirit, is no
member. But with this l^fe and spirit the invisible Church only, and company
of the Elect (I mean so many of them as are effectually called) do partake,
as before I have proved: Therefore not the visible, but the called of the
inuisib^e Church are members of the body of Christ, and make that body whereof
Jesus is the h^ad. And hereby he excludes and shuts out of the visible
Church all reprobates, all hypocrites and wicked men, as well secret as open
wicked, and makes it to consist only of godly or righteous men indeed, or if
you will of the El^ct alone. For says he, all the members of the true visible
Church, are members of the Body of Christ, not dead, but living members,
partaking with the spirit and life of Christ: But no r^probate, hypocrite, or
wicked man is a living member of the Body of Christ, partaking with the spirit
and life of Christ: Therefore none such are of the true visible Church. Again,
only the Elect, and sincere or truly godly are such living members. Therefore
only such (by your wise doctrine) are of the true visible Church. Moreover
observe here, that by this man's doctrine in the true visible Church there are
no children of the devil. For says he* Christ has no concord with Belial,
therefore not with his children: Again, All the members of the true visible
Church are members of Christ his glorious Body: But the dead, stinking, and
abominable members of Satan, are not members of Christ's glorious Body:
therefore not of the true visible church. Whereupon fo^loweth that all of the
true visible Church are the children of God, and so heirs of salvation: for if
children, heirs: And particularly that Cain, Ismael, Esau, Saul, Absalom,
Judas, and the Scribes and Pharisees were the children of God, and are sau^d:
for all these were members of the true visible Church. And tell me M.
Ainsworth, y^u that will have no children of Beliall; no dead, stinking, and
abominable members of Satan, members of the true visible Church, but require
that all the members of the visible Church, be members of the glorious Body of
Christ, having him for their head: f^r which cause you condemn the Church of
England for a false Church, because in it there be many dead and rotten
members: tell me (I say) in your next Treatise, first: whether this reason of
yours proves not (as is in part aforesaid) as well the Church of the Jews in
Christ's time, as also before, and after in the d^yes of his Apostles, to be a
false Church, as we^l as ours. Secondly, whether Cain, Esau, Judas, and the
rest above named, were living members, part^king of Christ his life and Spirit:
or dead, stinking, and the abominable members of Satan: And this latter being
true, which you cannot deny, whether dead, stinking, and abominable members of
Satan have not been members of the true visible Church: seeing these were no
better members, and yet were all of the vis. church. Mark also how in the
former words he requires faith and repentance in every member of the visible
Church. And so he does a little before. The people of England in the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth's reign, Counterp. 127.
did not enter into the church by repentance and faith in Christ, but by the
commandment of the Magistrate, were compelled unto the Church, Sacraments, and
ministry. Now the Magistrates law cannot work faith in any: Ephesians. 2.8. Romans
10.17.
seeing faith is the gift of God, and by his word only is wrought in man's
heart. I have told you before, and now tell you again, that not faith and
repentance, but the prof^ssion of these, is necessary to the making of a memb^r
of the visible church: and that thereunto the Magistrates law and authority
will draw and persuade men. Had you and the rest of your society learned
this, you would never then have required these graces, nor such holiness (at
least external) in all the members of the visible church as you do. But it is
no marvel though you requ^re faith and repentance (not in the judgment of
charity, but in deed and verity) in every member of the visible Church,
Communion of Saints. 321.
and tell us else where, that this is the door whereby a man must enter into
the Church: considering you teach that the visible Church is the Body of
Christ, and that all the members of the visible Church, are members of his
mystical body, and partakers of his spirit and life. For no unbeliever and
impen^tent person is member of the mystical body of Christ. You now that
require true faith and repentance in every member of the visible Church, say,
whether any of the visible Church can be damned. For the Scripture says, He
that believes is saved already; has passed from death to life. And that If
the wicked return from all his sins which he has committed, and keep all
Gods statutes, Ezech. 18.21.
that is, If he repent, he shall surely live, and shall not die.

After many friuelous lines tending hereunto, that there is peace and agreement
between Christ, and all of the visible Church: That in the Church, among the
members thereof; there is no hatred or enmity, both which are palpably false,
you drawing to an end of the proof of your Assumption, use these words
following. By this it may appear, that Christ is no head of such
Antichristians, Page 130.
nor of any other profane wicked worldlings; seeing his spirit gives them not
life and motion, but they are carried by the spirit of Satan that possessed
them: neither can they be knit unto him by joints or bands, as all his body
and members thereof are: Therefore (says he) the Church of England is not the
true Church of God.

Thus the second time you tell us, and truly, That Christ his body, and all
the members thereof, have his spirit giving them life and motion, whereby as by
joints or bands they are knit unto him the head: But (again say I) the called
of the invisible Church only have this spirit, by this spirit are knit unto the
head Christ: They therefore only are the body of Christ, and to him united as
the head. Again, many of the true visible Church, (that I say not the greatest
part thereof) have not this spirit causing in them this life and motion, thereby
also as by joints or bands knitting them unto Christ the head, but in stead
thereof are carried by the spirit of Satan that possesses them, as has often
been showed: Many therefore of the true visible church, are not members of
Christ's body. And therefore also the church of England, may be a true church,
notwithstanding there be many in and of it, who be not the members of Christ's
body, led by his spirit, but profane wicked worldlings, carried by the spirit
of Satan that poss^sseth them. You who teach that in the true visible Church
there be no profane wicked worldlings, none that are carried by the spirit of
Satan possessing them, and for this cause, will have it to be a false church:
answer me I pray you: First, whether the Scribes and Pharisees were pro: phane,
wicked, and worldlings: Ioh. 6.70. and 13.25.
and whether they were carried by the spirit of Satan, yea or no: and namely
Judas, whom Jesus calls a Devil, and of whom it is said, that Satan entered
into him. Secondly, whether all the Devils children, be not carried by his
spirit. And let this suffice for answer to your first argument. The second
follows.

Every true Church of God has Christ for the Mediator and Advocate of the
same. For it is written. There is one God, Counterp. 132.
and one Mediator between God and Man, which is the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim.
2.5. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
just: Neither is there salvation in any other; for among men there is given no
other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.22.

But the Church of England has not Christ for the Mediator and advocate of the
same:

Therefore the Church of England is not the true Church of God.

Paralleles 86.
In like manner M. Smith reasons against us: The true Church has Christ for
their Mediator: But your assemblies have him not for their Mediator: Therefore
they be false Churches.

Christ is the Mediator and Advocate of every true Church, that is, of every
several congregation or company of true believers: but that he is such to
every true visible Church, as you mean, I utterly deny. And grant that it
might be said, That Jesus is the Mediator and Advocate of every true visible
Church, it must needs be in respect and with relation had to them who be of
the invisible Church: which makes nothing for you, nor against us. Your
Proposition therefore is false, neither do the testimonies alleged by you
confirm it. They only prove, that Christ Jesus is a Mediator between God and
man, and an Advocate to the Father for him. Who in their wits but you and your
Disciples, by (man) in Timothy will understand the visible Church; or every
true visible Church; and not rather the invisible Church, and all of mankind
who be of Gods elect, whose alone Mediator and Advocate Jesus is. The Papists
may more probably by (man) understand all mankind, and make Jesus the Mediator
of all men, as they affirm that he died for all men, then you the visible
Church, seeing the letter of the Scripture here makes for that exposition. And
surely the one is as true as the other. As little does the place of John avail
you. For neither does he say, That Christ is the Advocate of the visible Church
or of every true visible Church, which is that you are to prove, and make your
unadvised Reader believe you do prove, when you do nothing less. Nay, your
Proposition may be convinced by this Scripture, so far is it from confirming
and strengthening of it. For whose advocate Christ is said here to be, for their
sins in the next verse) he is said to be a propitiation: But he is a
propitiation only for the sins of the Elect or invisible Church, which your
selves will not deny: Therefore the Advocate only of the invisible Church, and
consequently not of the visible. When John had said that Jesus Christ is our
Advocate, he adds, And he is the propitiation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world If by the
whole world you understand the whole visible Church, as by your alleging of
this Scripture for proof of your Proposition you seem to do, you must needs
do, or else cry peccaui, for alleging it, then will the whole Christian world
reject this your exp^sition. And know ye that that which is h^re said by John
is as true of the whole world, as of the whole vis. Church: and that Christ is
and shall as soon be a propitiation, and advocate for the sins of the whole
world, as an Advocate for the whole visible Church. The truth then is that by
(world) here is meant, all whosoever in the world believe in Christ, Jews or
Gentiles; or all Gods elect throughout the whole world. For their sins Christ
Jesus is said to be a propitiation, and for them only is he an advocate. And
this is confirmed by Paul. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? It is God that justifies. Who shall condemn? Meaning, any of
this chosen generation. Implying that it is not possibl^ that any of them
should be damned. And why? Because for all of this society, as only for them)
Christ died, and rose again and makes request also for them. If now one ask
the question, for whom Christ d^ed, for whom he rose again, and for whom he
makes intercession: the answer is ready, for Gods chosen, which be they we
call the invisible Church. But you give us an other answer, and say he is the
Advocate and makes intercession for the visib^e church. You may as well and
truly say, that Christ died for the visible church. For by this Scripture it
is clear, that he is an Advocate and makes request to God his Father for
them for whom he died. But he died, Confession of faith 26.
say you elsewhere, for the elect only: therefore as Adu^cate he makes
request only for the elect. And by consequent Jesus is not the Advocate of the
vis. church, as you teach: except the vis. church be the society of the elect,
and the visible, and invisible church be all one. Verse 20.
In the 17 of John our Savior says, I pray not for these alone, meaning the
eleven Disciples, but for them also which shall believe in me through their
word: But the elect and invisible church only believe in Christ, Tit 1.1. Act.
13.48.
whereupon faith is called the faith of Gods elect: and in the Acts it is said,
As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed: Therefore the elect and
invisible church only have Christ Jesus for their Advocate. Thus we see your
first proof of the Proposition makes nothing for you, the second greatly
against you, helping to convince you. Let us now here your third and last
testimony, taken out of Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other,
for among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved. Here is no mention of the vis. church, nor yet of Christ's Mediation, nor
intercession, but only of salvation by his means. How can this Scripture then
make for the confirmation of your Proposition? But happily you will have it,
That Christ is likewise the Savior of the visible church. For I am very sure
that whose Mediator and Advocate Christ Jesus is, their Savior he is, and
gives salvation to them all. But (say you) he is the Mediator and Advocate of
the vis. church. Therefore he is the Savior of the vis. church, and gives
salvation to all of that fellowship.

As your Proposition, so your Assumption, to wit, That the Church of England
has not Christ for the Mediator and Advocate of the same, is likewise false.
For the whole company in England that by faith are united unto Christ, and by
love one unto another, and they only, are the church of England: and all such
have Christ for their Mediator and Advocate. As for the wicked they are as S.
John speaks, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
among us, but not of us; in the church, but not of it: as the tares that grow
in the field, and among the wheat, are notwithstanding your commingling
wheat, Counterp. 132:
nor so to be called. But by Church here as before in your proposition, very
ignorantly you understand the visible church, and with many words go about to
prove, That the vis. church of England (if I may so speak) has not Christ for
the Mediator and Advocate of the same. Here you tell us again, of them among
us, who be profane, scoff at repentance, and scorn at all admonition,
despise wisdoms counsel, and such as reprove, they turn again, and rent
them. And as in the prosecution of the former Argument you prove, That such
vile men are not the body of Christ, neither have him for their head, so here
that Jesus is not the Mediator and Advocate of such, but of a more holy
society. In like manner you deal in your three other Arguments following.
(say you) has Christ for the King, Priest, and Prophet of the same: The Church
of England has not Christ for the King, Priest and Prophet of the same:
Therefore the church of England is not the true Church of God. This which I have
contracted into one, you make three Arguments of: and the Assumption of those
three you prove in that manner you do the two former Assumptions: wherein you
might have saved a great deal of labor, se^ing we all confidently hold, That
the vile and abominable among us, Mat. 13.25.
are not of the church of England* but tares sowed among the wheat by the
enemy, while men slept. And therefore we account them not the body of Christ,
nor to have him for a Mediator, and Advocate, and for their King, Priest, and
Prophet? What mean you then at large to pursue the proof of that we deny not?
But I will be more wise then spend any more time in answer to your reasons.
Only I will show, That Christ Jesus is not the King, Priest, and Prophet of
the vis. Church, Generally I prove it thus.

Whose Mediator Christ Jesus is, their King, Priest, and Prophet he is:

But Christ Jesus is the Mediator only of the elect, or invisible Church:

Therefore only of the elect or invisible church is Christ Jesus, King Priest,
and Prophet. And consequently not of the vis. church. Or thus.

The Proposition of these two Arguments, is hereby plain, in that these are
the parts of Christ his mediation. The Assump. tion needs no proof. That this
you here teach is false, may further be proved by your own doctrine: and thus.

Whose King, Priest, and Prophet Christ is, for them in that he is their Priest
he died, and makes intercession: To them in that he is their King, he does
apply and make effectual his priesthood: Them likewise he governs by his
word and spirit; them he defends, specially from all spiritual enemies, and
them he will exalt to the communion of his eternal kingdom. But Christ died
for, and makes intercession, he also applies his priesthood only to the
elect, governs by his Word and Spirit, defends, and thus highly exalts
the elect alone, ^s might be made evident out of the sacred Scriptures if it
need: Therefore he is King, Priest, and Prophet only of the elect and
invisible Church.

Counterp. 147
This may be proved also by M. Ainsworths own words: Thirdly, says he, the
Church of England has not Christ for the King thereof, because the people of
that Church were and are (even by the confession of our adversaries) of all
sorts of people, as well wicked as godly, and sins of all sorts do abound and
reign among them, that if the good laws of the common wealth did not repress
them, there would be no living in peace among them. Such profane worldly
people, are not the subjects of Christ, his kingdom is not of this world,
neither is it for the open wicked, but for the repentant and believing, for the
poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the persecuted for righteousness
sake, not for persecuters, haters, and contemners of the truth. In which words
you frame us this reason against your selves.

Christ is not King of a profane worldly people, neither are such his subjects
but only of an holy and heavenly people, of the repentant and believing, of
the poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the persecuted for righteousness
sake:

But the elect and invisible Church only are this holy and heavenly people,
etc.

The Elect therefore and the invisible Church only are the subjects of Christ,
and have him for their King.

Page 148.
Again say you a little after. If they had Christ for their King, his truth,
his word, would make them free, he would make them also Kings and Priests unto
God his Father: that howsoever the suppressing and abolishing of this unruly
Hierarchy with their many abominations is to be left unto the Magistrate who
only has power from God to execute this vengeance, yet every man should
deliver his own soul, abstaining from error, false worship, superstition,
popish thraldom, and all other evil whatsoever, though with affliction,
bonds, banishment, etc. and stand fast in the libertio wherewith Christ has
made him free, without yoke of thraldom. For he will reign in the midst of
his enemies. Satan and sin he has subdued, as for himself, so for all his
people and subjects, whom he has redeemed out of all Satanean and Babylonian
bondage, that sin should reign no more over them. Thus I from hence argue
against you.

They who have Christ for their King, his truth does make them free, he makes
them also Kings and Priests unto God his Father:

But Christ performs this to the elect and invisible church only, as is
plain by those two testimonies your self quote in the margent, Ioh. 8.32.
Reu. 1.6.

The elect therefore and invisible Church only have Christ for their King.

Secondly.

Their King Christ Jesus is, who abstain from error, false-worship, and all
other evil whatsoever, delivering thus their own souls:

But the elect and invisible Church only abstain from every evil way, and
deliver their own souls:

Therefore the elect only have Christ Jesus for their King.

Thirdly.

They only are the people and subjects of Christ, and have him for their King,
for whom he has subdued Satan and sin, and whom he has redeemed out of
all Satanean bondage, that sin should reign no more over them:

But Christ has subdued Satan and sin, only for the elect and invisible
Church, and them alone has he redeemed out of all Satanean bondage, that sin
should reign no more over them:

Therefore the elect and invisible Church only are the people and subjects of
Christ, and have him for their King. Thus what you build with the one hand, you
put down apase with the other. Ephesians. 4.8.11. Heb. 3.6.
Yet do not I deny that Christ has appointed the offices, and officers, and
given laws to the vis. church, by and according to which only it ought to be
governed, and that in th^s respect he is the only King thereof. Also, Mat.
28.18. Reu. 17.14.
in that all power is given unto him in heaven, and in earth, and is King of
the whole earth, being King of Kings: thus likewise he is King of the visible
church. And as King, he defends it from the enemies thereof for his own
glory and name that is called upon them, and for his elect sake, that are among
them. And lastly in this respect he is also King of the visible church, that
these rebels and enemies of his, that will not suffer him to reign over them
neither regard his laws and statutes he will take vengeance of them and
destroy them. Thus I acknowledge our Lord is King of the visible church, but
not so, a he is King to them, to whom he is Priest and Prophet as you do
affirm. Come we now to the second part of the aforesaid proposit on, Counterp.
141.
and to M. Ainsworth his 4. argument.

Every true visible Church has Christ for the Priest of the same:

The vis. Church of England has not Christ for the Priest of the some:

Therefore the Church of England is not a true visible Church.

I de^y your proposition, which to be false, I do thus make manifest. If
Christ Jesus be the Priest of the visible Church, then Christ died for the
v^sible church, and makes intercession for all of that society: for
doubtless he performed all the parts of his Priesthood, for them to whom he
is a Priest If Christ now died for the visible church, then all of the visible
church shall be saved, and none of them damned: for Christ's death shall be
effectual to save all those from perdition, for whom he died, Who shall
condemn (says the Apostle) It is Christ which is dead. Romans 8.34.
Intimating that none of those can possibly be damned, for whom Christ died.
Now the aforesaid inference is false, seeing there be many reprobates of the
visible church, for which Christ neither dyed nor makes intercession: and
therefore is that false from whence it is inferred and deduced: Nay I will
disprove this by your own words. In the 32. p. of your confession of faith,
thus you write. Touching his Priesthood Christ has appeared once to put away
sin, by the offering of himself: and to this end has fully performed and
suffered all those things by which God might be reconciled to his Elect. From
hence I reason thus.

If Christ in that he was a Priest has by the oblation of himself taken away
the sin of the Elect only, and reconciled unto God only the Elect, then is
he the Priest only of the Elect, or invisible church:

But Christ in that he was a Priest has by the oblation of himself taken
away the sin of the Elect only, and reconciled to God only the Elect:

Therefore Christ Jesus is the Priest only of the Elect, or church inuissible:
and by consequent not of the vissible church, as you affirm.

The Proposition is so clear in it self, that it needs no proof The
Assumption is proved by your own confession: Though you do not use this word
(only) yet must it nec^ssarilie be understood. This your self, also M.
Ainsworth do further confirm, Counterp. 141.
The Church of England (say you) has not Christ for the Priest, or Sacrificer
of the same: Because the gifts, and sacrifices which it offers unto God, are
not presented and offered unto him by Christ, neither is this Church reconciled
unto God by him, from hence also I argue thus.

Whose spiritual sacrifices Christ does present and offer unto his father,
their priest he is.

But the spir^tual sacrifices of the elect and invisible church only does
Christ present and offer unto his Father.

Therefore Christ is the Priest of the elect and invisible church only.

Agai^e.

To prove that Christ is the prophet of the invisible church, this (in a word)
may suffice: To what societ e soever he is king and priest, to the same he is
a prophet: But to the invisible church only he is a king and priest: Therefore
a prophet, the Proposition needs no proof. The Assumption has already been
proved. This likewise may be confirmed by your own lines, and therefore I may
well be sparing of mine. Counterp. 139.
Moreover the church of England wants part and communion with Christ in that
prophetical office, which he has imparted to his people, namely power and
freedom to witness, profess, practice and hold forth the word of life, and
all that Christ has commanded. And therefore concludes he: The church of
England has not Christ for the prophet thereof; from hence I reason thus.

To that church or company of men whatsoever which has power and freedom to
witness, profess, practice, and hold forth the word of life, and all that
Christ has commanded, to them only is Christ a prophet.

But this power and freedom has the invisible church only:

Therefore of the inuis. church only is Christ a Prophet.

The proposition is your own. The assumption is very clear: for though all of
the visible church, and many reprobates have power to profess, yet only the
Elect have the ability to practice the word of God, and to observe all that
Christ has commanded: that is, earnestly endeavor to obs^rue and keep the
commandments of God and Christ in all things: which is that we call
evangelical obedience. This obedience whereof our Lord speaks, Mat. 28.20.
Teaching the^ to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, is proper
(I say) to the elect, and cannot fall into any reprobate. But these words of
Jesus you understand of the polity of the church, and being general you
restrain to all things concerning ecclesiastical government. Whereupon it is
that in the words immediately following the former, you tell us of admonition,
reprehension, and excommunication, and not a title of any other commandment
of Christ. But how do you prove this to be the meaning of Jesus: Till you be
able to make this manifest, which I think will never be: I for my part will
reject this your gloss, and understand this Scripture more largely. And here
in the end of my Book may that justly be retorted upon M. Ainsworth, which he
unjustly in the beginning of his Counterpoyson does avouch against us.
Counterp: epist.
I have also produced their own testimonies against them, that the Saints on
earth may say: Their rock is not as our rock, even our enemies being Judges.
Deuteronomy. 32.31.
And if they will yet resist, the world may see, they are condemned by
themselves.

For these reasons you condemn our churches, and hold them to be false
visible Churches: whereupon you do separate. It had been fit you had better
informed your selves in the doctrine of the Church, and learned first what a
true vis. church is, and what a false: and to have been able to discern and
put a difference between the invisible, and vis. Church, and the Scriptures
concerning them, before you had thus presumptuously taken upon you to condemn
our congregations to be false Churches. My brethren you take to much upon you.
You condemn and speak evil of those things ye know not. See to it. Remember
also that this definitive sentence you have given of our churches is not in a
corner, where some few only might hear, and spread the same: but in the
streets, yea in the high street, among the press, and entering of the gates,
or rather upon the house top, (as Absalom abused his fathers concubines) so
as whosoever has an ear, except he stop it, cannot choose but hear it,
both in this age present, and in the ages succeeding. O that you were wise to
consider of these things.

To the aforesaid arguments M. Ainsworth adds two other, which he infers
upon the former, and as a bui^ding erected upon this foundation, That our
church is a false church. The drift of the one is to prove, That men ought to
separate from our Church and have no communion with it, seeing it is a false
Church: of the other, That our Ministers, are no true Ministers of Christ, and
therefore not to be heard. I do not mean to answer the said Arguments: for
that is needless: considering what a sandy foundation they stand upon, as
appears by the aforesaid tractate: but will only retort them upon
themselves,

That Church (says he) which is not the true Church of Christ and of God,
Counterp. 150
ought not by any true Christian to be continued or communicated with; but
must be forsaken and separated from, and a true Church of God sought and joined
unto, where Christ and salvation by him, may undoubtedly be had. Because we are
willed to abstain and separate from the false Church, 2. Cor. 6.14.17. Reu.
18.4. Hos. 4.15. Isa. 48.20, Ier. 51.45. Zach. 2.6.7. 1. Cor. 10 20.21. etc.
We are willed also to seek and join unto a true Church. Deuteronomy. 12.5. Song.
1.6. Ier. 50.4.5. Isa. 65.9. Psalm. 26.5.6. and 87.2.5.6. Act. 2.47.

But the Church of England is before proved not to be the true Church of Christ
and of God: Therefore it ought to be separated from; and a To wit theirs for
none other I dare be bold to say do they hold for a true Church, if they which
freely profess what herein they think.
true Church sought for* and joined to, of such as would be saved.

This I return upon them thus.

That church which is a true church ought to be continued or communicated with,
and must not be forsaken and separated from: because we are commanded to
abstain and separate from a false Church only, 2. We are commanded to seek
and join unto a true Church:

But the Church of England is before proved to be a true Church:

Therefore the Church of England ought to be continued and communicated with;
and must not be forsaken and separated from:

His other Argument concerning our Ministers is this.

These Ministers which have and execute the ministry of a false Church, are
not the true Ministers of Christ, and consequently not to be heard or obeyed
as Shepherds of our selves. Because the ministry of a false Church, must
needs be false also, seeing the Church having no interest in Christ, can have
no interest in a Christian Ministry. Besides Christ has given his ministry
to his own Church only, Ephesians. 4.11.12.14.15.16. 1. Cor. 12.27.28. See also,
Ioh. 10.1.4.5. Act. 20.28. Ioh. 21.15.16.

But all the Ministers of the Church of England, have and execute the
ministry of a false Church; for so by the former arguments that Church is
proved:

Therefore they are not the true Ministers of Christ, and consequently not to
be heard or obeyed as Shepherds of our souls.

Hereupon I reason thus.

These Ministers which have and execute the Ministry of a true Church, are the
true Ministers of Christ, and consequently to be heard and obeyed as Shepherds
of our souls. Because the ministry of a true Church, must needs be true
also: seeing the Church having interest in Christ, has interest in all the
gifts he bestows upon his church, and has therefore interest in a Christian
ministry. Besides, Christ has given his ministry to his own church, so that
Christ's church is not destitute of his ministry: Ephesians. 4.11. and 1. Cor.
12.28. etc.

But the Ministers of the church of England, have and execute the ministry of
a true church; for so by the former arguments contained in the 8. Chap. of this
Book that church is proved:

Therefore they are the true Ministers of Christ, and consequently to be heard,
or obeyed as shepherds of our souls.

To this argument, (and demonstration as M. Ainsworth thinks) he adds this
Epiphonema: For the further descryi^g of the false ministry of this church, I
refer thee (good Reader) to a Treatise lately published entitled, Reasons
and Arguments proouing that it is not lawful to hear the ministry of
England. And to another heretofore published, called a Treatise of the
Ministry of the Church of England. And thus ends he his Treatise.

I answer, that to these Reasons and Arguments, M. Wutton has re^urned an
answer, and sent it over to M. Johnson the Author of them about three years
since, expecting a^l this while his reply. But hitherto we hear of none, and
it is very likely never shall. If not justifying your Arguments, you proceed
still to avouch, that our ministry is a false ministry, notwithstanding the
vanity of your Arguments to this said purpose be discovered, your
consciences convinced, and mouths stopped: all the world may plainly see you
neither love, nor contend for the truth: but love more the praise of man, then
of God, and therefore do contend.

Thus much of the Church, and of the different points between us and you
eoncerning the same. That little which is here said of our Ministry, is (as
you may se^) upon occasion and by the way. Truly I much desired to have added
something here in d^fence of our Ministry, and answer to your sophismes: but
for diverse reasons whereof some be mentioned in the epistles dedicatorie, I
thought good to forbear, and at this present to say no more.

CHAP. IX. How the Separists to justify their separation from the Church of
England, do shamefully pervert the holy Scriptures.
AS for the proof of the particular points wherein we and you of the
separation do differ, you shamefully abuse and pervert the sacred Scriptures,
even all of you without exception, as manifestly appears by the premises: so
in the maine difference, concerning the separating of your selves from our
church, you do the like, whereof I will give the Reader likewise a taste. For
the justifying of their separation, they allege diverse places of holy
Scripture, and specially three, which they take to be very pregnant for them.
One of them is taken out of the 19. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. The
words be these. Verse. 8.
Moreover he (that is Paul) went into the Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the
space of three months, disputing and exhorting to the things that appertain
to the Kingdom of God, 9. But when certain were hardened and disobeyed,
speaking evil of the way of God before the multitude, he departed from them,
and separated the Disciples, and disputed daily in the School of one Tyrannus.

We answer: These men from whom Paul and other Christians separate, were open
contemners, nay blasphemers of the way of God: Because of this open contempt of
theirs, for it is said, they spoke evil of that way before the multitude: the
Apostle durst not Preach the word of God unto them, neither could have done
without sinning against God: for our Savior has fordidden to give that which
is holy unto Dogs, Matthew. 7.6.
and to cast pearls before Swine. And least we should think this were only
true of private admonition or reproof, we may remember that to the 70
Disciples he gives the same commandment concerning public teaching: saying
to them when he sent them forth to Preach by two and two: Luke 10.10.
But into whatsoever City ye shall enter, if they will not receive you, go
your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust which
cleaves on us of your City, we wipe of against you. Except therefore we be
such despisers as these, this Scripture makes not for their Separation, but is
misapplied and wrested by them: And notwithstanding S. Paul with the other
Christians did well in separating from them aforesaid, they do sinfully in
departing from us.

Another testimony of Scripture, and of all the most usual and principal,
they take out of the 6. Chapter of the second Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians. Verse. 14.15.
Be not unequally yoaked with Infidels; for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has the
believer with the infidel? 16. And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God: as God has said, I will
dwell among them, and walk there: and I will be their God, and they shall be
my people, 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves
says the Lord: and touch none unclean thing, and I will receive you, 18. And
I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty. Thus ends the 6. Chapter, and thus far do the
Separists coat and urge this Scripture, but no farther. But heereunto let us
add the first verse of the 7. Chapter: for that makes greatly for the right
understanding of this Scripture. Seeing then we have these promises, dearly
beloved let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit,
and finish our sanctification in the fear of God.

By these words of the Apostle it should seem that sundry Christians in
Corinthus (according to their accustomed manner before the time of their
conversion) went sometimes to their idols Temples, where were nothing but
gross and heathenish Idolatry, and their with their neighbors, who were
heathens and infidels, did join together in their idolatrous worship; or at
least in their holy feasts, (as is said 1. Cor. 8.10.) which they did celebrate
to the honor of their Idols, and so were d^fi^ed with the worship of idols:
thinking with themselves that they might lawfully join with them in external
idolatry, and thus far yield with their bodies, so long as they kept their
souls pure to the Lord. The Apostle hearing of this great corruption among
many others, tells them that they must withdraw themselves from this
idolatrous worship, and defilement, and separate themselves: For they cannot
worship God and the Devil, they are so contrary one to another, even as light
and darkn^sse: But if they thus worship idols, they worship the Diue^l, and
therefor so doing they cannot worship God. That they who worship idols do
worship the Devil, he has showed them in his former Epistle in these words:
What say I then? That the idol is any thing? 1. Cor. 10.19.
Or that that which is sacrificed to idols is any thing? Nay, but that these
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not unto
God: and I would not that you should have fellowship with the Devils. Ye cannot
be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of Devils. And whereas they
excused this fact of theirs thus, (as sundry do their going to Mass at this
day) that now they went not with this mind as sometimes they did, to give
honor to the idols; for they knew well that an idol is nothing, that is, that
there is not any Godhead in an idol, and therefore did keep their souls pure
from all pollution, he answers, that they whom God vouchsafes this honor
to be his children, must keep themselves pure not only in soul, but also in
body, 1 Cor. 6.20.
called h^re flesh: glorifying God in their bodies and in their spirits, for
they are Gods, that so they may be wholly pure. Thus we see the occasion, the
scope and drift of the Apostle, and the true sense and meaning of these words.
Whereby we learn, That the worshippers of the true God, may not communicate
with heathens, and infidels in their idolatrous or idol worship, which is no
b^tter then the worship of the Devil. And to apply this: That a Christian at
this day being in Turkey, may not partake with them in their worshipping of
Mahomet: or being among heath^ns join with them in their heathenish and
idolatrous service. Which makes nothing for their separating from us in the
worship of the true God, because of some corruptions therein. Except it be all
one when external worship in part is corrupted, as in some matter of
circumstance or ceremony, and when it is corrupted in the whole substance and
body thereof: which no man sure in his wits will affirm. These men in
alleging this Scripture for the iusti^ying of their Separation, do compare
and equal, first, our public worship of God, with the Idolaters of Corinthus
their public worship. Secondly, those Idolaters with us. And except there be
a likelihood and equality between these worships and worshippers, this place
of holy Scripture they pervert and abuse: because otherwise it proves not
their Separation to be lawful. Let us therefore see the sweet harmony that is
between these things and persons. We in our Churches or Church Assemblies
worship the true and living God, and (touching the substance) according to his
word. We in our Temples have the Word of God read, and as soundly interpreted
and ^ightly applied as either is, or ever has been in Christendom since the
Apostles days: with great power, fruit, and efficacy in the hearts of the
hearers, so as sinners are thereby converted from going astray, themselves
being judges. We in our public assemblies call upon the living God, and that
only in the name of Jesus Christ: and do receive only the Sacraments which
the Lord Jesus has instituted. But the Corinthians in their Temples fell down
before their Idols, which were representations of their feined gods; prayed
before them, and to a false God; and together with their Idols worshipped the
Devil, as we have heard. And as for these Corinthians they were all Heathens
and Infidels, void of all knowledge, and profession of the true Religion:
whereas we all profess the true religion, and many of us (through the grace
of God) walk according to our ho^y profession. Considering then the great
difference and inequality between us and them; our worship and theirs, it may
very well be, nay is lawful to communicate with us in divine worship, and yet
utterly unlawful to partake with such gross Idolaters as these Corinthians in
their worship. And what an absurd kind of re^soning is this: We may not join
with Heathens and Infidels in their idol-worship, and service (indeed) of the
Devil: Therefore not with Christians in the worship of the true God corrupted.
This testimony of the Apostle proves only this Antecedent, or first part of
this reason: and the conclusion here is that which (in the general) you infer
of this Scripture. Look well I beseech you in the fear of God of this
cons^quence, and consider of the lightness and vanity thereof. To allege
this Scripture or any such like for the proof of the aforesaid conclusion, and
the justifying of your separation, is a very childish part, and to no purpose,
and yet there is not any thing more usual with you. If you will write and
speak as beseems but men, and to the point in hand: show us where the
Apostle moves the Christians in Corinthus or elsewhere, which were more holy
and sincere then the rest, to separate from the other Christians, because of
some corruptions in the external worship of God. And this may aboundantdantly
suffice for answer to this your second testimony of holy Scripture. Wherein I
have been the larger, because the wise and considerate Reader may from thence
receive an answer to the third place of Scripture here alleged by you taken
forth of the 18. Chapter of the Revelation, where thus S. John speaks. Verse
2.4.
And I saw another Angel come down from heaven, and he cried out mightily
with a loud voice, saying, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great
City, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all foul
spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. 4. And I heard another
voice from heaven say, Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins* and that ye receive not of her plagues. Both these Scriptures teach
and persuade though by diverse reasons one and the same thing: that is, That we
must separate and go out from idolaters, and not communicate with them in
their idolatrous or idol-worship: and therefore one and the same answer may
serve them both. They differ only in this, that the one speaks of heathen,
the other of Antichristian Idolatry, and idolaters condemning all communion
with them in external worship. And hear that which before we have heard we
must again remember, and not forget: That it is one thing when the worship of
God is corrupted in the substance and whole body thereof, as it is in the
better of these worships, and another thing when it is corrupted in part, as
with humane ceremonies or ordinances of lesser moment. With the former of
these kinds of worship we may have no communion, which these two places of
holy Scripture do directly prove, but nothing else: With the latter kind (of
which our worship is) we may lawfully communicate. Thus we see how the
principal testimonies which out of the sacred Scriptures the Separatists
produce to vvarrant their separation are falsely applied, miserably wrested,
and perverted by them. The scope with the true sense, applied to a l^ke case,
is a true allegation of Scripture; else it is but a wretched abuse thereof, as
one says very well.

Nay, you have so accustomed your selves to sin in your allegations and
quotations of Scripture, that oftentimes when you have the truth in hand, and
go about to confirm that by Scripture, you are then also faulty herein,
whereof I will give you and the Reader a taste.

Princip. and Infer. 12.
The means (say you) of salvation are: the Word, Sacraments, Prayers,
Censures, and the ordinances of Christ for the dispensing of them all. Romans
3.2. and 4.11. Luke 19.46. Mat. 18.15.17. Act 2.42. 1. Cor. 11.23.26. Mat.
28.19. Psalm. 149 6.9.

Who considering these manifold testimonies can otherwise think, but that this
proposition in every part thereof is soundly proved? I deny not, but acknowledge
this to be an undoubted truth, but only take exc^ption against your manner of
proving it. You are to prove here, and pretend to prove, first, that the word
is a means of salvation. To this end you send us to Romans 3.2. Unto the Jews
were committed the Oracles of God. Is not here a goodly proof of the
aforesaid Proposition? Tell me, I pray you, whether any place in Scripture
wherein mention is made of the word of God, be not as good a proof as this
produced by you. Had you quoted Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think to have eternal life: Or, 1. Pet. 1.23. Where the word of God is
cal^ed immortal seed: Or 1. Cor. 1.28. and 21. It pleases God by the
foolishness of preaching to save those that believe: Or any such as these,
whereof there be store in the book of God: then had your allegation been
pertinent, where now they be frivolous. And what mean you to omit these
vvitnesses which would speak materially and to purpose, and instead of them
bring forth such as do not say a word for you. It argues that there is not
that fear in you of taking Gods Name in vain, and of doing the work of the
Lord negligently that should be. In like manner you deal in the other parts of
this position. For whereas you should prove, that the Sacraments are a means
of salvation, and the like by prayer, and censures, you send the Reader to some
pla es of scripture, where there is mention indeed of a Sacrament, of Prayer,
and of Censures, but not a word there to prove them to be the means of
salvation. Such as these are a l the quotations you have for proof of your
opinions.

The way or door (say you) whereby both members and officers enter in is
Christ, that is, the way taught by Christ in his word, Page 13,
Ioh. 14.6, and 10.3.7.9. and 17, 17. Mark. 13.34.37. Hereby you intimate that
for as much as we walk not in this way, nor enter in by this door, members
into communion, and officers into offices, therefore our people are not in
communion, or be not members of true visible Churches, nor our Ministers
Ecclesiastical Officers, but mere private. That in this way we walk, and
enter into the Church and Ministry by this door, it has touching the former
of these been already made manifest. True it is that in neither of these we
have walked, or do with that straight foot we should, and that in them we
bewray humane frailty: but such as through the mercy of God in Christ,
nullifies not our Church and Ministry: no more then Jacobs infirmities in the
way he walked to the blessing, hindered him of the blessing: Or his faulty
entrance into the married estate with Leah, made a nullitie in their
Matrimony, so as they lived perpetually in adultery.

And seeing I am fallen into this point, of your perverting and abuse of
Scripture, and got into this field, (a large one I conf^sse, and able to tire a
horse) I will go a few steps, or pases further therein. I take no exception
against this position, but your proofs thereof. In Ioh. 14.6. I am that Way,
that Truth, and that Life: Our Savior speaks of the way to Heaven, that by
him we must come thither, if ever we will be there; That by him we must have
life eternal, else we dye eternally. This to be Jesus his meaning we may
easily see by the dependence of this verse with the former. Christ fortelling
his Disciples of his Passion then approaching, and of his going to Heaven, to
prepare a place for them, uses thereupon these words: And whither I go ye
know, and the way ye know. Thomas answers Lord we know not whither thou
go: how can we know the way? Jesus replies, I am that way: meaning that
leads to Heaven, which is the place whither I go. This is the right sense and
meaning of this Scripture. For our Savior returning a direct answer to
Thomas, and therefore concerning that way which leads to the place whither
he was now going, which was Heaven, it must needs be that he speaks of the
way to Heaven. What mean you now speaking of the way, or entrance into the
visible Church, to coat this Scripture for confirmation thereof? In the way
Jesus here speaks of, the Elect only and the invisible Church does walk:
for to them alone he is the way. In the way you speak of, the visible Church,
the reprobate as well as the Elect do walk. All that walk in the way Jesus
speaks of, shall be saved: But many of those which tread the way you speak
of shall be damned. Christ Jesus then and you speak both of diverse societies
and of diverse ways. Indeed you speak of a way, and here that word way is
used. Is that enough? If I were to prove, that by Christ Jesus as by a door
we must enter into Heaven: and for proof thereof should allege, Genesis 6.16.
The door of the Arc thou shall set in the side thereof: Or Genesis 19.6. Then
Lot went out at the door unto them and shut the door after him: all men would
laugh at me. Be not offended with me. Thus M. Smith deal you, M. Johnson,
Ainsworth, Robinson, and Barrow full often in your allegations of Scripture.
There is nothing more usual with all of you then this, to understand that of
the visible Church, which by the holy Ghost is meant and spoken of the
invisible Church, or some members thereof. Here is Church, and Church; but
different Churches, and Societies: members and members, but of diverse bodies:
and therefore the Scriptures concerning one, make not at all for the other.
Your quotation of Ioh. 17.17. Sanctify them with thy truth; thy word is
truth: is idle, and to no purpose. Jesus speaks there of his eleven Apostles,
(as is evident by the verses precedent and subsequent, specially by the 20.
verse) praying for them to his Father: that seeing he was now to send them into
the world, to Preach the Gospel to every crea^ure, as h^s Father had sent him
into the world to perform the work of redemption, as verse. 18. that he would
indue them with gifts of his Spirit, for the discharge of the office of
Preaching, or of Apostleship. This you allege to prove, that the way taught
by Cbrist in his word, is the way or door whereby members are received into
the visible Church, and Officers into Offices. Frame your argument, and
conclude this proposition from this Scripture, and the vanity of your proof
will appear. Like to this is your last testimony, Mark. 13.34.37. And those
things that I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch.

For further proof of your abuse of Scripture, your confirmation of your tenth
position in the 71. Page of your Apology may suffice. To prove that the
Sacraments being seals of Gods covenant, ought to be administered only to the
faithful, and baptism to their seed, which no Christian man (understanding
this position aright) denies or doubts of, you coat above 50. testimonies of
holy Scripture: and that which is worse, scarce half of them (as I verily
think) do manifestly and directly prove that for which they are by you
alleged. And for a trial and taste thereof, let us hear one or two of your
testimonies in stead of many, as Ezekiel. 13.22. Because with your lies ye have
made the hearts of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his
wicked way, by promising him life: And Revel. 17.1. Then there came one of the
seven Angels, which had the seven vialls, and talked with me, saying unto me,
come: I will show the damnation of the great whore that sits upon many
waters. Hereunto add, Prou. 9.1.5. Hos. 2.2.4. Ezekiel. 16.59.60.61.62.63. And
23.41.42. Psalm. 22.30. with sundry others. These men being told of their abuse
of Scripture, do utterly deny it, and cast it from them as a very slander. But
how justly they are by us charged therewith, and how sinfully they stand out
against it and bless themselves in that which is evil, does partly here
appear, but more fully throughout this whole Treatise.

FINIS.

