CERTAIN DEVOVT CONSIDERATIONS OF FREQVENTING THE BLESSED SACRAMENT: WRITTEN
By the reverent Father FVLVIVS ANDROTIVS of the Society of JESUS.

WITH SUNDRY OTHER PRECEPTS and rules of direction, composed for the benefit
of such as seek to attain to the perfection of virtue.

First written in Italian: after turned into Latin: and now translated into
English.

If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. John. 6. Permissu
Superiorum.

TO HIS HONORABLE COSEN MISTRESS K. B. THE TRANSLATOR WISHES AL HAPPINESS AND
increase in virtue.
MY honorable Cosen, having often times considered with my self how many ways
I have bin made a debtor to you, for many courtesies which I must acknowledge I
have received from you. I have as often again condemned my self, that I have
never. sufficiently endeavored to show my self thankful to you, which is the
least requital that I may return for so many frendships. And consideringe
ingratitude to be so odious a vice, that to be noted with it deserves no less
punishment then for ever to be blotted out of your remembrance: I resolved on
nothing more then to find out some means how I might wipe away from my self
so foul a blemishe. In which resolution I encountered many doutes; for
findinge it needful to present you with some thing, I was long bethinkinge
what thing might best befitt me to send you, and what might best consorte
with your condition. At which time having in my hands this Treatise which now
I present unto you, written first by the Author in the Italian tongue, and
after for the general good of many turned into the Latin: I thought it a thing
most worthy my labor to spend some time in translating it into English, and
to present your self with the first fruits thereof. Which burden to
undergo, two principal causes have chiefly moved me. The one the great
affection and love which I bear to the Fathers of the B. Society of JESUS, by
one of whom this work was first most charitably composed. For having by their
writings and labors received no small encouragement to emulate their
virtues, and desieringe in some degree to show my self thankful unto them, I
resolved in translatinge this work to do them service, because I was not
other ways enabled to manifest my love to the^. The other (and not the least
cause was) the desire which as I said I had to show my tha^kful mind to your
self, for when I had accomplished the translation of the work, there was
nothing more in my desire then to find out some worthy person, to whom I
might dedicate my labors taken therein. And although there were many that
might of right challenge greater matters from me then this, yet your self
seemed most worthy to be honored, with all the right that I could challenge in
this work. I will not rehearse each particular reason that might induce me to
prefer you therein, considering^ that the very subject of the work seems to
allow you to be the patroness thereof. For since it is a consideration how we
ought to come worthily to the B. Sacrament of the Altar; I also considered
that now your years required some directions therein. And although I nothing
douted, but that by others you might be rightly informed therein, yet this
work so fitly offeringe it self unto me, I held your self most fit to whom I
might offer it again. Accept it therefore, and be pleased to read it over,
wherein you shall find great variety of good instructions. For herein are
contained many devout considerations to stir up men's minds often to frequent
the B. Sacrament of the Altar. Herein are set forth many devout admonitions
for worthy preparation in cominge to that B. Sacrament. Herein are we taught
how we ought to behave our selves after we have received it. Here shall we find
many sweet meditations. Here shall we find answered many objections, which
some troubled with scruples are accustomed to make. And to be short (referringe
you to each particular benefit which by readinge this treatise you shall find
in it) here may we learn several remedies and comfortes, against al those
assaults and temptations, with which our ghostly enemy is accustomed to
afflict the minds of those persons that he would hinder from devotion, and
from frequenting the B. Sacrament. As therefore amongst many I have chosen your
self most worthy, under whose patronage this English translation might show
it self to the world, so do you but accept it with a grateful mind, and I
shall think my labor in translatinge it most happily employed. For the benefit
which yourselfe or others shall receive by reading it, rest behouding to the
Author who first compiled it, to whom al thanks are due for so religious a
work. And if out of the zeal of your devotions you afforde me to be partaker
of the least part of your charitable prayers, I shall think my self more then
enough recompensed, for the labor I took in tra^slating it into English. And
so wishinge you to receive as much benefit by readinge it, as the Author showed
charity in laboring to write it, I rest.

Ever ready to do you service. I. G.

AN ADVERTISEment to the Reader.
AFTER that the Translator had labored to put into English this treatise of
Frequentinge the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and had faithfully performed
his duty heerin: referringe it to the ce^sure of some of better Judgment, it
was found that the Latin copy which this tra^slator had exactly followed,
differed in many places from that which was first published by the Author in the
Italian tongue. It has bin therefore thought fitter to follow the first Authors
invention, than to publish the work according to the alteration of a
translator: and for that cause many places are rejected in the Latin copy,
which are here published according to the first Italian edition. Let therefore
the Reader heerof suspend his judgment, if he find not a coherence betwixt the
Latin and the English, and allow of that translation which follows the first
and truest Copy.

Farewell.
THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
COnsideringe how little it profits or avails a man, to be possessed of a
rich and a most rare Jewel, if being ignorant or careless of the worth
thereof, he suffer it to be obscured or kept secreat in his chest: I thought
good by publishinge and printing this book, to bring forth into the world a
certain most precious Jewel, I mean to show how great a treasure he is
possessed of that has obtained from God the grace of frequent communicatinge
and receiuinge the B. Sacrament: which work I have undertaken principally for
that end, that when a man shall know with how rich a Jewel he is endowed by
the divine bounty of God, he may the more entirely love it, esteem the more
royally of it, be more thankful to God for it, and more careful and provident
never to loose it. And even as the pleasinge sweet taste of the most dainty and
rarest meats is never perfectly known if it be but presented before our eyes,
and not tasted in the mouth and chewed with the teeth: (for the more it is
bruised, the better it is tasted, so that they which swallow it down whole
vnchewed, do never perfectly find the true taste thereof:) Even so courteous
Reader it is not sufficient for thee, to have known the excellency of this
most B. Sacrament, and the manifould benefitts set forth in this book,
neither is it enough to read that which is contained in the meditations and
rules prescribed heerin: but farther thou must exercise and put in practice the
same, and chew and grind them with the teethe of consideration and spiritual
contemplation, demanding heartily of God that it may please him so to illuminate
thy mind with the light of his Grace, that thou may perfectly understand
what thou read heerin. Luc. 11.
It pleased God in the old law to account those beasts for clean that
chevved their cudd, thereby to show, that he which will be the servant of God
or one of his foulde, ought to reuolue and ruminate in mind his divine
misteris. Consideringe therefore that of all the meats which God has provided
for the use of man, this of the most B. Sacrament to be the most delicate and
excellent above all others, he has especially appointed it, most diligently to
be chevved in the mouth of our mind. When our Lord God gave the Manna to his
people in the wilderness, with great admiration they said Manhu, that is
what is this? Exodus 16.
thereby to show, that this sacred mystery prefigurated by Manna ought not to
be svvallovved down hastily, but to be well considered; discussinge in the
mind who he is whom we receive th^rin. Which thing this little book
will instruct and teach thee, and therefore read it over often, and
attentively, prayinge for the Author thereof and giueing praise and glory to
God, who is not only the Author of all goodness, but has ever, and ever will
remain in this B. Sacrament: thereby to make us partakers of everlasting
happiness.

(...) ceedinge mercy does him self vouchsafe to visitt thee, who is King of
all Kings, and Lord of Angels? How can it be but thou should be amazed,
and leap for joy, and cry out with S. Elizabeth, Luc. 1.
saying: How does it befall to me, that the Mother of my Lord comes unto me.
And with holy Zachary. Blessed be our Lord God of Israel, because he has
visited and wrought the redemption of his peopell. And with the most B. Virgin
Mary. My soul does magnify our Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior. 3. Reg. 10.
For if the Queen of Saba were so ravished with joy, and so greatly amazed to
behold the cowrte of Solomon so sumptuously adorned and furnished: what joy,
and comfort shall not he be filled with, that shall be present and be a
behoulder of this sight. Math. 2.
The sight of the star did exceedingly comfort the three kings, in directing
them to the place of the birth of our Savior: How great joy and comfort then
ought he to have, who knows his maker and redeemer accompanied with all the
fellowship of heaven, to vouchsafe to come to visitt him.

2. Consider that thou being a most vile and abject creature, art honored with
the presence of Christ, both God and man: and with the fellowship and company,
of all the Angels in heaven. To receive a guyft of a great Prince, thou
could not but account it an exceedinge favor: How great a favor ought
thou then to houlde it, saying the mos^ noble and greatest Prince that ever
was, does vouchsafe to come un to thee in his proper person, and present thee
with a present, not of gould, not of any rich and costlye jewel, but with the
treasure of all treasures, with him self, with his most precious body and
blood, with his soul and divinity? what thing can be thought on more worthy
of admiration, or that deserves greater joy, or more thanks? The Prophett
Daniel Dan. 4.
was much amazed, when it pleased God by his servant Abacuc to send him meat
being in the den of Lions: how greatly amazed ought I then to be, that
living and conuersing in this miserable world, the lake and den of infernal
and damned spirits, may yet receive by the hands of the Priest, the bread of
Angels, even the very body and blood of Christ.

3. Consider that when thou receyuest the B. Sacrament, thou becomest the
lyuinge Temple of the Holy Ghost, and that thou art environed with an infinite
number of Angels, continually singing Holy, Apoc. 4.
Holy, Holy. O that it were possible thou could behold them. O that thou
could hear their sweet music and melody. 3. Reg. q. 3.
King Solomon received great joy and comfort when he beheld the buylding of the
Temple of Jerusalem finished: how much then ought thou to rejoice and
triumph, if thou do duly consider, that by cominge worthily to the B.
Sacrament, thou art made thereby the very Temple of God.

4. Consider that being partaker of this holy Comunion, thou art made the
Tabernacle of the most holy Trynity, by receyuinge into thy soul and body, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: and therefore becomest as it were a
clear shyninge heaven, wherein almighty God the Creator both of heaven and
earth is contained* what thing can be conceived more strange or admirable?

5. Consider that now thou becomest the Mother of God, the spowse of JESUS, the
brother of Christ, and the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary. For so often as
thou doste receive the B. Sacrament, thou conceyuest Christ in thee, and art
made also one with him because he as it were transformeth thy body and soul
into his own proper substance: thou embracest and houldest in thy arms thy
savior Jesus, but in a far more noble sort, then did that holy Simyon. O
wonderful and most singular grace.

6. Consider that thou art, as it were the Reliquary of our Lord JESUS Christ:
if a friend should bestow on thee a most rich and curious case to keep
therein holy relics, how would thou love him? what thanks would thou
give him? what delight and contenteme^t would thou take therein? what
therefore might he say or how ought he to behave him self, who with diligence
does consider, that through often frequentinge this holy Sacrament, he is made
the Reliquary of the blood of Christ, and of his sacred humanity?

7. Consider that in receyuinge the B. Sacrament, thy flesh is touched of the
most sacred flesh of JESUS Christ. And if he could now as in the time of the
Apostells, be s^ene and beheld in a visible form: thou would hold it for
the greatest favor that might be, to come nere him, to kiss his holy hand, or
but to touch the hemme or skirte of his garment. Now if this would seem so
great an honor to thee, how art thou honored that may not only touch him
daily, but may receive within thy breast his very flesh: not mortal and
passible as the Apostels did, but immortal, impassible, and replenished with
all glory.

8. Consider that by often frequenting the B. Sacrament, thou art become a
living Sepulcher of JESUS Christ being a live. And if thou hadest bin present
when Christ was taken down from the Cross, and hadest constantly believed
that he had bin thy Savior, greatly would thou have labored, to have
received into thy house, that most divine and sacred body. And if it had bin
granted to thee, to have had that Sepulcher with thee in thy house, greatly
would thou have thought thy self to be honored. But in the most B.
Sacrament thou may daily receive Christ, not dead but a live, and of thy body
and soul make a Sepulcher for thy lyuinge Savior JESUS, where he may abide,
not forty hours as he did in his stony Sepulcher, but for ever and ever world
with out end.

9. Consider that by receyuinge the B. Sacrament thou now becomest the host of
Christ. If Christ while he conuersed here on earth had vouchsafed but once only
to have lodged in thy house, how happy a man would thou have thought thy
self to be? What signs of joy and contentement would thou have showed? But
how much more happy art thou now, that may every day if thou will thy self,
receive this gueste* not into thy house, but into thy body and soul, and
receive him whole, immortal, most bewtyfull, and shyninge in all glory.

10. Consider that by frequenting the B. Sacrament thou art made and becomest a
heavenly Paradise. For whersoeuer God omnipotent is, there, even there may we
say Paradise to be. Think therefore, so often as thou come to this sacred
table, that thou hear Christ, no more now mortal, noe more to be crucified,
but now in all glory to say unto thee, My Son, this day shalt thou be with
me in Paradise. So often therefore as thou shall be sadd or afflicted, say to
thy soul. My Soul have patience and expect a while, for to morrow or with in
some short time, by receuinge the B. Sacrament, thou shall be with thy Savior
in his heavenly Paradise. For whersoeuer it pleases Christ to be, there are
we sure that Paradise is.

11. Consider that by often frequentinge the B. Sacrament thou art now become a
cowrtiar of that heavenly Palace of our Lord, that thou sit with him at
his royal banquet, and art fedd with that most precious food of all other,
the very flesh and blood of our Lord and Savior. If Christ when he conuersed
here on the earth, had only once called thee to his table, well might thou
have thought thy self thereby most happy. How far then now do thou
exceed in happiness, when thou do not only sit at his royal table, but art
fed with the most precious food of his sacred body? Never was there found a
Mother so aboundinge in love, that she could be moved thereby to feed her
child with her own flesh: yet here at this table it pleases Almighty God, to
set before us to eat, the very true flesh of his most dear and only Son.

12. Consider, that God does bestow on thee and every one that worthelie
receives the B. Sacrament, more and greater spiritual benefittes then ever he
gave to any creature in this world: for when he does give unto us the very
flesh and blood of his most dearly beloved Son, he gives us also therewith,
the merits and benefitts, that by the effusion of the same most precious
blood were gained. Wherefore justly may we be held the happiest of all
creatures that do live in this world, and justly may we say: Psalm. 147.
He has not done the like to any other nation. For how many Dukes, Princes,
and Kings are there that never obtained so great grace, or so high a favor
and happiness.

13. Consider that so often as thou receauest this holy Sacrament, thou layest
thy mouth to the wound of our Saviors side, and as S. Chrysostom says,
suckest from thence his most precious blood, and there by do participate
with him of his holy spirit, and of all his merits and virtues. And like as
he that eats meat, conuerteth and turns it into his own flesh: even so
he that receives Christ in the B. Sacrament, makes thereby Christ's gifts
and merittes to be his own, and is also after a sort converted into his
sacred body. Whereby it follows that our heavenly Father, with the same
Fatherly eyes where with he behouldeth Christ as his most dear Son, with
the very same eyes he behouldeth and looks on us, even as on the members of
the same his beloved Son. Genesis 27.
And like as the Patriarche Jacob being apparelied in the garments of his
brother Esau, received the chiefest blessings due to his eldest brother: so we
being apparelled in the B. Sacrament with the flesh of Christ, receive
thereby from God many spiritual benedictions.

14. Consider that as Christ, moved there unto by an infinite love, ordained
this holy Sacrament: even so with the like infinite love, he daily gives him
self unto us in the same. If a gift or present although but of small value,
were given by some great Prince, with a most kind and louinge affection to
one that were of mean and poor estate, it would be most thankfully taken,
and kept and preserved in high account. How much more ought we to esteem
this present which is bestowed upon us in the most B. Sacrament, being a
gift of infinite value, given of an infinite love, and by the Prince of all
Majesty and glory? For who gives it but only God? what is given but only
God? Who in^iteth to this table? Who prepares it? Who serves and attends,
but only God the creator of all things?

15. Consider that Christ to the end he might bestow on us these benefitts,
gave and powered our for us, all his most precious blood. And that he might
heap abundantly upon us al his blessings, he suffered for our sakes all
sorts of shames and reproaches, and patiently endured death to give us life.
When the Jews devised and prepared the most cruel torments for him on earth,
then prepared he for us all the joys and comfortes in heaven. And when rods,
thorns, gall and vinegar, the Cross and lawnce were prepared for him, with
more cruel torments then can be expressed, even then did he provide for us,
the delights and happiness of his everlasting kingdom. For he said to the
Thief hanginge on the Cross: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

16. Consider with thy self how many millions of men there are living in this
world, which never attained to this heavenly treasure. And although many have
known the benefit and commodity of it, yet alas how few there are who seek
to frequent it: and if sometimes there be desser often it, yet opportunity is
often wantinge: and having opportunity, yet consider again how one thing or
other debarreth them from vsinge it. How many think thou live this day in
Germany, in France, in England and other contries that would desire, if they
might obtain it, but the very crummes that fall from the table of our Lord,
and yet the occasion and opportunity is not offered unto them? How many are
there that would hold them selves thrice happy, if but once in one monthe
they might be worthy to be guestes at this sacred table of our Lord? How
many religious and anointed persons trowest thou live in this world, that are
utterly debarred the frequentinge of this Sacrament? Wherefore worthelie may we
say, that have fit opportunity to come to receive it often. What shall I give
again to my Lord for all the benefits he has bestovved upon me? Psalm. 15.
What shall I render for so unspeakable a favor? I vvil receive the chalice of
salvation most willingly, and any cupp whatsoever though never so bitter, I
vvil call upon his blessed name, and it will taste in my mouth most sweet
and pleasant, I vvil yield and deliver up my vows unto him, I will abandon and
renownce as I promised in Baptism, all the vanities and pompes of this
wretched world, and to be ready to die for the only desire and love of Christ
my Savior. For, Most precious in the sight of our Lord is the death of his
Saints.

Certain Godly and devout admonitions for the more worthy preparation to the
B. Sacrament, ansvveringe to the former Considerations; the first admonition
ansvveringe to the first, the second, to the second, and so in order.
1. FIrst consideringe that so often as thou frequentest the B. Sacrament: thou
art visited by God and made partaker of his presence: of duty thou ought to
renownce and abandon, all the vanities and pleasures of this world: henceforth
no more to frequen^ t^u^rnes and banquets, no more to f^llow plays and vain
shows, nor to haunte hereafter dansing at weddinges: to fly and s^unne all
wanton meetings of youth, utterly to relinqu^sh and never to desire again, any
worldly or voluptuous ple^s^res: and carefully and diligently to keep watch
over thy heart, and daily to pray to God, that since thou desierest to have thy
mind recollected, it will please him to expel and cast out of thy soul, all
kind of vanities and worldly distractions, even as Christ expelled the buyers
and sellers forth of the Temple. Io. 2.


2. Seeinge thou art so honored by this holy Communion, worthily ought thou
to contemn all worldly honors: that thou may say with the Apostle Saint
Paul: ^al. 6.
The world is crucified to me, and I to the world. For to what end should he
esteem the honors of this world, who sees him self so honored and esteemed
with God, with his Angels, and with all the Saints in heaven? The holy
Fathers in times past duly considering this, desiered to be accounted and
reputed here as fools, and abiectes.

3. Even as the Temple or Church where the holy sacryfice is offered up, ought
to be kept most clean, and decentely adorned: so imagine and think that thy
heart ought to be, which is the Temple and habitation of God, in which thou
must daily praise and glorify his holy name, and say to all thy evil
thoughts, and wicked desiers: Marc. 11.
My house is the house of prayer, and the Temple of God, but you will make it
a den of thieves.

4. He that often frequenteth this holy Sacrament, is made and becomes, the
Tabernacle of the most B. Trynitye. Therefore even as the Tabernacle is
accustomed to be kept from all soil and vncleanlines, and carefully defended
from thieves and other violence: So much more ought our soul and body to be
preserved from al sport of syn, and strongly defended against the assaults and
temptations of our capiral enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil.

5. Consideringe that so often as thou receiuest the B. Sacrement, thou art
made as it were the Mother of God; thou ought to desire and endeavor all
that thou can, to imitate and follow the virtues of the Mother of God: and
principally, that most perfect and absolute resignation of her self, and of
all things what soever that appertained unto her, into the hands of God, that
thou may say with her so often as thou receiuest, the B. Body of our
Savior: Behold the handmayde of our Lord: be it to me according to thy
word. Which words when as she had pronownced: she presently became the Mother
of Christ.

6. And seeinge that thy soul by receiuinge the B. Sacrament, is made the
Relyquary of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which exceed in the highest
degree the Relics of all Saints whatsoever: thou ought ever to have most
diligent care, that this Reliquary be preserved, from all filth and pollution
of sin: and also that it be adorned with the glittering gould of charity,
with the bright shyninge silver of chastity, and with the orient pearls and
rich stones of al spiritual virtues, especially knowinge how much the health
of the soul is to be preferred before al worldly treasures.

7. And consideringe that thy flesh so often as thou do communicate, is
touched by the blessed and sacred flesh of Christ; great reason it is, that by
Christ thou preserve it, by Christ thou feed and nourish it, for Christ's sake
thou do love it, and be careful that no evil once defile it; imagininge it
to be nothing else then a holy chalice, or some other consecrated thing,
which for re^^erence sake none ought to presume to touch.

8. Even as the Sepulcher where the body of our Lord was laid, was new and
clean, never before having bin used of any; even so, ought our souls to be
clean and unspotted, so often as we receive the most B. Sacrament: The Body of
Christ was wrapped in a most pure and clean Syndon. The same Body of Christ is
likewise laid by the Priest on the Altar in a pure and clean corporal. The
Host it self is pure and white: and the Priest being redye to celebrate, does
twice wash his hands; to signify unto us, with what purity and cleanes of
conscience Christ is to be received in this holy Sacrament.

9. Thou must with great alacrity and exultation of spirit as a cheerful
Host receive thy Lord and Creator: not respectinge thy own imperfections,
but the exceedinge goodness of him whom thou receyuest in to thy house. For he
comes to thee only to that end, that he may supply al thy defectes, cure thy
infirmyties, enritch thy pouertye, and furnish thy soul with all variety of
spiritual perfections.

10. Even as in Paradise God is perfectly loved, his holy will performed, and
only his glory sought, and desiered: so, he that does often frequent the B.
Sacrament, being made thereby as it were the Paradise of God, ought to endeavor
to the uttermost of his power, to love God in all perfect manner, and in all
things to conform him self to his blessed will, and in every place, time, and
occasion to seek that only which is most to his honor, utterly contemninge
and treadinge underfoot his own, and saying with the Prophett: Psalm. 113.
Not to us O Lord not to us, but to thy holy name give al honor and glory.

11. Now that thou art become one of the cowrt of God and a guest of heaven,
consider how humble, how pure, and every way how pleasinge thou ought to
appear in his sight. For if thou were daily invited to some great Princes
table, how careful would thou be, to present thy self before him in all
comelines and decency, not enduringe any spot of uncleanness either in thy
countenance or attyar? If then thou would have so great a respect in cominge
to the table of a temporal Prince: how ought thou to prepare thy self
being invited to the table of the king of heaven?

12. Consideringe that in receiuinge the B. Sacrament, God daily bestows on
thee new graces and favors, adorneth thy soul with new gifts and honors, and
enricheth thee more and more with new increase of meritts and other spiritual
blessings: what then remains but that thou likewise more and more endeavor
again to love him, magnify, and laud him, wholly to dedicate and consecrate
thy self unto his service, and to direct all thy thoughts and actions only to
his glory?

13. If so often as thou come to the B. Sacrament, thou put thy mouth to
the side of thy Savior, and from thence drawest the suck of the most
precious blood of Christ: What care and watch ought thou henceforth to have
of thy mouth and tongue? What diligence to restrain them from vtteringe any
vain or immodest speeches? What study and endeavor that thy tongue be
always busied in magnifinge Christ's sacred blood and passion, and extollinge
his goodness for this unspeakable benefit? cryinge out with the Apostle. God
forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

14. If Christ of his infinite love have left him self unto us in the most B.
Sacrament: why then should not we receive him again, (if so it wear possible)
with like infinite love? yealdinge love for love, and gratitude for gratitude.
At least wise let us receive him, that he may fill and replenish us with true
charity, which is the weddinge garment whereby we may be present at this sacred
weddinge table, be made worthy to receive him, who is the God of love and
fountain of all goodness.

15. If Christ to bestow on us this most delicious food of Angels, would
shed his own sacred blood, and give us the same entirely in the holy
Eucharist: why should not we, that we might but even once receive the same,
shede for him our dearest blood? Why should not we pay, blood for blood? Give a
sinner, for an innocent? A thing of no worth, for a jewel of such price? Why
should not we desire, and wish from our very hearts to shed the same, even to
the utmost drop for so louinge a Savior?

16. If finally he has bestowed on us that which he has denied to so many
other nations, and does yet daily deny; how many, and ^ow great thanks ought
we to rendar unto him, for this so singular love and bounty toward us? And
in regard we are unable to give worthy and due thanks, so much the more
ought we to esteem and reverence this divine Sacrament, and the oftener to
frequent it; that he him self in us, and by us, may supply those thanks to
him self, which we, if we were able, ought to rendar unto him.

A MEDITATION OR prayer upon the Pater noster, to be used of such as frequent
the holy Communion.
FOR ever be thou blessed most sweet and eternal Father that it has pleased
thee of thy infinite mercy, to bestow upon me the mind and opportuni^ie, so
often to receive in the holy communion, the most sacred body and blood of thy
dearly beloved Son, together with his most blessed soul and divinity. For
which most singular grace and bounty, what shall I most wretched creature ever
be able to render unto

HALLOWED BE THY NAME.
Sweet Father grant unto me thy abundant grace, that I may be able to render
unto thee condign and worthy thanks for this so high a benefitt bestowed
upon me: that I may ever sanctify and praise thy most holy name, and extol
thy goodness and majesty, to al those who have not knowledge of thee. And that
in all my actions whatsoever I take in hand, I may only seek the advancement of
thy glory.

THY KINGDOM COME.
Reign for ever O Lord in my heart, which even now most freely I surrender
into thy hands. Let not that foul spirit the devil ever have any part in me.
Let not my filthy flesh bear any rule over me, which ever is at debate and
war with my soul. Let not the love of this world, or the allurements of
sin deceive me, which caused thy dear Son to suffer his most bitter
passion for me.

THY WILL BE DONE IN EARHT AS it is in heaven.
Teach me sweet Lord to fulfill thy holy will, in every place, in every
time, and in every occasion: with cheerfulnes, readiness, and a joyful heart,
even as do thy glorious Saints and Angels who for ever reign with thee in
thy heavenly kingdom.

GIVE US THIS DAY OUR daily bread.
Grant me O Father, a most fervent desire whereby worthily to receive this
divine Sacrament, worthelie to eat this true bread of Angels. I crave sweet
Lord ever to have the taste of it in my mouth: I crave purity of heart when I
shall receive it: A clean tongue where with to touch it: A discreet Priest to
administer it: And a devout inte^tion with dwe reverence to adore it.

AND FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES as we forgive them that trespass against us.
O my Lord grant me I beseech thee perfect remission of al my sins, and a
hearty detestation to hate and loath them. Give me likewise a prompt and
willinge mind that I may be ever ready for thy sake, to pardon and forgive al
injuries done unto me.

AND LEAD US NOT INTO temtation.
Tread down sweet Lord with thy heavenly presence, my ghostly enemy that
daily lies in wait to entrap me, that I nether assent being deceived, nor
(...) might call upon me saying. Our Father. If therefore thou love me as a
daughter ought to do, and like a daughter behauest thy self in my sight, what
cause have thou to distrust in me? Why tremblest thou where is no cause of
fear? What dout can thou have, if thou have done thy endeavor truly to
confess thee? If it be that thou art not certain that I have chosen thee for
my daughter, then here again I take thee for my daughter, and as a dear and
beloved daughter, do now welcome and entertain thee.

Consider that for thy sake I have created the heavens, and that for to redeem
thee I have sent my only Son from heaven, who even from his infancy, began
for thee to sheed his most precious blood, wept for thee when he was
circumcised, and for thy sake was called JESUS, that for these benefits thou
should say. Hallowed be thy name?

Call to mind that I have made him the servant of men, to the intent I might
make thee a Queen of heaven: and that by a longinge and fervent desire to be
with me in my glory, thou might say. Thy kingdom come.

Remember that for thy sake he humbled him self, and that he became obedient,
even to the death of the Cross, that thou might resign thy self unto me
and say. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Thou can no^ be ignorant that I gave my Son to eat the bread of sorrow,
that thou might be nourished with the sweet tastinge bread of the word of
God. And that for thy sake I have left him in the most B. Sacrament, that thou
might be there fed with his flesh, and as it were made drunk with his
blood, and finally become a daily guest at my Table, and say. Give us this day
our daily bread, How think thou then I could permit thee to sit at my
Table, if I were offended and displeased with thee, or if I did not love thee
as my dearly beloved daughter?

Thou can not be ignorant that I have laid on the showlders of my only Son
al thy sins and iniquities that ever thou have committed, and that I have
accepted his pains as a full satisfaction, and also have left unto thee his
most precious blood, that therewith thou migtest pay thy uttermost dett, and
say. Forgive us our trespasses. Which blood thou receiuest, so often as thou
receiuest my Son in the B. Sacrament. By reason whereof I look not upon thy
sins, for the partiality of my love obscureth thy defectes. Nether do I
behold in thee that which is thine, but that which is mine: not with the eye
of a strict judge, but of a most louinge and kind Father. For if I should
severely look into thy sins, to what end had I created thee at the beginning?
Consideringe also that I have made thee a reasonable creature, not
unreasonable: a Christian, not an Infidel: a Catholic, not an Heretic; and
for that cause do I feed thee with this sweet and heavenly Manna, and not
with the sower Onyons and Garlike of Egypt.

Thou can not beignerant that I suffered my only beloved Son to be nailed
to the Cross for the purginge of thy sins. And that I would have him forgive
his persecutors that deprived him of al he had, and lastly of his life, thereby
to leave an example unto thee, that thou might likewise pardon and forgive
thine enemies, and say. As we forgive them that trespass against us.

For if I would pardon and forgive those cruel enemies, that in my own sight
most barbarously crucified my only Son; at the which sight the earth was
amazed and trembled, the Sun was obscured, the rocks did cleave and rent in
sunder, the monuments opened, and the dead being astonished arose again, if I
say, I have pardoned such hayno^^ offenders, will I not pardon thee that love
me and desierest to be mine? I that have forgiven, and given life unto my
enemies, is it likely that I will suffer mine own daughter to perish? When
thou did refuse and deny to be mine, even then was I pleased, that my only
Son should die for thy redemption; and will I now think thou be unmindful
of thee, when most willingly thou do offer thy self unto me? If I have bin
so bountiful and merciful to the murderers of my Son, will I be so severe to
thee that so often receiuest him into thy heart? How can thou think it my
daughter, my delight?

When as thou only followedst after wordly vanities, and turnedst a way thy
face from my sight, I yet loved thee, expected thee, bare patiently with thee,
protected thee from fallinge into great perilles and dangers, and evermore
requited thee with good for evil; and will I now when thou resignest thy self
wholly unto me, renouncest the world, detestest al sin, art ready rather to
die then once to offend me, and with such seruent desire inuitest me to rest
in the harbor of thy heart, will I forget thee think thou? Will I turn away
from thee, and render evil for good unto thee?

Is it unknown unto thee that I suffered my B. Son to fast forty days and
fortye nights in the desert? to be conversant amongst wild beasts? and there
to be tempted of Satan? Al which I have done to this end that thou might not
be overcome by any wicked suggestions, but ever may say. And lead us not
into temtation.

Is it unknown unto thee, that to ease and disbarthen thee of al encumbrances,
I heaped and burdened my own Son with all manner of afflictions? How then
can thou think that I seek thy hurt, or rather not think that I wholly
seek thy good? For if I wished thee ill, then would I permit thee to do as
offenders do, then would I never have so lovingly bestowed my only Son upon
thee. Thou can not therefore think that I wish thee hurt, if thou do but
remember this so great a bounty. If thou remember what is past, thou shall
easily understand how well I have wished thee, that would have my only beloved
Son to die on the Cross for thy redemption. If thou will consider what is to
come, think that I have prepared for thee the kingdom of heaven, where my
self and all my Saints in bliss, do with joy and exultation expect thy
cominge. Is not this a sign of my love, and not of my indignation? But if thou
respect only that which is present, then do but remember that thou art fed
with the flesh and blood of mine only Son?

Now then bethink thy self O soul, shake of al these scruples, and lay aside
all this inordinate fear, and even as I offer my self unto thee like a most
louinge Father, so do thou present thy self before me as it beseems a
louinge daughter. Behold I daily make thee as it were a clear shininge
heaven, that so I may inhabit the secret corners of thy heart, whether I resort
that I may purify thee and replenishe thee with peace, and with all kind of
happiness. Behold also thy Savior JESUS my Son ever ready in all thy needs,
who comes to give thee life, and not to take it from th^^, whose love to thee
is such, that to deliver thee from death, he would die him self; receive thou
him therefore with a glad and joyful desire. Behold he comes to thee that he
may reign in thy heart: if therefore he be with thee, who shall be against thee?
If he rule and guide thee, what can be wantinge unto thee? I am no tirant o
Daughter, nether deal I like a tirant with thee. I am thy Lord full of al
mercy and gentleness, and with a heart replenished with all Fatherly love, I come
to meet and embrace thee, even as the Father received the prodigal child,
when his heart was moved with all tenderness of affection toward him.

Thou know, o Daughter, my will and pleasure, which desiereth only thy
sanctification, thy life and happiness. Will thou have a sign of my love
toward thee? See then how I feed thee with the flesh of my only beloved
Son? What greater dainties could I bestow upon thee? What present of more
price? What other Son have I to give thee? Think then how I have remitted al
thy sins, both past and present, and consider with thy self, that never
would I have bestowed my only Son upon thee, if I saw any thing in thee
that might offend mine eyes. Finally when I give thee my Son, I give thee
weapons against thy temptations wherewith thou may defend thy self from al
perrills and dangers, and say. Deliver us from evil.

Receive him therefore often with inward joy and exultation, that thereby thou
may delighte him, whose delighte and pleasure is to be conversant with thee.
For this was the cause why I adorned thee with the noble gifts of reason,
understanding, and other spiritual ornaments, that thereby I might daily
bestow him upon thee: nether do I think that I bestow any thing on thee,
when I do not freely give my dear and only Son unto thee.

A MEDITATION UPON THE Aue Maria, fit for such as frequent the B. Sacrament.
HAYLE MARIE.
RIghtly may we believe, that the Guardian Angel saluteth that soul, which often
receives the B. Sacrament, with the same words, that the Angel Gabriel
saluted the B. Virgin Marie, when he greeted her, and with great reverence and
sweetness said unto her. Aue. That is free, from al woe, to wit, al kind of
sin. For by the cominge of our Lord in this most B. Sacrament^, al venial
sins past and ptesent are freely remitted: as also such secret mortal sins
which the penitent had either forgotten, or whereof he has not had sufficient
contrition; and further, new grace is bestowed upon us, whereby we may avoid
the danger of renuinge any more our former offenses.

FVL OF GRACE.
How can that soul but be full of grace, which often receives the author of
grace? The fountain and spring of al grace* And him, who to the end he might
infuse into our souls his grace, would exhaust and pour out all the blood
forth of his own veins? Who chiefly took upon him our humane nature, that
he might wholly replenishe and fill our souls with divine favors. Who
continually stands and knocks importunatly, saying. O Daughter give and
resign to me thy heart. Vrgeing us by diverse ways, that we would ask and
demand of him his abundant grace: and for this cause he inuiteth us to thee
food of Angels, that thereby our hearts may be more and more filled with the
same; whereupon this B. Sacrament is called Eucharist: which signifies good
grace.

OUR LORD IS WITH THEE.
Has not that soul our Lord with her, which often receives in the B.
Sacrament, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? Has she not God with
her, that often receives the Divinity and Humanity of our Savior JESUS?
Has she not our Lord with her, who lodges Christ as a guest, and intombeth
him within the sepulcher of her heart?

BLESSED ART THOU AMONGST women.
May not that soul well be said to be most blessed, most happy, and most
high in the favor of God, that so often is visited of him, and so often is
honored with his divine presence, and is made as it were the Mother of God, and
temple of the Holy Ghost, the tabernacle of the most B. Trinity, and the
Reliquarie of the sacred body and blood of Christ? That soul I say that is
created by the very hand of God, and is daily fed with the flesh of his most
dear and only Son?

AND BLESSED IS THE FRVTE of thy womb JESUS.
These words also after a sort, may be applied to the devout soul partaker
of the B. Sacrament. For first most blessed is that mouth that receives this
blessed fruit JESUS. Blessed is the breast that bears and keeps it.
Blessed is the memory that remembers it. Blessed is the understanding that
always thinks on it, and blessed is the heart that always loves it; from
whence proceed, chaste thoughts, holy desires, heavenly love, and al divine
fruits.

HOLY MARIE MOTHER OF God. etc.
Well may that soul be called holy, and the mother of God, which when she
receives the B. Sacrament, receives the holy of al holies, and bears in
her the very same fruit, which the most B. Virgin Marie carried nine months
within her womb.

Meditations upon the Creed, fit for those that frequent the B. Sacrament.
1. I Believe in God the Father Almighty. If he be omnipotent, then he can: If
he be God, then he knows: If he be our Father, then will he help us in all our
necessities, comfort us in all our tribulations, pardon ^s our offenses, and
most lovingly embrace us, even as did the tender Father of the pro ligal child
when he returned again unto him.

2. Maker of heaven and earth. Why did he create heaven and earth but for me?
And when did he create them for me? when I was yet unborn, when as yet I was
nothing. By what did he create them? Thoroughe his infinite love, and that I
might ever enjoy him in heaven. If then he had me in so sweet a memory
before I had any being, is it likely that now he will forget or be unmindful of
me? He loved me before I was, knowinge in his wisdom what I would be; and now
that he has made and created me of nothing, is it likely that he will hate me?
Can this stand with Gods sweet nature and infinite goodness?

3. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. He was called Jesus, which
signifies a Savior, because he wrought our s^luation. And who did he save?
me, although he knew before what I would prove, to wit, ungrateful, perverse,
rebellious, and a most wicked wretch. From wh^t did he save me? From death, the
devil, hell, and sin. By what did he s^ue me? By his only goodness, his only
love, his only mercy. When did he save me? Long before I was borne. How did he
s^ue me? By sheadinge his precious blood, enduringe most cruel torments, and
sufferinge a most bitter death. Why then should not I firmly hope in this my
only Lord, that has done all this to save me, a most unworthy servant.

4. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost. For my sake and to work my
salvation he came down from heaven, where Angels, Archangels, and all the
celestial court did serve and attend him. For me he would be incarnate, and for
the space of nine months, lie enclosed in the womb of the B. Virgin.

5. Borne of the Virgin Marie. For me and to work my salvation, was he borne
in Bethelem. And in what place there? In a poor staule or stable. At what time
of the year? In the depth of cold winter, and then was he laid no better then
in a manger, where he by whose omnipotency all things were created, had need
of hay to lie upon, Luc. 2.
and the breath of dumb beasts to keep him warm.

6. Suffered under Pontius Pilate. Who suffered? The very Son of God. What
suffered he? Innumerable stripes, unspeakable reproaches, incredible torments.
For whom did he suffer them? For me, knowinge how ungrateful I would be in time
to come. By whom did he suffer? By the most abject and cruel wretches that ever
lived. Why did he suffer? Thereby to purchase my redemption and salvation.

7. Crucified. For my sake was he crucified. And who was he that was crucified?
The only Son of God. With whom was he crucified? In the midest between two
thieves. Where was he crucified? Upon the mount Caluarie, a most infamous and
loathsome place. At what time of the year? When the whole world should repair
to Jerusalem. In what manner was he crucified? Naked, and set as is seemed to
be scorned of al men. O most doleful and lamentable spectacle.

8. Dead. He died thoroughe thirste, that he might as it were make us drunk
with his blood. Lost h^s own life to ransom ours, even he that gives life
unto al men. O my soul what think thou? what can thou answer hereunto?

9. And buried. For my sake his most precious body became a dead coarse; O
matter of amazement. And forty hower^ remained in the Sepulcher; A thing
never enough admired.

10. He descended into hell. For me he descended into hell, that thereby he
might deliver me from the bitter torments of hell. How often alas had I fallen
headlong thither, if he had not of his great mercy houlden me back? How often
has he with his omnipotent hand, pulled me out from thence as it were by
violence?

11. The third day he rose again from the dead. For me the third day he arose
from death, conuersing with those few that were his faithful friends,
comforting them, and eatinge amongst them, and shewinge unto them his most
sacred body, never remembering the injuries done unto him; finally cherishing,
and cheeringe them by all means possible, he him self having no necessity of
their endeavors.

12. He ascended into heaven. For my salvation he ascended into heaven, there
to receive for me the possession of Paradise, where being accompanied with the
whole fellowship of heaven, he expects me with an incredible desire, that
there deuoide of al fear, I freely may enjoy the presence of the holy
Trinity, converse and live with the most noble and blessed spirits, and for
ever abound with all joy, peace, and jubilee. And for this cause has he created
us, and for this would he be present for us wretched sinners in the most B.
Sacrament.

13. Sits at the right hand of God the Father. For us and our salvation he
sits at the right hand of God the Father, having us continually in his
memory. A most sweet memory, a most holy memory, a memory full of all
consolation; ever without intermission speaking to his Father for us. And what
does he obtain? Peace, r^co^cilia^ion, and remission of our offenses. In our
behalf he shows daily his wounds to his eternal Father, offering up his
s^cred death, life, and passion. The mother shows to ^ir Son to obtain
mercy for us, the breast where with she gave him suck. And the Son again
shows to his Father, his wound^s and scarres which he suffered for us. What
can the Son deny to such a Mother? Or what can the Father deny to such ^
Son?

14. From thence shall he come to judge the qui^k and the dead. For us, and for
our greater glory, he shall come most glorious at the day of judgment, to
praise and extol us in the presence of the whole world, and in great honor
and triumph to carry us glorified, to reign with him in his kingdom,
thereby to exalt us who here have bin humbled, there to glorify us who here
have contemned glory.

15. I believe in the Holy Ghost. For us, and for our salvation he sent down
the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of love, the Spirit of peace, the Spirit of
devotion, and of al sweetness and consolation: that we might always love him,
always rejoice with him, always be linked and united with him in a most
sweet bond of love and charity, always be holy like as the children of a
most holy Father; that our souls being replenished with the Holy Ghost, we
may lead our lives in all sanctity and holiness, and in the end enjoying the
company of the glorious Angels, may singe incessantly, Holy, Holy, ^olie.

16. The Holy Catholic Church. For us, (and as every one may say, for me and
my salvation) he first planted the Holy Catholic Church, which as a most
loving mother might weane me with the sweet milk of the word of God, and
after might feed me with her holy Sacraments: and sometimes by one means,
sometimes by an other, might move and stir me up to praise, love, and serve
him, that in the end for ever I might live and reign with him.

17. The communion of Saints. For my sake has he suffered his blessed Saints
and Martyrs, to be wearied, mortified, and afflicted with torments, that he
might make me partaker of their singular meritts, and that I might offer them
up as mine own unto the eternal Father. And not only the meritts of all the
holy Saints, but even his own meritts who is the holy of al holies, to
present them to his heavenly Father, as mine own patrimony and inheritance.

18. The forgiveness of sins. For my sake amongst other things he first
instituted the Sacrament of Penance, that thereby I might ever have in store,
a medecin to purge me from al filthe of sin, and so to persevere and continue
ever in his grace. And to this end he came into the world, lived, died, and
was buried; descended, rose again, and ascended into heaven.

19. The resurrection of the flesh. For me, and for my greater glory, he will
raise at the latter day my flesh; that even as with it I have served God, so
likewise with the same I may enjoy the kingdom of heaven. Thrice happy be
they that so can chastise their flesh in this world, that it may for ever after
reign with him in glory.

Matt. 22.
2. If our Lord reproved those who being invited yet refused to come to the
marriage: what will he do to such, who once having tasted the delights of this
heavenly banquet, do after thoroughe sloth or necligence, absent them selves
from it?

3. By how much the gift of some noble Prince bestowed on a private person, is
of the more price and estimation: by so much the greater is the offense and
injury, if such a gift be either had in little regard, or any way contemned.

4. If king Assuerus refused to accept her for his wife who at his sendinge
neclected to come unto his table, and maryinge with an other, commanded forth
with all the jewels and rich ornaments to be taken from the first, and in his
sight to be brought and delivered to the second: what will God do unto him,
that once having tasted the sweetness of this divine Sacrament does afterward
omit to frequent the same?

5. If God punished so severely the offense of Eve, for that contrary to his
commandment she did eat one forbidden aple: what punishment may we think he
reserueth for those, whom having invited to feed at his Table, giueing them
his most sweet and sacred flesh for their repast, yet carelessly forsake this
heavenly food, to glut them selves with the unsavory garlic and onyons of
Egypt?

6. If God laid so severe a punishment upon the children of Israel, Nu^. 11.
for that loathing the Ma^na they desiered Quayles, in so much that they died
suddenly as they were eatinge their meat: what may we think he will do unto
those, who once having tasted this heavenly Ma^na, grow weary and contemn
the worthiness thereof?

7. Even as Esau, after he had sold to his younger brother Jacob the right of
his patrimony for a dishe of meat, Genesis 25.
was the whole remnaunt of his life perplexed and tormented with sorrows: so
likewise they consume and spend the time of their life in misery, who for a
thing of no moment, forsake our Savior Christ in the B. Sacrament, who is
their chief inheritance.

8. The frequenting of the Holy Sacraments, is the most assured and direct
way, whereby we may attain to salvation, by which we may abstain from sin,
furnishe our selves with virtue, overcome our temtations, and strongly resist
al assaults of our enemy. He therefore that once having tasted, refuses to
frequent them, forsakes the direct way that (...) so almighty God deals
often times with them whom he dearly loves, when he sees their affection
placed on worldely creatures: as for example, when he finds the parents with
a disordinate love addicted to their children, he often times takes them away.
The like may be said of riches, honors, and other worldely delights: and
herein especially appears his wonderful mercy toward us, that even by
constrainte he enforces us, to fly unto him.

So we read that God took from his beloved servant S. Angela of Folingium
both husband and children, that they should be noe more any occasion to
withdraw her love from him. The like also is read of S. Catherine of Sienna;
and of an other holy Saint, who being in one day deprived of her husband and
three children, gave hearty thanks to God, that now being freed from the cares
of this world, she might after be more attentive to his holy service. For this
cause Almighty God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his only Son, thereby to
show that our love to him, ought to be above al loves, and that thorough no
wordely creature, it ought to be let or hindered.

This love is that weddinge garment, which God would have al men to put on, who
come to his heavenly Table. For how can he come worthelie or be a guest at this
wedinge, that is clad or apparelled with the love of this world? How can a
worldlinge think to receive him in this most B. Sacrament, who never loved
riches but ever embraced poverty? Who ever refused honor, and was held most
contemptible? Who sought not after carnal delights, but always was full of
griefs? Who loved not his parents with any inordinate love? And finally who
nether for the love of his Disciples whom he loved most dearly, nor for the
love of his B. Mother whom he te^dered above al other creatur^s, would refuse
to suffer his most bitter passion, or diminishe any little part of the pains
he was to endure for our rede^ptio^.

Lastely, he, even he is received in this most B. Sacrament, who being lifted
upon high from the earth, honge al naked upon the Cross: thereby to show us
if we desire to be his, that we ought to be naked and free from al in^rdinate
affections, and to love him, and honor him above al earthly creatur^s.
Otherwis^ he will take his scourge in his hand, and drive out from us those
things which violate and contaminate his holy Temple, and pollute the place
of his sacred relics.

Other admonitions shevvinge how easily they are carried away with vanities
and do loose all taste of devotion, who omit to frequent the B. Sacrament.
EVen as, so soon as the Jews began to loath and contemn Manna, being a most
pleasant and sweet meat (and the true figure of this most B. Sacrament) they
presently longed after onyons, garlic, and the flesh of Egypt: so, such as
grow weary of this heavenly Manna (the very body of our Savior Christ)
are soon carried away with earthly delights and vanities.

Likewise as they then repined at Moses and Aaron, for bringinge them forth of
Egypt, and began to desire to return thither again: so these begin to
complain of their Confessors, and of those who were authors and causes of
their spiritual good. Often times also, when they thnike on their former
pleasures, they wish that they had never undertaken this virtuous course of
life; not at all co^sideringe, in what miserable slavery they then served the
devil their ghostly enemy.

Moreover as God heard the prayers of the Jews, even then when they murmured
against him, and according to their wishes sent them great abundance of
Qu^yles: so God being justly offended with these ungrateful minds, suffers
them many times, to obtain those things they desire, that by little and little
neclectinge to frequent this sacred mystery, they give them selves over to
sensual delights and pleasures, and so findinge no sweetness nor comfort in
the holy Sacraments, fall some times even to scoff at those who often
frequent them. But even as the Jews, when they were most greedely eatinge and
deuouringe their desiered Quayles, were presently stricken with soddaine death,
and now tasted that sharp supper for which before they had so greatly longed;
so also it happens to those, who leave to have access to the holy
Sacraments. For soon do those vanities decay and wholly forsake them,
making their lives full of bitterness, and their deaths full of horror,
verefyinge the saying of our Savior in the gospel, that we can not gather
Grapes from thorns, Luc. 6.
nor expect good Figs from thistles.

With what fears Satan our ghostly enemy is wont to terrify certain
persons from often frequentinge the B. Sacrament.
1. THe devil amongst other his subtle practices, is accustomed to put into
such persons who frequent the holy Sacraments, a certain fear, terrifyinge
them that either they have not rightly made their Confessions, or that they have
sinned when indeed they have not. Or if he can not prevail by any of these
shifts, then to make them to imagine that they are so ill prepared and so
unworthy to come to the Sacraments, that hardly can they persuade them selves
they do well therein. And further he suggesteth, that whatsoever they do, be
it never so well, yet that it has some great and notorious defect in it, and
that their whole lives abound in all kinds of imperfections.

2. These fears and terrors of mere malice he puts into us, for that he
sees us gracious in the sight of God; Even as heretofore the happy estate of
Adam so much grieved him, that he swelled with envy and never left practicing,
until he had cast him forth of Paradise. And therefore for the most part he
uses one of these two ways, that is, either to make that seem a sin which
is no sin, or else to persuade it to be far more grieueous then indeed it is,
thereby to make us refrain from the holy Sacraments, as th^ughe for our
unworthiness we were unfit to frequent them. But if he can not prevail with
this craft and subtlety, then does he labor so to preoccupate our sp^rituall
taste and understanding, with some continual discontentement or sorrow, that
at the least we should not feel any sweetness or comfort in the holy
Communion.

3. Ag^ine he deceives us with this crafty suggestion, disswadinge us from
believing our ghostly Father as we ought, thereby either that we may loose the
meritt of our faith, or else that by this occasion we might weary and molest
^im, sometime in confessinge more then we ought, and sometime by often
repeatinge what we have already confessed, he knowinge full well that hereby we
are deprived of much spiritual consolation.

4. Likewise he practices these subtle devises, for that he sees such
scruples to diminuishe the fervor of our love toward God: for whosoever has
his mind molested with these fears and difficulties, has not that persuasion
of God which he ought, but rather thinks him to be some worldly judge, most
contentious and ready to take al advantages against us. But if we considered
how much he desiereth our salvation, and what infinite benefits he daily
bestows upon us, we could never be troubled with such doutes and
perplexities. And much less if we well knew, what a treasure and pledge of
eternal happiness they carry in their bosoms, who have their hearts and desires
so disposed, that they would be content to endure any punishment or afflictione
rather then willingly to offend his majesty. For they which find them selves
in this disposition, may rest assured, that both they are sufficiently prepared
to come to the holy Sacraments, and also that hereby they are so nerely united
and conjoined to God, that justly they can have no cause of distrust or sorrow.

Remedies against such idle and vain fears as our enemy the Devil would put
into us.
THe first and most principal remedy that we can have against these fears,
is, to submit our selves to the iugdment of an other, and to suffer our selves
to be directed and guided by a prudent Confessor. For if by any accident he
should err or be mistaken, yet obeyinge his counsel, we are free from the
error, having Gods commandment for our warrant, who commands us in all
doutes to be directed by our Ghostly Father.

If therefore a wise and discreet Confessor well experienced in matters of
conscience, shall in a doutful case tell us, that we be free from sin, although
indeed it were a sin, yet obeying his counsel, it shall never be imputed unto
us. Likewise if thou fear in thy self, that thou haste not sufficiently
confessed thee, and cominge to thy Ghostly Father to crave his advise, he shall
warrant thee that thou need not to fear, God will never ask an account of
thee for those sins, although perhaps thy Ghostly Father should be deceived
or mistaken.

In like manner if thou be warranted at any time by thy Ghostly Father, that
t^ou may safely go to the B. Sacrament, then by his advise thou may
securely approach to receive the same. For although peradventure thy Ghostly
Father might be deceived, yet notwithstanding thou do rightly communicate;
and further do receive the merit of faith thereby, in giving credit to thy
Confessor, who is the vicegerent of God; also thou receiuest the merit of
obedience, obeying the commandment of God; the merit of humility; of
patience, and of resigning thy own will, when thou do as thou art commanded
purely for the lo^^ of God. Our envious enemy the Devil, well considering these
things, labors what he can by any subtle device, to deminuishe the credit
of the Ghostly Father with his Ghostly children.

The second remedy. The opinion of Cardinal Caietan is, that if one who is
troubled with a scrupulous conscience, shall go to confession, not having
before very narrowly examined him self, that he ought not afterward to make
any dout whether he has rightely confessed or no; but rather that he ought to
persuade him self, that either particularly or generally, he has confessed
what he should, especialy if he be willinge to reitterate his confession again
if need shall require, and his Ghostly Father allow the same.

The third remedy is, to get an habit to meditate on the goodness, mercy, and
clemency of God: and to think with what love, kindness, and with what tender
affection he imbraceth us: to imagine also with our selves that we behold
before our eyes, the most sweet presence of our Lord and Savior, ever most
kind and loving unto us (as the benefits which we receive do daily declare)
and not to stand before a severe or cruel judge. Think therefore that thy
Lord speaks unto thee as he did to his Disciples saying: Have I been thus
long with you and yet do you not know me? As if he had said. Consider how
long I have most familiarly used thee, by conuersing with thee in the most B.
Sacrament, in all which time since thou have found in me nothing but love,
gentleness, goodness, and mercy, how can thou imagine me to be so severe or
rigorous? Is not this plainly an injury done unto my love?

The fourth is, to consider what words the Priest does speak, houlding in his
hands the consecrated host, and saying: Behold the lamb of God, Behold him
that takes away the sins of the world. For this is he that comes
furnished with meeknes and mild love, like a lamb, not armed with cruelty and
severity like a lion; bringing with him life, not death; replenishing thy
soul with joy, not with sorrow; and who will plant in thy heart if thou
resign it to him, roses budding celestial cogitatio^s, not pensive thoughts
of pusillanimitie.

The fifth is, to imprint in our minds the history of the prodigal child
containinge al fatherly love and sweetness: and to think how the Father
behoulding him clad in a most contemptible habit, never spoke any reproachful
word unto him, never showed him any discontented countenance, never contemned
his base attayar; but so soon as he beheld the submission of his Son, being
presently overcome with a fatherly affection, he ran to meet him, and most
lovingly embraced him, and casting away his torn and ragged apparel, clothed
him with new, showed al signs of joy, killed a fatted calfe, and made him a
worthy feast. O history aboundinge with all sweetness and delight, wherein we
may observe these points following.

1. First, how exceeding great the mercy of our heavenly Father is, who i^
more desierous to give, then we to ask: readier to embrace us, then we to
return unto him.

2. Secondly, so soon as we begin to do penance, that God does not behold
in us what we have of our own, that is, our raged apparel, signifying our
sins, but that which is his own, to wit, our soul created after his own
likeness, and redeemed with the most precious blood of Christ his only Son.

3. Thirdly, that it is the custom of God to make this exchange with us, that
is, to withdraw and take away from us our rags, signifying our defectes, and
in lue thereof to bestow on us his graces.

4. Fourthlie, that he does not curiously or rather captiously pry into him,
who has utterly forsaken his sinful life, and is now become more willing to
die, then wittingly to commit any mortal offense.

5. Fifthly, that we ought in all our adversities and troubles, without any
fear or dout, to repair to our Savior in the B. Sacrament as a, needy body
to him that abounds in all riches; or as one oppressed with sickness, to a
most skillful Physician, who knows how to cure all manner of diseases: or as
children vnvnworthie of such a Father, yet who, of his infinite goodness will
vouchesafe to make us worthy, and will bestow upon us, more then we can
either ask or desire, it being his sweet nature to be good and bountiful to
al those who truly call upon him. Therefore the more deeply that we find our
selves plunged in miseries, the oftener ought we to have recourse to the holy
Sacraments, yea, if so it were convenient, often in one day; and to say with
the prodigal child: Luc. 15.
I will go unto my father; and what shall I say unto him, that I am not worthy
to be called his child. And this is the will of God as that p^rable shows; as
also the words of our Savior, where he says: Come unto me all that labor
and are laden, and I will refreshe you.

6. Sixthly hereby we may understand, that the prodigal child, if he had only
considered his own miseries, and his fathers worthiness, had for ever remained
in his former calamities: but bethinkinge him self that his father was a
Father, he rose up, went unto him, submitted him self, and was presentely
received into his grace and savor. So we, if we cast our eyes only upon our
imperfections, we shall little benefit our selves, but rather shall seem to
be further of from God. But if we behold and look upon our Redeemer, not as a
severe Judge, but as a Father, then shall we see just cause to fly unto him, as
to the only Author of al goodness and mercy.

7. Seventhly, consider that the love which our Lord bears toward us, does
in a manner shu^ up his fatherly eyes, that (...) ^^t least dissembleth to see
our imperfectio^s, which voluntariely we lay open before him. For no sooner can
we accuse our selves, then louingely we receive pardon of him. Even as
therefore this prodigal child became perfect of imperfect, happy being
unhappy, rich being poor, and filled with joy being starued in affliction: so
will it happen and befall unto us, if likewise with humility we return unto him.

8. E^gh^ly, it is a comfort to us to know and consider, that our dai^y
defectes and venial sins which we commit, do not withdraw from us ^ods
grace, whereof only mortal sin depriueth us. And again to consider, that
there is great difference, betwixt such venial sins which voluntarily we
commit, and those that we fall into thorough our own humane frailty.

9. Ninthly, consider that God does some time permit us to fall into venial
sins, not that thereby we should refrain the holy Sacraments, but for that
cause we should the oftener frequent them, thereby the better to avoid such
sins hereafter. Also he permiteth us to sin venially, that thereby we may
the better know our selves, and seek to mortify our appetites; and may see,
not only how great the love of our Savior is toward us, who vouchsafes to
bestow him self upon us, being so full of frailties, but also that we may
learn, how necessary and behoueful it is for us to fly unto him. Let us
therefore follow the example of the prodigal child, let us have recourse unto
him, by how much we find our selves the more entangled with sin. So ^hal our
defectes make us to know our own infirmities, and give us occasion to humble
our selves: to know our dis^ases, and to seek for remedy: to acknowledge the
infinite goodness of God, and to love him and fly unto him for succor, against
the multitudes of temtations which howerly assault us; and for this cause to
desire also, if so we might, to receive him howerly in the B. Sacrament.

God will have al things happen for the best to his elect, and will turn the
worst that does befall them, to their good in the end. He will have his servants
sometimes weep, but not for ever, but rather will have them always to rejoice
in him. Therefore will he have these our defectes an occasion, that by them we
may more nerely join our selves unto him. For even as a little trippinge, does
give occasion to a courageous horse that he does set his pace more strongly,
lest perhaps he should stu^ble: so likewise these venial sins which daily
we fall into, ought to make us the more wary and vigilant to withstand al
mortal: which easily when shall effect if we remember, not to dwell ouerlong upon
the discussion of our frailties (considering that by too much conuersinge in
them, they bring forth in us nothing but brambles and thorns, filling our
thoughts with scruples and pusillanimitie) but to run directly to our
heavenly Father for healpe, I mean, to call to our remembrance his infinite love
and great benefitts bestowed upon us: by which thought alone, al these former
thorns will be turned into roses, al these brambles into most pleasant grapes,
and al our sorrows into exceeding joys.

S. Catherin of Sienna was wont to say: That as he who desiereth to speak with
some po^ent Prince, staieth not at the door of the first entrance of his
palace, but labors to have access even into his secret chamber: so ought
we not to dwell upon the consideration of our defectes, but to enter into the
secret chamber of our merciful Lord and Sovereign, that is, to consider how
tenderly he loves us, and how ready he is to pardon and embrace us.

S. Gertrude says: That as we see the little birds not always to keep them
selves close in their nestes, but sometimes to five forth, and to soar up on
high, cheerfully to singe, and to show some signs of joy: so ought we not to
have our thoughts always conversant in our defectes, which is as it were our
nest, but to raise up our selves and to behold and contemplate, the
unspeakable mercy and goodness of God, and then again to return to the
consideration of our selves.

Thomas de Kempis saie^h: That God does daily propose two lessons to his
friends: the one whereby they may know and see their own imperfections; and
by the other to consider his divine goodness, that so mercifully and patiently
bears with their infirmities. And S. Bid affirms, that if S. Paul had
been free from the motion of the flesh, that happily he might have fallen into
eternal damnation: even so might many holy and virtuous men utterly perish,
if God did not sometime permit them to fall into venial sins.

A devout s^ruant of God was accustomed to say: That he never feared those
sins which he knew in him self and detested, but such sins only, which
other, he held him self free from, or which he made no great account to
commit: or else such sins as finding in him self, he would thorough
partiality color and excuse.

S. Augustine wills us to be sorry for our sins, and also that we should
rejoice and take comfort in such s^rrowe; considering that such s^rrowe is ever
acc^mpanied with the grace of God.

An other Holy Father would often say: that he never marueiled if
thorough-frailtie he found him self to fall into some sins, considering his
weakness, and how far he found him self from perfect virtue: but rather that he
marueiled, if at any time he found him self free from offending.

An other Father would say: that the often and daily defectes of good and
virtuous men, did show and verefie that which in an other sense is denied in
the gospel, Luc. 16.
that grapes may be gathered from unfruitful thorns, that is, that thorough
our own defaultes and imperfections, we may attain to the knowledge of the
goodness of God, and from the briars of our defectes, may gather the figs of
celestial and divine sweetness.

The same holy Father would say: that our B. Lord did permit us to fall into
sin, that by that occasion we might come unto him, being invited thereto by
those comfortable words, Matt. 15.
Come unto me al ye that are laden (with imperfections) and I vvil refresh you.

When a devout and virtuous person was sometime overcome with great sorrow and
gr^efe, considering deeply his own defectes and imperfections, he heard a
voice saying thus unto him. Why art thou pensive? come and cast al thy griefs
within the wound of my side: which words being spoken, his grief and
sorrow was presently taken away.

That al signs and tokens of true and perfect love are found to be in the
most B. Sacrament.
AMongst the infinite signs and arguments of love, which our Savior showed
toward us whilst he conuersed here with men, the institution of the most B.
Sacrament may be accounted with the greatest. Therefore says S. John: When
Christ had loved those that were his, he loved them unto the end: That is,
John. 13.
to the end of his life, for then did he bestow his greatest benefits upon
them, and gave them most manifest signs and tokens of his love: leaving for a
time his own life for them, and giving him self to them for ever in the B.
Sacrament.

First therefore the principal sign and token of true love, is an earnest
desire most nerely to join, and as it were to ingrafte our selves into the
thing which we entirely love. This sign how lively it appeared in Christ, is
made plain and manifest in the institution of the most B. Sacrament: for one
chief cause of the institution thereof, was, that he might make us, even one
with him self, and therefore did he institute it under the form of meat:
considering that as of meat and him that eats it, is made one and the self
same thing: even so is made one of Christ and the soul which receives him in
the B. Sacrament. And this union is made by participation of one spirit, in him
that receives, and him that is received, whereof ensues one manner of life and
conversation.

An other sign is, to do well unto him whom we love. And when he that loves
bestows his heart on him whom he loves, he has nothing left which most
willingly he would not bestow upon him: now then, what greater thing could be
thought on or imagined, then that which Christ imparteth unto us in the most B.
Sacrament? For he gives unto us his most precious flesh and blood, and makes
us partakers of al those merits, which he procured by sacrificing the same for
our redemption. And even as our soul, so soon at it was conjoined with that
flesh and blood which we received from our first father Adam, was presently
made partaker of all the miseries and calamities of Adam: even so, so soon as
it is conjoined, by receiuinge the most B. Sacrament, with the most precious
flesh of our Lord and Savior Christ, it is made partaker of the meritts and
treasures, of Christ: For which cause it is called Communion, because hereby
our Savior does communicate unto us, not only his most sacred body and blood,
but also the meritts which by the same body and blood he purchased for us.

Thirdly, those who entirely love the one the other, will ever the one be
mindful of the other: and therefore if at any time they be severed or parted,
yet leave they always some token of remembrance, which may preserve and renew
their love. The like sign of love is this most B. Sacrament, which as a token
of remembrance our Lord would leave with us: for the which cause, when first
he did institute the same he said: Do this in remembrance of me. That is, call
to mind and remember, so often as you come to this heavenly Table, what and how
great benefits, I have bestowed upon you, with what Fatherly love I have ever
loved you, how many, and how grieueous torments I have suffered for you.

Fourthly, the party who loves desiereth love again. And this sign have we
also of the love of Christ, who desiering so greatly to be beloved of us, has
instituted this sacred and mistical banquet, consecrated with such divine
words, that he who worthily freque^teth the same, is presently wounded with
love and admiration of his unspeakable goodness.

Fifthly, the lover desiereth to please his beloved, and studieth by all means
possible how to effect the same; even as tender parents do to their dear and
beloved children: our B. Lord did the like by institutinge this Sacrament,
whose effect is to give true consolation to a pure and immaculate soul; which
tastes thereby such exceedinge sweetenes, that according to S. Thomas, no
tongue is able to explicate the same.

Now consider I beseech thee at what time our most loving Lord and Savior
ordained this banquet, to wit, at his last supper, when shorly after he was to
suffer those most bitter torments, which already his cruel enemies had prepared
for him. So that when they were inuenting most sharp pains for him, then did
he provide this most heavenly food for us. When they were mingling for him
bitter gaul, then was he tempering for us most sweet honey. When they were
devising most exquisite tortures for him, then was he ordaining for us the
delights of Paradise. Nether could the apprehension of present death, nor the
remembrance of such torments as were prepared for him, so much posesse or
occupy his thoughts, that they could either withdraw him, or yet deter him,
from bestowing upon us this unspeakable benefit.

The lover houldeth the absence of his beloved as a torment unto him, always
desireing the presence of his love. For this is the effect of true and perfect
love, that it still desiereth to be united to that it loves, thereby to receive
contentment and delight: even so our divine and heavenly lover, our Lord JESUS,
has instituted and ordained this admirable Sacrament, in which him self is
really present; that so long as this Sacrament should continue in the world,
he him self would also remain therein, notwithstanding that he is ascended
into heaven. And this is an infallible testimony of his entire and singular
love.

How great a treasure the gift of the B. Sacrament contains.
Our most merciful and loving Savior, could never have left unto us here on
earth, a gift of greater honor, benefit, or delight, then he has left unto us
in the most B. Sacrament: for here we have him, to whom in all adversities we
may fly for succor, to whom when we have need, we may lament and make our
moan. O thrice happy estate of Christians, which daily may present the^ selves
before their Creator, and as it were face to face enter into conference with
him.

This being so rare and singular a gift, it happily might be esteemed of the
less moment, had it bin only bestowed on such as deserved it, or at the least
would have been thankful for it, and have used it to their own benefit, and
according to the dignity thereof: but considering that it is bestowed upon
many, who nether acou^t of it according to the worthiness, nor gratefully
receive it, nor yet apply it as they ought to the profit of their souls, this
shows the singular love and mercy of our Savior.

O wonder surpassing al admiration. If so it were that all the glory and divine
nature of God depended on man, as all that which is man's depends on God, what
could God more have done then he has, to win and purchase man's love unto him?
A most straung thing, and able to make us wholly astonished: that whereas al our
salvation, al our glory, and al our good depends on God, yet to see how we
fly from him; and again to behold how earnestly he desires our conioyning
with him, having no need at al of us, or of our endeauours.

After what manner Christ remains with us in the B. Sacrament.
NO one thing does more declare the greatness of the love of Christ toward
us, then the wonderful manner by which he conuerseth with ^s in the B.
Sacrament: for if it had pleased him to have remained with us in his own shape
and likeness, then it might have seemed that he had so remained, to have been
honored and worshipped of us; but remaining with us under the form of bread, he
so remains not only to be reverenced, but to be received of us as our
chiefest food, that in the one we might have cause to exercise our faith, and
in the other occasion to exercise our charity: and so is caled the bread of
life, for that he is life it self under the show of bread. He therefore who
worthelie receives this bread, in the self same instant receives life,
receiving him who is true life it self. If thou fear to receive it for that
it has life, yet receive it in regard it is the bread of Angels. If thou
esteem it but lightly being under the form of bread, yet hold it of high
price for that it is living and contains life.

Of three sins that are most opposite to this most B. Sacrament.
PRide, Envy, and Lust, are most opposite to the B. Eucharist. For in this
Sacrament is he received, who more then al men humbled him self for mankind:
who being nailed to the Cross, prayed for his persecutors: who took his pure
flesh of the most chaste and immaculate virgin. Therefore as it is necessary
for him that receives, to be clean from al sin: so especially ought he to
provide who comes to this heavenly banquet, that he be not defiled with any of
these three enormities.

Of Venial Sins.
EXceeding great are the impedime^ts which venial sins do cause in us, from
tasting the sweetness of this heavenly food, but especially those which
willingly and wittingly we daily commit. For as it is impossible to make
Enammel to fasten but only to gould, and not unto brass, copper, or other
drossie metal: so does not God permit this divine Enammel to make impression,
but in such a soul, which is void and free from the dross of sin.

Of the intention we ought to have when we come to receive the B. Sacrament.
AMongst other things which are most necessary for our preparation to receive
the B. Sacrament, the true intention and end why we come to receive it, is
specially to be regarded; for as it may be good, so it may be bad. The
intentions therefore by which we may come worthily to receive it, are noted by
S. Bonauenture, to be these that follow.

1. First, that thereby we may be the nerer united to God.

2. Secondly, that by receiving this most B. Sacrament, as by a most sovereign
medicine, we may be cured from al diseases and sickness of our souls.

3. Thirdly, that thereby we may perform to God, that which by duty we owe
unto him.

4. Fourthly, that thereby we may be delivered from al perils and dangers.

5. Fifthly, that thereby we may obtain from God some especial benefit.

6. Sixthly, that we may be thankful to God for all his benefitts bestowed upon
us, considering that no act which we can do, is more grateful unto him.

7. Seaue^thly, that we may thereby yeald praise unto God and his Saints,
consideringe this to be a sacrifice of all laud and praise.

8. Eighthly, that thereby we may help and asist our neighbors and brethren,
as well those that yet live, as those that be departed.

9. Ninthly, that by receiving this Sacrament, we may likewise receive the
spirit of Christ, and thereby may live with that humility, charity,
obedience, poverty of spirit, mortification of body, and contempt of the
world wherein our B. Savior lived when he coruersed in the same. And this
ought to be our chief and principal intention.

10. Tenthly, to renew the remembrance of the passion of our most sweet
Savior JESUS, according as we are taught by the Apostle S. Paul.

11. Eleuenthly, that thereby we may do that which is acceptable to God; who
desires to be conversant with us for this end, that his holy will and pleasure
may be performed in us. And unto this may be adjoined the other intentions
above mentioned.

Certain points to be examined before receiuinge according to S. Mechtildis.
WE must lay naked our conscience (says this B. Saint) to our Ghostly Father,
even as Christ showed his body naked for us. For if he laid naked his body
to the sharpnes of stripes: how much rather ought we to lay open our conscience
to the chasticements of words? Look therefore into the glass of the virtues
of our Lord and Savior JESUS.

And first, consider in the glass of the humility of Christ, thine own
humility: and whether with any spot of pride or vain glory, thou have
spotted or defiled the cleannes of thy soul.

Secondly, in the glass of the patience of Christ, consider thine own
patience: and see whether therein thou find it to be spotted with any blott
of impatience.

Thirdly, in the glass of the obedience of Christ, consider if thou find
any disobedience in thy soul.

Fourthly, in the glass of the love of Christ, try thou thine own love: and
consider how much love thou find in thy self; first toward God, and next
toward thy Superiors: how peaceably thou behauest thy self toward thy
equalles; and how meek and mildly toward thy inferiors.

And if hereby thou find any thing in thy soul worthy of reprehension,
endeavor meekely to cleanse it with the pure find on of Christ's humanity;
calling to mind that he is our brother, and eke so merciful and gentle, that
no sooner a man with a co^trite heart acknowledges his sins, but with all
mercy he does presently forgive them. And great disscretion must be used
herein, that we do not too rowghlye rub the sores of our soul, that is,
without consideration of the goodness of God: otherwise may we sooner hurt, then
cure the same. Hitherto are the words of S. Mechtildis.

Of Devotion.
Endeavor before thou come to receive the most B. Sacrament, to stir up in
thy self, some inward taste and feelinge of devotion, which according to
Divines we call Actual devotion. To this thou shall attain, if thou duly
consider the exceedinge greatness of God, and thy own unworthiness: what
benefitts he has bestowed on thee, and with what griueous sins thou have
offended him. Resemble thy self therefore in thy mind unto the Prodigal
child: or to the Publican: or unto the woman that was taken in adultery,
returning to her husband and askinge forgiveness of him.

Above al things the remembrance of the greatness of Gods love toward us, will
stir up in thee this kind of devotion.

Four things which S. Mechtildis did use to meditate upon, before she came to
receive the B. Sacrament.
1. FIrst upon the exceeding great love of God which he carried toward her
from al eternity.

2. Secondly, that it would please God of his infinite love, to create her his
servant: fore-knowing how ungrateful she would become to his divine Majesty.

3. Thirdly, that he would vouchsafe, to suffer for her his most bitter
passion, and by sheding his most sacred blood to make satisfaction to his
Father for her sins ad offenses.

4. Fourthly, that it pleased him of his infinite love toward her, to remain
in the most B. Sacrament, there to feed her with his own true flesh, and
wash away her sins with his most precious blood.

How we ought to hunger after this most B. Sacrament.
GReatly ought we to desire and hunger after this most B. Sacrament, and often
to frequent the same: consideringe, that as the forbiden aple was the poison of
our souls, so is this the true food and preservative of them. The hunger
whereof, the consideration of these things following ought to stir up in us.

1. First, the great necessity wherein we daily stand.

2. Secondly, the inuiting of Christ, and the threatening which he uses if we
come not to it.

3. Thirdly, the great desire which the B. Saints had of the same.

4. Fourthly, the singular fruit and effects which it works in our soul.

Of the fruits of the most B. Sacrament.
1. FIrst it remiteth sins past which were out of our remembrance.

2. Secondly it armeth and strengthens us against such sins, as thorough
frailty we are subject daily to fall into. (...) God, thy Lord, and Creator,
who has a more fervent a zealous desire to give his benefitts unto thee, then
thou have to accept and be partaker of them, as it appears by the parable of
the prodigal child, and who comes unto thee, not like a Lion, but like a most
meek and gentle Lamb.

It shall likewise be convenient and requisite for thee, often to meditate and
think on those words: How does it happen that my Lord and Savior vouchsafes
to come unto me? And likewise to consider who, and of what condition he is, who
thus comes unto thee, and to say with S. Francis my God, my God, who art thou
and who am I?

After thou have received the most B. Sacrament.
GReat are the thanks which of duty we are to give to almighty God for this
unspeakable benefit: and we ought to have an especial care and watch over our
mouth, that nothing proceed from thence that may be offenciue in his sight:
to demand likewise those things which most we want, but especially perfect
charity, and ever to remain one united with him: offeringe up our selves and
al ours to his service as an entire oblation.

This divine Sacrament works his effects in our soul, during all the time
that the form or species, under which we receive it, continue undigested.
Therefore after we have communicated, it shall be most convenient to recollect
our selves as devoutly as we may, and to speak unto our B. Savior in manner as
follows.

Certain short prayers which after we have received the B. Sacrament, either
vocally or mentally, we may offer up unto Almighty God.
MY sweet Lord and Savior for this end haste thou made me, that with all my
will and desire I should love and honor thee. Grant me sweet IESV that I may
perform the thing for the which I was created.

Too presumptuous am I most base and abject creature, that dare be bold to
crave so high and heavenly a love: more beseeming were it my bas^ unworthiness,
to ask a thing of far inf^riour valewe. But what shall I do, o Lord, since
thou command me that I shall love thee?

Thou sweet Savior have created me to the end that I should love theee: thou
do threaten me except I love thee: thou have suffered a most cruel death,
because I should love thee: and thou command me to ask of thee, especially
to love thee.

So greatly, sweet Savior, have thou desiered that I should love thee, that
finding my affection cold and frozen, thou did institute this Sacrament of
divine virtue, thereby to set mine heart on fire with most burninge love
toward thee.

O my sweet Creator and Redeemer, what am I in thy sight that thou command
me to love thee? And that thou should invent such variety of means, to
gain my love unto thee?

What other thing have I ever been to thee, then affliction, calamity, and
cause of thy bitter passion?

And again what have thou showed thy self toward me, but my Savior, my
rest, and the Author of al my good? If thererefore thou can love me, being
so vile and abject a wretch, how should not I love thee, being so sweet a
Savior unto me?

Unworthy am I, o Lord, to love thee, yet thou art most worthy to be beloved.
Grant me therefore thy grace, that I may most fervently love thee.

My God, my Lord, the love from whom al loves do spring, why am I not
consumed with this fire of thy love?

My God, my Lord, the only Goodness it self, thorough whom al things are good
that have goodness in them: why should I not love thee, considering that Goodness
is the only cause of love?

My God, my Lord, the Beauty from whence al beauty proceeds, why should I
not love thee, consideringe that Beauty does so ravish the hearts of al
creatures?

If I should be so unnatural as not to love thee for that which is in thee; yet
why should I not love thee for that which thou art in me?

The son loves the father for that he receives his being from him. Each
member loves the head, and in defense thereof expose them selves to al dangers
whatsoever, considering that by the head they are defended and preserved. Every
eff^^t loves the cause from whence it proceeds. And then what cause or let
abides in thee my sweet Savior, why I should not ^^ost truly love thee?

Thou have given and bestowed upon me my being, and that in a far higher degree
of perfection, then I have received it of my parents. Thou preseruest me also
in a far more excellent manner, then the head can preserve the members subject
unto it. O then my sweet Lord why should I not love thee?

Be far then from me al ye earthly creatures, fly where I shall never be
subject unto your temptations: for nether are you rightly joined with me,
nether may I unite my self with you. If it has pleased my most louinge Lord,
to assign you unto me as servants and ministers to supply my necessities, is
it reason that I like a false and adulterous bride, should violate my faith to
so louinge a spowse? Shall I betray my most dear and louinge Lord, by those
very servants which he has appointed to attend and serve met Therefore my
sweet Redeemer, seeing al things which are created here on earth, are made
for my use and service, and I my self only made to serve and honor thee; Why
should I not wholly love thee? Why should I not resign and yeald up my heart
unto thee? Why should I not burn and consume with thy heavenly fire? O sweet
IESV, o IESV my love?

Why all that come to receive the B. Sacrament, receive not the svveete and
heavenly consolations contained therein.
THe first reason is, the defect and imperfection of him that receives it, for
that he comes not duly prepared. For as a blind man deprived of sight, is
not capable of the light of the Sun, shine it never so brighte: even so the
spiritual taste of many, is so corrupted with earthly delights, that it never
finds the sweetness of the B. Sacrament, although they receive it and frequent
it daily. For as S. Paul says. 1. Cor. 2.
The sensual man (that is he who is carried away with his sensual appetites)
perceives not those things which are of the spirit of God.

Also it comes thorough the defect of due consideration, in that the dignity
of this heavenly food is not duly weighed and thought upon as it ought. For
he, who not meditatinge on the divine worthiness of it, does soddainly swallowe
it down, must of necessity be destitute of al spiritual taste and comfort
contained therein, as also he who does not apply it to the taste of his heart.
Therefore that thou may find the sweetness of this celestial food, thou
ought carefully to ponder with thy self the greatness of this mystery, and
to call to God for his divine help and assistance, that thorough true
understanding and devout contemplation, thou may attain to the perfect
taste thereof.

Four things to be considered in this most B. Sacrament.
GVlielmus Parisiensis an excellent learned man, says, that there are four
things especially to be considered in the B. Sacrament.

First, The admirable and omnipotent power of Almighty God, who does beyond
the reason of human capacity, change the visible substance of bread and
wine, into the invisible body and blood of Christ, leaving those external
forms, wholly deprived of their natural subject.

Secondly, The prudence and wisdom of almighty God, who provides for our
souls such convenient meat; especially the external forms of bread and wine
inuitinge us to come securely to this sacred table.

Thirdly, The infinite abounda^ce of his divine goodness, whereby he offers
unto us this heavenly food, with such exceedinge cheerefulnes and alacrity.

Fourthly, The great and unspeakable mercy of God, who spared not his only and
dearly beloved Son, but delivered him to a most cruel and shameful death,
that thereby even in this life we might have perpetual joy in our souls. O
work most worthy of al admiration, the which so often as we attentively
consider, is able to leave us altogether astonnished.

Wherefore not to feel sweetenes in the B. Sacrament, proceeds of the little
account made of venial sins, wittinglie commmitted. For the true effect of
this Sacrament is to give new consolation and refection to a pure and clean
soul; but al venial sins of what condition soever they be, are wholly
opposite to this purity and brightness, and do hinder and let al actual
devotion, which is most requisite to be had, to attain to the taste and
sweetenes of this divine mystery. So that this may stand for an infallible
ground, that by daily committing of venial sins, we are disabled from
tasting the sweetenes of the B. Sacrament. Let us therefore fly from sin as
from a most infectious pestilence, and humbly crave of almighty God, that it
will please him to give us such a will and desire, that rather we may choose to
suffer any cruel death, then willingly to commit the least venial offense.

Other vvayes and directions forth of sundry authors, how we may prepare our
selves to come vvorthely to receive the B. Sacrament.
SAINT Mechtildis accustomed before she received the B. Sacrament, five times
to say the. Aue Maria.

1. At the first she called to mind and devoutly did meditate, upon the
purity of the most B. Virgin Marie, whereby she conceived the Son of God,
and upon the profoundnes of her humility, where with she did as it were draw
him from heaven into her sacred womb: humbly making her petition unto her,
that by her assistance she might obtain perfect purity of heart.

2. Secondly she considered the unspeakable joy which our B. Lady felt, when
presently after she had brought forth her only Son, she knew him to be both
perfect God and man. Then making her humble petition unto her, that by her
asistance she might attain to the true knowledge and understanding of God.

3. Thirdly she considered that our most B. Lady, was every moment ready to
receive the grace of God. Then made she her prayers unto her, that she also
might have, thorough her intercession, her heart so prepared, that she might
daily receive from God new increase of grace.

4. Fourthly she caled to mind the great devotion and gratitude of our most B.
Lady, whilst she conuersed and lived here, upon the earth. Making her humble
petition unto her, that by her intercession she might be always acceptable and
grateful unto God, especially for this benefitt of the most B. Sacrament.

5. Fifthly she considered the great benevolence where with her Son speaking
unto her, received her most lovingly, to her admirable joy and comfort. Making
then her humble petition unto her, that by her intercession, she might obtain
grace to come to that heavenly table with spiritual consolation. And she was
wont to say; If a man knew what benefit, and how great profit he gained to his
soul, by worthy receiving the B. body of Christ, that he would be rapt beyond
him self, with the excess of joy and delight.

The said S. Mechtildis, was likewise accustomed before the receuing of the B.
Sacrament, above al things to call to mind, the bitter passion which our B.
Lord suffered for her redemption. And if at any time she chanced to let pass
that meditation, she thought her self to have committed a great error; for
that our Savior at the institution of this most B. Sacrament, Matt. ^.6.
said: Do this in remembrance of me. That is, Communicate. Whereupon when she
had craved of our Lord the meaning of those words, she understood by the
Holy Ghost, that this was the true meaning and signification of them.

Three things to be remembered concerning the body of Christ, at such time as
we receive the holy Sacrament.
1. THe first is: The eternal love where with God loved us, before we had any
being, thorough which he provided for us, al things that were needful, and
also created us to his own image and likeness. For this cause we are for ever
bound to render and yield unto him, al hearty and continual thanks, to the
utmost we are able.

2. The second is: The inestimable love that the Son of God showed toward
us, who being in the heavenly delights and glory of his Father, yet would
vouchsafe to take upon him, those griefs and miseries, which thorough Adams
offense were due unto us; as hunger, thirst, cold, wearines, shame, pain, and
the like: and lastly would suffer a most reproachful death, thereby to free us
from eternal damnation.

3. The third is: The insearchable love, where with at al times our most
merciful Savior loves us, and the exceeding care and providence where with he
does always govern us: and that he who is our Creator, our Redeemer, and most
entire louinge Brother, presents him self before his heavenly Father, and
does solicit and plead our cause, as our most careful Advocate.

These three things ought we ever to have fixed before our eyes (as that most
B. woman has directed us) but especially at such times as we shall be present,
and receive that most heavenly banquet, which our most merciful Redeemer
bestowed upon us, in his last will and testament of his great love toward
us. The memory whereof, we ought ever to retain with most thankful minds for
so great a benefit. This the B. Mechtildis knew likewise by the instinct of
the Holy Ghost: that when any busy them selves with thinkinge on worldly and
idle occasions, that they do contaminate the image of the B. Trinity, that is
to say, the beauty of their soul; as also if they be conversant in curious and
worldly wisdom, setting their delights on vain and transitory things. And
consideringe that so long as the soul is imprisoned in this earthly body of
ours, it does often defile it self with base and earthly cogitations:
therefore it behooves that we often reflect our eyes upon the glass of Gods
divine countenance, but especially at such time as we are to receive the most
B. Sacrament. And even as the purest white, being made redd with blushing, does
exceedingly adorn the face with beauty: so ought we, often to make white and
pure the face of our soul with Confession, and as it were to dye it with redd,
in remembering the bitter passion of our most merciful Redeemer.

What our Savior ansvvered again to this B. woman concerning her aforesaied
medita^ion.
Our Savior at one time said to this holy woman. When thou purposest to
receive me in the B. Sacrament, let this be the intention where with thou
come unto me: to wit, having a desire to entertain me with such love and
affection, as no humane heart has hitherto received me with the like. And I will
accept this love of thine, not so meanly as it appears in thee, but for such,
and so great, as I my self desire it should be.

At an other time when this holy woman was to receive the B. Sacrament, our
Savior seemed to write 7. letters upon her breast, and to place them there as
seven rich and precious jewels. The 1. did signify the purity of heart.
The 2. the continual remembrance of the conversation and life of Christ. The 3.
the profound humility of Christ. The 4. perseverance in good works. The 5.
patience in adversity. The 6. Hope. The 7. fervent love of heavenly things.
With these virtues, as with seven jewels, ought he to be adorned, who
purposes devoutly to receive the B. Sacrament.

Of S. Gertrude.
THis blessed woman S. Gertrude making her humble petition to our Savior, that
it would please him to instruct her, how she might prepare her self, to come
worthily to receive the most B. Sacrament, received this answer: That first
she must touch the hands, and side of our Savior. His side, with a thankful,
temembrance of the great and exceeding love of God toward us, where with from
the beginning he has chosen us to be his Sons, and heirs of his celestial
kingdom; and how he does heap upon us his daily blessings, who are most
unworthy, and unthankful for them.

His hands ought also to be touched of us, that is, we must consider with all
humble gratitude, all the pains and labors which our most merciful redeemer
suffered here on earth, for the space of 33. years, but especially those which
for us he endured, at the time of his bitter passion. And when we find our
souls inflamed with this meditation, then must we offer up our hearts to God,
with great humility and thanksgiuinge in the unity of that love whereof
Christ spoke, saying. As my Father has sent me so do I send you. That is, so
conforming our wills to his divine pleasure, that we should desire, or will to
do nothing, but that which may be acceptable to the will of God: disposing our
selves to suffer al things, which our B. Lord shall command or require of us.

Out of Johannes Tavvlerus.
HE writes that a certain devout person, desiered to be instructed of God,
who might come worthily to receive the B. Sacrament. And that he received this
answer from our Lord: He who has not that which is his own, and he that
is pleased with al things that I do. The exposition of which words, is
this. Three things are requisite to him, who comes to receive the B.
Sacrament. First that he have not that which is his own, to wit, sin, having
made clean his conscience by Confession. Secondly, that he desire that which
is not his own, to wit, God, not seekinge or enquiring any other thing then
his divine and heavenly grace. Thirdly, that renouncing al such things as
offend God, he resign him s lfe, and al his, unto his holy will and p^easure.
Whosoever finds these three things in him self, may securely come to the B.
Sacrament, although he should feel no actual devotion.

Condsierations before Communion out of the same author.
1. FIrst, consider how great, and who he is, that is to be received.

2. Secondly, how unworthy thou art who come to receive him, being fitter to
be fuel for the fire of hell, then to receive him who is the Lord of al
majesty.

3. Thirdly, that the most B. Virgin, who was most pure from the lest spott of
sin, was abashed and amazed being told by the Angel Gabriel that she should
conceive Christ in her womb. Luc. 1.
And how S. John trembled, Mat. 3.
when he was willed only to baptize Christ in the river of Jordan.

4. Fourthlie, that thou may repay the det which thou owe to thy heavenly
Father, for the great benefits which thou have received of him; and may
offer unto him that sacred Oaste, and thereby obtain strength against the
devil, the world, and the flesh. Also that thou may enrich thy poverty with
the treasures of Christ JESUS: and likewise so firmly unite thy self unto
him, that no earthly creature may be able to separate thee from him.

Out of the same Author.
Our Savior answered an other in this manner, who seemed to him self not
sufficiently prepared to receive the B. Sacrament. Know for certain that so
long as thou have a mind not to sin, and do confess thee of such sins
as shall come to thy remembrance* that thou art sufficiently prepared, to be
partaker of my Table.

And the same Author further says. I believe vndoutedl^, that in this manner
to receive the B. Body of Christ, is more available to the soul, then to be
present at an hundred Masses, or at an hundred Sermons. Yea he says further,
that some Doctors are of opinion: That he which receives the B. Sacrament but
once, being free from al mortal sin, obteineth more grace, then if he had
three times visited the holy Sepulcher. And that no man did ever communicate
in such estate, but that he was endued with most singular grace thereby: as
also with a special degree of charity which he had not before, although he
felt him self most dry, and void of al sensible devotion.

He adds moreover, three wonderful effects of this most B. Sacrament. The
first: That it transformeth the receiver into it self, Gal. 2.
so that he may say. I live, now not I, but Christ lives in me. The second
is: That it always brings new increase of grace and charity; in such sort,
that if a man had never before received any grace, this which now he receives
by only once communicating, is sufficient to bring him to everlasting life. For
which one cause, let no man permit him self, to be kept from frequenting this
venerable Sacrament. The third is: That al temptations both spiritual and
carnal, by virtue of this Sacrament, are assuaged and overcome, and that hereby
al our sins, both mortal and venial, are pardoned and quite forgotten.

Out of S. Dionysius Areopagita concerning Preparation.
SAint Dionysius Areopagita reduces this preparation into four heads, or
chapters. The first is: Thoroughly to clear our consciences from al spot of
sin, and to cleanse and sweep each corner of our sowles; for that the most
B. body of our Lord, is to be laid in a pure and undefiled vessel, and in a
new monument. To this purpose do especially belong, Confession, and a right
Intention.

The second is: To adorn our soul with virtues. And to this purpose Prayer
serves, which obtains whatsoever we crave. And also Charity, which
disposes our heart to feel the fervent love of our heavenly spowse Christ
JESUS.

The third is: To separate our selves from our selves, for our Lord will not
admit any riualls in his love, and so to mortify our senses and internal
appetites: which makes us to become crucified to the world, and the world
unto us.

The fourth is: To be stirred and raised up to a new kind of life, by resigning
all that we have into the hands of God, by thinkinge, speakinge, and
exercisinge al our actions wholly to his honor.

A Preparation out of S. Bonauenture.
1. FIrst, to recollect our minds by dilligent examination, and wassing our
consciences clean from al sin: at the least with the tears of the mind if
we can not of the body.

2. Secondly, to confess our sins, and to do penance for them.

3. Thirdly, attentively to meditate especially upon two things; First upon
the infinite greatness of almighty God. And next upon our own calamity and
misery.

4. Fourthly, how glorious a Lord he is: and how base and abject creatures we
are.

5. Fifthly, to remember how great the love of God is toward us, who with a
thing so vile and of no account, would so lovingly unite and conioyne him
self; and for a thing so contemptible and abject, would condescend to such
humility.

An other preparation out of the same Author.
1. FIrst call to thy remembrance, what work thou art now prepared to
undertake, to wit, to receive thy Savior and redeemer JESUS, both perfect God,
and perfect man, who suffered his most bitter passion, hanging for thy sins
al naked upon the tree of the Cross.

2. Secondly consider, who it is that undertakes this work. Thy self, a man,
and not a brute beast.

3. Thirdly, think that thou receiuest him, who is the Holy of all Holies,
and for that respect art to come unto him; (...) him self etc. Furthermore the
custom of the Church declares, that this examination is most behoueful and
necessary, so that no man being in mortal sin, have he never so great
contrition, ought to presume to come to the B. Sacrament, not first having
confessed his sins to a lawful Priest.

Heere-hence we may understand, that only mortal sin whereof we know our
selves guilty, not being purged by Confession, may keep us from receiving
this holy Sacrifice of the Altar. And again that Co^trition and Confession
are the wedding garments, where with whosoever is apparelled, may securely have
access to this heavenly ba^quet: the which is sufficient to remove many
scruples.

A Preparation out of the Roman Catechism.
THis B. Sacrament is called, Our daily bread, because either it is to be
received daily, or that we ought so to direct our lives, that we may daily be
worthy to receive it. The same author says. Let such men, as say that we
ought but seldom to frequent this Sacrament, hear and mark dilligently the
words of S. Ambrose. This bread is called our daily bread: why then come
thou to receive it after a year?

It is further noted, that before our Savior delivered his B. body to his
Apostles, although they were clean, yet that first he washed their feet:
thereby to show us, what great diligence and care we ought to use, to procure
integrity and innocence of mind, when we are to receive this sacred
mystery. For as the Ark of God (then the which nothing was ever more precious
amongst the children of Israel, and by the which they received most singular
benefits) being taken from them, brought unto the Philistians most greiueous
calamities, together with eternal reproach and infamy: so likewise this holy
Sacrament, has most contrary operations, in those that worthelie and
unworthily receive it; even as wholesome meats, which do nourish and comfort
the stomach well disposed, yet much offend the body filled with corrupted
humors. Whereupon S. Paul says. Therefore amongst you many are infirm, and
many sleep: 1. Cor. 11.
because they come unworthily to this sacred Table.

The same Author teaches us besides, that the first preparation that we are to
make, is, to discern table from table; that is the true heavenly food from
that which is counterfeit. The which we do, when firmly we believe to be
present, the real body, and blood of Christ; him whom the Angels adore in
heaven; at whose beck, the very heavens do tremble; and with whose glory,
both heaven and earth are replenished. And this is to discern the body of our
Lord, as the Apostle admonishes; the greatness of which mystery, we ought
rather to adore with humility, then vainly and curiously to search into.

An other preparation is there, of no less necessity, which is, that every
man call him self to a most strict account, whether truly, and unfeignedly he
love his neighbor. For if thou do find in thy self, the least hatred or
grudge against thy neigbour, this must thou wholly lay aside, and first
reconcile thy self unto him. Next if thy conscience accuse thee of any mortal
sin, it must be purged by Contrition and Conf^ssion.

Further we must remember how unworthy we are of so great a benefit. Therefore
often are we to repeat that saying of the Centurion, which was so highly
praised and commended of our Savior. Mat. 8.
Lord I am not vvorthie thou should enter, etc.

Also we must dilligently examine our selves, whether we may presume to use that
saying of S. Peter. John. 22.
Lord thou know that I love thee. For we must remember he which presumed to
come to the feast of our Lord, Matt. 22.
without his wedding garment, was adjudged to the torment of everlasting fire.

Nether is it sufficient, to use only the preparation of the mind, but also of
the body. For we must come to the B. Sacrament of the Altar fasting; in such
sort, that we nether eat nor drink any kind of sustenance, from the
midnight of the day before we come to receive. And such as be married, ought
also to have a reverent respect of so high a Sacrament.

Out of S. Thomas and S. Hillarie.
SAint Thomas, and S. Hillarie do in diverse places teach us, that only mortal
sin does bind us to refrain the B. Sacrament. And the same is taught in the
Council of Trent aforsaied.

A preparation out of Granatensis.
Three things required to receive benefit by the B. Sac. Purity of mind.
That we abstain from mortal sin, and be co^trite for those that are
committed. That we lay away al malice and auersion which we have conceived
against our brother: because this is the Sac. of perfect vnio^. That we have
our minds and bodies, free from al uncleanness: because we receive a body of al
integrity and pureness. That we e^deauour to avoid al venial sin, and wordly
thoughts: for that they hinder the fervor of devotion.
A true intention to receive. Not only for custom. Not to please men. Not to
seek only thy own consolation, but to receive thereby the true spirit of
Christ; that is, true love toward God and thy neighbor; profound humility;
and a fervent desire to suffer with Christ.
Actual devotion. To pray to God without distraction. To be devoutly and
spiritually affected toward Christ. To go to the B.S. with great reverence
and humility, as to the Son of God, the Creator of the world, and thy
Redemer. To receive this heavenly food with a longing desire, and spiritual
hunger; and to consider the infinite fruit and benefit thereof.
After thou have received. 1. First give thanks to almighty God, that it has
pleased him to enter into the habitation of thy soul. 2. Exercise some acts
of love, as spiritually embracing him, touching him, kissinge him, and humbly
beseeching him to make his abode with thee. 3. Lay open before him al thy
miseries and sorrows, al thy inspiratio^s and desires which thou have to serve
him: and crave humbly of him, that it would please him, to adorn the house of
thy soul with true virtues. 4. Use certain vocal prayers forth of the office
of our B. Lady. 5. Pass over and spend the day whereo^ thou receiuest, with
greater modesty and recollection then other days, least the fervor of thy
devotion do soon grow cold and decay.


REMEDIES AGAINST DIVERSE TEMPTATIONS, WHERE WITH THE DEVIL is accustomed to
trouble devout and godly persons, and such as do often frequent the B.
Sacrament:

Gathered OVT OF SUNDRY LEARNED writers; serving for all sorts of people, but
chiefly for such, as are more especially desierous, to lead a spiritual life.

TO THE READER.
THou have here courteous Reader diverse most profitable remedies, against
sundry temptations where with our ghostly enemy does daily lie in wait
to afflict, to tempt, and to overcome us: and especially those persons, who
contemning the allurements of the world and the flesh, have devoted them
selves to a spiritual life, placinge their chief endeauours, to subdue their
appetites, and to conquer their own passions. Read them therefore with great
attention, and no otherwise then if they were mest sovereign remedies for
such diseases, as afflict thy body both night and day. For if we consider how
much more precious our souls are then our bodies, we shall see good reason,
that we ought most carefully to seek out such preservatives, as may both cure
our present infirmities, and also prevent such, as may in time befall us.
Wherein if thou find any thing profitable to thy soul, give the only thanks
and praise to almighty God, and pray for him, who for the love of his divine
majesty and good of souls, bought with the precious blood of our Savior
Christ, has collected this treatise. To whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

WHAT THE DEVIL OUR GHOStlyenimie endeauoreth chiefly to hinder in us.
THERE is no one thing which the Devil our Ghostly enemy does more
maliciously practice, then by his subtleties to keep us from freque^ting the
holy Sacraments. For well does he find by experience, that nothing else does
so weaken the strength of his kingdom, and make frustrate his wicked and most
damnable attemptes. For therein we not only receive Sacramental grace, which is
of force to defend us from al assaults of the Devil: but also thereby we do
exercise such spiritual virtues, which do especially displease him, as faith,
hope, charity, humility, prayer, contempt of the world, resistance of sin,
not only mortal and the occasions thereof, but also of al venial, so far forth
as humane frailty may permit: and lastly are enabled thereby to perform al
those things, which our ghostly enemy does most of al detest. No marvel then
that he so busily labors, to hinder us from frequenting the holy Sacraments.

What impediments the Devil obiecteth to those that would frequent the B.
Sacrament.
1. THe first is, humane respect: wherein he uses the asista^ce of a certain
cruel Tirant, called, What vvil men say? they will say that I am become a little
Saint, an hypocrit, a dissembler, and such like. O how many does the enemy
withdraw from their good purpose, by this pretext and subtletie?

2. Secondly, he would put into man's minds, that such as will often frequent
the B. Sacrament, must of necessity give over al manner of recreations: and for
this cause presents before their eyes a most austere, and malancholy course
of life, thereby to terrify them from their good purposes; laboring in the
mean while, to keep secret by all means possible, that many who frequent this
Sacrament, have their minds less disqueited and are much more cheereful, then
ever they were in all their lives; and that some also are replenished with so
great joy and consolation, that they would not exchange their contentments with
any worldly Prince.

3. Thirdly, he sets before their eyes the high and excellent worthiness of
the most B. Sacrament, together with the baseness and unworthiness of such as
frequent it, and how thereby they are far unfit to receive it. And yet further
does he seek to withdraw the devout soul: for when by these means he cannot
hinder their good purposes, then does he object presumption unto them, and that
they pretend humility, which yet he persuades is nothing but pride; not
permitting us in the mean space to consider, that if we respect our own
dignity, we should not once in the year, or rather not once in our whole
life, be worthy to come to this holy Sacrament. And that it is unlike, that
the shirte thould be more pure, that is washed but once in the year, then that
which is duly washed once every week.

4. Fourthlie, he obiecteth that it is impossible for any to abstain so wholly
from sin, that they may worthelie repair so often to the B. Sacrament: ever
concealing, how many hereby are reclaimed from their vices, which before they
were accustomed daily to commit. He also labors to hide from them, that by
the benefit of this most heavenly food, a man is made more chaste, humble,
merciful, patient, a dispiser of wordly vanities, courageous to suffer
adversities for Gods cause, and more constant and perseuerant in all virtuous
exercises.

5. Fifthly he suggesteth into their minds many cauilles and doubts about the
B. Sacrament. As whether the very body of Christ be, or be not, really
present: and how it is there. And some persons he does so trouble with these
kinds of scruples, especially at the time when they are prepared to receive,
that they wholly refrain from cominge thereunto. In the mean time he
concealeth the admirable effects which daily happen by often frequenting the
same: for many, who before were blind in divine mysteries, receive their
sight: the deaf receive their hearing: the lame do walk cheerfully in the
way of our Lord: the Leapers, and such as are defiled with the sin of the
flesh, become chaste livers: and such as before were buried in deadly sin, had
now rather choose to die any corporal death, then wittingly to commit the least
offense. And whence proceeds this great alteration of the right hand of the
higest, if there be not the true humanity and divinity, of our Savior Christ
therein contained?

6. Sixthly, he obiecteth so many unclean thoughts and foul dreams,
especially the night before they come to the holy Communion, that thereby he
does afright many from frequenting the same. Whereupon we read that an ancient
Father, ever the night before he purposed to receive, had pollution of his
body; which he notinge in time to be a practice of the devil, would in despite
of his subteltie come to the holy Communion, and so after this, he ceased to
be troubled.

7. Seventhly he sets before their eyes the defectes and imperfections of
some that frequent the B. Sacrament, and by their disorderly living give
scandal unto others, never manifesting in the mean space, how miraculouslie
infinite numbers are thereby reclaimed. And by this example it should
consequently follow, that they should use nether wine, nor sword, knife, nor
any such necessary thing, because there be diverse persons that do abuse them.

8. Eighthly he obiecteth, that often frequenting the B. Sacrament, and overmuch
familiarity there with, bredeth in us a contempt. To which objection may well
be answered: that he which has not familiarity with God, has familiarity
with the devil, remembering that our Savior Christ says. He that is not with
me, is against me. And again if God will have us to call him Father, he will also
have familiarity betwixt him self and us. Whereupon it follows, that not all
familiarity causes contempt, but that only which is contracted betwixt men
subject to imperfections, by reason that men are wont to observe the
imperfections of others, for which defectes they often grow into contempt: but
in God who is perfection it self, no lest imperfection can be observed: and
therefore the B. Angels in heaven, which do always asiste and attend him
most familiarly, do also with all reverence adore and worship him.

Ten several temptations where with the Devil our ghostly enemy, is
accustomed to assault them principally, which do often frequent the holy
Sacraments.
When the devil can not hinder us from frequenting the holy Sacramte^s, then
endeauoreth he to afflict us, after several manners, but especially as follow.

1. The first temptation is, he will procure that such as frequent the
Sacraments be laughed at of others, and in way of derision be called Jesuits:
and also that they be vexed and molested by their familiars, who if they
perceive them sometime to be moved with any little anger, are straight ready to
exclaim and cry out against them, sainge. Lo this is he that does so often
communicate, and the like.

2. Secondly he obiecteth against us, that we are unworthy to approache so
often to the B. Sacrament. Against which objection a good Catholic may say:
that he frequenteth it often thereby to be made the more worthy of it. Besides
a man at such time is worthy, when he is in the grace and favor of God, which
grace he has, when he is truly confessed. For in Confession he receives that
wedding garment, where with being apparelled, he may come safely and securely
to this celestial Table. Again he may answer. That he frequenteth the B.
Sacrament thereby to please almighty God who inuiteth us to the same, (...)
ring therefore that this B. Sacrament is the principal and only good that can
be bestowed upon us, it were extreme folly, to omit to f^equent it, and yet
have a hope notwithstanding to do well. Herein we must imitate the prodigal
child, who being in extreme misery, said within him self: I will now
return home to my Father. Whereupon all things succeeded happily with him.

When the devil objected to S. Catherin of Sienna, that she was damned, and for
that respect, nether her prayers, nor other good works, could any thing
benefit her; she answered unto him: If I be damned, the^ will I do more good
deeds then ever I have done hitherto, each good work will I double; and so
much as possibily I can attain to, so much will I love God, I will ever adhere
unto him, and so long as it shall please him to lend me life in this world, I
will with all my strength labor to serve him, consideringe that in hell I cannot
love him, nor do any act that can be acceptable in his sight. And thus she
made the devil ashamed to tempte her.

5. Fifthly, he assayleth many men with sundry new temptations, which never
before they were accustomed to feel: which happens, either that they but
slightlie before resistinge them, did scarcely perceive them to be temptations;
or else, that it pleases God, to permit them to be tempted for their greater
good: For the Scripture says. Eccl. 34.
He that is not subie^t to temptation what knovveth he? And again. Eccl. 2.
My son cominge to the service of God, stand in fear, and prepare thy thy
mind for temptations. 2. Tim. 2.
And S. Paul say h. None s^al be crowned, but he that shall ^^ghte lavvfully.
Wherefore it is a good sign, when one the oftener he frequenteth the B.
Sacrament, happens so much the more to be assaulted with temptations.

6. Sixthly; he obiecteth to our memories, our household cares, and business; and
such things as may principally hinder our deu^tions, to which we may thus
answer. The greater occasions we have to entangle our selves with worldly
affairs, the greater need we have of Gods divine asistance.

7. The s^uenth temptation is, the fear of vain glory, or of reproachful
speech, when a man shall know him self to be commended or dispraised. Against
the first we may aptly answer with

10. Tenthdly, he makes some persons most scrupulous and full of doubts, as
though they never ^ad made their Confession sufficien^^, but had always
omitted some sin or other, not having plainly enough laid ^pen their
consciences to ^h^r ghos^ly Father By which means he ^ft n d^^r ueth these who
receive the B. Sacram^nt, of certain special effects, to wit, p ^ce of soul
and spiritual cons^lation. And when they ought to be cheerful and replenished
with joy, having now received their Lord into their house (as we read in the
Scripture of good Zacheus) by these temptations of their ghostly enemy, Iuc.
19.
they still remain full of sorrow and heaviness, still thinking they have omitted
some thing in their Confession: whereupon arises in them much disordinate
grief and pusillanimitie; and incredible toil and wearisomnes to their
ghostly Father. For remedy of which temptation, th^se documents followinge are
duly to be considered.

THE 1. DOCVMENT.
1. Having taken sufficient time of examining thy conscience, then to make thy
Confession, and so confidently to hope, that al thy sins are remitted by the
grace and mercy of our Savior JESUS; yea even those which are secret and
unknown, and which thou did not remember in Confession. And hereof to make
no manner of doubt.

THE 2. DOCVMENT.
2. To consider, that one manner of preparation is requisite for such as
confess but once in the year: an other for those who are confessed monthly:
an other for weekly: and an other for such as confess every other day. For
unto such a short time will be sufficient.

THE 3. DOCVMENT.
3. That no man is bound to confess his venial sins, except he have some
cause to doubt, whether they be venial, or mortal. So often therefore as a man
finds not his conscience guilty of any mortal sin, if he can not
conveniently provide a ghostly Father, he may securely approache to the B.
Sacrament.

THE 4. DOCVMENT.
4. Although no man is bound to confess his venial sins, yet is it most
expedient to confess them. First because new grace is thereby obtained.
Secondly for that it causes us she more easily to amend our lives. And lastly
for that it is a means, that the pain due to venial sin, is the sooner
remitted. Thus far S. Thomas. And according to Palludanus, a good custom to
confess our venial sins, makes us the better able to abstain from them.

THE 5. DOCVMENT.
5. In the manner of confessing, and for the expressing the number and
circumstances of our sins, it shall be good to follow the advice and
direction of a ghostly Father, who has had experience and trial of our
conscience. Also when a man shall think he ought to make his confession, and
his ghostly Father shall tell him that he may receive without confession, let him
securely approache to the B. Sacrament. For he gains thereby both what he had
gained by confession, and much more besides; both for the more obedience which
he has showed unto his ghostly Father, as also for the conquest which he has
made over his own will. Also he gains not a little by his faith, in believing
that whatsoever therein is said unto him by his ghostly Father, is said unto
him by God; So that he may conceive in his heart these joyful words to be
spoken unto him. Thy faith has made the whole.

THE 6. DOCVMENT.
6. Even as nothing is more easy for a man that has not the fear of God,
then daily to fall into most greueous sin: so is it most hard for him to
sin greueously, who had rather die then to commit a mortal offense. He
therefore that is armed with such a resollutio^, should not lightly believe that
he had sinned mortallie.

THE 7. DOCVMENT.
7. When a man finds his conscience to accuse him of no mortal but only
venial sins, he is not bound to confess every one by name, but only some
certain; and of other in general, to acknowledge him self to have sinned. And
so are al his venial sins remitted, according to Siluester in Summa.

THE 8. DOCVMENT.
8. Two things are wont principally to trouble spiritual men. That is,
Thoughts, and Detractions. Concerning the first we must understand, that
every evil thought is not a sin, but only such as we yeald consent unto. And
it is a sign that we give no consent, when such a thought does displease us,
and we unwilling to entertain it: having our mind so disposed, that we had
rather to suffer death, then to commit a mortal sin. Touching the second, we
must know, that when a man without any intention to hurt (thorough a certain
loosenes of speech, or other cause) shall speak any ill concerning his
neighbor, that he does not sin mortally, but either venially, or perhaps
not at al; although there ensue some discredit to the party, provided that it
be not in any public manner, according to Fumus in Armilla.

THE 9. DOCVMENT.
9. Although that every person which desiereth to profit in a spiritual course
of life, ought carefully and with his whole power to endeavor as much as in
him lies, to refrain from the smalest venial sin that may be committed (for
according to the general opinion of al Doctors and learned men, we ought rather
to permit the whole world to decay then willingly to commit the lest venial
sin) yet so often as thoroughe humane frailty we fall thereinto, we ought
not to vex and afflicte our selves, but with humility to be sorry, with full
purpose never to commit the same again; and so having asked pardon of God, to
queit our minds. And here we must understand that there be two several sorts
of venial sins: the one which willingly and wittingly we fall into: and this
sin ought we most carefully to eschew, for that it makes us apt to fall
into deadly sin, and brings great danger and peril to our souls. The other
sin is that, which thorough frailty, ignorance, and inconsideration we
commit: and into this sin does God permit us to fall, both thereby to humble
our selves under his ho^ie hand, and to make us remember our own baseness and
unworthiness, and for some other causes only known to his divine wisdom. Of
these speaks the Scripture where it says: Pro. 24.
The just man falls 7. times in one day and rises again.

THE 10. DOCVMENT.
10. It is expedi^nt that he which goes to Confession often in the week, be
short and not tedious, as well to avoid occasion of scrupulositie, as also
that thereby convenient time may be allowed to the ghostly Father to instruct
him; and besides to give good example to others, and place to such as are
likewise to be confessed: who otherwise are wont to marvel with them selves,
and sometimes to say. What cause can he have that goes so often to Confession,
to be so tedious unto his ghostly Father?

NECESSARY DIRECTIONS touching Confession, out of sundry authors, and first
out of Petrus Damianus.
1. IF thou have a purpose to amend thy life, and wilt do penna^ce for thy
sins, make choice of a discreet, and sufficient ghostly Father, to who^ thou
may have a refuge in all thy temptations, behoulding as it were God in him,
and in him having recourse unto God.

2. When thou have made choice of thy ghostly Father, use none other without
his consent and license.

3. Thou must not desire easy or light penance; for thereby thou shall
deceive thy self; considering what far greater penance is done in Purgative.

4. Thou must not confess thy sins for fear; for that were in some sort,
no voluntary Confession.

5. Thou must not excuse thy self in thy Confession; for that were not to
confess, but to excuse thy faults.

6. Thou must not accuse others; for that were not to confess, but to offend.

7. Thou must not confess because thou would be held good and virtuous; for
that were but illusion, and no confession.

What things are to be observed in Confession.
WE must observe that which the Prophet David says in the psalm: Psalm. 31.
I have said, I vvil confess against my self my iniquity to our Lord, and
thou have remitted the guilte of my sin.

First, when he says (I vvil confess) he shows a true and firm purpose to
tell and confess his sins.

2. When he says (I vvil confess) he shows that we ought to confess our
sins, and not to trifle, to laughe, or to play.

3. When he says (to our Lord) he declares that they which go to
Confession, ought not to go as to a man, but as to God; and therefore not to be
ashamed to reveal any sin whatsoever, considering that nothing can be hid
from him.

4. When he says (my iniquity) he shows that they do ill, who praise the^
selves and say, I have not stolen, I have not committed adultrie, and the like.

5. When he says (against my self) he shows that we ought not to reveal
in confession, the sin of any other person.

Certain Admonitions to direct us to make our Confession a right.
BEcause few men know how to make their Confession rightly, let him that will
learn it, observe these Admonitions followinge.

THE 1. ADMONITION.
First before thou go to Confession, thou must bestow some time in examining
thy conscience, especially if it be long since thou wast at confession: and
thou must imagine that thou have in hand a matter of so great waighte and
exceeding moment, which must be preferred before al other business. For if
thorough negligence any one mortal sin be omitted, the whole confession is
void, and to be made a new.

THE 2. ADMONITION.
Thou must tell the number of thy mortal sins, or else thy Confession will not
be perfect. And thou must tell them in as true an order as thou can; either how
long time thou have used to commit that sin, or else to say, that thou have
committed it so often, as occasion has been given unto thee to fall into it.

THE 3. ADMONITION.
Thou must tell the circumstances; as if thou have stolen to some other evil
end, as to commit murder, or the like. If thou have desiered the unlawful
company of a woman, whether she were a wife, a widdowe or else a virgin. If
thou have sinned in a Church. If by ouerthwarting speech, thou have provoked
others to sin. If thou have sinned in the presence of others with scandal, as
in eatinge of flesh upon forbidden days: or if thou be of authority, whereby
others take example by thee, etc. If thou have made any vow, not to swear,
not to commit adultery, etc. and have broken the same.

THE 4. ADMONITION.
The number of thy sins being laid open, together with the circumstances, it
shall suffice for the r^st to declare the kind of the sin without any
historical narration; as if thou have sworn, or have stolen, then to say, I
have sworn so many times, I have stolen, I have committed, adultery thus
often. And it is not necessary particularly to deliver in what manner thou have
committed these sins, but it shall suffice te say: Thus often I have committed
adultery; thus often I have lied, etc. If thou have sinned in unchaste
touching, it shall suffice to say: I have immodestly touched thus often, a
person of such or such a quality, not naminge the place, or manner how. If thou
have spoken dishonest words, they are not particularly to be repeated, but it
suffices to say: I have spoken dishonest speeches, so many times, to such an
end. If thou have sinned in thought, to say, I have thus often given consent to
unclean thoughts, declaring of what kind the thought has been.

THE 5. ADMONITION.
Thou must know that evil thoughts, are mortal sins, when consent is yielded
unto them, or when thou will take delighte in them, although thou will not
actually commit them. Into which thoughts vicious livers are most prone to
fall, and such as do inordinately love any creature.

THE 6. ADMONITION.
Thou must beware that thou do not defame any person in thy confession; and
therefore thou must never name the person with whom thou have sinned.

THE 7. ADMONITION.
Thou must nether excuse thy sins nor yet make them greater then they are,
nor deliver uncertain for certain, nor yet certain for uncertain.

THE 8. ADMONITION.
Thou must be careful to get a skilful Physician for thy soul, even as thou
would be to get one for thy body in time of sickness; and so much the more
careful, by how much the soul is more precious then the body.

Certain causes wherein the Confession is void and of no effect.
1. FIrst when either for shame, or of purpose, any mortal sin is left
unconfessed.

2. When in confession any lie is told in any matter of weight and mortal
sin, knowinge it to be so.

3. If a mortal sin be ommitted thoroughe negligent preparation.

4. If the penitent have not a full purpose, to refrain from some kind of
mortal sin.

5. If he be excommunicated, and seek not first to be absolved.

6. If the penitent, having matter to confess of any great moment, shall
purposly choose a ghostly Father simple and ignorant.

What the causes ^e that hinder many from goinge to Confession.
1. FIrst shame to lay open their sins. Against which is a remedy, that our
ghostly Father is there in the place of almighty God, to whom al things are
known, and that in the day of judgment al secrets shall be openly revealed.

2. The fear of penance. Against which is to be opposed the eternal pains of
hell.

3. A doubt least by opening our sins we be esteemed to be evil livers, or by
satisfaction receive some loss in our temporal estate. Against which we may
oppose the loss of heavenly treasures.

4. Despair, that we shall not be able to refrain those sins we have
accustomed to commit, especially of incontinencie. Against which is to be
opposed, a firm purpose and resolution to sin no more: the grace which is to
be received in the Sacrament: and the devout prayers of our Confessor.

Origenes says. Attend carefully to whom thou do confess thy sins:
search out a Physician for thy soul, that can be sick with the diseased,
weep with those that lament, and know how to have compassion on the
afflicted. If he be a skilful and merciful Physician, then follow his advice
and council; and although sometime he minister a sharp or bitter potion, yet
think that he does it the sooner to restore thee to thy perfect health.

Saint Hierom says. If that serpent the devil, does secretly bite one, and
he does conceal it and not tell it his Physician, he shall never recover his
health: for physic will not cure him who will not receive it.

Saint Ambrose affirms, that a christian concealinge his sins, is like
unto to Fox that lies lurkinge in his cave, to d^ceiue and beguyle others.

Petrus ^lesensis writes, that sick men that be wise, will not be ashamed to
discover their infirmities, even in the most privy part of their bodies: and
wilt not thou disclose to thy ghostly Father the infirmity of thy soul?

S. Augustine says. As an impostume being launced cease to swell, and
whereby the body auoidinge corruption recouereth health: so he that opens the
soars of his soul by Confession, does also recover the health thereof.

The fruits of Confession.
1. IT remitteh sin.

2. It brings grace.

3. It changes eternal pains into temporal.

4. It takes away part of our temporal pains.

5. It restrains the mind and queiteth the conscience.

6. It recouereth spritual benefits lost.

7. It makes us contrite, being before but attrite.

8. It restores health to the soul.

9. It makes Paradise to rejoice.

10. It gayneth the communion of Saints.

11. It always learneth some good from our ghostly Father.

12. It makes sorry our ghostly enemy.

13. It delights our Guardian Angel.

A form of Confession for such as do often frequent the B. Sracrament.
IT is very necessary that the penitent observe that form of Confession
which, shall be prescribed unto him by his ghostly Father: even as in matters
concerning the health of our bodies, we are careful to follow the prescript of
our Physician; especially considering our Physician may err, and often erreth
in the medicines he prescribes: but God (as witnesses that holy woman S.
Brigit) does not easily permit our ghostly Father to err, in matte^s
concerning our soul. Now the general rule here in may be, that the penitent
first accuse him self of the sins of the heart, to wit, of al his evil
thoughts, rash judgments, unlawful desires, unjust suspicions, and malice,
with other sins of the like nature and quality. Secondly, of the sins
which have past his mouth, as of lies, and untruths, deliueringe whether they
have been spoken advisedly or unadvisedly; and of al his idle words,
detractions, etc. Thirdly, of the watch and custody of his senses. Fourthly
of his deeds and actions according to his degree and vocation. Fifthly, that he
has not loved God above al things, nor his neighbor as him self. That he
has not been so thankful to God as he ought to be, for all such benefitts as he
has received of him. And that he comes not to the Sacraments, with due
reverence and devotion: and the like.

As for example.
Having made the sign of the Cross, and said the Confiteor unto Ideo
precor, then if time permit, to say. Father I confess my fault, or I accuse
my self, that I have been very negligent and careless, in resistinge evil
thoughts of sundry sorts, and that I have not exercised my mind in devout
and holy cogitations, nor carried that humble opinion of my self that I ought.

I accuse my self that I have not carefully brideled my tongue, but have
uttered many vain, idle, and unprofitable speeches. Likewise I have not spoken
so charitablie of my neighbor as I ought, and as I would have others to have
spoken of me. I have not had that compassion upon others defectes and wantes as
I have had over mine own. Nor have carried that reverend respect toward the
presence of God, and my good Angel as I ought.

I also confess that I have not governed my senses, especially my sight so
carefully as I ought. Nor have taken from my self and others so nere as I
could, al occasions of offendinge God.

I confess that I have not directed al my actions with so sincere an intention
to the honor of God as I ought. Nor have corected and admonished my family as
I ought. In many occasions I have yealded too much to my passions of anger, and
impatience. Nether have I taken such crosses as have happned unto me, as laid
upon me by the hand of God, but easily have suffered my self to be troubled
with them.

Finally I accuse my self, that I nether have loved my Lord God with all my
heart, nor my neighbor as my self. Nor have yielded due, thanks to God for all his benefitts hitherto bestowed upon me: and cheeflie for that he has with
so great love, given him self unto me. Lastly I accuse my self, for that I
have not received such benefit and fruit, by the holy Sacraments as I ought.
Ideo precor, etc.

A form of Confession for such as doubt whether they have made a perfect and
full Confession.
FIrst having confessed briefly all such sins as he remembers, let him say.
And of al my sins both mortal and venial: known and unknown: as well great
as small: which I have done, said, or thought: by work, word, or heart:
against God, my neighbor, or my self: thoroughe frailty, malice, or
omission: from the time that first I had use of reason, even until this
present: I confess my fault, my great fault, my most greueour fault. And I am
heartily sorry that I have not come to this holy Sacrament, with so great
reverence as I ought: nor have had so great sorrow and contrition for my
sins as I ought. Most humbly crauinge of almighty God, that thorough the
precious blood of my Lord and Savior JESUS Christ, he will supply al such
defectes as I have committed, in this or any other my former Confessions. And
also of you my ghostly Father, that for my sins you will enjoin me penance,
and give me absolution, and pray to our Lord God for me a most wretched sinner.

An other more brief form.
ALthough whatsoever has been hitherto said, has been necessary, and
prositable for scrupulous consciences: nevertheless such as confess often in
the week, should for the fore-alledged reasons, be much more short and brief
in their Confessions, and to give credit to their ghostly Father, perswadinge
them selves, that he would not omit to enquire farther, if he thought it
necessary. And as the Penitent ought confidently to come to receive the B.
Sacrament, not having been confessed, if so he be commanded by his ghostly
Father, and find his conscience clear from al mortal sin, so ought he
likewise duly to observe and use such form of Confession, as he shall be
directed by his Confessor.

As for example.
FIrst to accuse him self of such sins as he shall sinde his conscience to
accuse him of, and then to crave Absolution. As to say: Since my last
Confession I accuse my self, that once I have told an untruth. Thrice I have
detracted my neighbor. Often I have been suddenly angry, etc. Also I have
been negligent in resisting evil thoughts. I have not loved God, and my
neighbor as I ought. I have not conformed my will, to the will of God. I have
not been so thankful as I ought for all his benefitts bestowed upon me. I have
not gouerred my senses (especially my eyes) as I ought. Of al which, and of
many other sins, the which I fear I have committed, but do not now
remember, I accuse my self, and most humbly crave of you my ghostly Father,
that you will give me Absolution and pray for me.

A rule for such who lately have been Confessed: especially when as many others
are also to be Confessed, as it often happens on principal feasts.
WHen one who accustometh often to go to Confession, has been confessed but
the day before he need not again be confessed the day followinge, except the
ghostly Father has otherwise appointed him. But if he will be confessed, let
him declare, if it maybe eue^ in one word that which troubles his conscience,
that others who are to be confessed, may have convenient time and place.

That he which accustometh to receive often, if for want of a Confessor, or
for that his Confessor does think it expedient, he can not be confessed; yet
he ought not to be troubled or grieved in his mind, or reframe to come to the
B. Sacrament, according to the example of S. Mechtildis.
THis B. woman S. Mechtildis, having one day purposed to receive the B.
Sacrament, and for want of a Confessor being greatly troubled, with anguishe of
mind, began to recount to her self, al her sins and negligences: and being
full assured that they were forgiven her, she yealded hearty thanks to her Lord
and Savior, from whom she received answer as follows. Even as he which
expects the cominge of some great Prince, does forthwith make clean each
part of his house, that nothing ^ppeare to offend his eyes: but when he
understands he is so nere at hand, that he cannot void and carry the
soullage forth, he hides it in some corner, until he may more conveniently
remove it away, so when thou have a desire and will to confess thy sins, and
a purpose never to commit them again, they are so far removed from my sight,
that I never after at any time remember them.

Remedies and Documents for such scrupulous persons who think they never have
rightly confessed their sins out of Johannes Ruisbruchio a devout and
learned Docter.
I Counsel thee (says he) as nere as thou can, to avoid long and tedious
Confessions, for that they disturb the peace and queit of thy mind, and fill
thee with all manner of doubts and scruples. And know this for a truth; that if
in thy Confession thou shall use many unnecessary words and circumstances, as
in particular to confess every venial sin, thinking thereby to queit and
ease thy conscience, and not rather resting thy self upon the mercies of
almighty God, that thou art not partaker of the illuminations of God, nor
meet to be instructed by his divine Majesty; and so never shall be able to
distinguishe and discern between great and small offenses.

Farther if any sin which thou do accustom to confess, shall by chance
slip forth of thy remembrance, here with shall thou find thy self much
perplexed, and think that thou (...) not made a right Confession.

Out of the same Author.
OF al thy venial offenses (from which no man that lives in this world can be
free) confess thy self in as few words as thou can, and only in a
generality, carringe still within thee a purpose to do well, and to abstain
from al sins both mortal and venial, as much as lies in thy power.

Again out of the same.
THe principal foundation of sanctify and holiness, is Purity of conscience,
which easily thou may attain, by dilligent examination and calling thy
self to an account. And if at any time thou find thy self guilty, of
mortal, or of any great veni^l sin, presently confess thy self, and after
rest assured that it is forgiven thee. Often therefore liftinge up thy mind to
God, accustom to say. God be merciful unto me a sinner.

Out of Johannes Taulerus.
Concerning venial sins (from which no man is free) be not over careful
although thou do not confess every one by it self; for it suffices if
with Contrition thou ask pardon of God for them, and so shall thou not be
tedious to thy ghostly Father. For it is enough to confess them in general,
being bound to confess in particular, only mortal. For from venial sins we
may many ways free our selves: as by Contrition; saying the Pater noster;
taking devoutly holy water, and by bowinge our knees humbly before almighty
God; with the like.

Remedies for such as doubt whether they have true Contrition or not: out of
the same Author.
IF thou want true Contrition, be heartily sorry that thou do not feel it
in thee as thou desierest, and it is sufficient. Also if thou find not in
thy self that desire and love, which thou would have toward almighty
God, wish heartily to have it, and so rest contented.

When thou have confessed thy mortal sins, with humility leave the rest unto
God. And if any remorce of conscience yet do follow thee, resign thy self
unto his divine will, until it shall please him to set thee free.

Thou must believe thy ghostly Father, supplying the place of God, as thou
would believe God him self. And therefore thou ought to set a side al
scruples of conscience, whether thou have made a full Confession or no, putting
thy confidence in God who will never deceive thee.

A remedy for such as doubt weather God has remitted there sins, or not.
ALthough (says Taulerus) the mother sometime forgets her Son, yet can
not God be forgetful of us. And so great is his mercy toward us, that no
sooner is flax consumed, being cast into a fiery furnace, then God forgiueth
our sins when we be truly contrite for them: and so good is he, that
whatsoever he has once remitted, he never after lays against us.

And Henericus Susius says, that God is so merciful, that no mother be she
never so tender affected, does so readily stretch her hand to her own child,
lyinge in the flames of burning fire, as God stretches his hand to a sinner
that is penitent and contrite, although he have sinned an hundred times in one
day.

A remedy for him that is overmuch oppresed with sorrovve, for his sins
past.
Saint Augustine teaches, that a man ought to be sorry when he remembers his
sins: but yet that he ought again to take comfort of the same sorrow.

Saint Bernard says, that God respects not what a man has been in times
past, but what he is now, and what he desiereth to be hereafter. And if it be
true, that God (as it is said before) be so ready and willinge to pardon our
sins, and forget al our offenses, (as it was manifest in S. Peter, S. Paul,
S. Marie Magdalen and others) how great is the consolation which we may justly
take in so good and merciful a Lord?

Remedies for such as are troubled with unclean thoughts, out of sundry
authors; and first out of that learned Doctor Henericus Susius.
Know thou, that being tempted with unclean thoughts, yet thou never
committest sin, except thou yeald thy volu^tarie consent unto the suggestion:
so that if thou should have thy mind continually troubled, with such
abominable and detestable cogitations, as nether heart could conceive, nor
tongue could utter, and this should continue for two or three years together,
thy will and reason still resisting the temptation, thou should not thereby
any ways offend, and therefore should not be bound at al to confess them.

An other for the same out of Taulerus.
I Beseech thee (says he) be of good courage and comfort of mind, only
endeavor to expel them, and they shall never hurt thee; reason not, nor argue
with them, answer them not, nor make any account of them, but turn thee unto
our Lord and Savior with all thy heart.

A Remedy for such as are doubtful of them selves, for that thy have received
some little delighte in unclean thoughts: out of the same.
IF any unclean thought chance to enter thy mind, wherein thou did receive
some little delight or pleasure, and thorough forgetfu^nes, thou did not
presently suppress it, so that thou art doubtful, whether thou gave consent
to the delight or not, and so might commit some mortal sin; in this case
never think that thou have given thy consent, for then the delectation of the
pleasure is so imperfect, that some space of time does pass before it is
perceived: wherefore he that is timorous of conscience need not to fear, that
he has consented therein; for according to Saint Augustine, a sin is so
voluntary, that if it be not voluntary, it is not sin.

Remedies for such as are doutful in their minds whether they have yealded full
consent to unclean thoughts and temptations.
1. FIrst let us dilligently mark, whether such temptations, when firist they
assaulted us, have with full advertisement been pleasinge unto us or not: or
whether we have abhorred them, and detested them: for if we have utterly
detested them, then may we be certain, not to have consented unto them.

2. Secondly if we find in our selves such a disposition, as rather to dye,
then to consent to sin, or to take therein delight or contentement: then also
may we be sure not to have yielded our consent.

3. Thirdly let us plainly lay open our consciences to our ghostly Father, and
confidently believe as he shall advise us.

Remedies to drive away unclean thoughts.
1. THe first is, ever as nere as we may to have our minds busied with good
and devout thoughts, but especially of the passion of our Lord and Savior
JESUS.

2. The second, to restrain and bridle our senses, especially our eyes, our
tongue, and our hearing.

3. The third, to remove away the occasion of those things, which stir up
evil thoughts in us.

4. The fourth, to read devout and spiritual books.

5. The fifth, not to dispute or argue with such evil thoughts when they come
to our minds, but queitly to contemn them.

6, The sixte, if any shall vow Chastity, it will be very requisite, so often
as any such evil thoughts shall trouble their minds, presently to renew their
purpose which they vowed, which is an act of exceeding great merit.

7. The seventh, to commend our selves to the protection of the B. virgin
Marie, to our Guardian Angel; to all the B. virgins; and to all the glorious
Saints in Paradise.

8. The eight, earnestly to crave the help and asistance of God, who is at al
times present to those that call upon him. Who can, and will in all our
adversities, help us, and desiereth that we should continually call upon him.

9. The ninthe, at such times as unclean thoughts shall trouble our minds,
then to accustom to rehearse some such saying of holy Scripture as these
which follow.

Inclyne v^ my aid o God, o Lord make haste to ^lpe me.

From the dee^ ^^es I have cried unto thee o Lord hear my ^oyce.

Create in me a ^ane heart o God.

Son of David have mercy on me.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Christ does overcome, Christ does reign, Christ does rule: Christ defend me
from al peril and danger.

Help me, o Lord God depart not from me, incline unto my aid o my God,
defend me from my most potent enemies and from those that hate me.

10. The tenth, it is good to bless our selves with the sign of the Cross
upon our breasts, saying JESUS Maria. And O God inclyne unto mine aid, at
the least in our mind.

11. The eleventh, to confess and receive often, and plainly to lay open our
hearts to our ghostly Father, following his direction and counsel.

12. The twelueth, to meditate what our Savior Christ does at that instant.

13. The thirtenth, to imagine that Christ is now suffering his passion for us,
crowned with thorns, al bloody, and saying: behold what pains I here
suffer for thee; see with what price I have bought and redeemed thee.

14. The fourtenth, it helps us much to say and auerre to our selves, that we
will not consent to such unclean thoughts.

14. The fifteenth, always to auert our minds from such thoughts, or else to
be busied in some good exercise, and above al things to avoid idleness.

Why almighty God permits us to be troubled with unclean thoughts.
1. THe first cause is, that thereby we may endeavor to get an habit of
chastity.

2. The second, that we may detest al uncleanness.

3. The third, that with S. Paul, we may remain humble.

4. The fourth, that we may always live in fear of our selves.

5. The fifth, that we may acknowledge our own frailty and want of strength.

6. The sixth, that we may eschwe al occasions of unclean thoughts.

7. The seventh, that we may know, that we always stand in need of Gods
grace.

8. The eight, that we may purge our souls, from the like sins already
committed.

9. The ninth, that we persevere in prayer, and continually call for the holy
help of God and his Saints.

10. The tenth, that we may merit the greater glory in heaven.

11. The eleventh, to shame our ghostly enemy who daily assaulteth us.

12. The twelueth, to comfort our Guardian Angel, with our continual victory.

13. The thirteenth, that we may take comp^ssion on others afflicted with the
like temptations.

14. The fourtenth, that we may instruct and strengthten others in the like
temptations.

15. The fiftenth, that we may consider the greatness of our own danger, and
thereby unite our selves to God, by fi^^ quenting his holy Sacraments.

16. The sixtenth, that we may learn to know whether the grace of God remain
in us or no, which makes (...) detest such unclean thoughts, and to resist
them when they shall assault us.

17. The seuententh, that we may ^^ceiue consolation in ouercoming su^^
temptations, and become more capable ^f the grace of God.

18. The eightenth, that we may be made like unto the Saints, as unto Saint
Paul and others.

19. The nintenth, that God may daily exercise us as courageous soldiers.

20. The twentieth, that God may show how much he loves us, and how great ^
care he continually has of us, as of his most beloved children and dearest
frende^.

REMEDIES FOR SVCH, AS fall often in some imperfections, and thereby receive
great trouble of mind.
TAulerus says, that thou may think that the B. Apostles who were so
dear to Christ, did often fall into sundry imperfections, and that God often
permits them to slide whom he loves most, nether does any for the most part
attain to the height of perfection, that have not sometime fallen into some
great defect. And when thou chauncest thorough frailty to fall, presently
turn thee to God with all thy love and endeavor, and with a deep dislike,
d^test thine offense, be it never so small, because that it is committed
against the divine will of God, much more then for all the punishment, shame, or
pain which is due to such a sin.

This done, then turn thy self unto almighty God, with a firm resolution
ever to withstand the same. For (as Taulerus says) a great indignation
conceived against our selves, joined with a purpose to sin no more, and with
a true conversion unto almighty God, and firm confidence in his most bitter
passion and charity, is true and acceptable penance.

A remedy for such as find some defectes in them selves which they think
they cannot amend, and therein are afflicted.
SAint Gregory says, that our Lord God does sometimes deny small petitions
to some, to whom of his bounty he gives greater; and to such as he gives
grace to overcome great sins, to those he gives not the same, to conquer
their lesser frailties, as overmuch laughinge, intemperate mirthe, sudden
choler; and the like: that thereby they may have occasion to give greater
honor to God, thorough whose grace when they have overcome so great monsters,
as are mortal sins, yet can they not overcome so small Antes as are venial
sins, and so have cause the more to humble them selves.

Taulerus says, that God does sometime permit, that his most chos^n
servants, be not free from small imperfections, as sudden passion, choler,
hasty speech, and such like, thereby to give them occasion to preserve their
humility. Therefore may these defectes rightly be compared to imbers, or ashes
wherewith the fire of the love of God is more securely preserved: for which
respect, we ought nether for such imperfections to be terrified, nor despair,
but wholly to humble our selves before God, and so shall we ever gain increase
of his grace.

The cause why some fallinge into particular d^fe^tes are overmuch afflicted
thereby: with remedies for the same.
SOme parsons having fallen into some small def^c^e^ and imperfections, find so
great a tor^^nt and perturbation in their mind^s, that they r^ceiue greater
hurt by such ve^^tion, then thoroughe the def^ct it self. And b^c^us^ it is
the property of sin to torment the conscience, they thorough this remorce,
are so perplexed in their mi^^ies, that their hearts are quite dejected with
excess of sorrow; whereby being ever disqueited and destitute of heavenly
comfort, they become wholly faint and feeble, and loose that courage which
they were wont to have, in directinge their actions to Gods ho^^^ and glory.

And this often chances thorough a certain secret pride, which makes a man
to think, that he is worthy to be five and delivered of such imperfections.
But an humble man thinks altogether contrary, and that it is no strange
thing, his own weakness considered, to fall into many defaultes and errors.
Sometimes this happens also thorough pusillanimitie, when we do not ^ightly
consid^r the great grace of our redemption, nor use the remedies which our most
merciful Savior, by the virtue of his passion has left unto us.

The chief remedy therefore is, to consider the great goodness of our Lord and
Sau^our, and ever to fix our minds on the hope of his infinite mercy, who has
so abundantly satisfied for our sins, and for the sins of the whole world.
What distrust therefore can we have, under the wings of so merciful a redeemer?
What penance can we do, or what satisfaction can God receive from us, greater
then the s^tisfaction of his only Sonn^? Considering that any sat^s^^ctio^
whats^eu^r which lies in us to p^rf^rme, has the original and force* from
that ^f his. And what are the sins of all the world, compared with Christ's
meritts, but as the least chip, in respect of a fire of infinite greatness?

An answer to an objection.
But such an one will say, that he does daily fall into diverse defectes, and
never does truly amend them, for which cause he does much distrust him self.
To which objection may be answered, that he might have just cause to fear, if
Christ had not suffered his passion, and died for the sins which are daily
committed: but considering that he was crucified for all sins past, and to
come, there is no cause for such an one to fear, or in any sort to distrust in
his mercy.

An answer to an other objection.
SOme other will s^y, considering they daily receive many benefitts from
almighty God, that they are stricken with great fear, in regard of their
daily fall into several sins. But this objection may be answered. That as
the malice of man is in no one thing more made manifest, then that he
receiving daily benefitts from almighty God, no^withstanding proceeds to
heap sin* upon sin: so in nothing does the goodness of God more clearly
appear, then that he continually powers down new benefitts and graces upon
us, who never cease to redouble our offenses against him.

In this case, we should behave our selves like to a certain servant, who
although most faithful and trusty, yet not well experie^ced in his chardge,
having a loving and favorable master, and happily committing some offense
against him: although on the one side he be sorry for his fault, and willingly
would not for any thing have committed the same; yet on the other side
remembering the mildenes of his masters nature, is greatly comforted to consider
with him self, that as before, so now again he shall be pardoned and forgiven,
and so humbles him self making a full purpose and resolution, never after to
commit the like: even so we, acknowledging our sins and offenses, ought
heartily to be sorry and contrite for them, resolving never to commit them
after. And in steed of sorrow rising of this fear, we ought to rejoice, having
a firm considence in the mercy of God, and so to comfort and content our
selves.

Futhermore, as we see that of the most venomous and poisoning Viper, a
preservative is made against the strongest poison: so of our sins (considered
and thought on as before said) we ought to make a remedy against al venom of
sin, and so to blind and put out the eyes of our ghostly enemy, with his
own weapons where with he assa^lteth us, taking occasion thereby to love God
the more, and with greater diligence, to avoid the occasion of sin. And so
shall we gain two principal virtues, to wit, profound humility, and perfect
charity. For as our defectes and imperfections; will give us occasion to see our
own misery, and thereby also to humble our selves: so patience, longanimitie,
and the great willingness of God to pardon our sins, rendering unto us good for
evil, gives us just cause the more to love and worship him.

An other Remedy.
WE must know that there are two sorts of venial sins, differing the one
from the other. For some persons sin wholly against their wills and purposes,
other thorough infirmity, or negligence* or some evil habitts of the mind,
which hinder such in the course of virtue, who do not perceive and note them.
Others there be, that use a larger liberty of conscience, and thinking it
sufficient to abstain from mortal sin, have no regard to avoid such as be
venial, and so in eatinge, in drinking, and in idle discourses, do take their
pleasure, and mispend their time. To these men (so long as they follow so
great licentiousnes of life) their venial sins are never remitted, althoughte
they confess them; as it is well noted by Henricus Herpius, because they have
no purpose to amend them. And further they are in great peril thereby, to fall
also into mortal, according to the opinion of S. Thomas. But to the former, who
strive to avoid them, such venial sins are presently pardoned and forgiven.
For seven times in a day the just man falls and rises again.

The Conclusion.
Therefore our grief for such venial sins ought to be discrete and so to be
moderated, Pro. 14.
that we never any ways distrust of the mercy of God; for sorrow and grief
without the asistance of Gods grace, is by so much the worser, by how much it
is greater, for that it brings a man into desperation.

Remedies against particular imperfections.
1. FIrst to find out the cause and ground of our defectes, for commonly some
one or two special sins reign in us, from which al other do take their
begininge, which first being rooted out, al other will easily be subdued and
overcome.

2. To remember what remedies are prescribed against those sins, and to use
the same so often as need requires.

3. To labor to overcome our most principal defect, with detestation also of
the rest, never ceasing to fight against it, until we find it wholly overcome,
or at the least greatly to be weakened.

4. Often to renew our good purposes, for the ouercoming our defectes, and to
stir up in our selves a hatred against them.

5. Often to call to mind by what means we have subdued them, and still as they
rise again to suppress them by the same.

6. To crave of God his especial asistance, against that particular sin,
whereunto we are most incident.

7. To commend our selves to some particular Saint, who has also sometime been
assaulted with the same kind of sin, and has by the asistance of Gods grace
been delivered from it.

8. Often to examine our conscience of that particular sin, comparing the
estate of our life, one day with an other.

9. To impose upon our selves if we fall into it, some kind of penance, which
may be most contrary and opposite to the same.

10. To have a good courage to fight against this sin, for that is a sign
that in the end we shall obtain the victory.

11. Ever to persevere in fight against it, and never to deiect our minds, no
although we should fall a thousand times in one day: for he only is conquered,
that castinge down his weapons yeldeth him self overcome.

12. Although thou find thy self to profit little in this conflict, yet it
is not little. For although we perceive not the shadow of the dial to move or
go forward, yet are we most certain that it moves. So likewise we see, that
both men, trees, and herbs do daily grow, although we cannot perceive
their actual growing. In like manner we find not presently our increase in
virtue, yet if we persevere, in time we shall find it to have taken root in us;
and in this conflict, by our patience and humility, we gain no small fruit,
but exceeding meritt and favor with almighty God.

General remedies against al sorts of sins.
1. THe principal remedy to root out al sin, and to plant virtue in us, is,
often to be conversant in prayer, and s^riously to attend it.

2. Often to frequent Confession, especially soon after thou have chanced to
commit any sin of importance.

3. Often to receive the most B: Sacrament of the Altar.

4. To avoid al evil company, and to converse with such as are good and
virtuous.

5. Often to read devout and spiritual books.

6. Often to meditate on the passion of our Lord and Savior JESUS.

7. To consider the lives of the B. Saints.

8. To think on ^he presence of the divine majesty of God, and of our good
Angel.

9. To remember that nothing is more certain then death, and the hour most
uncertain of all.

10. To call to mind some examples of the divine justice of God.

11. To remember the dreadful day of judgment.

12. To think on the eternal pains of the damned.

13. To meditate on the reward and joys of Paradis^

REMEDIES FOR SCRVPVLOVS persons taken out of S. Anthoninus, and other l^arned
vvryt^rs.
The description of a scruple.
A Scruple is an inordinate fear of conscience, rising upon light causes,
whereof the Prophet David speaking, says: Psalm. 54.
Save me o Lord from pusillanimitie of spirit: which words such as are
scrupulous should often repeat.

How many evils do grovve thorough scruples.
1. FIrst they bring upon us a certain wearines and heaviness, that hardly can
we ef^ect or do any good work, for that they take away the strength and
endeavor of our minds.

2. Secondly, he who is scrupulous, by his ill example, does take from others
the courage to do well. For which cause God commanded that no fearful and
pusillanimous person, should go with Gedeon into the battle, but should
return home, lest thorough their fear and flight, they might likewise give
others occasions to fly.

3. Thirdly, a scrupulous conscience, does often draw men into desperation,
from which king David desired to be delivered when he said. Psalm. 54.
O Lord let not the tempest of water drown me or ouervvhelme me: that is of
desperatio^. And again: Save me o Lord from pusillanimitie of spirit and
tempest. Whereupon. S. Bernard teaches us, that pusillanimitie brings
disqueit of mind and perturbation; perturbation desperation, and desperation
death.

Whence scruples do grovve.
1. SOmetimes they grow from a cold complexion, being subject to fears:
whereby, women, old men, and melancholy parsons, are most incident to
scruples: for fear and coldness do bind the heart, whereupon the imagination is
apt to conceive some hurt to ensue.

2. Sometimes they grow thorough weakness of the head, whereby the imagination
is hurt and distempered.

3. Sometimes they are stirred up by the subtlety of our ghostly enemy, who
thorough the permission of God, can move the melancholy humor, whereby the
magination may be deceived, and some inordinate fear arise.

4. Sometimes they come thorough overmuch fasting, watching, and such like
austerities. Sometimes again by conuersing with scrupulous persons: the causes
therefore of scruples are to be taken away.

Certain rules out of S. Antoninus to expel scruples.
THE 1. RVLE.
FIrst to prepare our selves for the grace of God, by being sorrowful for our
sins which we have committed, as also by confessing them, and by having ^
steadfast purpose never afterward to offend. For whosoever shall do so much as
lies in his power, may be well assured that God will asist him therein: for
according to S. Thomas, God ever bestows on such his grace, and infuseth into
them the gift of wisdom, of counsel, of knowledge, and understanding, which
are exceeding helps and means against al scruples.

THE 2. RVLE.
Daily to read the holy Scripture, and other spiritual books.

THE 3. RVLE.
To use continual prayer which profits much: which caused the wiseman to say.
I called upon our lord, Sap. 7.
and the spirit of vvisdome came upon me: which spirit is that prayer which
teaches us al things. For prayer especialy is available to a scrupulous
person, molested by the ghostly enemy, whose condition was prefigured in that
lunatike man, Mat. 17.
cured by our Savior, who was cast sometime into the fire, sometime into the
water: for even so a scrupulous person, runeth from one extremity into an
other. Of this spirit our Savior spoke in the gospel sainge. Mark. 9.
This kind of devil is not cast out, but with prayer and fasting.

THE 4. RVLE.
Humble obedience, in submitting our judgment to the judgment of an other, not
giueing credit to our selves, but to our ghostly Father. Whereupon we read:
that S. Bernard willed a certain scholar of his, who thorough scruples durst
not presume to say mass, to go and celebrate upon his faith, who humbly
obeying what he was commanded, was presently freed from al his scruples.
Wherefore the scrupulous person, ought to obey his ghostly Father, as he would
obey God, whose place he houldeth here on earth, and to believe him, and follow
the direction which he shall give unto him, as he would fo^lowe the prescript of
his bodily Physician, although he should appoint him most bitter and sharp
potio^s.

THE 5. RVLE.
Not to account of scruples, but presently at the first to shake them of: for
so God wills us by Esaias the Prophet ^^ing Be of good comfort you pusilanimous
and fear not, behold your God. To wit, Cap. 3.
most ready to healpe and illuminate you.

S. Gregory writes, that the devil is like to a certain beast, that is
called the Lion of Antes, for that he is dreadful to the Antes, but he him
self is troaden under the feet of greater beasts, and so killed: so the
devil searches the dispositions of some men, and where he finds any subject
to pusillanimitie, thos^ bouldly he ass^ulteth, and labors what he may, even
to kill them with scruples; but encountering with others that do confidently
resist him, he is easile overthrown and put to shameful flight..

Ioannes Gersonus that devout author, councelled it as a sovereign remedy; to
contemn scruples as we contemn little dogs that bark at us, who feircely
seem, as if they meant to bite such as pass by them, yet if a man neglect them
they presently cease, but being provoked they bark and never are queit. He
says again, that it is always good to do opposite to a scruple, as to spet
within the Church if a scruple persuade the contrary. To pass over a Cross
engraued on the ground, if a scruple do forbid it; as he who will bring a twige
to grow right, will bend it to the contrary part. And further he adds, that
God does not judge according to the conceit and impression of our fantasies,
but according to the sense and consent of true reas^n. And that he will not
punish us for such things as we think or suffer contrary to our own wills,
but for such offenses as we commit thoroagh our own free consent.

THE 6. RVLE.
Not easelie to accuse our own conscience of mortal sin, but rather, in
doubtful matters, never to think we sin mortaly, or give consent thereunto;
especially so long as we find such an inclination in our selves, that we rather
would dye, then to offend God willingly. Nether do we sin, in doing a
thing, whereof we be easily doubtful, whether it be a sin or no, and yet do
it: especially if we do it by obeying the commandment of our ghostly Father.

THE 7. RVLE.
The devil is accustomed to observe the conscience of al men, and to note,
whether it be strict or remiss. If he find it strict, then labors he to
make it more strict, and to bring it into the extremity of scrupulositie, that
thereby being afflicted; it never may attain to true perfection. As for
example, if he perceive any one to detest and abhor mortal sin, and so much
to abhor it, that he cannot endure the lest suggestion to sin, then
labors he to draw him to some act, which although in it self it be not a
sin, yet such, as may be thought by him to be a sin; as in speaking, or
thinking. On the other side, if he sinde a man to have so large a conscience,
that he makes little, or no account at al of venial sins, then labors he,
to bring him to that pass, that he make also no reckning of mortal. For which
cause, he that will profit in the course of a spritual life, must carefully
endeavor, ever to incline to that part which is opposite to his ghostly enemy:
as if he work to make thee have a large and remiss conscience, endeavor thou
on the contratie part, to make thy conscience more strict: if he seek to make
it strict, then endeavor thou to enlardg it; and so eschewing the extremes,
thou shall attain to the mean.

THE 8. RVLE.
So often as a man will do, or say any thing, which is not contrary to the
practice of holy Church, nor to the opinion of the ancient Fathers, and
tends to the glory of God, and a scruple arises, whether he should do it
or not, for fear of vain glory, or lest happily he might be to some
offenciue, then ought he to lift up his mind unto God, and if he perceive that
it may be done to his glory, then, I say, freely to do it, or say it, and not
scrupulously to omit it, but with S. Bernard, to answer the ghostly enemy.
Nether for thy sake did I begin this work, nether for thee vvil I end it.

THE 9. RVLE.
It is good to receive often, and to be confessed but seldom, living, and
doing al things, according to the judgment of a discreet Confessor, for so
shall a man many ways increase his merit, and make his ghostly enemy ashamed,
and do a work most grateful to God, who never will demand an account of those
things, which he shall commit, or omit, doing them under the obedience of his
ghostly Father.

THE 10. RVLE.
Ignorance of the difference betwixt a th^ught and a consent, is an especial
great cause that breeds scruples. And therefore we must note, that an evil
thought may be considered four several ways. For sometime it is rejected
presently so soon as it arises: and then we meritt in that therein we
overcome the enemy. Sometime it continues for a certain space, and yet
without full consent* and then it is a ^e^ial sin greater, or lesser,
according to the time it shall continue. In confessing this thought, it is not
of necessity to confess the circumstances that arise, but it shall suffice to
declare the nature of the sin, saying: I confess that I have had such a
dishonest thought, or a thought of anger, or of vain glory or the like, and
have not as I ought, presently resisted it. Sometime consent is given to the
thought with a desire (if opportunity served) to execute it in act, and then
it is a mortal sin, if the substance, or the matter of the thought, were a
mortal sin. Sometime a delight is taken in the thought of sin, so that full
consent is given to delight in the thought, but yet without a mind to effect
the same: and then it is also a mortal sin, if a man purposely do imprint in
his thought, the imagination of a matter, which in his own nature it a mortal
sin, and in that thought, fully and perfectly, consents to take delight; as
in some immodest, or dishonest act or the like. But if such a thought happen
unto us but accidentally, and not deliberately, and so shall endure some time i^
the mind, yet wholly without any fu^ consent, then is such a thought but only
venial. Sometimes again we endeuou^ to reject some evil thoughts, which w^
find our selves to be most usually a^saulted with, but yet we cannot speedel^
do it, for that our mind is overmuch encombred with such suggestions; and
then is such a thought no sin at al.

THE 11. RVLE.
Even as he that lives not in the fear of God, does easily, and often fall
into mortal sin (at the lest in thought) so he that lives in the fear of
God, and would choose rather to die, then willingly to offend him, seldom or
never offe^deth mortally. For which cause a scrupulous body ought not easily to
think, that his sin was mortal.

THE 12. RVLE.
Some persons are ever troubled with unclean thoughts: others seem to them
selves, that they continually blaspheme God, and his Saints, and thereby are
still vexed, and molested in their minds; and especially at such time as they
should go to Confession* for both they are ashamed to confess such scruples,
and yet they think them selves bound to discover them. Wherein they are
deceived: for although a man, for many years together, should find him self,
contrary to his will, troubled with such ill thoughts and suggestions, yet
resisting them, he should not only, not sin, but also merit thereby
exceedingly, and therefore ought not to confess as a sin, that which turns
to his greater merit. With such temptations, according to the opinion of the
Fathers, was the B. Apostle S. Paul troubled, to whom our Lord answered, when
he desired to be freed from them; My grace is sufficient for thee, 2. Cor. and
12.
for vertu^s made perfect in infirmity. In which words he shows, that by
such tempations, we do not only, not loose the grace of God, but rather
increase it; so that we be careful, not to yield our consent unto them.

S. Catherin of Sienna, being on a time so assaulted with unclean thoughts,
that she seemed to her self, to be as it were plunged into hell, our Savior
appearing unto her, she said: O my sweet Jesus, where have* thou been? He
answering that he had been always present in her heart: she replied; How can
it be that thou should abide in a heart, which has been conversant in such
foul and unclean places? To whom he said. Have thou consented to such
unclean temptations? And she replying: No, but I have ever detested them,
wishing rather to dye the^ to yield my consent; received presently this answer
from our Lord: Then has^ thou committed no mortal sin, which only drives me
forth of thy heart: and this desire which thou hadest not to offend me, could
not be in thee, with out my especial grace.

It is also a good remedy, for such as are troubled with scruples, to humble
and resign them selves into the hands of God, accepting such temptations, as
al other tribulations what soever, in the place of a Cross, sent by him unto
them, for their probation and further trial.

THE 13. RVLE.
Scruples also do often grow in us, for that we have not a sufficient
understanding of the goodness of God, and of his desire to save our souls. And
therefore such do greatly wrong his divine goodness, not accounting of it as
they ought; yea they make God as it were an envious wordly Judge, that should
every way seek means to overthrow the accused person. For if they knew with
what a disire God did continually seek our salvation, they could never so
readily fall into such errors. But such scrupulous persons, do not so much as
know, that good which is them selves, and that they have a heart, wholly
resolved to do good, with a desire, rather to e^dure any misery, then in the
lest degree to offend his divine majesty: which special grace, if they did
righly consider, there would be no place left in them for any scruples,
retaining in their minds, so rich a jewel and treasure, as is their
conjunction, and friendship with almighty God.

THE 14. RVLE.
Although a man be never so learned, or well experienced in these cases, yet
ought he not herein to rely upon his own opinion: for being sick, he must
follow the advice of his Physician. And admit, that he which gives council
should err: yet shall not he err, that obediently follows it. For in such
cases, God commands us to be directed, and governed by others.

THE 15. RVLE.
Caietan also says, that a scrupulous person, is not bound to confess those
sins and offenses, which he is doubtful, whether he have already confessed or
no. For when he has with a reasonable preparation, made his Confession, he
ought not to call it again in question, but to say in his mind: as I have
heretofore confessed my other sins, so do I trust, that I have also
confessed these, else were I ready again to confess them, and so let him
queit his conscience. This is to be understood, when he has a doubt, whether
he have ommitted any mortal sin; for as for venial (as is said before) he is
not bound to confess them.

THE 16. RVLE.
Richardus de S. Victore writes, that Anger, Impatience, Sorrow, Covetousness,
Gluttony, Pride, Vain glory, and such like, are not at al times, to be
accounted mortal sins: and therefore, if a scrupulous person happen to fall
into any of them, he must not presently think that he has sinned mortally.

REMEDIES AGAINST AL kinds of sins and first of certain steps or degrees
to salvation.
THE 1. STEP.
FIRST the acknowledging of our sins, considering our offenses which are past
and the fowlenes of them, committed by that body, which ought to be a vessel of
sanctity and purity: Secondly, to acknowledge what thou have deserved thorough
the multitude of thy sins, to wit, the eternal pains of hell. Thirdly, to
remember what (thorough them) thou have deserved to have lost, that is the
everlasting joys of heaven.

THE 2. STEP.
Penance or hearty contrition for thy sins committed, with a firm purpose
to mortify thy flesh, and to sin no more.

THE 3. STEP.
First an inward sorrow for thy sins committed, whereby thou have offended
God thy Creator, to whose laws, both heaven and earth are obedient, and what
thing soever is created in them: but thou a^^^e have been rebellious unto him,
and have transgressed his holy commandments.

Secondly a greater sorrow, for that thou have offended, not only thy Creator,
but thy Father, yea and wh^t Father? Eu^n t^^t Father which gives thee the
fertility of the earth, the abundance of fruits, and has hitherto governed
thee, and yet does govern thee.

Thirdly and to this the greatest sorrow of al, which may wound thy heart for
contemning so loving a Savior, who suffered patiently, most bitter torments on
the Cross, for to deliver thee from the eternal pa^^es of hell.

THE 4. STEP.
Conf^ssion, which ought to be pure and not (...) with other discourses:
perfect, with our omission of any sin: humble that whatsoever we speak with
ou^ mouth, we think the same with our heart.

THE 5. STEP.
Chastising our bodies, which must be done, by the discreti^n of our ghostly
Father, for avoiding vain glory. Also secretly, so as that the left hand
knows not what the right hand does. And farther d^^^^^tly, according to the
(...) of our bodies.

THE 6. STEP.
A non (...) of our manners, and first (...) evil speech. (...) of our motions
(...) keeping them under. Thirdly the reforming, as much a^ we may, of (...)
and dis^olute persons, s^^^ply ^^^rch^nding them; and what we (...), not to
permit justice t^ ^he infr^nged and ^^^ated in our pres^nce.

THE 7. STEP.
Perseverance in goodness: which thou that attain unto, if thou do well
cons^der, the eternal r^w^rde or punishment, in heaven, and hell: as ^so other
gifts and graces which God has bestowed upon thee.

Remedies against pride.
1. FIrst, to consider our own imperfections; the vileness of our bodies; and
the innumerable infirmities of our minds.

2. to imitate and follow such, as excel us in virtue and perfection, and
especially our Savior Christ, who exhorts us to follow him, Man. 11.
saying: Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of heart.

3. To consider the servitude and baseness of proud people, who of the sons
of God, make them selves the servants and slaves of the devil; who is the
king of al pride.

4. To converse with such as be humble and modest.

5. In apparel, and al our external actions, to carry our selves according to
our condition and degree.

Against vain glory:
1. FIrst as nere as we can, to conceal such virtues as are in us.

2. Often to reflect our minds, upon our imperfections.

3. To attribute al our praise, unto almighty God, who is the only author of
al goodness.

Against Covetousness.
1. FIrst, to auert our minds, from the love of al earthly things, and for
that end, to call upon God for his heavenly grace.

2. To think that our minds will never be satisfied, have we never so great
riches.

3. To assure our selves, that we shall shorthly leave al riches behind us,
save only those which we have sent before, by the hands of the poor.

4. To consider, how great the poverty was of our Savior JESUS Christ, and of
those B. Saints which did imitate him.

5. To put our trust and confidence in God, who provides, even for the little
birds, and says unto us: Mat. 6.
Seek first the kingdom of God, and his justice, and al other things shall be
given unto you.

6. To eschew al affairs of covetous men, and to converse with such, as
contemn, and have forsaken the riches of the world.

7. To meditate upon the riches of heaven, and upon the infinite, delightful,
and eternal treasures, which our Lord God, has there provided for us, if truly
we dispite these which are transitory.

8. It is a most sovereign remedy against covetousness, truly to forsake the
tree sures of this world, and to posesse only so much, as shall be sufficient to
maintain our state.

Against carnal concupiscence.
1. TO have an especial regard to govern well our sight.

2. To avoid al such occasions, as are wont to draw men into that sin.

3. To fly the company and conversation of unchaste persons.

4. To shun idleness, and always to be busied in some good exercise.

5. Not to pamper our bodies with delicate fare, but to use fasting, and to
refrain strong wines, and hoate meats.

6. To keep a careful watch over our heart, and presently to repel al
naughty thoughts.

7. Carefully to govern al our senses.

8. To avoid al dishonest occasions, as we would avoid the sickness or pl^uge.

9. Often to ask of God the gift of cha^^^^e.

10. To ch^sten our flesh with some kind of penance, especially, when we find
our selves assaulted with fleshly temptations.

Against the pas^^^n of Anger in our s^lues.
1. FIrst, to prepare and arm our selves to bear with patience, any works,
or deeds that may move us to ang^r.

2. To cons^d^r, that a wrong done, does never hurt (...) that does patiently
suffer it, but rather him that does offer it.

3. To remember, what infinite wrongs our Savior Christ suffered for us, to
whom we are to render thanks, if we suffer in this world, any wrongs for his
sake.

4. To endeavor, not to think upon any injuries, and to busy our thoughts in
some other matter.

5. To conquer our selves, by not answering when we are wronged, and by little
and little to quench our anger already risen.

Against the passions of Anger in others.
1. TO answer mildly, remembering that an humble answer, does mittigate anger,
and that hasty speech, does enkindle the same.

2. To hold our peace, or to depart for the present.

Against Envy.
1. NOt to be in love with earthly delights.

2. To consider, what an unprofitable thing Envy is, which only hurts our
selves.

3. To think with our selves, how uncharitable a thing it is to envy others,
considering that we are bound even to die for our neighbor, if need so
required.

4. To consider, if thy neighbor had not, such, or such a thing, what thou
thy self should be the better thereby. If therefore envy do nothing avail
thee, nether in thy reputation, thy wealth, or happiness of thy soul; but on the
contrary art perplexed, and made odious before God, what reason then have thou
to be envious.

5. Always to meditate on such things as tend to brotherly love and
charity.

Against our own malice or hatred, conceived toward others.
1. FIrst, to remember that God will never forgive thee, except thou do
forgive others.

2. He that lives in malice, hurts him self more being in mortal sin,
then he does the other whom he maliceth.

3. It is of necessity that we must forgive others, except we mean wilfully
to throw our selves into hell.

4. Being in malice; we loose the benefit of all the good deeds we do, because
al our actions are most displeasing to God.

5. We make our selves wholly unlike our Savior Christ, who freely pardoned al
his enemies, that at once spoiled him,

Amos. 3.
1. For first, the Prophet says. There is no evil in the City which God has
not done.

Cap. 15.
2. God says by Esaias the Prophet. I am thy Lord, and there is no other making
light, and creating darkness: making peace, and causing evil.

Cap. 11.
3. Again by Jeremy the Prophet. Behold I vvil bring upon them evil which
thy shall not avoid.

Cap. 2.
4. Job says. If we have received good from the hands of God, why should
we not also receive ill.

5, Holy David desired of God, that his enemies might be illuminated, and that
they might understand, that the evils of his afflictions proceed from him,
saying, Psa. 108.
That they may know that this is thy hand: and thou O Lord have done them.

John. 19.
6. Our Lord said to Pilate: Thou could have no power against me, except it
were given thee from above. So that when the Jews apprehended him, he him
self gave them power. But they could not apprehend his Apostles, or take a
hair from them, because he gave them not power to do it.

7. S. Augustine says, in his book Of the city of God, that the affliction
both of the good and bad, is to be attributed to God.

And upon the ninth psalm he says; That all the pains which men suffer, are
to be referred to the divine providence: And in his 8. book of the city of
God. cap. 2. he says, that al wars and sacking of Cities, prooceede from
God. And again in his 5. book cap. 11. he says, that the leaf upon the
tree moves not, contrary to the divine will of God. And upon the 148. psalm,
he says, that what soever happens in this life contrary to our wills,
proceeds from the will, providence, order, and appointment of God.

Hereby it easily appears, how far they are deceived who say, I can
willingly bear and suffer, what soever it shall please God to lay upon me; but
I cannot endure such wrongs as men do unto me.

An answer to a certain objection.
SOme peradventure will say. If God be the cause of al evil, then is he the
author of al evil.

But this objection may thus be answered. There are two kinds of evils. One of
offense, or fault, whereof God is not the author. An other of punishment, as
sickness, plauge, war, dearth, earthquakes, heat, cold, and al other
punishments which afflict men on earth, and of these God is the author. As for
example. A man offers me an injury, he robs me, beatth me, or depraueth
my good name: here concur two things. First the sin of him that offers
this unto me, and this is contrary to the will of God, who permits these
things to be done, although they lo displease him. The other is my hurt and
punishment, and this I must take as from God, and not from man, because such
punishment is agreeable to the will and ordinance of God: as it was the will of
God that Christ should suffer for us, but not that the Jews should crucify
him. On the one side his passion was most grateful and acceptable, on the other
side, the action of them that crucified him, was most execrable and abominable.

Remedies for any afflictions that may happen unto us.
1. FIrst to rest most assured, that no tribulation, pressure, sorrow, or
other affliction, can happen unto us, which d th not proceed from God, and
from his divine ordinance and providence, as S. Augustine, and the holy
Scripture does teach us. And that he suffers these things to happen unto
us, of the same Fatherly love, which he showed when he would have his only and
dearly beloved S nne, to suffer far more greueous torments for our redemption.

2. Secondly to consider, how often and how long time, thou have most
grie^^ously offended almighty God. For if ^ut only once thou have offended his
Majesty who is infinite, thou have therefore deserved infinite pains, and not
these temporal punishments.

3. Thirdly, to think upon the pains of hell, which thou have so often
deserved.

4. Fourthly, to remember what torments the holy Saints have suffered in this
life, but chiefly our Lord and Savior JESUS Christ, the Holy of al holies,
and not once, but even the whole time of his life which he spent here upon
earth.

5. Fifthly, to meditate upon the eternal glory, to the which there is no
passage, but thorough many tribulations.

6. Sixthly to consider what is the fruit of tribulation, which is to humble
our selves before the presence of God: to have recourse unto him for help: to
sequester our selves from the affairs of this world: to thirst after heaven:
to imitate Christ: to please almigh^ie God: to mortify our flesh, which is so
great an enemy to us: to take away al oc^asions, that may offend his divine
Majesty: to cleanse our souls from sin: and finally, to enrich our selves
with grace, and after this life, with unspeakable glory.

Remedies for such who are grieved in mind, for that they are iniuried and
contemned.
1. FIrst to consider, what iniures were done to our Savior Christ him self;
and then to think, that the servant is not greater then the master.

2. To remember how often we our selves have offered many injuries to God: and
thereby may justly think, that the wrongs which we do suffer, are nothing to
be accounted.

3. To think what injuries the B. Saints in heaven have suffered, how they
were contemned, and how reproachfully they were used.

4. To consider that by suffering injuries, we have occasion ministered unto us
to forgive them, and thereby to deserve remission of many done by us unto
others: so that we may confidently say. Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us.

5. To remember, that hereby we have occasion given to please almighty God: to
become his children: to rejoice in spirit: to increase our glory in heaven, as
we read in the gospel.

6. To think that we are injured by our ghostly enemy the devil, who
according to Anselmus, posesseth a man for the time he is in sin, and
therefore to revenge our selves on him, with the weapons of humility, patience,
charity, prayer, and other like spiritual armor.

7. To behold in him who offers thee injury, the image and likeness of
almighty God, and to remember that he redeemed you both alike, with his most
precious blood.

8. To consider that he which offends thee, does also offend God, and that
thou should be m^re grieved ^herfore, then for the offense which is done
unto thee: and therefore to pr^y for him.

9. To have compassion upon him, to see him fall from the grace of God, for God
says: Ro^. 12.
Leave (...) to me. What grea^er misery can be fall us, then to fall from Gods
holy grace and favor.

10. To take them as we would do other tribulations sent us from the hand of
God: even as we have s^ene the ^^lie Martirs joyfully to have r^ceiu^d theirs,
and th^rfore not to complain or grudge against then. So holy (...) did refer
to God the l^ss^ of his go^des and children, which he had su^^^^d by the devil,
saying: Our Lord ha^^ (...) them away. He said not that the devil had taken
them away; for as S. Augu^^^ne notes, he knew full well, that the devil could
not take from him on hair of his he^d, contrary to the will and power of God.
So David being reuil^d by one of his own subjects. took it upon him as a
thing laid upon him by the hand of almighty God, saying in one of the
psalms. Psa. 67.
O Lord thou have given me as a reproach to a man without wit, and I have not
opened my mouth because thou have done it. And again. Psa. 38.
O Lord thou have set men upon our hea^es. And al wars and injuries which he
received from his enemies, he did at^ribute them to the hand of almighty God.

The whole Scripture is full of examples, where God has s^nt upon his servants,
plauge, war, and famine, and al other s^rtes of punishments.

And if the (...) Sparrow, ^^l not on the ground without the providence of
God, as we rea^e in the gosp^l: how can a man suffer any injury contrary to
the will of God? And if he have a (...) the l^^st h^ire of our h^^les, (...) we
not think he has the like of other things which more concern ^?

Rem^dies for those that are afflicted ^n their minds at such time a^ they
suffer tribulation.
1. FIrst to think that God i^ just and faithful, who never p^rmitt^th us to
suffer greater afflictions, then assisted by his grace we may easily endure, 1.
Cor. 10.
as S. Paul teaches us.

2. To remember the sundry miseries of our life past which before we felt
them, might have been thought intolerable, and yet being strengthened by the
divine grace of God, we have well overcome them: so likewise will God asist us,
to bear al afflictions that are to come.

3. To consider the example of others, especially of the B. Saints. For who
would not have thought, that S. Peter would have been afraid, if it should
have been told him, that he should have been crucified with his head
downewardes, and yet he chose that death him self. Likewise of S. Bartholomew
that he should have his skin fleid off. And the like may be said of many
other holy Martirs.

Remedies for such who for humane respects are ashamed to do well.
1. IF thou art not ashamed to do ill, why should thou be ashamed to do
well?

2, Remember that thou must die shortly, and must appear before Christ thy
judge, how will thou be ashamed at that time?

3. If our Redeemer Christ were not ashamed to hang naked on the cross, why
should thou be ashamed of well doing?

4. So many thousands of men and women have spent their lives for Christ, and
art thou ashamed to do good for the love of him?

5. What will thou say at the day of judgment? How great will thy shame then be,
how great thy confusion?

6. When thou do any good work, thou causest joy and delight to all the B.
Saints in heaven, and will thou then deprive them of that delight for any
humane respects?

7. He that is ashamed to do well is ashamed to be a Christian, and in some
sort denies Christ; and what shame can be greater then this?

8. Our Lord says in the gospel. Luc. 10.12.8.
He that shall be ashamed of me before men, I will be ashamed of him before my
Father which is in heaven.

9. David says, Psalm. 52.9.
God will confound and contemn those that seek to please men. And S. Paul. If
yet I should study to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

10. Consider how base and abject a thing it is, for worldly respects, to
neglect to do such things as are grateful to God and his Saints.

11. Thou did promise in thy Baptism, that thou would renounce the devil
and al his works, and would above al things love God thy Creator: why then
art thou not ashamed to do the works of the devil, and yet art ashamed to
perform thy duty to God?

12. The holy Scripture teaches us, to labor to please God, and to contemn
the world: why therefore are we not ashamed to displease God, and to embrace
the world?

13. It were great folly to be ashamed of well doing, by the which we are made
acceptable in the sight of God and his Angels, both here and in the world to
come: and not to be ashamed when we do ill, whereby we purchase pain in this
life, and eternal damnation hereafter.

14. They who for worldly respects refrain to do well, what shame shall they
suffer when they burn in hell fire?

15. The gospel says, that he which knows the will of his Lord and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes: what then shall be done unto him, who for
worldly respects neglects to do the will of God?

16. Thou say daily, Thy vvil be done, yet do thou neglect to do it,
because thou would please men.

17. Imagine what joy it will bring thee at the hour of thy death, when thou
shall remember, that for no worldly respect, thou have desisted to do good
works.

18. Can thou imagine that almighty God will bestow on thee those
priueledges, which to his B. Son or his Saints he never yet granted?

19. Think thou that God does not behold thee? Can thou persuade thy
self that he iesteth with thee? Or can thou believe that he will not punish
thee for such an injury?

20. Assure thy self, that it is a thing impossible, to hold the favor of
God, and the good opinion of the world: please the one, and not offend the
other.

21. Thou will not refrain thy meat, drink, or apparel, for any humane
respect that may happen unto thee, and yet art thou ashamed to do well?

22. Thou would not refrain from seeking a worldly treasure, though al thy
friends should laugh at thee for it, and art thou then ashamed to seek the
treasure of Gods grace?

23. Imagine upon thy one hand, God, and the joys of Paradise; and on thy other
hand, the world and the transitory delights thereof, which of th^se two
would thou chiefly regard, would thou not choose to posesse the joys of
Paradise?

24. For no worldly regard thou will omit to gratify him, that has delivered
thee from perril of loosing thy life: why then art thou unmindful to perform
thy duty to God, who has not only given thee life, but does also daily
preserve the same?

A remedy for such as the enemy labors to drive into di^paire, suggesting
unto them that al their good works are lost, and that them selves are damned.
Out of Taulerus.
THou must cast upon God as S. Peter teaches, and upon the depth of his
infinite mercy, al thy care and solicitude. For as Seamen being in extreme
danger of Shipwreck, cast their anchors into the Sea, thereby to save their
lives: so we being assaulted with the temptations of our ghostly enemy, must
cast the anchor of our hope and confidence, into the Se^ of the passion of
Christ, and into the bottomless depth of his divinity, fixing our perfect hope,
and most firm confidence in his only mercy and goodness.

Motives to comfort those that live virtuously and do many good deeds.
TO consider often these points following.

1. First that thou art created, after the image and similitude of God.

2. That thou art redeemed with the most precious blood of our Savior Jesus.

3. That in Baptism thou art made the Son of God.

4. That thou art reclaymed from vice to virtue, from sin to grace, from the
love of the world, to the love of God.

5. That thou art fed and nourished so often with his most precious body and
blood; prepared with such love, and with so great expense.

6. That he has given thee a new heart and spirit, to conte^ne al vanities of
this world, and a will to desire new grace, and also the comfort of his holy
Sacraments.

7. To think that from the beginning we were loved of God the Father, and that
it pleased him to send us his only Son, that he might enrich us with his
inestimable treasures.

8. To consider how carefully his divine providence provided for us, that al
things might happen and fall out for our Good.

9. To remember how lovingly he has remained with us in the most B. Sacrament,
whereby we may at al times communicate our wantes unto him, familiarly converse
with him, and receive him into the habitation of our hearts.

10. To think that he has prepared for us eternal glory,, that we may enjoy
his presence amongst the Saints in Paradise.

11. To consider, that to the end he might enrich us with eternal riches, he
made his only Son most poor and contemptible: that he humbled his own Son
to advance us: and that he might bring us to eternal life, he left his own
dear Son to suffer a most shameful death.

12. To remember that God has always a most singular and fatherly care over
us, and that he does ever behold us with a most merciful and loving eye.

REMEDIES AGAINST VENIAL sins: and first certain sayings of the Fathers
concerning this matter.
SAint Augustine, in a certain place speaking of venial sins, says thus.
Contemn not small sins, and although thou regard them not being but light
when thou do peyze them, yet let them terrify thee when thou do number
them. He says further, that no sin, how small soever, being contemned; but
does in time prove great and dangerous: for the sands of the Sea, although
they be little; as also drops of water, yet being multiplied together, cast up
great banks, and become huge rivers; and the smalest leake which a Ship can
have, in time will sink her to the bottom of the Sea. Also he says, that
there is no defect so little, but it is able to destroy our soul in time, if
once we grow to take delight in it, because thereby we are disposed to mortal
sin.

S. Hierome advises us to be very respective of venial sins, and not to
think that they be but small, but to remember, that God is great and
omnipotent, whom

(...) Romans 3.
1. First because according to S. Paul, we ought not to do evil, that good may
ensue thereof.

2. Secondly because our Savior says in the gospel. What does it profit a
man if he gain the whole world, and suffer loss of his own soul? As if he
had said, that he had gained nothing.

3. Thirdly because a man ought to love his soul above al other things, and
therefore ought not to do the least injury unto it, to procure the safety of
al other things. And we have declared already, how great hurt one venial sin
brings to the soul of man.

4. Fourthly because the end why man was created, was to see and behold God,
and therefore we ought not to commit one act to gain the whole world, that
should hinder us from that end: the which is caused by every venial sin.

5. Fifthly, we ought not to commit any act where with God may be offended or
displeased, not only to save the whole world, but not to save an hundred
thousand worlds: but a venial sin does displease God, and so by consequence
offend him, for which cause we ought not to commit it; although there be many
that that think it lawful, to take a false oath to save a man's life.

Cardinal Caietan in his Sum says, that he who regards not venial sins,
has no great care of his soul, and defraudeth him selse of many great
benefits. And further that his Guardian Angel thereby withdraws his care which
he has of him, and refuses to preserve him from many perrills, who is
careless and negligent to do him self good: which is a thing highly to be
considered.

S. Catherin of Sienna as it is written in her life, used to say, that a sin
were it never so small, did much offend God, if it were often committed and
done with contempt, and especially when a man grows negligent, by contrition
and penance, to make satisfaction for it.

S. Bridget affirmed (having it revealed unto her) that venial sins being often
committed and contemned, did greueously offend almighty God, and that
oftentimes he punishes them severely, who offend in this manner.

Why we ought to avoid venial sins.
WE have showed before out of Taulerus, seven several causes why we we should
avoid venial sins: to which we may adioyne these six that follow.

1. First for that they hinder the devotion of mental prayer.

2. They keep us back from profiting in spiritual perfection.

3. They displease and offend almighty God, and debar us from perfect
fulfilling his divine pleasure.

4. They deprive us of many spiritual gifts, with the which otherwise we had
been endued if they had not hindered: for they are like little thieves, who by
degrees steal from us many things, whose theft although we find it not at
the first, by reason that they take from us but little at once, yet the end
shows their theft, when we find in time that we have lost much. So we not
refrayning from venial sins, although at the first we perceive no loss, yet
in time shall we find our damage not small, being made thereby destitute, of
many spiritual benefitts.

5. They infect our souls, and make them subject to many infirmities. They are
also like small wounds which we receive in our bodies, which although they be
not deadly, yet do they annoye us, and hinder our health. As therefore we would
be careful to heal such wounds, so ought we no less to be mindful, to cure
our souls of such offenses.

6. They hinder us that we cannot perfectly behold and love almighty God: as
dust cast into our eyes does hinder our corporal sight.

That venial sins are most dangerous to those that frequent the B. Sacrament.
THe Doctors, and chiefly Tabiena in his Sum, do teach that when a man will
not refrain from little sins, or comes to receive the B. Sacrament with an
actual intention or affection to some venial sin, that he is deprived of an
effect of sacramental grace, which is the proper and peculiar s^^ite of this
Sacrament. For sacramental grace is a certain spiritual sweetness, which
increases devotion, and weakneth our inclination to vice: and this sweetness is
learned rather by experience then by any other science, which thing ought
highly to be esteemed, to the e^d that thereby we may preserve our devotion. And
hence it proceeds that many, although they frequent the B. Sacrament, yet do
not attain to this spiritual sweetness.

That some which are given to spiritual exercises do yet nevertheless not
profit therein, because they little account of venial sins.
A Certain learned man demanding why men do not profit in spiritual
exercises, answers; that one principal reason is, for that they account not
of venial sins. And S. Bernard saying that spiritual men ought to have great
regard of venial sins, adds; that such men ought as carefully to avoid
them, as other men ought to refrain from mortal.

That the reason why we neglect venial sins, proceeds of want of the
fear of God.
Eccl. 19.
THe holy Scripture says. He that regards not small things, shall by
degrees fall. Eccl. 7.
And again. He that fears God, neglects nothing. He therefore that fears
God, must not neglect his venial sins. And God speaks of such as want this
fear, in the Scripture, saying. If thou keep not thy self steadfastly in the
fear of God, thy house shall soon be subverted. which is thy soul.

That the Holy Ghost is contristated by venial sins.
Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians says. Do not contristate, the Holy
Ghost. And what does contristate the Holy Ghost, but not to account of our
venial sins: whereby the Holy Ghost is as it were debarred, that he cannot
work in us according as he would? For even as mortal sin does absolu^ely
drive him from us: so does venial sin contristate and offend him.

The opinion of Ludouicus Granatensis concerning venial sin.
LVdouicus Granatensis, does account one principal impediment of prayer to be,
the little reckoning that we make of venial sins. For that as Enamel will not
stick to brass but to goulde: so the most precious Enamel of devotion toward
God, cannot harbor or dwell, but in a heart pure and free from al kind of sin.

He adds further, that as mortal sin is the perdition of the soul, so
venial sin to be as a fever or dangerous sickness of the soul. For which
cause, as a man does noth fear only death, but also the least distemper that
may happen to his body, as cold or any other little disease: so ought he also
greatly to fear, least he fall into any venial sin. Further he compares
mortal sin, as if we should kill a little bird, and venial sin, as if we
should clip her wings that she could not fly, or mount aloft as before she
was accustomed: and then adioyneth, that as an evil woman is not at the first
perverted, but by degrees is corrupted and becomes naught, so by venial
sins, as by steps and degrees, we fall in the end into the greatest evils.
And again, even as a garment is not at the first worn old, but is defaced
and consumed in tracte of time: and as houses decay not, and fall down at
once, but grow ruinous and old by continuance: so fares it with men in the
exercise of a spritual life, if they be not careful of venial sins. Wherein
the old proverb is rightly verified, that if we neglect the nail, we soon
lose the shoe* losinge the shoe, the horse fails; and the horse once
failing, the horseman perishes.

Further he says, that no sin whatsoever can be so small, but the contempt
thereof is accompanied with great danger. Nether ought we to esteem that thing
small, which has his reference to so high and end, as is the divine love of
almighty God. Whereunto may be compared the saying of our Lord in the gospel.
He that is faithful in little things, Luc. 11.
is also faithful in much.

Similitudes for this purpose.
EVen as a good child, a loving wife, and a faithful servant, will carefully
fore see that in the least degree whatsoever they offend not, their father,
husband, or master: so ought we most diligently and carefully to provide, that
by no means whatsoever, we offend our Lord God. Nether to think our selves
excused by the smalnes of our sin, but to consider the commandment of God
which forbids us to sin, and to remember his greatness and power who at the
latter day of judgment, will require of us an exact account of every idle word.

S. Gertrudes saying concerning. venial sin.
Our Lord God upon a time revealed unto her, that there were two several kinds
of venial sins. The one certain defects which unadvisedly are committed,
even by the most deuoutest persons. And these God permiteth us to fall into,
that thereby we may have cause to humble our selves, and not to grow proud of
any work of our own, but to labor to perfection by virtuous exercises. The
other kind of venial sins are such, which as things of small account are
not regarded; and which is worse, are often defended as if they were no sins
at al: and thorough such defectes as these, does a man endanger his salvation,
and he that is subject unto them does profit litl^ in virtue.

That scrupulous persons may receive consolation herein: but those of large
consciences, cause of fear.
SOme persons are so scrupulous, that whatsoever they do, they imagine they
commit a sin in doing it, and are as much perplexed in a venial sin, as if
they had offended mortally: their comfort may be, that God permits such
defectes in them, for their further good, and to teach them humility. Others
there be who make no account of venial sins, and such men may justly fear
their own estates.

A question, whether a man may live in this world and commit no venial sin.
DVrandus answers to this question well and with a good distinction. First he
says that there be certain venial sins, which are soddainly and without
aduisement committed, that is, thorough inconsideration, ignorance, frailty,
or such like, so that a man never observes when he falls into them: as when
a man eats, or drinks, some little more then is con^enient, laugheth,
speaks over liberally, is distracted in prayer, whispereth, or iestingly
tells some untruths, without the which in some kind, no man lives: from
whence that saying of scripture is taken. Seven times in the day the just man
falls. Other venial sins says he there are, which are wilfully committed:
as when a man wittingly and willingly tells a lie; and from these sins a
man is especially bound ever to refrain, which easily he may do. These be
such sins which bring with them those mischiefs, whereof before we have
sundry times made mention.

Whether after a venial sin be forgiven, the punishment be also remitted.
IT is answered, that it is not; except the contrition be so great, that
thereby the punishment due to the same be also taken away, as it was in Marie
Magdalen.

Venial sins are taken away by these means following.
1. FIrst by Contrition.

2. By Confession.

3. By receiving the B. Sacrament.

4. By saying the Confiteor, and Miserere.

5. By devout taking of Holy water.

6. By saying the Pater noster.

7. By the Bishops benediction.

8. By hearing of Mass devoutly.

9. By examining our consciences.

10. By entering into consecrated Churches according to Dionys^us the Carthusian.

11 By knocking our breast, and saying. God be merciful unto me a sinner.

12. By exercising the works of mercy.

Remedies for avoiding of venial sins.
1. FIrst in the morning, to resolve with our selves, that r^^^er we will die
then willingly to commit one venial sin.

2. To avoid al accasions, business, and conuersations, that may minister matter
whereby we may sin.

3. Presently to be sor^^ if we fail into venial sin, to crave pardon of God,
and to purpose an amendment.

4. To examine our conscience at night before we go to rest, and sometimes to
take some voluntary penance.

5. Often to commend our selves unto God, and to frequent the holy Sacraments.

REMEDIES TO COMFORT those which are afflicted and sorrovvful for the death of
their friends, out of S. Antonynus.
1. FIrst we must consider that it pleases God to have it so, and then why
should we resist his blessed will? Why do we say daily, Thy vvil be done, and
yet not conform our selves unto his will? For which cause the Master of the
Sentences says. Let that thing please men which pleases God; and therefore
let it please men, because it pleases God.

2. To remember that al things created are the creatures of God, and therefore
we ought not to grieve if God take from us that thing which he has lent us.
For S. Hierom says; He takes away nothing of thine, who has but lent thee
that which is his own. And S. Augustine says. He that loves God truly, is
never grieved for the death of any one, whereupon blessed Job said at the death
of his children. Our Lord gave me them, and our Lord has taken them away, as
it has pleased our Lord so be it done, the name of our Lord be blessed.

3. Consider that it is ordained by God, that al men of what degree or
condition soever, shall once dye. And if God have not spared his only dear
Son (as S. Bernard notes) why should we look that he should spare others?
For which cause S. Ambrose says. What can be more absurd then to lament for
a thing that is common to al men?

4. Remember that death does free us from many miseries. Cap. 6.
Whereupon Ecclesiastes says. All the days of man are full of miseries and
sorrows, nether by night finds he rest. For this cause our Savior Christ
rejoiced in the death of Lazarus, saying to his disciples. John. 11.
Lazarus our friend is dead, and I am glad in your behalf. But when he raised
him from death, then did he weep, because he raised him to the miseries of
this life. Whereupon S. Augustine in a book which he wrote of the visiting of
the sick, says. O death most to be desiered. O death the end of al miseries
that this world brings forth. O death the end of al evil, and the beginning of
al good.

5. To think that God does know and understand al things, and therefore sees
what is most necessary for man. For happily if such a man had not them died,
he might have been damned, whereas now he is saved. Or else by living longer he
might have grown worse. To which purpose. Sap. 4.
S^lomon says of a certain person. He was taken out of the world lest malice
might have changed his understanding, or imaginations have deceived and
destroyed his soule^.

6. To consider that superfluous sorrow, does hurt thee, and nothing benefit
thy friend which is dead. So we read that king David wept bitterly so long as
his son l^y sick, 2. Reg. 12.
but so soon as he was dead he ceased to mourn, and yealding thanks to God,
began to eat: and being asked him why he did so, he answered, that before the
death of his son he lamented, if happily thereby he might have obtained his
life, but being once dead, he ceased to mourn, acknowledging it was the will of
God to have it so.

7. To call to mind, that excessive sorrow hurts both thee and thy friend
departed, because thereby thou can not have thy mind free, to pray for thy
self, or for him that is dead. For this cause the wise man says. Ec. 38.
Yeald not thy heart to sorrow, but drive it far from thee, remember the last
things forget them not, for after death there is no returning, and thy sorrow
shall not benefit thy fre^d departed, but thereby thou shall hurt thy self.

8. Think that many have been damnned for the inordinate love which they have
borne to their children, their husbands, their wives, kinsfolks, and friends.
Then again considering it is uncertain, whether thy child or friend might
have been cause to thee of thy damnation if he had lived, thou have no cause to
lament h^s death.

9. Remember that thy friend departed sha^ rise again, and that thou shall see
him. Whereupon S. Paul^ says. Be not (...) to the (...) which have no hope. 1.
These. 4. Ec. 22.
And Ecclesiasticus. Lament little for those that are ^^parted.

10. Consider that thy friend whose death thou bewaylest, is perhaps in a
place of joy, and then ought thou to be g^ad, because he may pray for th^e.

A rem^di^ for tho^^ who fear Death overmuch.
THere are many that can hardly endure to hear others talk of death, and are
terrified even with the thought thereof. Which comes, either for that they are
clogged with many enormious sins, which they will not forsake: or because they
have little confidence in the happiness of the world to come: or else by reason
they are overmuch wedded to the pleasures of this life, whereof they would not
willingly be deprived: and therefore is the memory of death most grieueous unto
them, considering that death will separate them from these delights whether
they will or no. First therefore let us free our selves from this servitude of
sin, let us shake of this inordinate love of the world, and then shall we
soon be delivered from this fear of death, yea we shall willingly desire it,
and joyfully embrace it.

A good remedy also against the fear of death, is, often to think and
meditate upon death. For contraries are expelled by contraries, and the more
oftener we set death before our eyes, the more easily and the sooner do we
remove al such occasions, as may make it fearful to our apprehension.

S. Au^ustine says. That an evil death, never follows a good life. Labor
therefore to dye to thy self and the world, and to live to God, and death will
neu^r be fearful unto thee.

A certain learned Father writes, that the devil labors all that he can, to
keep from our minds the remembrance of death, thereby to make us careless
how we live, and after at the hour of our deaths to deceive us. Therefore
ought we ever to set death before our eyes, and so carefully and virtuously to
spend our lives to the honor of God, that when death shall approach, our ghostly
enemy may have no power over us.

An other says. Even as he that will draw a toothe out of his head, does
first cause the flesh to be loosened round about it, and after to be stirred
and moved, until with two fingers it may easily be pulled out (for if he should
attempt at one pull with the instrument to draw it out, he must needs put him
self to exceeding pain) so they who do often meditate on death, do never
find it so terrible unto them, as they who never think thereon, until it
assault them.

A certain Doctor says. As Princes palaces, or other weighty affairs, are
not begun and finished at once: so death being a thing which does most concern
us, and which once we must undergo, can never be well finished, except by often
meditation thereof, we make it familiar unto us. There are two things of
importance: one to die, and that is common to al men: an other to die well, and
that proper to few, and only to such as fear God, and hold them selves but
bannished men whilst they live in this world, and continually have the memory
of death fixed before their eyes.

1. Cor. 7.
S. Paul counce^leth, that those that have wives, should live is if they had
no wives: and those that are conversant in the affairs of this world, should
carry them selves as men exempted from the world. As if he should say, that we
ought not to give our selves to the world, and least that we should be addict^d
to it, that we should often meditate on the hour of death. For this day we
line and to morrow hapily we may die: this lay spend our time in the vanities
of the world, and to morrow in our grave, without any further memory of us.

Death should be fearful only to Infidels, and to such as care not to live in
the fear of God. and those be such as never would hear that they must die,
but say, that to think on death makes men fools and subject to melanch^ly.
These men never remember how they contradict God, Ac. 7.
saying. Remember thy la^^en's: emongst which death is one: where note how
necessary that remembrance is unto us, when our Savior adds; and thou shall
not sin. Hence it follows that by remembering death, men be admonished to
refrain from sin, and therein no fools, but men endued with the truest
wisdom: yea he that will not endure to think on death, shows him self
therein most f^olishe; forsaking God, and receiving the devil; refusing heaven,
and embracing the earth, he ^^eth from virtue, and fol^^weth ^i^e; ^^nounceth
eternal happiness, and sek^th t^mporal delights. And when he might both in this
world and the next, find the joys of Paradise, living always in the grace of
God which yeldeth peace, contentment, and delight; he had rather here in this
world receive an earnest penny of hell. As the Poet says.

To noble minds death is no worse.
Then fight from prison vile. Petrarcha.

To abject minds it bringes more fear.
Then prison, or exele.
It is the extremest folly that that may be, to deceive and persuade our
selves, as if we should never die, which they do that will never think on
death. It is true wisdom therefore, ever to have it in our mind, that we may
always be exercised in some good work so long as we live in this world, and
not to defer to do well, until the last hour of our life, much like the
foolish virgins, who wanting oil in their lamps (that is good works) were
shut out from the wedding. Whereupon a certain writer says.

Reform thy life whilst thou have time,
Defer no day to mend:
For death does bring to weal or woe,
That never shall have end.
What we ought to do daily to the end we may not fear death.
TO call heartily upon God, that it will please him to send us his grace to
remember death, and to consider amongst other things, four, or five principal
anguishes, where with sinners are most afflicted at the hour of their death.

1. The first is, that then they must leave and forsake al worldly delights,
and that those things which most inordinatly they loved before, at the hour
of death will cause their greatest sorrow: even as is happened to Absalon, who
having nothing which he more esteemed then his fair hair, was brought by the
same to his final destruction.

2. The remorce of conscience.

3. The infernal devils accusing them.

4. The good Angels forsaking them.

5. The dreadful Judge all in wroath, whom easily before they might have made
their friend, especially by frequenting the holy Sacraments, by alms deeds,
and the like.

Then when we have acknowledged how worthily we have deserved these most
grieueous punishments, to crave the assistance of Gods holy grace, that truly
we may amend the imperfections of our lives, in dying to the world, the flesh,
the devil, all sin, and our own wills, and to live only to God: so that at
the hour of death being freed from these terrors, we may find consolations in
the mercies of Christ.

A remedy for those that fear not death but the pains of death
THere be further some persons that live in the fear of God, who fear not
death, but the griefs and pains of death, which the ghostly enemy puts
into their minds, whereby the remembrance thereof becomes most dreadful unto
them. This fear arises other from melanch^ly, (...) else from a certain
distrust which we have in God, ^s if he were not faithful, loving, and full ^f
mercy: and being our Father, yet that he will lay amo^^ (...) burt^^n upon us,
then we are able to bear^, and so suffer him self to ^e surm^unted in
sweetness, love, and affection, even by our earthly parents.

For this cause we ought wholly to resign our selves into the hands of God,
and to put our confidence in him, that he will so temper the pains of death,
that we may be well able patiently to endure them And if they chance to be more
griueous, that he will strengthen and asist us with so much the greater aid.

For such is the merciful nature of God, that the (...) he sees the danger of
man to be, the readier he is to send his asistence: and the more violent he
finds our ghostly enemy to afflict us, the nerer he is with his presence, to
give us comfort and consolation.

Nether does the holy Scripture tell us any one thing more often, then of the
exceeding care, and Fatherly providence of God twardes his children: and then
especially, when he sees them thorough their distresses, to stand most in need
of his help.

Do but behold with what cruel torments and exquisite punishments, he
suffered his B. Martyrs to be tried in this world: in which notwithstanding
they pe^seuered most c^nstantly, and cheerfully embraced their cruel deaths.

Consider how many good men thou see to die daily, and what comfort and
consolation God s^ndeth them in their agonies: which the some merciful Lord will
no^ d^ny thee at they death, if thou put thy confid^nce in him.

Rememb^r that hitherto God never laid a heau^er burden upon thee, then he
gave thee strength and ability to bear. Yea thou have undergone some burdens
which thou thoughtest thy self wholly unable to have endured: and think thou
that he will forsake thee in thy agonies of death?

It is good to call to remembrance some s^n ences of holy Scripture, especially
at such time as these fears shall assault thy weak mind. Psalm. 30.
As to say: O Lord I have put my trust in thee, let me never be confounded. If
God be for us, who can be against ^s? Romans 7.
Who has put his confidence in God and was ever confounded? and such like.

And if our Savior JESUS have already once died for thee, and were willing
again to die for thy sin if need should so require; how then can thou
imagine that he will forsake thee in thy last agonies?

And if with such signs of his love he has so often given him self unto thee
in the B. Sacrament: how can he forsake thee, when thou shall most of al need
his asistance.

Besides he says him self by his Prophet Esaias. Esaias. 49.
That sooner the mother shall forget her own tender babe, then he will forget or
be unmindful of us; thereby to declare that his love is greater, then the love
of any tender mother. If therefore a mother show so great love to her beloved
son, what will God do toward us, whom he esteems as his dearest children?

S. John says, when our Savior JESUS Christ had loved his in this life, Io.
13.
he loved them unto the end: for that is the property of true and perfect love.

And if in that instant when he suffered al his pains and torments on the
cross. he was mindful, not only of his B. mother, and his beloved disciple S.
John, but of those his enemies also who spoiled him of his fame, his goods,
and his most precious life: how then will he forget or be unmindful of those at
their ^^aths who adict themselves to his holy service?

Let us then say with S. Augustine: O Lord in this world ^urn^ me, or rent me
in pieces, if it should ^o please thee, so that in the next world thou deal
mercifully with me. Thy blessed will (...) Lord be done.

If at our deaths we confidently commend our souls into the hands of God:
why should we be more fearful to commit it our bodies?

If daily we say. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, that is, both
in soul and body, the will of God be done: why should we be terrified with any
temptations?

Therefore ought we at the hour of death most ^oyfully to suffer a^ pains and
(...), be they never so great or long, and to say. O Lord I am most ready to
endure any thing, (...) thy (...). And so do^ng we (...) God: a ^oy to his
Angels: (...) c^nfusion to the devils.

(...) be very good for us to turn o^^ minde^ (...) these thoughts which
bring such (...) upon us, and to say. Be it done with me as it shall please our
Lord to dispose: for what soever it shall please him to send me in this world,
it must needs ruin to good. He always sends his servants grace and
perseverance, to bear such his visitations, as he suffer th to befall them. In
this case we sh^^^d do as we see little children to do, who although they
hear^ others to talk of de^^th plague, war, o^ such like miseries, yet live
they mer^ly and cast all the care upon their parents to provide for their
necessities.

A remedy in the time of Sickness.
1. FIrst to think what commodity Sickness brings us. And to consider that it
is a messenger or harbinger sent from ^od unto us, to put us in mind to
prepare our selves to die.

2. It purges our sins: for it is a good sign of Gods love toward us,
when he punishes us in our members whereby we have offended him.

3. It weakneth our bodies, which is one of our espec^^ enemies. For which
cause S. Paul said. When I am made weak, then am I more strong. 1. Cor. 12.


4. It reclaymeth us from (...): for a sick man has no desert^ to be dru^ke,
no occasion of pride, or of such not (...) us sins, which are most hurtful to
the s^ule.

5. It stirs us up to good, as to confess our sins, to do work^s of
penance, and the (...).

6. Sickness is a sign of Gods love toward us: for God does (...) those whom
(...).

7. It is (...) which is in special gift (...).

8. It is a (...) salvation, and the high way t^ heaven gates and to (...) of
^nitie (...).

Think (...) in this world, th^^ r^ugh the great love of God, and for our
eternal salvation.

Remedies for avoiding the pains of Purgatory?
1. FIrst so nere as we can, to refrain from venial sins, and when we hau^
committed them, to be truly penitent for them, and to perform some penance.

2. Not to delight in the treasures of this world, but to use them as things
which God has only lent us.

3. To crave of God ^ur Purgatory in this world, (...) this great (...) us,
when he does vouchsafe us this favor.

4. Voluntary penance. For one Pater no^ter said in this life, is of more
effect th^^ many said by others for us after our death.

5. The communication of the ben^fitts (...) which is known but to few.

6. Patience in our (...), o^^enring them up to God for our sins.

7. To busy our selves in the works of mercy.

8. To off^r up to God a^ our good works, ^s well penal, as not penal, for
satisfaction of our sins.

9. To crave of God with perseverance, that it may please him to deliver us
from the pains of Purgatory.

10. To frequent the holy Sacraments.

11. To embrace death for the love of God, when we find it to approache, and of
our selves to desire and crave the holy oil of extreme unction.

12. Devoutly, and in the state of grace to receive Indulgences.

REMEDIES AGAINST DESPERATION.
FIRST consider iudicially al these remed^^s b^f^re recited, which are as so
(...) any gates and entrances of hope.

Next if th^r^ugh the greatness of thy sin thou d^^ d^spaire, beh^uld then S.
^ ter who ^enie^ this master, the greatest sin that he could commit, and yet
did God most mercifully forgive him.

If thou d^spaire thorough the multitude of thy sins, thou have M^rie
^agdalen to behold, who was pos^ssed with ^. devils, that is, with ^^ deadly
sins, and yet they were al remitted her.

(...) (...) dispayring, of his me^cie, then in killing his brother. As Iuda^
sinned more ^rieuously in hanging him self th^rough despe^ati^n, th^n in
betraying Chr^st^^ns Master.

S. Bernard writes, that all the m^rta^ and (...) sins, which (...) (...)
from the beginning ^f the w^r^^ if they were compared to the diu^ne merc^e of G
d, (...) other the (...) little (...) o^ wat^r, (...) of the (...) sea.

R p en^^^^t t^^t (...) f r th^e, and wo^^^ be (...) ag^ine (...) and (...)
little dr^p of h^s ^^ood were sufficient to redeem an^ hu^^red th us^nd
w^rldes: remembering th^s, ^ow can the^r despair? Dispay^e ^f thy s^^te and
put t^y c^nfidence in God (...) from thy s^^^e and runn^ to God, w^^^ every
where, and at al times, is ^^^st r^ady to embrace thee, Luc. 15.
even as the Father did to the prodigal child.

(...) (...) (...) served it? But seeing he has patiently borne ^ith thee so
song time, and given thee space to amend thy life, it plainly appears that he
desiereth thy salvation.

H^ did not damn thee when ^hou wast capti^^ to si^^e and his mortal enimie^
and will he damned thee now having done penance for thy sin, and being become
his saithful servant and f^^nd: Think th^^ that to be the nature of God? S.
Paul (...) argument. Romans 5.
If (...) were (...) to God ^^ we^e (...) by the (...) of his (...) recon^ille^
we (...). F r if Christ burn^d with to feru^nt a ^^sire ^f our salua^ion, that
to procure the same he would suffer (...), why w^ he not ^^y pardon thy (...)?

If w^ (...) seek the lost (...) rec^iued the pr^ (...) why wi^ he not receive
thee wh^ (...) within his sheep-fould. (...) the duty of an (...)? How can
thou despair of (...) with an oath he saves. Eze. 18.
I (...) and (...) death of a sinner, but that he be converted and live?

1. Cor. 11.
If (as S. Paul says) G^^ be the Father of mercy, and the God of a^ s^l^tion
(...) have displeased him, and have most humbly craved pardon for thy sins
committed?

And if God have not forsaken thee when thou did forsake him, and at al
times transgress his holy commandments, but has ever most mercifully
forgiven thee thy sins: will he now forsake thee being willing to amend thy
life, and heartily lamentest thy former offenses?

If before thou did penance for thy grievous sins, thou wast by Gods
mercy, moved to do penance, why should thou now despair of his goodness,
having by penance appeas^d his wrath?

The property and nature of Gods mercy, is, to take away the miseries and
afflictions of sinners. As Eccle^ast saves. God to whom it is proper to be
mer^^ful and (...). Considering then that God is infinitely merciful, he does
infinitely desire to pardon and forgive us. And S. Augustine says. That God
has so great a desire to deliver us from our mis^ries, that he is (as it were)
sorrowful and grieved, when we other will not, or make delay to accept of his
mercy. Wherefore he will pardon thee, if thou prostrate thy self before him.

Luc. 15.
It is said in S. Luke, that the Angels, and al paradise does greatly rejoice,
when a sinner does penance for his sins committed: will God then deprive
Paradise of so great a joy if thou endeavor to repent thee of thine offenses?

If a carnal parent be he never so bad, give not his child a stone when he
asks him bread, nor a scorpio^ for an egg* nor a serpent for a fishe^ why
then should we think that God (in comparison of whose love al love of earthly
parents may be said to be hatred) will give thee death in liew of life,
despair for hope, or darcknes for light? Whereupon our Savior says in the
gospel. If you fa^hers being evil, Luc. 11.
know, h^w to give good gifts to your children: how much more will your ^ather
in heaven, give a good spirit to th^se that ask him?

If our Lord and Savior JESUS Christ, whilst he conuersed in this world, did
eat with sinners, embraced sinners, end refused not to company with those that
were sick and diseased, but sought out the sick and the most grievous
sinners, and would make his abode and stay amongst them: why should we think
he will not do the like now? Has he changed his nature, or is he not the same
God that he was then?

It is a great glory to God, when a sinner is contrite and does penance for
his sins, for then appears his omnipotent power. For according to S.
Augustine, to justify a sinner declares a greater power, then of nothing to
create both heaven and earth. Further therein appears Gods infinite wisdom,
that can draw good out of ill, and most sweet sounding harmony, out of an
untuned instrument. Also his great goodness, who shows such mercy and
sweetness, even to his most mortal enemies.

DIVERSE WAYS HOW TO say the Pater noster with attentive devotion.
OUR FATHER.
O Father who have created me capable of the highest happiness, long before I
was borne into this miserable world, although thou knew how unthankful I
would be for so great a benefit: and being after thorough my own demerit, out
of the state of grace, thou have redeemed me with the life and blood, of thy
most dearly beloved Son. What (o heavenly Father) may I repay to thee for
such and so great benefitts which thou have powered down upon me, a most
miserable creature.

WHICH ART IN HEAVEN.
Thou have created the heavens for me, where daily thou do expect my
cominge. And that thou might adopte me an heir of the kingdom of heaven, it
pleased ^hee to send thy only Son to converse here with men on the earth,
and to live thirtye three years in extreme pouertye, pain, and affliction.
What can I repaye for so great a benefitt, most bountiful Father.

HALLOWED BE THY NAME.
Thou have made me fit to praise thy holy name, a work wherein consists the
office of Angels. Further thou have hon^red me with thy own proper name,
calling me a Christian, that is the Son of God, and the heir of heaven,
alth^ugh thou kowest how far unworthy I am thereof. Thou have made me the
Brother (or sister) of Jesus Christ, who according to thy holy vvil was
crucified in the midest betwixt two thieves, that I might praise thy name in
the midest of Angles. What due thanks can I give for so high a benefitt
bestovved on me so ungrateful, so unworthy, and so wretched a creature. O most
holy Father?

THY KINGDOM COME.
Thou, that thou might make me the king of heaven, would have thy own
Son to take on him the form of a most poor, and abiecte seruante; be borne
in a stable; live many days and nights in a solitary desert; converse with
infamous creatures; wash the feet of poor fisher men; be contemned of the
world; and to dye nailed upon the cross. What shall I render to thee for this
benefitt. O most svveete Father.

THY WILL BE DONE. etc.
Thou, that I might learn to fulfill thy will, would have thy Son to
perform the wills of men, in being obedient even to the death of the cross.
But what has my life bin at any time toward thee, but continually to repungne
thy blessed will, and to follow my own most wicked and unhappy will, and yet
hitherto thus long thou have borne with me. O Father most patient, how shall I
recompense this passing meeknes and longanimitie.

GIVE US THIS DAY OUR daily bread.
What can I give in requytall to thee, for the Institution of the most B.
Sacrament? For if I consider the person that did institute it; he was thy most
deerly beloved Son. And for whom did he institute it? For me, who he knew
would use it, so ill, so unworthily, so couldly, and with so little devotion.
The time when he did institute it was than, when he was ready to go to his
death: which with the greatest cruelty was prepared for him, when he provided
eternal life for us, whereby we might be transformed into him, and made
pertakers of all his merits, and be fedd in the desert of this miserable world
with that heavenly Manna. O unspeakable benefitt of a most louinge Father,
that would feed an unprofitable, an unworthy, and a miserable servant, with
the very flesh of his own and deerly beloved Son. Who ever has heard of so
great a love? O most bountyfull Father.

AND FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASES.
What shall I say of so many trespasses, so often, by so may means, and so
lovingly forgiven? what shall I say of the Sacrament of Penance, whereby often
with the price of the blood of Christ thou have purged my soul, although thou
knew I would prove most ungrateful? Whst shall I say, that having so often
(like the Prodigal child) forsaken thy house, and wandered into the region of
death, wasted and consumed both my own substance and thine: yet to have bin so
often again received into thy grace, entreated with all love and kindness,
and to have all my debtes paid by thee with no less price than with the
precious blood of thy only Son Jesus Christ? what shall I (I say) repay for
this so great a benefitt? consideringe thou kewest that after my trespasses
once forgiven, I would again fall into new sins and offenses? and how hard
and cruel I would be to remitt the trespasses of my neighbor? O most mild
and gentle Father.

AND LEADEVS NOT INTO TEMTATION.
What shall I render to thee, for so many helps and aids yealded to me in my
temptations, preseruinge me from such sins as I had headlonge run into, had
I not bin staide back by thy divine hand? what sin does man committ which I
had not committed, if thy divine grace had not assisted me? how often had I
tumbled headlonge into hell, if I had not bin held back by thee? how easily
had I bin overcome by each little temptation; if thy assistance had not always
been at hand to aid me? how often had that roringe Lion devoured me, if thy
most mighty right hand had not defended me? O most careful and vigilant
Father.

BUT DELIVER US FROM EVELL.
From how many myseries both of pain and of sin, am I delivered by thee. O
heavenly Father? How many are there that now burn in hell, who never,
committed so grievous offenses as I have done? How many other have perished not
having had so long life to do Penance as I have had? How many others that
have not had so great grace given them? Thou have delivered me from so many
diseases of blindness, of deafenes, of leprecye, of fallinge sickness, and
other infinite diseases, through which many with their own hands have
murdered them selves, and through despair have plunged them selves headlonge
into hell. If I wanted my eyes, my nose, my mouth, or my hands, what would I
not spend to recover them? If I wear deprived of my wits, or were for
theft defamed in the world, what would I not give to be free of that
disgrace? And who but thou. O most louinge Father, has delivered me from these
and innumerable other myseries? what shall I render to thee for this so high a
benefitt o lover of my soul? I will yealde up to thee o louinge Father, my
heart in the louinge thee, and acknowledgeing thee my Father. My heart shall
ever be with thee in heaven, it shall ever celebrate praises to thy holy name,
it shall ever be thy gueste, it shall ever be obedient to thy holy will, it
shall ever adheare unto thee, it shall patiently suffer all manner of injuries,
it never shall give consent to sin, and it shall ever be thine world with out
end. Amen.

The second may how to say the PATER NOSTER.
1. HE that will say the Pater noster with a certain feelinge of devotion, let
him observe these rules followinge.

1. First let him avoid overmuch hastines; whereby some are accustomed to say
many prayers with a desire to finish them s^eedily, and with a scruple to sin
except they say them all: whereby it happens that they say none as they ought
to do, find no taste of devotion but rather difficultye, tedioussenes, doubt,
distraction, scruple, and trouble, and so by ill custom huddell them up in
have, that they never understand what it is that they say. Let a man therefore
first rather undertake but few prayers and them to be well said, then to say
many with out devotion: for sparinge diett well disgested, pr^serueth life; but
much, and great varietic being ill disgested, breeds diseases.

2. Secondly, before he begin the Pater noster, let him a little recollect him
self. That is, all other cares and occasions set a part and impediments
removed, let him ^^nsider to whom he shall speak: what he undertakes: and in
whose presence he presents him self.

3. Thir^ly, when he has once begone, let him pawse a little upon every word,
weyghinge the force and signification of it: applyinge it sometime to God the
Father, sometime to the Son, and sometime to the Holy ghost; sometime again
to him self, and then to his neighbor; now to the Angels, and then to the
Saints.

4. Fourthly, it is expedient, that whilst he is in saying the Pater noster
(which are the words of the Son of God) he present before the eternal
Father, both his own necessities and the necessities of the Catholic Church,
for so shall he more easilye be heard, if the prayer of our Savior be
pronounced in the person of the Church.

5. Fifthly let him consider and meditate on the Pater noster in manner
followinge, makeinge as it were a Comentary on every word, thereby the more to
inflame his affection.

AS FOR EXAMPLE.
PATER. Father.
Mighty in creation.

Sweet in Love.

Rich in inheritance.

NOSTER. Our.
Of Christ by nature.

Of mortal men by grace.

Of the blessed by glory.

QVI ES. Which art.
In continuance, eternal.

In substance, infynite.

In goodness, the best.

IN COELIS. In heaven.
The myrrour of eternyt^^.

The Crown of Joy.

The treasure of felicity.

SANCTIFICETVR. Hallowed be,
Through lively faith.

Through firm hope.

Through fervent charity.

NO MEN. Name.
The glory of thy Son.

The majesty of the holy Ghost.

Thy everlasting Father-hoode.

TVVM. Thy.
That it may be sugar in the mouth.

Melody in the ear.

Iubilye in the heart.

TVVM. Thy. Again.
That thou only be glorified.

Thou only desiered.

Thou only loved, as the last end.

ADVENIAT. Come.
Above from the Father of light.

Within from the soul.

Without from grace and not from nature.

REGNVM. Kingdom.
Of Justice in the holy Ghost.

Of Joy in the holy Ghost.

Of Peace in the holy Ghost.

TVVM. Thy.
Not of this deceitful world.

Not of this mortal flesh.

Not of the callumnious devil.

Joyful without affliction.

Quiet without perturbation.

Secure without fear of perdition.

FIAT. Be done.
By thy commandment.

By thy Council.

By thy, and with thy help.

VOLVNTAS TVA.
Thy will.

Good in creation.

Merciful in redemption.

Perfect in Iu^tification.

SICVT IN COELO. As in heaven.
According to the Imitation of the good.

According to the similitude of the Blessed Virgin.

According to the example of Christ.

ET IN TERRA. So in earth.
That whatsoever thou will not, that we desire not.

That whatsoever thou love, we may love.

That whatsoever thou command: we may perform.

PANEM NOSTRVM.
Our bread.

The bread of tears.

The bread of the word of God.

The bread of the B. Sacrament.

QVOTIDIANVM. Daily.
By cause without it, we dye.

With out it we know nothing.

With out it we sin.

D A. Give.
Because it is proper to thee to give.

Because it is more blessed to give the^ to take.

Because it is proper to me to receive.

DA ETIAM. Again Give*
Not an Angel, but thy Son.

Not a man, but my Creator.

Not the thing given, but the Giver.

DA DOMINE. Give O Lord.
In the incarnation, thy word.

In justification, the Holy Ghost.

In glorification, thy self.

NOBIS. Us.
Unworthy servants.

Ungrateful servants.

Unprofitable servants.

HODIE. This day.
In this day of warfare.

In this day of darkness.

In this day of misery.

ET DIMITTE NOBIS.
And forgive us.

Thou which art mercy.

Thou which art the fountain of al grace.

Thou which on the Cross did pay the price of our offenses.

DEBITA COMMISSA. Trespasses Committed.
Against thy divine majesty.

Against the love of our neighbor.

Against our own salvation.

NOSTRA COMMISSA. Our committed.
With our heart.

With our mouth.

With our hands.

SICVT ET NOS DIMITTIMVS. As we forgive.
If we do not forgive them, thou will not forgive us.

If we do forgive them, we shall be made thy children by imitatinge thee.

If we pardon them, we shall be obedient to thy words.

DEBITORIBVS NOSTRIS. That trespass against us.
Who have offen ded us. Lightly. Ignora^tly Justly. Where as we have most
greueously offended our Creator for which we have des^rued a thousand hells.

ET NE NOS INDVCAS. And lead us not.
By taking away thy grace.

By remouinge the means of our salvation.

By with drawinge thy sweet presence.

By permittinge occasion for us to sin.

IN TENTATIONEM. Into temptation.
Of the Flesh.

Of the world.

Of the devil.

SED LIBERA. But deliver.
Thou which art our Deliverer.

Our Savior.

And our Redemer.

NOS. Us.
The Sons of death.

The servants of sin.

The bondmen of the devil.

A MALO. From evil.
Of sin and Pain.
Past. Present. And to come.
AMEN. So be it.
From thee.

By thee.

In me.

Hitherto Father ANDROTIVS. That which follows, of an other Father of the
Society of JESUS.

The third way how to say the Pater noster applyinge the seven petytions
thereof to so many effusions of the blood of our Savior Jesus.
PATER NOSTER. Our Father.
Sweet Lord and Savior JESUS Christ. Our Father, who through the effusion of
thy most precious Blood upon the cross, by the benefitt of the Sacrament of
Baptism, have regenerated us to be thy children.

QVI ES IN COELIS. Which art in heaven.
Heb. 9.
Who, as the Apostle witnesses, did enter into heaven, that thou might
appear before the face of God to make intercession for us with the scarres of
thy wounds, Romans 8. cap. 7.
and as a most faithful advocate, might plead our cause with unspeakable
sighs.

SANCTIFICETVR NOMEN TVVM. Hallowed be thy name.
The 1. effusio^.
Which name thou tookest in the first effusion of thy most precious blood, made
at ^hy Circumcision, that we who in Baptism (prefigurated by circumcision)
Coloss. ^.
had received that holy name of Christian might through the virtue of that most
precious Blood, circumcise our hearts from all sin and wicked inclinacions.

ADVENIAT REGNVM TVVM. Thy Kingdom come.
crowned with that crown of thorn, thou did deserve for thy self and us
thy unworthy servants. For, that we might be crowned with glory and honor in
heaven, thou would be crowned on earth with most sharp and woundinge
thorns.

FIAT VOLVNTAS TVA SICVT IN COELO ET IN TERRA. Thy will be done in earth, as it
is in heaven.
Bloody. Sweat made in the Garden: For there thou did show (and that in a
thing most bitter and irksome) that thou would fulfill the will of thy
Father and not thy own will, saying, yet not as I will, but as thou will,
Matt. 16.
be it O Father.

PANEM NOSTRVM QVOTIDIANVM, DA NOBIS HODIE. Give us this day, our daly bread.
If it had not bin the will of thy Father, that thou should suffer thy
bitter Passion for our Redemption, what other bread might I presume to crave
of thee, O Lord, but the bread of sorrow and of Passion which thou did
eat: and the Chalice of Tribulation which thou did drink? For I read.
That David a man according to thy heart said, My tears were my bread both
day and night. Whippinge, and would that it should be my daily bread, Luc.
9.
when thou saydest, If any will come after me: let him take up his Cross
daily. And if at any time this bread shall seem hard to my taste, join to
it sweet IESV the bread of Angels, the bread I mean of thy most precious
Body and Blood, which thou would have us to receive in remembrance of thy
Passion even to the end of the world, that being comforted and strengthened
therewith, we may through many tribulations ascend to the true Mountain Horeb,
3. Reg. 19.
which is life everlasting.

ET DIMITTE NOBIS DEBITA NOSTRA SICVT ET NOS DIMITTIMVS DEBITORIBVS NOSTRIS.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
I doubt not my sweet Savior IESV Christ, but that those thy cruel and
bloody tormentors, to the end they might increase thy torments and passions,
did again and again, take of and set on, that most sharp Crown of thorn
which they had violently thrust upon thy head, and that they often put on,
and again pulled of, thy garments all embrued and stifned with goare blood.
Renewinge of Thy most bloody wounds, which could not be but with much effusion
of thy Blood, that thou vouchsafe to remitt and pardon me those sins, which
so often I have renewed, and thereby given to thee new and fresh wounds
again; even so, as I do freely from my heart remitt and pardon, all wounds of
wrongs and injuries, that have bin offered to me.

ET NE NOS INDVCAS IN TENTATIONEM. And lead us not into temptation.
For thou, sweet Savior, according to S. James the Apostell, Cap. 1.
art no temptour to eu^ll, thou temptest no man, thou enforcest no man to give
consent to the temptations of the world, the flesh, or the devil; But thou
have suffered thy self to be tempted even to the most shameful death of the
Cross, that thereby thou might free us from all sorts of temptations. For
which cause thou spredst thy hands on the Cross, to receive us lovingly, if
in our temptation^ we shall fly unto thee. For this cause thou would have
thy hands fastened with nails, thereby to teach us for the subduinge of our
temptations, that we must crucyfie our flesh with all our sins, and
concupiscences: Three new fountains of blood that noe mean of aid may be
wantinge to us to purge all our imperfections, and overcome all our temptations.

SED LIBERA NOS A MALO. But deliver us from evil.
The openinge of thy side, from whence thy most precious blood flowed out in
great abundance. For what other thing does the flowinge of blood and water
from the side of Christ signify unto us, than the most holy Sacraments of
Baptism, of the Euchariste, of Penance and others, whereby the price of his
blood is most effectually applied unto us? Grante me therefore sweet IESV by
this effusion of thy blood a doble grace; the one that I may acknowledge and
often frequente these preservatives of thy holy Sacraments. The other that it
will please thee to receive me into that Hole of the rock, Cant. 2.
into that Cave in the wall, I mean into thy most sacred Side, where I may
rest secure from all miseries and adversities. For (according to S. Augustine)
Longinus did therefore open thy side with his Lance, that I might enter into it,
and there rest free from all temptations. Amen.

The fourth manner of sainge the Pater noster applied to the seaue^ words
which our Savior spoke hanginge on the Cross.
PATER NOSTER QVI ES IN COLIS Our Father which art in heaven.
Sweet Lord and Savior JESUS who with the wood of thy most blessed and
holy Cross have prepared a way and a bridge for us into heaven, and have
adopted us the heirs of everlasting life by thy last will; yet so as that we
suffer with thee, that also we may be gloryfied in heaven with thee.

SANCTIFICETVR NOMEN TVVM. Hallowed be thy name.
Because sweet IESV being nailed upon the Cross, thou above all others have
sanctified the name of thy heavenly Father, at which time in thy extremest
torments thou hadest thy only refuge to him, and calinge upon his holy name
did utter these words. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

ADVENIAT REGNVM TVVM. Thy kingdom come.
Kindell, my sweet Savior, within my heart, a feruente desire of the kingdom
of heaven, that thereby I may fully contemn all worldly delights, and with the
Apostle desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And in the end, after
many tribulations patiently suffered, and hard labors overcome, I may with
the Thief crucified with thee, be worthy to hear those words spoken on the
Cross. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Luc. 23.


FIAT VOLVNTAS TVA, SICVT IN CCEIO ET IN TERRA. Thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven.
When thou prayedst in the Garden sweet IESV, thou wast most redye to obey the
will of thy Father, even unto death, and that to the death of the Cross. And
being sone after nailed thereon, and ready to yeald thy soul into the hands
of thy Father, thou did in act fulfill his will when thou saydest It is
Consummated. Io. 19.
Grante me therefore grace my sweet IESV, that in executing the will of God,
that is, in fulfillinge his Commandments, in continual exercise of good
works, and in sufferinge tribulations for thy sake, I may constantly persevere
even to the end.

PANEM NOSTRVM QVOTIDIANVM DA NOBIS HODIE. Give us this day our daily bread.
What bread O Lord shall I crave of thee, but that bread which thou did
ask of thy Father, and what drink, but the same which thou did ask being
nailed on the Cross, saying. I thirst, for thoughthy corporal thirst were
exceeding great, yet thy spiritual thirst was much greater: whereof thou spakest
at an other time saying. Mat. 5.
Blessed ar they that thirst and hunger after Justice. Thou swe^ IESV did
thirst after the salvation o^ all men, for whose redemption thou did suffer
so cruel torments on the Cross: thou did thirst after the conversion of
thy Brethren the Jews, and even of those that were the mynisters of thy most
bitter Passion: thou did thirst after the salvation of all the Gentills,
yea, of all people whatsoever, had bin, were, or should be borne into the
world, for which cause most bountifully thou did sheade all thy sacred
blood. Grante me sweet Iesv a little of this thirst, that with a zeal and
desire of the salvation of sowles, I may employ that talent which thou have
lent me.

ET DIMITTE NOBIS DEBITA NOSTRA, SICVT ET NOS DIMITTIMVS DEBITORIBVS NOSTRIS.
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.
I doubt not my sweet Savior but thou will mercifully forgive our
trespasses, because thou forgauest the thief when thou wast nailed on the
Cross: nay even unto them that did crucify thee, sainge, Iac. 21.
Father forgive them; for they know not what they do. If then we show
mercy, and forgive those that trespass us: how much more o Father and
fountain of mercy can thou and will thou forgive as, if we through
frailty transgress thy commandments.

ET NE NOS INDVCAS IN TENTATIONEM. And let us not be led into temptation.
And although our sins be once forgiven us, yet so long as we live in this
miserable world, we are in dainger to fall into them again, the devil, the
Flesh, or the world, temptinge and vrgeinge us thereto: therefore is it necessary
for us, ever to fly and have recourse to thee, who upon thy Cross and through
thy Passion have overcome all temptations, even as in that great temptation,
when thou wast taken, and all thy Apostells fled thy most Blessed mother and
beloved disciple S. John, made it their refuge to fly to thee and thy holy
Cross. Whereupon even hanginge on the same thou did commend thy mother to
S. John, and S. John to thy mother, saying. Io. 10.
Woman behoulde thy Soon: and bedoulde thy Mother. Where, in the person of S.
John, we are all as it were commended to thy mother, to whom, next to thy self
in all temptations we are accustomed to fly, and to say, O Mary Mother of
grace, and mother of mercy, defend us from our enemy and receive us at the
hour of death.

SED LIBERA NOS A MALO. But deliver us from evil.
Then shall we be free, and defended from all evil, when we are under thy
protection, and under the shadow of the wings of thy Cross. Psalm. 25. and 55.
I will fear no hurt (said the Prophet David) because thou art with me. I
have put my trust in God, I will not fear what man can do to me. And therefore
thou my sweet Savior hanginge on the Cross, to make a final conclusion of
all thy torments and miseries through thy death, would have thy soul to be
under the protection of thy Father, Luc. 23.
sainge, Father into thy hands I do commend my spirit. Grante therefore
sweet IESV that singular grace to us, that at the hour of death we may so
commend our sowles to thee and our heavenly Father, that we depart out of
this world free from all ill both of sin and punishment, and may enjoy
eternal rest with thee, world without end.

Amen.
The fifte way how to say the Pater noster applyinge the seven petitions
thereof to the seven orders of Saints.
PATER NOSTER. Our Father.
OMnipotent everlasting God, Creator of heaven and earth, and Father of all
that live, either in heaven or on earth.

QVI ES IN COELIS. Which art in heaven.
For although through thy essence, power, and presence, thou art every where,
excluded from noe place: yet especially thou conuersest in the highest heavens,
where thou do manifest thy glory and majesty to all they Saints, both men
and Angels.

SANCTIFICETVR OMEN TVVM. Hallowed be thy name.
I beseech thee sweet Savior JESUS Christ, 1. Angels.
through the meritts of the most Blessed virgin MARY and all the powers in
heaven, that even as they do sanctify thy name, praise it, and glorify it,
and for ever will glorify it: So I and all other thy Creatures conuersinge yet
in this vale of tears, may until the end of our lives with all our power,
sanctify praise, and glorify the same.

ADVENIAT REGNVM TVVM. Thy kingdom come.
2. Prophetts.
I Further beseech thee through the prayers, tears, sighs, vows and desirs of
the holy Patriarchs and Prophettes, that as they in many places and at
several times have most longinglye expected the cominge of the kingdom of
Christ on earth: So we may most fervently thirst after the true spiritual
kingdom of Christ, both of this life which consists in true justice and
sanctity, and also of the next life, which consists in the highest felicity
both of soul and body.

FIAT VOLVNTAS TVA SICVT IN COELO ET IN TERRA. Thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven.
3. Apostels.
The holy Apostles o Lord fulfilled perfectly here on earth thy blessed will;
For at them did Christ point when he said. Whosoever shall fulfill the will
of my Father that is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother. They
truly both by word and wrytinge have diuulged thy will through the whole
world: and have both by example of their lives and also their deeds,
manifested the same in keepinge thy commandments and holy counsels. I most
humbly therefore beseech thee o Lord that we may also ever fulfill thy will
both by example of our lives, and may willingly teach and instruct our
neigbour, and so with the Apostles may immitate and follow thy beloved Son
Christ, of whom it is written. He began to do, and to teach.

PANEM NOSTRVM QVOTIDIANVM DA NOBIS HODIE. Give us this day our daily bread.
Consideringe o Lord that for the fullfillinge of thy will, we stand
principally in need of thy aid and assistance: for according to thy blessed
will and pleasure thou give us both a will and ability; thy aid I say, not
so much of corporal as of spiritual bread, whereby we may be-strengthned to
sustain and endure the tribulations of a Christian life. Even as thy B.
Martirs have done; who, 4. Martirs.
that they might more constantly suffer their torments and afflictions, did
strengthen them selves by daily receiuinge that blessed food of thy most
sacred body and blood. We therefore beseech thee through the meritts of all the
Martirs, that thou will vouchsafe to give us daily this bread in the holy
sacrifice of the Mass; if not Sacramentally, yet at the least spiritually.

ET DIMITTE NOBIS DEBITA NOSTRA SICVT ET NOS DIMITTIMVS DEBITORIBVS NOSTRIS.
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And in regard (o heavenly Father) that we are wholly unworthy not only of
this heavenly bread, but of all thy grace and assistance, add this benefitt
also to the heap of thy other gifts, that through the meritts of all chief
Bishops, Bishops, and Confessors, 5. Confessors.
whose office (by thy gift) has bin to remitt and forgive men's sins, that
my sins also both venial and mortal may be forgiven me. And as they directed
all their labors and watchings to no other end but by preachinge and writing
to draw men out of the jaws of the deuell and hell: so grant that I may
direct all my labors and studies to draw out of the filth of sin, first my
own soul, and afterward the sowles of other sinners, according to the
tallent which thou have bestowed upon me.

ET NE NOS INDVCAS IN TENTATIONEM. And lead us not into temptation.
Although (o Lord) we be free from sin, yet was it thy holy will that we
should not be without the temptations of this world, For we read that the
Angel Raphael said to Tobie. Because, Tob. 12.
thou wast grateful in the sight of God: it was necessary that temptation
should prove and try thee. For proof whereof never any endured greater
temptations of the devil and the flesh, nor did with greater constancy and
courage overcome them, than such as excelled others in austeritie and holiness
of life, as The Holy Eremitts, 6. Monks.
S. Anthony, S. Hilarion, S. Macharius and other religious persons. You have
lived (says one) amongst cruel Aspes and Dragons, neither could the most
terrible assaulters of the Devil daunte you. I therefore be seech thee sweet
Savior, that by the meritts of all holy Anchorits and other holy Saints thou will bestow that grace upon me, that amidest the many temptations which this
world yealdeth, thou will bestow on me spiritual weapons to beat down all
assaults of the world, the flesh, and the devil and that I never be overcome,
by giueing my consent to their wicked suggestions.

SED LIBERA NOS A MALO. But deliver us from evil.
Vouch safe o Lord to protect and defend me, from all evil of pain and
sin and if so it be thy divine will and pleasure, from all motion of
concupiscence which is the fountain of all evil. That henceforth I may order
and direct my life, in all purity and integrity both of mind and body,
according to the example of infinite virgins and holy wydowes whose blessed
memory the Church does yearly celebrate. 7. Virgins.
For so innocente were they from sin and all spott of uncleanness of life,
that rather would they spend their lives then blemishe their Chastity, more
willingly suffer all torments, than once yealde consent to the voluptuous
pleasures of the flesh. For which they have deserved a special and singular
Crown of Virginity in the kingdom of heaven, be sides the general felicity
of all the glorious Saints.

Amen.
FINIS.
A DEVOVT HYMN OF S. THOMAS OF AQVIN, very s^t to be said in the presence of
the ^. Sacrament.
Devoutly I adore thee o latent dietie,
Which truly do under these figures lie.
To thee my heart with reverence is enclind,
Ravished with that which in this work I find.
Sight, taste, and touch, in thee are quite deceived,
Wherefore by hearing thou must be believed.
I to thy words (Gods Son) give firmest credit,
Who art the truth that most belief do merit.
Upon the Cross lay only hid thy dietie,
But here both it and thy humanity.
Both which I do acknowledge and confess,
Wish^nge to have the happy thiefes success.
Thy wounds I do not here with Thomas see,
Yet as my Lord and God I honor thee.
More firm belief daily in me move
Effect my hopes and s^il increase my love
O sacred memorial of our Sauioures death,
True bread, that do to sinners life beqeathe.
Grant that my mind may ever live by thee,
And thou to it, a sauoure sweet may be.
O pious pelican, IESV Lord most good,
Cleanse my uncleanness, with thy precious blood.
Whose smalest drop, is of such worth and price,
As can whole worlds redeem from sin and vice.
IESV, whom I do, under veiles now see,
When shall my thirst, and longing quenched be:
That by fruition of that blessed place,
My soul may ever see thee face to face.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL POINTS CONTAINED IN THIS Book.
Certain devout and Godly Considerations to stir up and inflame the minds
of such who often frequent the Blessed Sacrament. fol. 1. Certain Godly and
devout admonitions for the more worthy preparation to the B. Sacrament,
answeringe to the former Considerations; the first admonition answeringe to the
first, the second, to the second, and so in order. p. 13. A meditation or
prayer upon the Pater noster, to be used of such as frequent the holy
Communion. p. 21. A most sweet and louinge conference of God the Father with a
devout soul, answeringe to the former petition. p. 26. A meditation upon the
Aue Maria, fit for such as frequent the B. Sacrament. p. 35 Meditations upon
the Creed, fit for those that frequent the B. Sacrament. p. 38. An
exhortation to such as are often invited by God to receive the B. Sacrament,
that they do not om^^^^. p. 47. Other admonitions shewinge how easily they are
carried away with vanities and do lo^se all tas^e of devotion, who omit to
frequent the B. Sacrament. p. 54. With what fears Satan our ghostly enemy is
went to terrif^e certain persons from ^ste frequentinge the B. Sacrament. p.
56. Remedies against such idle and vain fears as our enemy the Devil would
put into us. p. 59 That al signs and tokens of true and perfe^t love are
found to be in the most B. Sacrament. p. 71. How great a treasure the gift of
the B. Sacrament contains. p. ^6. After what manner Christ remains with us
in the B. Sacrament. p. ^^. Of three sins that are most opposite to this most
B. Sacrament. p. ^8. Of venial Sins. p. ^9. Of the intention we ought to have
when we come to receive the B. Sacrament. page ^9. Certain points to be
examined before receiuinge according to S. Mechtildis. page 81. Of Devotion.
p. 83. Four things which S. Mechtildis did use to meditate upon, before she
came to receive the B. Sacrament. p. 84. How we ought to hunger after this most
B. Sacrament. p. 85. Of the fruits of the most B. Sacrament. p. 85. What we
are to think upon when we come to receive the B. Sacrament. p. 87. After thou
has^ received the most B. Sacrament. p. 88. Certain s^orte prayers which after
we have received the B. Sacrament, either vocally or mentally, we may offer up
unto Almighty God. p. 89. VV^^ all that come to receive the B. Sacra^^nt,
receive not the sweet and heavenly cons^lations contained therein. p. 93. Four
things to be considered in this most B. Sacrament. 94. ^^^^rwayes and
directions forth of sundry authors, how we may prepare our s^lues to come
worthily to receive the B. Sacrament. p. 96. T^ree things to be remembr^d
concerning the body of Christ, at such time a^ we receive the holy
Sacrament, out of S. Mechtildis. p. 99. What our Savior answered again to
this B. woman concerning her aforesaied meditation. p. 101. Out of S.
Gertrude. p. 102. Out of Johannes Tawlerus. p. 103 Considerations before
Communion out of the same author p. 104 Out of the same Author. p. 105 Out of
S. Dionysius Areopagita concerning preparation. p. 107. A preparation out of
S. Bonauenture. p. 108. An other preparation out of the same Author. p. 109. A
preparation out of the Council of Trent. Ses. 13. cap. 7. p. 111 A preparation
out of the Roman Catechism. p. 112. Out of S. Thomas and S. Hillarie. p. 115.
A preparation out of Granatensis. p. 116. What the devil our ghostly enemy
endeauoreth chiefly to hinder in us. p. 123. What impediments the Devil
obiecteth to those that would frequent the B. Sacrament. p. 124. Ten several
temptations where with the devil our ghostly enemy, is accustomed to assaut
them principally, which do often frequent the holy Sacraments. p. 128.
Necessary directions touching Confession, out of sundry authors, and first
out of Petrus Damianus. p. 142. What things are to be observed in Confession.
p. 143. Certain Admonition to dirct us to make our Confession a right. p. 144.
Certain causes wherein the Confession is void and of no effect. p. 147. What
the causes be that hinder many from goinge to Confession. p. 148. The fruits
of Confession. p. 150. A form of Confession for such as do often frequent the
B. Sacrament. p. 151. As for example. p. 152. A form of Confession for such as
doubt whether they have made a perfect and full Confession. p. 154. An other
more brief form. p. 155. As for example. p. 155. A rule for such who lately
have been Confessed: especially when as many others are also to be Confessed,
as it often happens on principal feasts. p. 156. That he which accustometh to
receive often, if for want of a Confessor, or for that his Confessor does
think it expedient, he can not be confessed; yet he ought not to be troubled
or grieved in his mind, or refrain to come to the B. Sacrament, according to
the example of S. Mechtildis. p. 157 Remedies and Documents for such scrupulous
persons who think they never have rightly confessed their sins out of
Johannes Ruisbruchio a devout and learned Docter. page 158. Out of the same
Author. page 159. Again out of the same. p. 159. Out of Johannes Taulerus. p.
160. Remedies for such as doubt whether they have true Contrition or not: out
of the same Author. p. 161. A remedy for such as doubt wether God has
remitted there sins or not. p. 162. A remedy for him that is over much
oppressed with sorrow, for his sins past. p. 162. Remedies for such as are
troubled with unclean thoughts, out of sundry authors; and first out of that
learned Do tor Henericus Susius. p. 163. An other for the some out of Taulerus.
164. A Reme^ie for such as are doubtful of them selves, for that the have
received some little delighte in unclean thoughts: out of the sam^. p. 164.
Rem^dies for such as are d^ubtful in their minds whether they have yealded full
consent to unclean thoughts and temptations. p. 165. Remedies to drive away
unclean thoughts. p. 166. Why almighty God permits us to be ^r^ubled with
unclean thoughts. p. 169. Remedies for such, as fall often in some
imperfections, and thereby receive great troubl^ of mind. p. 171. A remedy for
such as find some defectes in them selves which they think they cannot
amend, and therein are afflicted. p. 172. The cause why some fallinge into
particular defect^s are overmuch afflicted thereby: with remedies for the same.
p. 173. An answer to an objection. p. 175. An answer to an other objection.
p. 175. An other Remedy. p. 178. The Conclusion. p. 179. Remedies against
particular imperfections. p. 179. General remedies against al sorts of sins.
p. 181. Remedies for scrupulous persons taken out of S. Antonius, and other
learned writers. p. 183. The description of a scruple. p. 183. How many evils
do grow thorough scruples. p. 183. Whence scruples do grow. p. 184.
Certain rules out of S. Antoninus to expel scruples. p. 185. Remedies against
al kinds of sins: and first of certain steps or degrees to salvation. p.
197. Remedies against pride. p. 200. Against vain glory. p. 200. Against
Covetousness. p. 201. Against carnal concupiscence. p. 202. Against the passion
of Anger in our selves. p. 203. Against the passion of Anger in others. p. 204.
Against Envy. p. 204. Against our own malice or hatred, conceived toward
others. p. 205. Against the malice or hatred of others conceived toward us.
p. 206. Against Gloutonie. p. 206. Against Sloth. p. 207. Remedies against
afflictions: and first that al evils of punishments, have their original from
God. p. 207. An answeere to a certain objection. p. 209. Remedies for any
afflictions that may happen unto us. p. 211. Remedies for such who are grie^ed
in mind, for that they are iniuried and contemned. p. 212. Remedies for those
that are afflicted in their minds at such time as they suffer tribulation. p.
215. Remedies for such, who for humane respects are ashamed to do well. p.
216. A remedy for such as the enemy labors to drive into despair,
suggesting unto them that al their good works are lost, and that themselves
are damned. Out of Taulerus. p. 220. Motives to comfort those that live
virtuously and do many good deeds. p. 221. Remedies against venial sins:
and first certain sayings of the Fathers concerning this matter. p. 223.
Whether it were lawful to commit on venial sin, to save the whole world. p.
225. Why we ought to avoid venial sins. p. 227. That venial sins are most
dangerous to those that frequent the B. Sacrament. p. 229. That some which are
given to spiritual exercises do yet nevertheless not profit therein, because
they little account of venial sins. p. 230. That the reason why we neglect
venial sins, peoceedeth of want of the fear of God. p. 230. That the Holy
Ghost is contristated by venial sins. p. 231. The opinio of Ludouicus
Granatensis concerning venial sin. p. 231. Similitudes for this purpose. p.
233. S. Gertrudes saying concerning venial sin. pap. 234. That scrupulous
persons may receive consolation herein: but those of large consciences* cause
of fear. p. 234. A question, whether a man may live in this world and commit
no venial sin. pap. 235. Whether after a venial sin be forgiven, the
punishment be also remitted. p. 236. Venial sins are are taken away by these
means following. p. 236. Remedies for avoiding of venial sins. p. 237.
Remedies to comfort those which are afflicted and sorrowful for the death of
their friends, out of S. Antoninus. p. 238. A remedy for those who fear Death
overmuch. p. 241. What we ought to do daily to the end we may not fear
death. p. 246. A remedy for those that fear not death but the pains of
death. p. 248. A remedy in the time of Sickness. p. 252. Remedies for avoiding
the pains of Purgatory? p. 254. Remedies against Desperation. p. 255. Other
remedies for those that despair thorough the multitude of there sins. page
259. Diverse ways how to say the Pater noster with attentive devotion. page
266. The second way how to say the Pater noster. p. 272. The third way how to
say the Pater noster applyinge the seven petitions thereof, to so many
effusions of the blood of our Savior JESUS. p. 280. The fourth manner of
sainge the Pater noster applied to the seven words which our Savior spoke
hanginge on the Cross. pap. 285. The fifte way how to say the Pater noster
applyinge the seven petitions thereof to the seven order of Saints. p. 291.
FINIS.

