THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY Of England.

BY SAMVEL DANYEL.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, dwelling near Holborne bridge. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT CARR VISCOUNT ROCHEster, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
TO give a reason of my work, is in my part as well as to do it. And therefore
my Noble Lord, why I undertook to write this History of England, I allege,
that having spent much time of my best understanding, in this part of humane
Learning, History, both in foreign countries where especially I took those
notions, as made most for the conduct of business in this kind, and also at
home, where it has been in my fortune (besides conference with men of good
experience) to have seen many of the best discourses, negotiations,
instructions and relations of the general affairs of the World: I resolved to
make trial of my forces in the contexture of our own History, which for that
it lay dispersed in consused pieces, has been much desired of many. And held
to be some blemish to the honor of our Country to come behind other Nations
in this kind, when neither in magnificence of State, glory of action, or
abilities of nature, we are any way inferior to them. Nor is there any Nation,
whose Ancestors have done more worthy things, both at home and abroad;
especially for matter of war. For since the Romans, no one people has fought
so many battles prosperously. And therefore out of the tender remorse, to see
these men much defrauded of their glory so dearly bought, and their affairs
confusedly delivered, I was drawn (though the least able for such a work) to
make this adventure which howsoever it prove, will yet show the willingness I
have to do my Country the best service I could; and perhaps, by my example
induce others of better abilities, to undergo the same. In the mean time, to
draw out a small substance of so huge a mass, as might have something of the
virtue of the whole, could not be, but an extraction worthy the pains, seeing
it concerns them most to know the general affairs of England, who have least
leisure to read them.

And the better to fit their use, I have made choice to deliver only those
affairs of action, that most concern the government: dividing my work into
three Sections, according to the Periods of those Ages that brought forth the
most remarkable Changes: And every Section into three Books. Whereof the
first, briefly relates the various mutations of State, plantation, and
supplantation of the inhabitants in the chiefest part of this Isle, before the
coming of the Norman. The second book contains the life and Reign of
William the first. The third, the succession of William the second, Henry the
first, and Stephan. And this part, I have here done.

The second Section begins with Henry the second, the first of the royal
family of Plantagenet, contains the lives of fourteen Princes of that Line,
and takes up 339 years. A space of time that yields us a view of a wider
extent of Dominion, by the accession of a third part of France to the Crown of
England: more matter of action, with a greater magnificence, and glory of State
then ever: in ermixt with strange varieties and turns of Fortune: the
inflammation of three civil wars, besides popular insurrections: the
deposing of four kings, and five usurpations which, in the end, so rent the
State, as all the glory of foreign greatness, which that line brought,
expired with it self.

The third Section contains the succession of five Sovereign Princes of the
Line of Tewdor, and the space of 129 years. A time not of that virilitie as
the former, but more subtle, and let out into wider notions, and bolder
discoueries of what lay hidden before. A time wherein began a greater
improuement of the Sovereignty, and more came to be effected by wit then the
sword: Equal and just incounters, of State, and State in forces, and of
Prince, and Prince in sufficiency. The opening of a new world, which strangely
altered the manner of this, inhancing both the rate of all things, by the
induction of infinite Treasure, and opened a wider way to corruption, whereby
Princes got much without their swords: Protections, and Confederations to
counterpoyse, and prevent ouer-growing powers, came to be maintained with
larger pensions. Leidger Ambassadors first employed abroad for intelligences.
Common Banks erected, to return and surnish moneys for these businesses.
Besides strange alterations in the State Ecclesiastical: Religion brought
forth to be an Actor in the greatest Designs of Ambition and Faction. To
conclude, a time stored with all variety of accidents fit for example, and
instructi-on. This is the scope of my design.-

And this I address to you, my Noble Lord, not only as a testimony of my
gratitude for the honorable regard you have taken of me: but also in respect
you being now a public person, and thereby engaged in the State of England, as
well as incorporated into the Body thereof, may here learn, by the observance
of affairs past (for that, Reason is strengthened by the success of example)
to judge the righter of things present: And withal, that herein, you, seeing
many precedents of such as have run even and direct courses, like your own
(howsoever the success was) never wanted glory, may thereby be comforted to
continue this way of integrity, and of being a just servant both to the King
and the Kingdom: nor can there be a better testimony to the world of your own
worth, then that you love and cherish the same, (wheresoever you find it) in
others.

And if by your hand it may come to the sight of his Royal Majesty, whose
abilities of nature are such, as whatsoever comes within his knowleldge is
presently under the dominion of his judgment, I shall think it happy: and
though in it self, it shall not be worthy his leisure, yet will it be much to
the glory of his Reign, that in his days there was a true History written: a
liberty proper only to Commonwealths, and never permitted to Kingdoms, but
under good Princes. Upon which liberty notwithstanding I will not usurp, but
tread as tenderly on the graves of his magnificent Progenitors, as possibly I
can: Knowing there may (in a kind) be Laesa Maiestas, even against dead
Princes. And as in reverence to the^, I will deliver nothing but what is fit
for the world to know, so through the whole work, I will make conscience that
it shall know nothing but (as faithfully as I can gather it) Truth: protesting
herein to have no other passion, then the zeal thereof, nor to hold any
stubborna opinion, but liable to submission and better information.

Your Lordships to command SAMVEL DANYEL.

THE FIRST BOOK of the History of England. Containing, A brief relation of
the State of this land, from the first knowledge we have thereof, to the
coming of William the Norman.
I Intend by the help of God, and your furtherance my noble Lord, Viscount
Rochester, to write a brief History of the principal affairs temporal of
England, especially from the coming of the Norman, to the end of the line of
Tewdor. A work I know great, and difficult, being to be raised of many
scattered pieces, variable and uncertain relations of times, diversely
affected: wherein, notwithstanding, I vow to be of no other side, then of
Truth, or as near truth-likelinesse as I possibly can get. Nor will produce any
thing, but out of the best approved Monuments domestical and foreign. Holding
it an impiety to misfashion the memory of times past, and suit them to our
present liking, and discourse: or to mis-leade the credulity of men, by making
up the opinion of Antiquity, with improbalities, considering we are not so
tied to stand to the fame of things, as to suffer our understanding to be
abused: nor yet so freed, to trafficque, all upon our own conjectures,
without custom of tradition: or so to vndervalew the discretion of former
times, as if ours were of a greater dimension: and peremptorily to censure
those actions, whose causes, and counsels we know not, having nothing but the
events, as dead carcasses, to show us what their living motions were.

And though I had a desire to have deduced this Breuiarie, from the beginning
of the first British Kings, as they are registered in their Catalogue, yet
finding no authentical warrant how they came there, I did put off that desire
with these considerations: that a lesser part of time, and better known, was
more then enough for my ability: and it was but our curiosity to search
further back into times past, then we might well discern, and whereof we
could neither have proof nor profit: how the beginnings of all people, and
states were as uncertain as the heads of great Rivers: and could not add to
our virtue, and peradventure little to our reputation to know them. Considering
how commonly they rise from the springs of poverty, pyracie, robbery, and
violence, how soever fabulous writers, to glorify their nations, strive to
abuse the credulity of after ages with heroycall or miraculous beginnings:
Seeing states, as men, are ever best seen, when they are up, and as they are,
not as they were. Bisides, it seems, God in his providence, to check our
presumption, wraps up all things in uncertainty, bars us out from long
antiquity, and bounds our searches within the compass of a few ages, as if
the same were sufficient, both for example, and instruction, to the government
of men. For had we the particular occurrents of all ages, and all nations, it
might more stuff, but not better our understanding. We shall find still the
same corespondencies to hold in the actions of men: Virtues and Vices the same,
though rising and falling, according to the worth, or weakness of Governors:
the causes of the ruins, and mutations of states to be alike: and the train
of affairs carried by precedent, in a course of Succession under like coulors.

But yet for that the chain of this business has a link of dependancie with
those former times, we shall show the passage of things the better, if we take
but a superficial view, of that wide, and uncertainly related state of this
Land, since the candle of letters gave us some little light thereof. Which was,
since the Romans made it a tributarie Province to their Empire. For before, as
it lay secluded out of the way, so it seemed out of the knowledge of the world.
For Julius Caesar, being but on the other side, in Gaul, could not attain to
any particular information of the state of Britayne, by any means he could
use, but by certain Merchants (of whom he got together as many as he could)
who told him something of the cost-townes, but of the state and condition of
the in-dwellers, they could say nothing, either so incurious were they
offurther knowledge then what concerned their trade, or the people here so
wary, to keep their state reserved, and unknown to strangers. And yet Caesar
gave out, that they sub-ayded the Gauls against him, and made it the occasion
of his quarrel, and invasion of the Land, whereof he only subdued the South
parts, and rather showed it, then won it, to the Roman Empire?

But now what was the state and form of government among the Britains before
this subjection? the first certain notice we have is also by the same Caesar,
who tells us how they were divided into many several states: nominates Caes.
comment. libro. 5.
4. Princes of Kent by the title of Kings: how Casseuillaunus, by the common
counsel was elected, in this their publicque danger, Complures sunt apud cos
dominationes Strabo. lib. 4.
to have the principal administration of the state, with the business of
war: and afterward how the cities sent their hostages unto him. Whereby we
perceive it was no Monarchy, as it is reported to have been, but like to the
Gauls, with whom it was then, one in religion, and much alike in fashion and
language, divided into a multitude of petty regiments, without any entire
rule, or combination. As now, we see all the west world (lately discovered) to
be, and generally all other countries are, in their first and natural free
nakedness, before they come to be taken in, either by some predominant power
from abroad, or grow to a head, within themselves, of strength and
understanding, to ouermaister, and dispose of all about them; introducing such
forms of rule, as ambition, or their other necessities shall beget. And such
was the^ the state of Brityane, Gaul, Spain, Germany, and all the west parts
of Europe, before the Romans (ouergrowing first the people of Italy, in like
manner divided) did by strength, and cunning unlock those liberties of theirs.
And such as were then termed Kings, were but as their Generals in war,
without any other great jurisdiction, within those small limits they held. So
that to tell us of the state of a Monarchy in this Land, (before that time,)
as if alone unlike, or more in State then all other nations, is to give
entertainment to those narrow conceits as apprehend not the progresses in the
affairs of mankind, and only the invention of such as take all their reason
from the example and Idea of the present Customs they see in use. For had
there been an absolute Monarch in these parts, which might have affronted the
Romans, with the power of a well-vnited state, it had been impossible for them
(having oftentimes much to do even with some poor Prince of a small
territory) to have circumuented or confounded, with all their stratagems, and
injustice, the peace and liberty of the world, in such sort as they did. And
though the Britaynes were then simple and had not that firebrand of letters,
yet seemed they more just and honest, and brought forth on the stage of action,
men as magnanimous, and touched with as true a sense of honor, and worthynes,
as themselves. But having no firm combinements to chain them together in
their public dangers, they lay loose to the advantage of the common enemy,
working upon the factions, and emulations, usual to such divisions, and were
made the instruments of their own subjection: for whilst every one defended
them apart, the whole was overcome.

So that with what credit, the accoumpt of above a thousand years from Brute
to Casseuellaunus, in a line of absolute Kings, can be cleared, I do not see,
and therefore will leave it on the book, to such as will be creditors,
according to the substance of their understanding. And yet, let me crave
pardon, least being but to report, I might seem to contend, if I make this
inquiry: how the memory of those former times, came to be preserved and Cic.
in Ep. ad Atticum vbi belli Britannici exiti^ expectari scribit, nullius ex ea
spem praedae, nisi ex mancipijs, ait. ex quibus nullos puto te, literis, aut
musicis cruditos expectare.
delivered to posterity, if they had not the use of letters in this Land (as
it seems by all probability they had not) before they were introduced by the
Romans, who sure would have given us notice thereof, had they found them here
at their coming, and especialy of schools and the Greek tongue, reported to
have been planted here for many ages before: but they tell us of no such thing:
they inform Et lib. de Not. Deorum, paris eos cum Scithis barbaries insimulat.
us how the Druydes, who were the ministers of Religion and Justice, the
especial men of knowledge, committed not their mysteries to writing, but
delivered them by tradition, Ingenio Galloru^ partim simileis sunt partim
simplicioreis, and magis barbari. Srabo lib. 4.
whereby the memory of them after their suppression (first by Augustus, and
after by Claudius) came wholly to perish with them. Which had they had letters
and books, could never by all the power and authority of the Roman State,
been so utterly extinct, but that we should have heard something more of them.

Besides it is strange how the Greek tongue, and the knowledge of Philosophy,
should be brought hither so far off, and so soon, seeing it was late, as Liuy
says, before it came into Italy, being so near at hand. Moreover, it is
considerable, how it made that transmigration, whether by Sea or Land? by Sea,
Hercules had set Pillars that shut up the world, many ages after for passing
that way. If by Land, Germany, and other Countries on that side, would have
taken some part in the passing: but Germany then, we find had no letters at
all. Only Merseilles, a Colonie of the Greeks being in the midway, might be a
gate to let it into Gaul, and so hither And it was after the subjection of
Gaul that they intertayned Philosophers, and physicians for public Readings,
and became a school for those parts as we may perceive by Strabo libro. 2.
: but they say the Merseillans used only Greek Charecters at first but for
their private accoumpts and contracts in traffic, and no other wise: So that
it seems then, the Britaynes received first letters (with their subjection)
from the Romans, and Agricola Prefect of the Province under Domitian caused
them here to be taught, (as Cornelius Tacitus (his son in law) reports upon
this occasion. Advice Was taken, says he, that the people dispersed, rude, and
so, apt to rebellion, should be inured to ease and quiet by their pleasures:
and therefore they exhorted privately, and aided them publikly to the building
of Temples, Bourses, Palaces; commending whom they found forward, and
correcting the unwilling, so that the emulation of honor was for necessity:
then they caused the principal men's sons to be taught the liberal Sciences,
extolling their wits for learning, above the Gauls, in so much that they, who
lately scorned the Roman tongue, now desired eloquence. Hereupon grew our
habits in honor, the Gown frequent, and by degrees a general collapsion into
those softnings of vices; fair howses, bathes and delicate banquets, and that,
by the ignorant, was termed humanity, when it was a part of servitude. Thus
far he acquaints us with the introduction, and cause of the Roman learning in
this Land. Which had it had the Greek tongue, so many hundred years before,
would have been as forward in the liberal Sciences, as the Romans, and not
needed this emollition by learning. Philosophy would have prepared them to a
sufferance of subjection, that they could not have been so universally rude,
and Barbarous as they are reported to have been. So that I fear me, of all
that lies beyond this time, we can have no other intelligence, but by
tradition. Which how we may credit for so long past (when letters, for all the
assurance they can make, break faith with us, in the information of things
even present) let it be judged.

And now for the time since (which seems to be all that amounts to our
knowledge of the State of Britayne) we find it, during the domination of the
Romans, governed by their Prefects: and if they had Kings of the British
nation, they were tributarie, and had their whole authority depending on that
Empire; which as the same Tacitus, (that free-tongued Roman) says; made it now
their custom to have Kings the instruments of servitude: speaking of
Cogedunus, to whom Claudius gave certain Cities in Britayne, with title of
King. For now after Caesar had opened the passage, and made tributaric so much,
as he subdued, the rest could not long hold out, against that all-incompassing
State of Rome: although during the time of their civil wars, and change of
government, Nostra aetate, inquit Strabo. lib. 4. Regulorum quidem
Britanicorum, legationibus and officys amicitiam Augusti Caef. consecuti,
donar^a in Capitolio dedicarunt: familiaremque Romany totam pene insulam
redigerunt. And at that time it seems by Strabo, held it not worth the
garding, for that it would not quit the charge.
from a Republique to a Monarchy, this Country lay neglected the space of 20.
years: yet after Augustus had settled the sovereignty, and possessed all the
wide obedience of that Empire, the Princes and Cities of Britayne, fearing to
be enforced, came in of their own accord, with their guists and tributes, and
the rather, for that as yet, they had found no other weight of subjection, then
a tolerable tribute, which, it seemed, they were content to endure with the
rest of their neighbors. But after Augustus time, when the corruptions of that
State, had bred miserable inflammations in all parts of the world, the
Britaynes, what with their own factions, and those of their Roman commanders,
remained in an uncertain obedience till the time of Claudius the Emperor; who
having much of the fume of glory, and little fire to raise it otherwhere:
casts an especial eye on this Province, to make it the pompous matter of his
triumph, and to prepare the way, without adventure of himself, foresends
Publius Ostorius Scapula a great warrier, Pro-praetor into Britayne, where he
met with many turbulencies, and a people hardly to be driven, howsoever they
might be lead: yet as one who well knew his mistier; and how the first events
are those which incussed a dauntingnesse, or daring, employed all means to
make his expeditions sudden, and his executions cruel. Notwithstanding did
Carodocus, one of the British Kings, hold these great Romans work for 9.
years together, and could not be surprised, till, betrayed by his own nation,
he was delivered into their hands, and brought to Rome captive, with his wife
and children, to be the subject of their triumph: whereof notwithstanding the
glory was his.

But Claudius had the honor of taking in the whole isle of Britayne, to the
Roman Empire which though thus won, was not, till a long time after,
overcome. For now the Britaynes (understanding the misery of their
dissociation: how their submission brought but the more oppression) colleague
themselves, against the Romans, taking their occasion upon the outrages,
committed on the person, and State of Queen Voadicia, widow of Prasutagus
King of the Iceni, a great and rich Prince; who at his death had left Nero his
heir, and two daughters, hoping thereby to free his house from injury: but it
fell out contrary; for no sooner was he dead, but his kingdom was spoiled by
the Centurions, his house ranfack't by slaves, his wife beaten, and his
daughters ravished. Besides the chief men of the Iceni (as if all the region
had been given in prey) reft of their goods, and the Kings kinsmen esteemed as
captives, with which contumely, and fear of greater mischeife, they conspire
with the Trinobantes and others not yet inured to servitude, to resume their
liberty. And first set upon the Garrisons of the Veteran soldiers (whom they
most hated) defeited the ninth legion, whereof they slew all the foot, forced
Cerialis the Legate, and leader to flight, and put to the sword 70. thousand
komans and associats, inhabiting their municipall Camolodunum now Maldon.
towns, London, Virolame, and Camolodunum; before Suetonius Governor of the
Province could assemble the rest of the dispersed forces, to make head against
their Army consisting of 12000 Britaynes, conducted by Voadicia, who (with her
two daughters, brought into the field to move compassion and revenge) incites
them to that noble, and manly work of liberty: which to recover she protests
to hold her self there, but as one of the vulgar, without weighing her great
honor and birth, resolved either to win or dye. Many of their wives were
likewise there, to be spectators and incouragers of their husbands valor, but
in the end Suetonius got the victory with the slaughter of 80. thousand
Britaynes, whereupon Voadicia poisons herself, and the miserable country with
their heavy loss, had also more weights laid upon their servitude. And yet
after this made they many other defections, and bravely struggled with the
Romans, upon all advantages they could apprehend, but the continual supplies,
ever ready from all parts of that mighty Empire, were such, as the Britaynes,
having no means, but their own swords, in an vncomposed State laid all open
to invasion, and spent their blood in vain. And in the end, growing base with
their fortune (as loosing their virtue with their liberty) became utterly
quayled, and miserably held down to subjection, by the powrefull hand of 14.
Garnisons, disposed in several limits of the Land, with their companies,
consisting of sundry strange nations, Noticia.
computated in all to be 52. thousand foot, and 300. horse, besides 37.
companies containing 23. thousand foot, and 1300 horse; which continually
guarded the North parts, where that, which is now Scotland, and obeyed not the
Roman Empire, was excluded from the rest with a wall or trench, first raised by
Agricola, after reedified by Adrian, Seuerus and others.

And in this sort continued the State of Britayne, whilst the Romans held it;
enduring all the calamities that a dejected nation could do, under the
domination of strangers, proud, greedy and cruel. Which not only content, by
all tyrannical means, to extort their substance, but also constrayne their
bodies to serve under their ensigns, when, or wheresoever their quarrelous
ambition would expose them. And besides the being at the will of their rulers,
in their obedience, they were forced to follow them also in their rebellions.
For after the election of the Emperors grew to be commonly made by the Armies,
many possessing those mighty Roman forces here, were proclaimed Casars, and
put for the whole Empire. As first Carausius, and after him Alectus, whom
Constantius (the associate of Maximianus, in the Empire) at his first coming
into Britayne, by Asclepiodorus the Praetorian Prefect, vanquished, with all
such as took part with him. After that, the Caledonians, and Picts, made
eruptions into the State, and much afflicted the Britaynes: whom to repress,
Constantius, (then sole Emperor of the west) came the second time into this
Land; and in an expedition to the north parts, died at York; whether his son
Constantine (a little before his death) repaired out of Illiria, escaping a
train, laid for him by Galerius, Emperor of the East, with whom he was in
wars against the Sarmatians, when his father came first into Britayne,
against Alectus; and here was he now first saluted Emperor, for which it
seems he much esteemed the Country, as that which gave birth to his dignity.
And reordring the government thereof, for a future security, deuides it into. 5.
Provinces, to be ruled by one vicegerent; 5. Rectors, 2. Consulars, and 3.
Presidents. After whose time, we have no certain nor important mark to direct
us, which way the Sat went, till the reign of Valentinian the elder; who
sendes Theodosius (the father of him who was after Emperor of that name) into
Britayne, against the irruptions of the Picts, Attacotti, Scoti, Saxones and
Eranci, which of all sides invaded and spoiled the Country: and after
Theodosius had by the forces of the Battaui, and Heruli, cleared it, Ciuilis
was sent to govern the Province, and Dulcitius the Army: Men of fair names
for such offices.

In these wars with Theodosius, was one Maximus, a man borne in Spain, but
of Roman education, who after, in the time of the younger Valentinian, having
the charge of the Army, was here proclaimed Caesar, and to subvert the present
Emperor, transports the whole power of Britayne: and first in his way subdues
Gaul, and there furnishes every place of defense with British soldiers; and
they say, peopled the whole Country of Armorica, (now called Britayne in
France) with the same nation: which yet retains their language, in somekinde,
to this day. And having spread one arm to Spain, the other to Germany,
embraced so great a part of the Empire, as he drove Valentinian to seek aid of
Theodosius, Emperor of the East, after the vanquishment and death of his
brother Gratianus at Lions. And by this immoderate vent, both of the Garrisons,
and the ablest people of the Land, he dis-furnisht and left it in that
impotency, as it never recovered like power again. All those great forces he
took with him, either left in Gaul, or perishing with him at Aquileia, where
he was overthrown by Valentinian.

And yet again in the time of Honorius the Emperor, the Colony of the Veteran
soldiers, fearing the invasion of the Vana'ales, made another defection, and
tumultuarilie proclaimed Emperor, one Marcus, whom shortly after they slew,
then Gratianus, who likewise within 4. months being murdered, they gave the
title to one Constantine, not so much for his merit, as the omination of his
name. This Constantine taking the same course that Maximus did, whatsocuer
strength was left, or lately in any sort recovered, he emptied it wholly, and
made himself of that power, as he subdued many of the western Provinces: gave
his son Constans (a Monk) the title of Augustus, and after many fortunes,
and incounters with the forces of Honorius came vanquished, and executed at
Arles. Where also perished the whole power he brought out of Britayne. And so
the State having all the best strength exhausted, and none, or small supplies
from the Romans, lay open to the rapine and spoil of their northern enemies:
who taking the advantage of this disfurnishment, never left till they had
reduced them to extreme miseries: which forced them to implore the aid of
Aetius, Prefect of Gaul under Valentinian 3. and that in so lamentable
manner, their Ambassadors in torn garments (with sand on their heads to stir
compassion) as Aetius was moved to send forces to succor them, and caused a
wall to be raised upon the trench (formerly made by Adrian) from Sea to Sea of
8. foot thick, and 12. high inter-set with Bulwarks, which the Roman
soldiers, and an infinite number of Britaynes (fitter for that work then war)
with great labor effected. And so Aetius left them again, once more freed and
defended from their enemies, aduising them from thenceforth, to inure and
employ their own forces, without any more expectation of succor from the
Romans, who ouer-wrought with other business could not attend affairs that
lay so far off.

No sooner had the enemy intelligence of the departure of these succors, but
on they came, (notwithstanding this fortification) battered down the wall,
overthrew the defenders, and harrowed the country worse then before. Whereupon,
again this miserable people send to Aetius, using these words: To Aetius
thrice Consul, the sighs of the Britaynes, and after thus complain: The
barbarous enemy beats us to the Sea, the Sea beats us back to the enemy:
between these two kind of deaths, we are either murdered or drowned. But
their implorations prevailed not, for Aetius at that time, had enough to do, to
keep his own head, and Valentinian the Empire: which now endured the last
convulsions of a dying State, having all the parts and Provinces thereof,
miserably rent and torn with the violencies of strange nations. So that this
was also in the fate of Britayne to be first made known; to perish by, and
with the Roman State. Which never suffering the people of this Land, to have any
use or knowledge of arms, within their own country, left them (upon their
dissolution) naked and exposed to all that would assail them.

And so ended the Roman Government in The end of the Romans Government in
Britayne Anno. 447.
Britayne, which from their first invasion by Julius. Caesar to this
Valentinianus 3. had continued the space of 500. years. In all which time, we
find but these 7. British Kings, nominated to have reigned: Theomantius,
Cunobelinus, Guiderius, Aruiragus, Marius, Coelus, and lastly Lucius, who is
crowned with immortal honor for planting Christian religion within this Land.
All other from Lucius to Vortigern, (who succeeds this relinquishment) were
Roman governors.

This is briefly so much of especial note, as I can collect out of the Roman
history, concerning the State and government of Britayne: finding els-where
little certainty, and from hence forth (during their short possession of this
Land) far less: Whereof Gildas, the Britayne complaynes, laying the cause on
the barbarism of their enemies, who had destroyed all their monuments and
memorial of times Gildas de excidio Britaniae.
past. And though himself wrote, about 40. years after the invasion of the
Saxons, and was next these times we come now to remember, yet has he left (in
his enigmaticall passions) so small light thereof as we discern very little
thereby. Nor has the Britaynes any honor by that antiquity of his, which
ouerblacks them with such ugly deformities as we can see no part clear:
accusing them to be neither strong in peace, nor faithful in war, and
universally casts those aspersions on their manners, as if he labored to
inueigh, not to inform. And though, no doubt, there was, as ever is, in these
periods of States, a concurrencie of disorder, and a general loosenes of
disposition, that met with the fulness of time; yet were there, no doubt, some
mixtures of worth, and other notions of that age, wherewith aftertimes, would
have been much pleased to have had acquaintance. But it seems his zeal (in
that respect) wider then his charity, took up the whole room of his
understanding, to whom the reverence of antiquity, and his title of Sapiens
does now give Sanctuary, and we must not presume to touch him.

Such was the State of Britayne, left without arms or order, when Vortigern,
either by usurpation or faction, became King, and is said to be the author of
the first calling in, or employing, being in, the Saxons, to make good his own
extablishment, and the saftie of his kingdom, against the Picts and Scots.

The Saxons at this time, possessed the third The State of the Saxons.
part of Germany, holding all the country between the Rivers Rhene, and Elue,
bounded on the North by the Baltique Sea, and the Ocean: on the south by Silua
Hircinia, and divided by the river Visurgis into Ostphalia, and Westphalia:
governed by an Optimacie of 12. Princes, with an election of a sovereign
leader for the business of war. This being so spacious, populous, and near a
country, well furnished with shipping (which the Britaynes had not) yielded ever
plentiful means to supply the undertakers of this action, which were first 2.
brothers, Hengist and Horsa, with all necessary provisions upon every fit
occasion. After they had been here a while, as stipendaries, and finding the
debility of Prince and people, their number soon increased. And first they had
the Isle of Thanet allowed them to inhabit: then the whole country of Kent,
was made over to Hengist by transaction, under covenant, to defend the Land
against the Picts, and Scots. And upon the marriage of Vortigern, with the
daughter or niece of Hengist, an exceeding beautiful lady, (brought over of
purpose to work on the dotage of a dissolute Prince) larger privileges were
granted: so that, by this alliance, and the fertillity of the Land, were
drawn in, so many of this populous and millitary nation, that Kent, in short
time, grew too narrow for them, and Hengist, to distend their power into other
parts, advised Vortigern, to plant a Colony of them in the North beyond Humber,
to be a continual guard against all invasions that way. Which being granted,
he sendes for Otha, his brother, and son Ebusa, with great supplies out of
Saxony, to furnish that diseigne. And so came the Saxons to have first
domination in Kent, and Northumberland, which contained all the country from
Humber to Scotland. And now began of servants, masters; to contemn their
enterteynors, and commit many insolences. Whereupon the British nobility
Vortigern is deposed.
combine themselves, depose Vortigern (the author of this improuident
admission) and Vortimer elected King of Brittayne.
elect Vortimer his son, a Prince of great worth, who (whilst he lived, which
was not long) gave them many fierce incounters: but all prevailed not, for the
Saxons being possessed of the principal gate of the Land, lying open on their
own country, to receive all supplies without resistance; had the advantage to
wear them out of all in the end. And beside force, they are said to have used
treachery in murdering 300 of the British nobility at an assembly of peace
at Amesburie, where they took their King prisoner, and would not release him,
but upon the grant of three Provinces more. Also the long life of Hengist, a
pollitique leader (of almo st 40. years continuance) made much for the
settling here of their estate: which yet they could not effect, but with much
travail, and effusion of blood. For the Britaynes, now made martial, by long
practice, and often battles, grew in the end so enraged, to see their
country surprised from under their feet; as they sold the inheritance thereof
at a very dear rate. Wherein we must attribute much to the worthiness of their
leaders (whence the spirit of a people is raised) who in these their greatest
actions, were especially Ambrosius the last of the Romans, and King Arthur.
Arthur, the noblest of Britaynes: A man in force and courage above man, and
worthy to have been a subject of truth to posterity, and not of fiction, as
legendary writers have made him: for whilst he stood, he bare up the sinking
State of his country, and is said to have incountered with the Saxons, in 12.
set battles: wherein he had either victory, or equal revenge. In the end,
himself overthrown by treason; the best men consumed in the wars, and the
rest unable to resist, fled into the mountains, and remote deserts of the west
parts of the Isle, and left all to the inuadors, daily growing more and more
upon them.

For many principal men of Saxony, seeing the happy success and plantation
here of Hengist, entered likewise on diverse coasts, to get Estates for
themselves, with such multitudes of people, as the Britaynes making head in one
place, were assaulted in another, and euerywhere overwhelmed with new
increasing numbers.

For after Hengist had obtained the dominion of Kent, (which from him became to
be The several entries made by the Saxons.
a kingdom) and Otha, and Ebuse possessed of all the North countries from Humber
to Scotland: Ella, and his sons conquered the South-Easte parts and began
the kingdom of the south Saxons, containing Sussex, and part of Surrey. Then
Cerdic and his sons landed at Portsmouth, invaded the South, and west parts,
and began the kingdom of the west Saxons, which after contained the
countries of Hamsheire, Berkesheire, Wiltshire, Dorcetshire; Somersetshire, and
Devonshire. And about the same time, Vffa, invaded the North cast parts, and
began the kingdom of the East Angles, containing Northfolke, Suffolk,
Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Eley: Erkenwin, began the kingdom of the
East Saxons, containing Essex, Middlesex, and a part of Hertfordshire.

Having thus, in a manner, surrounded the best of the whole State of Britayne;
they after invaded the inner, and middle part. And Cridda began the kingdom
of Mercna-land, or middle Angels, containing Lincolnshire, North-hamptonshire,
Huntingdonshire, Rutlandshire, Bedford, Buckingha^, Oxfordshire, Chesshire
Derbie, Nottingham, and Staffordshire, with part of the shires of Hereford, and
Hartford: Warwick, Shropshire, Lancaster, and Gloucestershire.

And with all these Princes, and leaders, before they could establish their
dominions, the Britains so desperately grappled, as plant they could not, but
upon destruction, and dessolation of the whole country, whereof in the end they
extinguished, both the religion, laws, language, and all, with the people and
name of Britain. Which having been so long a Province of great honor and
benefit to the Roman Empire, could not but partake of the magnificence of their
goodly structures, Thermes, Aquaductes, High ways, and all other their
ornaments of delight, ease, and greatness: which all came to be so utterly
razed and confounded by the Saxons, as there is not left standing so much as
the ruynes, to point us where they were: for they, being a people of a rough
breeding, that would not be taken with these delicacies of life, seemed to care
for no other monuments but of earth, and as borne in the field, would build
their fortunes only there. Witness so many Intrenchments, Mounts and
Borroughs raised for tombs and defenses upon all the wide champions and
eminent hills of this Isle, remaining yet as the characters of the deep
scratches made on the whole face of our country, to show the hard labor our
Progenitors endured to get it for us.

Which general subversion of a State, is very seeldome seen: Invasion, and
deuastation of Provinces have often been made, but in such sort as they
continued, or recovered, with some commixtion of their own, with the
generation of the inuadors. But in this, by reason of the vicinage, and
innumerous populacie of that nation (transporting hither both sexes) the
incompatibility of Paganism and Christianity, with the immens blood shed on
both sides, wrought such an implacable hatred, as but one must possess all.
The conquest made by the Romans, was not to extirpate the nation; but to
master it. The Danes, which afterward invaded the Saxons, made only at the
first depredations on the coast, and therewith for a time contented themselves.
When they grew to have further interest, they sought not the subversion, but a
community, and in the end, a sovereignty of the State; matching with the
weomen they here found, bringing few of their own with them. The Normans
dealt the like with the Province of Nuestria in France: and after they had the
dominion, and what the victory would yield them in England, were content to
suffer the people here, to have their being, intermatched with them, and so
grew in short space into their body. But this was an absolute The absolute
subversion of Britayne.
subversion, and concurred with the universal mutation, which about that time
happened in all these parts of the world; whereof, there was no one country, or
Province, but changed bounds, inhabitants, customs, language, and in a
manner all their names.

For upon the breaking up of the Roman Empire (first divided into two, and then
by faction disioynted in each part) employing the forces of many strange
nations to fortify their sides; were made so wide ruptures in the North, and
North East bounds of that Empire; as there burst out infinite streams of
strange people, that ouer-ranne, and laid open the world again to liberty,
other forms and lymits of State: whereupon followed all these transmigratio^s
and shiftings of people, from one country to another. The Francs and
Burgognons dispossessed the Gauls, and gave the names of France and Burgogne to
their Province. The Gauls transplanted themselves on some coasts of Spain,
where they could find, or make their habitation: and of them had Gallicia and
Portugal their names. The Hunnes and Auari subdued Pannonia, and there to gave
the name of Hungary. The Longbeardes, a people of Germany, bordering upon the
Saxons, entered Italy, got the greatest part thereof, and left there their name
to a principal Province, remaining to this day. The Goths and Vandales,
miserably afflicted the rest, sacked Rome, and after subdued, peopled, and
possessed Spain. So that it was not in the fate of Britayne alone, to be undone,
but to perish, almost, with the general dissolution of other States, which
happened about the same age.

Wherefore, we are now here to begin with a new Body of people, with a new
State, and government of this Land, which retained nothing of the former, nor
held other memory but that, of the dissolution thereof: where scarce a City,
Dwelling, River, Hill, or Mountain, but changed names. Britayne it self was
now no more Britayne, but New Saxony, and shortly after either of the Angles
(the greatest people of the inuadors) or of Hengist, called Engist-Land, or
England. The distance, made by the rage of war, lay so wide between the
conquering and conquered people, that nothing either of laws, rites and
customs, came to pass over unto us from the Britaynes: nor had our Ancestors
any thing from them, but their country: which they first divided into eight
kingdoms: all which, continued to the last extermination of the Britaynes
under Caretius their King, with whom they were driven over Seuerne, 136.
years after the first entertainment of Hengist. And soon after, the Saxons,
encroching upon each oath rs parts, or States (which never held certain
bounds) and the stronger usurping upon their weaker neighbors, reduced them
to seven kingdoms; that of the Northanimbrians, being made one of two: and
then to six (the west Saxons taking in the kingdom of Sussex to their
dominion.) And so it continued about 250 years.

At the first, by the space of 150 years, they were merely governed by their
own laws, without mixture of any other. But after Augustine the Monk, sent
with 40 others, by Pope Gregory, had converted Aethelbert, King of Kent, and
some other, they all shortly after received the Christian faith, and had their
laws and rites ordered according to Ecclesiastical constitutions. Many of
their Kings, when their stern asperitie grew molified by humility of the
religion, began to raise presently so many and great monuments of their
piety, in all parts of the Land, as if they striued who should exceed therein,
and had no other glory: Diverse of them renounced their; temporal dignities
for Spiritual, solitude, and became Monks; as Aetheldred, and Kindred, Kings
of Merena-Land; Offa King of the East Saxons; Kadwalla, and Ina, Kings of the
west Saxons; Eadberte King of the Northumbrians. etc.

At length the kingdoms of Merc-naland, and west Sax, so far ouergrew the
others in power, as between them two it lay, who should have all. For Ina, a
martial, wise, and religious Prince, governing the west Saxons, first
advanced that kingdom to a preheminencie, and did much to have subdued
Mercna-land: but yet Offa, (afterward King thereof) was in fair possibility
to have swallowed up both the west Saxons, and all the rest of the kingdoms.
For whilst he lived, which was in the time of Carolus Magnus, (with whom he
held league and amity) he was esteemed as the especial King of the Land. But
the many wrongs he did, and the murder committed in his house, upon
Aethelbert, King of the East Angles, coming to him under public faith, and a
suitor to his daughter, were justly revenged upon his posterity, which after
him declining, in the end lost all. For Egbert, descended from Inegild, the
brother of Ina, attayning the kingdom of the west Saxons, began the way to
bring all the rest into subjection. And being a Prince, who from a private
fortune, wherein he lived below, with, and not above other men, had learned
sufferance and moderation; and by the Estate of an exile, experience, grew to
have great advantages over the time, and others borne fortunes, and rose by
these means.

Ina, his great uncle, renouncing the world, with his kingdom, and dying
without issue, left the succession imbroiled, and out of the direct royal line
as he found it. So that those four Kings of the west Saxons, who severally
succeeded him. Ethelard, Sigibert, Kinulph and Britric, were rather Kings by
election, and their own power, then by right of descent. And Britric knowing
the weakness of his title, and the much promising forwardnes of Egbert; with
his propinquitie in blood, to the former Kings, practiced to have him made
away; which he perceauing, fled first to Offa, King of Mercna-land, where
finding little security, in regard Britric had (to strength himself) married
the daughter of that king, he escaped into France, and there remained till the
death of Britric, and then returning, obtaines the kingdom of the Westsaxons;
subdues Cornwall, inhabited by the Britaynes; and after sets upon Bernulph,
newly invested in the kingdom of Mercna-land; a State by the rupture of the
Royal line, likewise grown tottering. For Egferth, the son of Offa, enjoyed
but. 4. months, the inheritance of his fathers immanitie: whereby that
kingdom descended collaterally to Kennulph, who left it to Kenelme a child,
after murdered by his sister Quinred. Ceolulph, brother to Kennulph,
succeeding, after his first years reign, was expeld by Bernulph, and Bernulph
by Egbert, who made that kingdom Egbert obtained the kingdom, which by him
was named EngLind. Anno. 802.
tributarie to the west Saxons, as he did after that of the South, and East
Saxons, with the kingdom of Northumberland. And by this means, in a manner,
attained to a sovereignty of the whole. But the Danes imbroiling his peace in
the end of his reign, held him back from enjoying such a fullness of power,
as that we may account him the absolute Monarch of the kingdom, nor yet any
of his successors so long as the Danes continued vnsubiected. For they having
first made irruptions into the State, in the reign of the late King Britric
(his predecessor) ever after held a part thereof, and afflicted the whole, till
they had attained the absolute sovereignty to themselves.

The Danes were a people of Germany, next The description of the Danes
neighbors to the Saxons, and of language and manners little different.
possessing besides Cimbrica Chersonesus (now called Denmark) all the Isles
adjacent in the Baltique Sea, and sometimes the kingdom of Norway, A mighty,
rough, and martial nation; strong in shipping, through their exercise of
piracie, and numerous in people for all suppliments. Who perceauing here the
happy success, and plantation of the Saxons, were drawn with desire and
emulation, likewise, to put in for a part, the coaste lying open to invasion,
and the many divisions of the Land, with the discord of Princes, making them an
easy way thereunto. So that in a manner, as soon as the Saxons had ended
their travails with the Britaynes, and drew to settling of a Monarchy, the
Danes, as if ordained to revenge their slaughters, began to assault them with
the like a^fflictions. The long, the many, and horrible encounters between this
two fierce nations, with the bloodshed, and infinite spoils committed in every
part of the Land, are of so disorded and troublous memory, that what with their
asperous names, together with the confusion of place, times, and persons,
intricately delivered, is yet a war to the reader to ouer-looke them. And
therefore to favor mine own pains and his, who shall get little profit
thereby, I pass them over.

After the death of Egbert, Aethelwolph, his son succeeded in the State, with
the title of King of the west Saxons only, and was a Prince more addicted to
devotion then action: as may be seen by his donation of the tenth part of his
kingdom (with exemption of all regal service) for the service of God: besides
an annuitie of 300 marks, to be bestowed in pious uses at Rome; whither he
went twice in person, with his youngest son Alfred, whom he especially loved;
and whom Pope Leo 4 anointed a King at eleven years of age, as if deuining of
his future fortune.

Upon his last journey, and whole years stay at Rome; Aethelbald, his eldest
son, combined with the nobility of the Westsaxons, to keep him out, and
deprive him utterly of his government, and wrought so, as notwithstanding the
great love his people bare him, he was brought to yield up the kingdom of the
Westsaxons, to Aethelbald, and retain only the kingdom of the East Angles,
(a State of far less dignity) to himself. After which, reigning but two
years, Aethelbald succeeded in the whole, and with great infamy, marrying his
fathers widow, Judith, daughter to Charles le Chauue, King of France, enjoyed
it but two years and a half; when Aethelred, the second son of Aethelulph,
entered to the government, which he held 5 years in continual conflict, with
the Danes.

After whom, Alfred, the mirror of Alfred. 872.
Princes (made a King before he had a kingdom) at 22 years of his age, and in
a year wherein eight several battles had been given to the Danes, by the
Saxons; begane his troublous reign, wherein he was perpetually in war, either
against his enemies, or cls against vices.

First after a great danger to lose all, he was forced to yield up a part of
the kingdom (which was that of the East Angles and Northumberland) to Guthrun,
leader of the Danes, whom upon his baptization, he made his confederate, and
owner of that by right, which before he usurped by violence.

And notwithstanding all the continual, and intricate toil he endured amidst
the clattering and horror of arms, he performed all noble actions of peace:
collecting first the laws of his predecessors, and other the Kings of the
Saxons, (as if Offa, King of Merena-land, and Aethelbert the first christian
english King) of which, by the grave advise, and consent of his States
assembled, he makes choice of the fittest; antiquates those of no use, and ads
other according to the necessity of the time.

And for that the wildenes of war, by reason of these perpetual conflicts
with strangers, had so let out the people of the Land, to unlawful riots and
rapine; that no man could travail without conuoy: he ordained the divisions
of shires, hundreds, and tithings: that every Englishman (now the general name
for all the Saxons) living legally, might be of a certain hundred or tithing,
out of which he was not to remove without security: and out of which, if he
were accused of any crime, he was likewise to produce sureties for his
behavior, which if he could not find, he was to endure the punishment of
the law. If any malefactor, before or after he had put in sureties escaped;
all the Tithing or Hundred were fined to the King, by which means he secured
trauailers, and the peace of his country.

The opinion he had of learning made him often complain the want thereof:
imputing it amongst his greatest infortunes to have been bred without it, and
to have his kingdom so utterly destitute of learned men, as it was, through
the long continuance of this barbarous war: which made him send out for such,
as were any way famous for letters, and having gotten them, he both highly
preferred them, and also (as they do, who know not to much themselves) held
them in great veneration: rarenes then, setting a higher price on meaner parts,
then after, plenty did on more perfections. Grimbald, and Scotus, he drew out
of France: Asser (who wrote his life) out of wales; others from other parts: he
was the first lettered Prince we had in England; by whose means and
encouragement public schools had here, either their reviving, or beginning.

Those wants of his own, made him take a greater care for the education of his
sons, with whom were bred, under most deligent masters, almost all the
children of the Nobility within his kingdom.

All his own time he could clear from other business, he bestowed in
study, and did himself, and caused others, to translate many things in the
vulgar tongue: which he labored, it seems, much to adorn, and especially
affected the Saxon meeters: whereby Mat. Westminster.
to glorify that of a King, he attained the title of Poet.

The natural day, consisting of 24 hours, he cast into 3 parts: whereof
eight he spent in prayer, study, and writing: eight in the service of his
body, and eight in the affairs of his States. Which spaces (having then no
other engine for it) he measured by a great wax light, divided into so many
parts, receiving notice by the keeper thereof, as the several hours passed in
the burning.

With as fair an order did he proportion his revenues, equalling his
liberalities to all The first furuay of the kingdom.
his other expenses: whereof to make the current run more certain, he took
a precise notice of them, and made a general suruay of the kingdom, and had
all the particulers of his estate registered in a book which he kept in his
treasury at Winchester. And within this circumference of order, he held him in
that irregularitie of fortune, with a weak disposition of body, and reigned
27 years, leaving his son Edward, a worthy succestor, to maintain the line
of noblenes thus begun by him.

EDward, though he were far inferior to Edwardus Senior. 900.
him in learning, went much beyond him in power: for he had all the kingdom of
Mercna-land, in possession: whereof Alfred had but the homage, and some write,
held soueraignitie over the east Angles, and Northumbrians: though we find
in the joint laws that he and Guthrun made together, they held the same
confederation fore-concluded by Alfred. He also subdued the Britaynes in
wales: fortified and furnished with garrisons diverse towns in England, that
lay fit to prevent the incursions of the Danes; and was all his reign of 23
years, in continual action, and ever before hand with fortune. And surely his
father, he, and many that succeeded, during this Danicque war, though they
lost their ease, won much glory and renown. For this affliction held them so
in, as having little out-lets, or leisure, for ease and luxury, they wear made
the more pious, just and careful in their government: otherwise it had been
impossible to have held out against the Danes, as they did: a people of that
power and vndauntable stomach, as no fortune could deter, nor make to give
over their hold. And the imbecillitie of some inactive Prince at that time,
had been enough to have let them quite into the whole: which may be the cause,
that in the succession of some of these Kings, were certain ruptures made out
of course, in respect of their ablenes. As first after the death of this
renowned King Edward Senior, his son Athelstan of full years, and Anno. 924.
spirit, was (notwithstanding the bracke in his birth) preferred before his
legittimate son Edmond, under age: Nor did Athelstan disappoint the kingdom
in this work, but performed all noble parts of religion, justice, and
magnanimity, after 16 years reign, dying without issue, Edmond his brother
succeeded Edmond. 940.
him. A Prince likely to have equalled the worth of his predecessors, had he
not untimely perished by the hand of a base outlaw in his own house, at a
festival, amidst his people, that dearly loved and honored him. And though
he left two sons, yet was Edred his brother preferred to the kingdom before
Edred or Eldred 946.
them: who making no variation from the line of virtue, continued by his
ancestors, was held perpetually in work by the Danes, during the whole time
of his reign, which was of 10 years.

Edwin, his nephew, the eldest son of Edwin.
Edmond, succeeded him, an irregular youth, who interrupting the course of
goodness, lived dissolutely, and died wishedly. Otherwise had Edgar (the other
son of Edmond) continued that rare succession of good Princes, without the
interposition of any ill.

959.
Edgar, though he were but 16 years of age, yet capeable of council, was by
the grave advise of his Bishops (who in that time of zeal held especially the
raines on the hearts and affections of men) put and directed in the way of
goodness, and became a most heroical Prince.

Amongst other his excellent actions of government, he provided a mighty
Navy, to secure his coasts from invasion; which now he found (though late) was
the only mean to keep out these miseries from within, that thus lamentably
afflicted the land, ever before negligent, or not inured to sea-affaires. For
when the Romans first subdued the same, there was no shipping, but a few small
vessels made of wicker, and covered with hides: whereby they, and after the
Danes, both mighty (as those times gave) in shipping, found that easy footing
they had: Yet Egbert is said to have provided a strong Navy, about the year
840. And Alfrid 30 or 40 years after did the like. But either now dis-used, or
consumed by the enemy, Edgar re-edifies, and sets forth a Fleet consisting (as
some write) of 1600 sail, others a far greater number, and those he deuides
and places in four parts of the Realm, making his progresses yearly, with
part of this mighty Navy, round about the whole Isle, whereof he assumed the
title of king.

And to reduce it all to one name and Monarchy, he was entitled, king of all
Albion; as testifies his Charter granted to the Abbey of Maldesmesbury, in
these' words: Ego Edgarus totius Albionis Basileus nec non Maritimorum seu
insulanorum Regum circum habitantium, etc. For he having first of all other
made peace with the Danes, and granted them quiet cohabitation through all his
dominions; had the sovereignty over them: And Kenneth, king of Scots did him
homage, whether for Cumberland and Westmerland, given to that Crown by king
Edmond his father, or for his whole kingdom; I cannot say. And five kings of
Wales did the like for their country, and came all to his Court at Cardiffe.

So that he seems the first and most absolute Monarch of this land that
hitherto we find: The general peace that held all his time, honored his name
with the title of Pacificus: and rendered his kingdom, never before acquainted
with the glory of quietness, very flourishing.

But as if the same had been given to show, and not to use, like a short calm
betwixt storms, it lasted but little beyond his reign of sixteen years:
being too short to close the disseuered joints of a commixed kingdom; which was
only to have been the work of Time: and that none of these late Princes (who
were best like to have advanced and confirmed the State of a Monarchy,) were
ordained to have. But all (as if things would another way) were put off from
their ends, by their untimely deaths: as was this glorious young Prince, in the
32 year of his age: Saint Edward.
leaving his son Edward, a child, to undergo 975.
the miseries of nonage, to be made a sacrifice Elfred his stepmother is said
to have murdered him, hunting in the Isle of Purbeck.
for ambition, and a Saint by persecution, through the hand of a stepmother;
who to advance her own son Ethelred, brake in, over the bounds of nature and
right, to make his way: and is said, her self to have murdered him, coming
to her house, estrayed, in hunting, and discompanied.

But Ethelred, as if ill set, prospered not Ethelred.
on this ground: the entrance to whose 978.
reign was blood; the middle, misery; and the end, confusion: They write,
Saint Dunstan preaching at his Coronation, prophetically foretold him of these
calamities would follow this transgression: saying: For that thou have aspired
to the Crown, by the death of thy brother, murdered by thy mother; thus says
the Lord: the sword shall never depart from thy house, raging against thee all
the days of thy life, slaying those of thy seed, till the kingdom be
transferred to another, whose fashion and language thy people shall not know.
Nor shall thy sin, nor the sin of thy ignominious mother, with her
counselors, be expiated, but by long auengement. And this (whether so uttered
or not) was ratified in the event. For either this unjust disordring the
succession, or the concurrency of hidden causes meeting with it, so wrought, as
this late begun Monarchy fell quite asunder, and begat the occasion of two
conquests, by foreign nations, within the space of 50 years.

For the Danes, having now been so long inmates with the English, dispread
over all parts by intermatching with them, and multiplying with the late peace
and confederations, had their party, (though not their rule) greater then ever:
so that this opportunity of a young and unsettled Prince, in a new and branling
State, drew over such multitudes of other of the same nation: as every coast
and part of the Land, were miserably made the open rodes of spoil and
saccage: in such sort, as the State knew not where to make any certain head
against them: for if incountred in one place, they assaild another, and had so
sure intelligence what, and where all preparations were raised, as nothing
could be effected auaylable to quayle them; Whereupon Ethelred, in the end, was
feign, seeing he could not prevail with the sword, to assail them with money,
and bought a peace for ten thousand pounds: which God wot, proved after, a very
dear pennyworth to the common wealth, showing the seller thereof, how much was
in his power, and the buyer, at how hard a rate his necessity was to be
served; and yet not sure of his bargain, longer then the contractor would. Who
having found the benefit of this market, raised the price thereof almost every
year. And yet had not Ethelred what he paid for: the Land in one part or
other, never free from spoil and invasion, but rather the more now oppressed,
both by the The original of Dane gelt the first imposition laid upon the
kingdom.
war, and this taxation. Which was the first we find in our annals laid upon
the kingdom, (and with heavy greeuance raised in a poor distressed State,)
continewing many ages after the occasion was extinct: And in the end (though in
another name) became the usual supplyment in the dangers of the kingdom, and
the occasions of Princes.

And hereby Ethelred both enlarged the means and desire of the enemy, so that
at length came Swayn, King of Denmark, and Aulafe, King of Norway, in person,
as if likewise to receive hire for committing outrage, and were both returned
with great sums, and Aulafe of a milder disposition, with baptism.

These calamities from abroad, were made more, by the disloyalties at home:
faith and respect (being seldom found safe in lost fortunes) held not in most
of the principal men employed in the defense. Aelfric, Admiral of the Navy,
is said to have given intelligence of all Sea-preparations, and disappointed
that work. The Earls Fran, Frithigist, Godwin, and Turkettle, descended of
Danicke progeny, and of greatest comaund, deceived the armies by Land, and were
the aucthors of discouragement to the people they led. Edric Earl of
Mare-land, after them made General of the Kings forces, is branded with
everlasting ignominy, and the title of False, for his barbarous disloyalty,
frustrating all attempts wherein he was employed.

Wolnod, a nobleman, for his misdemeanor outlawed, made depredations on the
coasts, with 20 ships, and was the cause that 80 more sent to take him in,
were utterly consumed.

This defection of his nobility, howsoever it might be by their own
discontent, emulation, corruption, or affection, is laid to the pride of
Ethelred, whom yet we find more unfortunate then weak, howsoever they have
set his mark: and neglected no occasion to make resistance and reparations
against all events, bringing often his affairs to the very point of dispatch,
and yet put by, at an instant from all, as if nothing went with him, bur his
will to do worthily: which howsoever it were (besides the misery to loose) he
must have (that which accompanies infelicity) Blame, and Reproach. Though the
many and desperate battles he made; the good constitutions for the
government; the provisions to supply all important occasions, show, that he was
not much behind the best Princes, but only in fortune.

By the example of Edgar his father, he procured a mighty Navy, causing of
every 310 hide or plough-land throughout the kingdom, a ship to be built, and
of every eighth, a Corslet to be found: Yet all this shipping stood him in
little stead, but was either quasht with tempest, consumed with fire by the
enemy, or otherwise made unuseful by neglect, or ignorance: whereby the hope
and infinite charge of the State were disappointed. Famine, and mortality, the
attendants of war, with strange inundations, wrought likewise their part, as
if conspirators of destruction, and all concurred to make a dismal season.

Many years it was not, ere Swain king of Danes returned to raise again new
sums by new afflictions; and totmenting here this poor turmoyled people,
more then ever; receives a fee for bloodshed, to the sum of 48000 pounds;
granted in the general assembly of the States at London, and a peace, or
rather paction of servitude concluded; with quiet cohabitation, use of like
liberties, and a perfect union between the two nations, confirmed by oaths of
either part, and hostages delivered of ours.

But this as a breathing time, scarce held out the year. When the occasion of
greater mischiefs was given by a universal massacre of the Danes suddenly
here contrived: and effected by the kings commandment, upon the suggestion of
Hune, a great Commander, and a violent warrier of that time. Urging the
insolency of the Danes, that now grown haughty with this peace; Committed
many outrages, violating the wives and daughters of great men, with many other
intolerable disorders.

Such, and so sudden was the general execution The massacre of the Danes.
of this act, throughout all parts of the kingdom at one instant, as showed
the concurrencie 1002.
of an inueterate rankor, and incompatability of these two nations, impossible
to be conjoined. So that neither Temples, Altars, Supplications, nor any band
of aliance, were available to save them from slaughter. Wherein to incense the
more their king, Gunild, his sister, a woman of masculine, courage, who had a
little before received Christendom, a mediator and pledge of the peace, having
first her husband and son slain in her sight, rather with a threatening, then
appaled countenance, met her death, making imprecation for revenge, and
foretelling her blood would, as it did, cost England dear.

Soon was the notice of this enormious act, given to Swain, and as soon
armed with rage and power, reentred he the kingdom, having now a fayrer show
to do fowly, then ever: wrong had made him a right, who had none before: and
the people of the Land, not so forward to maintain their act, as to commit it,
rather were content to give him the possession of their country, then that he
should win it: the greatest part of the kingdom submitting themselves unto
him; only the city of London, which Ethelred held fortified made noble
resistance till he left them; and, conveyed himself first into the Isle of
Wight, and after into Normandy, whither he had sent Emma his Queen, with
their 2 sons, Aelfrid and Edward, before, from the rage of this tempest. But
within 2 months he was recalled home by the people of England, upon the death
of Swain, who at the point to have been crowned King, and had generally taken
ostages and oaths of fealty, died suddenly: leaving his son Knute to
succeed his fortunes, and accomplish what he intended.

Ethelred returning, was soon furnished with an Army, sets upon Knute in
Lindsey, where he lay with his fathers shipping, and Hostages, and drove him to
take the seas: wherewith enraged, making about to Sandwich, he miserably
mangled, and dismembered those hostages, and so sent them home: himself, with
the spoils his father and he had gotten, returned to his country, to make
greater preparations for the prosecution of his purpose.

Ethelred in the mean time, to increase the sum of reuengement with more
wrath, at a general Assembly at Oxford, caused many of the Danicque Nobility
to be murdered: Among which were Sigifrith, and Morchar, Earls of
Northumberland, whom the false Edric (who had a hand on each side for
mischief) inuiting them to his lodging, under pretense of feasting,
barbarously caused to be slain: their followers, after they had so long as
they could desperately defended themselves and their masters, fled into a
Church, where they were with the same burnt. Knute armed with the greatest of
his own and neighbors powers made his confederates, landed again, within the
year, at Sandwich, and without resistance, had all the West parts rendered unto
him, with pledges for their obedience, and furnishment with horse and armor.
Here the false Edric leaves his Liege-lord, and yields up 40 ships, and his
perjured faith to Knute. Ethelred, languishing in mind and body, Edmond his
son, surnamed Ironside (to oppose youth to youth) was employed against this
rabious inuador. A Prince worthy of a better time, and had he found faith, had
made it so, and delivered his country at that turn, from the worst of
miseries, the conquest by strangers.

But now upon the death of Ethelred (whose 37 years reign, shows that
infelicity shall have time too much, and happiness too little.) Knute was by
most of the Clergy and Nobility chosen king: only the City of London, with
some of the Nobility thereabout, made election of Edmond Edmond Ironside son
to Ethelred, by his first wife Ethelgina.
, and furnished him with that power, as thereby, with the courageous ardour of
his youth (which commonly 1016.
is most in the first attempts) he had the better in three imminent battles,
within. 3 months, and had likewise obtained the fourth at Essendon (likely to
have been the last with the Danes) but that the disloyal Edric (late
renouncing his new Lord, seeing Edmonds part in possibility to prevail) again
betrayed his trust, and withdrew himself, and the charge he had, to the enemy.
This fatal battle lost England: here perished the best flower of honor it
then had: Here amongst the rest was slain, Vlkill, an Earl of Essex, of ever
memorable worth, who had long stood up for the kingdom, and in the time of
Swain, was the first that showed there was hope and possibility to quail the
enemy, had there been an union in loyalty.

From this bloody work, Edmond escapes to Gloucester, to recollect new forces,
nor was he so forsaken with this fortune, but that he soon recovered another
army, to re-assaile the enemy, that might be idle upon this victory. But
Knute, as provident in the prosecution of his business, as fortunate therein,
makes after: Here when both Armies were at the point to encounter, a motion of
peace was propounded: Some say the two Kings, by single combat consented to
decide their fortunes, and the ouer-commer to take all: and that in an Isle of
the river Seuern (their Armies on either shore, spectators of the act) they
tried the maistery for the prize of a kingdom: After long and equal fight,
finding each others worth, they cast away their weapons, embraced and concluded
the peace: But howsoever, it seems both sides tired with the misery of a
consuming war, never like to be ended, but by the utter extirpation of the
one, and considering the danger of either, and incertaintie of the future, were
easily persuaded to embrace a present agreement: which was made by parting
England betwixt them two, and confirmed by Oath and Sacrament: putting on each
others Apparel, and Arms, as a ceremonic to express the atonement of their
minds, as if they made transaction of their persons each to other. Knute
became Edmond, and Edmond, Knute. A fatal exchange for so free and magnanimous
a Prince as Edmond: who indeed was now no more himself; and being but half a
king, was in so few days after, none: as makes this peace show fouler then
war: for that armed him for life, this exposed him naked to death, which was
shortly after treacherously given The death of King Edmond Ironside at Oxford.
him at Oxford; some say by the son of Edric (as if to show he would be the
heir of his father also in Treason) whereby both the hope, and the other half
of England were utterly lost, as determinable with his reign: which (with all
we have else of his magnanimous actions) took up scarce the circuit of one
whole year: And yet had that been space enough for gloric (whose measure is to
be taken rather by the profundity, then the length, which seldom holds long
and even) could he have had that clear, and better for his renown to have
died at the battle of Essendon with England, then descended to have made it
half Denmark, and live.

But by this means Knute attained the absolute Knute the first Danic King.
dominition of the whole kingdom, which he governed with better Justice then
he got, conforming his native roughnes, to 1018.
a more civil and regular fashion of life: And to have England see that now he
was hers; he sendes away his Navy, and stipendary soldiers, home to their
countries, and puts himself wholly, upon this people, taking the way of
mildness, a better means for his establishment, then force: but the Land paid
for the remuneration of his people, and this euacuation of Strangers, 83000
pounds of silver; which it rather consented to do at once, then to have them a
daily burden, to pester the Statefor ever.

At his first coming to the Crown, he sought to rid himself, as well of
his friends as of those might prove his enemies. Edric who came first to salute
him sole King of England (as if to tell, that he made him so) he caused his
head to be set on the highest part of the Tower of London, therein performing
his promise of advancing him above any Lord of the Land, and thereby discharged
himself of such a debt, which though he should have paid, would never yet be
held fully cleared; giving a general satisfaction to the people, that rejoiced
to see Treason so justly rewarded. Like compensation had shortly after, the
Earls Turkil, and Erick, who being banished the Land, were executed upon their
arrival in Denmark.

But the love, and high opinion of Justice he got in these, were lost again in
those actions, wherein he took counsel only of his fears, for the
extirpation of all those of the Royal blood of England; As of Edwin, and
Edward, the sons of the late King Edmond (to whom apperteyned the moyetie of
the kingdom by contract) and of Edwin his brother; which three, he sent to be
murdered abroad, to beguile the rumor at home: But, which is strange, those
times, though rough, afforded not yet an instrument for the execution of his
desire: and all these Princes were preserved and conveyed out of danger by
those who should have made them away. The two last were bred by Solomon, King
of Hungary, where Edward (suruiuing his brother) married Agatha, sister to that
Queen. (And some write, daughter to the Emperor Henry 3) by whom he had two
sons, Edmond and Edgar, daughters, Margaret and Christina.

Aelfred, and Edward, sons of King Ethelred, by Emme, were preserved by
Richard, Duke of Normandy their uncle, and so lay out of his way.

This private injustice (which often may be more in compassion, then hurt to
the State) he sought to recompense with all public satisfactions: repairing
the naufrage of the commonwealth (made by the rage of war) both in ornament
and order: erecting Churches and Monasteries, with large patents of provisions,
both for the expiation of his inmanities fore-committed, and to memorize the
places of his victories with his thankfulness to God. The Constitutions
Ecclesiastical and Civil, diuulged in the language of that time, testify his
tender piety, and care of Justice: and are so full of religious admonitions, as
it seems, he held the best means to have laws observed, was, to have them
first enacted in the consciences of men. Amongst others, he inflicted exact
punishment on all intemperances of his people, and offenses committed against
public manners. Severe he was, but not cruel: few of his laws sanguinarie,
as being not the custom of the time: which though rough, yet found means to
maintain public order, without the luctuall remedy of blood. No punishments
capital, unless conspiracies: the rest were all pecuniaric mulcts, banishments,
bondage or imprisonment.

To show his clemency, this (amongst many) is one example: there was a law,
that whosoever had committed thest, and the goods found in his house, all his
family were made bond, even to the child in the cradle: This he antiquates as
most unjust, and ordaines, that only the malefactor, and such as could aid
him, should endure the punishment: and that the wife, unless the thing stolen,
were found under her lock, should not be guilty of her husbands offense.

Thus was he to his people, with whom, he is said to have so well cleared
himself (howsoever he did with God) that he became King of their affections,
as well as of their country. And to maintain this opinion, he did many
popular acts: as first all rites of honor and reverence to the memory of the
late King Edmond, his confederate: besides: the executing all such as could be
found to have had any hand in that murder. Then married he here at home,
Emme, late wife to King Ethelred (though it were more for his honor then hers,
to accept his bed, that had been the persecutor of her husband and children)
whereby he held the Duke of Normandy from attempting any thing for his
nephews, in regard his sister might have other by him.

Having thus established this mighty kingdom, occasion prepares him another.
The people of Norway, co^temning the debilitie of their King, and conspiring to
depose him, grew into faction: whereupon he fastens; and with the great forces
he brought out of England, the might of money, and high estimation of his
worthiness, so prevailed, as he soon obtained that kingdom; and was now the
most renowned and potent Prince in all these parts of the world: entitled, King
of England, Denmark and Norwey.

Herewithall grew his magnificence, as wide as his power, and was especially
extended to the Church, which he labored most to gratify, either for the
conscience of his deeds, or that his people, (generally addicted to devotion)
might be made the more his. And holding it not enough to pour out his immense
bounty here within the land, seeks to make Rome also feel the fullness
thereof; whither he went in person, and performed many famous works of
charity and honor; both there, and in all his voyage. He freed the Saxon
school, his predecessors of England had founded, from all imposition: as he
did likewise all streights and passages, where travelers were with rigor
constrained to pay toll.

Of his entertainment at Rome with the Pope, Conrade the Emperor, and diverse
other Princes of the Christian world, himself writes to the Bishops and
Nobility of England, and withal exhorts them very powerfully to have an
especial regard to the due administration of Justice, to all his subjects
alike, without doing the least wrong for his gain, having no need to advance
his revenue by sin: And also charges them to see all Chirchscot and Romescot
fully cleared before his return.

The active virtue of this Prince, being the mightiest, and most absolute
Monarch that cuer yet appeared in this kingdom, the author of a cloze, and
first of a new Government, is such; as shows he striued by all worthy ways,
to lay the groundwork of a State; which according to his frame, was either to
hold good to his posterity, or not. And as likely was he, to have been the
root of a succession, spreading into many discents, as was afterward the
Norman; having as plentiful an issue masculine, as he: besides, he reigned
near as long; far better beloved; of disposition more bountiful, and of
power larger to do good. But it was not in his fate; his children miscarried in
the succession, and all this great work fell in a manner with himself.

1038.
HArald, the eldest son of Knute (some Harald.
write by his fathers ordinance, others by the election of the Danicque
Nobility, in an assembly at Oxford) was made king: whereas Godwin Earl of
Kent, and the Nobility of England, would have chosen Hardiknute, borne of
Queen Emme, or else Alfride, the son of Ethelred, who is said to have come
out of Normandy, upon the death of Knute, to claim the Crown; But Harald,
being at hand carried it; The first act of whose reign, was the banishment, and
surprising all the Treasure of his stepmother Queen Emme: Then the putting
out the eyes of Alfrid her son, his competitor: and committing him to a
loathsome prison, where he died. For which deed, the Earl Godwyn bears a
foul mark, as betraying him. Queen Emme repaires to Baldouin, Earl of
Flanders, her kinsman, where she remained during the reign of Harald, which
was but offoure years, and then with her son Hardiknute (who came out of
Denmark, as it seems prepared for some thing else, then to visit her at
Bridges) returned into England.

THis Hardiknute invested in the Government, Hardiknute,
soon frustrated the hope and opinion 1041.
fore-conceiued of him: and first in like sort began with that degenerous act
of revenge (wherein none are said so much to delight in, as women) causing the
body of the late king to be vntomb'd, the head cut off, and thrown into
Thames; Then makes inquisition for such as were guilty of the death of
Alfride, his brother by the mother: whereof Earl Godwyn and the Bishop of
Worcester are accused; The Bishop is disposest his Sea: and the Earl with a
rich and rare devised present, in form of a ship of gold, appeased that fury:
making public protestation of his innocence before the whole Nobility, with
whom in respect his deep root had spread so many branches, he stood firm,
and all the blame was laid to the violence and rankor of the late king.

Besides the offending these great men, he added a general grieuance to the
whole kingdom, by a prodigal largess, giving to every Mariner of his Navy
eight Marks, and to every Master ten, which he imposed to be paid by the
State. But after having called home Edward his other halfe-brother, out of
Normandy, he lived not long, for farther violences; Dying suddenly the second
year of his reign, in the celebration of a marriage at Lambeth in his greatest
iolity, not without suspicion of poison.

ANd with him ended the government of the Danes in England, having only
continued The reason of the extinction of the Danes in England.
26 years under these three last Kings: and that without any crack or noise,
by reason the nation had no predominant side, that might sway the State in
respect of the remission of Anno 1043.
their power home in the first year of Knute, and no great admission of others
after: and that such, as were here before, were now so incorporated with the
English, as they made one body: and most of them planted in the remote parts
of the kingdom, that lay over against Denmark: where by, that which with all
the struggling, no power or diligence of man could resist, expired of it self:
leaving England to a King of her own, and Denmark to civil discord about the
succession, Norwey likewise returning obedience to a son of Olaue, recovered
quietness, and a home borne King.

BY which occasion, Edward, the son of Edward the Confessor.
Ethelred, succeeding in the government, reigned 24 years in peace (which
besides a 1043.
few months, was all the space that lay betwixt, the two gulphes of strangers
domination) and was a Prince more necessary then profitable: fit for no other
then the calm time he had. For having been so long brought up with the Nuns
at Iumieges, in Normandy, he scarce knew to be a man when he came into
England. And to show how little he understood himself; they note how in a
great anger he said to a base fellow that disturbed his game in hunting, I
would punish thee were I able. And as if he had vowed their continency with
whom he was bred, was so far from knowing other women (either through
conscience or debilitie) as his own wife, after his death, protested herself
free from any carnal act done by him, and yet lived he with her in all formal
show of marriage.

The soft simplicity of this King, gave way to the greatness of the Earl
Godwyn, and his children, who for that he would seem the especial man in his
preferme^t to the Crown, and by matching his daughter Edith to him, swayed
cheifely the wheel of that time: and yet not without opposition: For Syward,
Earl of Northumberland, and Leofrike, Earl of Hereford, men of as great State
and spirit, seeing him most for himself, became more for the King, and had
their turn in performing very noble actions. Nor did their emulation but much
conduce to the present benifit both of the King and State; For the Earl
Syward, would not be behind hand in effecting as brave deeds in the North, as
Harold, Earl of Westsex, the son of the Earl Godwyn performed against the
welsh in the west: For the first deprived of life and Crown, Macbeth, an
usurper, and invested Malcolin, in the kingdom of Scotland, the other defeited
Ris, and Griffine, two brothers, Kings of Wales, and subdued that Province to
this Crown.

Besides the Earl Godwyn, had to struggle with an Arch-byshop of Canterbury,
Robert, a Norman, preferred, from a Monk, first to London, and after to that
Sea, by the King, inwardly affecting most that nation, as being part of their
blood, and bred amongst them. Of whom it seemed he had many about his person,
whose neerenes, being strangers, whatsoever they did, could not avoid to be
thought to do ill offices against the Earl, and the English in general:
whereby, what went not right in the line of menn's desires, was thought to be
their cause. And in stomachs full charged, this occasion gave more fire.
Eustace Earl of Bullogne, who had married Goda the Kings sister, having been
at the Court, and returning into France, his Herbenger in taking up lodgings at
Dover, upon his peremptory behavior, was by a citizen slain; The Earl
arriving with all his train, pursues, and slew the homicide, with 18 other.
The City seeing this, took arms, and in the bickering, the Earl lost 22 of
his men whereupon, back he hasts to the King, aggrauates the insolency of the
Citizens so far, that the Earl Goawyn is sent for, and commanded with a power
of men, to make against the City of Dover, to chastise the people. The Earl
considering it was upon the information of one side; advised the King rather to
send for the chief of the City, to understand what they could say for
themselves, and accordingly to proceed, which being taken for a coldness in the
business, and of favor to his countrymen, gave the King and his enemies
occasion to suspect his affection. Shortly after, the Earl is summoned to an
Assembly at Gloucester, where neither he, nor any of his sons would
appear; and suspecting some practice against him by his enemies, raises
forces, pretending to suppress the Welsh, who were not found to offend,
whereupon the Assembly remoues to London, summons him again to make his
appearance, to dismiss his forces, and to come only attended with 12 persons.
He sendes them word, to dismiss his forces he was content, or any thing else
the King would command him, so it were with the safety of his life and
honor; but to come disaccompanied, was for neither. Then was he commanded
within 5 days to depart the Realm, which he did, and with Toustayne and
Swayne his sons, gets him into Flaunders, where Toustayne married the
daughter of the Earl Baldouin 5. Harald his eldest son, departs into
Ireland: the King puts from him the Queen, to be partaker of the disgrace, and
misery of her house. The Earl Godwin in this desperate fortune, whilst the
French and his enemies possessed the King, fell to piracye, disturbed the
coasts, approached London, by the River, and being so popular, as no forces
would oppose against him, made at length his own peace with power; in such
sort, as the French fearing revenge, forsook both the Court and kingdom.

This (as fore-pointing to a storm that was gathering on that coast) began the
first difference with the French nation: which thus acquainted with the
distraction of the kingdom, and factions of great men, wrought on those
advantages, and were instruments to draw on the fatal enterprise that followed.

The weakness of the king, and the disproportionate greatness of the Earl
Godwyn, being risen up from so great a fall (learning thereby, to look better
to his feet, and make his sides strong) increased these discontentments, and
partialities in the State: wherein many acts of injustice, by the sway of power
and passion, were committed, which did much blacken that time of peace, and
made a good man (not by doing, but enduring ill) held to be a bad king.

And it is said, that Emme the Queen mother, had her part of much affliction
in his reign, suffering both in her goods and fame: and how to purge her self
of a scandal raised on her with Alwyn, Bishop of Winchester, she underwent
the trial of Fire-Ordeall (which was to pass blindfold, with bare feet,
over certain plough-shares, made red hot, and laid an uneven distance one
before the other) which she safely performed. And the reason why, both her
son and the State so little respected this great Lady (whose many years had
made her an actor in diverse fortunes) was, for that she never affected king
Ethelred, nor the children she had by him: and for her marriage with Knute, the
great enemy and subduer of the kingdom, whom she ever much more loved living,
and commended dead.

It seemed these private grudges, with men's particular ends, held these times
so busied, that the public was neglected, and an issuelesse King, gave matter
for ambition and power, to build hopes and practices upon: though for his own
part, he showed to have had a care for the succession, in sending for his
nephew Edward, entitled the Outlaw, with his children, out of Hungary. But
Edward, shortly after his arrival died, and Edgar his son (surnamed
Atheling) to say the noble Edgar) either by reason of his youth, which yet was
no bar to his right, or being borne and bred a stranger, little knowing, or
known to the kingdom, had his claim neglected upon the death of this pious
king.

ANd Harald, son to the Earl Godwin Harald the Second.
1066.
(the next day after) was preferredto the Crown, whether by any title he might
pretend from the Danicque kings, as descended from that nation (and as some
report, son to Githa, sister to Swayne) or by mere election of the greater
part of the Nobility, we cannot say: but it seems, the pressing necessity of
the time, that required a more man, to undergo the burden of war, and that
trouble, the world was like to fall into, by reason of the claims now made
both by the Dane and Norman, cast it suddenly upon him, as the most eminent man
of the kingdom, both by the experience of his own deseruings, and the
strength of his alliance. Neither did he fail but in fortune, to make good
this election, taking all the best courses both for the well-ordering of the
State, and all provisions for defense, that a politic and active Prince could
do. But being to deal in a broken world, where the affections of men were all
disioynted, or dashed with the terror of an approaching mischief, failing (as
usually is seen) in these public fears, both in their diligence and courage
to withstand it, soonefound more then enough to do.

And the first man, which began to disturb his new government, was his own
younger brother Toustayne, who in the time of the late king Edward, having the
government of Northumberland, was for his pride and immanities showed in those
parts, banished the kingdom, and now by reason of his former conceived hatred
against his brother, easily set on, by the Duke of Normandy, and Baldouin,
Earl of Flanders (whose two daughters the Duke and he had married) assailes
first the Isle of Wight, and after sets upon the coast of Kent, whence he was
chased by the power of Harald, and forced to withdraw into the North parts, and
there seeking to land, was likewise repulsed, by the Earls Morchar and Edwyn
(whose sister Harald had married.) Then craves he aid of the Scots, and after
of Harald surnamed Harfager, king of Norwey, being then taking in, the
Orchades, and exercising piracie in those parts, whom he induced with all his
forces to invade England. And landing at Tinmouth (discomfeiting their first
incounters) they marched into the heart of the kingdom without resistance.
Near Stamford, king Harald of England met them with a puissant army; and
after long and eager fight, ended the day with victory, and the death of his
brother Toustayne, and the king of Norwey.

But from hence was he called with his wearied and broken forces, to a more
fatal business in the South. For now William Duke of Normandy, pretending a
right to the Crown of England, by the testament of the late king Edward his
kinsman, upon the advantage of a busy time, and the disfurnishment of those
parts, landed at Pemsey, not far from Hastings in Sussex: near to which
place, was tried by the great Assize of Gods judgment in battle, the right of
power, between the English and Norman Nation. A battle the most memorable of
all other, and howsoever miserably lost, yet most nobly fought, on the part of
England; and the many wounds of Harald there slain, with the heaps of
thousands of the English show, how much was wrought to have saved their
country, from the calamity of foreign servitude.

And yet, how so great a kingdom as England then was, could with one blow be
subdued by so small a province as Normandy; in such sort, as it could never
after come to make any general head against the Conqueror, might seem
strange, did not the circumstances fore-noted, and other concurrent causes, in
the next book to be declared, give us fair and probable reason thereof:
Besides the indisposition of a diseased time (as it is described by such as
lived nearest it) may give us great evidence in this examination. For they say,
the people of this kingdom, were, by their being, secure from their former
enemy the Dane, and their long peace; which had held in a manner from the death
of king Edmond Ironside, almost 50 years; grown neglectiue of arms, and
generally debaushed with luxury, and idleness: the Clergy licentious, and
only content with a tumultuary learning: The Nobility given to gluttony,
venery and oppression: the common sort to drunkenness, and all disorder: And
they say, that in the last action of Harald at Stamford, the brauest men
perished, and himself growing insolent upon the victory, retaining the
spoils, without distribution to his soldiers, not inured to be commanded by
martial discipline, made them discontent and unruly: and coming to this
battle with many mercinary men, and a discontented Army, gave great occasion
to the lamentable loss thereof.

Besides, the Normans had a peculiar fight with long bows, wherewith the
English (then altogether unacquainted.) were especially overthrown. And yet
their own Writers report how the maine battallion of the English consisting of
Bills (their chief and ancient weapon) held in a body so close locked together,
as no force could dissolve them: till the Normans, faining to fly, drew them to
a disordered pursuit. And so they excuse the fortune of the day.

And thus my noble Lord, have I, in the streightest course, the uneven compass
of Antiquity could direct me, got over the wide and intricate passage of those
times, that lay beyond the work I purpose more particularly to deliver.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK of the History of England
The life of William. 1.
I Come now (my noble Lord of Rochester) to write of a time, wherein the State
of England received an alteration of laws, customs, fashion, manner of
living, language writing, with new forms of fights, fortifications, buildings,
and generally an innovation in most things but Religion. So that from this
mutation, which was the greatest it ever had, we are to begin with a new
account of an England, more in dominion abroad, more in State and ability at
home, and of more honor and name in the world then heretofore: which by being
thus undone, was made, as if it were in her fate to get more by her losses,
then her better fortunes. For as first the conquest of the Danes; brought her
to the intyrest Government, she ever possessed at home, and made her most
redoubted of all the kingdoms of the North: so did this of the Norman by
coming in upon her, make a way to let her out, and stretch her mighty arms
over the Seas, into the goodly Provinces of the South; For before these times,
the English nation from their first establishment in this Land, about the space
of 500 years, never made any sally out of the Isle, upon any other part of the
world, but busied at home in a divided State, held a broken government with the
Danes, and of no great regard, it seems, with other nations, till Knute lead
them forth into the kingdom of Norwey, where they first showed effects of
their valor, and what they would be, were they employed.

But the Normans having more of the sun, and ciuilitic by their commixtion
with the English, begat smoother fashions, with quicker motions. And being a
nation free from that dull discease of drink, wherewith their former
conquerours were naturally infected, induced a more comely temperance, with a
nearer regard of reputation and honor: For where as before, the English lived
loose, in little homely cottages, where they spent all their revenues in good
fare, caring for little other gaitie at all. Now after the Norman manner,
Malmsbury.
they build them stately houses, provide furnishments, erect Castles, after the
architecture of France, which before were otherwise. They enclose parkes for
their private pleasure, being debarred the general liberty of hunting, which
heretofore they enjoyed: whereupon all the terms of building, hunting, tools
of workmen, names of most handy-crafts apperteyning to the delights and
adornements of life, came all to be in French. And withal, the Norman habits,
and fashion of living, became generally assumed, both in regard of novelty,
and to take away the note of difference, which could not be well looked on, in
this change.

And though the body of our language remained the Saxon, yet it came so
altered in the apparraile of the French tongue, as now we hardly know it in the
ancient form it had; and not so much as the character wherein it was written,
but was altered to that of the Roman, and French now used.

But to the end we may the better know the man, and the nation that thus
subdude us; we must take our course up to the head of their originals.

The Normans, we find to have issued out The original of the Normans
of Norway and Denmark, and were of like manners, as the rest of those
Northern countries: which by reason of the apt mixture of their phlegmatique
and sanguine complexions, with their promiscuous ingendring, without any tie of
marriage, yielded that continual surchargement of people, as they were forced
to unburden themselves on other countries, wheresoever their violence could
make them room. And out of this redundancie, Roll, or Rou, a great Cmmaunder
amongst them, furnished a robustious power, in the time of King Alfrid, and
first landed in England, (that ever lay in the Road to all these inuadors)
where finding no room empty, nor any employment, was content (upon some
releife received) to use his forces otherwhere; which he did against Rambalt,
Duke of Prize, and Reignier Duke of Chaumont, and Hennalt: with whom he had
many violent incounters, and committed great spoils in their countries. Which
done; he passed along the coast of France, entered the mouth of Seine, and
sacked all the country up to Roan: where the people having been lately before
miserably afflicted by Hasting, (another inuador of the same Nation) were so
terrified by the approach of these new forces, that the Arch-byshop of Roan, by
the consent of the people, offered him the obedience of that City, and the
Country about, on condition, he would defend them, and minister Justice
according to the laws of CHRIST, and the Customs of the Country. For Charles
the Simples, then King of France, yielding no present succor, being otherwise
imbroiled about the right of his Crown, gave him the opportunity to plant him
in that place, and to grow so powrefull, as shortly after he attempted the
conquest of Paris, and gave many notable defeits to the French Leaders. So that
in the end, Charles was feign to buy his peace with the price of an alliance,
and the whole country of Nuestria (or Westrish) which of the Normans, was
after called Normandy. And thereupon Roll became a Christian, and baptized,
had the name of Robert, given by Robert, brother to Eudes late King of France,
who then stood in competition for that Crown with Charles the Simples, and is
said to have vnderaided Roll secretly, of purpose to make him friend his
diseignes; though after he urged it an article against Charles, the giving away
his Country, and the favoring of strangers.

And thus came Roll to establish a State to his posterity, ordering the same
with that Judgment and equity, as he left his name in a perpetual reverence,
and his successors a firm foundation to plant upon. From him, in a direct
line, descended six Dukes of Normandy in the space of 120 years: William,
the first, Richard 1. Richard 2 who had two sons, Richard and Robert, that
successively inherited the Dukedom.

Robert after having governed eight years, (either merely for devotion,)
which charity ought rather deem) or expiation for some secret guilt,
wherewith his conscience might stand charged, about his brothers death, (which
because it was untimely, might be thought unnatural) resolves to visit the
holy Sepulcher. And acquainting his Nobility therewithal, was by them much
diswaded, in regard he had no issue: and that already they said, Alain, Earl
of Britayne, and the Earl of Burgogne, were in contestation, who should
succeed him in the Duchy: so that upon his death, and their strife the
Country was like to become a prey to the Soldier, from which in conscience
he was bound by his best means to secure it. The Duke willed them to be
content. I have (said he) a little Bastard, of whose worthiness, I have great
hope, and I doubt not but he is of my begetting: him will I inuest in the
Duchy as mine heir: And from hence forth I pray you take him for your Lord.
The Earl of Britayne (notwithstanding his competition) to show the affiance I
have in him, I will constitute his governor, and Seneschall of Normandy; the
King of France shall be his Guardian, and so I will leave him to God and your
loyalties.

Shortly after, the Bishops and Barons did their homage to this base son,
named William, who was the sixth Duke of Normandy after Roll, begotten on
Arlette, a mean woman of Falaise. And Duke Robert taking his intended journey,
delivers the child with his own hand, to Henry 1. King of France: whom
before he had mainely aided in preserving his Crown (left him by his father
King Roberts Testament) against his elder brother, and his mother Consiance,
which with a great side of Nobility, stood for the right of Primogeniture,
according to the custom of France: And therefore might the more presume (if
good turns done to Princes could waighe so much, as their selfe-respects would
not turn the skale) to have had a fair discharge of his trust; and him for a
protector, whose power was best able to be so. And causing the child to do
homage for his Duchy of Normandy, commits him to his Royal faith; departs
his Court, and shortly after his life, in Asia. Whereupon his successor, but 9
years of age, became obnoxious to all the miseries that afflict Princes in
their pupillage: besides the reproach of his birth; which though his honor and
virtue might get over, yet lay it ever a bar in his way, and hindered his
standing clear, stood he never so high.

The nobles of Normandy soon after his fathers death, by much entreaty, got
him out of the French Kings hands, thinking the having him amongst them would
add more grace to his Counselors, and such as were in office: and the State
of a Court, awe his State the better. But soon they found, the having his
person without his power was but to put them out into more discord and faction.

For presently followed the murdering and poisoning of Governors, displacing
Officers, intrusion, supplantation, surprizings, and recouerings of his person,
by a Nobility, stubborn, haughty, and incompatible of each others
precedencie or neerenes. But this was the least, as being done all for his
person. Now followed more dangerous practices against it. His right was
quarrelled by competitors, clear in blood, and great in means. Whereof the
first (though farthest off in descent) was Roger de Tresny, bringing a fair
line from Roll, and much proof of his own worth, by having gotten great
experience in the Sarazine war in Spain: whereby upon his return,
entertayning and feasting the great and especial men of worth, he was grown
powerful, well followed, and beloved of many: in so much that at length,
measuring his own height, he vrges what wrong it was that a Bastard, and a
child, should be preferred before him in the succession of that Duchy his
ancestors had nobly gotten: and what a shame the Normans, a people of that
worth, would endure to be so governed; seeing they had others of the renowned
race of Roll, William and Richard, Dukes of Normandy, of a lawful and direct
line, if they held him unworthy to inherit the State: and impatient (as is
ambition that cuer rides without raines) of any long delay, brings his claim
to a strong battle in the field, which by the valiancie of Roger de
Beaumount, was utterly defeited, and himself with his. 2. brethren slain.
Whereby all fear, that way, was extinquished, and the reputation of the Duke
and his, so much advanced, as the King of France, (notwithstanding his
tutelarie charge) took from him the Castle of Thuilliers, and demolisht it,
pretending the insolences committed there, by the Garrisons, upon his
subjects: and makes show as yet, only to keep things even. But long it was
not, ere he plainly bewrayed his mind; aiding in person William Earl of
Arques, brother to Duke Robert, and son to Richard. 2. making his claim to
the Duchy, and bringes a mighty army to succor Arques, assieged by Conte
Guiffard the Dukes General; who by a stratageme so trained the French into an
ambushe, as he overthrew their whole power, and returns the King to Paris,
with great loss and dishonor: leaving Arques the first Arch of tryumphe to
this conqueror (not yet arrived to 17 years of age) and the discomfeited
competitor, to seek his fortunes with Eustace Earl of Bologne, finding upon
his return little grace in Court, where fortune ever alters credit, and few
regard men overthrown.

This storm ouerpast, another succedes more dangerous; there lived with Duke
William, a young Lord of like years, named Guy, son to Regnalt, Earl of
Borgogne, and Alix, daughter to Richard. 2. who coming to be sensible of his
interest, was advised by some stirring spirits, to attempt for the Duchy,
which they said apperteyned to him in right, and was wrongfully usurped by the
Bastard: And to advance his purpose, happens deadly hostility between two of
the greatest Lords of Normandy, Viconte Neele, and the Earl of Bessin, whose
debate Duke William did not, or could not pacific. This Guy (lately made Earl
of Bryorn, and Vernon, interposed himself to compose this discord; and by the
advice of Grimoult de Plessis (a principal mouer in this work) so wrought,
that either of these Lords, turned the point of their malice upon him, who in
their quarrel favoring neither, made both to hate him; and easily conspire
with Guy to murder him at unawares: which they had done, had not a certain
Fool (whom, for being held a natural they suspected not) noting their
preparations, got away in the dead of the night to Valogne, knocking and crying
at the gate, till he was admitted to the Dukes presence, whom he willed in all
have to fly, or he would be murdered. The Duke seeing the Fool in this
affright, thought dangers were not be weighed by the worth of the reporter, but
by their likelihood; and knowing his fortune was liable unto all sudden
assasinations; instantly takes horse and all alone posts to Fallaise, his
especial place of strength: on the way, his horse being tired, about break of
day, he comes to a little village called Rye, where, by good fortune, the
gentleman of the place, was standing at his door ready to go abroad; of whom
the Duke enquires the next way to Fallaise: The gentleman perceiving who he was
(though as then very unwilling to be known) humbly craves the cause of his so
strange and untimely riding alone: The Duke seeing himself discovered, tells
the occasion: the gentleman whose name was Robert de Rye, furnishes him with a
fresh horse, and sendes two of his sons to conduct him the nearest way to
Fallaise: Noe sooner was he gone out of sight, but after post the conspirators,
enquiring of the same gentleman, whether he saw the Duke; who answered, that
he was gone a little before, such a way (showing them a diverse path) and rode
on with them, offering his service to Conte Bessin; of whom he held that
village under the Duke, and so long he lead them about, that the Duke had
recovered Fallaise; Whereupon, disappointed of their purpose, they returned
into the Countries of Constantin, and Bessin; where they made themselves so
powrefull, as the Duke withdrewe him to Roan, and from thence to the King of
France, to crave his aid, putting him in mind of, the faithful service his
father had done him: how he was his homager, under his tutelarie charge, and
had no other sanctuary of succor to fly unto, in this case of his mutinous
and turbulent nobility; the effect whereof was of dangerous consequence to
that Crown. And so far urged the importancie of releife, as the King at length
(who seems was yet content to have him be, though not too strong, and
peradventure rather him then his competitor Guy de Burgogne) aided him in
person with a puissant army against these competitors, whom they found in the
vale of Dunes with as great power and resolution to bid them battle, as they
to assail them. Here one Guilleson, uncle to Viconte Neel by the mother,
forced his horse into the battaillon of the French, and made at the King, and
struck him down with his Lance: which Conte Saint Paul perceauing, hastes to
encounter him with that violence, as both fell to the earth: but Guilleson
soon gets up, and though his horse was slain under him, by Chastillon, he
escapes out of the press, and after fled into Apulia with others. The King
recovered, and more inkindled with this affront, spared not his person, to
avenge his wrath. Duke William likewise (as it stood him most upon) showed
effects of an all-daring and magnanimous Prince. And yet had not Ralfe de
Tesson been false to his fellows to recover faith with him, he had not
carried (as he did) the victory. After which diverse of the conspirators (who
had too great hearts to yield) passed the mountains into Italy, to Robert
Guiscard their countryman, (who of a private gentleman, was now by his
prowess, become Lord of Apulia, Calabria, and Cicile, within the space of 12
years) to whom they were exceeding welcome, and especially Guilleson, for
having incountred with a King in the midst of his battle, which made him of
wider note.

But the better to know, what star these Norman spirits had, as borne for
the reuolutions of those times, it shall not lie out of our way to show, how
they first came into Italy, upon this occasion. There happened a debate between
one Osmond Drengot, and William Repostell, gentlemen both valiant, and of great
parentage in Normandy, who as they hunted in the forest of Rouuerie (near
Rouan) with Duke Robert; Drengot slew Repostell, in his presence, and fearing
the fury of the Duke, and the friends of the slain, fled to Rome, and so to
Naples, where he, with his small company of Normans that followed him, was
entertained of the Duke de Beneuento, to serve him against the Sarasins, and
Affricans, which miserably infested Apulia, and Calabria, at that time. The
brute of which intertaynement was no sooner spread in Normandy, but diverse
valiant Gentlemen and Soldiers, allured with the hope of good fortune, passed
the Alps, got to their nation, and so wrought, as they grew formidable to
these Barbarians, and in the end, utterly chaced and extinguished them. The
Calabrians and Apulians, seeing themselves rid of their enemies, would have
been glad likewise (their turn served) to be rid of their friends, and either
using them, more unkindly then of custom, or they presuming more of desert,
turned their swords upon their intertayners. And first got a little place,
which they fortified for their Rendeuous, and receipt of booty: And so
augmenting still their winnings, obtained Territories, Cities, and Fortresses.
After the death of Drengo, succeeded other gallant leaders, and at length
Tancred Signor de Hauteuille, in Constantine, with his. 12. sons, came into
Apulia, of whom his third son Robert, surnamed Guiscard, attained the
command, and was a man of a fair stature, clear judgment, and indefatigable
courage. He conquered all Apulia, Callabria and Cicile, passed the Sea into
Greece; releiued Michaell Diocrisius, Emperor of Constantinople, defeited
Nicephorus that usurped the Empire, and shortly after Alexius attempting the
like: and in one year vanquished two Emperors, the one of Greece, the other
of Germany: Swayed the whole Estate of Italy, and was in a fair way to have
attained the Empire of Constantinople for himself, had he not dyed in the
expedition.

Beomond his eldest son, by his first wife, became after Prince of Antioch,
and is much renowned in the holy wars. Roger (of his second marriage with
the daughter of the Prince of Salerno) succeeded in the States of Italy, as
more theirs by birth and blood. His daughters were all highly married; Thus
from a private gentleman, came this famous Norman to leave a succession of
Kings, and Princes after him, and died the same year as did this William, his
concurrent in the love and favor of fortune.

And to this man fled all the discontented and desperate Normans during these
civil wars the Duke had with so many competitors: and cuery overthrow he
gave them, augmented Guiscards forces in Italy; and especially this battle
of Dunes; which ended not the Dukes travails, for Guy de Burgogne escaping the
fight, fortified the Castles of Briorn and Verneuille, but in the end was feign
to render them both, and himself, to the Dukes mercy, and became his
pencioner, who was his competitor; which act of clemency in the Duke, brought
in many other to submit themselves; whereby they re-obteyned their segniories,
but had their Castles demolished.

Having ended this work, new occasion to keep him in action, was ministered by
Geoffry Martle, Earlc of Aniou, who warring upon the Poictouins, incroached
also upon his neighbors States, and usurped Alencon, Dampfront, and Passais,
members of the Duchy of Normandy: which to recover, the Duke leauies an Army,
and first got Alencon, where, for that he was opprobriously skorned by the
beseiged (who when they saw him, would cry La Pel, La Pel, in reproach of the
baseness of his mother, and the trade of the place of his birth) he showed
extreme cruelty. Then lays he seige to Dampfront; which to releive, Conte
Martel comes with his greatest forces: and the Duke to take notice of his
strength, sendes out Roger de Mongomerie, with. 2. other knights to deliver
this message to the Earl, that if he came to victual Damfronte, he should
find him there the Porter to keep him out: whereto the Earl returns this
answer: Tell the Duke, to morrow by day break, he shall have me there on a
white horse, ready to give him the combare, and I will enter Damfront if I
can; And to the end he shall know me, I will were a shield d'or, without any
devise.

Roger replies, Sir you shall not need to take that pains, for to morrow
morning, you shall have the Duke in this place, mounted on a bay horse; And
that you may know him, he shall were on the point of his Lance, a streamer of
taffata, to wipe your face. Herewith returning, each side prepares for the
morning: when the Earl, busy in ordering his battles, was advertised by two
horsemen, that came crossing the field, how Damfronte, for certain, was
rendered to the Duke; whereupon in great rage, he presently departs with his
army: whereof a part, was (in passing a straight) cut off, by Viconte Neel, who
for that service, redeemed his former offense, and was restored to the Dukes
favor, whom ever after he faithfully served. Those of Damfronte, desperate of
succor, presently yield themselves to the Duke, who with his ingines and
forces remoues from thence to Hambrieres, a frontier town of Conte Martels,
and by the way (had it not been by himself discovered) he had been utterly
overthrown by an ambush, which gave him much to do, and lost him very many
brave men. Wherewith he grew so enraged, that he forced into the troops of his
enemies; made at Conte Martel, stracke him down with his sword, claue his
helmet, and cut of an ear: but yet he escaped out of the preasse, though
diverse were taken, and the Aniouuins utterly defeited.

Whilst thus he was trauayled with an outward enemy, two more, were found at
home, to conspire against him. william Guelan, Earl of Mortagne, descended
from Richard the second. And William Earl of Eu, and Montreul, yssuing from
William, the brother of the same Richard, and of Esselin, Countess of
Montreul: the first upon suspicion, the other upon proof, of an intention, was
banished, and their estates seized: the Earldome of Mortaigne he gave to
Robert: that of Eu to Odo, (after Bishop of Bayeux) both his brethren by the
mother.

These assaults from abroad, these skornes, conspiracies, and vnder-workings
at home, he passed before he was full. 22 years of age: and thus his enemies
made him, that sought to undo him. But now, more to underset and strengthen
his State, against future practices, he conuokes an assembly of his Prelates,
Barons, and Gentlemen, causing them to receive their oath of fealty, and raze
their castles. which done, he married Matilde, the daughter of Baldouin, 5.
Earl of Flaunders, but not without contrast and trouble: for his uncle Mauger,
Arch-byshope of Roan, excommunicates him, for matching within the forbidden
degrees of kindred: she being daughter to Elinor, daughter to Richard the. 2.
and so his fathers sisters daughter. To expiate for which offense, (upon a
dispensation from Pope Victor) they were enjoined the building of certain
Hospitals for blind people: and two Abbeyes, the one for men, the other for
women: which were erected at Caen.

This match, and the ouer-matching his enemies, set him so high a mark of
envy in the eye of France, which naturally loved not the Normans (whom in
reproach they usually called Trewans) as they easily incensed their King, who
of himself was forward enoughe, to abate a power, grown so out of proportion,
with the rest of the Princes of his dominions, to find a quarrel (which
confiners easily do) to set upon him: and to make it look the fairer,
pretendes to correct the insolences of the Normans, committed on his
territories, and to releive Count Martel, oppressed by the Duke; besides
alleging, it concerned him in honor and justice, to have that Province, which
held of his Crown, to be governed by a Prince of lawful blood, according to
Christian order and laws Ecclesiastical: and therefore resolves utterly to
exterminate the Duke, and establish a legittimate Prince in the Duchy. For
which effect, two armies are gathered from all parts of his kingdom; the one
sent along the river Sein, the other into the Country of Bessin, as meaning to
incompasse him.

The Duke likewise deuides his forces into 2. parts: sendes his brother Odo,
Earl of Eu, Walter Guifford Earl of Longueuill, and others with the one, to
the Country of Caux, himself with the other takes toward Eureux, (to make
head to the King that was at Mante) and withdrawes all cattle and provisions
out of the flat Country, into Cities and Fortresses, for their own store, and
disfurnishment of the enemy. The Kings army marching from Beauuois, to
Mortimer, and finding there a fat country full of all provisions, betook them
to make good cheer, and restes there all that night; thinking the Norman
forces were yet with the Duke at Eureux; which the army in Caux, conducted by
Odo understanding, marched all night, and by break of day, gave them so hot an
alarm, and so sudden, as put them all in roat, leaving horse, and armor, and
all to the assaylants; who made such a destruction of them, as of. 40.
thousand, not the fourth part escaped.

With this deseiture, the King of France is again returned home, with great
rage and grief, and the Duke, with the redemption of the prisoners, recouers
his peace, and the Castle of Thuilliers, taken from him in his vnder-age. Cont
Martell though much difmayd, with the Kings overthrow, yet leaves not to make
some attempts for the recovering his Towns; but with no success. The Duke he
saw was too well beloved and followed, for him to do any good without a
stronger arm. Wherefore the next spring, he goes, again to importune the King
of France, to aid him against the Duke: who (he said) was now grown so
insolent upon this peace, and the victory he had stolen, and not won, that
there was no living for his neighbors near him: besides the Normans had the
French in such derision, and base esteem, as they made their act at Mortimer
their only sport, and the subject of their rimes: as if a King of France, upon
the loss of a few men, was retired, and durst not break a dishonorable peace.

With which instigation, and being stung with the touch of reproach, he raises
another Army far mightier then before, wherein were three Dukes, and twelve
Earls, and notwithstanding the sollemne peace made, and so lately sworn with
the Duke, he enters Normandy in the harvest time, ouerrunnes and spoils all
the Country, along the Coast to Bessin: from whence marching to Bayeux, and
Caen, with purpose to pass the river Diue at Varneuille, to destroy the
Countries of Auge, Liseux, and Roumoys, even to Roan: and finding the case-way
long, and the bridge narrow, caused his vantguard to pass over first: and, to
secure his Arierguard, conducted by the Duke of Berry, himself stays behind
in Caen, till his people, and their carriages were passed. Duke William, who
all this while, stores his fortresses with men and victual, makes himself as
strong in the Town of Falaise, as he could; has no army in the field, but a
running camp to be ready to take all advantages: lets the fury of the storm
spend it self, and having advertisement of this passage, marched all night
with. 10. thousand men, and in the morning early, sets upon the Arrierguard,
with so sudayne a cry and fury, as they who were before on the Case-way hearing
this noise behind, thrust forward their fellows, hasting to get over the
bridge, with such a crowd and preasse, as they brake it, and many were drowned
in the river. They who were gotten over, could not return to aid the rest;
nor the King, (by reason of the Marshes on both sides) yield any succor to
his people; but stood a spectator of their slaughter, and the taking of six of
his Earls, of whom one was the exiled Earl of Eu, whom the King (favoring
his great worth) had made Conte De Soissons.

The grief of this overthrow, shortly after gave the King of France his death,
and the Duke of Normandy a joyful peace, which he nobly employed in the
ordering and adorning his State: building, endowing, and decking Monasteries
and Churches: gathering relics from all parts to furnish his Abbeyes at Caen,
(where he also erected a Tomb for himself and his wife) feasting and
rewarding his Nobles and men of worth: whereby he so possessed him of the hearts
of all his people generally, as they were entirely his, for what he would.

During this calm of his life, he makes a journey over into England, as if to
visit King Edward his kinsman: who, in regard of the preservation, and
breeding he had in Normandy, by Duke Richard the second, (Grandfather to them
both) gave him most royal entertainment: And here he showed himself; and
here no doubt he found matter for his hopes to work on. In this enterview he
discovered England, being to be presupposed, he came not to gather
cockle-shels, on the shore. Nor was it long after cre Harald, (whether of
purpose to ratify some paction closely contrived betwixt them: or by casualty
of weather driven into France, (and so same to make it seem a journey of
purpose to the Duke) is not certainly delivered) was gallantly entertained in
Normandy, presented with all shows of Arms, brought to Paris, and there
likewise feasted in that Court. And at his return to Rouen, something was
concluded, either in likelihood to divide the Kingdom between them, or that
Harald being a coastdweller, and had the strongest hand in the State, should
let in the Duke, and do his best to help him to the Crown, upon conditions
of his own greatness, or whatsoever it was; promises were made and confirmed
by oaths upon the Evangelists, and all the sacred Relics at Rouen, in the
presence of diverse great persons. Besides for more assurance, Harald was
fyanced to Adeliza, the Dukes daughter, and his brother Wolnot, left a pledge
for the performance.

This intercourse made the trans-action of the fate of England, and so much was
done, either by King Edward or Harald (though neithers act, if any such were,
was of power to prejudice the State, or alter the course of a right succession)
as gave the Duke a color to clame the Crown, by a donation made by Testament,
which being against the Law and Custom of the Kingdom, could be of no
validity at all. For the Crown being held, not as Patrimoniall, but in a
succession by remotion (which is a succeding to another place) it was not in
the power of King Edward to collate the same by any dispositine and
testamentary will, the right discending to the next of blood, only by the
Custom and Law of the Kingdom: For the Successor is not said properly to be
the heir of the King, but the Kingdom, which makes him so, and cannot be put
from it by any act of his Predecessor. But this was only his claim; the right
was of his own making, and no otherwise. For as soon as he had heard of the
death of King Edward, with the Election, and Coronation of Harald, (for they
came both together) he assembles the States of Normandy, and acquaints them
with the right he had to England, soliciting an extention of their utmost
means for his recovery thereof, and auengement of the perjured Usurper Harald;
showing them apparent probability of suceesse, by infallible intelligence he
had from the State, his strong party therein, with the debility and distraction
of the people; What glory, wealth, and greatness, it would add to their
Nation, the obtaining of such a Kingdom, as was thus opportunely laid open for
them, if they apprehended the present occasion. All which remonstrances
notwithstanding, could enduce but very few to like of this attempt, and those
such who had long followed him in the wars, exhausted their estates, and
content to run upon any adventure that might promise likelihood of
advancement. The rest were of diverse opinions: some that it was sufficient to
hold and defend their own country; without hazarding themselves, to conquer
others; and these were men of the best ability: others were content to
contribute, but so sparingly, as would little advance the business: and for
the most part they were so tired with the formerwarres, and so desirous to
embrace the blessing of peace, as they were unwilling to undergo a certain
trouble for an uncertain good. And with these oppositions, or faint offers,
the Dukes purpose, at first, had so little way, as did much perplex him: At
length, seeing this protraction, and difficulty in general: he deals with his
nearest and most trusty friends in particular, being such as he knew affected
the glory of action, and would adventure their whole estates with him. As
William fitz Auber, Conte de Bretteuile, Gnalter Guifford Earl of Logueuille,
Roger, Signor de Beaumont, with others, especially his own brothers, Odo
Bishop of Bayeux, and Robert Earl of Mortaigne: these in full assembly he
wrought to make their offers: which they did in so large a proportion; and
especially William fitz Auber (who made the first offer, to furnish forty ships
with men and munition; the Bishop of Bayeux. 40. the Bishop of Man's. 30. and so
others, according or beyond their abilities) as the rest of the assembly,
doubting if the action succeeded without their help (the Duke aryuing to that
greatness) would bear in mind, what little mind they showed to advance his
desires, began to contribute more largely.

The Duke finding them yiedling, though not in such sort as was requisite for
such a work; dealt with the Bishops and great men a part, so effectually, as
at length he got of them severally that, which of altogether he could never
have compassed, and causing each man's contribution to be registered; inkindled
such an emulation amongst them, as they who lately would do nothing, now
stryued who should do most.

And not only wan he the people of his own Provinces, to undertake this
action, but drew by his fair persuasions and large promises, most of the
greatest Princes and Nobles of France, to adventure their persons, and much of
their estates with him; as Robert fitz Haruays, Duke of Orleance, the Earls of
Bretaigne, Ponthicu, Bologne, Poictou, Main, Neuers, Hiesms, Aumal; Le Signors
de Tours, and even his mortal enemy Martel, Earl of Aniou, became to be as
forward as any. All which, he sure could never have induced, had not this
virtues and greatness gained a wide opinion and reputation amonst them.

Although in these aduancements and turns of Princes, there is a concurrency
of dispositions, and a constitution of times prepared for it: yet is it
strange, that so many mighty men of the French nation, would adventure their
lives and fortunes to add England to Normandy, to make it more then France,
and so great a Crown to a Duke, who was too great for them already. But where
mutations are destyned, the counsels of men must be corrupted, and there will
fall out all advantages to serve that business.

The King of France, who should have strangled this disseigne in the birth, was
a child, and under the curature of Baldouin, Earl of Flanders, whose daughter
the Duke had married, and was sure to have rather furtherance then any
opposition that way: Besides, to amuze that Court, and dazell a young Prince, he
promised faithfully, if he conquered this kingdom; to hold it of the King, as
he did the Duchy of Normandy, and do him homage for the same; which would
add a great glory to that Crown. Then was he before hand with Pope
Alexander, (to make religion give reputation and auowment to his pretended
right) promising likewise to hold it of the Apostolic Sea, if he prevailed in
his enterprise. Whereupon the Pope sent him a Banner of the Church, with an
Agnus of gold, and one of the hayres of Saint Peter. The Emperor Hen. 4 sent
him a Prince of Almayne with forces, but of what name, or his number, is not
remembered: so that we see it was not Normandy alone that subdued England, but
a collected power out of all France and Flanders with the aids of other
Princes. And by these means made he good his undertaking, and within eight
months was ready furnished with a powrefull army at Saint Valerie in
Normandy, whence he transported the same into England in. 896. ships, as some
write. And this was the man, and thus made to subdue England.

And now having gotten, the great and difficult battaille, before remembered, at
Hastings, the fourtenth of October. 1066. he marched without any opposition to
London, where Edwin and Morchar, Earls of Northumberland, and Mercland,
brothers of eminent dignity and respect in the kingdom, had labored with all
their power to stir the hearts of the people for the conservation of the
State, and establishing Edgar Atheling, the next of the Royal issue, in his
right of the Crown: whereunto other of the Nobility had likewise consented;
had they not seen the Bishops auerse or wavering. For, asthen, to the Clergy,
any King (so a Christian) was all one: they had their Province a part, divided
from secular domination: and of a Prince (though a stranger) who had taken up
so much of the world before hand, upon credit and fame of his piety and
bounty, they could not but presume well for their estate: and so were content
to give way to the present Fortune.

The Nobility, considering they were so borne, and must have a King: not to
take him that was of power to make himself, would show more of passion then
providence: and to be now behind hand to receive, with more then submission,
was as if to withstand: which (with the distrust of each others faith) made
them strive and run headlong who should be first to pre-occupate the grace of
servitude, and intrude them into forrayne subjection.

The Commons, like a strong vessel that might have been for good use, was
hereby left, without a stern, and could not move but irregularly. So that all
estates in general either corrupted with new hopes, or transported with fear,
forsook themselves, and their distressed Country. Upon his approach to London
the gates were all set open: the Archbyshope of Canterbury, Stigand, with
other Bishops, the Nobility, Magistrates, and people, rendering themselves in
all obedience unto him: and he returning plausible protestations of his future
government, was on Christmas day, then next following, crowned King of England
at Westminister, by Aldred, Arch-byshop of York, for that Stigand was not held
canonically invested in his Sea: and yet thought to have been a forward mouer
of this alteration.

Here, according to the accustomed form, at his Coronation, the Bishops and
Barons of the Realm, took their oath, to be his true and loyal subjects, and
he reciprocally (being required thereunto by the Arch-byshope of York) made
his personal oath, before the Altar of Saint Peter, to defend the holy Churches
of God, and the Rectors of the same: to govern the Universal people, subject
unto him, justly: to establish equal laws, and to see them ducly executed.
Nor did he ever claim any power by conquest, but as a regular Prince,
submitted himself to the orders of the kingdom: desirous rather to have his
Testamentarie title (howsoever weak) to make good his succession, rather then
his sword. And though the Style of Conqueror by the flattery of the time, was
after given him, he showed by all the course of his government he assumed it
not: introducing none of all those alterations, (which followed) by violence,
but a mild gathering upon the disposition of the State, and the occasions
offered, and that by way of reformation. And now taking hostages for his more
security, and order for the defense and government of his kingdom, at the
opening of the spring next, he returns into Normandy, so to settle his
affairs there, as they might not distract him from his business in England,
that required his whole powers.

And to leave here all sure behind him, he commits the rule of the kingdom, to
his brother the Bishop of Bayeux, and to his cousin Fitz Auber, whom he had made
Earl of Hereford, Or Osborne.
taking with him all the chief men of England, who were likest to be heads to
a revolt. As Edger Atheling, the Archbishop Stigand, lately discontented:
Edwyn, and Morchar, with many other Bishops and Noble men: Besides to unburden
his charge, and dis-impester his Court; he took back with him all the French
adventurers, and such as were unnecessary men, rewarding them as far as his
treasure would extend, and the rest he made up in fair promises.

In his absence, which was all that whole summer, nothing was here attempted
against him, but only that Edric, surnamed the Forrester, in the County of
Hereford, called in the kings of the Welsh, to his aid, and forraged only the
remote borders of that country. The rest of the kingdom stood quiet, expecting
what would become of that new world, wherein as yet they found no great
alteration, their laws and liberties remaining the same they were before, and
might hope by this accession of a new Province, the state of England would be
but enlarged in dominion abroad, and not impaired in profit at home, by reason
the nation was but small, and of a plentiful, and not ouer-peopled country,
likely to impester them.

Having disposed his affairs of Normandy, he returns toward winter, into
England, where he was to satisfy three sorts of men; first such adventurers,
with whom he had not yet cleared: Secondly, those of his own people, whose
merits or neernesse, looked for recompense, whereof the number being so great,
many must have their expectations fed, if not satisfied: Thirdly, the people of
this kingdom, by whom he must now subsist, for being not able with his own
nation, so to impeople the same, as to hold and defend it (if he should proceed
to an extirpation of the natural inhabitants) he was likewise to give them
satisfaction.

Wherein he had more to do then in his battle at Hastings; seeing all
remunerations, with supplies of money, must be raised out of the stock of the
kingdom, which could not but be irksome to the State in general, and all
preferments and dignities conferd on his, to be either by vacancies, or
displacing others, which must needs breed very feeling grieuances in
particular. And yet we find no great men thrust out of their rooms, but such
as put themselves out, by reuolting, after his establishment, and their fealty
given. So that it seems, he contented himself and his, for the time, only
with what he found here ready, and with filling up their places, who were
slain in the battle, or fled, as many were, with the sons of Harald out of
the kingdom. Such Gentlemen as he could not presently prefer, and had a
purpose to advance, he dispersed abroad into Abbeys, there to live till places
fell out for them: and 24 he sent to the Abbey of Eley: whereby he not only
lessened the multitude of attendants and suitors at Court; eased that eyesore
of strangers, but also had them a watch over the Clergy, who then were of
great and eminent power in the kingdom; and might much prevail with the
people.

But the English Nobility, incompatible of these new concurrents; found
notwithstanding, such a disproportion of grace, and darkning of their
dignities, by the interposition of so many, as must needs lessen their
splendor; that many of the chiefest, doubting to be more impaired in honor and
estate, conspired together, and fled some into Scotland, and some into
Denmark, to try if by aid from abroad, they might recover themselves, and
their lost fortunes again at home The English Nobility forsake the kingdom.
. Amongst which, the chief was Edgar Atheling, (termed, Englands Dearling,
which showed the peoples zeal to his blood) who with his mother Agatha, and
his two sisters Margaret and Christin, intending to retire into Hungary,
(their native Country) were driven by tempest on the coast of Scotland, where
they were with all Hospitable comfort interteyned by Malcolin. 3. whose former
sufferings in his exile, had taught him to compassionate others like distresses;
and whom it concerned now to look to his own, his neighbors house being thus
on fire: and to foster a party against so dangerous an in-commer, that was
like to thrust them all out of door. Which induced him not only to entertayne
this Prince, dispossessed of his right, but to enter league with him for the
public safety; And to inchaine it the stronger, he takes to wife Margaret,
the sister of Edgar, (a Lady endued with all blessed virtues) by whom the
blood of our ancient Kings was preserved, and conjoined with the Norman in
Hen. 2. and so became English again. Unto Edgar in Scotland, repaired the
Earls Edwin and Morchar, Hereward, Gospatric, Siward, with others: and shortly
after Stigand and Aldred, Arch-byshops, with diverse of the clergy: who in the
third year of this Kings reign, raised very great commotions in the North,
beyond Humber, and wrought most egarly to recover their lost Country: but
being now to late, and the occasion not taken before the settling of the govern
meant, whilst it was new and branling, they prevailed nothing, but gave
advantage to the conqueror, to make himself more then he was: For all
conspiracies of subjects, if they succeed not, advance the sovereignty: and
nothing gave root to the Norman planting here, more then the petty reuolts
made by discattred troops, in several parts, begun without order, and
followed without resolution; whereas nothing could be done for a general
recovery, but by a general sulleuation of the people: for which all wary
prevention was used; and they had waytes enough laid on, to hold them down.
And though these Lords imbroiled themselves, and held him doing in the North,
yet he having all the South parts settled under his domination, with well
practiced and prepared forces, there could be little hope of good, whilst all
their great estates furnished the Normans, both in state and means to ruin
them; The Earldom; and all the Lands which Edwyn held in Yorkshire, were
given to Alain, Earl of Britayne, kinsman to the Conqueror; The
Arch-byshopricke of Canterbury, conferd on Lanfranc, Abbot of Caen. That of
York, on Thomas his Chapline, and all the rest both of the Clergy and others,
which were out, had their places within, supplied by Normans.

And after King William had appeased a commotion in the West, which the sons
of Harrald, with forces out of Ireland had raised, and also repressed the
rebellions of Excester, and Oxford; he takes his journey in person Northward
with all expedition, least the enemy there, should grow too high in heart and
opinion, upon the great slaughter of his people, made at York; and the
defeiture of his Brother and Leiuetenant, Robert Earl of Mortaigne, slain
with. 700. Normans at Durham: where, at his first coming he so wrought, that
he either discomfeited, or corrupted the generals of the Danicque forces,
newly arrived to aid the Lords; andsent by Swayn, King of Denmark, under the
conduct of his two sons, Harrald and Knute, with a Navy of. 300. sail: and
after sets upon the army of the Lords, weakened both in strength and hope, by
this departure of their confederates, and puts them to slight: Which done, he
utterly wasted, and laid desolate, all that goodly Country between York and
Durham, the space of 60. miles, that it might be no more a succor to the
enemy: And the like course he used on all the Coasts where any apt landings
lay for invasions; and so returns to London.

Most of the Lords after this great defeit, came in, upon public faith given
them, and were conducted to Barkehamsted, by the Abbot Fredricke; where, upon
their submission, and oath of allegiance retaken, they had their pardon, and
restitution of grace granted by the King, who it seems was so willing to
acquiet them, that again he takes his personal oath before the Arch-byshop
Lanfranck, and the Lords, to observe the ancient laws of the Realm,
established by his Noble predecessors, the Kings of England, and especially
those of Saint Edward. Whereupon these stormy dispositions held calm a while.

But long it was not ere many of these Lords (whether upon intelligence of new
hopes, from Edgar (who was still in Scotland) or grown desperate with new
displeasures, at home, finding small performance of promises, made rupture of
oath, and all other respects, and brake out again. The Earl Edwyn, making
toward Scotland, was murdered by his own people. The Lords Morchar, and
Hereward, betook them to the Isle of Eley, meaning to make good that place for
that winter; whether also repaired the Earl Syward, and the Bishop of Durham
out of Scotland. But the King, who was no tyme-giuer unto growing dangers,
beset all the Isle with flat boats on the East, and made a bridge of two miles
long on the West, and safely brought in his people upon the enemy; who seeing
themselves surprised; yielded all to the Kings mercy, except Hereward, who
desperately marched with his people through the Fennes, and recovered Scotland:
The rest were sent to diverse prisons, where they dyed, or remained during the
Kings life.

Those Lords who persisted loyal upon this last submission, were all employed
and well graced with the King, as Edric the Forester, (and first that rebelled
in his reign) was held in clear trust, and near about him. Gospatrice he
made Earl of Northumberland, and sent him against Malcolin, who in this time,
subdues the Countries of Tisdall, Cleueland, and Comberland: Waltheof, son to
the Earl Syward, he held so worthy to be made his, as he married him to his
niece Judith, though he had been a principal actor in the Northern
commotion, (and in defending the City of York against him: is said to have
stricken off the heads of diverse Normans, one by one, as they entered a breach,
to the admiration of all about him) showing therein that true touch of the
noblest nature, to love virtue, even in his enemies.

And now seeing Scotland to be the especial retrayt for all conspirators, and
discontented in his kingdom, yiedling them continual succor, and assistance,
and where his competitor Edgar lived, to beget and nurse perpetual matter for
their hopes, and at hand for all advantages; he enters that kingdom with a
puissant Army: which, incountring with more necessities then forces, soon grew
tired, and both Kings, considering of what difficulties the victory would
consist, were willing, to take the safest way to there ends, and upon fair
ouertures, to conclude a peace; Articling for the bounds of each kingdom,
with the same title of dominion, as in former times: All delinquents, and their
partakers generally pardoned.

Here with the universal turn of alteration, thus wrought in England,
Scotland being a part of the body of this Isle, is noted to have Scotland
before this time generally spoke a Kind of Irish.
likewise had a share; and as in the Court of England, the French tongue became
generally spoken; so in that of Scotland did the English, by reason of the
multitude of this Nation, attending both the Queen and her brother Edgar, and
daily repairing thither for their safety, and combination against the common
enemy: of whom diverse, abandoning their native distressed Country, were by
the bounty of that King preferred: and there planted spread their offspring
into many noble families, remaining to this day: The titles for distinguishing
degrees of honor; as of Duke, Marquess, Earl, Baron, Rider or Knight, were
then (as is thought) first introduced: and the nobler sort began to be called
by the title of their Signories (according to the French manner) which before
bare the name of their Father, with the addition of Mac, after the fashion of
Ireland. Other innouations, no doubt, entered there likewise at the opening of
this wide mutation of ours: fashion and imitation like weeds easily growing in
every soil.

Shortly after this late made peace, Edgar Edgar Atheling submitted himself to
King William.
Etheling voluntarily came in, and submitted himself to the King, being then
in Normandy, and was restored to grace, and a fair maintenance, which held him
ever after quiet. And it made well at that time for the fortune of the King,
howsoever for his own, being thought to have ill-timed his affairs (either
through want of seasonable intelligence, or despair of success) in making too
soon that submission, which was latter or never to have been done. For in this
absence of the King, Roger fits Auber, the young Earl of Hereford, contrary to
his express commandment, gave his sister in marriage to Ralph Waher, Earl
of Northfolke, and Suffolk, and at the great solemnization thereof, the two
Earls conspired with Eustace Earl of Boloigne (who secretly came over to this
festival) and with the Earl Waltheof, and other English Lords, to call in the
Danes, and by maine power to keep out and dispossess the King. Who having
thus passed over so many gulfes of foreign dangers, might little imagine of
any wrack so near home; and that those, whom he had most advanced, should
have the especial hand in his destruction: But no rewards are benefits, that
are not held so, nor can ever clear the accounts with them that ouer-value
their merits. And had not this conspiracy been opportunely discovered (which
some say was by the Earl Waltheof, moved with the ugliness of so foul an
ingratitude) they had put him again to the winning of England. But now the
fire bewrayed before it flamed, was soon quenched by the diligence of Odon the
Kings Vicegerent, the Bishop of Worcester and others, who kept the
conspirators from joining their forces: So that they never came to make any
head, but were either surprised, or forced to fly: The Earl Roger fitz Auber
was taken, and some say executed; and so was shortly after the Earl Waltheof,
whose dissent from the act, could not get him pardon for his former consent,
though much compassion in respect of his great worthiness. But the wide
distent of these tumors, fed from many secret veins, seemed to be of that
danger, as required this extremity of cure, especially in a part so apt for
infection, upon any the like humors.

For this conspiracy seems to take motion from a general league of all the
neighbor Princes here about, as may well be gathered by their several
actions. First in the King of France by defending Dole in Britaigne (a Castle
of Raph de Waher) against the King of England, and in likelihood, employing the
Earl of Boloigne toward the conspirators: In Swayne King of Denmark, by
sending a Navy of two hundredth sail, under the conduct of his son Knut, and
others. In Drone King of Ireland, by furnishing the sons of Harald with 65
ships. In Malcoline, and the Kings of Wales, by their readiness to assist. But
the Danes being on the coast, and hearing how their confederates had sped, with
the great preparations the king had made, after some pillage taken upon the
shores of England and Flanders, returned home, and never after arrived to
disturb this land. Though in Anno Reg. 19. Knute, then king of Denmark, after
the death of Swain, intending to repair the dishonor of his two last
adventures past, and put for the Crown of England, his predecessors had
holden, prepared a Navy of a thousand sail, and was aided with six hundredth
more by Robert le Frison Earl of Flanders (whose daughter he had married.) But
the winds held so contrary for two years together, as utterly quasht that
enterprise, and freed the king and his successors for ever after from future
molestation that way.

But this business put the State to an infinite charge, the king entertaining
all that time, besides his Normans, Hugh, brother to the king of France, with
many companies of French. Finding the English (in respect of many great
families allied to the Danes) to incline rather to that nation, then the
Norman, and had experience of the great and near intelligence continually
passing between them.

And these were all the wars he had within the kingdom, saving in Anno Regni
15. he subdued Wales, and brought the kings there, to do him homage.

His wars abroad, were all about his dominions in France, first raised by his
own son Robert, left Lieftenant governor of the Duchy of Normandy, and the
County of Main, who in his fathers absence, tasting the glory of command,
grew to assume the absolute rule of the Province, causing the Barons there, to
do him homage as Duke, not as Lieftenant, and leagues him with the King of
France, who working upon the easiness of his youth and ambition, was glad to
apprehend that occasion to disioynct his estate, who was grown too great for
him. And the profuse largess and disorderly expense whereto Robert was
addicted, is nourished by all ways possible, as the means to imbrake him in
those difficulties of still getting money, that could not but needs yield
continual occasion to intertayne both his own discontent, and theirs, from
whom his supplies must be raised. And though thereby he purchased him the title
of Courtois, yet he lost the opinion of good government, and constrained the
estates of Normandy, to complain to his father of the great concussion, and
violent exactions he used amongst them.

The King understanding the fire thus kindled in his own house, that had set
others all in combustion, hastes with forces into Normandy, to have surprised
his son; who advertised of his coming, furnished with. 2000. men at arms, by
the King of France, lay in ambush where he should pass; sets upon him,
defeited most of his people, and in the pursuit happened to encounter with
himself, whom he vnhors'd, and wounded in the arm, with his Lance; but
perceauing by his voice, it was his father, he hasted to remounte him, humbly
craving pardon for his offense: which the father (seeing in what case he was)
granted, howsoever he gave; and upon his submission, took him with him to
Rouen; whence, after cured of his hurt, he returned with his son William
(likewise wounded in the fight) into England.

Long was it not ere he was again informed of his sons remutyning, and how
he exacted upon the Normans, usurped the entire government, and urged his
fathers promise thereof, made him before the King of France, upon his Conquest
of England: which caused his little stay here, but to make preparatio^s for his
return into those parts: whether in passing, he was driven on the Coast of
Spain, but at length ariuing at Bordeaux, with his great preparations, his
son Robert came in, and submitted himself the second time: whom he now
took with him into England, to frame him to a better obedience, employing him
in the hard and necessitous wars of Scotland, (the late peace being between
the two Kings again broken) and after sent him back, and his young son
Henry, with the association of charge and like power (but of more trust) to the
government of Normandy.

After the two Princes had been there a while, they went to visit the King of
France at Conflance, where feasting certain days, upon an after dinner, Henry
wanne so much at chesse, of Louis, the Kings eldest son, as he, growing into
choler, called him the son of a Bastard, and threw the Chesse in his face.
Henry takes up the Chesse-bord, and struck Louis, with that force, as drew
blood, and had killed him, had not his brother Robert come in the mean time,
and interposed himself: Whereupon they suddenly took horse, and with much
ado they recovered Pontoise, from the Kings people that pursued them.

This quarrel arising, upon the intermeeting of these Princes (a thing that
seldom breeds good blood amongst them) re-inkindled a heat of more rancor in
the fathers, and began the first war between the English and French. For
presently the King of France, complots again with Robert (impatient of a
partner) enters Normandy, and takes the City of Vernon. The King of England
inuades France, subdues the Country of Zaintonge and Poictou, and returns to
Rouen, where the third time, his son Robert is reconciled unto him, which
much disappoints and vexes the King of France, who thereupon, summons the King
of England, to do him homage for the kingdom of England, which he refused to
do, saying, he held it of none but God and his sword. For the Duchy of
Normandy he offers him homage: but that would not satisfy the King of France,
whom nothing would, but what he could not have, the Maistery: and seeks to
make any occasion the motive of his quarrel: and again inuades his
territories, but with more loss then profit. In the end, they conclude a
certain crazie peace, which held no longer then King William had recovered a
sickness, whereinto (through his late travail, age, and corpulencie) he was
fallen: at which time, the King of France, then young and lusty, ieasting at his
great belly, whereof he said, he lay in, at Rouen, so irritated him, as being
recovered, he gathers all his best forces, enters France in the chiefest time
of their fruits, making spoil of all in his way, till he came even before
Paris; where the King of France then was; to whom he sendes, to show him of his
vp-sitting, and from thence marched to the City of Mants, which he utterly
sacked, and in the destruction thereof, gate his own, by the strain of his
horse, among the breaches, and was thence conveyed sick to Rouen, and so ended
all his wars.

NOw for his government in peace, and the His government in peace.
course he held in establishing the kingdom thus gotten; first after he had
represt the conspiracies in the North, and well quieted all other parts of the
State (which now being absolutely his, he would have to be ruled by his own
law) began to govern all by the Customs of Normandy. Whereupon the
agreeued Lords, and sad people of England, tender their humble petition,
beseeching him, in regard of his oath made at his Coronation: And by the soul
of Saint Edward, from whom he had the Crown and kingdom; under whose laws
they were borne and bred; That he would not add that misery, to deliver them
up to be judged, by a strange law they understood not. And so earnestly they
wrought, that he was pleased to confirm that by his Charter, which he had
twice fore-promised by his oath: And gave commandment to his Iusticiaries to
see those laws of Saint Edward (so called, not that he made them, but
collected them out of Merchen-law, Dane law, and Westsex law) to be inuiolablie
observed throughout the kingdom. And yet notwithstanding this confirmation,
and the Charters afterward granted by Hen. 1. Hen 2. and King John, to the same
effect, there followed a general innovation both in the laws and government
of England: So that this seems rather done to acquiet the people with a show
of the continuation of their ancient customs, then that they enjoyed them in
effect. For the little conformity between those laws of former times, and
these that followed upon this change of State, show from what head they sprang.
And though there might be some veins issuing from foriner originals, yet the
main stream, of our Common law, with the practice thereof, flowed out of
Normandy, notwithstanding all objections can be made to the contrary. For
before these collections of the Confessors, there was no universal law of the
kingdom, but every several Province held their own customs: all the
inhabitants from Humber to Scotland used the Danicque law: Merchland, the middle
part of the Country, and the State of the West Saxons, had their several
constitutions, as being several dominions: And though for some few years
there seemed to be a reduction of the Heptarchie, into a Monarchy, yet held it
not so long together (as we may see in the succession of that broken
government) as to setle one form of order current over all; but that every
Province, according to their particular founders, had their customs a part,
and held nothing in common (besides religion, and the constitutions thereof) but
with the universality of Meum and Tuum, ordered according to the rites of
nations, and that ius innatum, the Common law of all the world, which we see to
be as universal, as are the cohabitations and societies of men, and serves the
turn to hold them together in all Countries, howsoever they may differ in
their forms.

So that by these passages, we see what way we came, where we are, and the
furthest end we can discover of the original of our Common law; and to strive
to look beyond this, is to look into an uncertain vastness, beyond our
discerning. Nor can it detract from the glory of good Customs, if they bring
but a pedigree of 600. years to approve their gentilitie; seeing it is the
equity, and not the antiquity of laws that makes them venerable, and the
integrity of the professors thereof, the profession honored. And it were well
with mankind, if days brought not their corruptions, and good orders were
continued with that providence, as they were instituted.

But this alteration of the laws of England bred most heavy doleances, not
only in this Kings time, but long after: For whereas before, those laws they
had, were written in their own tongue, intelligible to all; now are they
translated into Latin and French, and practiced wholly in the Norman form and
language; thereby to draw the people of this kingdom, to learn that speech
for their own need, which otherwise they would not doc; And seeing a
difference in tongue, would continue a difference in affections; all means was
wrought to reduce it to one Idiom, which yet was not in the power of the
Conqueror to do, without the extirpation or ouerlaying the Land-bred people;
who being so far in number as they were above the inuadors, both carry the
main of the language, and in few years, have those who subdued them,
vndistinguishablie theirs. For notwithstanding the former conquest by the
Danes, and now this by the Norman, the solid body of the kingdom, still
consisted of the English, and the accession of strange people, was but as
Ryuers to the Ocean, that changed not it, but were changed into it. And though
the king labored what he could to turn all to French, by enioyning their
children here to use noc other language, with their Grammar in schools, to
have the laws practiced in French, All petitions and business of Court, in
French, No man graced but he that spoke French, yet soon after his days, all
returns natural English again, but law, and that still held foreign, and
became in the end wholly to be enclosed in that language: nor have we now other
mark of our subjection and inuassellage from Normandy, but only that, and
that still speaks French to us in England.

And herewithall new Terms, new Constitutions, new forms of Pleas, new
Offices and Courts are now introduced by the Normans; a people more inured to
litigation, and of spirits more impatient, and contentious, then were the
English: who by reason of their continual war (wherein law is not borne) and
labor to defend the public, were more at unity in their private: and that
small time of peace they had, devotion and good fellowship entertained.

For their laws and constitutions before, we see them plain, brief, and
simple, without perplexities, having neither fold nor plaite, commanding, not
disputing: Their graunts and transactions as brief and simple, which showed
them a cleere-meaning people, retaining still the nature of that plain
realnesse they brought with them, vncomposed of other fashion, then their own,
and vnaffecting imitation.

For their trials in cases criminal, where manifest proofs failed, they
continued their ancient custom, held from before their Christianity, until
this great alteration: which trials they called Ordeal ( Or signifying right,
Deal, part) whereof they had these kinds: Ordeal by fire, which was for the
better sort, and by water for the inferior: That of Fire was to go blindfold
over certain ploughshares, made red hot, and laid an uneven distance one
from another. That of Water was either of hot or cold: in the one to put their
arms to the elbow, in the other to be cast headlong. According to their
escapes or hurts, they were adjudged: such as were cast into the rivers, if
they sancke were held guiltless, ifnot, culpable, as eiected by that Element.
These trials they called the judgments of God, and they were performed with
solemn Oraisons. In some cases, the accused was admitted to clear himself by
receiving the Eucharist, or by his own oath, or the oaths of two or three; but
this was for especial persons, and such whose livings were of a rate allowable
thereunto, the usual opinion persuading them, that men of ability held a more
regard of honesty.

With these they had the trial of Campefight, or single combat (which likewise
the Lumbards, originally of the same German nation, brought into Italy)
permitted by the law in cases either of safety and fame, or of possessions.
All which trials show them to be ignorant in any other form of law, or to
neglect it; Nor would they be induced to forgo these customs, and determine
their affairs by Imperial or Pontificiall Constitutions, no more then would
the Lumbards forsake their duellary laws in Italy, which their Princes,
against some of their wills, were constrained to ratify, as Luytprandus, their
king, thus ingeniously confesses. We are uncertain of the judgment of God,
and we have heard many by fight, to have lost their cause without just cause;
yet in respect of the custom of our nation, we cannot avoid an impious law.
But all these forms of judgments and trials had their seasons; Those of Fire
and Water, in short time after the Conquest, grew disused, and in the end
utterly abrogated by the Pope; as derived from Paganism; That of combat
continues longer-liued, but of no ordinary use: And all actions now, both
criminal and real, began to be wholly adjudged by the verduit of 12 men,
according to the custom of Normandy, where the like form is used, and called
by the name of Enquest, with the same cautions for the Jurors, as it is here
continued to this day. Although some hold opinion that this form of trial was
of use in this kingdom from all antiquity, and allege an ordinance of king
Ethelred (father to the Confessor) willing in their Gemote, or conuentions,
monthly held in every hundred, twelve grave men of free condition, should with
the Greut, the chief Officer amongst them, swear upon the Evangelists, to
judge every man's cause aright. But here we see twelve men were to be assessors
with the Grieve to judge, and no Jurors, according to this manner of trial now
used; Besides, had there been any such form, we should as well have heard
thereof in their laws and practice, as of those other kinds of Ordeal, only
and usually mentioned.

But whatsoever innouations were in all other things; the government for the
peace and security of the kingdom (which most imported the King to look
unto) seems to be continued as before, and for that business he found here
better laws established, by the wary care of our former kings, then any he
could bring. Amongst which especially was the Boroh law, whereby every free man
of the Commons stood as surety for each others behavior, in this sort.

The kingdom was divided into Sheires or Shares, every Sheire consisting of so
many Hundreds, and every Hundred of a number of Boroughs, Villages, or
Tythings, containing ten householders, whereof if any one should commit an
unlawful act, the other nine were to attach and bring him to reason: If he
fled, 31 days were enjoined him to appear: If in the mean time apprehended,
he was made to restore the damage done; otherwise the Free-boroughead (to say
the Tythingman) was to take with him two of the same Village, and out of three
other Villages next adjoining as many (that is, the Tythingman, and two other
of the principal men) and before the officers of that hundred purge himself
and the village of the fact, restoring the damage done with the goods of the
malefactor, which if they suffized not to satisfy, the Free-boroh, or Tything,
must make up the rest, and besides take an oath to be no way accessarie to the
fact; and to produce the offender, if by any means they could recover him, or
know where he were. Besides every Lord and Master, stood Boroh, for all his
family, whereof if any servant were called in question, the Master was to see
him answer it in the hundred where he was accused. If he fled, the Master
was to yield such goods as he had to the King. If himself were accused to be
aiding or privy to his servants flight, he was to clear himself by. 5. men,
otherwise to forfeit all his goods to the King, and his man to be outlawed.

These lincks thus intermutually fastened, made so strong a chain to hold the
whole frame of the State together in peace and order, as, all the most
pollitique regiments upon earth, all the interleagued societies of men, cannot
show us a streighter form of combination. This might make the Conqueror,
coming upon a people thus lawbound hand and foot, to establish him, so soon
and easily as he did; This Boroh-law, being as a Cittadell built to guard the
Common wealth, coming to be possessed by a conquering Master, was made to turn
all this ordinance upon the State, and batter herself with her own weapon:
and this law may be some cause, we find no popular insurrection before the
Conquest. For had not this people been borne with these fetters, and an idle
peace, but lived loose, and in action, it is like they would have done as
nobly, and given as many, and as deep wounds ere they lost their Country, as
ever the Britains did, either against the Romans, or the Saxons, their
predecessors, or themselves had done against the Danes; a people far more
powrefull, and numerous then these. The Conqueror, without this, had not made
it the work of one day, nor had Normandy ever been able to have yielded
those multitudes for supplies, that many battails must have had.

But now. 1. the strickt executing this law, 2. disweapning the Commons. 3.
Preventing their night-meetings with a heavy penalty, that every man at the
day closing, should cover his fire, and depart to his rest. 4. Erecting diverse
fortresses in fit parts of the kingdom. 5. And collating all offices, both of
command, and judicature, on such as were his; made his domination such as he
would have it.

And where before the Bishop and the Alderman were the absolute judges to
determine all business in every sheire, and the Bishop in many cases shared in
the benifite of the mulcts with the King, now he confined the Clergy, within
the Province of their own Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to deal only in
business concerning rule of souls, according to the Cannons, and laws
Episcopal.

And whereas the causes of the kingdom were before determined in every sheire,
and by a law of King Edward Senior, all matters in question should, upon
especial penalty, without further deferment, be finally decided in their
Gemote, or conuentions held monthly in every hundred: now he ordained that
four times in the year, for certain days, the same businesses should be
determined in such place as he would appoint, where he constituted judges to
attend for that purpose, and also others, from whom, as from the bosom of the
Prince, all litigators should have justice; and from whom was no appeal.
Others he appointed for the punishment of malefactors, called Iusticiarij Pacis.

What alteration was then made in the tenure of men's possessions, or since
introduced, we may find by taking note of their former vsances. Our Ancestors
had only two kind of tenures, Boke-land, and Folkland, the one was a
possession by writing, the other without. That by writing was as freehold, and
by charter, hereditarie, with all immunities, and for the free and nobler sort.
That without writing, was to hold at the will of the Lord, bound to rents and
services, and was for the rural people. The inheritances descended not alone,
but after the German manner, equally divided amongst all the children, which
they called Landskiftan, to say Partland, a custom yet continued in some
places of Kent, by the name of Gauel kin, of gif eal kin: And hecreupon some
write how the people of that Country, retained their ancient laws and
liberties by especial grant from the Conqueror: who after his battle at
Hastings, coming to Dover, to make all sure on that side, was encompassed by
the whole people of that Province, carrying boughs of trees in their hands,
and marching round about him like a moving wood. With which strange and
sudden show being much moved, the Archbishop Stigand, and the Abot Egelsin,
(who had raised this commotion by showing the people in what danger they were,
utterly to lose their liberties, and endure the perpetual misery of servitude
under the domination of strangers) present themselves, and declared how they
were the universal people of that Country, gathered together in that manner,
with boughs in their hands, either as Olive branches of intercession, for
peace and liberty, or to entangle him in his passage, with resolution rather
to leave their lives, then that which was deerer, their freedom. Whereupon
they say the Conqueror granted them the continuation of their former Customs
and Liberties: whereof notwithstanding they now retain no other then such as
are common with the rest of the kingdom.

For such as were Tenants at the will of their Geruasius, Tilburiensis.
Lords (which now grown to a greater number, and more miserable then before)
upon their petition, and compassion of their oppression he relieved: their case
was this: All such as were discovered to have had a hand in any rebellion, and
were pardoned, only to enjoy the benefit of life, having all their liuclihood
taken from them, became vassals unto those Lords to whom the possessions were
given, of all such lands forfeited by attaindors. And if by their diligent
service, they could attain any portion of ground, they held it but only so
long as it pleased their Lords, without having any estate for themselves, or
their children, and were oftentimes violently cast out upon any small
displeasure, contrary to all right: whereupon it was ordained that whatsoever
they had obtained of their Lords by their obsequious service, or agreed for, by
any lawful pact, they should hold by an inviolable law during their own lives.

The next great work after the ordering his laws, was the raising and
disposing of his revenues, taking a course to make, and know the utmost of his
estate, by a general survey of the kingdom, whereof he had a president by the
Dome book of Winchester, taken before by king Alfride. But as one day informs
another, so these actions of profit grew more exact in their after practice:
and a larger Commission is granted, a choice of skilfuller men employed, to
take the particulars both of his own possessions, and every man's else in the
kingdom, the nature and the quality of their lands, their estates, and
abilities; besides the descriptions, bounds, and divisions of Sheires and
Hundreds, and this was drawn into one book, and brought into his treasury,
then newly called the Exchequer (according to the sovereign court of that name
of Normandy) before termed here the Talee, and it was called the Dome book (
Liber iudiciarius) for all occasions concerning these particulars.

All the Forests and Chases of the kingdom, he seized into his proper
possession, and exempted them from being under any other law then his own
pleasure, to serve as Penetralia Regum, the withdrawing chambers of kings, to
recreate them after theirserious labors in he State, where none other might
presume to have to do, and where all punishments and pardons of delinquents
were to be disposed by himself, absolutely, and all former customs abrogated.
And to make his command the more, he increased the number of them in all parts
of the Land, and on the South coast dispeopled the country for above thirty
miles space, making of old inhabited possessions, a new Forest, inflicting most
severe The new Forest in Hamshire.
punishments for hunting his Dear, and thereby much aduances his revenues. An
act of the greatest concussion, and tyranny, he committed in his reign, and
which purchased him much hatred: And the same course held almost every king
near the Conquest, till this heavy grieuance was allayed by the Charter of
Forests, granted by Henry 3.

Besides these, he imposed no new taxations on the State, and used those he
found very moderately, as Dangelt, an imposition of two shillings upon every
hide or plough-land, (raised first by king Ethelred, to bribe the Danes, after
to war upon them) he would not have it made an Annual payment, but only
taken upon urgent occasion, and it was seldom gathered in his time, or his
successors (says Geruasius) yet we find in our Annals, a tax of 6. shil. upon
every hide-land, leauied presently after the general surucy of the kingdom.

Escuage (whether it were an imposition formerly laid, though now newly named,
I do not find) was a sum of money, taken of every Knights fee: In after
times, especially raised for the service of Scotland; And this also, says
Geruasius, was seldom leauied but on great occasion, for stipends, and
donatiues to soldiers; yet was it at first a due, reserved out of such lands
as were given by the Prince for service of war; according to the custom of
other nations. As in the Romans time we find lands were given in reward of
service to the men of war, for term of their lives, as they are at this day
in Turkey: After they became Patrimoniall, and hereditarie to their children.
Seuerus the Emperor was the first who permitted the children of men of war,
to enjoy their Fiefs, provided that they followed Arms. Constantine to reward
his principal Captains, granted them a perpetuity in the lands assigned them.
The estates which were but for life, were made perpetual in France, under the
last kings of the race of Charlemaine. Those Lords who had the great Fiefs of
the king, sub-deuided them to other persons, of whom they were to have service.

Mulctuary profits, besides, such as might arise by the breach of his
Forest-lawes, he had, few or none new, unless that of Murder, which arose
upon this occasion. In the beginning of his reign, the rankor of the English
toward the new-come Normans, was such, as finding them single in woods, or
remote places, they secretly murdered them; and the deed doers, for any the
seuerest courses taken, could never be discovered: whereupon it was ordained,
that the Hundred, wherein a Norman was found slain, and the Murderer not
taken, should be condemned to pay to the king, some 36 pounds, some 28 pounds,
according to the quantity of the Hundred, that the punishment, being generally
inflicted, might perticularly deter them, and hasten the discovery of the
malefactor, by whom so many must otherwise be interessed.

For his prouisionary revenues, he continued the former custom held by his
predecessors, which was in this manner. The kings Tenants, who held their lands
of the Crown, paid no money at all, but only Victuals, Wheat, Beifes,
Muttons, Hay, Oats, etc. and a just note of the quality and quantity of every
man's ratement was taken throughout all the Sheires of the kingdom, and leauied
ever certain, for the maintenance of the kings house; Other ordinary in-come
of ready moneys was there none, but what was raised by mulcts, and out of
Cities and Castles where Agriculture was not used.

What the Church yielded him, was by extent of a power that never reached so
far before, and the first hand he laid upon that side, which weighed heavily,
was his seizing upon the Plate, Jewels, and Treasure within all the Monasteries
of England, pretending the rebels, and their assistants, conveyed their riches
into these religious houses (as into places privileged, and free from seizure)
to defraud him thereof.

Besides this, he made all Bishoprics, and Abbeys that held Barronies (before
that time free from all secular services) contributary to his wars, and his
other occasions. And this may be the cause why they, who then only held the
Pen (the Scepter that rules over the memory of kings) have laid such an
eternal imposition upon his name, of rigor, oppression, and even barbarous
immanity, as they have done. When the nature and necessary disposition of his
affairs (being as he was) may advocate, and in many things much excuse his
courses. But this name of Conquest, which ever imports violence and misery, is
of so harsh a sound, and so odious in nature, as a people subdued cannot give a
Conqueror his due, how ever worthy, and especially to a stranger, whom only
time must naturalize and incorporate by degrees into their liking and opinion:
And yet therein this king was greatly aduantaged, by reason of his twenty
years government, which had much impaired the memory of former customs in the
younger sort, and well inured the elder to the present vsances and form of
State, whereby the rule was made more easy to his sons: who though they were
far inferior to him in worth, were somewhat better beloved then he; and the
rather for that their occasions made them somewhat to vnwrest the Sovereignty
from that height whereunto he had strayned it.

How he was underset with able ministers His Counselors.
for the managing of these great affairs of his, though time has shut us out
from the knowledge of some of them (it being in the fortune of kings, to have
their ministers like rivers in the Ocean, buried in their glory) yet no doubt,
being of a strong constitution of judgment, he could not but be strongly
furnished in that kind, for weak kings have weak sides, and the most renowned
Princes are ever best stored with able ministers. The principal of highest
employment, were Odon, Bishop of Bayeux, and Earl of Kent: Lanfranke,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Fitz Auber, Earl of Hereford: Odon
supplied the place of Viceroy in the kings absence, and had the management of
the Treasury. A man of a wide and agile spirit, let out into as spacious a
conceit of greatness, as the height of his place could show him: And is
rumord by the infinite accumulation of money (which his avarice, and length of
office had made) either to buy the Popedom, or purchase the people of England,
upon the death of the his brother: who understanding a purpose he had of going
to Rome, and seeing a mighty confluence of followers, gathering unto him, made
a close prison stay his journey: excusing it to the Church, that he imprisoned
not a Bishop of Bayeux, but an Earl of Kent, and Officer and accomptant unto
him. Yet upon his deathbed (shortly following) after many obsecrations, that
he would, in respect of blood and nature, be a kind mean for the future peace
of his sons, he released him. But the Bishop failed his request therein, and
became the only kindle-fire to set them all into more furious combustion. The
motive of his discontent (the engine where-withall Ambition evermore turns
about her intentions) was the envy he bare to Lanfranc, whose council, in his
greatest affairs, the king especially used: and to oppose and ouer-beare him,
took he all the contrary courses, and part with Robert, his nephew, whom
(after many fortunes) he attended to the holy war, and died in the siege of
Antioche.

Lanfranc was a man of as universal goodness as learning, borne in Lumbardie,
and came happily a stranger, in these strange time to do good to England; upon
whose observance, though the King might (in regard he raised him) lay some
tie, yet his affections could not but take part with his piety and place: in so
much as he feared not to oppose against Odon, the Kings brother, seeking to
gripe from the State of his Church: And in all he could, stood so between the
kingdom and the Kings rigor, as stayed many precipitious violencies, that he
(whose power lay as wide as his will) might else have fallen into. For the
Conqueror, howsoever austere to others, was to him always mild and yiedling,
as if subdued with his gravity and virtue.

He reformed the irregularitie and rudeness of the Clergy, introducing a more
Southern formalitie and respect, according to his breeding, and the custom of
his Country: concurring herein likewise to be an actor of alteration (though in
the best kind) with this change of State. And to give entertaynement
todeuotion, he did all he could to furnish his Church with the most exquisite
ornaments might be procured: added a more State and conueniency to the
structure of religious houses, and began the founding of Hospitals. Having
long struggled, with indefatigable labor, to hold things in an even course,
during the whole reign of this busy new state-building King. And after his
death, seeing his successor in the Crown (established especially by his means)
to fail his expectation, out of the experience of worldly causes, deuining of
future mischeifes by present courses, grew much to lament with his friends the
teadiousnesse of life, which shortly after he mildly left, which such a
sickness, as neither hindered his speech nor memory: a thing he would often
desire of God.

William Fitz Auber, (as is delivered) was a principal councellor and
instrument in this action for England; wherein he furnished 40. ships at his
own charge. A man of great means, yet of a heart greater, and a hand larger
then any means would well suffice. His profuse liberalities to men of arms,
gave often sharp offense to the King, who could not endure any such
improuident expenses. Amongst the laws he made (which shows the power these
Earls then had in their Provinces) he ordained that in the County of
Hereford, no man of arms (or soldier) should be fined for any offense
whatsoever, above 7. shillings when in other Counties, upon the least occasion
of disobeying their Lords will, they were forced to pay. 20. or 25. shil. But
his estate seeming to bear no proportion with his mind, and enough it was not
to be an eminent Earl, an especial Councellor, in all the affairs of England
and Normandy, a chief fauoritie to so great a Monarch; but that larger hopes
drew him away; designing to marry Richeld, Countess dowager of Flanders, and
to have the government of that Country, during the non age of Arnulph her
son; of whom, with the King of France, he had the tutelarie charge, committed
by Baldouin the sixth, Father to Arnulph; whose estate, Robert Le Frison, his
uncle, called by the people to the government, upon the exactions inflicted on
them by Richeld, had usurped. And against him Fitz Auber opposing, was with
Arnulph, surprised and slain.

And this was in the fate of the Conqueror, to see most of all these great men,
who had been the especial actors in all his fortunes, spent and extinct
before him; As Beaumont, Monsort, Harcourte, Hugh de Gourney, Vicount Neele,
Hugh de Mortimer, Conte de Vennes etc. And now himself, after his being
brought sick to Rouan, and there disposing his estate, ended also his act, in
the. 74. year of his age, and the. 21. of his reign.

Three days the Corpse of this great Monarch is said to have layne neglected,
while his servants attended to imbessill his mouables: in the end, his youngest
son Henry, had it conveyed to the Abbey of Cane; where first at the entry
into the Town, they who carried the Corpse, left it alone, and ran all to
quench the fire: Afterward brought to be intombed, a Gentleman stands forth,
and in stern manner, forbids the interment in that place, claiming the ground
to be his inheritance, descended from his ancestors, taken from him at the
building of that Abbey, and appeals to Row, their first founder, for Justice:
whereupon they were feign to compound with him for an Annual rent. Such ado
had the body of him after death (who had made so much in his life) to be
brought to the earth; and of all he attaind, had not now a room to contain
him, without being purchased at the hand of another, men esteeming a living Dog
more then a dead Lion.

He had a fair issue by Maude his wife, four sons, and five daughters. To
Robert his eldest, he lest the Duchy of Normandy: to William the third son,
the kingdom of England: to Henry the youngest, his treasure, with an annual
pension to be paid him by his brothers. Richard who was his second son, and
his darling, a Prince of great hope, died in his youth, of a surfeit taken in
the new Forest, and began the fatalnesse that followed in that place, by the
death of William the second, there slain with an arrow, and of Richard, the
son of Robert Duke of Normandy, who brake his neck.

His eldst daughter Cicilie, became a Nun, Constance married to the Earl of
Britain: Adula to Stephen Earl of Blois, who likewise rendered her self a
Nun in her age; such was then their devotion, and so much were these solitary
retires, affected by the greatest Ladies of those times: the other two died
before marriage.

Now what he was in the circle of himself in his own continent, we find him
of an even stature, comely personage, of good presence, riding, sitting, or
standing, till his corpulency increasing with age, made him somewhat unwieldy,
of so strong a constitution, as he was never sickly till a few months before
his death. His strength such, as few men could draw his bow, and being about 50
of his age, when he subdued this kingdom, it seems by his continual actions,
he felt not the weight of years upon him, till his last year.

What was the composition of his mind, we see it the fairest drawn in his
actions, and how his abilities of Nature, were answerable to his undertakings
of Fortune, as pre-ordain'd for the great work he effected. And though he
might have some advantage of the time, wherein we often see men prevail more
by the imbecility of others, then their own worth; yet let that season of the
world be well examined, and a just measure taken of his active virtues, they
will appear of an exceeding proportion: Nor wanted he those incounters and
concurrencies of sufficient able Princes, to put him to the trial thereof:
Having one side the French to grapple withal; on the other the Dane, far
mightier in people, and shipping then himself, strongly sided in this
kingdom, as eager to recover their former footing here, as ever, and as well
or better prepared.

For his devotion and mercy, the brightest stars in the Sphere of Majesty,
they appear above all his other virtues, and the due observation of the first,
the Clergy (that loved him not) confess: the other was seen, in the often
pardoning, and receiving into grace, those who had forfeited their loyalties,
and dangerously rebelled against him; as if he held submission satisfactorie,
for the greatest offense, and sought not to defeit men, but their enterprises:
For we find but one Noble man executed in all his reign, and that was the
Earl Waltheof, who had twice falsified his faith before: And those he held
prisoners in Normandy, as the Earls Morchar and Siward, with Wolfnoth, the
brother of Harald, and others (upon compassion of their indurance) he released
a little before his death.

Besides, he was as far from suspicion, as cowardice, and of that confidence
(an especial note of his magnanimity) as he gave Edgar his competitor in the
Crown, the liberty of his Court: And (upon his suite) sent him well furnished
to the holy war, where he nobly behaved himself, and attained to great
estimation, with the Emperors of Greece and Almaine, which might have bin held
dangerous, in respect of his alliances that way, being as some write,
graund-child to the Emperor Henry 3. But these may be as well virtues of the
Time, as of Men, and so the age must have part of this commendation.

Magnificent he was in his Festiuals, which with great solemnity and ceremony
(the formal entertainers of reverence and respect) he duly observed. Keeping
his Christmas at Gloucester, his Easter at Winchester, and Penticost at
Westminster: whither he sommoned his whole Nobility; that Ambassadors and
Strangers might see his State, and largeness. Nor ever was he more mild and
indulgent, then at such times. And these ceremonies his next Successor
observed; but the second omitted.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of the History of England.
William the second.
WIlliam, second son to William 1. not attending his Fathers funerals, hastes
into England to recover his Crown, where, by the especial mediation of the
Arch-byshop Lanfranc, his own large bountic and wide promises he obtained it,
according to his fathers will, to whom, by his obsequiousness he had much
indeered himself, especially after the abdication of his elder brother Robert.

He was a Prince more gallant then good, and having been bred with the sword,
always in action, and on the better side of fortune, of a nature rough, and
hautie, whereunto, his youth, and sovereignty added a greater wideness.
Coming to succeed in a government, fore-ruled by mature, and gray counsel, he
was so ouer-whelmed with his fathers worth and greatness, as made him appear
of a lesser Orb then otherwise he would, and then the shortness of his
reign, being but of 13. years, allowed him not time to recover that opinion,
which the errors of his first government had lost, or his necessities caused
him to commit. For the succession in right of Primogeniture, being none of his,
and the elder brother living, howsoever his fathers will was, he must now be
put, and held in possession of the Crown, by the will of the kingdom, which
to purchase, must be by large conditions of relieuements in general, and
profuse gifts in particular. Wherein he had the more to do, being to deal with
a State consisting, of a twofold body, and different temperaments, where any
inflammation of discontent, was the more apt to take, having a head where-to it
might readily gather. Which made, that unless he would lay more to their hopes
then another, he could not hope to have them firmly his. And therefore seeing
the best way to win the Normans was by money, and the English with liberties,
he spared not at first, to bestow on the one, and to promise the other, more
then fitted his estate, and dignity, which, when afterward failing both in
supplies (for great giuers must always give,) and also in performances, got
him far more hatred then otherwise he could ever have had, being forced to all
the dishonorable shifts for raising monyes that could be devised, and even to
resume his own former grantes.

And to begin at first to take the course to be ever needy, presently after
his Coronation he goes to Winchester, where his Fathers treasure lay, and
empties out all that which with gteat providence was there amassed, whereby,
though he won the love of many, he lost more, being not able to content all.
And now although his brother Robert had not (this great ingine of men) money, he
had to give hopes: and there were here of the Normans, as Oaon his uncle, Roger
de Mongomerie Earl of Shrewesbury, with others, who were mainly for him, and
work he does all he can, to batter his brothers fortunes, upon their first
foundation. And for this purpose borowes great sums of his younger brother
Henry (to whom the father and mother had left much treasure) and for the same,
ingages the Country of Constantine, and leauies an Army for England. But
William newly invested in the Crown, though well prepared for all assaults,
had rather purchase a present peace by mediation of the Nobles on both sides,
till time had better settled him in his government then to raise spirits that
could not easily be allayed. And an agreement between them is wrought, that
William should hold the crown of England during his life, paying to Robert 3.
thousand Marks Per annum.

Robert having closed this business, resumes by force the Country of Costantin
out of his brother Henry's hands, without discharge of those sums, for which
he had engaged it. Whereupon King William obrayds Henry with the great gain he
had made by his usury in lending money to deprive him of his Crown. And so
Henry got the hatred of both his brothers, and having no place safe from their
danger where to live, surprised the Castle of Mount Saint Michel, fortifies him
therein gets aid of Hugh Earl of Britaigne and for his money was served with
Bretons, who committed great spoils, in the Countries of Costantin and Bessin.

Odon, Bishop of Bayeux, returning into England after his imprisonment in
Normandy, and restored to his Earldom of Kent, finding himself so far under
what he had been, and Lanfranc his concurrent, now the only man in council
with the King, complots with as many Norman Lords as he found, or made to
affect change and a new master, and sets them on work in diverse parts of the
Realm to distract the Kings forces: as first Geoffery Bishop of Constans, with
his nephew Robert de Mowbray Earl of Northumberland fortify them selves in
Bristow, and take in, all the Country about: Roger de Bigod, made himself
strong in Northfolke: Hugh de Grandmenill about Leicester: Roger de Mongomerie
Earl of Shrewsbery with a power of Welshmen, and other there about, sets out
accompanied with William Bishop of Durham; Bernard de Newmarch, Roger Lacie,
and Raulfe Mortimer, all Normans, and assail the City of Worcester, making
themselves strong in those parts. Odon himself fortifies the Castle of
Rochester, makes good all the coast of Kent, sollicites Robert to use what
speed he could to come with all his power out of Normandy: which had he done
in time, and not given his brother so large opportunity of prevention, he had
carried the kingdom; but his delay yeeldes the King time to confirm his
friends, vnder-worke his enemies, and make him strong with the English, which he
did by granting relaxation of tribute, with other relieuements of their
doleances, and restoring them to their former freedom of hunting in all his
woods and forests, a thing they much esteemed; whereby he made them so
strongly his, as he soon brake the neck of all the Norman conspiracies (they
being egar to revenge them of that nation) and here they learned first to beat
their Conquerors, having the fair advantage of this action, which cut the
throtes of many of them.

Mongomerie, being won from his accomplices, and the several conspirators in
other parts represt, the King comes with an Army into Kent, where the head of
the faction lay, and first won the Castle of Tunbridge, and that of Pemsey,
which Odon was forced to yield, and promise to cause those which defended that
of Rochester, which were Eustace, Earl of Bologne, and the Earl of Mortaigne,
to render likewise the same. But being brought thither to effect the business,
they within, receiving him, detayned him, as he pretended, prisoner, and held
out stoutly against the King upon a false intelligence given of the ariuall of
Duke Robert at Southampton, but in the end they were forced to quit the place,
and retire into France, and Odon to abjure England.

And to keep off the like danger from hence he transports his forces into
Normandy, there to waste and weaken his brother at home. So, as might hold him
from any future attempts abroad for ever after. Where first he obtaines Saint
Valery, and after Albemarle with the whole Country of Eu, Fescampe, the Abathie
of monte Saint Michel, Cherburge, and other places. Robert seeks aid of
Phillip King of France, who comes down with an Army into Normandy; but
overcome with the power of money wherewith King William assailed him, did him
little good, and so retired.

Whereupon Duke Robert, in the end, was driven to a dishonorable peace,
concluded at Caen, with these Articles. 1. that King William should hold the
County of Eu, Fescampe, and all other places, which he had bought, and were
delivered unto him, by William Earl of Eu, and Stephen Earl of Aumal, sisters
son to William the first. 2. He should aid the Duke to recover all other
pieces which belonged to his Father, and were usurped from the Duchy. 3. That
such Normans, as hadlost their estates in England, by taking part with the
Duke, should be restored thereunto 4. That the suruiuer of either of them
should succeed in the dominions both of England and Normandy.

After this peace made, by the mediation of the King of France, whilst William
had a strong Army in the field, Duke Robert requested his aid against their
brother Henry; who still kept him in the fort of mount Saint Michel, upon his
guard, holding it best for his saftie: For being a Prince that could not subsist
of himself, as an earthen vessel set amongst iron pots, he was every way in
danger to be crushed, and seeing he had lost both his brothers by doing the one
a kindness; if he should have took to either, their turn being served, his
own might be in hazard; and so betook him to this defense. Forty days the 2.
Princes laid siege to this Castle, and one day, as the King was alone on the
shore, there sallies out of the Forte, a company of horse, whereof three ran
at him so violently, and all struck his horse together with their lances, as
they brake pectorall, girses, and all, that the horse slips away and leaves the
King and the saddle on the ground: the King takes up the saddle with both
hands, and therewith defendes himself till rescue came, and being blamed by
some of his people for putting himself thus in peril of his life to save his
saddle, answered: it would have angered him, the Bretons should have bragged,
they had won the saddle from under him, and how great an indignity it was
for a King to suffer inferiors to force any thing from him.

In the end Henry grew to extreme want of drink and water; allthough he had
all other provision sufficient within his forte, and sends to Duke Robert that
he might have his necessity supplied: the Duke sendes him a Tun of wine, and
grantes him truce for a day to furnish him with water. Wherewith William being
displeased, Duke Robert told him: it was hard to deny a brother meat, and
drink which craved it, and that if he perished, they had not a brother.
Wherewith William likewise relenting, they sent for Henry, and an agreement is
made, he should hold in morgage the Country of Costantine till the money was
paid, and a day appointed to receive it at Rouen.

Which accord King William the rather wrought, to draw as much from Robert as
he might, whom by this voyage he not only had wasted, but possessed himself of
a safe and continual landing place, with a part of his Duchy: caused him to
put from him and banish out of Normandy, Edgar Etheling, whom Robert held his
Pensioner, and as a stone in his hand upon all occasions to threaten William
with another right, if his own prevailed not: And besides, he wrought so as
either through promise of money, or some farther ratification to be made here,
he brought his brother Robert with him over into England, and took him along
in an expedition against Malcolin, who had incroched upon his territories,
during his absence. Which business ebing determined without battle, Robert,
soon after, returns much discontented into Normandy, and as it seems,
without money to satisfy his brother Henry. Who repairing to Rouen at his day
appointed, in stead of receiving it, was committed to prison, and before he
could be released, forced to renounce the country of Costentine, and swear
never to claim any thing in Normandy.

Henry complains of this gross injustice, to Philip king of France, who gave
him a fair entertainment in his Court. Where he remained not long, but that a
knight of Normandy, named Hachard, undertaking to put him into a Fort (maugre
his brother Robert) within the Duchy, conveyed him disguised out of the Court,
and wrought so, as the Castle of Damfronc was delivered unto him, whereby
shortly after, he got all the country of Passays, about it, and a good part of
Costentine, by the secret aid of king William, Richard de Riuieres, and Roger
de Manneuile.

Duke Robert leuies forces, and eagerly wrought to recover Damfronc, but
finding how Henry was underset, inueighes against the persidie of his brother
of England: in so much as the flame of rankor burst out again more then ever.
And over, passes king William with a great Army, but rather to terrify, then
do any great matter; as a Prince that did more contend then war, and would be
great with the sword, yet seldom desired to use it, if he could get to his
ends by any other means, seeking rather to buy his peace then win it.

Many skirmishes interpassed, with surprisements of Castles, but in the end a
treaty of peace was propounded: wherein to make his conditions, what he would,
king William seems hard to be wrought, and makes the more show of force,
sending over into England for an Army of 30000 men, which being brought to the
shore, ready to be shipped, an offer was made to be proclaimed by his
Lieftenant, that giving ten shillings a man, whosoever would might depart home
to his dwelling. Whereby was raised so much as discharged his expense, and
served to see the king of France, underhand, for his forbearing aid to Duke
Robert, who seeing himself left by the French, must needs make his peace as
the other would have it.

Now for his affairs at home, the uncertain wars with Wales, and Scotland,
gave him more business then honor. Being driven in the one to encounter with
mountains in stead of men, to the great loss and disadvantage of his people,
and in the other with as many necessities. Wales he sought to subdue, Scotland
so to restrain as it might not hurt him. For the last, after much broyle, both
kings, seeming more willing to have peace then to seek it, are brought to an
enteruiew. Malcolin upon public faith, and safe-conduit came to Gloucester;
where, upon the hautinesse of king William, looking to be satisfied in all his
demands, and the vnyeeldingnesse of king Malcolin, standing upon his regalitie
within his own, though content to be ordered for the confines, according to the
judgment of the Primare of both kingdoms; nothing was effected but a greater
disdain, and rankor in Malcolin, seeing himself despised, and scarce looked
on, by the king of England. So that upon his return, armed with rage, he
raises an Army, enters Northumberland, which four times before he had
depopulated, and now the fifth, seeking utterly to destroy it, and to have gone
farther, was, with his eldest son Edward slain, rather by the fraud then
power of Robert Mowbray Earl of that County: The grief of whose deaths gave
Margueret, that blessed Queen, hers. After whom the State Roger Houedew
elected Dufnald, brother to Malcolin, and chased out all the English, which
attended the Queen, and were harbored, or preferred by Malcolin. King William
to set the line right, and to have a king there which should be beholding to
his power, aides Edgar, the second son to Malcolin (who had served him in his
wars) to obtain the Crown due unto him in right of succession: by whose
means Dufnald was expeld, and the State received Edgar, but killed all the
aid he brought with him out of England, and capitulated that he should never
more entertain English or Norman in his service.

This business settled, Wales struggling for liberty, and revenge, gave new
occasion of work: whither he went in person, with purpose to depopulate the
country: but they retiring into the Mountains and the Isle of Anglesey,
avoided the present fury. But afterward, Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury, and Hugh
Earl of Chester, surprising the Isle, their chicfest retreit, committed there,
barbarous examples of cruelty, by excoecations, and miserable dismembring the
people, which immanity was there suddenly avenged on the Earl of Shrewsbury
with a double death, first shot into the eye, and then tumbling ouer-boord into
the sea, to the sport and scorn of his enemy the king of Norway, who either by
chance, or of purpose, coming upon that coast from taking in the Orchades,
encountered with him and that force he had at sea.

These were the remote businesses, when a conspiracy brake out within the body
of the kingdom, complotted by Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, William
d' Ou, and many other, which gave the King more trouble then danger: for by the
speedy and maine prosecution of the business, wherein he used the best
strength of England, it was soon ended, with the confusion of the undertakers.
But it wrought an ill effect in his nature, by hardening the same to an extreme
rigor: for after the fear was past, his wrath, and cruelty were not, but,
which is hideous in a Prince, they grew to be numbered amongst incurable
diseases.

Many accusations of great men followed upon this act, and were easily
believed, howsoever proved. William de Aluerie, a man of goodly personage, his
Aunts son, and his Sewer was, at a Council holden at Salisbury, condemned to
be hanged: when both in his confession to Osmond the Bishop there, and to all
the people as he passed to his execution, he left a clear opinion of his
innocence, and the wrong he had by the king.

But now whilst these fractures here at home the vnrepairable breaches abroad,
were such, as could give the king no longer assuredness of quiet then the
attempters would: and that all the Christian world was out, either at discord
amongst themselves, or in faction, by the schism of the Church; Pope Urban,
assembling a general Council at Cleirmont in Auuergne, to compose the
affairs of Christendom, exhorted all the Princes thereof, to join themselves
in action, for the recovery of the holy land, out of the hands of infidels.
Which motion by the zealous negotiation of Peter the Hermit, of Amiens, took
so generally (meeting with the disposition of an active, and religious world)
as turned all that flame; which had else consumed each other at home, upon
unknown nations that undid them a broad.

Such and so great grew the heat of this action, made by the persuasion of the
justice thereof, with the state and glory it would bring on earth, and the
assuredness of heaven to all the pious undertakers, that none were esteemed to
contain any thing of worth which would stay behind. Each gives hand to other
to lead them along, and example ads number. The forwardness of so many great
Princes, passing away their whole estates, and leaving all what the deernesse
of their Country contained, drew to this war 300000 men; all which, though
in arms, passed from diverse countries and ports, with that quietness, as
they seemed rather Pilgrims then Soldiers.

Godefroy of Bouillon, nephew and heir to the Duke of Lorrayne, a generous
Prince, bred in the wars of the Emperor Henry 4. was the first that offered
up himself to this famous voyage, and with him his two brothers, Eustace, and
Baudouin, by whose examples were drawn Hugh le Grand, Count de Vermendois,
brother to Philip king of France. Robert Duke of Normandy, Robert le Frison,
Earl of Flanders. Stephen Earl of Blois, and Chartres. Aimar Bishop of Puy.
William Bishop of Orange: Raimond Earl of Toulouse: Baudouin Earl of Hainaut,
Baudouin, Earl of Rethel, and Garnier Earl of Gretz: Harpin Earl of Bourges:
Ysoard Earl of Die: Ramb and Earl of Orange: Guillaum Conte de Forests,
Stephen Conte de Aumaul: Hugh Earl of Saint Pol; Rotron Earl of Perch, and
others. These were for France, Germany, and the Countries adjoining. Italy had
Bohemond Duke of Apulia; and England, Beauchampe, with others, whose names are
lost: Spain only had none, being afflicted at, that time with the Sarazins.

Most of all these Princes and great personages to furnish themselves for this
expedition, sold, or engaged their possessions. Godefroy sold the Duchy of
Bologne to Aubert Bishop of Liege, and Metz to the Citizens: besides he sold
the Castle of Sarteney, and Monsa to Richard Bishop of Verdun: and to the same
Bishop, Bandouin, his brother, sold the Earldome of Verdun. Eustace likewise
sold all his liuelihood to the Church. Herpin Earl of Bourges, his Earldome to
Phillip King of France: and Robert morgaged his Duchy of Normandy, the
Earldome of Maine, and all he had, to his brother King William of England.

Whereby the Pope not only weakened the Empire, with whom the Church had, to
the great affliction of Christendom, held a long, and bloody business, about
the inuestitures of Bishops; took away and infeobled his partisans, abated, as
if by Ostrocisme, the power ofany Prince that might oppose him, but also
advanced the State Ecclefiasticall by purchasing these great temporalties,
(more honorable for the sellers then the buyers) unto a greater means then
ever. For by aduising the undertakers, seeing their action was for CHRIST and
his Church, rather to make over their estates to the Clergy, of whom they
might again redeem the same, and be sure to have the fairest dealing; then
unto lay men; he effected this work. Whereby the third part of the best Fiefs
in France came to be possessed by the Clergic: and afterward upon the same
occasion, many things more sold unto them in England, especially when Richard
1. undertook the voyage, who passed over diverse Manors to Hugh Bishop of
Durham, and also for his money created him Earl of Durham. An Emperor of
Germany, 2. Kings of France with their wives, a King of England, and a King of
Norwey went all thither in person.


This humor was kept up, and in motion above 200. years, notwithstanding all
the discouragements, by the difficulties in passing, the disasters there,
through contagion arysing from a disagreeing clime: and the multitudes of
indigent people, cast oftentimes into miserable wants. It consumed infinite
treasure, and most of the brauest men of all our West world, and especially
France. For Germany, and Italy, those who were the Popes friends, and would
have gone, were stayed at home by dispensation to make good his party against
the Emperor, who notwithstanding still strugled with him, but in the end, by
this means the Pope prevailed. But these were not all the effects this voyage
wrought: the Christians; who went out to seek an enemy in Asia, brought one
thence: to the danger of all Christendom, and the loss of the fairest part
thereof. For this long keeping it in a war, that had many intermissions with
fits of heates and coldnesses, (as made by a league, consisting of several
nations, emulous, and vnconcurrent in their courses) taught such, as were of an
entire body, their weaknesses, and the way to conquer them. This was the
great effect, this voyage wrought.

And by this means king William here was now rid of an elder brother, and a
Competitor, had the possession of Normandy during his reign, and a more
absoluteness, and irregularity in England. Where now, in making up this great
sum to pay Robert, he used all the extreme means could be devised: as he had
done in all like businesses before. Whereby he incurred the hatred of his
people in general, and especially of the Clergy, being the first king which
showed his successors an evil precedent of keeping their Livings vacant, and
receiving the profits of them himself, as he did that of Canterbury, four
years after the death of Lanfranc: and had holden it longer, but that being
dangerously sick at Gloucester, the sixth year of his reign, his Clergy, in
the weakness of his body, took to work upon his mind, so as he vowed, upon
his recovery to see it furnished, which he did, but with so great ado, as
showed that having escaped the danger he would willingly have deceived the
Saint. And Anselme, an Italian borne, though bred in Normandy, is in the end
preferred to that Sea. But, what with his own stiffenesse, and the kings
standing on his regalitie, he never enjoyed it quietly under him. For between
them two, began the first co^testation about the inuestitures of Bishops, and
other privileges of the Church, which gave much to do, to many of his
successors. Anselme not yielding to the Kings will, forsook the Land,
whereupon his Byshopricke was reassumed and the King held in his hands at one
time, besides that of Canterbury, the Byshopricks of Winchester, Sarum, and
eleven Abayes whereof he took all the profits.

He usually sold all sprituall preferments to those would give most, and took
fines of Priests for fornication, he vexed Robert Bluet Bishop of Lincoln, in
suite, till he paid him 5000. pounds.

And now the Clergy, upon this tax, complaining their wants, were answered,
that they had Shrines of gold in their Churches, and for so holy a work, as
this war against infidels, they should not spare them. He also took money of
Jews, to cause such of them as were converted, to renounce Christianity, as
making more benifit by their unbelief, then their conversion. Wherein he
discovered the worst piece of his nature, irreligion.

Besides his great taxations laid on the Laity, The antiquity of Informers.
he set informers upon them, and for small transgressions made great penalties.
These were his courses for raising moneys, wherein he failed not of fit
ministers to execute his will, among whom was chief, Ranulph Bishop of This
Ranulph gave a thousand pounds for his Bishopric, and was the Kings
Chancellor.
Durham, whom he had corrupted with other Bishops to counterpoyze the Clergy,
awe the Layty, and countenance his proceedings. All which means, he exhausted,
either in his buildings, which were the new Castle upon Tine, the City of
Carleil, Westminster Hall, and the walls of the Tower of London, or else in
his prodigal gifts to strangers. Twice he appeased the king of France with
money, and his profusion was such, as put him evermore into extreme wants.

This one act, which shows, both his violence and magnanimity, remains: As
he was one day hunting, a messenger comes in all have out of Normandy, and tells
him how the City of Man's was surprised by Hely Conte de la Flesche (who by his
wife pretended right thereunto, and was aided by Fouques d' Angiers, the
ancient enemy of the Dukes of Normandy) and that the Castle which held out
valiantly for him, was, without present succor, to be rendered. He sends back
the messenger instantly, wills him to make all the speed he could to signify to
his people in the Castle, that he would be there within eight days, if Fortune
hindered him nor. And suddenly he asks of his people about him, which way Man's
lay, and a Norman being by, showed him: Presently he turns his horse toward
that coast, and in great have, rides on: when some advised him to stay for fit
provisions, and people for his journey, he said, They who love me will follow
me. And coming to imbarke at Dartmouth, the master told him the weather was
rough, and there was no passing, without eminent danger, Tush, said he, set
forward, I never yet heard of king that was drowned.

By break of day, he arrived at Harfleu, sends for his Captains, and men of
war to attend him all at Man's, whither he came at the day appointed. Conte de
la Flesche, having more right then power, after many skirmishes, was taken by a
stratagem, and brought prisoner to Rouen: where, more enraged, then dismaide
with his fortune, he let fall these words: that had he not been taken with a
wile, he would have left the king but little land on that side the sea; and
were he again at liberty, they should not so easily take him. Which being
reported; theking sent for him, set him at liberty, gave him a fair horse, bad
him go his way, and do his worst. Which act overcame him more then his taking,
and a quiet end was made between them.

The King returns into England, with great iollitie, as ever bringing home
better fortune out of Normandy, then from any his Northern expeditions: Feasts
his Nobility with all magnificence in his new hall, lately finished at
Westminster; wherewith he found much fault for being built too little: saying,
it was fitter for a chamber then a Hall for a king of England, and takes a plot
for one far more spacious to be added unto it. And in this gaytie of state,
when he had got above all his businesses, betakes him wholly to the pleasure
of peace, and being hunting with his brother Henry in the new Forest, Walter
Terell, a Normand, and his kinsman, shooting at a Dear (whether mistaking his
mark, or not, is uncertain) struck him to the heart. And so fell this fierce
king, in the 43 year of his age. A Prince, who for the first two years of his
reign, whilst, held in, by the grave counsel of Lanfranc, and his own
fears; bare himself most worthily, and had been absolute for State, had he
not after sought to be absolute in power; which meeting with an exorbitant
will, makes both Prince, and People miserable.

Henry the First.
HEnry the youngest son of William the first, being at hand, and borne in
England, (which made much for him) was elected and crowned, within four days
after his brothers death it being given out, that Robert, who should have
succeeded William, was chosen king of Jerusalem, and not like to give over that
kingdom for this. Wherefore to settle Henry in the possession of the Crown,
all expedition possible was used, least the report of Roberts returning from
the holy wars (being now in Apulia coming home) might be noysed abroad to
stagger the State; which seemed generally willing to accept of Henry.

The first actions of his government tended all, to bait the people, and sugar
their subjection, as his predecessor, upon the like interposition had done, but
with more moderation and aduisednesse: this being a Prince better rectified in
judgment, and of a nature more allayed, both by his sufferings, having sighed
with other men under the hand of oppression, that taught him patience, and also
by having somewhat of the book, which got him opinion, and the title of
Beauclerke.

First to fasten the Clergy, he furnishes with fit men, all those vacancies
his brother had kept empty: recals Anselme home to his Bishopric of
Canterbury, and restores them to all whatsoever privileges had been infringed
by his predecessor. And for the Layety, he not only pleased them in their
relieuments, but in their passion, by punishing the chief ministers of their
exactions, which evermore eases the spleen of the people, glad to discharge
their Princes of the evils done them (knowing how they cannot work without
hands) and lay them on their officers, who have the active power, where
themselves have but the passive, and commonly turn as they are moved.

Raulfe Bishop of Durham chief counsaylor to the late King, a man risen by
subtletie, and his tongue from infimous condition, to the highest employments,
was committed to a straight and loath some prison, being famed to have put his
master into all these courses of exaction, and irregularities, and remaynes
amongst the examples of perpetual ignominy. All dissolute persons are
expelled the Court: the people eased of their impositions, and restored to
their lights in the night, which after the Couerfeu Bell were forbidden them
upon great penalty, since the beginning of William I. Many other good orders,
for the government of the kingdom are ordained, and besides to make him the
more popular, and beloved, he matches in the royal blood of England, taking to
wife Matilde, daughter of Margueret, late Queen of Scots, and niece to Edgar
Atheling, descended from Edmond Ironside. A Lady that brought with her, the
inheritance of goodness she had from a blessed mother, and with much a do was
won from her cloister, and her vow to God, to descend to the world, and be a
wife to a King.

Thus stood he entrenched in the State of England, when his brother Robert
returning from the holy wars, and received with great applause into his
Duchy of Normandy, shakes the ground of all this business: the first year
threatening, the second ariuing with a strong Army at Portsmouth, to recover the
Crown, appertayning to him by the course of right, having a mighty party in
England of the Norman Nobility; who either moved with conscience or their
discontent (a sickness rising of self opinion and ouer-expectatio^) made any
light occasion the motive of revolt. The Armies on both sides meet, and are
ready to encounter, when, for avoiding Christian blood, a treaty of peace was
moved, and in the end concluded with these articles: that seeing Henry was borne
since his father was King of England, which made him the eldest son of a
King, though the last of a Duke, and now invested in the Crown by the act of
the kingdom, he should enjoy the same during his life, paying to Robert 3000.
marks, per annum, and Robert, suruiuing, to succeed him: that all who had
taken part with Robert should have their pardon and receive no detriment.

This business thus fairly passed over; Robert of a generous, and free
nature, stays and feasts with his brother here in England, from the beginning
of August till Michelmas, and then returns into Normandy: When Henry, rid of
this fear, takes to a higher strain of regalitie, and now stands upon his
Prerogative, for the inuestitures of Bishops, and collation of other
Ecclesiastical estates within his kingdom, oppugned by Anselme, who refused
to consecrate such as he preferred: alleging it to be a violation of the
sacred rites and Ceremonies of the Church, lately decreed concerning this
business: in so much as the King dispatches an Embassage to Pope Paschal, with
declaration of the right he had to such inuestitures, from his predecessors,
the Kings of England, who evermore conferred the same, without interruption,
till now of late.

Anselme follows after these Ambassadors, goes likewise to Rome, to make good
the opposition. The King banishes him the kingdom, and takes into his hands the
Byshopricke. The Pope stands stiffly to the power assumed by the Church, but in
the end, seeing the King fast, strong, and lay too far off, out of his way to
be constrained, and having much to do at that time with the Emperor and other
Princes, about the same business, takes the way of persuasion to draw him to
his will, soliciting him with kind letters, full of protestations, to further
any designs of his, that might concern his state, if he would desist from
this proceeding.

The King, pressed with some other occasions, that held him in, and having
purposes of that nature, as by forbearance of the Church, might be the better
effected, consents to satisfy the Popes will: and becomes an example to other
Princes, of yielding in this case. Anselme is re-called, after a years
banishment, and the Ambassadors return with large remunerations.

Whilst these things were managing at Rome, there burst out here a flame, which
consumed the parties that raised it, and brought the king more easily to his
ends, then otherwise he could ever have expected. Robert de Belesme, Earl of
Shrewsbury, son to Roger de Mongomery, a fierce youth, presuming of his great
estate, and his friends, fortifies his Castles of Shrewsbury, Bridgenorth,
Tickhill, and Arundell, with some other pieces in Wales belonging to him, and
combines with the Welsh, to oppose against the present State, out of a desire
to set all in combustion, for his own ends, that were uncertain: which put
the king to much travail and charge: but within 30. days, by employing great
forces, and terrors mixed with promises, he scattered his accomplices, and took
all his Castles, except that of Arundell, which rendered upon condition, that
the Master might be permitted to retire safe into Normandy: which the king
easily granted, seeing now he was but the body of a silly naked creature, that
had lost both feathers and wings. And it made well for the king, his going
thither. For, from the loosing of his own estate in England, and thereby
advancing the kings revenues, he goes to loose Normandy also, and bring it to
this Crown. For as soon as he came thither, he fastens amity with one of
like condition, and fortune as himself, an exiled man, whose insolency had
likewise stripped him out of all his estate in England, and much wasted that in
Normandy, which was William Earl of Mortaigne, son to Robert, half brother
to King William I. Who being also Earl of Cornwall made suit likewise, to
have that of Kent, Which his uncle Odon lately held, but being denied it, and
also euicted by law, of certain other parcels of Land, which he claymed,
retires with great indignation into Normandy, where not only, he assaults the
Kings Castles, but also vsurps upon the State of Richard, the young Earl of
Chester, then the Kings ward.

These two Earls combine themselves, and with their adherents committed many
outrageous actions, to the great spoil and displeasure of the Country,
whereof, though they complained to Duke Robert, they found little remedy. For,
he being now grown poor by his out-lauishing humor, began, it seems, to be
little respected: or else fallen from action, and those greatnesses his
expectation had showed him, was (as commonly great minds dashed with ill
fortunes are) fallen likewise in spirit, and given over to his ease. Whereupon
the people of Normandy make their exclamations to the King of England, who
sendes for his brother Robert, reprehendes him for the sufferance of these
disorders; aduises him to act the part of a Prince and not a Monk: and in
conclusion, whether by detention of his pension, or drawing him, being of a
facile nature, to some act of releasing it, sendes him home so much
discontented, as he ioynes with these mutinous Earls; and by their instigation
was set into that flame, as he raised all his utmost forces to be revenged on
his brother.

The King, touched in conscience with the fowlenesse of a fraternall war, which
the world would take (he being the mightier) to proceed out of his designs;
stood doubtful what do, when Pope Pasehall, by his letters (written with that
eloquence, says Malmesbury, wherein he was quick) persuaded him, that herein
he should not make a civil war, but do a noble, and memorable benefit to his
Country. Whereby (paid for remitting the inuestitures) he held himself
countenanced in this business, Whereon, now he sets with more alacrity and
resolution. And after many difficulties, and loss of diverse worthy men, in a
mighty battle, nere the Castle of Tenerchbray, his enemies, with much a do,
were all defeited. Whereby England, won Normandy, and on the same day, by
computation, wherein 40. years before, Normandy ouer-came England: such are
the turnings in affairs of men.

And here Robert, who stood in a fair possibility of two Crowns, came to be
deprived of his Duchy, and all he had, brought prisoner into England, and
committed to the Castle of Cardiffe. Where, to add to his misery, he had the
misfortune of a long life: suruiuing, after he lost himself, 26. years,
whereof the most part he saw not, having his eyes put out, whereby he was
only left to his thoughts, a punishment barbarously inflicted on him, for
attempting an escape.

He was a Prince, that gave out to the world, very few notes of his ill, but
many of his nobleness and valor, especially in his great voyage, where he had
the second command, and was in election to have been the first, preferred to
the Crown of Jerusalem, and missed it hardly. Only the disobedience, in his
youth, showed to his father (which yet might proceed from a rough hand borne
over him, and the animation of others, rather then his own nature) set a
stayne upon him: and then his profusion (which some would have, liberality)
showed his impotencie, and put him into those courses, that overthrew him. All
the revenues of his Duchy, which should serve for his maintenance, he sold or
engaged, and was upon passing the City of Roan to the Citizens: Which made
him held unfit for the government; and gave occasion to his brother to quarrel
with him.

And thus came Henry freed from this fear, and absolute Duke of Normandy: had
many years of quiet, gathered great treasure, and intertayned good
intelligence with the neighbor Princes. Scotland, by his Match, and doing
their Princes good, he held from doing him hurt; clearing them from
usurpations. Wales, though under his title, yet not subjection, gave him some
exercise of action; which he ordered with great wisdom. First he planted with
in the body of that Country a Colonie of Flemings, who at that time much
pestred this kingdom: being admitted here in the reign of King William 1.
marrying their Country woman, and using their help in the action of England,
where they daily increased, in such sort, as gave great displeasure to the
people. But by this means, both that greuance was eased, and the use of them
made profitable to the State: for being so great a number and a strong people,
they made room for themselves, and held it in that sort, as they kept the
Welsh, all about them, in very good awe. Besides the King took for Ostages the
chief men's sons of the Country, and hereby quieted it. For France he stood
secure so long as Phillip 1. lived, who, wholly given over to his ease and
luxury, was not for other attempts, out of that course: but his son he was
to look unto, whenever he came to that Crown.

With the Earl of Flanders he had some debate, but it was only in words, and
upon this occasion. King William the first, in retribution of the good, his
father in law Bald^^in 5. had done, by aiding him in the action of England,
gave him yearly 300 marks, and likewise continued it to his son after him.
Now, Robert, Earl of Flanders, of a collateral line, returning empty from
the holy wars, and finding this sum paid out of England to his
predecessors, demaundes the same of king Henry, as his due; who not easy to
part with money, sends him word; that it was not the custom of the kings of
England to pay tribute: If they gave pensions they were temporanie, and
according to desert. Which answer so much displeased the Earl, that though
himself lived not to show his hatred, yet his son did, and aided afterward
William, the son of Robert Curtoys, in his attempts, for recovery of the
Duchy of Normandy, against king Henry.

Thus stood this king in the first part of his reign: in the other, he had
more to do abroad then at home, where he had by his excellent wisdom so
settled the government, as it held a steady course without in interruption, all
his time. But now Lewis le Gros, succeeding his father Philip the first, gave
him warning to look to his State of Normandy: and for that he would not attend
a quarrel, he makes one; taking occasion about the City of Gisors, situate
on the river Epre, in the confines of Normandy, whilst Louys was travailed with
a stubborn Nobility, presuming upon their Franchises, within their own
Signories, whereof there were many, at that time, about Paris, as the Contes of
Crecy, Pissaux, Dammartin, Champagne, and others, who by example, and
emulation, would be absolute Lords, without awe of a master, putting
themselves under the protection of Henry: who being near to assist them,
fostred those humors, which in sick bodies, most show themselves. But after
Louys, by years, gathering strength, dissolved that compact, and made his
means the more, by their confiscations.

Now to entertain these two great Princes in work, the quarrel between the
Pope, and the Emperor, ministered fresh occasion. The Emperor Henry 5. having
(by the Popes instigation) banded against his father, Henry 4. who associated
him in the Empire, and held him prisoner in that distress, as he died, touched
afterward with remorse of this act, and reproach of the State, for abandoning
the rights of the Empire, leuies sixty thousand foot, and thirty thousand
horse, for Italy; constraines the Pope and his College to acknowledge the
rights of the Empire, in that form as Leo 4. had done to Otho 2. and before
that, Adrian, to Charlemaigne, according to the decree of the Council of Rome,
and made him take his Oath of fidelity, between his hands, as to the true and
lawful Emperor. The Pope, so soon as Henry was departed home, assembles a
Council, nullifies this acknowledgment, as done by force, and shortly after,
deceased. The Emperor to make himself the stronger, against his successor,
enters into aliance with the King of England, takes to wife his daughter Maud,
being but five years of age. After this Calixte, son of the Conte de
Borgogne, coming to be Pope, and being French, (to their great applause)
assembles a Council at Reimes: where, by Ecclesiastical sentence, Henry 5. is
declared enemy of the Church, and degraded of his Imperial dignity. The King
of England, seeing this Council was held in France, and composed chiefly of
the Galicane Church, desirous to ouer-maister Louys, incenses his son in law
the Emperor (stung with this disgrace) to set upon him) as the Popes chief
pillar) on one side, and he would assail him on the other. The Emperor
easily wrought to such a business, prepares all his best forces: the King of
England does the like.

The King of France seeing this storm coming so impetuously upon him, wrought
so with the Princes of Germany, as they, weighing the future mischife of a
war, undertaken in a hear, with the importance of a kind neighborhood,
advise the Emperor not to enter there into, till he had signified to the King
of France, the causes of his discontent.

Where upon an Embassage is dispatched: the King of France answers, that he
grieved much to see the two great pillars of the Church thus shaken with these
dissentions, whereby might be feared, the whole frame would be ruined: that
he was friend to them both, and would gladly be an inter-dealer for concord,
rather then to carry wood to a fire too fierce already, which he desired to
extinguish, for the good and quiet of Christendom.

This Embassage wrought so, as it disarmed the Emperor, glad to have Louys a
mediator of the accord between the Pope and him: to the great displeasure of
the King of England, who expected greater matters to have risen by this
business. The accord is concluded at Worms, to the Popes advantage, to whom
the Emperor yields up the right of inuestitures of Bishops and other
Benifices. But this was only to appease not cure the malady.

The King of England disapoynted thus of the Emperors assistance, proceeds
notwithstanding in his intentions against Louys. And seeing he failed of
outward forces, he sets up a party in his kingdom, to confront him: ayding
Theobald, Conte de Champagne, with so great power, as he stood to do him much
displeasure: besides he obtained a strong side in that kingdom, by his
aliances: for Stephen, Earl of Blois, had married his sister Adela, to whom
this Theobald was near in blood, and had won Foulke, Earl of Aniou (an
important neighbor, and ever an enemy to Normandy) to be his, by matching his
son William to his daughter.

Louys on the other side, fails not to practice all means to vnder-worke
Henry's estate in Normandy, and combines with William, Earl of Flanders, for
the restoring of William, the son of Robert Curtoys, to whom the same
appertained by right of inheritance: and had the fairer show of his actions, by
taking hold on the side of justice.

Great, and many, were the conflicts between these two Princes, with the
expense of much blood and charge. But in the end, being both tired, a peace was
concluded, by the mediation of the Earl of Aniou. And William, son to King
Henry, did homage to Louys for the Duchy of Normandy: And William, the Anno
Reg. 20.
son of Robert Curtoys, is left to himself, and desists from his claim.

Upon the fair cloze of all rhese troubles, there followed presently an
accident, which seasoned it with that sowrenesse of grief, as overcame all the
joy of the success. William the young Prince, the only hope of all the Norman
race, at 17 years of age, returning into England, in a ship by himself,
accompanied with Richard his base brother, Mary, Countess of Perch, their
sister, Richard, Earl of Chester, with his wife the kings Niece, and many
other personages of honor, and their attendants, to the number of 140. besides
50 Mariners, setting out from Harflew, were all cast away at Sea Queen Maud
lived not to see this disaster, Anno Reg 21
. The Prince had recovered a Cock-boat, and in possibility to have been saved,
had not the compassion of his sisters cries drawn him back to the sinking
ship to take her in, and perish with his company.

Which sudden clap of Gods judgment, coming in a calm of glory, when all
these bustlings seemed past over, might make a conscience shrink with terror,
to see oppression and supplantation repayd with the extinction of that, for
which so much had been wrought, and the line masculine of Normandy expired in
the third heir, as if to begin the fate laid on all the future succession,
wherein never, but once, the third, in a right descent, inioyed the Crown
without supplantation or extinction, to the great affliction of the kingdom
and himself, to leave his other issue subject to the like ouerturnings; which
may teach Princes to observe the ways of righteousness, and let men alone
with their rights, and God with his providence.

But in hope to repair this loss, King Henry within 5 months after, married
Adalicia, a beautiful young Lady, daughter to the Duke of Lovaine, and of the
house of Loraine, but never had issue by her, nor long rest from his troubles
abroad. For this rent at home, cracked all the chain of his courses in France.
Normandy it self became wavering, and many adhered to William the Nephew: his
great confederats are most regayn'd to the king of France: Foulke, Earl of
Aniou, quarrels for his daughters dower: Robert de Mellent, his chief friend
and Counselor, a man of great employment, fell from him, conspired with Hugh,
Earl of Monfort, and wrought him great trouble.

But such was his diligence and working spirit, that he soon made whole all
those ruptures again. The two Earls himself surprises, and Aniou, death:
which being so important a neighbor, as we may see, by matching a Prince of
England there; the King fastens upon it with another aliance, and discends to
marry his daughter, (and now only child, which had bin wife to an Emperor,
and desired by the Princes of Lumbardy and Loraine) to the now Earl Geffrey
Plantagenet, the son of Foulke.

The King of France to fortify his opposition, entertaines William the Nephew,
where now all the danger lay: and aids him in person with great power to
obtain the Earldom of Flanders, whereunto he had a fair Title, by the
defailance of issue of the late Earl Baldouin, slain in a battle in France
against King Henry. But William, as if heir also of his fathers fortunes,
admitted to the Earldom, miscarried in the rule, was deprived, and slain in
battle; and in him all of Robert Curtoys perished.

And now the whole care of king Henry, was the settling of the succession upon
Maude (of whom he lived to see two sons borne) for which he conuokes a
Parliament in England, wherein, an oath is ministered to the Lords of this land,
to be true to her and her heirs, and acknowledge them as the right inheritors
of the Crown. This oath was first taken by David, king of Scots, vnkleto
Maude, and by Stephen, Earl of Bollogne, and Mortaine, Nephew to the King, on
whom he had bestowed great possessions in England, and advanced his brother to
the Bishopric of Winchester. And to make all the more fast, this oath was
afterward ministered again at Northampton in another Parliament.

So that now all seems safe and quiet, but his own sleeps, which are said to
have been very tumultuous, and full of affrightments, wherein he would often
rise, take his sword, and be in act, as if he defended himself against
assaults of his person, which showed all was not well within.

His government in peace, was such as ranks His government in peace
him in the list amongst our Kings of the fairest mark: holding the kingdom
so well ordered, as during all his reign, which was long, he had ever the least
to do at home. At the first, the competition with his brother, after, the care
to establish his succession, held him in, to observe all the best courses, that
might make for the good and quiet of the State; having an especial regard to
the due administration of Justice, that no corruption or oppression might
disease his people, whereby things were carried with that cuennes, between the
Great men and the Commons, as gave all satisfaction. He made diverse progresses
into remote parts of the Land, to see how the State was ordered. And for that
purpose, when so ever he was in England, he kept The cause of Progresses.
no certain residence, but solemnized the great festiuals in several, and far
distant places of the kingdom, that all might partake of him.

And for that he would not wreste ny thing The beginning of Parlements
by an imperial power from the kingdom, The first Parliament at Salisbury
Anno. Reg, 15.
(which might breed ulcers of dangerous nature) he took a course to obtain
their free consents to serve his occasions, in their general Assemblies of the
3. estates of the Land, which he first, and often conuoked: and which had, from
his time, the name of Parliament, according to the manner of Normandy, and
other States, where Princes keep within their circles to the good of their
people, their own glory, and security of their posterity.

He was a Prince that lived formally himself, His reformations.
and repressed those excesses in his subjects which those times interrayned, as
the wearing of long hair, which though it were a gaytie of no charge, like
those sumptuous braueries, that waste kingdoms in peace, yet for the
vndecencie there of, he reformed it, and all other dissoluteness.

His great businesses, and his wantes taught His means to raise moneys.
him frugalitie, and warynesse of expense, and his wars being seldom
inuasiue, and so not getting, put him often to use hard courses for his
suppliments of treasure. Toward the marriage of his daughter with the
Emperor, and the charge of his war, he obtained (as it might seem at his
first Parliament at Salisbury) Anno. Reg. 15. three shillings upon every
hide-land, but he had no more in all his reign, except one supply for his
wars afterward in France.

He kept Byshopricks and Abbayes void in his hands, as that of Canterbury, 5
years together.

By an act of Parliament at London. Anno. Reg. 30. he had permission to punish
marriage, and incontinencie of Priests, who for fines notwithstanding, he
suffered to enjoy their wives, but hereby he displeased the Clergy and
disappoynted that reformation.

Punishments which were mutilation of member, he made pecuniarie. And by reason
of his often, and long being in Normandy, those provisions for his house,
which were used to be paid in kind, were rated to certain prices and
received in money, by the consent of the State, and to the great content of the
subject; who by reason that many dwelling far off throughout all shires of
England, were much molested with satisfying the same otherwife. He resumed the
liberties of hunting in his Forests, which took up much fair ground of the
kingdom; and besides renewing former penalties, made an Edict, that if any man
in his own private woods, killed the Kings Dear should forfeit his woods to
the King. But he permitted them enclosures for Parkes, which under him seems
to have their original, by the example of that of his at Woodstoke, and after
their multitude grew to be a diseaze.

His expenses were chiefly in his wars, and his many and great fortifications
in Normandy. His buildings were the Abbay of Reading, the Manor of
Woodstoke, and the great enclosure about that Park.

The most eminent men of his Council His Counselors.
were, Roger Bishop of Sarum, and the Earl of Mellent, both, men of great
experience in the affairs of the world. Roger was ever as Viceroy, had the
whole management of the kingdom in his absence, which was sometimes three, and
four years together. He had managed the Kings monyes and other affairs of
his house, when he was a poor Prince, and a private man; whereby he gained an
especial trust with him ever after, and discharged his part with great policy
and understanding; had the title of Iusticiarius totius Anglia. Of whose
magnificence and spacious mind, we have more memorials left in notes of stone,
then of any one Man, Prince, or other of this kingdom. The ruynes yet
remaining of his stately structures, especially that of the Devises in
Wiltshire, thewes us the carcass of a most Roman-like Fabric. Besides he
built the Castles of Malmsburie and Shirburne, two strong and sumptuous pieces:
new walled and repaired the Castle of Salisburie, but all these he lived to see
rent from him, and seized into the next Kings hands, as being things done
out his part, and ly now deformed heaps of rubble. But the goodly Church of
Salisburie, a work appertayning to his function, remaynes, as of another fate.

Robert Earl of Mellent, was the son of Roger Beaumont; who of all the great
men which followed William I. in his civil wars of Normandy, refused to
attend him in his expedition for England, though with large promises invited
thereunto, saying: The inheritance left him by his predecessors, was sufficient
to maintain his estate at home; and he desired not to thrust himself into
other men's possessions abroad. But his son Robert was of another mind, and
had a mighty estate both in England and Normandy. Was a man of great direction
in Council, and ever used in all the weighty affairs of the State. His
parsimony, both in apparel and diet, was of such example, being a man of
eminent note, as did much good to the kingdom in those days. But in the end
he fell into disgrace, the fate of Court, and eminency; opposed against the
king, and died bereft of his estate.

Besides these, this king was served with a potent and martial Nobility, whom
his spirit led to affect those great designs of his in France, for the
preservation of his state in Normandy. Whither in the 32 year of his reign,
he makes his last voyage to dye there, and in his passage thithe, happened an
exceeding great Ecclips of the Sun, which was taken to fore-signifie his
death; for that it followed shortly after in the thirty five year of his
reign.

He was of a graceful personage, quickeeyed, His personage
brown hair, (a different complexion from his brothers) and of a close
compacted temperament, wherein dwelt a mind of a more solid constitution, with
better ordered affections. He had, in his youth, some taste of learning; but
only, as if to set his stomach, not to ouer-charge it therewith. But this put
many of his subjects into the fashion of the Book, and diverse learned men
flourished in his time.

King Stephen.
THE Line Masculine of the Norman extinct, and only a daughter left, and she
married to a Frenchman: Stephen, Earl of Bologne, and Mortagne, son of
Stephen, Earl of Blois, and of Adela, daughter to William I. was
(notwithstanding the former oath taken for Maud) elected by the State, and
invested in the Crown of England, within 30 days after the death of Henry.
Upon what reasons of Council, we must gather out of the circumstances of the
courses held in that time.

Some imagine, the state refused Maude; for not being then the custom, of any
other kingdom Christian (whose Kings are anointed) to admit women to inherit
the Crown; and therefore they might pretend to be freed from their oath, as
being unlawful. But Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, one of the principal men then
in council, yielded another reason for the discharge of this oath, which was,
that seeing the late King had married his daughter out of the Realm, and
without the consent thereof, they might lawfully refuse her. And so was
Stephen, having no Title at all, by mere election, advanced to the Crown. For
if he should claim any right in the Succession, as being the son of Adela,
then must Theobald, Earl of Blois, his elder brother, have been preferred
before him: and Henry Fitz Empress (if they refused the mother) was nearer in
blood to the right Stem, then either. But they had other reasons that ruled
that time. Stephen was a man, and of great possessions, both in England and
France, had one brother, Earl of Bloss, a Prince of great estate: another,
Bishop of Winchester (the Popes Legate in England, of power eminent) was popular
for his affability, goodly personage, and actiuenesse: and therefore acceptable
to the Nobility, who, at that time, were altogether guided by the Clergy, and
they, by the working of the Bishop of Winchester, induced to make choice of
him, having an opinion, that by preferring one, whose Title was least, would
make his obligation the more to them, and so they might stand better secured of
their liberties, then under such a one, as might presume of an hereditary
succession. And to be the more sure thereof, before his admittance to the
Crown, he takes a private oath before the Bishop of Canterbury, to confirm
the ancient liberties of the Church, and had his brother to undertake, betwixt
God and him, for the performance thereof.

But being now in possession of the kingdom, and all the treasure his uncle
had in many years gathered, which amounted to one hundred thousand pounds of
exquisite silver, besides plate and jewels, of inestimable value, after the
funerals performed at Reading, he assembles a Parliament at Oxford, wherein
herestored to the Clergy, all their former liberties, and freed the Laytie from
their tributes, exactions, or whatsoever grieuances oppressed them, confirming
the same by his Charter, which, faithfully to observe, he took a public
oath before all the Assembly: where likewise the Bishops swore fealty unto him,
but with this condition; so long as he observed the tenor of this Charter.

And now as one that was to make good the hold he had gotten, with power, and
his sword, prepares for all assaults, which he was suit to have come upon him.
And first graunts license, to all that would, to build Castles upon their own
Lands, thereby to fortify the Realm, and break the force of any ouerrunning
invasion, that should master the field. Which in settled times might be of good
effect, but in a season of distraction, and part-takings very dangerous. And
being to subsist by friends, he makes all he could, creates new Lords, gives to
many great possessions, and having a full purse spares for no cost to buy love,
and fidelity: a purchase very uncertain, when there may be other conucyances
made of more strength to carry it.

Two ways he was to look for blows: from Scotland on one side, and France on
the other: Scotland wanted no instigators: David their King, moved both with
nature and his oath to his Niece, turns head upon him: Stephen was presently
there with the show of a strong Army, and appeased him with the gift of
Cumberland, and his son Henry, Prince of Scotland with the Earldome of
Huntingdon; the last took an oath of fealty unto him, which the father
refused as having first sworn to Maude, wherein he satisfied not the King, who
returning from this voyage, found some defection of his Nobility, which
presently put him into another action, that intertayned him sometime. After
which, he falls dangerously sick, in so much as he was noysed to be dead, by
which sickness, he lost more then his health: For his friends, put in danger
thereby, cast to seek another party to bear them up: it wakened Aniou, and
sets him on to surprise certain pieces in Normandy, to prepare for the
recovery of his wives right: and made all this kingdom waver. Thus was his
first year spent, which showed how the rest of 18. would prove, wherein we are
to have no other representations, but of reuoltes, beseiging of Castles,
surprizings, recouerings, loosings again, with great spoils, and destruction;
in brief a most miserable face of a distracted State, that can yield us no
other notes of instruction, but such as are general in all times of like
disposition: and therefore herein we may the better forbear the rehearsal of
many perticulars, being all under one head of action, and like nature.

The King, having recovered, would make the world know he was alive, and
presently passes with forces into Normandy, overcame the Earl of Aniou in
battle: after makes peace with him, and upon renouncing of the claim of
Maude, covenants to give them 5000. marks per annum: he intertaynes amity
with King Louys 7. and causes his son Eustace to do him homage for the Duchy
of Normandy, wherein he was invested: besides to content his elder brother
Theobald, Earl of Blois, he gives him a pension of 2000. marks and so
returns again into England, to a war against Scotland, which, in this mean
time, made incursions on the kingdom; where whilst he was held busy in work,
Robert Earl of Gloucester, base son to Henry 1. a man of high spirit, great
direction and indefatigable industry (an especial actor that performed the
greatest part, in these times, for his sister Maude) had surprised the Castle
of Bristow, and procured confederates to make good other pieces abroad in
diverse parts: as William Talbot the Castle of Hereford; Paynel the Castle of
Ludlow; Louell that of Carry: Moune the Castle of Dunstor: Robert de Nichol,
that of Warham, Eustace Fitz John that of Walton, and William Fitz Allan the
Castle of Shrewsbury.

Stephen leaves the prosecution of the Scottish wars to Thurstan Archbishop
of York, whom he made his lieutenant, and furnished with many valiant leaders,
as Walter Earl of Albemarle, William Peuerell of Nottingham; Walter and
Gilbert Lacies. Himself bravely attended, bendes all his power to repress the
conspirators, which he did in one expedition, recouers all these Castles (by
reason of their distances, not able to succor one another) and drove the Earl
of Gloucester home to his sister into Aniou.

No less success had his forces in the North, against the Scots, whom in a
great battle they discomfeited and put to flight, which great fortunes
meeting together in one year, brought forth occasion of bad, in that
following: for now presuming more of himfelfe, he fell upon those rocks that
rent all his greatness. He calls a Council at Oxford, where occasion was
given to set him out with the Clergy, that had only put him into the State.
The Bishops upon the permission of building Castles, so out-went the Lords in
magnificence, strength and number of their erections, and especially the Bishop
of Salisbury that their greatness was much maligned by them, putting the King
in head, that all these great Castles, especially of Salisbury, the Vies,
Shirburne, Malmsbury, and Newwark, were only to intertayne the party of
Maude, whereupon the King, whose fears were apt to take fire, sendes for the
Bishop of Salisbury (most suspected) to Oxford. The Bishop, as if foreseing the
mischief coming to him, would gladly have put off this journey, and excused
it by the debilitie of his age, but it would not serve his turn: thither he
comes, where his servants, about the taking up of lodgings, quarrel with the
servants of the Earl of Britayne, and from words fall to blows, so that in
the bickering, one of them was slain, and the nephew of the Earl dangerously
wounded. Whereupon the King sendes for the Bishop, to satisfy his Court, for
the breach of peace, made by his servants: The satisfaction required, was the
yielding up the keys of his Castles, as pledges of his fealty, but that being
stood upon, the Bishop, with his nephew, Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, were
restrained of their liberty, and shortly after sent as prisoners to the Castle
of the Devises, whither the Bishop of Eley, another of his Nephews, had retired
himself before. The King seazes into his hands his Castles of Salisbury,
Shyrburne, Malmesbury, and after 3. days assault the Devises was likewise
rendered, besides he took all his treasure, which amounted to 40. thousand
marks.

This action, being of an extraordinary strain, gave much occasion of rumor:
some said: The King had done well in seazing upon these Castles; it being
unfit, and against the Cannons of the Church, that they who were men of
religion, and peace, should raise fortresses for war, and in that sort as
might be prejudicial to the King. Against this, was the Bishop of Winchester,
the Popes Legate, taking rather the part of his function, then that of a
brother: saying: that if the Bishops had transgressed, it was not the King, but
the Cannons, that must judge it: that they ought not to be deprived of their
possessions, without a public Ecclesiastical Counsel; that the King had not
done it, out of the zeal of justice, but for his own benefit, taking away
that which had been built upon the Lands, and by the charge of the Church, to
put it into the hands of lay men, little affected to religion: And therefore to
the end, the power of the Canno^s might be examined, he appoints a Counsel to
be called at Winchester, whither the King is summoned: and thither repair most
of all the Bishops of the Kingdom, where first is read the Commission of the
Legatine power, granted by Pope Innocent to the Bishop of Winchester, who there
openly vrges the indignity offered to the Church, by the imprisoning of these
Bshops: An act most heinous and shameful for the King, that in the peace of
his Court, through the instigation of evil ministers, would thus lay hands upon
such men, and spoil them of their estates. Which was a violence against God,
And that seeing the King would yield to no admonitions, he had at length called
this Council; where they were to consult what was to be done: that for his
part, neither the love of the King, though his brother, nor the loss of his
living, or danger of his life, should make him fail in the execution of what
they should decree.

The King, standing upon his cause, sendes certain Earls to this Council, to
know why he was called thither: answer was made by the Legate: that the King,
who was subject to the faith of CHRIST, ought not to take it ill, if by the
ministers of CHRIST, he was called to make satisfaction, being conscious of
such an offense as that age had not known: that it was for times of the
Gentiles, for Bishops to be imprisoned, and deprived of their possessions, and
therefore they should tell the King, his brother, that if he would vout safe to
yield consent to the Council, it should be such, by the help of God, as
neither the Roman Church, the Court of the King of France, nor the Earl
Theobald, brother to them both (a man wise, and religious) should, in reason
dislike it: that the King should do advisedly to render the reason of his act,
and undergo a Canonical judgment: that he ought in duty to favor the Church,
into whose bosom being taken, he was advanced to the Crown without any
military hand.

With which answer the Earls departed, attended with Alberic de Ver, a man
exercised in the law, and having related the same, are returned with the
Kingsreply, which Alberic vtters, and vrges the inuries Bishop Roger had done
to the King: how he seldom came to his Court: that his men, presuming upon his
power, had offered violence to the Nephew and servants, of the Earl of
Britayne, and to the servants of Herui de Lions, a man of that Nobility and
sloutnesse, as would never voutsafe to come upon any request to the late King,
and yet for the love of this, was desirous to see England: where, to have this
violence offered was an injury to the King, and dishonor to the Realm, that the
Bishop of Lincoln, for the ancient hatred to the Earl of Britayne, was the
author of his men's sedition: that the Bishop of Salisbury secretly favored the
Kings enemies; and did but subtlely temporize, as the King had found by diverse
circumstances: especially, when Roger de Mortimer, sent with the Kings forces,
in the great danger of Bristow, he would not lodge him one night in Malmsbury:
that it was in every man's mouth, as soon as the Empress came, He and his
nephews would render their Castles unto him. That he was arested, not as a
Bishop, but a servant to the King, and one that administered his procurations,
and received his moneys. That the King took not his Castles by violence, but
the Bishop voluntarily rendered them, to avoid the calumny of their tumult
rayfed in his Court: if the King found some money in his Castles, he might
lawfully seize on it, in regard that Roger had collected it, out of the
revenues of the King his uncle, and predecessor: and the Bishop willingly
yielded up the same, as well as his Castles, through fear of his offenses; and
of this, wanted not witnesses of the Kings, who part desired that the
covenants, made between him, and the Bishop, might remain ratified.

Against this, Bishop Roger opposes: That he was never servant to the King, nor
recesued his moneys; and withal, added threatenings, as a man, not yet broken,
though bent with his fortunes: that if he found not justice for his wrongs in
that Council, he would bring it to the hearing of a greater Court.

The Legate, mildly, as he did other things, said: That all what was spoken
against the Bishops, ought first to be examined in the Ecclesiastical
Council, whether they were true or no, before sentence should have been given
against them, contrary to the Canons: and therefore the King should, as it is
lawful in judicial trials, reuest the Bishops in their former estates,
otherwise, by the law of Nations, being dissaised, they shall not hold their
Plea.

After much debate the Kings cause was, upon a motion, put off till the next
day, to the end the Archbishop of Roan, an especial instrument for the King,
might be there; who delivering his opinion, said: That if the Bishops could
rightly prove by the Canons, they ought to have Castles, they should hold them;
but if they could not, it proceeded of great improbitie to strive to do
otherwise. And be it, said he, their right to have them, yet in a suspected
time, according to the manner of other Nations, all great men ought to deliver
the keys of their Fortresses, to be at the Kings pleasure, who is to fight
for the peace of all. But it is not their right, by the decree of the Canons,
to have Castles; and if, by the Princes indulgence, it be tolerated, yet in a
time of necessity, they ought to deliver the keys.

The Lawyer Alberic adds: That it was signified to the King, how the Bishops
threatened, and had furnished some to go to Rome against him. But, said he, the
King would have you know, that none of you presume to do it: for if any go out
of England, contrary to his will, and the dignity of the kingdom, it will be
hard returning. In conclusion the Council brake up, nothing was done. The
Bishops durst not excommunicate the King, without the Popes priuitie: and
besides, they saw the swords to busy about them: yet failed not the Legate, and
the Archbishop to prosecute their parts, and from authority fell to prayer, and
at the Kings feet, in his chamber, besought him, that he would pity the
Church, pity his own soul, and his fame, not to fuffer dissension to be
between the kingdom and the Priesthood. The king returned them fair words,
but held what he had gotten.

Shortly after, through grief, dyed the Bishop of Salisbury, and (according to
the fate of ouer-eminent and greedy Officers) vnpittied. He was a man, in his
latter time, noted of much corruption, and insatiable desire of having. For
whom, the present King in the beginning of his reign, had done very much,
making one of his Nephews Chancellor, the other Treasurer, and, upon his suit,
gave to himself the Borough of Malmesbury; insomuch as the King would say to
his familiars about him: If this man will beg thus, still; I will give hm
half the Kingdom but I will please him: and first shall he be weary of
craving, ere 1 of granting. And sure the King had great reason to suspect his
adhering to Maud, whose part he began to favor: only, out of the hatred he
bare to Winchester, who yet was content to forsake his own brother, in regard,
by his engagement he was preferred to the Crown, rather then to loose his
good will, and the rest of the Clergy.

But yet this breaking of the King into the Church, which had made him, utterly
dissolved him. For presently here upon all his power fell asunder: the Empress
found now a way open to let her in, and the Earl of Glocefter presuming of a
sure side, conducted her into England, only with 150. men, puts her into the
Castle of Arundell, and himself, attended but with 12. horse, passed away
clear through all the country, to Bristow, and from thence to Gloucester, where
he had leisure, without opposition, to raise all the country, to take part with
the Empress; who, from Arundell castle, was afterward, by the Legate himself,
and the Kings permission, conveyed to Bristow, received with all obedience,
grew daily in strength, as she went and came, at length to her brother, (who
had taken in Hereford, made himself strong with the Welsh, and settled those
parts) to gather up more of the kingdom by showing herself and her power in
diverse places.

Stephan, having no part clear, by reason the Castles, upon which he spent,
both his time and means, lay so thick blocks in his way, as he could not
make that speed to stop this stream, as otherwise he would, holding it not
safe to go forward, and leave dangers bebehinde, that might ouer-take him. And
first he lays siege to the Castle of Wallingford, which Brian, son to the
Earl of Gloucester, held against him: then to the Castle of Bristow, and other
places, working much, but effecting little: which seeing, to get time, and
stagger the swift proceeding of this new received Princess, he causes a
treaty of peace to be propounded at Bath, where the Legate, (who likewise
earnestly solicited the same) with the Archbishop of Canterbury, were
appointed Commissioners for the King; and the Earl of Gloucester for the
Empress; but nothing was effected, both return to make good their sides. The
Empress seckes to recover more, the King what he had lost. And least the North
parts might fall from him, and the King of Scots come on, he repaires
thitherward: and finding the Castle of Lincoln possessed by Ralfe, Earl of
Chester, who had married a daughter of the Earl of Gloucester, and holding it
not safe to be in the hands of such a master, in such a time, seeks to take
it in by force. The Earl of Chester, who held Newtrall, attempting nothing
against the King, took it ill and stood upon his defense: but being ouer-layd
by power, conueyes himself out of the Castle, leaves his brother and wife
within, to defend it, and procures aid of his father in law, the Earl of
Gloucester, to succor him.

The Earl takes in hand this business, sets out of Gloucester with an Army of
Welshmen and others, attended with Hugh Bigod, and Robert de Morley, ioynes
with the Earl of Chester, marches to Lincoln, where, in the battle, King
Stephan was taken, carried prisoner to Gloucester, presented to the Empress,
and by her sent to be kept in the Castle of Bristow; but in all honorable
fashion, till his attempts to escape laid fetters on him.

Hereupon the Empress (as at the top of her fortune) labors the Legate to be
admitted to the kingdom, as the daughter of the late King, to whom the Realm
had taken an oath to accept for sovereign in the succession; and wrought so,
as a Parle was appointed for this purpose, on the Plain near to winchester,
where in ablustring sad day, like the fate of the business, they met, and the
Empress swore, and made affidation to the Legar, that all the great
businesses, and especially the donation of Bishoprics and Abbyes, should be
at his disposing, if he (with the Church) would receive her as Queen of
England, and hold perpetual fidelity unto her. The same oath and affidation
took likewise her brother Robert, Earl of Gloucester, Brian his son,
Marquisse of Wallingford; Miles of Gloucester (after Earl of Hareford) with
many others for her. Nor did the Bishop stick to accept her as Queen, (though
she never came to be so) and with some few other, made like wife affidatio^ for
his part, that so long as she infringed not her covenant, he would also hold
his fidelity to her. The next day she was received with solemn procession into
the Bishops Church at Winchester, the Bishop leading her on the right hand, and
Bernard, Bishop of Saint David's, on the left. There were present many other
Bishops, as Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and Nigel Bishop of Ely (the nephews
of Roger, lately imprisoned) Robert Bishop of Bath, and Robert Bishop of
Worcester, with many Abbots.

Within a few days after came Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, to the
Empress, invited by the Legate; but deferred to do fealty unto her, as holding
it unworthy his person and place, without having conferd first with the king.
And therefore he, with many Prelates, and some of the Layty, by permission
obtained, went to the king to Bristow. The Council brake up: the Empress
keeps her Easter at Oxford, being her own town. Shortly upon Easter a
Council of the Clergy is again called to Winchester, where the first day the
Legate had secret conference with every Bishop apart, and then with every Abbot,
and other which were called to the Council: the next day he makes a public
speech, Showing how the cause of their Assembly was, to consult for the peace
of their country, in great danger of utter ruin. Repeates the flourishing
reign of his uncle: the peace, wealth and honor of the kingdom in his time:
and how that renowned king, many years before his death, had received an oath
both of England and Normandy, for the succession of his daughter Maude and her
Issue. But, said he, after his decease, his daughter being then in Normandy,
making delay to come into England, where (for that it seemed long to expect)
order was to be taken for the peace of the country, and my brother was
permitted to reign. And although I interposed my self a surety between God
and him, that he should honor and exalt the holy Church, keep and ordain
good laws; Yet, how he has behaved himself in the kingdom, it gricues me to
remember, and I am ashamed to repeat. And then recounts he all the Kings
courses with the Bishops, and all his other misgouernments. And then, said he,
every man knows I ought to love my mortal brother, but much more the cause
of my immortal Father: and therefore seeing God has showed his judgment on my
brother, and suffered him, without my knowledge, to fall into the hand of
Power: that the kingdom may not miscary for want of a Ruler; I have called you
all hither by the power of my Legation. Yesterday the cause was moved in
secret, to the greatest part of the Clergy, to whom the right appertains to
elect and ordain a Prince. And therefore after having inuoked, as it is meet,
the Divine aid, we elect for Queen of England the daughter of the peaceful,
glorious, rich, good, and in our time the incomparable king, and to her we
promise our faith and allegiance.

When all, who were present, either modestly gave their voice, or by their
silence contradicted it, the Legate ads: The Londoners, who are, in respect of
the greatness of their City, as among the optimacie of England, we have by our
messengers summoned, and I trust they will not stay beyond this day; to morrow
we will expect them.

The Londoners came, were brought into the Council, showed, How they were sent
from the Communaltie of London, not to bring contention, but prayer, that the
King their Lord might be fred from captivity, and the same did all the Barons
(received within their Liberties) earnestly beseech of my Lord Legate, and all
the Clergy there present. The Legate answers them at large, and loftily,
according to his speech the day before, and added, That the Londoners, who were
held in that degree in England, ought not to take their parts, who had forsaken
their Lord in the war, by whose Council the Church had been dishonored,
and who favored the Londoners but for their own gain.

Then stands there up a Chaplayne to Queen Maude, wife to Stephan, and
delivers a letter to the Legate, which he silently read, and then said alowd,
that it was not lawful in the assembly of so many reverend and religious
persons the same should be publikly read, containing matter reprehensible. The
Chaplayne not to fail in his message, boldly reads the letter himself, which
was to this effect: That the Queen earnestly intreates all the Clergy there
assembled, and namely the Bishop of Winchester, the brother of her Lord, to
restore him unto the kingdom, whom wicked men, which were also his subjects,
held prisoner.

To this the Legate answers, as to the Londoners, and shortly after the
Council brake up; where in many of the Kings part were excommunicated, namely
William Martell, an especial man about the King, who had much displeased the
Legate.

Hereupon a great part of England willingly accepted of Maude, in whose
businesses her brother Robert imployes all his diligence and best care,
reforming justice, restoring the Laws of England, promising relieuements, and
whatsoever might be to win the people; the Legate seconding all his courses.

But now, she being at the point of obtaining the whole kingdom; all came
suddenly dashed by the practice of the Londoners, who, adhering to the other
side, began openly to inueigh against her, who, in something, whatsoever it
were, had displeased them, and they had plotted to surprise her in their
City, whereof she having notice, secretly withdrawing herself, accompanied
with her uncle David King of Scots (who was come to visit her) and her brother
Robert, unto Oxford, a place of more security. The Legate himself takes, or
makes an occasion to be flacke in her cause, upon her denying him a suit for
his Nephew Eustace, the son of Stephan, about the inheritance of his Earldome
of Mortaigne in Normandy. Besides the Queen regnant, watchful over all
opportunity, found means to parle with the Legate, sets upon him with her
tears, entreaty, promises, and assurances for the Kings reformation; in so
much as she recalled him to the affections of nature, brought him about again
to absolve such of the Kings part as he had lately excommunicated.

The Earl of Gloucester seeing this sudden and strange relaps of their
affairs, strives by all means to hold up Opinion, and re-quicken the Legates
disposition, which to keep sound, was all. He brings the Empress to
Winchester, setles her, and her guard, in the Castle, where she desires to
speak with the Legate, who first delays, then denies to come. Whereupon they
call their best friends about them. Queen Maude and the Lords incompasse the
Town, and cut off all victual from the Empress, so that in the end, the
Earl of Gloucester wrought means to have her conveyed from thence to the Vies,
but himself was taken and in him most of her.

This sets the sides both even again into the Lists of their trial: the two
prisoners are to redeem each other: The disproportion of the quality between
them, showed yet there was an evenness of power, and the Earl would not
consent to the Kings delivery (who only in that was to have the precedence)
but upon most secure cautions. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Legate,
undertook to yield themselves prisoners for him, if the King released him not,
according to his promise: But that would not serve the turn, till they both
had written their Briefes to the Pope, to intimate the course that was taken
herein, and delivered the same unto him, under their hands and seals. So that,
if the King should, as he might not care, to hold the Bishops in prison: yet
the Pope, if hard measure were offered, might relieve him. Which shows the
advantage of credit in the business, lay on this side, and the king was to
have his fetters, though at liberty. The Queen and Eustace, her son, the
Prince, upon the enlargement of Stephan, remain pledges in the Castle of
Bristow till the Earl were released, which was done upon the kings coming to
Winchester. Where the Earl in familiar conference, was, by all are possible,
solicited to forsake the party of Maude, with promise of all preferments of
honor and estate: but nothing could move him being fixed to his courses, and
rather would he have been content to remain a perpetual prisoner, then that
Stephan should have been released, had not his sister wrought him to this
conclusion.

The Legate, after this, calls a Council at London, where the Popes letters,
written unto him, are openly read, which argue him, (but mildly) of some
neglect of his brothers releasing, and exhort him to use all means
Ecclesiastical, and Secular, to set him at liberty.

The King himself came into the Council, complains, how his subjects, to
whom he had never denied Justice, had taken him, and reproachfully afflicted
him even to death. The Legate, with great cloquence, labors to excuse his own
courses: alleging, How he received not the Empress by his will, but
necessity: that presently upon the kings overthrow, whilst the Lords were
either fled, or stood in suspense attending the event, she and her people came
thundering to the walls of Winchester: and that, what pact soever he had made
with her for the right of the Church, she obstinately brake all: besides, he
was certainly informed, that she and hers had plotted, both against his
dignity, and life: But God in his mercy, contrary to her desire, had turned the
business so, as he escaped the danger, and his brother was delivered out of
bands. And therefore he, from the part of God, and the Pope, willed them, with
all their utmost power, to aid the King, anointed by the consent of the
People, and the Sea Apostolic, and to Excommunicate all the disturbers of the
peace that favored the Countess of Aniou.

There was in the Council a Lay Agent for the Empress, who openly charged the
Legate, That in respect of the faith he had given the Empress, to pass no act
there, prejudicial to her Honor: having sworn unto her never to aid his
brother with above twenty Soldiers: that her coming into England, was upon
his often Letters unto her: and his cause it was, that the King was taken and
held prisoner. This, and much more said the Agent with great austerity of
words, wherewith the Legate seemed not to be moved at all, nor would stoop to
reply.

Both parts thus set at liberty, were left to work for themselves, holding
the State broken between them; and no means made to interpose any bar to
keep them asunder. Their borders lay every where, and then the engagements of
their Partakers, who look all to be sauers, or to recover their stakes, when
they were lost, (which makes them never give over) entertain the contention.
But the best was, they were rather troubles, then wars, and cost more labor
then blood. Every one fought with Bucklers, and seldom came to the sharp in
the field, which would soon have ended the business.

Some few months after these inlargements, stood both sides at some rest, but
not idle, casting how to compass their ends. The Empress at the Vies with her
Council, resolves to send over her brother into Normandy to solicit her
husband the Earl of Aniou, to come to aid her, with forces from thence: Her
brother, the better to secure her in his absence, setles her in the Castle of
Oxford, well furnished for all assaults: and takes with him the sons of the
especial men about her, as pledges to hold them to their fidelity. Stephan
seeks to stop the Earls passage, but could not, and then lays siege to the
Castle of Oxford; which held him all the time the Earl was abroad. Geffrey
Earl of Aniou, desirous rather to have Normandy, where of, in this mean
time, he had attained the most part, and in possibility of the rest, then to
adventure for England, which lay in danger, refused to come in person, but
sends some small aid, and his eldest son Henry, being then but eleven years
of age, that he might look upon England, and be showed to the people, to try
if that would move them to a consideration of his right: which proved of more
effect then an Army.

The Earl of Gloucester safely returning, makes toward Oxford to releive the
Empress, who had secretly conveyed her self disguised out at a posterne gate,
only with four persons, got over the Thames, passed a foot to Abington, and
from thence conuayd to Wallingford, where her brother and son met her, to her
more comfort after hard distresses.

Stephan seeing his enemy thus supplied, and like to grow, labors to win
friends, but money fayles, which made diverse of his Lords, and especially his
mercinaries, whereof he had many out of Flanders, to fall to the rifling of
Abbayes, which was of dangerous consequence: And for Armies there was no
means; only about Castles, with small powers, lay all the business of these
times, and they being so many were to small effect, but only to hold them
doing, which was for many years.

The Earl of Gloucester, the chief pillar of the Empress, within 2. years
after his last coming out of Normandy dyed, and shortly after Miles Earl of
Hereford, an especial man of hers, which had utterly quasht her, but that in
stead of a brother she had a son grew up to be of more estimation with the
Nobility, and shortly after of ablenes to undergo the travails of war. His
first expedition at 16. years of age was Northward to combine him with David
King of Scots his great uncle, to whom his mother had given the Country of
Northumberland. After him follows Stephan with an Army to York, least he
should surprise that City, and to intercept him in his return: but according
to his usual manner, and French-like, after the first heat of his
undertakings, which were quick and brave, he quayles: nothing was effected,
and both return without incountring.

Now to advance the State and means of Henry, fortune, as if in love with
young Princes, presents this occasion. Louys 7. King of France going in person
to the holy wars, and taking with him his wife Elenor, the only daughter and
heir of William Duke of Guien, grew into such an odious conceit of her, upon
the notice of her lascivious behavior in those parts, as the first work he
does upon his coming back he repudiates, and turns her home with all her
great dowry, rather content to loose the mighty estate she brought then to
live with her. With this great Lady matches Henry, before he was 20. years of
age (being now Duke of Normandy, his father deceased, who had recovered it for
him) and had by her the possession of all those large and rich Countries
apertaining to the Duchy of Guien, besides, the Earldome of Poicton. Whereupon
Louys enraged to see him enlarged by this great accession of State, who was so
near, and like to be so dangerous and eminenta neighbor, combines with
Stephan, and aids Eustace his son, with main power, for the recovery of
Normandy, wherein he was first possessed. But this young Prince, furnished now
with all this powerful means, leaves the management of the affairs of
England to his friends, defendes Normandy, wrought so, as the King of France
did him little hurt; and Eustace, his competitor, returned home into England,
where shortly after he dyed, about 18. years of his age, borne never to see
out of the calamities of war, and was buried at Feuersham with his mother,
who deceased a little before, and had no other joy nor glory of a Crown but
what we see.

Stephan, whilst Duke Henry was in Normandy, recouers what he could, and at
length besieges Wallingsord, which seems in these times to have been a piece
of great importance, and impregnable, and reduced the Defendants to that
extremity, as they sent to Duke Henry for succor, who presently thereupon,
in the midst of winter, ariues in England with 3000. foot, and 140. horse.
Where first, to draw the King from Wallingford, he lays siege to Malmesbury,
and had most of all the great men in the West, and from other parts coming in
unto him. Stephan, now resolved to put it to the trial of a day, brings
thither all the power he could make; and far ouer-went his enemy in number: but
floods and storms, in an unseasonable winter, kept the Armies from
incountring, till the Bishops, doubtful of the success, and seeing how
dangerous it was for them, and the whole State, to have a young Prince get the
maistry by his sword mediated a peace, which was after concluded in a
Parliament at Winchester, upon these conditions.

1 That King Stephan, during his natural life, should remain King of England,
and Henry enjoy the Dukedom of Normandy, as descended unto him from his
mother, and be proclaimed heir apparent to the kingdom of England, as the
adopted son of King Stephan. 2 That the partisans of either should receive no
damage, but enjoy their estates according to their ancient rights and titles. 3
That the king should resume into his hands all such parcels of inheritance
belonging Presumptions.
to the Crown, as had been aliened by him, or usurped in his time. And that
all those possessions which by intrusion had been violently taken from the
owners since the days of king Henry, should be restored unto them who were
rightly possessed therein when the said king reigned. 4 That all such Castles
as had been built by the permission of Stephan, and in his time (which were
found to be 1117) should be demolished, etc.
There is a Charter of this agreement in our Annals, which has other Articles
of reservation for the estates of particular persons. And first for William,
the second son of Stephan, to enjoy all the possessions his father held
before he was king of England, and many other particulars of especial note.

After this pacification, and all business here, settled, Duke Henry returns
into Normandy, and likewise there concludes a peace with the king of France,
and for that he would be sure to have it, buys it, with twenty thousand Marks.

And now king Stephan having attained (that he never had) Peace (which yet, it
seems he enjoyed not a year after) uses all the best means he could to
repair the ruins of the State, makes his progresses into most parts of the
kingdom, to reform the mischiefs that had grown up under the sword: and
after his return calls a Parliament at London, to consult of the best means
for the public good. After the Parliament, he goes to meet the Earl of
Flanders at Dover, who desired conference with him, and having dispatched him,
1154.
falls presently sick, dies within few days after, He reigned 18 years and 10
months.
and was buried (in the Abbey he founded) at Feuersham, with the unfortunate
Princes.

A man so continually in motion, as we cannot take his dimension, but only in
passing, and that but on one side, which was war: on the other, we never saw
but a glance of him, which yet, for the most part, was such, as showed him to
be a very worthy Prince for the government. He kept his word with the State
concerning the relieuement of Tributes, and never had Subsidy that we find.

But which is more remarkable, having his sword continually out, and so many
defections and rebellions against him, he never put any great man to death.
Besides it is noted, that notwithstanding all these miseries of war, there
were more Abbaies built in his reign then in 100. years before, which shows
though the times were bad, they were not impious.

The end of the third Book.
Errata.
For the Faults committed herein, Charitable Reader, know they are not the
Printers (who has bin honestly careful for his part) but merely mine own:
freely confessing my self to be more an honorer then searcher of antiquities,
that lie far off from us, and only studious of the general notions, which
especially concern the succession of affairs of action, which is the part I
have undertake. And therefore I trust all worthy spirits in that respect will
pardon me and reform my knowledge, rather by way of conference then
detraction; for no man truly ingenious is malignant. And (if Iliue) after this
private impression, which is but of a few coppies for my friends, I will amend
what is amiss in the public. I have got over the worst and roughest part of
this work and am now come into a more plain and open passage, where I shall
be better able to stand to answer for what shall be done, and I trust, have
more helps of my friends, and all worthy men that are furnished with matter of
this nature, whom I inuoke to assist me, and who, seeing my honest ends, I
trust will not deny their Country the knowledge of what they have. And
especially herein I rely upon the aid of the right worthy and well-deseruing
knight, Sir Robert Cotton, who, out of his choice, and excellent store, can
best furnish this work.

FINIS.

