CERTAIN SMALL POEMS LATELY PRINTED: with the Tragedy of Philotas.

Written by SAMVEL DANIEL.

Carmen amat, quisquis carmine digna gerit. AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld for
Simon Waterson. 1605.

To the right Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret Countess
of Cumberland.
ALthough the meaner sort (whose thoughts are placed
As in another region, far below
The Sphere of greatness) cannot rightly taste
What touch it has, nor right her passions know:
Yet have I here aduentur'd to bestow
Words upon grief, as my griefs comprehend,
And made this great afflicted Lady show
Out of my feelings, what she might have pend.
And here the same, I bring forth, to attend
Upon thy reverent name, to live with thee
Most virtuous Lady, that vouchsaf'st to lend
Ear to my notes, and comfort unto me,
That one day may thine own fair virtues spread
Be'ing Secretary now, but to the dead.
The Argument.
Upon the second agreement (the first being broken through jealousy of a
disproportion of eminency) between the Triumuiti Octauius Caesar, Marcus
Antonius, and Lepidus: Octauia the sister of Octauius Caesar, was married to
Antonius, as a link to combine that which never yet, the greatest strength of
nature, or any power of nearest respect could long hold together, who made but
the instrument of others ends, and delivered up as an Ostage to serve the
opportunity of advantages, met not with that integrity she brought: but as
highly preferred to affliction encountered with all the greeuances that beat
upon the misery of greatness, exposed to stand betwixt the diverse tending
humors of unquiet parties. For Antonie having yet upon him the fetters of
AEgipt, laid on by the power of a most incomparable beauty, could admit no new
laws into the state of his affection, or dispose of himself being not
himself, but as having his heart turned Eastward whither the point of his
desires were directed, touched with the strongest allurements that ambition, and
a licencious soueraintie could draw a man unto: could not truly descend to the
private love of a civil nurtred. Matrone, whose entertainment bounded with
modesty and the nature of her education, knew not to cloth her affections in
any other colors then the plain habit of truth: wherein she ever suited al her
actions^ and used all her best ornaments of honesty, to win the good liking of
him that held her but as a Curtain drawn between him and Octauius to shadow
his other purposes withal; which the sharp sight of an equally jealous
ambition could soon pierce into, and as easily look through and over blood and
nature as he to abuse it: And therefore to prevent his aspiring, he arms his
forces either to reduce Antonie to the rank of his estate, or else to disranke
him out of state and al. When Octauia by the employment of Antonie (as being
not yet ready to put his fortune to her trial) throws her self, great with
child, and a^ big with sorrow, into the travail of a most laboursome
recon^iliacion: taking her journey from the farthest part of Greece to find
Octauius, with whom her care and tears were so good agents that they effected
their Commission beyond all expectation, and for that time quite disarmed their
wrath, which yet long could not hold so. For Antonius falling into the relaps
of his former disease, watching his opportunity got over again into Egypt, where
he so forgot himself, that he quite put off his own nature, and wholly became
a pray to his pleasures, as if he had wound himself out of the respect of
Country, blood and alliance, which gave to Octauia the cause of much
affliction, and to me the Argument of this letter.

A Letter sent from Octauia to her husband Marcus Antonius into Egypt.
1
TO thee (yet dear) though most disloyal Lord,
Whom impious love keeps in a barbarous land,
Thy wronged wife Octauia sends word
Of th'vnkind wounds received by thy hand,
Great Antony, o let thine eyes afford
But to permit thy heart to understand
The hurt thou do, and do but read her tears
That still is thine though thou will not be hers.
2
Although perhaps, these my complaints may come
Whilst thou in the arms of that incestious Qeeene
The stain of Egypt, and the shame of Rome
Shall dallying sit, and blush to have them seen:
Whilst proud disdainful she, gessing from whom
The message came, and what the cause has been,
Will scorning say, says, this comes from your Dear,
Now sir you must be shent for staying here.
3
From her indeed it comes, delitious dame,
(Thou royal Concubine, and Queen of lust)
Whose arms yet pure, whose breasts are void of blame,
And whose most lawful flame proves thine unjust:
It Is she that sends the message of thy shame,
And his untruth that has betrayed her trust:
Pardon, dear lord, from her these sorrows are
Whose bed brings neither infamy nor war.
4
And therefore hear her words, that too too much
Has heard the wrongs committed by thy shame;
Although at first my trust in thee was such
As it held out against the strongest fame;
My heart would never let in once a touch
Of least belief, till all confirmd the same:
That I was almost last that would believe
Because I know me first that most must grieve.
5
How often have poor abused I took part
With falsehood only for to make thee true?
How often have I argued against my heart
Not suffering it to know that which it knew?
And for I would not have thee what thou art
I made my self, unto my self untrue:
So much my love labourd against thy Sin
To shut our fear which yet kept fear within:
6
For I could never think the aspiring mind
Of worthy and victorious Antonie,
Could be by such a Siren so declinde,
As to be traind a pray to Luxury:
I could not think my Lord would be s^ unkind
As to despise his Children, Rome and me:
But o how soon are they deceived that trust
And more their shame, that will be so unjust.
7
But now that certain same has open laid
Thy new relaps, and strange revolt from me,
Truth has quite beaten all my hopes away
and made the passage of my sorrows free:
For now poor heart, there is nothing in the way
Remains to stand betwixt despair and thee;
All is thrown down, there comes no succors new
It is most true, my Lord is most untrue.
8
And now I may with shame enough pull in
The colors I advanced in his grace
For that subduing power, that him did win
Has lost me too, the honor of my face:
Yet why should I bearing no part of sin
Bear such a mighty part of his disgrace?
Yes though it be not mine, it is of mine;
And his renown being clips'd, mine cannot shine,
9
Which makes me as I do, hide from the eye
Of the misiudging vulger that will deem,
That sure there was in me some reason why
Which made thee thus, my bed to disesteeme:
So that alas poor undeserving I
A cause of thy unclean deserts shall seem,
Though lust takes never joy in what is true,
But still leaves known delights to seek out new.
10
And yet my brother Caesar labored
To have me leave thy house, and live more free,
But God forbid, Octauia should be led
To leave to live in thine, though left by thee
The pledges here of thy forsaken bed,
Are still the objects that remember me
What Antony was once, although false now,
And is my Lord, though he neglect his vow.
11
These walls that here do keep me out of sight
Shall keep me all unspotted unto thee,
And testify that I will do thee right,
I Will never stain thy house, though thou shame me:
The now sad Chamber of my once delight
Shall be the temple of my piety
Sacred unto the faith I reverence,
Where I will pay my tears for thy offense.
12
Although my youth, thy absence, and this wrong
Might draw my blood to forfeit unto shame,
Nor need I frustrate my delights so long
That have such means to carry so the same,
Since that the face of greatness is so strong
As it dissolues suspect, and bears out blame,
Having all secret helps that long thereto
That seldom wants there ought but will to do:
13
Which yet to do, ere lust this heart shall frame
Earth swallow me alive, hell rap me hence:
Shall I because despisd contemn my shame,
And add disgrace to others impudence?
What can my power but give more power to fame?
Greatness must make it great incontinence;
Chambers are false, the bed and all will tell,
No door keeps in their shame that do not well.
14
Has greatness ought peculiar else alone
But to stand fair and bright above the base?
What does divide the cottage from the throne,
If vice shall lay both level with disgrace?
For if uncleanness make them but all one
What privilege ha^h honor by his place?
What though our sins go brave and better clad,
They are as those in rags as base as bad.
15
I know not how, but wrongfully I know
Has undiscerning custom placed our kind
Under desert, and set us far below
The reputation to our sex assigned;
Charging our wrong reputed weakness, how
We are unconstant, fickle, false, unkind:
And though our life with thousand proofs shows no
Yet since strength says it, weakness must be so.
16
Unequal partage to b'allow'd no share
Of power to do of life's best benefit;
But stand as if we interdicted were
Of virtue, action, liberty and might:
Must you have all, and not vouchsafe to spare
Our weakness any intrest of delight?
Is there no portion left for us at all,
But sufferance, sorrow, ignorance and thrall?
17
Thrice happy you in whom it is no fault,
To know, to speak, to do, and to be wise:
Whose words have credit, and whose deeds though naught
Must yet be made to seem far otherwise:
You can be only heard whilst we are taught
To hold our peace, and not to exercise
The powers of our best parts, because your parts
Have with our freedom robbed us of our hearts,
18
We in this prison of our selves confined
Must here shut up with our own passions live
Turned in upon us, and denied to find
The vent of outward means that might relieve:
That they alone must take up all our mind;
And no room left us, but to think and grieve,
Yet often our narrowed thoughts look more direct
Then your loose wisdoms borne with wild neglect.
19
For should we too (as God forbid we should)
Carry no better hand on our desires
Then your strength does; what interest could
Our wronged patience pay you for your hires?
What mixture of strange generations would
Succeed the fortunes of uncertain Sires?
What foul confusion in your blood and race
To your immortal shame, and our disgrace?
20
What? are there bars for us, no bounds for you?
Must leuitie stand sure, though firmnes fall?
And are you priuiledg'd to be untrue,
And we no grant to be dispensed withal?
Must we inviolable keep your due,
Both to your love, and to your falsehood thrall?
Whilst you have stretched your lust unto your will
As if your strength were licensed to do ill.
21
O if you be more strong then be more just
Clear this suspicion, make not the world to doubt,
Whether in strong, or weak be better trust,
If frailry, or else valor be more stout:
And if we have shut in our hearts from lust
Let not your bad example let them out,
Think that there is like ^eeling in our blood,
If you will have us good, be you then good.
22
Is it that love does take no true delight
In what it has, but still in what it would,
Which draws you on to do us this unright,
Whilst fear in us of loosing what we hold
Keeps us in still to you, that set us light,
So that what you unties, does us infold?
Then love it is thou that do confound us so
To make our truth the occasion of our woe.
23
Distressed woman kind that either must
For loving loose your loves, or get neglect;
Whilst wantons are more cared for then the just
And falsehood cheerisht, faith without respect:
Better she fares in whom is lesser trust,
And more is loved that is in more suspect.
Which (pardon me) shows no great strength of mind
To be most theirs, that use you most unkind.
24
Yet well it fit^ for that sin ever must
Be tortured with the rack of his own frame,
For he that holds no faith shall find no trust:
But sowing wrong is sure to reap the same:
How can he look to have his measure just
That fills deceit, and reckons not of shame,
And being not pleased with what he ^ath in lo^
Shall ever pine for that which he has not?
25
Yet if thou could not love, thou might have seemed
Though to have seemed had likewise been unjust:
Yet so much are lean shows of us esteemed
That often they feed, though not suffice our trust,
Because our nature grieueth to be deemed
To be so wronged, although we be and must.
And i'ts some ease yet to be kindly used
In outward show, though secretly abused.
26
But woe to her, that both in show despised.
And in effect disgraced and left forlorn,
For whom no comforts are to be devised,
Nor no new hopes can evermore, be borne:
O Antony, could it not have suffiz'd
That I was thine, but must be made her skorne
That enuies all our blood, and does divide
Thee from thy self, only to serve her pride?
27
What fault have I committed that should make
So great dislike of me and of my love?
Or does thy fault but an occasion take
For to dislike what most does it reprove?
Because the conscience gladly would mistake
Her own misdeedes which she would feign remove,
And they that are unwilling to amend
Will take offense because they will offend.
28
Or having run beyond all pardon quite
They fly and join with sin as wholly his,
Making it now their side their part, their right,
And to turn back would show to have done amiss:
For now they think not to be opposite
To what obraides their fault, were wickedness:
So much does folly thrust them into blame
That even to leave off shame, they count it shame.
29
Which do not thou dear Lord, for I do not
Pu^su^ thy fault, but sue for thy return
Back to thy self, whom thou have both forgot
With me, poor me, that does not spite but mourn.
And if thou could as well amend thy blot
As I forgive, these plaints had been forborne:
And thou should be the same unto my heart
Which once thou were, not that which now thou art.
30
Though deep does sit the hard recovering smart
Of that last wound (which God grant be the last)
And more does touch that tender feeling part
Of my sad soul, then all th'vnkindnes past:
And Antony I appeal to thine own heart,
(If th'h^rt which once was thine thou yet still have)
To judge if ever woman that did live
Had iuster cause, then wretched I, to grieve.
31
For coming unto Athens as I did,
Weary and weak with ^oyle, and all distressed,
After I had with sorrow compassed
A hard consent, to grant me that request:
And how my travail was considered
And all my care, and cost, thy self knows best:
That would not move one foot from lust for me
That had left all was dear to come to thee:
32
For first what great ado had I to win.
My offended brother Caesar's backward will?
And praid, and wept, and cride to stay the sin
Of civil rancor rising twixt you still:
For in what ^as^ shall wretched I be in,
Set betwixt both to share with both your ill?
My blood said I with either of you goes,
Who ever win, I shall be sure to lose.
33
For what shame should such mighty persons get
For two weak women's cause to disagree?
Nay what shall I that shall be deemed to set
Th'inkindled fire, seeming inflamed for me?
O if I be the motive of this heat
Let these unguilty hands the quenchers be,
And let me trudge to mediate an accord
The Agent twixt my brother and my Lord.
34
With prayers, vows and tears, with urging hard
I wrung from him a slender grant at last,
And with the rich provisions I prepaid
For thy (intended Parthian war) made have
Weighing not how my poor weak body fared,
But all the tedious difficulties past:
And came to Athens; whence I Niger sent
To show thee of my coming and intent.
35
Whereof when he had made relation:
I was commanded to approach no near?
Then sent I back to know what should de done
With th'horse, and men, and money I had there:
Whereat perhaps when some remorse begun
To touch thy soul, to think yet what we were.
Th'Inchanters straight steps twixt thy heart and the
And intercepts all thoughts that came of me.
36
She arms her tears, the ingins of deceit
And all her battery, to oppose my love;
And bring thy coming grace to a retrait
The power of all her subtilty to prove:
Now pale and faint she languishes, and straight
Seems in a sound unable more to move:
Whilst her instructed followers plie thine ears.
with forged passions, mixed with fained tears.
37.
Hard-harted lord: say they, how can thou see
This mighty Queen a creature so divine,
Lie thus distressed, and languishing for thee
And only wretched but for being thine?
Whilst base Octauia must entitled be
Thy wife, and she esteemed thy concubine:
Advance thy heart, raise it unto his right
And let a seepter baser passions quit:
38
Thus they assail thy natures weakest side
And work upon the advantage of thy mind,
Knowing where judgment stood least fortified
And how t'incounter folly in her kind:
But yet the while O what do thou abide,
Who in thy self such wrestling thoughts do find?
In what confused case is thy soul in
Rackt betwixt pity, sorrow, shame and sin?
39
I cannot tell but sure I dare believe
My travails needs must some compassion move:
For no such lock to blood could nature give
To shut out pity, though it shut out love:
Conscience must leave a little way to grieve
To let in horror coming to reprove,
The guilt of thy offense that caused the same,
For deepest wounds the hand, of our own shame.
40
Never have unjust pleasures been compleet
In joys entire, but still fear kept the door
And held back something from that full of sweet
To interfowre unsure delights the more:
For never did all circumstances meet
With those desires which were co^ceiu'd before
Something must still be left to check our sin,
And give a touch of what should not have bin.
41
Wretched mankind, wherefore has nature made
The lawful vndelightfull, th'vniust shame?
As if our pleasure only were forbade,
But to give fire to lust, t'ad greater flame;
Or else but as ordained more to lade
Our heart with passions to confound the same,
Which though it be, yet ad not worse to ill,
Do, as the best men do, bound thine own will.
42
Redeem thy self, and now at length make peace
With thy divided heart oppressed with toil:
Break up this war, this breast dissension cease,
Thy passions to thy passions reconcile:
I do not only seek my good to increase,
But thine own ease, and liberty the while:
Thee in the circuit of thy self confine.
And be thine own, and then thou will be mine.
43
I know my pitied love, does aggrauate
Envy and wrath for these wrongs offered:
And that my sufferings add with my estate
Coals in thy bosom, hatred on thy head:
Yet is not that, my, fault, but my hard fate,
Who rather wish to have been unpitied
Of all but thee, then that my love should be
Hurtful to him that is so dear to me.
44
Cannot the busy world let me alone
To bear alone the burden of my grief,
But they must intermeddle with my moan
And seek to offend me with unsought relief?
Whilst my afflictions labored to move none
But only thee; must pity play the thief,
To steal so many hearts to hurt my heart,
And move a part against my dearest part,?
45
Yet all this shall not prejudice my Lord
If yet he will but make return at last,
His sight shall raze out of the sad record
Of my inrowled grief all that is past;
And I will not so much as once afford
Place for a thought to think I was disgrac'st:
And pity shall bring back again with me
The Offended hearts that have forsaken thee,
46
And therefore come dear lord, least longer stay
Do arm against thee all the powers of spite.
And thou be made at last the woeful pray
Of full inkindled wrath, and ruined quite:
But what presaging thought of blood does stay
My trembling hand, and does my soul affright?
What horror do I see, prepared to attend
The Event of this? what end unless thou end?
47
With what strange forms and shadows ominous
Did my last sleep, my grieved soul intertaine?
I dreampt, yet o, dreams are but frivolous,
And yet I Will tell it, and God grant it vain.
Me thought a mighty Hippopotamus A Sea Horse.

From Nilus floting, thrusts into the maine,
Upon whose back a wanton Mermaid sat,
As if she ruld his course and steerd his ^ite.
48
With whom t'incounter, forth another makes,
Alike in kind, of strength and power as good:
At whose ingrappling Neptunes mantle takes
A purple color did with streams of blood,
Whereat, this looker on, amazed forsakes
Her Champion there, who yet the better stood;
But se'ing her gone straight after her he hies
As if his heart and strength lay in her eyes:
49
On follows wrath upon disgrace and fear,
Whereof the event forsook me with the night,
But my waked cares, gave me, these shadows were
Drawn but from darkness to instruct the light,
These secret figures, natures message bear
Of coming woes, where they desciphered right;
But if as clouds of sleep thou shall them take,
Yet credit wrath and spite that are awake.
50
Prevent great spirit the tempest that begin,
If lust and thy ambition have left way
But to look out, and have not shut all in,
To stop thy judgment from a true suruay
Of thy estate; and let thy heart within
Consider in what danger thou do lay
Thy life and mine^ to leave the good thou have,
To follow hopes with shadows ouercast,
51
Come, come away from wrong, from craft, from toil,
Possess thine own with right, with truth, with peace;
Break from these snares, thy judgment vnbeguile.
Free thine own torment, and my grief release.
But whither am I carried all this while
Beyond my scope, and know not when to cease?
Words still with my increasing so^owes grow;
I know to have said too much but not ynow.
Wherefore no more but only I commend
To thee the heart that is thine, and so I end,
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY of Cleopatra. To the Lady Marie Countisse of Pembrooke.
AEtas prima canat veneres postrema tumultus.
The Argument.
AFter the death of Antonius, Cleopatra, (living still in the Monument she had
caused to be built,) could not, by any means be drawn forth, although
Octauius Caesar very earnestly labored it: and sent Proculeius, to use all
diligence to bring her unto him: for that he thought it would be a great
Ornament to his Triumphs, to get her alive to Rome. But never would she put
her self into the hands of Proculeius, although on a time he found the
means, (by a window that was at the top of the Monument) to come down unto
he^^ where he persuaded her (all he might) to yield her self to Caesar's
mercy. Which she, (to be rid of him,) cunningly seemed to grant unto. After
that, Octauius in person went to visit her, to whom she excused her offense,
laying all the fault upon the greatness, and fear she had of Antonius, and
withal, seemed very tractable, and willing to be disposed of by him.

Whereupon Octauius, (thinking himself sure) resolved presently to send her
away to Rome. Whereof, Dolabella, a favorite of Caesar's, (and one that was
grown into some good liking of her) having certified her, she makes her
humble petition to Caesar, that he would suffer her to sacrifice to the ghost
of Antonius: which being granted her, she was brought unto his sepulcher,
where, after her rites performed, she returned to the monument, and there dined
with great magnific^nce. And in dinner time, came there one in the habit of a
countr^man, with a basket of Figs unto her, who (unsuspected) was suffered to
carry them in. And in that Basket (among the Figs) were conveyed the Aspickes
wherewith she did her self to death. Dinner being ended, she dispatched
Letters to Caesar, containing great lamentations^ with an earnest supplication,
that she might be intombed with Antonius. Whereupon Caesar knowing what she
intended, sent presently with all speed, Messengers to have prevented her
death, which notwithstanding, before they came, was dispatched.

Caesario her son, which she had by Julius Caesar (con^eyed before unto
India, out of the danger of the wars) was about the same time of her death,
murdered at Rhodes: trained thither by the falshoode of his Tutor, corrupted
by Caesar. And so, hereby came the race of the Prolomies to be wholly extinct,
and the flourishing rich kingdom of Egypt utterly overthrown and subdued.

THE TRAGEDY of Cleopatra.
The Scaene supposed Alexandria.

THE ACTORS
Cleopatra. Octauius Caesar. Proculeius. Dolobella. Titius, servant to
dolabella. two Philosophers. Arius Philostratus.
Seleucus, secretary to Cleopatra. Rodon, tutor to Caesario. Nuntius. The
Chorus, all Egyptians.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
Cleopatra. YET do I live, and yet does breath extend
My life beyond my life? not can my grave
Shut up my griefs, to make my end my end?
Will yet confusion have more then I have?
Is th'honor, wonder, glory, pomp, and all
Of Cleopatra dead, and she not dead?
Have I out-liu'd my self, and seen the fall
Of all upon me, and not ruined?
Can yet these eyes endure the ghastly look
Of Desolations dark and ougly face,
Wont but on Fortunes fairest side to l^oke,
Where naught was but applause, but smiles, and grace?
Whiles on his shoulders all my rest relide
On whom the Bu^ then of ^^'ambition lay,
My Atlas, and supporter of my pride
That did the world of all my glory sway,
Who now thrown down, disgraced, confounded lies
Crushed with the weight of Shame and Infamy,
Following th'vnlucky party of mine eyes,
The trains of lust and imbecilitie.
Whereby my dissolution is become
The grave of Egypt and the wrack of all;
My vnforeseeing weakness must int^^ome
My Countries fame, and glory with my fall.
Now who would think that I were she who late
With all the ornaments on earth enriched,
Enuiron'd with delights, compassed with state,
Glittring in pomp that h^^s and eyes bewitched;
Should thus distressed, cast down from off that height
Leuell'd with low disgraced calamity,
Under the weight of such affliction sigh,
Reduced unto th'extr^^amest misery^
Am I the woman whose inu^n^ue pride,
Adorned like Isis, sco^^d mortality?
Is It I would have my frailety so belide,
That fla^terie could persuade I was no^ I.
Well, then I see, they but delude that praise us,
Greatness is mock, prosperity betraye us:
And we are but our selves, although this cloud
Of interposed smoke makes us seem more:
These spreading parts of pomp whereof we are p^ov^d.
Are not our parts, but parts of others store.
Witness these gallant fortune following trains,
These Summer Swallows of felicity
Gone with the heat: of all, see what remains,
This monument, two maids, and wretched I.
And I t'adorne their triumphs am reserved
A captive, kept to honor others spoils,
Whom Caesar labors so to have preserved
And seeks to entertain my life with wiles.
But Caesar, it is more then thou can do,
Promise, flatter, threaten extreamitie.
Employ thy wits and all thy force thereto,
I have both hands, and will, and I can die.
Though thou, of both my country and my crown,
Of power, of means and all do quite bereave me^
Though thou have wholly Egypt made thine owne^
Yet have thou left me that which will deceive thee.
That courage with my blood and birth innated,
Admired of all the earth as thou art now,
Can never be so abiectly abated
To be thy slave that ruled as good as thou.
Think Caesar, I that lived and reigned a Queen.
Do scorn to buy my life at such a rate,
That I should underneath my self be seen,
Basely enduring to survive my state:
That Rome should see my scepter-bearing hands
Behind me bound, and glory in my tears,
That I should pass whereas Octauia stands,
To veiw my misery that purchased he^s.
No, I disdain that head which wore a crown,
Should stoop to rake up that which others give;
I must not be, unless I be mine owne^
It Is sweet to die when we are forced to live.
Nor had I staide behind my self this space,
Nor paid such intr'est for this borrowed breath,
But that hereby I seek to purchase grace^
For my distressed scede after my death^
It Is that which does my dearest blood control,
That Is it alas detaines me from my to^^be,
Whiles Nature brings to contradict my soul
The argument of mine unhappy womb.
You lucklesse issue of an woeful mother,
The wretched pledges of a wanton bed,
You Kings designed, must subjects live ^o other;
Or else, I fear, scarce live, when I am dead.
It is for you I temporize with Caesar,
And stay this while to mediate your safety:
For you I feign content and sooth his pleasure,
Calamity herein has made me crafty.
But this is but to try what may be done,
For come what will, this stands I must ^ie free,
And die my self vncaptiu'd and vnwone.
Blood, Children, Nature, all must pardon me.
My soul yields Honor up the victorie^
And I must be a Queen, forget a mother,
Though mother would I be, were I no I:
And Queen would not be now, could I be other.
But what know I if th'heauens have decreed,
And that the sins of Egypt have deserved
The Ptolomies should fail and none succeed,
And that my weakness was thereto reserved
That I should bring confusion to my stare,
And fill the measure of iniquity,
Luxuriousness in me should raise the rate
Of loose and ill-dispensed liberty.
If it be so, then what need these delays?
Since I was made the means of misery:
Why should I strive but to make death my praise,
That had my life but for my infamy?
And let me write in letters of my blood
A fit memorial for the times to come,
To be example to such Princes good
As please themselves, and care not what become.
And Antony although the world takes note
That my defects have only ruined thee:
And my ambitious practices are thought
The motive and the cause of all to be:
Yet God thou know this stain is wrongly laid
Upon my soul, whom ill success makes ill:
And my condemned misfortune has no aid
Against proud luck that argues what it will.
I have no means to vndeceiue their minds,
But to bring in the witness of my blood.
To testify the faith and love that binds
My equal shame, to fall with whom I stood.
Defects I grant I had, but this was worst,
That being the first to fall I died not first.
Though I perhaps could lighten mine own side
With some excuse of my constrained case
Drawn down with pow^e: but that were to divide
My shame: to stand alone in my disgrace.
To clear me so, would show m^'affections naught
And make th'excuse more heinous then the faule.
Since if I should ou^ errors disunite,
I should confound afflictions only rest,
That from stern death even steals a sad delight
To die with friends or with the like distressed.
And since we took of either such firm hold
In th'ouerwhelming seas of fortune cast.
What power should be of power to revnfold
The a^^mes of our affections locked so fast.
For grapling in the ocean of our pride,
We sunke^adh others greatness both together:
And both made shipwreck of our fame beside,
Both wrought a like destruction unto either:
And therefore I am bound to sacrifice
To death and thee, the life that does reproue'me:
Our like distress I feel does simpathi^e,
And even affliction makes me truly love thee,
Which Antonie, I must confess my fault
I never did sincerely until now,
Now I protest I do, now am I taught
In death to love, in life that knew not how.
For whilst my glory in her greatness stood,
And that I saw my state, and knew my beauty:
Saw how the world admired me, how they wooed,
I then thought all men must love me of duty:
And I love none; for my lascivious Court,
Fertile in ever fresh and new-choise pleasure,
Affoorded me so bountiful disport,
That I to stay on Love had never leisure:
My vagabond desires no limits sound.
For lust is endless, pleasure has no bound.
Thou coming from the strictness of thy City.
And this loose pomp of monarchs never learnest,
Inured to wars, in women's wiles vnwitty,
Whilst others faind, thou fell'st to love in earnest;
Not knowing how we like them best that houer,
And make least reckning of a doting lover.
And yet thou came but in my beauties waine,
When new appeering wrinckles of declining
Wrought with the hand of years, seemed to detain
My graces light, as now but dimly shining
Even in the confines of mine age, when I
Failing of what I was, and was but thus;
When such as we do deem in jealousy
That men love for themselves, and not for us.
Then, and but thus, thou did love most sincerely
O Antony (who best deseru'st it better)
This Autumn of my beauty bought so dearly,
For which in more then death, I stand thy debtor.
Which I will pay thee with so true a mind,
(Casting up all these deep accounts of mine)
That both our souls, and all the world shall find
All recknings cleared, betwixt my love and thine.
But to the end I may prevent proud Caesar,
Who does so eagerly my life importune,
I must prevail me of this little leisure,
Seeming to suit my mind unto my fortune;
Thereby with more conuenience to provide
For what my death and honor best shall fit:
An yielding base content must wary hide
My last dissigne till I accomplish it,
That hereby yet the world shall see that I,
Although unwise to live, had wit to die.

Exit CHORUS. BEhold what furies still
Torment their tortured breast,
Who by their doing ill,
Have wrought the worlds unrest.
Which when being most distressed,
Yet more to vex their sprite,
The hidious face of sin.
(In forms they must detest)
Stands ever in their sight.
Their conscience still within
The Eternal larum is
That euer-barking dog that calls upon their miss.
No means at all to hide
Man from himself can find:
No way to start aside
Out from the hell of mind.
But in himself confined,
He still sees sin before:
And winged-footed pain,
That swiftly comes behind,
The which is euer-more,
The sure and certain gain
Impiety does get,
And wanton loose respect, that does it self forget.
And Cleopatra now,
Well sees the dangerous way
She took, and cared not^ how,
Which led her to decay.
And likewise makes us pay
For her disordred lust,
The interest of our blood:
Or live a servile pray,
Under a hand unjust,
As others shall think good.
This has her riot woone
And thus she has her state her self and us undone.
Now every mouth can tell,
What close was muttered:
How that she did not well,
To take the course she did.
For now is nothing hid,
Of what fear did restrain,
No secret closely done,
But now is uttered.
The text is made most plain
That flattery glos'd upon,
The bed of sin revealed,
And all the luxury that shame would have concealed.
The scene is broken down,
And all vncou'red lies,
The purple actors known
Scarce men, whom men despise.
The complots of the wise,
Prove imperfections smoke:
And all what wonder gave
To pleasure-gazing eyes,
Lies scattred, dashed, all broke.
Thus much beguiled have
Poor inconsiderate wights,
These momentarie pleasures^ fugitive delights.

ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Caesar. Proculeius. KIngdoms I see we win, we conquer Climates,
Yet cannot vanquish hearts, nor force obedience,
Affections kept in close-concealed limits.
Stand far without the reach of sword or violence,
Who forced do pay us duty, pay not love:
Free is the heart, the temple of the mind,
The Sanctuary sacred from above,
Where nature keeps the keys that loose and bind.
No mortal hand force open can that door,
So close shut up, and locked to all mankind:
I see men's bodies only ours, no more,
The rest, another right, that rules the mind.
Behold, my forces vanquished have this Land,
Subdued that strong Competitor of mine:
All Egypt yields to my all-conqu'ring hand,
And all their treasure and themselves resign,
Only this Queen, that has lost all this all.
To whom is nothing left except a mind:
Cannot into a thought of yielding fall,
To be disposed as Chance has her assigned.
But Proculei, what hope does she now give,
Will she be brought to condescend to live?

Proc. My Lord, what time being sent from you to try
To win her forth al^^e (if that I might)
From out the Monument, where wo^ully
She lives enclosed in most afflicted plight:
No way I found, no means how to surprise her,
But through a gra^e at th'entry of the place
Standing to treat, I labored to advise her,
To come to Caesar, and to sue for grace.
She said she craved not life, but leave to die,
Yet for her children, prayed they might inherit,
That Caesar would vouchsafe (in clemency)
To pity them, though she deserved no merit.
So leaving her for then; and since of late,
With Gallus sent to try an other time,
The whilst he entertaines her at the grate,
I found the means up to the Tomb to clime.
Where, in descending in the closest wise,
And silent manner as I could contriue:
Her woman me descri'd, and out she cries,
Poor Cleopatra, thou art taken alive.
With that the Queen ^aught from her side her knife,
And even in act to stab her martred breast,
I stepped with speed, and held, and saved her life,
And forth her trembling hand the blade did wrest.
Ah Cleopatra, why should thou, (said I)
Both injury thy self and Caesar so?
Bar him the honor of his victory,
Who ever deals most mildly with his foe?
Live, and rely on him, whose mercy will
To thy submission always ready be.
With that (as all amazed) she held her still,
Twixt majesty confuz'd and misery.
Her proud grieved eyes, held sorrow and disdain,
State and distress warring within her soul:
Dying ambition disposlest her reign,
So base affliction seemed to control.
Like as a burning Lamp, whose liquor spent
With intermitted flames, when dead you deem it,
Sends forth a dying slash, as discontent,
That so the matter fails that should redeem it:
So she (in spite) to see her low-brought state,
When all her hopes were now consumed to naught)
Scorns yet to make an abject league with Fate,
Or once descend into a servile thought.
The Imperious tongue unused to beseech,
Authority confounds with prayers so
That words of power conioyn'd with humble speech,
Showed she would live, yet scorned to pray her foe.
Ah, what has Caesar here to do, said she,
In confines of the dead in darkness lying?
Will he not grant our sepulchers be free,
But violate the privilege of dying?
What, must he stretch forth his ambitious hand
Into the right of Death, and force us here?
Has Misery no covert where to stand
Free from the storm of Pride, is it safe no where?
Cannot my land, my gold, my crown suffice,
And all what I held dear, to him made common,
But that he must in this sort tyrannize,
The Afflicted body of an woeful woman?
Tell him, my frailetie, and the gods have given
Sufficient glory, could he be content:
And let him now with his desires make even,
And leave me to this horror, to lament.
Now he has taken all away from me,
What must he take me from my self by force?
Ah, let him yet (in mercy) leave me free
The kingdom of this poor distressed corse.
No other crownel seek, no other good.
Yet wish that Caesar would vouchsafe this grace,
To favor the poor offspring of my blood.
Confused issue, yet of Roman race.
If blood and name be linckes of love in Princes,
Not spurs of hate; my poor Caesario may
Find favor notwithstanding mine offenses,
And Caesar's blood, may Caesar's raging stay.
But if that with the torrent of my fall,
All must be rapt with furious violence,
And no respect, nor no regard at all,
Can aught with nature or with blood dispense:
Then be it so, if needs it must be so.
There stays and shrinckes in horror of her state:
When I began to mittigate her woe,
And thy great mercies unto her relate;
Wishing her not despair, but rather come
And sue for grace^ and shake off idle fears:
No doubt she should obtain as gentle doom
As she desired, both for her self and hers.
And so with much ado, (well pacifide
Seeming to be) she showed content to live,
Saying she was resolved thy doom to abide,
And to accept what favor thou would give,
And here withal craved also that she might
Perform her last^^tes to her lost beloved.
To sacrifice to him that wrought her plight:
And that she might not be by force removed.
I granting from thy part this her request,
L^^^ her for then, seeming in better rest.

Caes. But do thou think she will remain so still?

Pro. I think, and do assure my self she will.

Caes. Ah, private men sound not the hearts of Princes,
Whose purposes bear contrary pretenses.

Pro. Why it is her safety to come yield to thee.

Caes. But it is more honor for her to die free.

Pro. She may thereby procure her childrens good.

Caes. Princes are not allied unto their blood.

Pro. Can Princes power dispense with nature than?

Caes. To be a Prince, is more then be a man.

Pro. There Is none but have in time persuaded been,

Caes, And so might she too, were she not a Queen.

Pro. Diverse respects will force her be reclaimed.

Caes. Princes (like Lions) never will be ^am'd
A private man may yield and care not how,
But greater hearts will break before they bow.
And sure I think sh'will never condescend,
To live to grace our spoils with her disgrace:
But yet let still a wary troop attend,
To guard her person, and to watch the place.
And look that none with her come to confer:
Shortly my self will go to visit her.

CHORUS. OPINION, how do thou molest
Th'affected mind of restless man?
Who following thee never can,
Nor ever shall attain to rest,
For getting what thou say is best,
Yet lo, that best he finds far wide
Of what thou promisedst before:
For in the same he looked for more,
Which proves but small when once it is tried
Then something else thou find'st beside.
To draw him still from thought to thought,
When in the end all proves but naught.
Farther from rest he finds him than,
Then at the first when he began.
O malecontent seducing guest,
Contriuer of our greatest woes:
Which borne of wind, and fed with shows.
Do nurse thy self in thine unrest.
Judging vngotten things the best,
Or what thou in conceit desig'nst,
And all things in the world do deem,
Not as they are, but as they seem:
Which shows, their state thou ill design'st,
And live to come, in present pin'st.
For what thou have, thou still do lack:
O minds tormentor, bodies wrack,
Vain promiser of that sweet rest,
Which never any yet possessed.
If we unto ambition tend,
Then do thou draw our weakness on,
With vain imagination
Of that which never has an end.
Or if that lust we apprehend,
How does that pleasant plague infest?
O what strange forms of luxury,
Thou strait do cast t'intice us by?
And tell us that is ever best,
Which we have never yet possessed.
And that more pleasure rests beside,
In something that we have not tried.
And when the sanse likewise is had,
Then all is one, and all is bad.
This Antony can say is true,
And Cleopatra knows it is so,
By the experience of their woe.
She can say, she never knew
But that lust found pleasures new,
And was never satisfide:
He can say by proof of toil,
Ambition is a Vulture vile,
That feeds upon the heart of pride:
And finds no rest when all is tried.
For worlds cannot confine the one,
The Other, lists and bounds has none.
And both subvert the mind, the state,
Procure destruction, envy, hate.
And now when all this is proved vain,
Yet Opinion leaves not here,
But sticks to Cleopatra near,
Persuading now, how she shall gain
Honor by death^ and fame attain.
And what a shame it were to live,
Her kingdom lost, her Lover dead:
And so with this persuasion led,
Despair does such a courage give,
That naught else can her mind relieve,
Nor yet divert her from that thought:
To this conclusion all is brought:
This is that rest this vain world lends,
To end in death that all things ends.

ACTVS TERTIVS.
Philostratus. Arius. HOw deeply Arius am I bound to thee,
That sau'dst from death this wretched life of mine:
Obtaining Caesar's gentle grace for me,
When I of all helps else dispaird but thine?
Although I see in such a woeful state.
Life is not that which should be much desired
Since all our glories come to end their date,
Our Countries honor and our own expired
Now that the hand of wrath has ouer-gone us.
We live but as i^ the arms of our dead mother,
With blood under our feet, ruin upon us,
And in a Land most wretched of all other,
When yet we reckon life our dearest good.
And so we live, we care not how we live:
So deep we feel impressed in our blood,
That touch which Nature with our breath did give.
And yet what blasts of words has Learning found,
To blow against the fear of death and dying?
What comforts vnsicke eloquence can sound,
And yet all fails us in the point of trying.
For whilst we reason with the breath of safety,
Without the compass of destruction living,
What precepts show we then what courage lofty
In taxing others fears in council giving?
When all this air of sweet-contriued words
Proves but weak armor to defend the heart.
For when this life, pale Fear and Terror boords,
Where are our precepts then, where is our art?
O who is he that from himself can turn,
That bears about the body of a man?
Who does not toil and labor to adiorne
The day of death, by any means he can?
All this I speak to the end my self t'excuse,
For my base begging of a servile breath,
Wherein I grant my self much to abuse,
So shamefully to seek t'auoide my death.

Arius. Philostratus, that self some care to live,
Possesses all alike, and grieve not then,
Nature does us no more then others give:
Though we speak more then men, we are but men.
And yet (in truth) these miseries to see,
Wherein we stand in most extreme distress:
Might to our selves sufficient motives be
To loath this life, and weigh our death the less:
For never any age has better taught,
What feeble footing pride and greatness has.
How' improuident prosperity is caught.
And clean confounded in the day of wrath.
See how dismayed Confusion keeps those streets.
That naught but mirth and music late resounded,
How nothing with our eic but horror meets,
Our state, our wealth, our pride and all confounded.
Yet what weak sight did not discern from far
This black-arising tempest, all confounding?
Who did not see we should be what we are,
When pride and riot grew to such abounding.
When dissolute impiety possessed
Th'vnrespectiue minds of prince and people:
When insolent Security found rest
In wanton thoughts, which lust and ease made feeble.
Then when unwary Peace with fat-fed pleasure:
New-fresh muented ryots still detected.
Purchac'd with all the Ptolomies rich treasure,
Our laws, our gods, our mysteryes neglected.
Who saw not how this confluence of vice,
This inundation of disorders, must
At length of force pay back the bloody price
Of sad destruction, (a reward for lust)
O thou and I have heard, and read, and known
Of like proud states, as woefully incombred.
And framed by them, examples for our own:
Which now among examples must be numbered.
For this decre a law from high is given,
An ancient Canon, of eternal date,
In Consistory of the stars of heaven,
Entered the Book of vnauoyded Fate:
That no state can in heigh of happiness.
In the'exaltation of their glory stand:
But thither once arrived declining less,
Ruin themselves, or fall by others hand.
Thus does the euer-changing course of things
Run a perpetual cirkle, ever turning:
And that same day that hiest glory brings,
Brings us unto the point of back-returning:
For senseless sensualty, does ever
Accompany felicity and greatness.
A fatal witch, whose charms do leave us never
Till we leave all in sorrow for our sweetness;
When yet our selves must be the cause we fall,
Although the same be first decreed on hie:
Our errors still must bear the blame of all,
This must it be: earth, ask not heaven why.
Yet mighty men with wary jealous hand,
Strive to cut off all obstacles of fear:
All whatsoever seems but to withstand
Their least conceit of quiet held so ^eere:
And so entrench themselves with blood with crimes,
With all injustice as their fears dispose:
Yet for all this we see, how oftentimes
The means they work to keep are means to lose,
And sure I cannot see, how this can stand
With great Augustus glory and his honor,
T'extinguish the succession of our land,
For her offense that pulld the wars upon her,

Phi. Must all her issue be confounded now?

Ari. Yea all that from the roots of kings did grow,

Phi. And sweet Caesario sprung of Caesar's blood?

Ari. Plurality of Caesar's are not good.

Phi. Alas, what hurt procures his feeble arm?

Ari. Not for it does, but that it may do harm.

Phi. Then when it offers hurt, repress the same.

Ari. It Is best to quench a spark before it flame.

Phi. It Is inhumane, an innocent to kill.

Ari. Such innocents seldom remain so still.
And sure his death may best procure our peace,
Competitors the subject dearly buies:
And so that our affliction may surcease,
Let great men be the peoples sacrifice.
But see where Caesar comes himself to try
And work the mind of our distressed Queen
With some deluding hope: whereby
She might be drawn to have her fortune seen.
But yet I trust, Rome will not see that face
(That queld her champions) blush in base disgrace,

SCENA SECVNDA.
Caesar, Cleopatra, Selucus, Dolabella. Caesar. What Cleopatra, do thou
doubt so much
Of Caesar's mercy, that thou hid'st thy face?
Or do thou think, thy offenses can be such,
That they surmount the measure of our grace?

Cle. O Caesar, not for that I fly thy sight
My soul this sad retire of sorrow chose:
But that m'oppressed thoughts abhorring light
Like best in darkness, my disgrace ^'inclose.
And here to these close limits of despair,
This solitary horror where I bide:
Caesar, I thought no Roman should repair,
More after him, who here oppressed did.
Yet now, here at thy conquering feet I lie,
Poor captive soul, that never thought to bow:
Whose happy foot of rule and Majesty
Stood late on that same ground thou stand now.

Caes. Rise Queen, none but thy self is cause of all,
And yet, would all were but thine own alone:
That others ruin had not with thy fall
Brought Rome her sorrows, to my triumphs moan.
For breaking off the league of love and blood,
Thou make my winning joy again unpleasing:
Since the eye of griefs look not into our good,
But thor'w the horror of our own blood shedding.
And all, we must attribute unto thee.

Cle. To me? Caesar, what should a woman do
Oppressed with greatness? what was it for me
To contradict my Lord, being bent thereto?
I was by love, by fear by weakness, made
An instrument to such disseignes as these.
For when the Lord of all the Orient bade,
Who but obeyed? who was not glad to please?
And how could I withdraw my succouring hand
From him that had my heart, and what was mine?
The interest of my faith in streightest band,
My love to his most firmly did combine.

Caes. Love? ah no no, it was th'innated hatred
That thou and thine have ever borne our people:
That made thee seek all means to have us scattred,
To disunite our strength, and make us feeble.
And therefore did that breast nurse our dissension,
With hope t'exalt thy self, t'augment thy state:
To pray upon the wrack of our contention,
And (with the rest our foes,) to joy thereat.

Cleo: O Caesar, see how easy it is t'accuse
Whom Fortune has made faulty by their fall,
The wretched conquered may not resuse
The titles of reproach he is charged withal.
The conquering cause has right, wherein thou art,
The vanquished still is iudgde the worser part.
Which part is mine, because I lost my part.
No lesser then the portion of a Crown.
Enough for me, alas was needed art
To gain by others, but to keep mine own?
But here let weaker powers note what it is,
To neighbor great Compe^itors too near,
If we take part, we often do perish thus,
If neutrall bide, both parties we must fear.
Alas, what shall the forced partakers do,
When following none, yet must they perish too?
But Caesar, since thy right and cause is such,
Be not a heavy weight upon calamity:
Depresse not the afflicted overmuch,
The chie^est glory is the Victors lenity.
The Inheritance of mercy from him take,
Of whom thou have thy fortune^ and thy name:
Great Caesar me a Queen at first did make,
And let not Caesar now confound the same,
Read here these lines which still I keep with me,
The witness of his love and favors ever:
And God forbid this should be said of thee,
That Caesar wronged the favored of Caesar.
For look what I have been to Antony
Think thou the same I might have been to thee.
And here I do present thee with the note
Of all the treasure, all the jewels rate
That Egypt has in many ages got;
And look what Cleopatra has, is there.

Seleu. Nay there is not all set down within that roll,
I know some things she has reserved apart.

Cle. What vile ungrateful wretch, dare tho^ co^troule
Thy Queen and sovereign, cai^i^e as thou art.

Caes. Hold, hold; a poor revenge ca^ work so feeble hands

Cle. Ah Caesar, what a great indignity
Is this, that here my vassal subject stands
TO accuse me to my Lord of trecher^e?
If I reserved some certain women's toys,
Alas it was not for my self (God knows,)
Poor miserable soul, that little joys
In trifling ornaments in outward shows.
But what I kept, I kept to make my way
Unto thy Liuia and Octauius grace,
That thereby in compassion moved, they
Might mediate thy favor in my case.

Caes. Well Cleopatra, fear not, thou shall find
What favor thou desir'st, or can expect:
For Caesar never yet was found but kind
To such as yield, and can themselves subject.
And therefore give thou comfort to thy mind,
Relieve thy soul thus ouer-charg'd with care,
How well I will entreat thee thou shall find,
So soon as some affairs dispatched are.
Till when farewell. Cl. Thanks thrice renowned Caesar,
Poor Cleopatra rests thine own for ^uer.

Dol. No marvel Caesar though our greatest spirits,
Have to the power of such act arming beauty
Been brought to yield the honor of their merits:
Forgetting all respect of other duty.
Then whilst the glory of her youth remained
The wondering object to each wanton eye':
Before her full of sweet (with sorrow wain'd,)
Came to the period of this misery.
If still, even in the midst of death and horror
Such beauty shines, through clouds of age and sorrow,
If even those sweet decaies seem to plead for her,
Which from affliction moving graces borrow:
If in calamity she could thus move,
What could she do adorned with youth and love?
What could she do then, when as spreading wide
The pomp of beauty, in her glory dight?
When armed with wonder, she could use beside,
Th'ingines of her love, Hope and Delight?
Daughter of Marvel beauty O see how
Thou can disgracing sorrows sweetly grace.
What power thou show'st in a distressed brow,
That make affliction fair, give tears their grace.
What can vntressed locks, can torn rent hair,
A weeping eye, a waiilng face be fair?
I see then, artlesse feature can content,
And that true beauty needs no ornament,

Caes. What in passion a Dolabella? what take heed:
Let others fresh examples be thy warning:
What mischiefs these, so idle humors breed,
Whilst error keeps us from a true discerning.
Indeed I saw she labored to impart
Her sweetest graces in her saddest cheer:
Presuming on the face that knew the art
To move with what aspect so eu'r it were.
But all in vain, she takes her aim amiss.
The ground and mark her leuel much deceiues:
Time now has altered all, for neither is
She as she was, nor we as she conceiues.
And therefore now leave he^ unto her sadness
Folly in youth is sin, in age, it is madness.
And for my part, I seek but ^'entertaine
In her some feeding hope to draw her forth,
The greatest Trophey that my travail ^ gain,
^^to bring home a prizall of such worth.
A^^ now, since that she seems so well content.
To be disposed by us, without more stay
She with her children shall to Rome be fent,
Whilst I by Syria thither take my way.

CHORUS. O Fearful frowning Nemesis,
Daughter of Justice, most severe,
That art the worlds great arbitresse,
And Queen of causes reigning here:
Whose swift-sure hand is ever near
Eternal justice, righting wrong:
Who never yet deferrest long
The prowds decay, the weaks redress:
But through thy power every where,
Do raze the great, and raise the less.
The less made great do ruin too,
To show the earth what heaven can do.
Thou from darke-clos'd eternity,
From thy black cloudy hidden seat,
The worlds disorders do desery:
Which when they swell so prowdly great,
Reuersing the order nature set,
Thou give thy all confounding doom,
Which none can know before it come.
Th'ineuitable destiny,
Which neither wit nor strength can let,
Fast chained unto necessity,
In mortal things does order so,
Th'alternate course of weal or woe.
O how the powers of heaven do play
With travailed mortality:
And does their weakness still betray,
In their best prosperity?
When being lifted up so hie,
They look beyond themselves so far,
That to themselves they take no care;
Whilst swift confusion down does lay,
Their late proud mounting vanity:
Bringing their glory to decay,
And with the ruin of their fall,
Extinguish people, state and all.
But is it Justice that all we
The innocent poor multitude,
For great men's faults should punished be,
And to destruction thus pursude?
O why should th'heauens us include,
Within the compass of their fall,
Who of themselves procured all?
Or do the gods in close decree,
Occasion take how to extrude
Man from the earth with cruelty?
Ah no, the gods are ever just,
Our faults excuse their rigor must.
This is the period Fate set down,
To Egypts fat prosperity:
Which now unto her greatest grown,
Must perish thus, by course must die,
And some must be the causers why
This revolution must be wrought:
As borne to bring their state to naught:
To change the people and the crown,
And purge the worlds iniquity:
Which vice so far has over grown.
As we, so they that treat us thus,
Must one day perish like to us.

ACTVS QVARTVS.
Seleucus. Rodon. Sell. FRiend Rodon never in a better bower,
Could I have met thee then even now I do,
Having affliction in the greatest power
Upon my soul, and none to tell it too.
For it is some ease our sorrows to reveal,
If they to whom we shall impart our woes
Seem but to feel a part of what we feel:
And meet us with a sigh but at a cloze.

Rod. And never (friend Seleuchus) found'st thou one
That better could bear such a part with thee:
Who by his own, knows others cares to moan,
And can, in like accord of grief, agree.
And therefore tell th'oppression of thy heart,
Tell to an ear prepared and tuned to care:
And I will likewise unto thee impart
As sad a tale as what thou shall declare.
So shall we both our mournful plaints combine,
I Will wail thy state, and thou shall pity mine.

Cel. Well then, thou know how I have lived in grace
With Cleopatra, and esteemed in Court
As one of Council, and of chiefest place,
And ever held my credit in that sort.
Till now in this confusion of our state,
When thinking to have used a mean to climb,
And fled the wretched, flowne unto the great,
(Following the fortune of the present time,)
Am come to be cast down and ruined clean;
And in the course of mine own plot undone.
For having all the secrets of the Queen
Reueald to Caesar, to have favor won.
My treachery is quited with disgrace,
My falsehood loathed, and not without great reason.
Though good for him, yet Princes in this case
Do hate the Traitor, though they love the treason.
For how could he imagine I would be
Faithful to him, being false unto mine own?
And false to such a bounteous Queen as she.
That had me raised and made mine honor known.
He saw it was not for zeal to him I bare,
But for base fear, or mine own state to settle.
Weakness is false, and faith in Cowards rare,
Fear finds out shifts, timiditie is subtle.
And therefore scorned of him, scorned of mine own.
Hateful to all that look into my state:
Despised Seleucus now is only grown
The mark of infamy, that is pointed at.

Rod. It Is much thou say, and O too much to feel,
And I do grieve and do lament thy fall:
But yet all this which thou do here reveal,
Compared with mine, will make thine seem but small.
Although my fault be in the selfsame kind,
Yet in degree far greater, far more hateful;
Mine sprung of mischief, thine from feeble mind,
I staind with blood, thou only but ungrateful.
For unto me did Cleopatra giu^^
The best and dearest treasure of her blood,
Lovely Caesario, whom she would have live
Free from the dangers wherein Egypt stood.
And unto me with him this charge she gave,
Here Rodon, take, convey from out this coast,
This precious Gem, the chiefest that I have,
The jewel of any soul I value most.
Guide him to India, lead him far from hence,
Safeguard him where secure he may remain,
Till better fortune call him back from thence,
And Egypts peace be reconciled again.
For this is he that may our hopes bring back;
(The rising Sun of our declining state:)
These be the hands that may restore our wrack,
And raise the broken ruins made of late.
He may give limits to the boundless pride
Of fierce Octauius, and abate his might:
Great Julius of^ spring, he may come to guide
The Empire of the world, ^s his by right.
O how he seems the model of his Sire?
O how I gaze my Caesar in his face?
Such was his gate, so did his looks aspire;
Such was his threatening brow, such was his grace.
High shouldred, and his forehead even as hie.
And O, (if he had not been borne so late.)
He might have ruled the worlds great Monarchy.
And now have been the Champion of our state.
Then unto him, O my dear Son (she says,)
Son of my youth, fly hence, O fly, be gone,
Reserve thy self, ordained for better days,
For much thou have to ground thy hopes upon.
Leave me (thy woeful Mother) to endure
The fury of this tempest here alone,
Who cares not for her self, so thou be sure,
Thou may revenge, when others can but moan:
Rodon will see thee safe, Rodon will guide
Thee and thy ways, thou shall not need to fear.
Rodon (My faithful servant) will provide
What shall be best for the, take thou no care.
And O good Rodon, look well to his youth,
The ways are long, and dangers every where.
I urge it not that I do doubt thy truth,
Mothers will cast the worst, and always fear.
The absent danger greater still appears,
Less fears he, who is near the thing he fears.
And O, I know nor what presaging thought
My sprite suggests of lucklesse bad event:
But yet it may be it is but Love does doat,
Or idle shadows with my fears present,
But yet the memory of mine own fate
Makes me fear his. And yet why should I fear
His fortune may recover better state,
And he may come in pomp to govern here.
But yet I doubt the Genius of our race
By some malignant spirit comes overthrown:
Our blood must be extinct, in my disgrace,
Egypt must have no more Kings of their own,
Then let him stay, and let us fall together,
Since it is fore-decreed that we must all?
Yet who knows what may come? let him go thither.
What Merchaunt i^ one vessel ventures all?
Let us d^uide our stars. Go, go my son,
Let not the fate of Egypt find thee here:
Try if so be thy destiny can shun
The common wrack of us by being there.
But who is he found^ ever yet defense
Against the heavens, or hid him any where?
Then what need I to send thee so far hence
To seek thy death that may as well die here?
And here die with thy mother, die in rest,
Not traveling to what will come to thee.
Why should we leave our blood unto the East,
When Egypt may a Tomb sufficient be?
O my divided soul, what shall I do?
Whereon shall now my resolution rest?
What were I best resolve to yield unto,
When both are bad, how shall I know the best?
Stay, I may hap so work with Caesar now,
That he may yield him to restore thy right.
Go: Caesar never will consent that thou
So near in blood, shall be so great in might.
Then take him Rodon, go my son, farewell.
But stay there is something else that I would say:
Yet nothing now, but O god speed thee well,
Lest saving more, that more may make thee stay.
Yet let me speak: It may be it is the last,
That ever I shall speak to thee my son,
Do Mothers use to part in such post have?
What, must I end when I have scarce begun?
Ah no (dear heart) it is no such slender twine
Where with the knot is tide twixt thee and me,
That blood within thy veins came out of mine,
Parting from thee I part from part of me:
And therefore I must speak. Yet what? O son.
Here more she would, when more she could not say,
Sorrow rebounding back whence it begun,
Filld up the passage, and quite stopped the way:
When sweet Caesario with a princely spirit,
(Though comfortless himself) did comfort give,
With mildest words persuading her to bear it.
And as for him, she should not need to grieve.
And I (with protesta^ions of my part.)
Swore by that faith, (which sworn I did deceive)
That I would use all care, all wit and art
To see him safe; And so we took our leave.
Scarce had we trauail'd to our iurnie^ end,
When Caesar having knowledge of our way,
His Agents after us with speed does send
To labor me Caesario to betray.
Who with rewards and promises so large,
Assailed me then, that I grew soon content
And back to Rhodes did reconuay my charge,
Pretending that Octauius for him sent,
To make him King of Egypt presently.
And thither come, seeing himself betrayed.
And in the hands of death through treachery,
Wayling his state, thus to himself he said.
Lo here brought back by subtle train to death
Betraide by Tutors faith, or traitors rather
My fault my blood, and mine offense my birth,
For being son of such a mighty Father.
From India, (whither sent by mothers care,
To be reserved from Egipts common wrack,)
To Rhodes, (so long the arms of tyrants are,)
I am by Caesar's subtle reach brought back:
Here to be made th'oblation for his fears,
Who doubts the poor revenge these hands may do him
Respecting neither blood, nor youth, nor years,
Or how small safety can my death be to him.
And is this all the good of being borne great?
Then wretched greatness proud rich misery,
Pompous distress, glittering calamity.
Is it for this the ambitious Fathers sweat,
To purchase blood and death for them and theirs?
I^ this the issue that their glories get,
So leave a sure dest^uction to their heirs?
O how much better had it been for me,
From low descent, derived of humble birth,
To Have eat the sweet sour bread of poverty,
And drunk of Nylus streams in Nilus earth.
Under the cou'ring of some quiet Cottage,
Free from the wrath of heaven, secure in mind,
Untouched when sad events of princes dottage
Confounds what ever mighty it does find.
Out of the way of greatness, whose condition
Is to have all made clear, and all thing plain
Between them and the mark of their ambition,
That nothing let, the full sight of their reign
Where nothing stands, that stands not in submission;
Where greatness must all in it self contain.
Kings will be alone, Competitors must down,
Near death he stands, that stands to near a Crown.
Such is my case, for Caesar will have all.
My blood must feale the assurance of his state:
Yet ah weak state that blood assure him shall,
Whose wrong full shedding, gods and men do hate.
Injustice never scapes unpunished still,
Though men revenge not, yet the heavens will.
And thou Augustus that with bloody hand,
Cut'st off succession from another race,
May find the heavens thy vows so to withstand,
That others may deprive thine in like case
When thou may see thy proud contentious bed
Yielding thee none of thine that may inherit:
Subvert thy blood, place others in their sted,
To pay this thy injustice her due merit.
If it be true (as who can that deny
Which sacred Priests of Memphis do fore-say)
Some of the offspring yet of Antony.
Shall all the rule of this whole Empire sway;
And then Augustus, what is it thou gainest
By poor Antillus blood, or this of mine?
Nothing but this thy victory thou, stainest,
And pull'st the wrath of heaven on thee and thine.
In vain does man contend against the starr's,
For that he seeks to make, his wisdom marr's.
Yet in the mean-time we whom Fates reserve,
The bloody sacrifices of ambition
We feel the smart what ever they deserve,
And we endure the present times condition.
The justice of the heavens renenging thus,
Does only satisfy it self, not us.
Yet it is a pleasing comfort that does ease
Affliction in so great extremity.
To think their dike destruction shall appease
Our ghosts, who did procure our misery.
But dead we are, uncertain what shall be,
And living, we are sure to feel the wrong:
Our certain ruin we our selves do see.
They joy the while, and we know not how long.
But yet Caesarie, thou must die content,
For men will moan, and God revenge the innocent.
Thus he complained, and thus thou hea'rst my shame,

S^l. But how has Caesar now rewarded thee?

Rod. As he has thee. And I expect the same,
As fell to Theodor to fall to me:
For he (one of my coat) having betrayed
The young Antillus son of Anthony,
And at his death from off his neck conuaid
A jewel: which being ask^, he did deny:
Caesar occasion took to hang him strait.
Such instruments with Princes live not long.
Although they need such actors of deceit,
Yet still our sight seems to vpbraid their wrong;
And therefore we must needs this danger run,
And in the net of our own guile be caught:
We must not live to brag what we have done.
For what is done, must not appear their fault.
But here comes Cleopatrae, Woeful Queen,
And our shame will not that we should be seen.
Exeunt.
Cleopatra. WHat has my face yet power to win a Lover?
Can this torn remnant serve to grace me so,
That it can Caesar's secret plots discover
What he intends with me and mine to do?
Why then poor Beauty thou have done thy last,
And best good service thou could do unto me.
For now the time of death revealed thou have,
Which in my life did serve but to undo me.
Here Dolabella far forsooth in love,
Writes, how that Caesar means forthwith, to send
Both me and mine, the air of Rome to prove:
There his Triumphant Chariot to attend.
I thank the man, both for his love and letter;
The one comes fit to warn me thus before,
But for the other, I must die his debtor,
For Cleopatra now can love no more.
But having leave, I must go take my leave
And last farewell of my dead Anthony:
Whose deerly honored tomb must here receive
This sacrifice, the last before I die
O sacred euer-memorable stone,
That have without my tears, within my flame,
Receive th'oblation of the wofull'st moan
That ever yet from sad affliction came.
And you dear relics of my Lord and Love,
(The sweetest parcels of the faithfull'st liver,)
O let no impious hand dare to remove
You out from hence, but rest you here for ever.
Let Egypt now give peace unto you dead,
That living gave you trouble and turmoile:
Sleep quiet in this euer-lasting bed,
In foreign land preferred before your soil,
And O, if that the spirits of men remain
After their bodies; and do never die,
Then hear thy ghost, thy captive spouse complain,
And be attentive to her misery.
But if that laboursome mortallitie
Found this sweet error, only to confine
The curious search of idle vanity,
That would the deapth of darkness undermine:
Or rather to give rest unto the thought
Of wretched man, with th'after-comming joy
Of those conceived fields whereon we dote,
To pacify the present worlds annoy:
Then do I speak but only to the air:
But it is not so, my Anthony does hear:
His everliving ghost attends my prayer,
And I do know his houering sprite is near.
And I will speak, and pray, and mourn to thee,
O pure immortal love that daign'st to hear:
I feel thou answer'st my credulity
With touch of comfort, finding none elsewhere.
Thou know these hands entombed thee here of late,
Free and vnforc'd, which now must servile be,
Reserved for bands to grace proud Caesar's state,
Who seeks in me to triumph over thee.
O if in life we could not seuerd be,
Shall death divide our bodies now a sunder?
Must thine in Egypt, mine in Italy,
Be kept the Monuments of Fortunes wonder?
If any powers be there whereas thou art,
(Since our own cuntry gods betray our case,)
O work they may their gracious help impart,
To save thy woeful wife from such disgrace.
Do not permit she shoutd in triumph show
The blush of her reproach, joined with thy shame
But (rather) let that hate full tyrant know,
That thou and I had power t'auoyde the same.
But what do I spend breath and idle wind.
In vain inuoking a conceived aid?
Why do I not my self occasion find
To break the bounds wherein my self am staide?
Words are for them that can complain and live,
Whose melting hearts composd of baser frame,
Can to their sorrows, time and leisure give,
But Cleopatra may not do the same.
No Antony, thy love requires more:
A lingering death, with thee deserves no merit,
I must my self force open wide a door
To let out life, and so vnhouse my spirit.
These hands must break the prison of my soul
To come to thee, there to enjoy like state,
As does the long-pent solitary Foul.
That has escapt her cage, and found her mate,
This sacrifice to sacrifize my life,
Is that true incense that does best beseem:
These rites may serve a life-desiring wife,
Who doing them, to have done enough does deem.
My-hart-bloud should the purple flowers have been,
Which here upon thy Tomb to thee are offered.
No smoke but dying breath should here bin seen,
And this it had bin too, had I bin suffered.
But what have I save these bare silly hands?
And these weak fingers are not iron-poynted:
They cannot pierce with them which stands
And I of all means else am disapointed.
But yet I must some way endeavor how
To come unto thee, whatsoere I do.
O Death, art thou sohard to come by now,
That we must pray, iutreate, and seek thee too?
But I will find thee wheresoere thou lie.
For who can stay a mind resolved to die?
And now I go to work the effect indeed,
I Will never send more words or sights to thee:
I Will bring my soul my self, and that with speed,
My self will bring my soul to Antony.
Come go my maids, my fortunes sole attenders,
That minister to misery and sorrow:
Your Mistress you unto your freedom renders.
And Will discharge your charge yet ere to morrow.
And now by this, I think the man I sent,
Is near retourn'd that brings me my dispatch.
God grant his cunning sort to good event,
And that his skill may well beguile my watch:
So shall I shun disgrace, leave to be sorry,
Fly to my love, escape my foe, free my soul;
So shall I act the last of life with glory,
Die like a Queen, and rest without control.
Exit.
CHORUS. MIsterious Egypt, wonder breeder,
Strict Religions strange obseruer,
State-ordrer zeal, the best rule-keeper,
Fostring still in temperate feruor:
O how came thou to lose so wholly
all religion, law and order?
And thus become the most unholy
of all Lands, that Nylus border?
How could confused Disorder enter
where stern Law sat so severely?
How durst weak lust and riot venture
the eye of Justice looking nearly?
Could not those means that made thee great
Be still the means to keep thy state?
Ah no, the course of things requires
change and alteration ever:
That stayed continuance man desires,
th'vnconstant world yields never.
We in our counsels must be blinded,
And not see what does import us:
And often times the thing least minded
is the thing that most must hurt us.
Yet they that have the stern in guiding,
it is their fault that should prevent it,
Who when they see their Country sliding,
for their private are contented.
We imiiate the greater powers,
The Princes manners fashion ours.
The Example of their light regarding,
vulgar looseness much incenses:
Vice uncontrould, grows wide enlarging,
Kings small faults be great offenses.
And this has set the window open
unto license, lust, and riot:
This way confusion first found broken,
whereby entered our disquiet,
Those laws that old Sesostris founded,
and the Ptolomies observed,
Hereby first came to be confounded,
which our state so long preserved.
The wanton luxury of Court.
Did form the people of like sort.
For all (respecting private pleasure,)
universally consenting
To abuse their time their treasure,
in their own delights contenting:
And future dangers naught respecting,
whereby, (O how easy matter
Made this so general neglesting,
confused weakness to discatter?)
Caesar found the effect true tried,
in his easy entrance making:
Who at the sight of arms, deseryed
all our people, all forsaking.
For riot (worse then war,) so sore
Had wasted all our strength before.
And thus is Egypt servile rendered
to the insolent destroyer:
And all their sumptuous treasure tendered,
all her wealth that did betray her,
Which poison (O if heaven be rightful,)
may so far infect their senses,
That Egypts pleasures so delightful,
may breed them the like offenses.
And Romans learn our way of weakness,
be instructed in our vices:
That our spoils may spoil your greatness,
overcome with our devises.
Fill full your hands, and carry home
Enough from us to ruin Rome.

ACTVS QVINTVS.
Dolabella. Titius. Dol. COme tell me Titius every circumstance
How Cleopatra did receive my news:
Tell every look, each gesture, countenance,
That she did in my Letters reading use.

Tit. I shall my Lord, so far as I could note,
Or my conceit observe in any wise.
It was the time when as she having got
Leave to her Dearest dead to sacrifice;
And now was issuing out the monument
With odors, incense, garlands in her hand,
When I approacht (as one from Caesar sent,)
And did her close, thy message t'vnderstand.
She turns her back, and with her takes me in,
Reads in thy lines thy strange unlooked for tale:
And reads, and smiles, and stays, and does begin
Again to read, then blushed, and then was pale.
And having ended with a sigh, refoldes
Thy Letter up: and with a fixed eye,
(Which steadfast her imagination holds)
She mused a while, standing confusedly:
At length. Ah friend, says she) tell thy good Lord,
How dear I hold his pitying of my case:
That out of his sweet nature can afford
A miserable woman so much grace.
Tell him how much my heavy soul does grieve;
Merciless Caesar should so deal with me:
Pray him that he would all the counsel give,
That might divert him from such cruelty.
As for my love, say Antony has all,
Say that my heart is gone into the grave
With him, in whom it rests and ever shall:
I have it not my self, not cannot have.
Yet tell him, he shall more command of me
Then any, whosoever living can.
He that so friendly shows himself to be
A right kind Roman, and a Gentleman.
Although his Nation (fatal unto me,)
Have had mine age a spoil, my youth a pray,
Yet his affection must accepted be,
That favors one distressed in her decay.
Ah. he was worthy then to have been loved,
Of Cleopatra whiles her glory lasted;
Before she had declining fortune proved,
Or seen her honor wrackt, her flower thus blasted.
Now there is nothing left her but disgrace,
Nothing but her affliction that can move,
Tell Dolabella, one that is in her case.
(Poor soul) needs rather pity now then love.
But shortly shall thy Lord hear more of me.
And ending so her speech, no longer stayed,
But hasted to the tomb of Antonie,
And this was all she did, and all she said.

Dol. Ah sweet distressed Lady. What hard heart
Could choose but pity thee, and love thee too?
Thy worthiness, the state where in thou art
Requires both, and both I vow to do.
Although ambition lets not Caesar see
The wrong he does thy majesty and sweetness.
Which makes him now exact so much of thee,
To add unto himself to grace his greatness,
He knows thou can no hurt procure us now,
Since all thy strength is seizd into our hands:
Nor seares he that, but rather labors how
He might show Rome so great a Queen in bands:
That our great Ladies (envying thee so much
That stained them all, and held them in such wonder,)
Might joy to see thee, and thy fortune such,
Thereby extolling him that brought thee under,
But I will seek to stay it what I may;
I am but one, yet one that Caesar loves,
And O if now I could do more then pray,
Then should thou know how far affection moves,
But what my power and prayer may prevail,
I Will join them both, to hinder thy disgrace:
And even this present day I will not fail
To do my best with Caesar in this case.

Tit. And sir, even now herself has letters sent.
I met her messenger as I came hither,
With a dispatch as he to Caesar went,
But know not what imports her sending thither.
Yet this he told, how Cleopatra late
Was come from sacrifice. How richly clad
Was served to dinner in most sumptuous state,
With all the brauest ornaments she had.
How having dined, she writes, and sends away
Him strait to Caesar, and commanded than
All should depart the Tomb, and none to stay
But her two maids, and one Poor countriman.

Dol. Why then I know she sends to have audience now,
And means t'experience what her state can do:
To see it majesty will make him bow
To what affliction could not move him too.
And O, if now she could but bring a view
Of that fresh beauty she in youth possessed
(The argument wherewith she overthrew
The wit of Julius Caesar, and the rest,)
Then happily Augustus might relent.
Whilst powrefull Love, (far stronger then ambition)
Might work in him, a mind to be content
To condescend unto her small petition
But being as she is, yet does she merit
To be respected for her having been,
The wonder of her kind, of so rare spirit,
A glorious Lady, and a mighty Queen.
And now, but by a little weakness ^alling
To do that which perhaps sh'was forced to do:
Alas, an error past, is past recalling,
Take away weakness, and take women too.
But now I go^ to be thy advocate,
Sweet Cleopatra, now ^le use mine art.
Thy presence will me greatly animate,
Thy face will teach my tongue, thy love my heart.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Nuntius. AM I ordained the careful Messenger,
And sad newes-bringer of the strangest death,
Which self hand did upon it self infer,
To free a captive soul from servile breath?
Must I the lamentable wonder show,
Which all the world may grieve and marvel at?
The rarest form of death on earth below,
That ever pity, glory, wonder gat.

Cho. What news bringst thou, can Egypt yet yield more,
Of sorrow than it has? what can it add
Unto th'already ouerflowing store
Of sad affliction, matter yet more sad?
Have we not seen our worst calamity?
Is there behind yet something of distress
Unknown? if there be greater misery
Relate it, that we do not wail the less.
Tell us what so it be, and tell at first,
For sorrow ever longs to hear her worst.

Nu. Well then, the strangest thing relate I will,
That ever eye of mortal man has seen.
I (as you know) even from my youth, have still
Attended on the person of the Queen:
And ever in all fortunes good or ill,
With her as one of chiefest trust have been.
And now in these so great extremities,
That ever could to majesty be fall,
I did my best in what I could devise,
And left her not, till now she left us all.

Cho. What is she gone. Has Caesar forced her so?

Nun. Yea, she is gone, and has deceived him too.

Cho. What, fled to India; to go find her son?

Nun. No, not to India, but to find her son.

Cho. Why the^ there is hope she may her state recover

Nun. Her state? nay rather honor, and her Lover.

Cho. Her Lover? him she cannot have again.

Nun. Well, him she has, with him she does remain

Cho. Why the^ she is dead Is It so? why speakst not thou

Nun. You guess aright, and I will tell you how.
When she perceived all hope was clean bereft,
That Caesar meant to send her strait away,
And saw no means of reconcilement left,
Work what she could, she could not work to stay:
She calls me to her, and she thus began.
O thou, whose trust has ever been the same,
And one in all my fortunes, faithful man,
Alone conten^ to attend disgrace and shame.
Thou, whom the fea^efull ruin of my fall,
Never deterred to leave calamity:
As did those others smooth state-pleasers all,
Who followed but my fortune, and not me.
It Is thou must do a service for thy Queen,
Wherein thy faith and skill must do their best:
Thy honest care and d^uy shall be seen,
Performing this, more then in all the rest.
For all what thou have done, may die with thee,
Although it is pity that such faith should die.
But this shall evermore remembered be,
A rare example to posterity.
And look how long as Cleopatra shall
In after ages live in memory.
So long shall thy clear same endure withal,
And therefore thou must not my suit deny
Nor contradict my will. For what I will
I am resolu'd^ and this now must it be:
Go find me out with all thy art and skill
Two Aspicks, and convey them close to me.
I have a work to do with them in hand,
Enquire not what, for thou shall soon see what,
If th'heauens do not my disseigns withstand,
But do thy charge, and let me shift with that.
Being thus coniur'd by her t'whom I had vowed
My true perpetual service, forth I went,
Devising how my close attempt to shrowde,
So that there might no art my art prevent.
And so disguisd in habit as you see,
Having found out the thing for which I went,
I soon returned again, and brought with me
The Aspicks, in a basket closely pent.
Which I had filld with Figs, and leaves upon.
And coming to the guard that kept the door,
What have thou there? said they, and looked thereon.
Seeing the figs, they deemed of nothing more,
But said, they were the fairest they had seen.
Taste some, said I, for they are good and pleasant.
No, no, said they, go bear them to thy Queen,
Thinking me some poor man that brought a present.
Well, in I went, wherebrighter then the Sun,
Glittering in all her pompous rich array,
Great Cleopatra sat, as if sh'had won
Caesar, and all the world beside this day:
Even as she was when on thy cristall streams.
Clear Cydnos she did show what earth could show.
When Asia all ama'zd in wonder deemes
Venus from heaven was come on earth below,
Even as she went at first to meet her Love,
So goes she now at last again to find him.
But that first, did her greatness only prove,
This last her love, that could not live behind him.
Yet as she sat, the doubt of my good speed,
Detracts much from the sweetness of her look:
Cheere-marrer Care, did then such passions breed,
That made her eye bewray the grief she took.
But she no sooner sees me in the place,
But strait her sorrow-clouded brow she cleeres,
Lightning a smile from out a stormy face.
Which all her tempest-beaten senses cheeres.
Look how a strayed perplexed traveler,
When chasd by thieves, and even at point of ^^king,
Descrying suddenly some town not far,
Or some unlooked for aid to him-warde making;
Cheeres up his tired sprites, thrusts forth his strength
To meet that good, that comes in so good hour:
Such was her joy perceiving now at length,
Her honor was t'escape so proud a power.
Forth from her seat she hastes to meet the present,
And as one ouer-ioy'd, she caught it strait.
And with a smiling cheer in action pleasant,
Looking among the figs, finds the deceit.
And seeing there the ugly venomous beast,
Nothing dismayed, she fayes and views it well,
At length the extremest of her passion ceast,
When she began with words her joy to tell.
O rarest beast (says she) that Afric breeds,
How dearly welcome art thou unto me?
The fear creature that fair Nylus feeds
Me thinks I see, in now beholding thee.
What though the euer-erring world does deem
That angered Nature framed thee bu^ in spite?
Little they know what they of light esteem,
That never learned the wonder of thy might.
Better then Death, Deaths office thou dischargest.
That with on^ gentle touch can free our breath:
And in a pleasing sleep our soul inlargest,
Making our selves not privy to our death,
If Nature erred, O then how happy e^^or,
Thinking to make thee worst, she made the best:
Since thou best freest us from our lives worst terror,
In sweetly bringing; souls to quiet rest.
When that inexorable Monster Death
That follows Fortune, flies the poor distressed,
Tortures our bodies ere he takes our breath,
And loads with pains th'already weak oppressed.
How often have I begged praid. entreated him
To take my life, which he would never do,
And when he comes, he coms so ugly grim,
Attended on with hidious torments to.
Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chief
That open can with such a^ easiekey
The door of life, come gentle cunning thief,
That from our selves so steal'st our selves away.
Well did our Priests discern something divine
Shadowed in thee, and therefore first they did
Offerings and worships due to thee assign,
In whom they found such mysteries were hid.
Comparing thy swift motion to the Sun,
That mou'st without the instruments that move:
And never waxing old, but always one,
Do therein a divinity approve.
And therefore too, the rather unto thee
In zeal I make the offering of my blood,
Calamity confirming now in me
A sure belief that piety makes good.
Which happy men neglect, or hold ambiguous,
And only the afflicted are religious.
And here I sacrifice these arms to Death,
That Lust late dedicated to Delights:
Offering up for my last, this last of breath,
The complement of my loves dearest rites,
With that she bares her arm, and offer makes
To touch her death, yet at the touch with draws,
And seeming more to speak, occasion takes,
Willing to die, and willing too to pause.
Look how a mother at her sons departing
For some far voyage bent to get him fame,
Does entertain him with an idle pa^ling
And still does speak, and still speaks but the same;
Now bids farewell, and now recalles him back,
Tells what was told, and bids again farewell,
And yet again recalles; for still does lack
Something that Love would feign and cannot tell.
Pleased he should go, yet cannot let him go.
So she, although she knew there was no way
But this, yet this she could not handle so
But she must show that life desired delay.
Feign would she entertain the time as now.
And now would feign that Death would seize upon her,
Whilst I might see presented in her brow,
The doubtful combat tried twixt Life and Honor.
Life bringing Legions of fresh hopes with her,
Armed with the proof of time, which yeeldes we say
Comfort and help, to such as do refer
All unto him, and can admit delay.
But Honor scorning Life, lo forth leads he
Clear Immorralitie armed all in flames:
Through whose bright shining rays of glory, she
Might see how base was life that her defames.
Besides she saw whole armies of reproaches,
And base Disgraces, Furies fearful, sad,
Marching therewith, and Shame that still incroches
Upon her face, in blushing colors clad.
Which representments seeing, far worse then death
She deemed to yield to Life, and therefore chose
To render all to Honor, heart and breath:
And that with speed, least that her inward foes
False flesh and blood, joining with life and hope,
Should mutiny against her resolution.
And to the end she would not give them scope,
She presently proceeds to the execution.
And sharply blaming of her rebel powers,
False flesh (says she) and what do thou conspire
With Caesar too, as thou were none of ours,
To work my shame, and hinder my desire?
Will thou retain in closure of thy veins,
That enemy base life, to let my good?
No, know there is a greater power constraines
Then can be counterchekt with fearful blood.
For to the mind that is great, nothing seems great^
And seeing death to be the last of woes,
And life lasting disgrace, which I shall get,
What do I lose, that have but life to lose?
This having said, strengthened in her own heart.
And union of her self, senses in one
Charging together, she performs that part
That has so great a part of glory won,
And so receives the deadly poys'ning tuch;
That touch that tried the gold of her love, pure,
And has confirmed her honor to be such,
As must a wonder to all worlds endure.
Now not an yielding shrink or touch of fear,
Consented to bewray least sense of pain:
But still in one same sweet vnalired cheer,
Her honor did her dying thoughts retain.
Well, now this work is done (says she) here ends
This act of Life, that part the Fares assigned:
What glory of disgraces this world lends,
Both have I had, and both I leave behind.
And now o earth, the Theater where I
Have acted this, witness I die vnforst.
Witness my soul parts free to Antony,
And now proud Tyrant Caesar do thy worst.
This said, she stays, and makes a sudden pause,
As if to feel w^^^her the poison wrought:
Or rather else the working might be cause
That made her stay, and intertain'd her thought.
For in that instant I might well perceive
The drowsy humor in her falling brow:
And how each power, each part oppressed did leave
Their former office, and did senseless grow.
Look how a new plucked branch against the Sun,
Declines his fading leaves in feeble sort;
So her disioyned ioyn^ ures as undone,
Let fall her weak dissolved limbs support.
Yet lo that face the wonder of her life,
Retains in death, a grace that graceth death,
Color so lively, cheer so lovely rise,
That none would think such beauty could want breath.
And in that cheer the impression of a smile,
Did seem to show she scorned Death and Caesar,
As glorying that she could them both beguile,
And telling Death how much her death did please her
Wonder it was to see how soon she went,
She went with such a will, and did so haste it,
That sure I think she did her pain prevent,
Foregoing pain, or staying not to taste it,
And senseless, in her sincking down she wries
The Diadem which on her head she wore,
Which Charmion (poor weak feeble maid) espies,
And hastes to right it as it was before.
For Eras now was dead, and Charmion too
Even at the point, for both would immitate
Their Mistress glory, striving like to do.
But Charmion would in this exceed her mate,
For she would have this honor to be last,
That should adorn that head that must be seen
To wear that Crown in death, which life held fast,
That all the world might know she did a Queen,
And as she stood setting it fitly on,
Lo, in rush Caesar's messengers in haste,
Thinking to have prevented what was done.
But yet they came too late, for all was past.
For there they found stretched on a bed of gold,
Dead Cleopatra, and that prowdly dead,
In all the rich attire procure she could,
And dying Charmion trimming of her head,
And Eras at her feet, dead in like case.
Charmion, is this well done? said one of them.
Yea, well said she, and her that from the race
Of so great Kings descends, does best become.
And with that word, yields to, her faithful breath,
To pass the assurance of her love with death.

Cho. But how knew Caesar of her close intents

Nun. By Letters which before to him she sent.
For when she had procured this means to die,
She writes, and earnestly intreates, she might
Be buried in one Tomb with Antony,
Whereby then Caesar gess'd all went not right.
And forthwith sends, yet ere the message came
She was dispatched, he crossed in his intent.
Her providence had ordered so the same,
That she was sure none should her plot prevent.

CHORUS. THen thus we have beheld
The Accomplishment of woes
The full of ruin and
The worst of worst of ills:
And seen all hope expeld,
That ever sweet repose
Shall repossesse the Land,
That Desolation fills,
And where Ambition spills
With uncontrolled hand,
All the issue of all those
That so long rule have held:
To make us no more us,
But clean confound us thus.
And can O Nylus thou,
Father of floods endure,
That yellow Tyber should
With sandy streams rule thee?
Will thou be pleased to bow
To him those feet so pure,
Whose unknown head we hold
A power divine to be?
Thou that did ever see
Thy free banks uncontrolled,
Live under thine own care:
Ah will thou bear it now?
And now wilt yield thy streams
A prey to other Reames?
Draw back thy waters flo
To thy concealed head:
Rocks strangle up thy waves,
Stop Cataractes thy fall.
And turn thy courses so,
That sandy Deserts dead,
(The world of dust that craves
To swallow thee up all,
May drink so much as shall
Revive from vastie graves
A living green which spread
Far flourishing, may gro
On that wide face of Death,
Where nothing now draws breath,
Fatten some people there,
Even as thou us have done,
With plenties wanton store,
And feeble luxury:
And them as us prepare
Fit for the day of moan
Respected not before.
Leave leuell'd Egypt dry,
A barren prey to lie,
Wasted for euer-more,
Of plenties yielding none
To recompense the care
Of Victors greedy lust,
And bring forth naught but dust.
And so O leave to be,
Since thou art what thou art:
Let not our race possess
The Inheritance of shame,
The fee of sin, that we
Have left them for their part:
The yoke of whose distress
Must still vpbraid our blame,
Telling from whom it came,
Our weight of wantonness
Lies heavy on their heart,
Who neuer-more shall see
The glory of that worth
They left, who brought us forth.
O thou all-seeing light,
High President of heaven,
You magistrates the stars
Of that eternal Court
Of Providence and Right
Are these the bounds y'haue given
Th'vntranspassable bars,
That limit pride so short,
Is greatness of this sort,
That greatness greatness marres,
And wracks it self, self driven
On Rocks of her own might?
Does Order order so
Disorders ouer-thro?

FINIS.
THE COMPLAINT of ROSAMOND.
OVT from the horror of Infernal deepes,
My poor afflicted ghost coms here to plain it,
Attended with my shame that never sleeps,
The spot wherewith my kind and youth did stain it.
My body found a grave where to contain it.
A sheet could hide my face, but not my sin,
For Fame finds never tomb t'inclose it in.
And which is worse, my soul is now denied,
Her transport to the sweet Elisian rest,
The joyful bliss for ghosts repurified,
The euer-springing Gardens of the blessed:
Caron denies me waftage with the rest.
And says, my soul can never pass the River,
Till Lovers sighs on earth shall it deliver.
So shall I never pass; for how should I
Procure this sacrifice amongst the living?
Time has long since worn out the memory
Both of my life, and lives unjust depriving,
Sorrow for me is dead for aye reviving:
Rosamond has little left her but her name,
And that disgraced for time has wronged the same.
No muse, suggests the pity of my case,
Each pen does ouerpasse my just complaint,
Whilst others are preferred, though far more base:
Shores wife is graced, and passes for a Saint;
Her Legend iustifies her foul attaint,
Her wel-told tale did such compassion find,
That she is passed, and I am left behind.
Which seen with grief, my miserable ghost,
(Whilome invested in so fair a veil,
Which whilst it lived, was honored of the most,
And being dead gives matter to bewail,)
Comes to solicit thee, (since others fail,)
To take this task, and in thy woeful song
To form my case, and regester my wrong.
Although I know thy just lamenting Muse.
Toyld in th'affliction of thine own distress,
In others cares has little time to use,
And therefore may esteem of mine the less:
Yet as thy hopes attend happy redress,
Thy joys depending on a woman's grace,
So move thy mind a woeful woman's case.
DHLIA may hap to deigne to read our story,
And offer up her sigh among the rest.
Who^e merit would suffice for both our glory,
Whereby thou might be graced and I be blessed;
That indulgence would profit me the best.
Such power she has by whom thy youth is led,
To joy the living, and to bless the dead.
So I (through beauty) made the wofull'st wight,
By beauty might have comfort after death:
That dying fairest, by the fairest might
Find life above on earth, and rest beneath.
She that can bless us with one happy breath,
Give comfort to thy Muse to do her best,
That thereby thou may joy, and I might rest
Thus said: forth with moved with a tender care,
And pity, (which my self could never find,)
What she desired, my Muse deigned to declare,
And therefore, willed her boldly tell her mind.
And I (more willing) took this charge assigned,
Because her griefs were worthy to be known,
And telling hers, might hap forget mine own.
Then write (quoth she) the ruin of my youth,
Report the downe-fall of my slip^y st^te,
Of all my life reuaile the simple truth,
To teach to others what I learnt too late.
Exemplify my frailty, tell how Fate
Keeps in eternal dark our fortunes hidden,
And ere they come, to know them it is forbidden.
For Whilst the Sunshine of my fortune lasted,
I joyed the happiest warmth, the sweetest hea^e:
That ever yet imper^ous beauty tasted,
I had what glory ever flesh could get:
But this fair morning had a shameful set.
Disgrace darkt honor, sin did cloud my brow,
As note the sequel, and I Will tell thee how.
The blood I staind, was good and of the best,
My b^th had honor, and my beauty fame:
Nature and Fortune ioin'd to make me blessed,
Had ^ had grace ^haue known to use the same.
My education showed from whence I came,
And all concurd to make me happy furst,
That so great hap might make me more accursed,
Happy lived I whilst parents eye did guide
The indiscretion of my feeble ways,
And country home kept me from being eide,
Where best unknown I spent my sweetest days:
Till that my friends mine honor sough to raise
To higher place, which greater credit yeeldes.
Deeming such beauty was unfit for feeldes.
From Country then to Court I was preferred,
From calm to storms, from shore into the deepes:
There where I perished, where my youth first erred,
There where I lost the flower which honor keeps,
There where the worser thriues, the better weeps;
Ay me (poor wench) on that unhappy shelfe,
I grounded me, and cast away my self.
There whereas frail and tender Beauty stands,
With all assaulting powers environed;
Having but prayers and weak feeble hands
To hold their honors Fort vnvanquished;
There where to stand, and be unconquered,
Is to b'aboue the nature of our kind,
That cannot long for pity be unkind.
For thither com'd, when years had armed my youth,
With rarest proof of beauty ever seen:
When my reviving eye had learnt the truth,
That it had power to make the winter green,
And flower affections whereas none had been;
Soon could I teach my brow to tyrannize,
And make the world do homage to mine eyes.
For age I saw, (though years with cold conceit,
Congeald their thoughts against a warm des^e,)
Yet sigh their want, and look at such a bait;
I saw how youth was wax before the fire;
I saw by stealth, I framed my look a lyre,
Yet well perceived, how Fortune made me then
The envy of my sex, and wonder unto men.
Look how a Comet at the first appearing,
Draws all men's eyes with wonder to behold it:
Or as the saddest tale at sudden hearing,
Makes silent listening unto him that told it,
So did my speech when Rubies did unfold it:
So did the blasing of my blush appear,
T'amaze the world, that holds such sights so dear.
Ah beauty Siren, saire enchaunting good,
Sweet silent the torique of persuading eyes:
Dombe eloquence, whose power does move the blood
More then the words, or wisdom of the wise:
Still harmony, whose diapason lies
Within a brow, the ^oy which passions move.
To ravish sense, and play a world in love.
What might I then not do whose power was such?
What cannot women do that know their power?
What women knows it not (I fear too much)
How bliss or bale lies in their laugh or lowre?
Whilst they enjoy their happy blooming flower,
Whilst nature deckes them in their best attires
Of youth and beauty which the world admires.
Such one was I, my beauty was mine own,
No borrowed blush which bank-rot beau^les seek:
That newfound shame, a finne to us unknown,
Th'adulterate beauty of a falsed cheek:
Vilde stain to honor, and to women eeke,
Seeing that time our f^ding must detect.
Thus with defect to cover our defect.
Implety of times, Chastities aba^or,
Falsehood, wherein thy self thy self deniest:
Treason to counterfeit the seal of Nature,
The stamp of heaven, impressed by the hiest.
Disgrace unto the world, to whom thou lie.
Idol unto thy self, shame to the wise,
And all that honor thee idolatrise.
Far was that sin from us whose age was pure,
When simple beauty was accounted best,
The time when women had no other lure
But modesty, pure cheeks, a virtuous breast.
This was the pomp wherewith my youth was blessed.
These were the weapons which mine honor won.
In all the conflicts which mine eyes begun.
Which were not small, I wrought on no mean^ oblect,
A Crown was at my feet, Scepters obeyed me,
Whom Fortu^e made my King, Love made my subject,
Who did command the Land, most humbly praid me,
Henry the second, that so highly weighed me.
Found well (by proof) the privilege of beuty,
That it had power to counter-maund all duty.
For after all his victories in France,
And all the triumphs of his honor won:
Unmatched; by sword, was vanquished by a glance.
And hotter wars within his breast begun.
Wars, whom whole legions of desires drew on:
Against all which, my chastity contends
With force of honor, which my shame defends.
No armor might be found that could defend,
Transpearcing rays of cristall poynted eyes:
No stratagem, no reason could amend,
No not his age; (yet old men should be wise.)
But shows deceive, outward appearance lies.
Let none for seeming so, think Saints of others,
For all are men, and all have sucked their mothers.
Who would have thought a Mo^arch would have eues
Obeyed his hand-maide of so mean estate:
Vultu^e ^mbition feeding on his liver,
Age having worn his pleasures out of date,
But hap comes never, or it comes too late.
For such a dainty which his youth found not,
Unto his feeble age did chance a lot.
Ah Fortune, never absolutely good,
For that some cross still counter-checks our luck:
As here behold th'incomparible blood,
Of age and youth was that whereon we stuck:
Whose lothing, we from natures breasts do suck,
As opposite to what our blood requires,
For equal age, does equal like desires.
But mighty men, in highest honor sitting,
Naught but applause and pleasure can behold:
Soothed in their liking, careless what is fitting,
May not be suffered once to think the'are old:
Not trusting what they see, but what is told.
Miserable fortune to forget so far
The state of flesh, and what our frailties are.
Yet must I needs excuse so great defect
For drinking of the Lethe of mine eyes,
H'is forced forget himself, and all respect
Of majesty, whereon his state relies:
And now of loves, and pleasures must devise.
For thus revived again he serves and su'th,
And seeks all means to undermine my youth.
Which never by assault he could recover,
So well encamped in strength of chaste desires:
My cleane-arm'd thoughts repelld an unchaste lover.
The Crown that could command what it requires,
I lesser prizd then Chastities attires.
Th'vnstayned veil, which innocents adornes,
Th'vngathred Rose, defended with the thrones.
And safe mine honor stood, till that in truth,
One of my sex, of place, and nature bad,
Was set in ambush to entrap my youth.
One in the habit of our frailty clad,
One who the liu'ry of like weakness had.
A seeming Matron, yet a sinful monster,
As by her words the chaster sort may conster.
She set upon me with the smoothest speech
That Court and Age could cunningly devise,
The One authentic, made her fit to teach,
The other learnd her how to subtelise.
Both were enough to circumuent the wise.
A document that well might teach the sage,
That there is no trust in youth, nor hope in age.
Daughter (said she) behold thy happy chance,
That have the lot cast down into thy lap.
Whereby thou may thy honor great advance,
Whilst thou (unhappy) wilt not see thy hap:
Such fond respect thy youth does so inwrap,
To Oppose thy self against thine own good fortune,
That points thee out, and seems thee to importune.
Do thou not see^ how that thy King (thy Jove)
Lightens forth glory on thy dark estate:
And showers down gold and treasure from above.
Whilst thou do shut thy lap against thy fate?
Fie sondling fie, thou will repent too late
The error of thy youth; that can not see
What is the fortune that does follow thee.
Thou must not think thy flower can always flourish,
And that thy beauty will be still admired:
But that those rays which all these flames do nourish,
Canceled with Time, will have their date expired,
And men will scorn what now is so desired.
Our frailties doom is written in the flowers,
Which flourish now, and fade ere many hours.
Read in my face the ruins of my youth,
The wrack of years upon my aged brow;
I have been fair (I must confess the truth)
And stood upon as nice respects as thou;
I lost my time, and I repent it now.
But were I to begin my youth again,
I would redeem the time I spent in vain.
But thou have years, and privilege to use them,
Thy privilege does bear Beauties great seal:
Besides, the law of Nature does excuse them,
To whom thy youth may have a just appeal.
Esteem not Fame more then thou do thy weal.
Fame (whereof the world seems to make such choice)
Is but an Echo, and an idle voice,
Then why should this respect of honor bound us,
In th'imaginarie listes of reputation?
Titles which cold severity has found us,
Breath of the vulgar, foe to recreation:
Ages opinion, Customs out-worne fashion,
Pleasures plague, beauties scourge, hell to the fair,
To leave the sweet, for Castles in the air.
Pleasure i^ felt, opinion but conceau'd,
Honor, a thing without us, not our own:
Whereof we see how many are bereaved,
Which should have reaped the glory they had sown
And many have it, yet unworthy, known.
So breaches his blast this many-headed beast,
Whereof the wisest have esteemed least.
The subtle Citty-women, better learned,
Esteem them chaste enough that best seem so:
Who though they sport, it shall not be discerned,
Their face bewrayes not what their bodies do;
It Is wary walking that does safeliest go.
With show of virtue, as the cunning knows.
Babes are beguild with sweets, and me with sho,
Then use thy tallent youth shall be thy warrant,
And let not honor from thy sports detract:
Thou must not fondly think thy self transparent,
That those who see thy face can judge thy fact,
Let her have shame that cannot closely act.
And seem the chaste, which is the chiefest art,
For what we seem each see, none knows out heart.
The mighty, who can with such sins dispense,
In steed of shame do honors great bestow:
A worthy Author does redeem the offense,
And makes the scarlet sin as white as snow,
The Majesty that does descend so low,
Is not defilde but pure remains therein,
And being sacred, sanctifies the sin,
What, do thou stand on this, that he is old?
Thy beauty has the more to work upon.
Thy pleasures want shall be supplide with gold,
Cold age dotes most when heat of youth is gone:
Enticing words prevail with such a one.
Alluring shows most deep impression strikes
For age is prone to credit what it likes.
Here interrupt, she leaves me in a doubt,
When lo began the combat in my blood,
See'ing my weak youth inuiron'd round about,
The ground uncertain where my reasons stood;
Small my defense to make my party good,
Against such powers which were so surely laid,
To overthrow a poor unskillful Maid.
Treason was in my bones, my self conspiring,
To fell my self to lust, my soul to sin:
Pure-blushing shame was even upon retiring,
Leaving the sacred hold it glori'd in.
Honor lay prost^ate for my flesh to win,
When cleaner thoughts my weakness began vpbray
Against my self, and shame did force me say;
Ah Rosamond, what does thy flesh prepare?
Destruction to thy days, death to thy fame,
Will thou betray that honor held with care,
T'entombe with black reproach a spotted name?
Leaving thy blush the colors of thy shame?
Opening thy feet to sin, thy soul to lust,
Graceless to lay thy glory in the dust?
Nay, first let the earth gape wide to swallow thee,
And shut thee up in bosom with her dead,
Ere Serpent tempt thee taste forbidden Tree,
Or feel the warmth of an unlawful bed;
Suffering thy self by lust to be misled;
So to disgrace thy self and g^ieue thine heirs,
That Cli^^ords race should scorn thee one of theirs.
Never wish longer to enjoy the air,
Then that thou breathe the breath of chastity:
Longer then thou preseru'st thy soul as fair
As is thy face, free from impu^itie.
Thy face, that makes th'admir'd in every eye,
Where Natures care such rarities inroule,
Which used amiss, may serve to damn thy soul.
But what? he is my King and may constrain me,
Whether I yield or not, I live diffamed.
The world will think authori^ie did gain me,
I shall be judged his Love, and so be shamed.
We see the fair condem'nd, that never gamed.
And if I yield, it is honorable shame,
If no^, I live disgraced, yet thought the same.
What way is left thee then (unhappy maid,)
Whereby thy spotless foot, may wander out
This dreadful danger, which thou see is laid,
Wherein thy shame does compass thee about?
Thy simple years cannot resolve this doubt.
Thy youth can never guide thy foot so even,
But (in despite) some scandale will be given.
Thus stood I balanced equally precize,
Till my frail flesh did weigh me down to sin;
Till world and pleasure made me partialize,
And glittering pomp my vanity did win,
When to excuse my fault my lusts begin.
And impious thoughts alleged this wanton clause,
That though I sinned, my sin had honest cause.
So well the golden balls cast down before me,
Could entertain my course, hinder my way:
Whereat my retchlesse youth stooping to store me,
Lost me the gole, the glory, and the day.
Pleasure had set my well schooled thoughts to play,
And bade me use the virtue of mine eyes,
For sweetly it fits the fair to wantonise.
Thus wrought to sin, soon was I traind from Court,
T'a solitary G^ange, there to attend
The time the King should thither make resort,
Where he Loves long desired work should end.
Thither he daily messages does send,
With costly Jewels (Orators of Love,)
Which (ah too well men know) do women move.
The day before the night of my defeature,
He greets me with a Casket richly wrought;
So rare, that Art did seem to strive with Nature,
To Express the cunning worke-mens curious thought^
The mystery whereof I prying sought,
And found engraven on the lidde above,
Amymone, how she with Neptune strove.
Amymone, old Danaus fairest Daughter,
As she was fetching water all alone
At Lerna: whereas Neptune came and caught her,
From whom she strived and strugled to be gone,
Beating the ay^e with cries and piteous moan:
But all in vain, with him she is forced to go,
It Is shame that men should use poor maidens so.
There might I see described how she lay,
At those proud feet, not satisfide with prayer:
Wayling her heavy hap, cursing the day,
In act so pitious to express despair.
And by how much more grieved, so much more fair.
Her tears upon her cheeks (poor careful gerle,)
Did seem against the Sun crystal and pearl.
Whose pure clear streams, (which lo so fair appears)
Wrought hotter flames, (O miracle of love.)
That kindles fire in water, heat in tears,
And makes neglected beauty mightier prove,
Teaching afflicted eyes affects to move;
To show that nothing ill becomes the fair,
But cruelty, which yields unto no prayer.
This having viewd, and therewith something moved,
Figured I find within the other squares,
Transformed Io, Jove's dearly loved,
In her affliction how she strangely fares.
Strangely distressed (O beauty, borne to cares,)
Turned to a Heiffer, kept with jealous eyes,
Always in danger of her hateful spies.
These presidents presented to my view,
Wherein the presage of my fall was shown,
Might have fore-warned me well what would ensue,
And others harms have made me shun mine own.
But fate is not prevented, though foreknowne.
For that must hap, decreed by heavenly powers,
Who work our fall, yet make the fault still ours.
Witness the world, wherein is nothing riser,
Then miseries unkind before they come:
Who can the characters of chance decipher,
Written in clouds of our concealed dome?
Which though perhaps have been reueald to some,
Yet that so doubtful, (as success did prove them,)
That me^ must know they have the heu'ns above ^^
I saw the sin wherein my foot was entering,
I saw how that dishonor did attend it,
I saw the shame whereon my flesh was ventring,
Yet had I not the virtue to defend it.
So weak is sense when error has condemned it.
We see what is good, and thereto we consent,
But yet we choose the worst, and soon repent.
And now I come to tell the worst of illness,
Now draws the date of mine affliction near.
Now when the dark had wrapped up all in stillness,
And dreadful black had dispossessed the clear,
Com'd was the night, (mother of sleep and fear;)
Who with her sable-mantle friendly couers,
The sweet-stolne sports, of joyful meeting Lovers.
When lo, I joyed my Lover, not my Love,
And felt the hand of lust most undesired:
Enforced th'vnprooued bitter sweet to prove,
Which yields no mutual pleasure when it is hired.
Love's not constrained, nor yet of due required.
Judge they who are unfortunately wed,
What it is to come unto a loathed bed.
But soon his age received his short contenting,
And sleep sealed up his languishing desires:
When he turns to his rest, I to repenting,
Into my self my waking thought retires:
My nakedness had proved my senses liers.
Now opened were mine eyes to look therein,
For first we taste the fruit, then see our sin.
Now did I find my self vnparadis'd,
From those pure fields of my so clean beginning:
Now I perceived how ill I was advised,
My flesh began loathe the new-felt touch of sinning,
Shame leaves us by degrees, not at first winning.
For nature checks a new offense with loathing,
But use of sin does make it seem as nothing.
And use of sin did work in me a boldness,
And love in him, incorporates such ze^le,
That jealousy increased with ages coldness,
Fearing to loose the joy of all his weal.
Or doubting time his stealth might else reueale^
H'is driven to devise some subtle way,
How he might safeliest keep so rich a pray.
A stately Palace he forthwith did build,
Whose, intricate innumerable ways,
With such confused errors so beguild
Th'vnguided entrers with uncertain strayes^
And doubtful turnings kept them in delays,
With bootlesse labor leading them about,
Able to find no way, nor in, nor out.
Within the closed bosom of which frame,
That served a Center to that goodly Round:
Were lodgings, with a Garden to the same,
With sweetest flowers that eu'r adorned the ground.
And all the pleasures that delight has found,
T'intertaine the sense of wanton eyes,
Fuel of love, from whence lufts flame arise.
Here I enclosed from all the world asunder,
The Mino aure of shame kept for disgrace,
The Monster of misfortune th'ages wonder,
Lived cloistred in so desolate a case:
None but the King might come into the place,
Wi^h certain Maids that did attend my need,
And he himself came guided by a thread.
O ^ealousie, daughter of Hate and Love,
Most way ward issue of a gentle fire;
Fostred with fears thy fathers joys t'improue,
Mirth-marring Monster borne a subtle lier;
Hateful unto thy self, flying thine own desire:
Feeding upon suspect that does renew thee,
Happy were Lovers if they never knew thee.
Thou have a thousand gates thou enterest by,
Condemning trembling passions to our heart:
Hundred eyed Argus, euer-waking Spy.
Pale Hagge, infernal Fury, pleasures smart,
Envious Obseruer, prying in every part:
Suspicious, fearful, gazing still about thee,
O would to God that love could be without thee.
Thou did deprive (through false suggesting fear,)
Him of content, and me of liberty:
The only good that women hold so dear,
And turnst my freedom to captivity,
First made a prisoner ere an enemy.
Enioynd the ransom of my bodies shame,
Which though I paid, could not redeem the same,
What greater torment ever could have been,
Then to enforce the fair to live retired?
For what is beauty if it be not seen?
Or what is it to beseene, unless admired?
And though admired unless in love desired?
Never were cheeks of Roses, locks of Amber,
Ordained to live imprisoned in a Chamber.
Nature created Beauty for the view,
(Like as the fire for heat, the Sun for light:)
The fair do hold this privilege as due
By ancient Charter, to live most in sight,
And she that is debarred it, has not right.
In vain our friends from this, do us dehort,
For Beauty will be where is most resort.
Witness the fairest streets that Thames does visit,
The wondrous concourse of the glittering Fair:
For what rare woman decked with, beauty is it,
That thither couets not to make repair?
The solitary Country may not stay her.
Here is the center of all Beautyes best,
Excepting DELIA, left t'adorne the West.
Here does the curious with judicial eyes,
Contemplate Beauty gloriously atri^ed.
And herein all our chiefest glory lies,
To live where we are praised and most desired.
O how we joy to see our selves admired,
Whilst niggardly our favors we discover.
We love to be beloved, yet scorn the Lover.
Yet would to God my foot had never moved
From country safety, from the fields of rest:
To know the danger to be highly loved,
And live in pomp to brave among the best,
Happy for me, better had I been blessed,
If I unluckily had never straide,
But lived at home a happy country maid,
Whose unaffected innocence thinks
No guilefull fraud, as does the Courtly liver:
She Is deck^ with truth, the River where she drinks
Does serve her for her glass, her council giver:
She loves sincerely, and is loved ever.
Her days are peace, and so she ends her breath.
(True life that knows not what is to die till death.)
So should I never have been registered,
In the black book of the unfortunate:
Nor had my name enrold with Maids misled,
Which bought their pleasures at so hie a rate.
Nor had I taught (through my unhappy fate,)
This lesson (which my self learnt with expense)
How most it hurts that most delights the sense:
Shame follows sin, disgrace is duly given;
Impiety will out, never so closely done;
No walls can hide us from the eye of heaven,
For shame must end what wickedness begun;
Forth breaks reproach when we least think thereon,
And this is ever proper unto Courts,
That nothing can be done, but fame reports.
Fame does explore what lies most secret hidden,
Entering the closet of the Palace dweller:
Abroad revealing what is most forbidden:
Of truth and falshod both an equal teller.
It Is not a guard can serve for to expel her.
The sword of justice cannot cut her wings,
Nor stop her mouth from vtt'ring secret things.
And this our stealth she could not long conceal,
From her whom such a forfeit most concerned:
The wronged Queen, who could so closely deal,
That she the whole of all our practice learned,
And watched a time when least it was descerned,
In absence of the King, to wreake her wrong,
With such revenge as she desired long.
The Laberinth she entered by that thread.
That served a conduct to my absent Lord,
Lest there by chance, reserved for such a deed,
Where she surp^iz'd me whom she so abhord.
Enraged with madness, scarce she speaks a word,
But flies with eager fury to my face,
Offering me most unwomanly disgrace.
Look how a Tygresse that has lost her whelpe,
Runs fiercely raging through the woods astray:
And seeing her self deprived of hope or help,
Does furiously assault what is in her way,
To satisfy her wrath, (not for a pray;)
So fell she on me in outrageous wise,
As could Disdain and Jealousy devise.
And after all her vile reproaches used,
She forced me ^ake the poison she had brought,
To end the life that had her so abusde,
And free her fears, and ease her jealous thought.
No cruelty her wrath would leave unwrought,
No spiteful act that to Revenge is common;
No beast being fiercer then a jealous woman.
Here take (says she) thou impudent unclean,
Base graceless strumpet, take this next your heart;
Your loue-sicke heart, that over charged has been
With Pleasures surfeit, must be purged with Art.
This potion has a power that will conuart
To naught, those humors that oppress you so.
And (Gerle) I Will see you take it ere I go.
What stand you now amazed retire you back?
Tremble you (minion?) come dispatch with speed:
There is no help, your Champion now you lack.
And all these tears you shed will nothing steed:
Those daynty fingers needs must do the deed.
Take it or I will drench you else by force,
And trifle not, left that I use you worse.
Having this bloody doom from hellish breath,
My woeful eyes on every side I cast:
Rigor about me, in my hand my death,
Presenting me the horror of my last:
All hope of pity and of comfort past.
No means, no power, no forces to contend,
My trembling hands must give my self my end.
Those hands that beauties ministers had been,
They must give death that me adorned of late,
That mouth that newly gave consent to sin,
Must now receive destruction in thereat,
That body which my lust did violate,
Must sacrifice it self to appease the wrong.
(So short is pleasure glory lasts not long.)
And she no sooner saw I had it taken,
But forth she rushes, (proud with victory,)
And leaves m'alone, of all the world forsaken,
Except of Death, which she had left with me.
(Death and my self alone together be.)
To whom she did her full revenge refer.
Oh poor weak conquest both for him and her.
Then straight my conscience summons up my sin,
T'appeare before me, in a hidious ^ace;
Now does the terror of my soul begin,
When every corner of that hateful place
Dictates mine error, and reueals disgrace;
Whilst I remain oppressed in every part,
Deoth in my body, horror at my heart.
Down on my bed my loathsome self I cast,
The bed that likewise gives in evidence
Against my soul, and tells I was unchaste,
Tells I was wanton, tells I followed sense,
And therefore cast, by guilt of mine offense.
Must here the right of heaven needs satisfy,
And where I wanton lay, must wretched die.
Here I began to wail my hard mishap,
My sudden, strange unlooked for misery.
Accusing them that did my youth entrap,
To give me such a fall of infamy.
And poor distressed Rosamond. (said I,)
Is this thy glory got, to die forlorn
In Dezarts, where no ear can hear thee mourn^
Nor any eye of pity to behold
The woeful end of thy sad tragedy;
But that thy wrongs unseen, thy tale untold,
Must here in secret silence buried lie.
And with thee, thine excuse together die.
Thy sin eeueal'd, but thy repentance hid,
Thy shame alive, but dead what thy death did.
Yet breath out to these walls the breath of moan,
Tell the air thy plaints, since men thou can not tell.
And though thou perish desolate alone,
Tell yet thy self, what thy self knows too well:
V^ter thy grief where with thy soul does swell.
And let thy heart pity thy hearts remorse.
And be thy self the mourner and the corse.
Condole thee here, clad all in black despair,
With silence only, and a dying bed;
Thou that of late, so flourishing, so fair,
Did glorious live, admired and honored:
And now from friends, from succor hither led,
Art made a spoil to lust, to wrath, to death,
And in disgrace, forced here to yield thy breath.
Did Nature (for this good) ingeniate,
To show in thee the glory of her best;
Framing thine eye the star of thy ill fate.
Making thy face the foe to spoil the rest?
O Beauty, thou an enemy professed
To Chastity and us that love thee most,
Without theo how we are loathed, and with thee lost?
You, you that proud with liberty and beauty,
(And well may you be proud that you be so,)
Glitter in Court, loved and observed of duty:
Would God I might to you but ere I go
Speak what I feele^ to warn you by my woe,
To keep your feet in cleanly paths of shame,
That no enticing may divert the same.
See'ng how against your tender weakness still,
The strength of wit, of gold, and all is bent:
And all the assaults that ever might or skill,
Can give against a chaste and clean intent:
Ah let not greatness work you to consent.
The spot is foul, though by a Monarch made,
Kings cannot privilege what God forbade.
Lock up therefore the treasure of your love,
Under the surest keys of fear and shame:
And let no powers have power chaste thoughts to move
To make a lawless entry on your fame.
Open to those the comfort of your flame,
Whose equal love shall march with equal pace,
In those pure ways that lead to no disgrace.
For see how many discontented beds,
Our own aspiring, or our Parents pride
Have caused, whilst that ambition vainly weds
Wealth and not love, honor and naught beside:
Whilst married but to titles, we abide
As wedded widows, wanting what we have,
When shadows cannot give us what we crave.
Or whilst we spend the freshest of our time,
The sweet of youth in plotting in the air;
Alas how often we fall, hoping to clime;
Or wither as unprofitably fair,
Whilst those decays which are without repair,
Make us neglected, scorned and reprou'd.
(And O what are we, if we be not loved?)
Fasten therefore upon occasions fit,
Lest this, or that, or like disgrace as mine,
Do ouer-take your youth to ruin it,
And cloud with infamy your beauties shine:
Seeing how many seek to undermine
The treasury that is vnpossest of any:
And hard it is kept that is desired of many.
And fly (O fly) these Bed-brokers unclean,
(The monsters of our sex, that make a pray
Of their own kind, by an unkindly mean;
And even (like Vipers) eating out a way
Through th'wombe of their own shame, accursed they
Live by the death of Fame, the gain of sin,
The filth of lust, uncleanness wallowes in.
As if it were not enough that we, (poor we)
Have weakness, beauty, gold, and men our foes,
But we must have some of our selves to be
Traitors unto our selves, to join with those?
Such as our feeble forces do disclose,
And still betray our cause, our shame our youth,
To lust, to folly, and to men's untruth?
Hateful confounders both of blood and laws,
Vilde Oraters of shame, that plead delight:
Ungracious Agents in a wicked cause,
Factors for darkness, messengers of night,
Serpents of guile, devils, that do inuire
The wanton taste of that forbidden tree,
Whose fruit once plucked, will show how foul we be.
You in the habit of a grave aspect,
(In credit by the trust of years, (can shoe
The cunning ways of lust, and can direct
The fair and wily wantons how they go,
Having (youth loathsome selves) your youth spent so.
And in uncleanness ever have been fed,
By the revenue of a wanton bed.
By you, have been the innocent betrayed,
The blushing fearful, boldned unto sin,
The wife made subtle, subtle made the maid,
The husband scorned, dishonored the kin:
Parents disgraced, children infamous been.
Confused our race, and falsi-fied our blood,
Whilst fathers sons possess wrong Fathers good.
This, and much more, I would have vttred then,
A testament to be recorded still,
Signed with my blood, subscribed with Conscience pen,
To warn the fair and beautiful from ill.
Though I could wish (by the example of my will,)
I had not left this note unto the fair,
But did intestate to have had no heir.
But now, the poison spread through all my veins,
Began dispossess my living senses quite:
And naught respecting death, (the last of pains,)
Placed his pale colors, (th'ensigne of his might,)
Upon his new-got spoil before his right;
Thence chased my soul, setting my day ere noone,
When I least thought my joys could end so soon.
And as conuaid t'vntimely funerals,
My scarce cold corse not suffered longer stay,
Behold, the King (by chance) returning, falls
T'incounter with the same upon the way,
As he repaired to see his dearest joy.
Not thinking such a meeting could have been,
To see his Love, and seeing been unseen,
Judge those whom chance depriues of sweetest treasure,
What it is to lose a thing we hold so dear:
The best delight, wherein our soul takes pleasure,
The sweet of life, that penetrates so near.
What passions feels that heart, enforced to bear
The deep impression of so strange a sight,
That ouerwhelmes us, or confounds us quite?
Amazed he stands, nor voice nor body steares,
Words had no passage, tears no issue found,
For sorrow shut up words, wrath kept in tears,
Confused affects each other do confound:
Oppressed with grief, his passions had no bound.
Striving to tell his woes, words would not come;
For light cares speak, when mighty griefs are dombe.
At length extremity breaks out a way,
Through which th'imprisned voice with tears atte^ded,
Wailes out a sound that sorrows do bewray,
With arms a-crosse, and eyes to heaven bended,
Vaporing our sighs that to the skies ascended.
Sighs (the poor ease calamity affoords,)
Which serve for speech when sorrow wants words.
O heavens) quoth he,) why do mine eyes behold
The hateful rays of this unhappy sun?
Why have I light to see my sins contrould,
With blood of mine own shame thus vildly done?
How can my sight endure to look thereon?
Why does not black eternal darkness hide,
That from mine eyes, my heart cannot abide?
What saw my life, wherein my soul might joy,
What had my days, whom troubles still afflicted,
But only this, to counterpoize annoy?
This joy, this hope, which Death has interdicted;
This sweet, whose loss has all distress inflicted:
This, that did season all my sour of life,
Vexed still at home with broiles, abroad in strife:
Vexed still at home with broiles, abroad in strife,
Dissension in my blood, iarres in my bed:
Distrust at board, suspecting still my life,
Spending the night in horror, days in dread:
(Such life has Tyrants, and this life I led.)
These miseries go masked in glittering shows,
Which wise men see, the vulgar littles knows.
Thus as these passions do him ouerwhelme,
He draws him near my body to behold it.
And as the Vine married unto the Elm
With strict embraces, so does he infold it.
And as he in his careful arms does hold it,
Viewing the face that now even death commends,
On senseless lips, millions of kisses spends.
Pitt^full mouth (says he) that living gave
The sweetest comfort that my soul could wish:
O be it lawful now, that dead thou hauest,
This sorrowing farewell of a dying kisle.
And you fair eyes, containers of my bliss,
Motives of love, borne to be matched never,
Entombed in your sweet circles sleep for ever.
Ah how me thinks I see Death dallying seeks,
To entertain it self in Loves sweet place:
Decayed Roses of discolored cheeks,
Do yet retain deerenotes of former grace:
And ugly Death sits fair within her face;
Sweet remnants resting of vermillian red,
That Death it self doubts whether she be dead.
Wonder of beauty, oh receive these plaints,
These obsequies, the last that I shall make thee:
For lo, my soul that now already faints,
(That loved thee living, dead will not forsake thee,)
Hastens her speedy course to ouer-take thee.
I^e meet my death, and free my self thereby,
For (ah) what can he do that cannot die?
Yet ere I die, thus much my soul does vow,
Revenge shall sweeten death with ease of mind:
And I will cause posterity shall know,
How fa^e thou were above all woman kind,
And after-ages monuments shall find
Showing thy beauties title, no^ thy name,
Rose of the world that sweetened so the same.
This said, though more desirous yet to say,
(For sorrow is unwilling to give over.)
He does repress what grief would else bewray,
Least he too much his passions should discover.
And yet respect scarce bridles such a Lover.
So far transported that he knew not whither,
For Love and Majesty dwell ill together,
Then were my funerals not long deferred.
But done with all the rites pomp could devise,
At Godstow, where my body was interred.
And richly tomb'd in honorable wise,
Where yet as now scarce any note descries
Unto these times, the memory of me,
Marble and Brass so little lasting be.
For those walls which the credulous ^euout,
And apt-beleeuing ignorant did found;
With willing zeal, that never called in doubt,
That Time their works should ever so confound,
Lie like confused heaps as under ground.
And what their ignorance esteemed so holy^
Our wiser ages do account as folly.
And were it not thy favorable lines
Re-edified the wrack of my decaies,
And that thy accents willingly assigns
Some farther date, and give meelonger days,
Few in this age had known my Beautyes praise.
But thus renewed, my fame redeemes some time,
Till other ages shall neglect thy rhyme.
Then when Confusion in her course shall bring
Sad desolation on the times to come:
When mirthlesse Thames shall have no Swanne to sing,
All music silent, and the Muses dombe:
And yet even then it must be known to some,
That once they flourisht, though not cherisht so,
And Thames had Swannes as well as ever Po,
But here an end, I may no longer stay.
I must return to attend at Stygian flood:
Yet ere I go, this one word more I pray.
Tell Delia, now her sight may do me good,
And will her note the frailty of our blood.
And if I pass unto th^se happy banks.
Then she must have her praise, thy pen her thanks.
So vanquished she, and left me to return
To prosecute the tenor of my woes:
Eternal matter for my Muse to mourn,
But (yet) the world has heard too much of those,
My youth such errors must no more disclose.
I Will hide the rest, and grieve for what has been,
Who made me known must make me live vnsee^
FINIS.
An Ode.
NOW each creature joys the other,
passing happy days and hours,
One Bird reports unto another,
in the fall of silver showers,
Whilst the earth (our common mother)
has her bosom decked with flowers.
Whilst the greatest Torch of heaven,
with bright rays warmes Floras lap,
Making nights and days both even,
chearing plants with fresher sap:
My field of flowers quite bereuen,
wants refresh of better hap.
Echo, daughter of the Air,
(babbling guest of Rocks and hills,)
Knows the name of my fierce Fair,
and sounds the accents of my ils.
Each thing pitties my despair,
whilst that she her Lover kills.
Whilst that she (O cruel Maid)
does me and my love despise,
My lives flourish is decayed,
that depended on her eyes:
But her will must be obeyed,
and well he ends for love who dies.
A Pastoral.
O Happy golden Age,
Not for that Rivers ran
With streams of milk, and hunny dropped from treet,
Not that the earth did gage
Unto the husbandman
Her voluntary fruits, free without fees:
Not for no cold did freeze,
Nor any cloud beguile,
The Eternal flowring Spring
Wherein lived every thing,
And whereon th'heauens perpetually did smile,
Not for no sh^p had brought
From foreign shores, or wars or wares ill sought.
But only for that name,
That Idle name of wind:
That Idol of deceit, that empty sound
Called Honor, which became
The tyran of the mind:
And so torments our Nature without ground,
Was not yet vainly found:
Nor yet sad griefs imparts
Amidst the sweet delights
Of joyful amorous wights.
Nor were his hard laws known to freeborn hearts.
But golden laws like these
Which Nature wrote. That Is lawful which does please.
Then amongst flowers and springs
Making delightful sport,
Sat Lovers without conflict, without flame:
And Nimphs and shepherds sing
Mixing in wanton sort
Whisp'rings with Songs, then kisses with the same
Which from affection came:
The naked virgin then
Her Roses fresh reueales,
Which now her veil conceales.
The tender Apples in her bosom seen,
And often in Rivers clear
The Lovers with their Loves consorting were.
HONOR, thou first did close
The spring of all delight:
Denying water to the amorous thirst
Thou taught'st fair eyes to lose
The glory of their light.
Restrained from men, and on themselves reuerst.
Thou in a Lawne did first
These golden hairs incase,
Late spread unto the wind:
Thou made loose grace unkind,
Gave bridle to their words, art to their pace.
O Honor it is thou
That make that stealth, which love does free allow.
It is thy work that brings
Our griefs, and torments thus:
But thou fierce Lord of Nature and of Love,
The quallifier of Kings,
What do thou here with us
That are below thy power, shut from above?
Go and from us remove,
Trouble the mighties sleep,
Let us neglected, base,
Live still without thy grace,
And the use of th'auncient happy ages keep,
Let Us love, this life of ours
Can make no truce with time that all deuours.
Let Us love, the sun does set, and rise again,
But when as our short light
Comes once to set, it makes eternal night.
FINIS.
Ulysses and the Siren.
Siren. COme worthy Greek, Ulysses come
Possess these shores with me:
The winds and Seas are troublesome,
And here we may be free.
Here may we sit, and view their toil
That travail in the deep,
And joy the day in mirth the while,
And spend the night in sleep.

Vlis. Fair Nymph, if fame, or honor were
To be attaynd with case
Then would I come, and rest with thee,
And leave such toils as these.
But here it dwells, and here must I
With danger seek it forth,
To spend the time luxuriously
Becomes not men of worth.

Sir. Ulysses, O be not deceived
With that vnreall name:
This honor is a thing conceived,
And rests on others fame.
Begotten only to molest
Our peace, and to beguile
(The best thing of our life) our rest,
And give us up to toil.

Vlis. Delicious Nymph, suppose there were
Nor honor, nor report,
Yet manlines would scorn to wear
The time in idle sport.
For toil does give a better touch,
To make us feel our joy;
And case finds tediousness as much
As labor yields annoy.

Sir. Then pleasure likewise seems the shore,
Whereto tends all your toil,
Which you forgo to make it more,
And perish often the while.
Who may disporte them diversely,
Find never tedious day,
And ease may have variety,
As well as action may.

Vlis. But natures of the noblest frame
These toils, and dangers please,
And they take comfort in the same,
As much as you in ease.
And with the thought of actions past
Are recreated still;
When pleasure leaves a touch at las^,
To show that it was ill.

Sy. That does opinion only cause,
That Is out of custom bred,
Which makes us many other laws
Then ever Nature did.
No widows wail for our delights,
Our sportes are without blood,
The world we see by warlike wights.
Receives more hurt then good.

Vlis. But yet the state of things require
These motions of unrest,
And these great Spirits of high desire,
Seem borne to turn them best.
To purge the mischiefs that increase,
And all good order mar:
For often we see a wicked peace
To be well changed for war.

Sy. Well, well Ulysses then I see,
I shall not have thee here,
And therefore I will come to thee,
And take my fortunes there.
I must be won that cannot win,
Yet lost were I not won:
For beauty has created bin,
T'vndoo, or be undone.

FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF PHILOTAS.

By SAM: DANIEL.

AT LONDON Printed by G.E. for Simon Waterson and Edward Blount., 1605.

To the Prince.
TO you most hopeful Prince, not as you are
But as you may be, do I give these lines:
That when your judgment shall ariue so far,
As t'ouerlooke th'intricate designs,
Of discontented man: you may behold
With what incounters greatest fortunes cloze,
What dangers, what attempts, what manifold
Encumbrances, ambition undergoes:
How hardly men digest felicity;
How to th'intemperat, to the prodigal,
To wantonness, and unto luxury
Many things want, but to ambition all.
And you shall find the greatest enemy
That man can have, is his prosperity.
Here shall you see how men disguise their ends,
And playte bad courses under pleasing shows,
How well presumption broken ways defends,
Which cleere-eyed judgment gravely does disclose.
Here shall you see how th'easie multitude
Transported, take the party of distress;
And only out of passion do conclude,
Not out of judgment; of men's practices.
How powr^s are thought to wrong, that wrongs debar,
And kings not held in danger, though they are.
These ancient representments of times past;
Tell us that men have, do, and always run
The self same line of action, and do cast
Their course alike, and nothing can be done,
(Whilst they, their ends, and nature are the same^
But will be wrought upon the selfsame frame.
This benefit, most noble Prince, does yield
The sure records of Books, in which we find
The tenure of our state, how it was held
By all our ancestors, and in what kind
We hold the same, and likewise how in the end
This frail possession of felicity,
Shall to our late posterity descend,
By the same pattent of like destiny.
In them we find that nothiwg can accrue
To man, and his condition that is new.
And though you have a Swannet of your own,
Which on the banks of Douen meditates
Sweet notes for you, and unto your renown
The glory of his Music dedicates;
And in a lofty tune is set to sound
The deep reports of Sullein tragedies.
Yet may this l^st of me be likewise found,
Amongst the vows that others sacrifize
Unto the hope of you, that you one day,
May grace this now neglected harmony:
Which set unto your glorious actions may
Record the same to all posterity.
Though I the remnant of another time.
Am never like to see that happiness:
Yet for the zeal that I have borne to rhyme,
And to the Muses wish that good success
To others travail, that in better place,
And better comfort, they may be incheerd
Who shall deserve, and who shall have the grace
To have a Muse held worthy to be heard.
And know, sweet Prince, when you shall come to know,
That it is not in the power of Kings to raise
A spirit for verse that is not borne thereto:
Nor are they borne in every Princes days.
For late Elizas reign, gave birth to more
Then all the kings of England did before.
And it may be, the Genius of that time,
Would leave to her the glory in that kind;
And that the utmost powers of English Ryme,
Should be within her peaceful reign confinde.
For since that time, our songues could never thrive,
But lain as if for lorne: though in the prime
Of this new rising season, we did strive
To bring the best we could unto the time.
And I although among the latter train,
And least of those that sung unto this land,
Have borne my part, though in an humble strain,
And pleased the gentler that did understand:
And never had my harmless Pen at all
Distaind with any loose immodestie,
Nor ever noted to be touched with gall,
To aggrauate the worst man's infamy.
But still have done the fairest offices
To virtue and the time, yet naught preuailes,
And all our labors are without success,
For either favor or our virtue fails.
And therefore since I have out liud the date
Of former grace, acceptance, and delight,
I would my lines late-borne beyond the fate
Of her spent line, had never come to light.
So had I not been taxed for wishing well
Nor now mistaken by the censuring stage
Nor, in my fame and reputation fell.
Which I esteem more then what all the age
Or the earth can give. But years has don this wrong,
To make me write too much, and live too long.
And yet I grieve for that vnfinisht frame,
Which thou dear Muse did vow to sacrifize,
Unto the Bed of peace, and in the same,
Design our happiness to memorize,
Must, as it is remain, though as it is:
It shall to after times relate my zeal
To kings, and unto right, to quietness,
And to the union of the commonweal.
But this may now, seem a superfluous vow,
We have this peace; and thou have sung ynow
And more then will be heard, and then as good
As not to write, as not be understood.
Sam: Dan.
THE ARGUMENT.
PHilotas the son of Parmenio, Plutarch in the life of Alex.
was a man of great estimation among the Macedonians, and next unto Alexander
held to be the most valiant of the Greeks: patient of travail, exceeding
bountiful, and one that loved his men and friends better then any Nobleman of
the Camp: but otherwise noted of vainglory and prodigallitie, in so much as
his father having notice of his carriage, warned him to make himself less
then he was, to avoid the envy of the Camp, and the dislike of the King, who
grew suspicious of him in respect of the greatness of his Father, and his own
popularitie, and by having intelligence of certain vaunts of his used to
Antigona a fair Curtizan borne in the city of Pidna, with whom being in
love, he let fall many brave words, and bostes of a Soldier, to advance his
own actions and his fathers, terming Alexander at every word the young man.
Which speeches Antigona revealing to a companion of hers, were at length
brought to Craterus, who with the woman carried them to Alexander, whereby
Philotas lay open to all the advantages that might work his overthrow. Q.
Curtius lib. 6.
And in the end concealing a conspiracy (which was reueald unto him) intended
against the King, was thereby suspected to have been a party in the plotte:
but brought before Alexander, he so defended himself, that he obtained his
pardon for that time, suppd with the King that night, and yet the next day
notwithstanding, was arraignd for the same fact, which he stoutly denying, was
afterward put to torture, and then confessed his treason. And indeed Alexanders
drawing a pedigree from heaven with assuming the Persian magnificence; was the
cause that withdrew many the hearts of the nobility and people from him, and
by the confession of Philotas was that, which gave a purpose to him and his
father to have subverted the King as soon as he had established Asia, and freed
them from other fears, which being by Ephestion and Craterus, two the most
especial Counselors of Alexander gravely and prouidently discerned, was
prosecuted in that manner as became their neerenesse, and dearness with their
Lord and master, and fitting to the safety of the state, in the case of so
great an aspirer: who no doubt, had he not been prevented, (howsoe^er
popularly in the Army it might be otherwise deemed) he had turned the course of
(...)meant upon his Father and himself, or else by his imbroylments made it a
monster of many heads, as it afterward pro^^^d upon the death of Alexander.
The Chorus consisting of three Graecians, (as of three estates of a Kingdom)
and one Persian, representing the multitude and body of a people, who vulgarly
according to their affections carried rather with compassion on great men's
misfortunes, then with the consideration of the cause, frame their imaginations
by that square, and censure what is done.

The names of the Actors.
Philotas. Cebalinus. Chalisthenes. Polidamas. Alexander. Nichomachus.
Ephestion. Metron. Craterus. Thais a Curtizan. Antigone sometimes one of the
concubines of Darius. Attarras. Clitus. Sostratus. Perdiccas. Chorus. 3.
Graecians and a Persian.
THE TRAGEDY of PHILOTAS.
ACTVS I.
Philotas. Chalisthenes. Philotas reading his Fathers letter. MAke thy self
less Philotas then thou art?
What means my father thus to write to me?
Less then I am: in what? how can that be?
Must I be then set underneath my heart?
Shall I let go the hold I have of grace
Gaynd with so hard adventures of my blood,
And suffer others mount into my place,
And from below, look up to where I stood?
Shall I degrade the opinion of my worth?
By putting off employment; as undone
In spirit or grace: whilst other men set forth
To get that start of action I have won?
As if such men as I, had any place,
To stay betwixt their ruin, and their grace.
Can any go beyond me, but they will
Go over me, and trample on my state,
And make their fortune good upon my ill,
Whilst fear has power to wound me worse the^ hate?

Chapter Philotas, you deceive your self in this,
Your father means not you should yield in place,
But in your popular dependences:
Your entertainments, guifes, and public grace,
That does in jealous Kings, distaste the Peers,
And makes you not the greater but in fears.

Phi. Alas what popular dependences
Do I retain? can I shake off the zeal
Of such as do out of their kindnesses
Follow my fortunes in the commonweal.

Cha. Indeed Philotas therein you say true:
They follow do, your fortunes, and not you.

Phi. Yea but I find their love to me sincere.

Cha. Even such as to the Wolf the Fox does bea^e,
That visits him but to partake his pray,
And seeing his hopes deceived turns to betray.

Phi. I know they would if I in danger stood,
Run unto me, with hazard of their blood.

Cha. Yea like as men to burning houses run,
Not to lend aid, but to be lookers on.

Phi. But I with bounty, and with gifts have tide
Their hearts so sure, I know, they will not slide.

Cha. Bounty and gifts loose more then they do find,
Where many look for good, few have their mind:
Each thinks he merits more then than he has,
And so gifts laid for love do catch men wrath.

Phi. But many merely out of love attend.

Cha. Yea, those that love and have no other end:
Think you that men can love you when they know,
You have them not for friendship, but for sho^^^.
And as you are engaged in your affairs,
And have your ends, think, likewise they have theirs.

Phi. But I do truly from my heart affect
Virtue and worth, where I do find it set:
Besides my foes do force me in effect,
To make my party of opinion great,
And I must arm me thus against their scorns,
Men must be shodd, that go among the thorns.

Cha. Ah good Philotas you your self be guile,
It Is not the way to quench the fire with oil.
The meek and humble Lamb with small adoo,
Sucks his own dam, we see, and others too.
In Courts men longest live and keep their ranks,
By taking injuries, and giving thanks.

Phi. And is it so? then never are these hairs,
Like to attain that sober hew of gray,
I cannot plaster and disguise m'affaires,
In other colors then my heart does lay.
Nor can I patiently endure this fond
And strange proceeding of authority,
That has ingrost up all into their hand,
By idoliuing feeble majesty.
And impiously do labor all they can,
To make the King forget he is a man.
Whilst they divide the spoils, and pray of power,
And none at all respect the public good.
Those hands that guard and get us what is our,
The Solderie, engaged to vent their blood,
In worse ^ase seem then Pallas old-growne Moyle,
The Athenians fostred at their public cost;
For these poor souls consumed with tedious toil
Remain neglected, having done their most.
And nothing shall bring home of all these wars
But empty age and bodies chardgd with skarres.

Chapter Philotas, all this public care I fear
Is but some private touch of your dislike.
Who seeing your own designs not stand to square
With your desires, no others courses like.
The grief you take things are not ordered well,
Is that you feel your self I fear not well.
But when your fortunes shall stand parabel
With those you envy now: all will be well.
For you great men, I see are never more
Your ends attained the same you were before.
You with a finger can point out the staynes
Of others errors now, and now condem
The train of state, whilst your desire remains
without. But once got in you iumpe with them,
And interleague ye with iniquity,
And with a like neglect do temporize
And only serve your own commodity:
Your fortune then viewes things with other eyes.
For either greatness does transform the heart.
Int'other shapes of thoughts or certainly
This vulgar honesty does dwell apart
From power, and is some private quallity,
Or rather those fair parts which we esteem
In such as you, are not the same they seem,
You double with your selves or else with us.
And therefore now Philotas even as good.
Timbrace the times, as swell, and do no good.

Ph. Alas Chalisthenes you have not laid
True level to my nature, but are wide
From what I am within; all you have said
Shall never make me of another side
Then that I am, and I do skorne to clyme
By shaking hands with this unworthy time.

Chapter The time, Philotas then will break thy neck.

Ph. They dare nor, friend, my faith will keep my neck,
My service to the state has causioned
So surely for mine honor, as it shall
Make good the place my deeds have purchased
With danger, in the love, and hearts of all,

Chapter Those services, will serve as waights to charge
And presle you unto death, if your foot fail
never so little underneath your charge
And will be dee^'d, done, for your own avail.
And who have spirits to do the greatest good,
May do most hurt if they remain not good.

Ph. Tush. They cannot want my service in the state.

Ch These times want not men to supply the state.

Ph. I fear not whilst Parmenios forces stand.

Chapter Water far off q^enches not fire near hand.
You may be fair dispatched, e^e he can hear
Or if he heard, before he could be here.
And therefore do not build upon such sand
It will deceive your hopes, when all is done
For though you were the minion of the land
If you break out, be sure you are undone.
When running with the current of the state,
Were you the weakest man of men alive
And in conuentions, and in counsel sat
And did but sleep or nod, yet should you thrive
These mo^iue spirits are never fit to rise,
And it is a danger to be held so wise.

Ph. What call you running with the slate; shall I
Combine with those that do abuse the slate?
Whose want of judgment, wit and honesty,
I am ashamed to see, and seeing hate.

Chapter Tush, tush, my Lord think not of what were fit,
The world is gouernd more by form, then wit.
He that will ^ret at Lords, and at the r^ine,
Is but a fool, and grieves himself in vain.
Cannot you great men suffer others to
Have part in rule, but must have all to do.
Now good my Lord con^orme you to the rest,
Let not your wings be greater then your nest.

Ph. solus. See how these vain discoursiue Booke-men talk,
Out of those shadows of their ayerie powers,
And do not see how much they must defalke
Of their accoumpts, to make them gree with ours.
They little know to what necessities,
Our courses stand allied, or how we are,
Engaged in reputation other-wise
To be our selves in our particulare.
They think we can command our hearts to lie,
Out of their place: and still they preach to us.
Pack-bearing Patience that base property,
And silly g^i^^ of the all enduring Ass.
But let them talk their fill, it is but wind,
I must sail by the compass of my mind,
Enters a Messenger. My Lord, the King calls for you come my Lord away,

Ph. Well then I know there is some new stratage^
In hand, to be consulted on to day.
That I am sent for with such speed, to him,
Whose youth and fortune cannot brook delay.
But here is a Suitor stands t'impeech my have,
I would I had gone up the priule way:
Whereby we escape th'attending multitude,
Though I confess, that in humanity
It Is better to deny, then to delude.
Enters Cebalinus. My Lord Philotas I am come with news,
Of great importance that concerns us all,
And well has my good fortune met with you:
Who best can hear, and best discharge my care.

Ph. Say what it is and pray-thee friend be brief.

Ceb. The case requires your patience good my lord,
And therefore I must crave your ear a while,

Ph. I cannot now be long from Alexander.

Ceb. Nor Alexander will be long with us,
Unless you hear, and therefore know, the news
I bring, concerns his life; and this it is,
There is one Dymnus here within the camp:
Whose low estate, and high affections
Seem to have thrust him int'outragious ways.
This man affecting one Nichomacus
A youth, my brother, whom one day h'allures
Int'a temple where being both alone,
He breaks out in this sort: Nichomacus
Sweet lovely youth, ah should I not impart
To thee the deepest secrets of my heart,
My heart that has no lock shut against thee,
Would let it out sometimes unawares of me.
But as it issues from my faithful love,
So close it up in thine, and keep it fast:
Swear to be secret dear Nichomacus.
Swear by the sacred Godhead of this place
To keep my council, and I will reveal
A matter of the greatest consequence
That ever man imparted to his friend.
Youth and desire drawn with a love to know,
Swore to be secret, and to keep it close
When Dymnus tells him, that within three days
There should b'effected a conspiracy
On Alexanders person, by his means
And diverse more of the Nobillitie.
To free their labors and redeem them home,
Which when Nichomacus my brother heard:
Is this your tale says he? O God forbid
Mine oath should tie my tongue to keep in this.
This ouglie sin of treason, which to tell
Mine oath compells me, faith against my faith
Must not be kept. My falsehood here is truth
And I must tell^ friend or friend not, Il^ tell.
Dymnus amazed hearing beyond conceit
The self-willd youth vow to reveal their plot:
Stands staring on him, drawing back his breath,
Or else his breath confounded with his thoughts
Bufied with death and horror, could not work,
Not having leisure now, to think what was
But what would be, his fears were run before,
And at misfortune ere she came to him.
At length yet, when his reason had reduced
His flying thoughts back to some certain stand,
Perceiving yet some distance was betwixt
Death and his fears which gave him time to work,
With his returning spirits he drew his sword,
Puts it to his own then to my brothers throat,
Then lays it down, the^ wrings his hands, the^ kneeles.
Then steadfast looks, then takes him in his arms,
Weeps on his neck, no word, but O will thou?
Will thou, be the destruction of us all?
And finding no relenting in the youth.
His milerie grew furiou^ and again
He takes his sword, and swears to sacrifice
To silence and their cause, his dearest blood.
The boy amazed, seeing no other way,
Was feign to vow, and promise secrecy;
And as if won t'allow and take that part,
Prays him to tell, who were his accomplices.
Which, though perplexed with grief for what was done,
Yet thinking now to have gained him to his side,
Dymnus replies: no wor^e then Loceus,
Demetrius of the privy Chamber, and
Nicanor, Amyntas, and Archelopis,
Drocenus, Aphebetus, Leuculaus,
Shall be th'associats of Nichomacus.
This when my brother once had understood,
And after much a do had got away
He comes and ^els me all the whole discourse:
Which here I have related unto you,
And here will I attend t'auouch the same,
Or bring my brother to confirm as much.
Whom now I leaft behind, least the conspirators
Seeing him here vnusing to this place,
Suspecting ^'b'appeachd, might shifts away.

Phil. Well fellow, I have heard thy strange report,
And will find time t'acquaint the king therewith,

SCENA SECVNDA.
Antigona and Thais. WHat can a free estate afford me more
Then my incaptiu'd fortune does allow?
Was I beloud, enriched, and graced before?
Am I not loved, enriched, and graced now?

Tha. Yea, but before thou were a kings delight.

Ant. I might be his although he was not mine.

Tha. His greatness made thee greater in men's sight.

Ant. More great perhapps without, but not within:
My love was then above me, I am now
Above my love. Darius then had thousands more
Philotas has but me as I do know.
Nor none else will he have, and so he swore.

Tha. Nay then you may believe him, if he swore.
Alas poor soul, she never came to know
Her liberty, nor lovers periuries.

Ant. Stand I not better with a meaner love,
That is alone to me, then with these powers,
Who out of all proportion must b'aboue
And have us theirs, but they will not be ours.
And Thais although thou be a Grecian,
And I a Persian, do not envy me.
That I embrace the only gallant man
Persia, or Greece or all the world can see.
Thou, who art intertain'd and graced by all
The flower of honor else, do not despise.
That unto me poor captive should befall
So great a grace in such a worthies eyes.

Tha, Antigona, I envy not thy love,
But thinks thee blessed t'inioy him in that sort.
But tell me truly did thou ever prove
Whether he loved in earnest or in sport

Ant. Thais; let m'a little glory in my grace,
Out of the passion of the joy I feel
And tell the'a secret, but in any case,
As you are a woman do not it reueile.
One day as I was fitting all alone,
In comes Philotas from a victory
All blood and dust, yet jolly having wenne
The glory of the day most gallantly.
And warmed with honor of his good Success.
Relates to me the dangers he was in:
Whereat I wondering, blamed his forwardnes.
Faith wench, says he, thus must we fight, toil, win.
To make that yong-man proud, thus is he borne:
Upon the wings of our disartes, our blood
Setts him above himself and makes him skorne,
His own, his country, and the Authors of his good.
My father was the first that out from Greece
Showed him the way of Asia, set him on
And by his project raisd the greatest piece
Of this proud work which now he treads upon.
Parmenio without Alexander much has wrought,
Without Parmenio, Alexander has done naught.
But let him use his fortune whilst he may,
Times have their change, we must not still be lead.
And sweet Antigona thou may one day
Yet, bless the hour to have known Philotas bed.
Wherewith he sweetly kissed me, and now deem,
If that so great, so wise, so rare a man,
Would if he held me not in dear esteem
Have vttred this t'a captive Persian.
But Thais I may no longer stay, for fear
My lord return, and find me not within,
Whose eyes yet never saw me any where
But in his chamber where I should have been.
And therefore Thais farewell.

Th. Fare well Antigona.
Now have I that which I desired long
Laid in my lap by this fond woman here,
And means t'auenge me of a secret wrong
That does concern my reputation nere.
This gallant man, whom this fool in this wise
Vaunts to be hers, I must confess to have loved
And used all th'ingins of these conquering eyes
Affections in his hy-built heart to have moved
Yet never could: for what my labor seeks
I see is lost upon vain ignorance.
Whilst he that is the glory of the Greeks
Virtues vpholder, honors countenance,
Out of this garnish of his worthy parts
Is fallen upon this foolish Persian,
To whom his secrets gravely he imparts,
Which she as wisely keep and govern can:
It Is strange to see the humor of these men,
These great aspiring spirits that should be wise
We women shall know all; for now and then
Out of the humor of their iollities
The smoke of their ambition must have vent,
And out it comes what rackes should not reuaile,
For this her humor has so much of wind,
That it will burst it self if too close pent,
And none more fit then us their wisdoms find,
Who will for love or want of wit conceal.
For being the nature of great spirits, to love
To be, where they may be most eminent,
And rating of themselves so far above
Us in conceit with whom they do frequent,
Imagine how we wonder and esteem
AIl that they do or say, which makes them strive
To make our admiration more extreme:
Which they suppose they cannot, less they give
Notice of their extreme and highest thoughts.
And then the opinion that we love them too,
Begers a confidence of secrecy,
Whereby what ever they intend to do,
We shall be sure to know it presently.
But faith, I scorn that such a one as she,
A silly witted wench, should have this grace
To be preferred and honored before me,
Having but only beauty, and a face.
I that was ever courted by the Great
And gallanist Peers and Princes of the East,
Whom Alexander in the greatest state
The earth did ever see him, made his guest.
There where this tongue obtained for her merit
Eternity of fame: there where these hands
Did write in fire the glory of my spirit,
And set a trophey that for ever stands.
Thaeis Action with the Grecian acts shall be
Inregistred alike. Thaeis she that fired
The stareliest Palace the earth did ever see,
Darius house that to the clouds aspired,
She is put back behind Antigona,
But soon Philotas shall his error see,
Who thinks that beauty best, men's passions fi^s,
For that they use our bodies, not our wits:
And unto Craterus will I presently,
And him acquaint with all this whose discourse,
Who I am sure will take it well of us,
For these great minions, who with envious eye
Look on each others greatness, will be glad,
In such a case of this importancie,
To have the advantage that may here be had.

CHORUS. WE as the Chorus of the vulgar^ stand
Spectators here, to see these great men play
Their parts both of obedience and command,
And censure all they do, and all they say.
For though we be esteemd but ignorant,
Yet are we capable of truth, and know
Where they do well, and where their actions want
The grace that makes them prove the best in show.
And though we know not, what they do within,
Where they attire, their mysteries of state:
Yet know we by th'euents, what plottes have been,
And how they all without do personate.
We see who well a meaner part became,
Fail in a greater and disgrace the same.
We see some worthy of advancement deemed,
Save when they have it: some again have got
Good reputation, and been well esteemed
In place of greatness, which before were not.
We see affliction act a better scene,
Then prosperous fortune which has marr^d it clean.
We see that all which we have praisd in some,
Have only been their fortune, not desert:
Some war have graced, whom peace does ill become:
And lustful ease has blemished all their part.
We see Philotas acts his goodness ill,
And makes his passions to report of him
Worse then he is: and we do fear he will
Bring his free nature to b'intrapt by them.
For sure there is some ingin closely laid
Against his grace and greatness with the King:
And that unless his humors prove more staide,
We soon shall see his utter ruining.
And his affliction, our compassion draws,
Which still looks on men's fortunes, not the cause,

ACTVS 2.
SCENA 1.
Alexander, Ephestion, Craterus. Alexander. EPhestion, thou do Alexander
love,
Craterus thou the King: yet both you meet
In one self point of loyalty and love,
And both I find like careful, like discreet.
Therefore my faithfuls^ Councillors to you
I must a weighty accident impart,
Which lies so heavy, as I tell you true
I find the burden much t'oppresse my heart.
Ingratitude and stubborn carriage,
In one of whom my love deserved respect,
Is that which moves my passion into rage,
And is a thing, I ought not to neglect.
You see how I Philotas raised have
Above his rank, his Peers, beyond his term:
You see the place, the offices I gave,
As th'earnest of my love to bind his firm.
But all, he deeming rather his desartes,
Then the effects of my grace any way,
Begins to play most peremptory parts,
As fitter to control then to obey.
And I have been informed, he fosters too,
The faction of that home-bent cowardice,
That would run back from glory, and undo
All the whole wonder of our enterprise,
And one day to our self presumes to write,
(Seeming ourstile and title to obrayd,
Which th'oracles themselves held requisite
And which not I, but men on me have laid)
And said he pitied those who under him should live.
Who held himself the son of Jupiter.
Alas good man, as though what breath could give,
Could make mine own thoughts other then they are.
I that am Arbiter betwixt my heart,
And their opinion, know how it stands within,
And find that my infirmities take part,
Of that same frailty, other men live in.
And yet what if I were disposd to wink,
At th'intertaind opinion spread so far.
And rather was content the world should think.
Us other then we are, then what we are.
In doing which, I know I am not gone
Beyond example, seeing that Majesty
Needs all the propps of admiration
That may be got to bear it up on hye.
And much more mine, which but even now begun
By miracles of fortune, and our worth,
Needs all the complements to rest upon:
That reu'rence and opinion can bring forth,
Which this wise man conceiues not, and yet takes:
Upon him to instruct us what to do.
But these are but the florishes he makes,
Of greater malice he is bent unto:
For sure me thinks I view within his face,
The mapp of change and inncuacion:
I see his pride contented with no place,
Unless it be the throne I sit upon.

Ephesians Had I not heard this from your sacred tongue,
Dear sovereign, I would never have believed
Philotas folly would have done that wrong
To His own worth, and th'honors he received,
And yet me thought of late his carriage.
In such exceeding pomp and galiantry,
And such a world of followers; did presage
That he affected popularity.
Especially since for his service done.
He was adiudgd to have the second place
In honor with Antigonus, which won,
To some the opinion to be high in grace.
Then this last action leading the right winge,
And th'ouerthrow he gave, might happ enlarge
The Opinion of himself considering,
Th'especiall grace and honor of his charge.
Whereby perhaps in rating his own worth,
His pride might vnder-ualew that great grace:
From whence it grew, and that which put him forth.
And made his fortune suting to the place.
But yet I think he is not so unwise,
Although his fortune, youth and iollity.
Makes him thus mad, as he will enterprise
Ought against course, his faith, and loyalty.
And therefore if your grace did but withdraw,
Those beams of favor which do daze his w^^ts:
He would be soon reduced to his rank of awe.
And know himself, and bear bim as befits.

Alex. Withdraw our grace, and how can that be done.
Without some sulliuation to ensue.
Can he be safe brought in being so sar gone,
I hold it not. Say Craterus what think you.

Cra. Sovereign. I know the man, I find his spirit,
And malice shall not make me I protest.
Speak other then I know his pride does merit,
And what I speak is for your interest.
Which long ere this I would have uttered,
But that I feared your majesty would take,
That from some private g^idg it rather bred,
Then out of care for your dea^e sisters sake.
Or rather that I sought to cross your grace,
Or to confine your favor within bounds,
And finding him to hold so high a place:
In that divine conceit which ours confounds,
I thought the safest way to let it rest,
In hope that time some passage open would:
To let in those clear looks into that breast
That does but malice and confusion hold.
And now I see you have discernd the man,
Whom I protest I hold most dangerous.
And that you ought with all the speed you can
Work to repress a spirit so mutinou^:
For even already he is swollen so high,
That his affections ouer-flowe the brime
Of his own powers, not able to deny
Passage unto the thoughts that govern him.
For but even now I heard a strange report
Of speeches he should use to his Curtizan:
Vaunting what he had done, and in what sort,
He labourd to advance that proud young man.
(So terming of your sacred majesty)
With other such extrauagant discourse:
Whereof we shall attain more certainty,
I doubt not shortly and discry his course,
Mean while about your person I advise,
Your grace should^ all ^ more sufficient guard:
And on his actions set such wary eyes,
As may thereof take special good regard.
And note what p^rson^ chiefly he frequents:
And who to him have the most free access,
How he bestows his time, where he presents,
The large revenue of his bounteousnesse.
And for his wench that lies betwixt his arms.
And knows his hare I will about with her,
She shall be wrought t'apply her usual charms:
And I will make her my discouerer.
Alex. This counsel Craterus we do well allow,
And give thee many thanks for thy great care.
But yet we must bear fair, lest he should know,
That we suspect what his affections are,
For that you see he holds a side of power:
which might perhapps call up some mutiny.
His father old Parmenio at this hour,
Rules Medea with no lesser powers then I.
Himself you see gallantly followed:
Holds next to us a special government:
Canus that with his Sister married,
Has under him again commandment:
Amyntas and Symanus his dear friends
With both their honorable offices.
And then the private train that on them tendes,
With all particular dependences.
Are motives to advice us how to deal.
Crat. Your grace says true, but yet these clouds of smooke
Vanish before the sun of that respect
Whereon men's long-inurd affections look
With such a native zeal, and so affect:
As that the vain and shallow practisies,
Of no such giddy traitor (if the thing,
Be took in time with due aduisednesse:
Shall the least show of any fealing bring.
Alex, Well then to thee dear Craterus I refer,
Th'especiall care of this great business.

SCENA 2.
Philotas, Ceballinus, Ser^uis. Ceb. MY Lord. I here have long attendance made
Expecting to be called t'auouch my newes^

Ph. In troth my friend I have not found the king^
At any leisure yet to hear the same.

Ceb. No not at leisure to prevent his death?
And is the matter of no more import?
I Will try another. Yet me thinks such men,
As are the eyes and ears of princes, should,
Not weigh so light such an intelligence

Ser. My lord the sum you willed me to give,
The captain that did visit you to day:
To tell you plain your cosfers yeald it not,

Phi. How, if they yeald it not, have I not then,
Apparel, plate jewels; why sell them: ^utarch ^^ the life ^f Alexan^er.

And go your way dispatch and give it him.
Me thinks I find the king much chaungd of late,
And unto me his graces not so great.
Although they seem in show all of one rate,
Yet by the touch I find them counterfe^^^
For when I speak, although I have his ear
Yet do I see his mind is other where.
And when he speaks to me I see he strives,
To give a coulor unto what is not,
For he must think that we whose states, whose lives.
Depend vp^n his grace l^arne not by rote,
T'obserue his actions, and to know his trym,
And though indeed princes be manifold,
Yet have they still such eyes to wait on them.
As are to piercing that they can behold.
And penetrate the inwards of the heart,
That no device can set so close a door,
Betwixt their shows and thoughts, but that their art:
Of shadowing it, makes it appear the more.
But many malicing my state of grace,
I know do work, with all the powers they have
Upon that easy nature, to displace
My fortunes, and my actions to deprave:
And though I know they seek t'inclose him in,
And feign would lock him up and chamber him:
Yet will I never stoop and seek to win
My way by them, that came not in by them.
And skorne to stand on any other feet
Then these of mine own worth; and what my plain
And open actions cannot fairly get
Baseness and soothing them shall never gain.
And yet, I know my presence and access,
Cleers all these mists which they have raisd before:
Though with my back straight turns that happiness.
And they again blow up as much or more;
Thus do we role the stone of our own toil,
And men suppose our hell, a heaven the while.

SCENA 3.
Craterus. Antigona. ANtigona, there is no remedy,
You needs must justify the speech you held,
With Thais, who will your conf'rence verify,
And therefore now it cannot be conceald.

Anti. O my good Lord I pray you urge me not,
Thais only of a cunning envious w^,
Scorning a stranger should have such alott,
Has out of her invention forged it.

Cra. Why then shall rackes and tortures force thee show,
Both this and other matters which we know.
Think therefore if it were not a wiser part,
T'accept of rest, rewards, pre^erment, grace,
And being perhaps so beauteous as thou art,
Of fair election for a nearer place,
To tell the truth, then to be obstinate,
And fall with the misfortune of a man^
Who in his dangerous and concusled state,
No good to thee but ruin render can^
Resolve thee of this choice, and let me know
Thy mind at full, at my returning back.

Ant. What shall I do, shall I betray my love,
Or die disgraced? what do I make a doubt
Betray my love? O heavenly powers above
Forbid that such a thought should issue out
Of this confused breast: nay rather first
Let tortures, death, and horror do their worst.
But out alas this inconsidrate tongue,
Without my hart^ consent and priuitie,
Has done already this unwilling wrong,
And now it is no wisdom to deny.
No wisdom to deny? yes, yes, that tongue
That thus has been the ^avtor to my heart,
Shall either powrefully redeem that wrong,
Or never more shall words of breath impart,
Yet what can my den^all profit him,
Whom they perhaps whether I tell or not,
Are purposed upon matters known to them,
To ^uinate on some discovered plot.
Let them do what they will. Let not thy heart
Seem to be accessarie in a thought,
To give the leaft advantage of thy part,
To have a part of shame in what is wrought.
O this were well, if that my dangers could
Redeem his peril, and his grace restore,
For which, I vow, my life I render would,
If this poor life could satisfy therefore.
But it is not for thy honor to forsake
Thy love for death, that loved thee in this sort,
Alas what notice will the world take
Of such respects in women of my sort.
This act may yet put on so fay^e a cote
Upon my foul profession, as it may
Not blush t'appeare with those of cleanest note,
And have as hye a place with fame as they.
What do I talk of fame? do I not see
This faction of my flesh, my fears, my youth
Already entered and have bent at me,
The joys of life to batter down my truth.
O my subdued thought^ what have you done.
To let in fear and falsehood, to my heart,
Whom though they have surprizd they have not won,
For still my love shall hold the dearest part.

Crat. Antigona what are you yet resolud.

Ant. Resolved my Lord t'indure all misery.

Crat. And so be sure you shall if that b'your choice.

Ant What will you have me do my Lord, I am
Content to say what you will have me say.

Crat. Then come go with me to Alexander.

CHORUS. HOw do thou wear, and weary out thy days,
Restles ambition never at an end:
Whose trauails no her culean pillor stayes^
But still beyond thy rest thy labors tend.
Above good fortune, thou thy hopes do raise.
Still climing and yet never can ascend:
For when thou have attaind unto the top,
Of thy desires thou have not yet got up.
That heigh of fortune either is contrould.
By some more powrefull ouerlooking eye:
(That does the fullness of thy grace withhold)
Or counter-checkt with some concurrencie:
That it does cost far more adoo to hold,
The higth attaind, then was to get so hie.
Where stand thou can not, but with careful toil,
Nor loose thy hold with out thy utter spoil.
There do thou struggle with thine own distrust,
And others iealosies, their conterplot:
Against some vnderworking pride that must,
Supplanted be, or else thou stand not:
There wrong is paid with wrong, and he that thrust:
Down others, comes himself to have that lot.
The same concussion does afflict his breast.
That others shook, oppression is oppressed
That either happiness dwells not so hie,
Or else above. whereto pride cannot rise:
And that the hy'st of man's felicity,
But in the region of affliction lies:
And that we clime but up to misery,
High fortunes are but high calamities,
It is not in that Sphere, where peace does move,
Rest dwells below it, happiness above.
For in this hight of fortune are imbred,
Those thundering fragors that affright the earth.
From thence have all distempratures their head:
That bringes forth desolation, famine, d^arth,
There certain order is disordered:
And there it is confusion has her birth.
It is that high of fortune does undo,
Both her own quietness and others too.

ACTVS TERTIVS.
Alex. Metron. Ceballinus. Craterus Perdiccas, Ephest, COme, Metron say of whom
have thou received,
Th'intelligence of this conspiracy:
Contriud against our person, as thou say,
By Dymnus and some other of the Camp,
Is It not some vain report borne without cause,
That envy or imagination draws
From private ends to breed a public fear.
T'amuze the world with things that never were,

Met. Here may it please your highness is the man,
One Ceballinus that brought me the news.

Ceb. O Alexander I have saved thy life.
I am the man that has reueild their plot.

Alex. And how came thou to be informd thereof,

Ceb. By mine own brother, one Nichomacus,
Whom Dymnus chief of the conspirators,
Acquainted with the whole of their intents,

Alex. How long since is it, this was told to thee?

Ceb. About some three days, my Sovereign Lord.

Alex. What three days since? and have thou so long kept
The thing co^ceald from us being of that weight.
Guard, take and lay him presently in hold:

Ceb. O may it please your grace I did not keep,
The thing conceald one hour, but presently,
Ran to acquaint Philotas therewithal,
Supposing him a man so nere in place,
Would best repect a case that touched so neare^
And on him have I waited these two days.
Expecting to have been brought unto your Grace,
And seeing him weigh it light, pretending that
Your graces leisure serud not fit to hear.
I, to the master of your armory,
Addressed my self forthwith, to Metron here,
Who without making any more delay,
Pressed in unto your grace being in your bath,
Locking me up the while in th'armorie,
And all what I could show revealed has.

Alex. If this be so then, fellow I confess,
Thy loyal care of us was more then theirs,
Who had more reason theirs should have bin more,
Cause Dymnus to be presently brought forth,
And call Philotas straight, who now I see
Has not deceived me, in deceiving me,
Who would have thought one whom I held so nere.
Would from my saftie have been so far off,
When most it should and ought import his care,
And wherein his allegiance might make proof
Of those effects my favors had deserved,
And ought to have claym'd more duly at his hands
Then any of the rest. But thus we are served.
When private grace out of proportion stands
And that we call up men from of below:
From th'Element of baser property,
And set them where they may behold and know
The way of might and work of majesty.
Where se'ing those rays, which being sent far off,
Reflect a heat of wonder and respect,
To fail nere hand and not to show that proof,
(The object only working that effect,)
Think seeing themselves (though by our favor) set.
Within the self same orb of rule with us,
Their light would shine alone if ours were set,
And so presume t'obscure or shadow us.
But he shall know although his neerenes has,
Not felt our heat that we can burn him too.
And grace that shines can kindle unto wrath:
And Alexander and the king are two.
But here they bring us Dymnus in whose face,
I see is gilt, despair, horror and death.

Guar. Yea death indeed, for ere he could b'attachd.
He stabbed himself so deadly to the heart,
As it is impossible that he should live.

Al. Say Dymnus what have I deserud of thee:
That thou should think worthier to be thy king,
Philotas then our self. Hold hold he sinkes:
Guard keep him up get him to answer us.

Guar. H'hath spoke his last h'will never answer more^

Al. Sorry I am for that, for now has death,
Shut us cleene out from knowing him within:
And locked up in his breast all the others hearts,
But yet this deed argues the truth in grosle,
Though we be barred it in particular.
Philotas? are you come look here this man,
This Ceballinus should have suffered death:
Could it but have been proved he had conceald,
Th'intended treason from us these two days,
Wherewith he says he straight acquainted thee:
Think the more nere thou ar^e about our self,
The greater is the shame of thine offense.
And which had been less foul in him then thee.

Phil. Renouned prince, for that my heart is clear,
Amazement cannot ouercast my face,
And I must boldly with th'as^ured cheer,
Of my unguilty conscience tell your grace:
That this offense (thus happening) was not made,
By any the least thought of ill in me:
And that the keeping of it vnbewraid,
was that I held the iumor vain to be.
Considring some who were accusd were known,
Your ancient and most loyal seruitors:
And such as rather would let out their own:
Heart blood I know then once endanger yours,
And for me then upon no certain note,
But on the brable, of two wanton youths,
To Have told an idle tale, that would have wrought,
In your distrust, and wrong to other^ truths,
And to no end but only to have made,
My self a scorn and odious unto all.
(For which I rather took the bait was laid:
Then else for any treachery at all.)
I must confess I thought the safest way,
To smoother it a while, to the end I might:
If such a thing could be, some proufes bewray,
That might yield probability of right.
Protesting that mine own unspotted thought.
A like belief of others truth did breed,
Judging no impious wretch could have been wrought
T'imagin such a detestable deed.
And therefore O dread Sovereign do not way
Philotas faith by this his ouer-fight.
But by his actions past, and only lay
Error to his chardge, not malice not dispight.

Al. Well, lo thou have a favorable judge,
When though thou have not power to clear thy blame,
Yet has he power to pardon thee the same,
Which take not as thy right but as his grace,
Since here the person alters not the case.
And here Philotas, I forgive the offense,
And to confirm the same, lo here is my hand.

Phi. O sacred hand the witness of my life,
By thee I hold my safety ^s secure,
As is my conscience free from treachery.

Alex. Well got'your charge, and look to our affairs,
For we to morrow purpose to remove.
Exit.
Alex. In troth I know not what to judge herein,
Me thinks the man seems surely clear in this,
How ever otherwise his hopes have been,
Transported by his unadvisedness:
It cannot be, a guilty conscience should
Put on so sure a brow, or else by art
His looks stand new^rall, seeming not to hold
Respondencie of interest with his heart.
Sure for my part, he has dissolved the knot
Of my suspicion, with so clear a hand,
As that I think in this (what ever plot
Of mischief it may be) he has no hand

Crat. My Lord, the greater confidence he shows,
Who is suspected should be feared the more:
For danger from weak natures never grows,
Who must disturb the world are built therefore.
He more is to be feared that nothing fears,
And malice most effects, that least appears.
Presumption of men's powers as well may breed,
Assuredness, as innocence may:
And mischief seldom but by trust does speed,
Who kings betray, first their belief betray.
I would your grace had first conferrd with us
Since you would needs such clemency have shown.
That we might yet but have aduisd you thus,
That he his danger never might have known.
In faults wherein an after shame will live.
It Is better to conceal then to forgive.
For who are brought unto the block of death,
Think rather on the perrill they have past:
Then on that grace which has preserud their breath,
And more their sufferings then their mercy taste,
He now to plot your danger still may live.
But you his guilt not always to forgive.
Know that a man so swollen with discontent,
No grace can cure nor pardon can restore:
He knows how those who once have mercy spent,
Can never hope to have it any more.
But say that through remorce he calmer prove,
Will great Parmenio so attended on,
With that brave Army fostred in his love:
Be thankful for this grace you do his sonne^
Some benefits are odious, so is this:
Where men are still ashamed to confess,
To have so done as to deserve to die:
And ever do desire that men should guess,
They rather had receiud an injury,
Then life, since life they know in such a case,
May be restord to all but not to grace.

Perd. And for my part my liege I hold this mind
That sure he would not have so much suppressed,
The notice of a treason in that kind,
Unless he were a party with the rest:
Can it be thought that great Parmenios son,
The general commander of the horse:
The minion of the camp the only one,
Of secret counsel, and of free recourse
should not in three days space have found the king,
At leisure t'heare three words of that import:
Whilst he himself in idle lauishing,
Did thousands spend t'adua^ce his own report?

Cra. And if he gave no credit to the youth,
Why did he two days space delay him then?
As if he had belieu'd it for a truth,
To hinder his address to other men:
If he had held it but a vain conceit,
I pray why had he not dismissed him straight?
Men in their private dangers may be stout:
But in th'occasions and the fears of kings,
We ought not to be credulous, but doubt,
The intimation of the vainest things.

Alex. Well howsoever, we will yet this night,
Disport and banquet in unusual wise.
That it may seem we weigh this practice light,
How ever heavy, here within it lies.
Kings may not know distrust, and though they fear,
They must not take acquaintance of their fear.

SCENA 2.
Antigona. Thais. OY'are a secret councell-keeper Thais,
In troth I little thought you such a one:

Tha. And why Antigona what have I done.

Ant. You know fulwell your conscience you bewraies,

Tha. Alas good soul would you have me conceal:
That which your self could not but needs reueile?
Think you another can be more to you,
In what concerns them not, then you can be,
Whom it imports? Will others hold them true:
When you prove false to your own secrecy?
But yet this is no wonder for we see,
Wiser then we do lay their heads to gage:
For ryotous expenses of their tongues
Although it be a property belongs,
Especially to us and every age,
Can show strange presidents what we have been,
In cases of the greatest plots of men.
And it is the Scene on this worlds stage we play,
Whose revolution, we with men conuer^,
And are to act our pa^te as well as they:
Though commonly the weakest, yet apart.
For this great motion of a state we see,
Does turn on many wheeles^ and some though small
Do yet the greater move, who in degree.
Stir those who likewise turn the great'st of all.
For though we are not wise, we see the wise
By us are made or make us pa^^ies still,
In actions of the greatest quallities
That they can manage, be they good or ill.

Ant. I cannot tell; but you have made me do,
That which must ever more aflict my heart,
And if this be my woeful part t'vndo,
my dearest love, would I had had no part.
How have I sealy woman sifted been
Examind, tryde, flattred, ter^ifide,
By Craterus the cunningest of men,
That never leaft me till I had discride
What ever of Philotas I had known.

Tha. What is that all? perhapps I have thereby
Done thee more good then thou can apprehend.

Ant. Such good I rather you should get then I.
If that can be a good t'accuse my friend.

Th. Alas thy accusation did but quote
The mergin of some text of greater note.

Ant. But that is more then thou or I can tell.

Th. Yes yes Antigona I know it well.
For be thou sure that always those who seek
T'attack the Lion, so provide that still,
Their toils be such as that he shall not skape.
To turn his rage on those that wrought his ill.
Philotas neither was so strong nor high
But malice ouerlookt him, and discride,
Where he lay weak, where was his vanity,
And built her contermonts upon that side,
In such sort as they would be sure to raze
His fortunes with the ingins of disgrace.
And now may thou perhapps come great hereby,
And gracious with his greatest enemy.
For such men think they have no full succes:
unless they likewise gain the mistresses,
Of those they master, and succeed the place,
And fortunes of their loves with equal grace

Ant. Loves out alas, love such a one as he,
That seeks t'vndoo my loue^ and in him me.

Th. Tush love his fortunes, love his state, his place,
What ever greatness does it must have grace.

Ant. I weigh not greatness I must please mine eye.

Th. The Eye nothing fairer sees then dignity.

Ant. But what is dignity without our love?

Th. If we have that we cannot want our love,

Ant. Why that gives but the outside of delight:
The daytime joy, what comfort has the night?

Th. If power procure not that, what can it do?

Ant. I know not how that can b'attaind unto.

Th. Nor will I teach thee if thou know it not.
It Is vain I see to lea^ne an Asian wit.

Exit. Ant. If this be that great wit that learned skill,
You Greeks profess let me be foolish still,
So I be faithful. And now being here alone,
Let me record the heavy notes of moan.

SCENA 3.
Craterus. Ephestion. Clitus. etc. MY Lords, you see the flexible conceit,
Of our indaungered sovereign, and you know:
How much his perile, and Philotas pride,
Imports the state and us, and therefore now,
We either must oppose against deceit:
Or be undone. For now has time discride,
An open passage to his farthest ends,
From whence if negligence now put us back,
Return we never can without our wrack.
And good my Lords since you conceive as much,
And that we stand alike, make not me prosecute
The cause alone as if it did but touch
Only my self, and that I did both breed,
And urge these doubts out of a private grief.
Indeed I know I might with much more ease,
Sit still like others, and if dangers come:
Might think to shift for one as well as they,
But yet the says the duty and respect:
We owe both to our sovereign and the state,
My Lords, I hold, requires another care,

Ephesians. My Lord, assure you we will take a time
To urge a stricter count of Dymnus death.

Cra. My Lords I say unless this be the time,
You will apply your physic after death.
You see the king invited has this night
Philotas with the rest, and intertaines
Him with as kind an usage to our sight,
As ever, and you see the cunning strains
Of sweet insinuation that are vsd
Tallure the ear of grace with false reports,
So that all this will come to be excusd;
With one remove, one action quite transports
The kings affections over to his hopes,
And sets him so beyond the due regard
Of his own safety, as one enterprise,
May serve their turn, and may us all surprise.

Cli. But now since things thus of them selue break out
We have advantage to prevent the worst,
And every day will yeald us more no doubt,
For they are saved that thus are warned first.

Cra. So my Lord Clitus are they likewise warned.
T'accelarate their plot, being thus bewraide.

Cli. But that they cannot now it is too late
For treason taken ere the birth, does come
Abortiue, and her womb, is made her tomb

Cra. You do not know how far it has put forth
The force of malice, nor how far is spread
Already the contagion of this ill.

Clit. Why then there may some one be tortured
Of those whom Ceballinus bath reueald
Whereby the rest may be discovered.

Cra. That one must be Philotas from whose head
All this corruption flows, take him, take all.

Cli. Philotas is not named, and therefore may
Perhaps not be acquainted with this plot.

Cra. That his concealing of the plot bewrayes,
And if we do not cast to find him first.
His wit be sure bath laid so good a ground,
As he will be the last that will be found.

Cli. But if he be not found: then in this case,
We do him more by iniuring his grace.

Cra. If that he be not found to have dealt in this,
Yet this will force out some such thoughts of his,
As will undo him, for you seldom see,
Such men araignd that ever quitted be:

Ephesians. Well my Lord Craterus we will move his grace
(Though it be late) before he take his rest,
That some course may be taken in this case,
And God ordain it may be for the best.
Exeunt
CHORUS. SEE how these greatmen cloth their private hate,
In those fair colors of the public good:
And to effect their ends pretend the state,
As if the state by their affections stood.
And arm^ with power and princes iealosies,
Will put the least conceit of discontent:
Into the greatest rank of treacheries:
That no one action shell seem innocent.
Yea, valor, honor bounty shall be made,
As accessaries unto ends unjust:
And even the service of the state must lade,
The needfull'st undertakings with distrust.
So that base vileness idle luxury,
Seem safer far, then to do worthily.
Suspicion full of eyes, and full of ears,
Does through the tincture of her own conceit,
See all things in the colors of her fears:
And truth it self must look^ like to deceit,
That what ways' ever the suspected take,
Still, envy will most cunningly forelay
The ambush of their ruin, or will make
Their humors of themselves to take that way.
But this is still the fate of those that are,
By nature or their fortunes eminent.
Who either carried in conceit too far,
Do work their own or others discontent:
Or else are deemed sit to be suppressed.
Not for they are, but that they may be ill,
Since states have ever had far more unrest,
By spirits of worth, then men of meaner skill:
And find that those do always better prove,
Wh'are equal to employment not above.
For self opinion would be seen more wise
Then present counsels, customs, orders laws,
And to the end to have them otherwise,
The common wealth into combustion draws.
As if ordaind t'imbroyle the world with wit,
As Well as grosenesse to dishonor it.

ACTVS 4.
SCENA 1.
Attarras. Sostratus. Sost. CAn there be such a sudaine change in Court
As you report? is it to be belieud
That great Philotas whom we all beheld
In grace last night should be arraignd to day.

At. It can be: and it is as I report
For states of grace are no sure holds in courts.

Sost. But yet it is strange they should be overthrown
Before their certain forseitures were known.

At. Tush it was breeding long though suddenly
This thunder-crack comes but to break out now.

Sost. The time I waited and I waited long
Until Philotas with some other Lords
Depart the presence, and as I conceiud,
I never saw the king in better mood,
Nor yet Philotas ever in more grace
Can such storms grow and yet no clouds appear?

At. Yea court storms grow when skies there seem most clear
It was about the deepest of the night
The blackest hour of darkness and of sleep
When with some other lords comes Craterus
Falls down before the King, entreats, implores,
Coniures his grace as ever he would look
To save his person and the state from spoil,
Now to prevent Philotas practices.
Whom they had plainly found to be the man
Had plotted the destruction of them all.
The king would feign have put them off to time
And farther day, till better proofs were known
Which they perceiving pressed him still the more
And reinforced his dangers and their own.
And never leaft him till they had obtaind
Commission t'apprehend Philotas straight.
Now to make fear look with more hidious fac^,
Or else but to beget it out of form,
And careful preparations of distrust:
About the palace men in armor watch
In armor men about the king attend,
All passages and issue were forelaid
With horse, t'interrupt what ever news
Should hence break out into Parmenios camp.
I with three hundred men in armor chargd
Had warrant to attach and to committ
The person of Philotas presently:
And coming to his lodging where he lay,
Found him imburied in the soundest sleep
That ever man could be. where neither noice
Of clattring weapons, or our rushing in
With rude and trampling rumor, could dissolve
The heavy humor of that drowsy brow
Which held perhaps his senses now more fast
As loath to leave because it was the last.

Sost. Attarras, what can treason sleep so sound?
Will that loud hand of Horror that still beats,
Upon the guilty conscience of distrust:
Permit it ^'haue so resolute a rest?

At. I cannot tell but thus we found him there,
Nor could we I assure you waken him:
Till thrice I called him by his name, and thrice
Had shook him hard, and then at length he wakes,
And looking on me with a settled cheer,
Dear friend Attarras, what is the news said he?
What up so soon to hasten the remove,
Or raisd by some al'arme or some distrust?
I told him that the king had some distrust.
Why what will Nabarzanes play says he
The villain with the king; as he has done
Already with his miserable Lord?
I seeing he would, or did not understand
His own distreste: told him the charge I had:
Wherewith he rose, and rising vsd these words:
O Alexander now I see my foes,
Have got above thy goodness, and preuaild:
Against my innocence and thy word.
And as we then inchain'd and fettred him,
Looking on that base furniture of shame,
Poor body, said he, has so many alarm:
Raysd thee to blood and danger from thy rest,
T'inuest thee with this armor now at last,
Is this the service I am called to now?
But we that were not to attend his plaints,
Covering his head with a disgraceful weed:
Took and conuaid him suddenly to ward,
From whence he shall be instantly brought forth,
Here to b'arraignd before the king, who sits,
(According to the Macedonian use)
In cases capital, himself, as Judge.

Sost. Well then I see who are so high above,
Are nere to lightning that are nere to Jove.

SCENA 2.
Alexander with all his counsel, the dead body of Dymnus. the reuealers of the
conspiracy, Philotas. THe heinous treason of some few had like,
To Have ^ent me from you worthy soldiers,
But by the mercy of the immortal Gods
I live, and joy your sight, your reverend sight,
Which makes me more t'abhore those parracides,
Not for mine own respect, but for the wrong,
You had received, if their design had stood.
Since I desire but life to do you good.
But how will you be moved when you shall know,
Who were the men that did attempt this shame:
When I shall show that which I grieve to show:
And name such as would God I could not name,
But that the foulness of their practice now:
Blots out all memory of what they were
And though I would suppress them, yet I know,
This shame of theirs will never but appear.
Parmenio is the man, a man you see
Bound by so many merits both to me
And to my father, our ancienst friend
A man of years, experience gravity,
Whose wicked minister Philotas is
Who here Dimetrius Luculaus, and
This Dymnus whose dead body here you see
With others has subornd to slaughter me.
And, here comes Motron with Nichomacus
To whom this murthred wretch at first reueald
The project of this whole conspiracy
T'auere as much as was disclosd to him.
Nichomacus look here advise thee well,
What do thou know this man that here lies dead?

Nic. My sovereign Lord: I know him very well,
It is one Dymnus who did three days since
Bewray to me a treason practiced
By him and others to have slain your grace.

Al. Where or by whom, or when did he report
This wicked act should be accomplished?

Nic. He said within three days your majesty
Should be within your chamber murdered
By special men of the nobillity
Of whom he many namd, and they were these:
Loceus, Dimetrius, and Archelopis
Nicanor and Amyntas, Luculous
Droceus with Aphebaetus and himself.

Mot Thus much his brother Ceballinus did
Reveal to me from out this youths report.

Ceb. And so much with the circumstance of all
Did I unto Philotas intimate.

Alex. Then what has been his mind, who did suppress
The information of so foul a train
Your selves my worthy Soludiers well may guess,
Which Dymnus death declares not to be vain.
Poor Ceballinus not a moment stays,
To redischarge himself of such a weight,
Philotas careless, fearelesse, nothing weighes
Nor ought reueales. His silence shows deceit,
And tells he was content it should be done
Which though he were no party makes him one.
For he that knew upon what power he stood
And saw his fathers greatness, and his own
Saw nothing in the way which now withstood
His vast^ desires, but only this my crown.
Which in respect that I am issulesse
He thinks the rather easy to b'attaind
But yet Philotas is deceiud in this
I have who shall inhe^it all I gaind.
In you I have both children, kindred friends
You are the heirs of all my purchases,
And whilst you live I am not issuleste.
And that these are not shadows of my fears,
(For I fear naught but want of enemies,)
See what this intercepted letter bears,
And how Parmenio does his sons advise:
This shows their ends, hold read it Craterus.

Crat. reads it. My sons, First have a special care unto your selves
Then unto those which do depend on you.
So Shall you do what you intend to do.

Alex. See but how close he writes, that if these lines
Should come unto his sons, as they are sent,
They might encourage them in their disseignes,
If interpris'd, might mock the ignorant
But now you see what was the thing was meant,
You see the fathers care the sons intent.
And what if he as a conspirator,
Was not by Dymnus named among the rest:
That shows not his innocence but his power,
Whom they account too great to be suppressed:
And rather will accuse themselves then him,
For that whilst he shall live, there is hope for them.
And how h'hath borne himself in private sort.
I will not stand to urge, it is too well known,
Nor what has been his arrogant report:
T'imbase my actions, and to brag his own.
Nor how he mocked my letter which I wrote^:
To show him of the style bestowd on me,
By th'Oracle of Jove. these things I thought
But weaknesses, and words of vanity,
(Yet words that read the ulcers of his heart)
Which I suppressed, and never ceast to yeald
The chief rewards of worth and still compart,
the best degrees and honors of the field.
In hope to win his love, yet now at length,
There have I danger where I looked for strength:
I would to God my blood had rather been
Powrd out, the offering of an enemy;
Then practizd to be shed by one of mine,
That one of mine should have this in^amy.
Have I been so reserud from fears to fall
There where I ought not to have feared at all^
Have you so often aduisd me to regard
The safety, which you saw me running from,
When with some hot pursuit I pressed hard
My foes abroad; to perish thus at home?
But now that safty only rests in you
Which you so often have wished me look unto.
And now unto your bosoms must I fly
Without whose will I will not wish to live:
And with your wills I cannot; less I give
Due punishment unto this treachery.

Amyn. Attarras, bring the hateful prisoner forth
This traitor which has sought t'vndoo us all,
To give us up to slaughter, and to make
Our blood a skorne, here in a barberous land.
That none of us should have returned back,
Unto our native country, to our wives
Our aged parents, kindred, and our friends.
To make the body of this glorious host
A most deformed trunk without a head,
Without the life or soul to guide the same

Caenus. O thou base traitor impious parracide,
Who make me loath the blood that matched with thine
And if I might but have my will. I vow
Thou should not die by other hand then mine.

Alex. Fie Caenus what a barbarous course is this
He first must to his accusation plead.
And have his trial, formal to our laws
And let him make the best of his bad cause
Philotas here the Macedonians are
To judge your fact, what language will thou use?

Phi. The Persian language if it please your grace,
For thar beside the Macedonians, here
Are many that will better understand,
If I shall use the speech your grace has used,
Which was I hold unto no other end,
But that the most men here might understand.

Al. See how his native language he disdaines,
But let him speak at large as he desires,
So long as you remember he does hate
Besides the speech our glory and the state.
Exit^
Phi. Black are the colors laid upon the crime,
Wherewith my faith stands chargd my worthy lord^^
That as behind in fortune so in time,
I come too late to clear the same with words.
My condemnation is gone out before
My innocence, and my just defense:
And takes up all your hearts, and leaves no door
For mine excuse to have an entrance.
That destitute of all compassion, now,
Betwixt an vp^ight conscience of desert,
And an unjust disgrace, I know not how
To satisfy the time, and mine own heart.
Authority looks with so stern an eye
Upon this woeful Bar, and must have still
Such an advantage over misery
As that it will make^ good, all that it will.
He who should only judge my cause, is gone,
And why he would not stay, I do not see,
Since when my cause were heard his power alone,
As well might then condemn as set me free:
Nor can I by his absence now be cleared
Whose presence has condemned me thus unheard.
And though the greeuance of a prisoners tongue,
May both superfluous and disgraceful seem,
Which does not sue, but shows the judge his wrong:
Yet pardon me, I must not disesteme
My rightful cause for being dispisd, nor must
Forsake my self, though I am leaft of all,
Fear cannot make my innocence unjust
Unto it self, to give my truth the fall.
And I had rather, seeing how my fortune draws,
My words should be deformed then my cause.
I know that nothing is more delicate
Then is the sense and feeling of a state:
The clappe, the bruit, the fear but of a hurt
In kings behalfes, thrusts with that violence
The subjects will to prosecute report,
As they condemn, ere they discern the offense.

Ephesians. Philotas you deceive your self in this
That think to win compassion, and belief
B'impugning justice and to make men guess
We do you wrong out of our heat of grief,
Or that our place or passions did lay more
On your misfortunes, then your own deseart
Or have not well discernd your fact before,
Or would without, due proofs your state subvert,
These are the usual theames of traitors tongues
Who practice mischiefs, and complain of wrongs
Your treasons are too manifestly known
To mask in other livery then their own.

Cra. Think not, that we are set to charge you here
With bare suspicions but with open fact,
And with a treason that appears as clear
As is the sun, and known to be your act.

Ph. What is this treason? who accuses me?

Cra. The process of the whole conspiracy.

Ph. But where is the man that names me to be one?

Cra. Here this dead traitor shows you to be one.

Ph. How can he dead, accuse me of the same
Whom living he nor did, nor yet could name.

Cra. But we can other testimony show
From those who were your chiefest accomplices.

Ph. I am not to b'adiudgd in law you know
By testimony, but by witnesses. No testimonijs si^e testibsu.

Let them be here produced unto my face
That can avouch m'a party in this case.
My Lords and fellow soldiers if of those
Whom Dymnus nominated, any one
Out of his tortures will a word disclose
To show I was a party: I have done.
Think not so great a number ever will
Endure their torments and themselves accuse
And leave me out. Since men in such case, still
Will rather slander others then excuse.
Calamity malignant is, and he
That suffers justly for his guiltiness
Eases his own affliction, but to see
Others' tormented in the same distress,
And yet I fear not whatsoever they
By rackes and tortures can be forest to say.
Had I been one would Dymnus have conceald,
My name being held to be the principal?
would he not for his glory have reueald
The best to him to whom he must tell all?
Nay if he falsely then had named me one?
To grace himself, must I of force be one.
Alas, if Ceb^llinus had not come to me
And given me note of this conspiracy
I had not stood here now but bin as free
From question as I am from treachery.
That is the only cloud that thundereth
On my disgrace. Which had I deemed true
Or could but have deuind of Dymnus death
Philotas, had, my Lords, sat therewith you.
My fault was to have been too credulous
Wherein I showed my weakness I confess.

Cra. Philotas what a monarch and confess
Your imperfections and your weakness?

Phi. O Craterus, do not insult upon calamity,
It is a barberous grossnes to lay on
The weight of skome where heavy misery
To much already ways men's fortunes down
For if the cause be ill I undergo,
The law and not reproach must make it so.

Caen. There Is no reproach can ever be too much
To lay on traitors, whose desearts are such.

Ph. Men use the most reproaches where they fear
The cause will better prove then their desire.

Caen. But sir, a traitors ^ause that is so clear.
As this of yours will never need that fear.

Phi. I am no traitor but suspected one,
For not beleiuing a conspiracy.
And mere suspect by law condemns none,
They are approved facts for which men die.

Cra. The law in treasons does the will correct.
With like seuerenes as it does the effect.
The Affection is the essence of the offense,
The execution only but th'accidence,
To have but willed it, is to have done the same.

Phi. I did not err in will, but in belief,
And if that be a traitor, then am I the chief.

Cra. Yea but your will made your belief consent
To hide th'practise till the accomplishment.

Phi. Belief turns not by motions of our will,
And it was but the event that made that ill.
Some facts men may excuse, though not defend,
Where will and fortune have a diverse end.
The Example of my father made me fear,
To be too forward to relate things heard.
Who writing to the king, wished him forbear,
The potion his physician had prepared.
For that he heard Darius tempted had,
His faith, with many talents, to b'vntrue.
And yet his druggs in the end not proving bad,
Did make my fathers care seem more then due.
For often by an untimely diligence,
A busy faith may give a prince offense.
So that, what shall we do? if we reveal,
We are dispis'd, suspected if conceal.
And as for this where ever now thou be
O Alexander thou have pardoned me.
Thou have already given me thy hand,
The earnest of thy reconciled heart.
And therefore now o let thy goodness stand,
Unto thy word, and be thou as thou were.
If thou beleuidst me then, I am absolud,
If pardoned me, these fetters are dissolved.
What have I else deserved since yester night,
When at thy table I such grace did find,
What heinous crime has since been brought to light^
To wrong my faith, and to divert thy mind?
That from a restfull quiet most profound,
Sleeping in my misfortunes, made secure
Both by thy hand, and by a conscience sound,
I must be wak't for Gyues, for robes impure,
For all disgrace that on me wrath could lay,
And see the worst of shame, ere I saw day.
When I least thought that others cruelty,
Should have wrought more the^ thine own clemency.

Cra. Philotas whatsoever gloss you lay,
Upon your rotten cause, it is in vain,
Your pride, your carriage, ever did bewray.
Your discontent, your malice, and disdain.
You cannot palliat mischief but it will,
The Row all the fairest couerings of deceit
Be always seen; we know those streams of ill,
Flowed from that head that feed them with conceit.
You foster malcontents, you intertaine
All humors, you all factions must embrace.
You vaunt your own exploites, and you disdain
The kings proceedings, and his style disgrace.
You promise mountains, and you draw men on,
With hopes of greater good then has been seen.
You braggd of late that something would be done
Whereby your Concubine should be a Queen.
And now we see the thing that should be done.
But God be praisd we see you first undone.

Ph. Ah do not make my nature, if it had,
So pliable a stern of disposition,
To turn to every kindness, to be bad,
For doing good to men of all condition.
Make not you charity t'inter prete all
Is done for favor to be done for show,
And that we in our bounties prodigal.
Upon our ends not on men's needs bestow.
Let not my one days error make you tell,
That all my lifetime I did never well.
And that because this falls out to be ill,
That what I did, did tend unto this ill.
It is unjust to join t'a present fact
More of time past then it has ever had
Before to do with-all, as if it lackt
Sufficient matterels to make it bad.
^ d^o confess indeed I wrote something.
Against this title of the son of Jove,
And that not of the king but to the king,
I ^reely used these words out of my love,
And thereby has that dangerous liberty
Of speaking truth, with trust on former grace
Betrayed my meaning unto emnity
And drawn an argument of my disgrace.
So that I see though I spoke what I ought,
It was not in that manner as I ought.
And God forbid that ever soldiers words
Should be made liable unto misdeedes,
When fainting in their march, tyrd in the fight,
Sick in their tent, stopping their wounds that bleedes,
Or haut and jolly after conquest got
They shall out of their heat use words unkind,
Their deeds deserve to have them rather thought
The passion of the season, then their mind.
For soldiers joy, or wrath is measurelesse^
Rapt with an instant motion, and we blame,
We hate, we praise, we pity in excess
According as our present passions flame.
Sometimes to pass the Ocean we would feign
Sometimes to other worlds, and sometimes slack
And idle, with our conquests, intertaine
A sullen humor of returning back.
All which conceits one trumpets sound does end,
And each man running to his ranks does lose
What in our tents dislik^ us, and we spend
All that conceived wrath upon our foes.
And words, if they proceed of leuity
Are to be skornd, of madness pitied
If out of malice or of injury
To be remiss'd or vnacknowledged:
For of themselves they vanish by disdain,
But if pursude they will be thought not vain.

Cr^. But words according to the person way,
If his designs are heinous so are they,
They are the tinder of sedition, still,
Wherewith you kindle fires inflame men's will.

Phi. Craterus you have the advantage of the day,
The law is yours to say what you will say.
And yet does all your Gloss but bear the sense,
Only of my misfortune not offense.
Had I pretended mischief to the king,
Could not I have effected it without
Dimnus? did not my free access bring
Continual means to have brought the same about?
Was not I since I heard the thing discride,
Alone, and armed in private with his grace,
What hindered me that then I had not tried
To Have done that mischief, having time and place?

Cra. Philotas even the providence above.
Protectresse of the sacred state of kings,
That never suffers treachery to have
Good council, never in this case but bringes
Confusion to the actors, did undo
Your hearts, in what you went about to do.

Phi. But yet despair we see does thrust men on
Se'ing no way else t'vndoo er be undone.

Cra. That same despair does likewise let men fall
In that amaze they can do naught at all.

Phi. Well, well, my Lords my service has made known^
The faith I owe my Sovereign and the state
Philotas forwardness has ever shown
Unto all nations at how high a rate
I prizd my king, and at how low my blood,
To do him honor and my country good.

Ephesians. We blame not what y'haue been, but what you are:
We accuse not here your valor, but your fact,
Not to have been a leader in the war,
But an ill subject, in a wicked act.
Although we know thrust rather with the love
Of your own glory, then with duty lead
You have done much, yet all your courses prove
You tide still your a^chieuements to the head
Of your own honor, when it had bin meet,
You had them laid, down at your sovereigns feet.
God gives to kings the honor to command,
To subjects all their glory to obey:
Who ought in time of war as rampires stand,
In peace as th'ornaments of state array.
The king has recompensd your services
With better love then you show thankfulness.
By grace, he made you greater then you were
By nature: you received that which he was not tide
To give to you: his gift was far more dear
Then all you did, in making you imployd.
But say your service has deserved at all,
This one offense has made it odious all.
And therefore here in vain, you use that mean
To plead for life, which you have canceald clean.

Phi. My lord you far mistake me if you dee^e
I plead for life, that poor weak blast of breath,
From which so often I ran with light esteem
And so well have acquainted me with death,
No no, my Lords, it is not that I fear
It is mine honor that I seek to clear.
And which if my disgraced cause would let
The language of my heart be understood,
Is all which I have ever sought to get
And which (o leave me now) and take my blood.
Let not your envy go beyond the bound
Of what you seek: my life stands in your way
That is your aim, take it and do not wound
My reputation with that wrong I pray.
If I must needs be made the sacrifice
Of envy, and that no oblation will
The wrath, of Kings but only blood suff^ze,
Yet let me, have something left that is not ill.
Is there no way to get unto our lives
But first to have our honor overthrown?
Alas though grace of Kings all greatness gives
It cannot give us virtue, that is our own
Though all be theirs our hearts and hands can do
Yet that by which we do is only ours:
The trophies that our blood erects unto
Their memory to glorify their powers
Let them enjoy: yet only to have done
Worthy of grace let not that be undone.
Let that high swelling river of their fame
Leave humble streams that feed them yet their name
O my dear father did thou bring that spirit
Those hands of valor that so much have done.
In this great work of Asia, this to merit
By doing worthily to be undone?
And have thou made this purchase of thy sword
To get so great an Empire for thy Lord
And so disgraced a grave for thee and thine,
T'extinguish by thy service all thy line?
One of thy sons by being to valourous
But five days since, yet o well, lost his breath
Thy dear Nicanor th'halfe arch of thy house,
And here now the other at the bar of death
Stands ouerchardgd with wrath in far worse case
And is to be confounded with disgrace.
Thy self must give th'acquitance of thy blood
For others debts to whom thou have done good.
Which if they would a little time afford
Death would have taken it without a sword.
Such the rewards of great employments are
Hate kills in peace, whom fortune spares in war.
And this is that high grace of Kings we seek,
Whose favor, and whose wrath consumes a like.

Ephesians. Lo here the misery of kings, whose cause
How ever just it be, how ever strong,
Yet in respect they may, their greatness draws
The world to think they ever do the wrong.
But this foul fact of yours you stand upon
Philotas shall beside th'apparancy
Which all the world sees plain, ere we have done
By your own mouth be made to satisfy.
The most stiff par^lalist that will not see.

Phi. My mouth will never prove so false I trust
Unto my heart, to show it self unjust:
And what I here do speak I know my lords
I speak with mine own mouth, but other where
What may be said I say, may be the words
Not of my breath, but fame that often does err,
Let th'oracle of Ammon be inquir^d
About this fact, who if it shall be true
Will never suffer those who have conspird
Against Jove's son t'escape without their due;
But will reveal the truth, or if this shall
Not seem convenient: why then lay on all
The tortures that may force a tongue to tell,
The secret'st thought that could imagine ill.

Bell. What need we se^d to know more then we know
That were to give you time t'acquaint your friends
With your estate, till some combustion grow
Within the camp to hasten on your ends:
And that the gold and all the treasury
Committed to your fathers custody
In Media, now might arm his desp'rat troops
To come upon us and to cut our throtes.
What shall we ask of Jove that which he has
Reueald already? but let us send to give
Thanks that by him, the king has skapt the wrath
Of thee disloyal traitor and does live.

Guar. Lets tear the wretch in pieces, let us rend
With our own hands, the traitrous para^ide.

Alex. Peace ^elon, silence loving soldiers.
You see my lords out of your judgments grau^
That all excuses sickly colors have,
And he that has thus false and faithles ben^
Must find out other gods and other men
Whom to forswear, and whom he may decelue,
No words of his can make us more believe
His impudence, and therefore seeing it is late,
We till the morning, do dismiss the court.

ACTVS 5.
Chorus. Grecian and Persian. Per. WEll then I see there is small difference
Betwixt your state and ours, you civil Greek^
You great contriuers of free gouerments.
Whose skill the world from out all countries seeks.
Those whom you call your kings are but the same
As are our sovereign tirants of the East,
I see they only differ but in name,
The Effects they show agree, or near at least.
Your great men here as our great Satrapaes
I see laid prostrate are with basest shame,
Upon the least suspect, or iealousies
Your King, ^conceiue or others en^^yes frame,
Only herein they differ, that your Prince
Proceeds by form of law to effect his end;
Our Persian Monarch makes his frown convince
The strongest truth: his sword the process ends
With present death, and maks no more adoo,
He never stands to give a gloss unto
His violence, to make it to appear
In other hew, then that it ought to beare^
Wherein plain dealing best his course commends
For more h'offends who by the law offends
What need has Alexander so to strive
By all these shows of fornie to find this man
Guilty of treason, when he does contriue
To have him so adiudgd, do what he can.
He must not be acquit, though he be clear
Th'offendor not the offense is punished here.
And what availes the fore-condemnd to speak
How ever strong his cause, his state is weak.

Gre. Ah, but it satisfies the world, and we
Think that well don, which done by law wesee.

Per. And yet your law serves but your private ends
And to the compass of your power extends.
But is it for the ^^iesty of Kings
To sit in judgments thus themselves with you?

Gre. To do men justice is the thing that bringes
The greatest majesty on earth to Kings.

Per. That by their subalternate ministers
May be performed as well, and with more grate
For to command it to be don infers
More glory then to do. It does imbase
The Opinion of a power t'inuulgar so
That sacred presence, which should never go
Never bes^ene, but even as Gods below
Like to our Persian Kings in glorious show.
And who as stars affixed to their Sphere
May not descend to be from what they are.

Gre. Where kings are so like gods, there subjects are not men,

Per. Your king begins this course, and what will you be the^?

Gre. Indeed since prosperous fortune gave the rain
To headstrong power and lust, I must confess
We Grecians have lost deeply by our gain,
And this our greatness makes us much the l^ss^
For by th'accession of these mighty states
Which Alexander wonderously has got
He has forgot himself, and us, and rates
His state above mankind, and ours at noughs.
This has thy pompeo feeble Asia wrought,
Thy base adorings hathtransformd the King
Into that shape of pride, as he is brought
Out of his wits, out of acknowledging
From whence the glory of his greatness springes,
And that it was our swords that wrought these things.
How well were we within the narrow bounds
Of our sufficient yielding Macedon,
Before our kings inlardgd then with our wounds
And made these salies of ambition.
Before they came to give the regal law
To those free states which kept their crowns in awe.
They by these large dominions are made more
But we become far weaker then before.
What get we now by winning but wide minds
And weary bodies with the expense of blood?
What should ill do, since happy fortune finds
But misery, and is not good, though good?
Action begets still action, and retains
Our hopes beyond our wishes, drawing on
Aneuer ending circle of our pains
That makes us not have done, when we have done.
What can give bounds to Alexanders ends
Who countes the world but small, that calls him great:
And his desires beyond his pray distends
Like beasts that murder more then they can eat?
When shall we look his travails will be done,
That tends beyond the Ocean and the Sun?
What discontentments will there still arise
In such a Camp of kings, to inter-shock
Each others greatness, and what mutinies,
Will put him from his comforts, and will mock
His hopes, and never suffer him to have
That which he has of all which fortune gave?
And from Philotas blood (o worthy man)
Whose body now rent on the torture lies
Will slow that vain of fresh conspiracies,
As ouer-flow him will, do what he can.
For cruelty does not imbetter men
But them more wary makes, then they have been.

Per. Are not your great-men free from tortures then
Must they be likewise rackt, as other men?

Gre. Treason affords a priuiledg to none
Who like offends, has punishment all one.

SCENA 2.
Polidamas, Sostratus. FRriend Sostratus, come have you euet known
Such a distracted face of court as now,
Such a distrustful eye, as men are grown
To fear themselves and all: and do not know.
Where is the side that shakes not, who looks best
In this foul day, th'oppressor or the oppressed.
What posting, what dispatches, what advice,
What search, what running, what discoueries?
What rumors, what suggestions, what device
To clear the king, please people, hold the wise,
Retain the ^ude, crush the suspected sort
At unawares, ere they discearne they are hurt.
So much the fall of such a weighty peer
Does shake the state, and with him tumble down,
All whom his beam of favor did vpbeare,
All who to rest upon his base were known.
And none that did but touch upon his love
Are free from fear to perish with his love.
My self whom all the world have known t'imbrace
Parmenio in th'intirenes of my heart,
And ever in all battayles, every chase
Of danger, fought still next him on that part:
Was seazd on this last night, late in my bed,
And brought unto the presence of the king.
To pay I thought the tribute of my head,
But o it was for a more abhorred thing:
I must redeem my danger with the blood
Of this dear friend, this dear Parmenios blood.
His life must pay for mine, these hands must gore,
That worthy heart, for whom they fought before.

Sost. What has the king commanded such a deed,
To make the hearts of all his subjects bleed?
Must that old worthy man Parmenio die?

Pol. O Sostratus he has his doom to die,
And we must yeald unto necessity.
For coming to the king, and there receiud
With unexpected grace, he thus began:
Polidamas we both have been deceiud
In holding friendship with that faithless man
Parmenio, who for all his glozing mine
Thou see has sought to cut my throat and thine,
And thou must work revenge for thee and me:
And therefore haste to Media speedely,
Take these two letters here, the one from me
Unto my sure and trusty seiuants there,
The other signed with Philotas seal,
As if the same to his father written were:
Carry them both, effect what I have said,
The one will give th'accesse, the other aid,
I took the letters, vowed to effect the same.
And here I go the instrument of shame.

Sost. But will you charge your honor with this shame?

Poli. I must or be undone with all my name.
For I have left all th'adamantiue ties
Of blood and natu^re, that can hold a heart
Chaind to the world^ my br^ethren and allies
The Ostages to caution for my part.
And for their lives must I dishonor mine.
Else should the king rather have turned this sword
Upon my heart, then forced it impiously,
(Having done all fair service to his Lord
Now to b'imployd in this foul villainy.)
Thus must we do who are inthrald to kings,
whether they will just or unlawful things.
But now Parmenio, o me think I see
Thee walking in th'artificiall Grove
Of pleasant Susis, when I come to thee,
And thou rememb^ing all our ancient love
Hastes to embrace me. Saying o my friend,
My dear Polidamas, welcome my friend,
Well art thou come that we may sit and chate
Of all the old adventures we have run.
It Is long Polidamas since we two met,
How does my sovereign Lord, how does my son?
When I vile wretch, whilst m'answere he attends
With this hand give the letter, this hand ends
His speaking joy, and stabbs him to the heart.
And thus Parmenio thou rewarded art
For all thy service, thou that did agree
For Alexander to kill Attalus
For Alexander I must now kill thee.
Such are the judgments of the heavenly powrs,
We others ruynes work, and others ours.

Cho. P. Why this is right now Alexander takes
The course of power, this is a Persian trick,
This is our way, here public trial makes
No doubtful noise, but buries clamor quick.

Gr. Indeed now Persia has no cause to rue,
For you have us undone, who undid you.

NVNGIVS. THis work is done, the sad Catastrophe
Of this great act of blood is finished now.
Philotas ended has the tragedy.

Cho. Now good my friend I pray thee tell us how.

N. As willing to relato as you to hear
A full-chargd heart is glad to find an ear.
The Council being dimissd from hence, and gone,
Still Craterus plyes the King, still in his ear,
Still whispering to him privately alone,
Urging it seemd a quick dispatch of fear:
For they who speako but privately to Kings,
Do seldom speak the best and fittest things.
Some would have had him forthwith stoned to death.
According to the Macedonian course:
But yet that would not satisfy the breath
Of busy rumor; but would argue force,
There must be some confessions made within,
That must abroad more satisfaction minne.
Craterus with Caenus and Ephestion,
Do mainely urge to have him tortured,
Whereto the king consents, and there upon
They three are sent to see it accomplished.
Racks, Yrons, Fires, the grisely torturers
Stand hidcously prepared before his face.
Philotas all unmoved, vnchaungd appears,
As if^ he would, deaths ougliest brow outface,
And skornd the worst of force, and asked them why
They staid to torture the kings enemy.

Cho. That part was acted well, God grant we hear
No worse a Scene then this, and all goes clear.
So should worth act, and they who dare to fight
Against corrupted times should dye upright:
Such hearts kings may dissolve but not defeat,
Agreat man where he falls he should lie great
Whose ruin (like the sacred carkeses
Of skattred temples which still reverent lio,
And the religious honor them no less
Then if they stood in all their gallantry.
But on with thy report.

Nu. Straight were hote-yrons applied to sere his flesh,
Then wresting racks, his comely body strain:
Then iron whipps and then the rack a-fresh,
Then fire again, and then the whipps again:
Which he indures with so resolud a look
As if his mind were of another side
Then of his body, and his sense for sooke
The part of nature, to be wholly tide
To honor, that he would not once consent
So much as with a sight' his punishment.

Chapter Yet does he like himself yet all is well.
This Argument no tyrant can refell,
This plea of resolution winnes his cause
More right then all, more admiration draws,
For we love nothing more then to renown
Men stoutely miserable, highly down.

N. But now.

Chapter We f^are that but. O if he ought descend
Leave here, and let the Tragedy here end,
Let not the least act now of his at last,
Mar all his act of life and glories past.

Nu, I must tell all, and therefore give nie leave,
Swollen with raw tumors, vlcered with the ierk^s
Of Iron whips, that slesh from been had raz^d,
And no part free from wounds; it erkes
His soul to see the house so foul defast,
Wherein his life had dwelt so long time clean,
And therefore craves he, they would now dismiss
His grievous tortures, and he would begin
To open all wherein he had done amiss.
Straight were his tortures ceast, and after they
Had let him to recover sense he said,
Now Craterus say, what you will have me say?
Wherewith as if deluded, or delaid,
Cratetus in wrath calls presently again,
To have the tortures to be reapplied.
When what soever secret of his heart
Which had been fore-conceiued but in athought
What friend soever had but took his part
In common love h'accus'd; and so forgot
Himself that now he was more forward to
Confess, then they to urge him thereunto,
Whether affliction had his spirits undone,
Or seeing to hide or utter was all one;
Both ways lay death, and therefore he would vie
Now to be sure to say enough to die.
and then began his fortunes to deplore
Humbly besought them, whom he skornd before,
That Alexander where he stood behind
A Trauers, out of sight, was heard to speak:
I never thought a man that had a mind
T'attempt so much, had had a heart so weak.
There he confessed that one Hegelochus,
When first the King proclaimd himself Jove's son:
Incene'd his fathers heart against him thus,
By telling him that now we were undone,
If we endured, that he which did disdain
To have been Philips son, should live and reign.
He that above the state of man will strain
His style, and will not be that which we are,
Not only us contemnes, but does disdain
The godds themselves, with whom he would compare,
We have lost Alexander, lost (said he)
The King; and falue on pride and vanity:
And we have made a God of our own blood,
That glorisies himself, neglects our good.
Intolerable is this impious deed,
To Godds, whom he would match, to men he would exceed.
Thus having overnight Hegelochus
Discoursd: my father sends next day
For me to hear the same: and there to us
All he had said to him made him re-say.
Supposing out of wine the night before
He might but idlic rave. When he again
Far more inragd; in heat and passion more
Vrgd us to clear the state of such a stayne.
Coniurd us to redeem the commonweal
And do like men, or else as men conceal.
Parmenio thought whilst yet Darius st^od
This course was out of season; and thereby
Th'extinguishing of Alexanders blood
Would now not profit us, but the enemy.
But he once dead; we seazing the others powers
Might make all the orient, and all Asia ours,
That course we liked, to that our council stands,
There-to we tide our oaths, and gave our hands.
And as for this, he said, for Dymnus plot,
Though he were clear yet now it cleared him not.
And yet the force of racks at last could do
So much with him, as he confessed that too.
And said that fearing Bactra would detain
The king too long, he hastened on his ends,
Least that his father, Lord of such a train
And such a wealth, an whom the whole depends,
Should being aged, by his death prevent
These his designs, and frustrate his intent. Dum inficiatus eft facinus
crudeliter torqu^rividebatur post confessione Philotas ne amicor^^ guid^
misericordiam mer^it.


Cho. O would we had not heard this latter jar,
This all his former strains of worth does mar:
Before this last his foes his spirit commends,
But now he is vnpittied of his friends.

Nun. Then was Demetrius likewise brought in place,
And put to torture, who denies the deed,
Philotas he auerres it to his face.
Demetrius still denies: then he espide
A youth one Calm that was standing by;
Calin said he, how long will thou abide,
Demetrius vainly to avouch a lie.
The youth, that never had been named before
In all his tortures, gave them cause to guess
Philotas cared not now to utter more
Then had been privy to his practices.
And seeing they had as much as they desired,
They with Demetrius stoned him unto death,
And all whom Dymnus named to have conspird,
With grievous tortures now must loose their breath:
And all that were allyde which could not fly,
Are in the hands of Justice now to dye.

Chapter What must the punishment ariue beyond
The offense, not with the offender make an end?

Nu. They all must dye who may be feared in time
To be the heirs unto their kindreds crime,
All other punishments end with our breath,
But treason is pursude beyond our death,

Chapter The wrath of Kings does seldom measure keep,
Seeking to cure bad parts they lance too deep:
When punishment like lightning should appear
To few men's hurt, but unto all men's fear.
Great Elephants, and Lions murder least,
The ignoble beast is the most cruel beast,
But all is well if by the mighty fall
Of this great man, the King be safely freed:
But if this Hydra of ambition shall
Have other heads, to spring up in his ste^d
Then has he made but way for them to rise,
Who will assault him with fresh trecheries.
The which may teach us to observe this strain,
T'admire high hills, but live within the plaine^

FINIS.

