THE POETICAL ESSAYS OF SAM. DANYEL.

Newly corrected and augmented.

AEtas prima canat veneres, postrema tumultus.

AT LONDON Printed by P. Short for Simon Waterson. 1599.

The Arguments of these Essays following.
THe civil wars between the two houses of Lancaster and York. Musophilus, or
a defense of learning. The Epistle of Octauia to Antonius. The Tragedy of
Cleopatra corrected. The complaint of Rosamond.
To the Right honorable, Sir Charles Blunt Knight, Lord Mountioy, and Knight of
the most Noble order of the Garter, and his most worthy Lord.
I Do not plant thy great respected name
Here in this front, to the end thou should protect
These my endeavors from contempt or blame,
Which none but their own forces must effect:
Nor do I seek to win thy more respect,
Most learned Lord, by these Essaies of mine,
Since that clear judgment that did first elect
To favor me, will always keep me thine:
Nor do I this more honor to assign.
Unto thy worth that is not more hereby,
Since the offerings made unto the powers divine,
Enrich not them but show men's piety:
But this I do to the end if destiny
Shall any monument reserve of me,
Those times should see my love, how willing I
That lived by thee, would have thee lius with me.
S. D.
THE CIVIL WARS OF ENGLAND, BEtween the two Houses of Lancaster and York.

AEtas prima canat veneres, postrema tumultus.

SAM. DANIELL:

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Simon Waterson. 1599.



THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST BOOK.
What times forgo Richard the seconds reign:
The fatal causes of this civil war
His Uncles pride, his greedte Minions gain,
Glosters revolt, and death dcliuered are:
Herford accusd, exild, called back again,
Pretends t'amend what others Rule did mar.
The King from Ireland, hastes but did no good,
Whilst strange prodigious signs foretoken blood.
1
I Sing the civil wars, tumultuous broils,
And bloody factions of a mighty land:
Whose people hauty, proud with forain spoils
Upon themselves, turn back their conquering hand:
Whilst Kin their Kin, brother the brother foyles,
Like Ensigns all against like Ensigns band:
Bows against bows, the Crown against the crown,
whilst all pretending right, all right thrown down.
2
What fury, o what madness held you so
Dear people to too prodigal of blood?
To wast so much and war without a foe,
Whilst France to see your spoils, at pleasure stood;
How much might you have purchasd with less woe?
Thaue done you honor and your Nephews good,
Yours might have been what ever lies between
The Perenei and Alps, Aquitayne, and Rbeine.
3
And yet o God we have no cause to plain
Since hereby came, the quiet calm we joy
The bliss of thee ELIZA, happy gain
For all our loss; for that no other way
The heavens could find, then unite again
The fatal seu'red families; that they
Might bring forth thee; that in thy peace might grow
That glory which no age could ever show.
4
O sacred Goddess, I no muse but thee
Invoke in this great work I now entend,
Do thou inspire my thoughts, infuse in me
A power to bring the same to happy end:
Raise up a work for latter times to see
That may thy glory and my pains commend:
Strengthen thy subject strange things to rehearse
And give peace to my life, life to my verse.
5
And thou Charles Mountioy borne the worlds
That have received into thy quiet shore delight,
Me tempest-driuen fortune-tossed wight,
Tired with expecting and could hope no more:
And cheerest on my better years to write
A sadder Subject then I took before,
Receive the work I consecrate to thee
Borne of that rest which thou do give to me.
6
And MEMORY, preseruresse of things done,
Come thou, unfold the wounds, the wrack, the wast,
Reucale to me how all the strife begun
Twixt Lancaster and York in ages past.
How causes, counsels and events did run
So long as these unhappy times did last,
Vnintermixt with fictions, fantasies;
I versifie the troth, not poetize.
7
And to the end we may with better ease
Judge the true progress; here bigin to show
What wear the times fore going nere to thease,
That these we may with better profit know:
Tell how the world fell into this disease
And how so great distemperature did grow,
So shall we see by what degrees it came
How things grown full, do sone grow out of frame.
8
Ten kings had now raignd of the Norman race
With variable fortune turning chance,
All in two hundredth sixty one years space,
When Edward third of name and first of France
Possessed the crown in fortunes highest grace;
And did to greatest state, his state advance,
When England might the largest limits see
That ever any king attaind but he.
9
For most of all the rest, toyld in unrest
What with wrong titles, what with inward broyl,
Hardly a true establishment possessed
Of what they sought with such exceeding toil;
For why their power within it self oppressed,
Scarce could break forth to greatness all that while;
Such woe the childhood of this state did pass
Before it could attain to what it wasse.
10
For first the Norman conquering all by might, William the Conqueror.

By might was forced to keep what he had got:
Altring the laws, changing the form of Right,
And placing barbarous Customs he had brought:
Maistring the mighty, humbling the poorer wight
With grievous taxes tyranie had sought,
Scarce laid th'assured grounds to build upon
The change so hateful in such course begone.
11
William his son tracing the selfsame ways William Rufus.

The great outworne with war, or slain in peace
Only upon depressed weakness prays,
And treades down what was likeliest to increase,
Those that were left, being left to woeful days,
Had only power to wish for some release:
Whilst giving beasts what did to men pertain
Took for a beast himself was after slain.
12
Henry his brother reigns when he had done Henry 1.

(Who Roberts title better to reject)
The Norman Duke the Conquerours first son,
Lightens in show, rather then in effect
Those greeuances, his fatal race begun
Reformes the laws which soon he did neglect:
Whose sons being drowned for who^ he did prepare
Leaves crown and strif to Maud his daughters care.
13
Whom Stephen his Nephew (falsifying his oath)
Preuents; assailes the Realm; obtaines the crown: King Stephen.

Raising such tumults as torment them both
Whilst both held nothing certainly their own.
The Afflicted Realm divided in their troth,
And partial faith; most miserable grown,
Endures the while; till peace and Stephens death
Conclude some hope, of quiet; to take breath.
14
The son of Maud (from Saxon blood derived Henry 2.

By mothers line) succeeds th'vnrightfull king
Henry the second, in whose reign revived
The Oppressed state and first began to spring,
And o if he had not been too long lived
To Have seen th'affliction that his age did bring
By his ungodly sons; then happy man,
For they against him warred, for whom hewan
15
All Ireland, Scotland, th'Iles of Orcades,
Poytiers, Guienna, Brittany he got,
And leads forth sorrow from it self to thease,
Recouers strength at home so feeble brought:
Gives courage to the strong, to weaker ease;
Ads to the state what England never sought:
Who him succeed (the foreign blood out grown)
Are home born kings by speech and birth our own.
16
Lo hitherto the newborn state in tears
Was in her raw and wayling infancy,
During a hundred two and twenty years
Under the hand of strangers tyranny:
And now some better strength and youth appears
Which promises a glad recovery:
For hard beginnings have the greatest states
What with their own, or neighbourers debates.
17
Even like to Rheine which in his birth oppressed,
Strangled almost with rocks and mighty hills,
Works out a way to come to better rest,
Wars with the mountains, strives against their wills:
Bringes forth his streams in unity possessed
Into the quiet bed he proudly fills,
Carrying that greatness which he cannot keep
Unto his death and burial in the deep:
18
So did the worlds proud Mistres Rome at first
Strive with a hard beginning, warred with need;
Forcing her strong Confiners to the worst,
And in her blood her greatness first did breed:
So Spain at home with Moors ere forth it burst
Did practice long and in it self did bleed;
So did our state begin with her own wounds
To try her strength ere it enlarged her bounds.
19
But now comes Richard to succeed his fire, Rich. t.

Who much the glory of our arms increast,
His fathers limits bound not his desire
He spreeds the English Ensigns in the East:
And whilst his virtues would have raisd him hyer
Treason, and malice his great actions ceast:
A faithles brother and a fatal king
Cut off his growth of glory in the spring.
20
Which wicked brother contrary to course K.Iolm.

False John usurps his Nephew Arthurs right,
Gets to the crown by craft, by wrong, by force,
Rules it with lust, oppression, rigor, might:
Murders the lawful heir without remorse,
Wherefore procuring all the worlds despite,
A Tyrant loathed, a homicide conuented
Poisoned he dies, disgraced and unlamented.
21
Henry his son is chosen king, though young Henry 3.

And Jews of France (elected first) beguilde,
After the mighty had debated long,
Doubtful to choose a stranger or a child:
With him the Barons (in these times grown strong)
War for their ancient laws so long exild.
He graunts the Charter that pretended ease
And kept his own, yet did his own appease.
22
Edward his son a martial king succeedes
Just, prudent, grave, religious, fortunate: Edwa.1.

Whose happy ordered reign most fertile breeds
Plenty of mighty spirits to strength his state,
And worthy minds, to manage worthy deeds
The experience of those times ingenerate:
For ever great employment for the great
Quickens the blood and honor does beget.
23
And had not his mis-lead lascivious son Edward.1.

Edward the second, intermitted so
The course of glory happily begun
Which brought him, and his favorites to woe:
That happy current without stop had run
Unto the full of his son Edwards flo:
But who has often seen in such a state,
Father and son like good, like fortunate.
24
But now this great succeeder all repaires, Edward.3.

And rebrings-backe that discontinued good,
He buildes up strength and greatness for his heirs
Out of the virtues that adornd his blood:
He makes his subjects Lords of more then theirs,
And sets their bounds far wider then they stood:
Could greatness have but kept what he had got
It was enough he did, and what he wrought.
25
And had his heir surviu'd him in due course, Edward the black prince who died
before his father.

What limits England had thou found, what bar?
What world could have resisted so great force?
O more then men! two thunderbolts of war,
Why did not time your joined worth divorce
To Have made your several glories greater far?
Too prodigal was nature thus to do,
To spend in one age, what should serve for two.
26
But now the scepter in this glorious state Rich, 2. 1

Supported with strong power and victory
Was left unto a child, ordained by fate
To stay the course of what might grow too hie:
Here was a stop that greatness did abate
When power upon so weak a base did lie,
For lest great fortune should presume too far
Such oppositions interposed are.
27
Never this Island better peopled stood,
Never more men of might, and minds addressed,
Never more Princes of the royal blood,
(If not too many, for the public rest)
Nor ever was more treasure, wealth and good,
Then when this Richard first the crown possessed
Second of name, a name in two accursed,
And well we might have mist all but the first.
28
In this man's reign began this fatal strife
The bloody argument where of we treat;
That dearly cost so many' a Prince his life;
That spoild the weak, and even consumed the great,
That, wherein all calamity was rife
That memory even grieves her to repeat
And would that time would now this knowledge lose,
But that it is good to learn by others woes.
29
Edward the third being dead, had left this child
Son of his worthy son deceasd of late
The crown and Scepter of this Realm to wield,
Appointing the protectors of his state
Two of his sons to be his better shield,
Supposing uncles free from guile or hate
Would order all things for his better good,
In the respect and honor of their blood.
30
Of these John Duke of Lancaster was one,
(Too great a subject grown, for such a state
The title of a king and what he had done
In great exploits his mind did eleuate
Above proportion kingdoms stand upon,
Which made him push at what his issue gate)
The other Edmond Langley, whose mild sprite
Affected quiet and a safe delight.
31
With these did interpose his proud unrest
Thomas of woodstocke, one most violent,
Impatient of command, of peace, of rest,
Whose brow would show, that which his heart had meant:
His open malice and repugnant breast
Procured much mischief by his discontent:
And these had all the charge of king and state,
Till by himself he might it ordinate.
32
And in the first years of this government,
Things past, as first; the wars in France proceed
Though not with that same fortune and event
Being now not followed with such careful heed,
Our people here at home grown discontent
Through great exactions insurrections breed,
Private respects hindered the common weal,
And idle ease does on the mighty steal.
33
Too many kings breed factions in the court,
The head too weak, the members grown too great:
O this is that which kingdoms does transport,
This plague the heavens do for injustice threat
When children rule, who ever in this sort
Confound the state their ancestors did get;
For the ambitious once inured to reign
Can never brook a private state again.
34
And kingdoms ever suffer this distress,
For one or many guide the infant king,
Which one or many, tasting this excess
Of greatness and command; can never bring
Their thoughts again t'obay or to be less:
From hence these insolences ever spring,
Contempt of others whom they seek to foil,
Then follow leagues, destruction, ruin, spoil.
35
Whether it were that they which had the charge
Suffered the king to take a youthful vain,
That they their private better might enlarge:
Or whether he himself would farther strain
(Thinking his years sufficient to discharge
The government) presumd to take the reign,
We will not say: but now his ear he lendes
To youthful counsel, and his lusts attends.
36
And courts were never barren yet of those
Which could with subtle train and apt advise
Work on the Princes weakness, and dispose
Of feeble frailty easiest to entice:
And such no doubt about this king arose,
Whose flattery (the dangerous nurse of vice)
Got hand upon his youth to pleasures bent
Which lead by them did others discontent.
37
For now his uncles grew much to mislike
These ill proceedings; were it that they saw,
That others fauor'd did aspiring seek
Their nephew from their counsels to withdraw,
Seeing his nature flexible and mecke,
Because they only would keep all in awe:
Or that indeed they found the king and state
Abusde by such as now in office sat.
38
Or rather else they all were in the fault,
The ambitious uncles, the indiscreet young king,
The greedy counsel and the Minions naught,
And all together did this tempest bring;
Besides the times withal injustice fraught,
Concurred in this confusd disordering,
That we may truly say this spoild the state;
Youthful Counsel, private gain, partial hate.
39
And sure the king plainly discovers
Apparent cause his uncles to suspect;
For John of Gaunt was said to seek his death
By secret means, which came not to effect:
The Duke of Gloucester like wise practices
In open world that all men might detect
And leagues his Nobles, and in greatest strength
Rises in arms against him too at length.
40
Under pretense from him to take away
Such as they said the states oppressors wear,
To whom the Realm was now become a pray;
The chief of whom they named was Robert Vere
Then Duke of Ireland; bearing greatest sway
About the king, who held him only dear,
Him they would have removed and diverse more,
Or else would never lay down arms they swore.
41
The king was forced in that next Parliment
To grant them what he durst not well refuse,
For thither armed they came and fully bent
To suffer no repulse nor no excuse:
And here they did accomplish their intent
Where justice did her sword, not balance use:
For even that sacred place they violate
And there arest the Judges as they sat.
42
Which soon with many others had their end,
Cruelly slain without the course of right,
And still these wars that public good pretend
Work most injustice being done for spite:
For the agrieued evermore do bend
Against those whom they see of greatest might,
Who though themselves are wronged and often forced,
Yet for they can do most are thought the worst.
43
And yet I do not seem herein to excuse
The Justices, and Minions of the king
Which might their office and their grace abuse,
But only blame the course of managing:
For great men too well graced much rigor use;
Presuming favorites mischief ever bring;
So that concluding I may boldly speak,
Minions too great, argue a king too weak.
44
Now that so much was granted as was sought,
A reconcilement made although not meant
Appeasd them all in show, but not in thought
Whilst every one seemed outwardly content:
Though hereby king, nor peers, nor people got
More love, more strength, or easier government;
But every day things now succeeded worse,
For good from kings must not be drawn by force.
45
And this it lo continued till by chance
The Queen (which was the emperors daughter) died;
When as the king to establish peace with France
And better for home quiet to provide,
Sought by contracting marriage to advance
His own affairs against his uncles pride:
Took the young daughter of king Charles to wife
Which after in the end raisd greater strife.
46
For now his uncle Gloucester much repined
Against this french aliance and this peace,
Having himself a working stirring mind
Which never was content the wars should cease:
Whether he did dishonorable find
Those articles that did our bounds decrease,
And therefore stormed because the crown had wrong;
Or that he feared the king would grow too strong;
47
Or whatsoever moved him; this is sure
Hereby he wrought his ruin in the end,
And was a fatal cause that did procure
The swift approaching mischiefs that attend:
For lo the king no longer could endure
Thus to be crossed in what he did intend,
And therefore watched but some occasion fit
TO attach the Duke when he thought least of it.
48
And fortune now to further this intent
The great Earl of S.Paul does hither bring,
From Charles of France unto the young Q. sent
To see both her and to salute the king:
To whom he shows his uncles discontent
And of his secret dangerous practicing,
How he his subjects sought to fulleuare
And break the league with France concluded late.
49
To whom the subtle Earl forthwith replies,
Great Prince it is within your power with ease,
To remedy such fears, such ielousies,
And rid you of such mutiners as thease;
By cutting off that which might greater rise,
And now at first preventing this disease,
And that before he shall your wrath disclose,
For who threats first means of revenge does lose.
50
First take his head, then tell the reason why,
Stand not to find him guilty by your laws,
Easier you shall with him your quarrel try
Dead then alive who has the better cause:
For in the murmuring vulgar usually
This public course of yours compassion draws,
Especially in cases of the great
Which work much pity in the vndiscreat.
51
And this is sure though his offense be such,
Yet does calamity attract commorse,
And men repine at Princes bloodshed much
How iust-socuer judging it is by force:
I know not how their death gives such a tuch
In those that reach not to a true discourse;
That so shall you observing formal right
Be still thought as unjust and win more spite.
52
And often the cause, may come prevented so,
And therefore when it is done, let it be heard;
So shall you hereby escape your private woe
And satisfy the world to, afterward:
What need you weigh the rumors that shall go?
What is that breath being with your life compard?
And therefore if you will be ruled by me
Strangled or poisoned secret let him be.
53
And then araigne the chief of those you find
Were of his faction secretly compact,
Whom you may wisely order in such kind
That you may such confessions then exact,
As both you may appease the peoples mind
And by their death much aggrauate the fact:
So shall you rid your self of dangers quite
And show the world that you have done but right.
54
This counsel vttred unto such an ear
As willing listens to the safest ways,
Works on the yielding matter of his fear,
Which easelie to any course obeies:
For every Prince seeing his danger near
By any means his quiet peace assaies:
And still the greatest wrongs that ever were
Have then bin wrought when kings were put in fear.
55
And long it was not ere he apprehendes
The Duke, who close to Calice was conuei'd,
And the Earls of Arundell and Warwike sendes,
Both in close prisons strongly to be laid;
And soon the Duke his life unquiet ends,
Strangled in secret ere it was bewraide;
And Arundell was put to public death,
But Warwike by great means he banisheth.
56
And for his person he procures a guard
A thousand Archers daily to attend,
Which now upon the act he had prepared
As the argument his actions to defend:
But yet the world had now conceived so hard
That all this naught auaild him in the end:
In vain with terror is he fortified
That is not guarded with firm love beside.
57
Now storm his uncles albeit in vain,
For that no remedy they could devise,
They might their sorrows inwardly complain,
But outwardly they needs must temporise:
The king was great, and they should nothing gain
T'attempt revenge or offer once to rise,
This league with France had made him now so strong
That they must needs as yet endure this wrong.
58
For like a Lion that escapes his bounds
Having bin long restraind his use to straie,
Raunges the restles woods, stays on no ground,
Riottes with bloodshed, wantons on his pray:
Seckes not for need but in his pride to wound,
Glorying to see his strength and what he may;
So this unbridled king freed of his fears
In liberty himself thus wildly bears.
59
For standing on himself he sees his might
Out of the compass of respective awe,
And now begins to violate all right
While no restraining fear at hand he saw:
Now he exactes of all, wastes in delight,
Riots in pleasure, and neglects the law;
He thinks his crown is licensd to do ill
That less should list, that may do what it will.
60
Thus b'ing transported in this sensual course
No friend to warn, no counsel to withstand,
He still proceeds on from bad to worse,
Soothed in all actions that he took in hand
By such as all impiety did nurse,
Commending ever what he did command:
Unhappy kings that never may be taught
To know themselves or to discern their fault.
61
And whilst all sylent grieve at what is done,
The Duke of Herford then of courage bold
And worthily great John of Gaunts first son
Vtters the passion which he could not hold,
In sad discourse upon this course begun,
Which he to Mowbray Duke of Norfolk told;
To the end he being great about the king
Might do some good by better counselling.
62
The faithles Duke that presently takes hold Froisart. Pol. Virg. and Hall,
der huer it in this sort.

Of such advantage to insinuate
Hastes to the king, perverting what was told,
And what came of good mind he makes it hate:
The king that might not now be so controld
Or censured in his course, much frets thereat;
Sendes for the Duke, who does such words deny
And craves the combat of his enemy.
63
Which straight was granted, and the day assigned
When both in order of the field appear
To right each other as the event should find,
And now both even at point of combat were
When lo the king changd suddenly his mind,
Casts down his warder and so stays them there,
As better now aduisd what way to take
Which might for his assured safety make.
64
For now considering (as it likely might)
The victory should hap on Herfords side,
A man most valiant and of noble sprite,
Beloved of all, and ever worthy tried:
How much he might be graced in public sight
By such an act as might advance his pride,
And so become more popular by this,
Which he fears, too much he already is.
65
And therefore he resolves to banish both,
Though the one in chiefest favor with him stood,
A man he dearly loved and might be loath
To leave him that had done him so much good:
Yet having cause to do as now he does
To mitigate the envy of his blood,
Thought best to loose a friend, to rid a foe,
And such a one as now he doubted so.
66
And therefore to perpetual exile he
Mowbray condemns; Herford but for ten years:
Thinking (for that the wrong of this decree
Compard with greater rigor less appears)
It might of all the better liked be:
But yet such murmuring of the fact he hears,
That he is feign four of the ten forgive,
And judged him six years in exile to live.
67
At whose departure hence out of the land,
O how the open multitude reveal
The wondrous love they bare him underhand,
Which now in this hot passion of their zeal
They plainly shewde that all might understand
How dear he was unto the common weal:
They feared not to exclaim against the king
As one that sought all good men's ruining.
68
Unto the shore with tears, with sighs, with moan
They him conduct, cursing the bounds that stay
Their willing feet that would have further gone
Had not the fearful Ocean stopped their way:
Why Neptune have thou made us stand alone
Divided from the world, for this say they?
Hemd in to be a spoil to tyranny
Leaving affliction hence no way to fly?
69
Are we locked up poor souls, here to abide
Within the watery prison of thy waves,
As in a fold, where subject to the pride
And lust of rulers we remain as slaves?
Here in the reach of might, where none can hide
From the eye of wrath, but only in their graves?
Happy confiners you of other lands
That shift your soil and often escape tyrants hands.
70
Ah must we leave him here; that here were fit
We should retain the pillar of our state;
Whose virtues well deserve to govern it,
And not this wanton young effeminate?
Why should not he in regal honor sit,
That best knows how a realm to ordinate?
Yet one day o we hope thou shall bring back
Dear Bullingbrooke the justice that we lack.
71
Thus muttred lo the malecontented sort
That love kings best before they have them still,
And never can the present state comport,
But would as often change as they change their will:
For this good Duke had won them in this sort
By suckring them and pitying of their ill,
That they supposed straight it was one thing,
To be both a good man, and a good king.
72
When as the grauer sort that saw the course
And knew that Princes may not be controlde,
Likt well to suffer this for fear of worse;
Since many great, one kingdom cannot hold:
For now they saw intestine strife of force
The apt-deuided state entangle would,
If he should stay whom they would make their head,
By whom the vulgar body might be lead.
73
They saw likewise that Princes often are feign
To buy their quiet with the price of wrong:
And better twere that now a few complain
Then all should morn, as well the weak as strong:
Seeing how little Realms by change do gain,
And therefore learned by observing long
TO admire times past, follow the present will
Wish for good Princes, but to endure the ill.
74
For when it naught awailes what folly then
To strive against the current of the time?
Who will throw down himself for other men
That make a ladder by his fall to clime?
Or who would seek t'imbroile his country when
He might have rest; suffering but others crime?
Since wisemen ever have preferred far
The vniustest peace, before the iustest war.
75
Thus they considered that in quiet fate,
Rich or content, or else unfit to strive:
Peace louer-wealth, hating a troublous state
Does willing reasons for their rest contriue:
But if that all were thus considerate
How should in court the great, the favored thrive?
Factions must be and these varieties,
And some must fall that other some may rise.
76
But long the Duke remaind not in exile
Before that John of Gaunt his father dies,
Upon whose state the king seasd now this while
Disposing of it as his enemies:
This open wrong no longer could beguile
The world that saw these great indignities,
Which so exasperates the minds of all
That they resolved him home again to call
77
For now they saw it was malice in the king
Transported in his il-conceiued thought,
That made him so to prosecute the thing
Against all law and in a course so naught:
And this advantage to the Duke did bring
Fitter occasions whereupon he wrought:
For to a man so strong and of such might
He gives him more, that takes away his right.
78
The king, in this mean time, I know not how
Was drawn into some actions forth the land,
TO appease the Irish that revolted now;
And there attending what he had in hand
Neglects those parts from whence worse dangers grow,
As ignorant how his affairs did stand:
Whether the plot was wrought it should be so,
Or that his fate did draw him on to go.
79
Certain it is that he committed here
An ignorant and idle oversight,
Not looking to the Dukes proceedings there,
Being in the court of France where best he might,
Where both the king and all assured were
TO have stopped his course being within their right:
But being now exild he thought him sure
And free from farther doubting lived secure.
80
So blindes the sharpest counsels of the wise
This ouershadowing providence on hie,
And dazeleth the clearest sighted eyes,
That they see not how nakedly they lie:
There where they little think the storm does rise,
And ouercasts their clear security:
When man has stopped al ways save only that
That (least suspected) ruin enters at.
81
And now was all disorder in the excess
And whatsoever does a change portend,
As idle luxury, and wantonness,
Proteus-like varying pride, vain without end:
Wrong-worker Riot, motive to oppress,
Endless exactions, which the idle spend,
Consuming usury and credits cracked,
Called on this purging war that many lackt.
82
Then ill persuading want in martial minds,
And wronged patience, long oppressed with might,
Loosenes in all, which no religion binds,
Commanding force the measure made of right,
Gave suell to this fire, that easy finds
The way t'inflame the whole indangerd quite:
These were the public breeders of this war,
By which still greatest states confounded are.
83
For now this peace with France had shue in here
The ouergrowing humors wars do spend,
For where to cuacuate no employments were
Widerth' unwieldy burden does distend;
Men wholly vsd to war, peace could not bear;
As knowing no course else whereto to bend:
For brought up in the broiles of these two Realms,
They thought best fishing still in troubled streams.
84
Like to a river that is stopped his course
Does violate his banks, breaks his own bed,
Destroies his bounds and ouer-runs by force
The neighbor fields irregularly spread:
Even so this sudden stop of war does nurse
Home broiles within it self, from others lead:
So dangerous the change hereof is tried
Ere minds come soft or otherwise imploid.
85
And all this makes for thee, o Bullingbrooke,
To work a way unto thy Soueraintie;
This care the heavens, fate and fortune took
To bring thee to thy scepter easily:
Upon the false that hap which him forsook
Who crowned a king, a king yet must not die,
Thou were ordaind by providence to raise
A quarrel lasting longer then thy days.
86
For now this absent king out of his land,
Where though he showed great sprite and valor then,
(Being attended with a worthy band
of valiant Peers, and most courageous men)
Gave time to them at home that had in hand
The ungodly work and knew the season when;
Who fail not to advise the Duke with speed,
Soliciting to what he soon agreed.
87
For presently upon so good report,
He does with cunning train and policy
Convey himself out of the French kings court
Under pretense to go to Brittanie:
And with his followers that to him resort
Landed in England. Welcomed joyfully
Of the altring vulgar apt for changes still
As headlong carried with a present will.
88
And com'd to quiet shore but not to rest,
The first night of his joyful landing here
A fearful vision does his thoughts molest,
Seeming to see in woeful form appear
A naked goodly woman all distressed,
Which with ful-weeping eyes and rent-white hair,
Wringing her hands as one that grieud and praid,
With sighs commixt, with words it seemed she said.
89
O whither do thou tend my unkind son?
What mischief do thou go about to bring
To her whose Genius thou here lookst upon,
Thy mother country whence thy self did spring?
O whither do thou in ambition run,
To change due course by foul disordering?
What bloodshed, o what broils do thou co^mence
To last for many woeful ages hence?
90
Stay here thy foot, thy yet unguilty foot,
That can not stay when thou art farther in,
Retire thee yet unstained whilst it does boot,
The end is spoil of what thou do begin:
Injustice never yet took lasting root,
Nor held that long impiety did win:
The babes unborn, shall o be borne to bleed
In this thy quarrel if thou do proceed.
91
Thus said she ceast, when he in troubled thought
Grieved at this tale and sighed, and this replies:
Dear Country o I have not hither brought
These Arms to spoil but for thy liberties:
Tho sin be on their head that this have wrought
Who wronged me first, and thee do tyrannise;
I am thy Champion and I seek my right,
Prouokt I am to this by others spite.
92
This this pretense faith she, the ambitious find
To smooth injustice, and to flatter wrong:
Thou do not know what then will be thy mind
When thou shall see thy self advanced and strong:
When thou have shak'd off that which others bind
Thou soon forgettest what thou learned long:
Men do not know what then themselves will be
When as more then themselves, themselves they see.
93
And here withal turning about he wakes,
Laboring in sprite, troubled with this strange sight:
And musd a while, waking aduisement takes
Of what had past in sleep and silent night.
Yet hereof no important reckoning makes
But as a dream that vanished with the light:
The day designs, and what he had in hand
Left it to his diuerted thoughts vnskand.
94
Doubtful at first, he wary does proceed
Seems not to affect, that which he did effect,
Or else perhaps seems as he meant indeed,
Sought but his own, and did no more expect:
Then fortune thou art guilty of his deed,
That did his state above his hopes erect,
And thou must bear some blame of his great sin
That left'st him worse then when he did begin.
95
Thou did conspire with pride, and with the time
To make so easy an assent to wrong,
That he that had no thought so hie to clime,
(With favoring comfort still allured along)
Was with occasion thrust into the crime,
Seeing others weakness and his part so-strong:
And o in such a case who is it will
Do good, and fear that may live free with ill.
96
We will not say nor think O Lancaster,
But that thou then did mean as thou did swear
Upon the Evangelists at Doncaster,
In the eye of heaven, and that assembly there
That thou but as an upright orderer
Sought'st to reform the abused kingdom here,
And get thy right, and what was thine before,
And this was all, thou would attempt no more.
97
Though we might say and think that this pretense
Was but a shadow to the intended act,
Because the event does argue the offense
And plainly seems to manifest the fact:
For that hereby thou might win confidence
With those whom else thy course might hap distract,
And all suspicion of thy drift remove,
Since easily men credit whom they love.
98
But God forbid we should so nerely pry
Into the low deep buried sins long past
TO examine and confer iniquity,
Whereof faith would no memory should last:
That our times might not have to exemplify
With aged stains, but with our own shame cast,
Might think our blot the first not done before,
That new-made sins might make us blush the more.
99
And let vnwresting charity believe
That then thy oath with thy intent agreed,
And others faith, thy faith did first deceive,
Thy after fortune forced thee to this deed:
And let no man this idle censure give
Because the event proves so, it was so decreed:
For o what counsels sort to other end
Then that which frailty did at first intend?
100
Whilst those that are but outward lookers on,
That cannot sound these mysteries of state,
Deemes things were so contrived as they are done,
Holding that policy, that was but fate:
Wondering how strange it was wrought, how close begun,
And think all actions else did tend to that,
When o how short they come, or cast too fare
Making the happy wiser then they are.
101
But by degrees he venters now on blood,
And sacrifiz'd unto the peoples love,
The death of those that chief in envy stood
As the Officers, who first these dangers prove:
The treasorer and those that they thought good,
Bushy and Green by death he must remove,
These were the men the people thought did cause
Those great exactions and abusd the laws.
102
This done, his cause was preached with learned skill,
And the Archbishop of Canterbury showed
A pardon sent from Rome, to all that will
Take part with him, and quit the faith they owed
To Richard, as a Prince unfit and ill,
On whom the crown was fatally bestowed:
And easie-yeelding zeal was quickly caught
With what the mouth of gravity had taught.
103
O that this power from everlasting given
The great alliance made twixt God and us,
The intelligence that earth does hold with heaven,
Sacred religion, o that thou must thus
Be made to smooth our ways unjust, uneven,
Brought from above earth-quarrels to discuss,
Must men beguile our souls to win our wills,
And make our zeal the furtherer of ils?
104
But the ambitious to advance their might
Dispense with heaven and what religion would,
The armed will find right, or else make right,
If this means wrought not, yet another should:
And this and other now do all incite
To strength the faction that the Duke does hold;
Who easily obtained what he sought,
His virtues and his love so greatly wrought.
105
The king still busied in this Irish war
Which by his valor there did well succeed,
Had news how here his Lords revolted are,
And how the Duke of Herford does proceed:
In these affairs he fears are grown too far,
Hastes his return from thence with greatest speed;
But was by tempests, winds, and seas debarred
As if they likewise had against him warred.
106
But at the length, though late, in wales he lands,
Where thoroughly informed of Henry's force,
And well aduertisd how his own case stands, The Duke of Anibarle son to the
Duke of York.

Which to his grief he sees tendes to the worse:
He leauest' Aumarle, at Milford all those bands
He brought from Ireland; taking thence his course
To Conwaie all disguisd with fourteen more
Toth' Earl of. Salisburie thither sent before.
107
Thinking the Earl had raisd some forces there
Whom there he finds for saken all alone,
The people in those parts which levied were
B'ing closely shronke away dispersd and gone:
The king had stayed too long, and they in fear
Resolved every man to shift for one,
At this amasd such fortune he laments,
Foresees his fall whereto each thing consents.
108
In this disturbed tumultuous broken state,
Whilst yet the event stood doubtful what should be,
Whilst naught but headlong running to debate
And glittering troops and armor men might see:
Fury, and fear, compassion, wrath, and hate
Confusd through all the land no Corner free:
The strong all mad, to strife, to ruin bent;
The weaker waild, the aged they lament,
109
And blame their many years that live so long
To see the horror of these miseries:
Why had not we (said they) did with the strong
In foreign fields in honorable wise?
In just exploits, and lawful without wrong,
And by the valiant hand of enemies?
And not thus now reserved in our age
To home confusion and disordered rage.
110
Unto the Temples flock the weak devout,
Sad wailing women, there to vow and pray
For husbands, brothers, or their sons gone out.
To bloodshed, whom nor tears, nor love could stay:
Here grave religious fathers which much doubt
The sad events these broils procure them may,
As Prophets warn, exclaim, dissuade these crimes
By the examples fresh of other times.
111
And o what do you now prepare said they,
Another conquest by these fatal ways?
What must your own hands make your selves a pray
To desolation, which these tumults raise?
What Dane, what Norman, shall prepare his way
To triumph on the spoil of your decaies?
That which nor France nor all the world could do
In union, shall your discord, bring you to?
112
Conspire against us neighbor nations all
That envy at the height whereto we are grown;
Conjure the barbarous North, and let them call
Strange fury from far distant shores unknown,
And let them altogether on us fall;
So to divert the ruin of our own,
That we forgetting what does so incense
May turn the hand of malice to defense.
113
Calm these tempestuous spirits O mighty Lord,
This threatening storm that over hangs the land,
Make them consider ere they'vnsheath the sword
How vain is the earth, this point whereon they stand,
And with what sad calamities is stoor'd
The best of that, for which the Ambitious band:
Labor the end of labor, strife of strife,
Terror in death and horror after life.
114
Thus they in zeal whose humbled thoughts were good:
Whilst in this wide spread volume of the skies,
The book of providence disclosed stood,
Warnings of wrath, foregoing miseries;
In lines of fire and caracters of blood,
There fearful forms in dreadful flames arise,
Amazing Comets, threatening Monarchs might
And new-seene stars, unknown unto the night.
115
Red fiery dragons in the air do fly,
And burning Meteors, poynted-streaming lights,
Bright stars in midst of day appear in sky,
Prodigious monsters, ghastly fearful sights:
Strange Ghosts, and apparitions terrific,
The woeful mother her own birth affrights,
Seeing a wrong deformed infant borne
Grieves in her pains, deceived in shame does morn.
116
The Earth as if afeard of blood and wounds
Trembles in terror of these falling bloes:
The hollow concaues give out groaning sounds
And sighing, murmurs to lament our woes:
The Ocean all at discord with his bounds,
Reiterates his strange untimely floes:
Nature all out of course to check our course,
Neglects her work to work in us remorse.
117
So great a wrack unto it self does lo
Disordered mortality prepare:
That this whole frame does even labor so
Her ruin unto frailty to declare;
And travails to fore-signifie the woe,
That weak improuidence could not beware:
For heaven and earth, and air and seas and all
Taught men to see, but not to shun their fall.
118
Is man so dear unto the heavens that they
Respect the ways of earth, the works of sin?
Does this great all this universal weigh
The vain designs that weakness does begin?
Or do our fear father of zeal make way
Unto this error ignorance lives in?
Making our faults the cause that move these powers
That have their cause from other cause then ours?
119
Or do the conscience of our wicked decdes
Apply to sin the terror of these sights,
Happening at the instant when commotion breeds
Amazing only timorous vulgar wights,
Who ever aggravating that which feeds
Their fears, still find out matter that affrights,
Whilst the impious fierce, neglecting seele no touch,
And weigh too light what other scare so much.
120
Ah no the eternal power that guides this frame
And serves him with the instruments of heaven
To call the earth and summon up our shame,
By an edict from everlasting given;
Forbids mortality to search the same,
Where sense is blind, and wit of wit bereauen
Terror must be our knowledge, fear our skill,
TO admire his work and tremble at his will.
121
And these beginnings had this impious war,
The ungodly bloodshed that did so defile
The beauty of thy fields, and even did mar
The flower of thy chief pride o fairest I Will:
These were the causes that incensd so far
The civil wounding hand inragd with spoil,
That now the living with afflicted eye
Look back with grief on such calamity.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND BOOK.
King Richard mones his wrong and wailes his reign:
And here betrayed to London he is led,
Basely attyrd attending Herfords train,
Where the one is skornd, the other welcomed.
His Wife mistaking him does much complain
And both together greatly sorrowed:
In hope to save his life and ease his thrall
He yields up state, and Rule, and Crown, and all.
1
IN dearth of faith and scarsity of friends,
The late great mighty monarch on the shore
In the utmost corner of his land attends
To call back false obedience fled before:
Toils, and in vain, his toil and labor spends,
More hearts he sought to gain he lost the more:
All turned their faces to the rising sun
And leaves his setting-fortune night begun.
2
O Percy how by thy example lead This Percy was Earl of Woster, and brother to
the Earl of Northumberland.

The household train for sooke their wretched Lord,
When with thy staff of charge dishonored,
Thou brak'st thy faith, not steward of thy word,
And tookst his part that after took thy head:
When thine own hand had strengthened first his
For such great merits do obraid, and call
For great reward, or think the great too small.
3
And kings love not to be beholding ought,
Which makes their chiefest friends often speed the worst:
For those by whom their fortunes have bin wrought
Put them in mind of what they were at first:
Whose doubtful faith if once in question brought
It Is thought they will offend because they durst,
And taken in a fault are never spared,
Being casier to revenge, then to reward.
4
And thus these mighty actors sons of change,
These partizanes of factions, often tried
That in the smoke of innouations strange
Build huge uncertain plots of unsure pride:
And on the hazard of a bad exchange
Have venterd all the stock of life beside,
Whilst Princes raisd, disdain to have been raisd
By those whose helps deserve not to be praisd.
5
O Majesty left naked all alone,
But with the unarmed title of thy right,
Those gallant troops, thy fortune followers gone;
And all that pomp (the complements of might)
The amazing shadows that are cast upon
The ears of Princes, to be guile the sight,
Are vanished clean, and only frailty left
Thy self of all, besides thy self berest.
6
Like when some great Colossus, whose strong base
Or mighty props are shronke or sunk away,
Fore-shewing ruin, threatening all the place
That in the danger of his fall does stay,
All straight to better safety flock apace,
None rest to help the ruin while they may:
The peril great and doubtful there dress,
Men are content to leave right in distress.
7
As stately Thames inricht with many a flood,
And goodly rivers that have made their graves
And buried both their names and all their good
Within his greatness to augment his waves;
Glides on with pomp of waters vnwithstood
Unto the Ocean, which his tribute craves
And Taies up all his wealth within that power,
Which in it self all greatness does devour.
8
So flock the mighty with their following train
Unto the all-receiuing Builing brook,
Who wonders at himself how he should gain
So many hearts as now his party took,
And with what ease and with how slender pain,
His fortune gives him more then he could look,
What he imagind never could be wrought
Is powrd upon him, far beyond his thought.
9
So often things which seem at first in show
Without the compass of accomplishment,
Once ventred on to that success do grow,
That even the Authors do admire the event:
So many means which they did never know
Do second their designs, and do present
Strange unexpected helps, and chiefly then
When the Actors are reputed worthy men.
10
And Richard who looked fortune in the back,
Sees headlong-lightnes running from the right,
Amazed stands to note how great a wrack
Of faith his riots causd, what mortal spite
The bear him, who did law and justice lack:
Sees how concealed hate breaks out in sight,
And feare-depressed envy pent before
When fit occasion thus unlocked the door.
11
Like when some mastiue whelpe disposd to play
A whole confused heard of beasts does chase,
Which with one vile consent run all away,
If any hardier then the rest in place
But turn the head that idle fear to stay,
Back straight the daunted chaser turns his face,
And all the rest with bold example led
As fastrun on him as before they fled.
12
So with this bold opposer rushes on
This many-headed monster Multitude:
And he who late was feared is set upon,
And by his own Actaeon-like pursude,
His own that had all love and awe forgone;
Whom breath and shadows only did delude,
And newer hopes which promises persuade:
Though rare performed promises so made.
13
Which seeing this: thus to himself complains:
O why do you fond false deceived so
Run headlong to that change that nothing gains
But gain of sorrow, only change of woe?
Which is all one if he be like that reigns:
Why will you buy with blood what you forgoo
It Is naught but shows that ignorance esteems,
The thing possessed is not the thing it seems.
14
And when the sins of Bullingbrooke shall be
As great as mine, and you unanswered
In these your hopes; then may you wish for me
Your lawful Sour'aigne from whose faith you fled,
And grieved in your souls the error see
That shining promises had shadowed:
As th humorous sick removing find no ease,
When changed Chambers change not the disease.
15
Then shall you find this name of liberty
(The watchword of rebellion ever vsd
The idle echo of uncertainty,
That evermore the simple has abusd)
But new-turnd servitude and mise rye,
And even the same and worse before refusd,
The aspirer once attaind unto the top
Cuts off those means by which himself got up.
16
And with a harder hand and streighter rain
Does curb that loosenes he did find before,
Doubting the occasion like might serve again,
His own example makes him fear the more:
Then o injurious land what do thou gain
To aggrauate thine own affictions store
Since thou must needs obey to government,
And no rule, ever yet could all content
17
O if my youth has offered up to lust
Licentious fruits of indiscreet desires
When idle heat of vainer years did thrust
That fury on: yet now when it retires
To calmer state: o why should you distrust
To reap that good whereto mine age aspires?
The youth of Princes have no bounds for sin
Unless themselves do make them bounds within.
18
Who sees not that sees ought (woe worth the while)
The easy way that greatness has to fall
Enuirond with deceit, hemmed in with guile,
Soothed up in flattery, fawned on of all:
Within his own living, as in exile,
Hears but with others ears or not at all:
Even made a pray only unto a few,
Who lock up grace that would to others show.
19
And who as let in lease do farm the crown,
And joy the use of Majesty and might,
Whilst we hold but the shadow of our own,
Pleased but with shows, and dalied with delight:
They as huge vnproportion'd mountains grown.
Between our land and us, shadowing our light,
Bereave the rest of joy and us of love,
And keep down all to keep themselves above.
20
Which wounds with grief poor unrespected zeal
When grace holds no proportion in the parts;
When distribution in the common weal
Of charge and honor due to good deserts
Is stopped, when others greedy hands must deal
The benefit that Maiestic imparts:
What good we meant comes gleaned home but light
Whilst we are robbed of praise, they of their right.
21
O hence I see, and to my grief I see,
The unreconcilable disunion
Is grown between m' aggraued realm and me,
And by their fault, whose faith I trusted on:
My easy nature tractable and free,
Soon drawn to what my council would have done
Is thus betrayed by them and my neglect,
Easiest deceiud where least I did suspect.
22
Thus he complaind, when lo from Lancaster
(The new entitled Duke) with order sent
Ariu'd Northumberland, as to confer
And make relation of the Dukes intent:
And offered there, if that he would refer
The controversy unto Parliament,
And punish those that had abusd the state
As causers of this universal hate,
23
And also see that justice might be had
On those the Duke of Glosters death procured,
And such remoud from council as were bad,
His cousin Henry would he there assured
On humble knees before his grace be glad
To ask him pardon to be well secured,
And have his right and grace restored again,
The which was all he labored to obtain.
24
And therefore he a Parley does exhort,
Persuades him leave that unbeseeming place
And with a Princely hardines resort
Unto his people, that attend his grace:
They meant the public good and not his hurt,
And would most ioifull be to see his face:
He Iaies his soul to pledge, and takes his oath
The ost of Christ an ostage for his troth.
25
This profer with such protestations made
Unto a king that so nere danger stood,
Was a sufficient motive to persuade
When no way else could show a face of good:
Th dishonorable means of safety bade
Danger accept what Majesty withstood:
When better choices are not to be had
We needs must take the seeming best of bad.
26
Yet stands h' in doubt a while what way to take,
And does confer with that small staying troop
That fortune left; which never would forsake
Their poor distressed Lord, nor ever stoop
To any hopes the stronger part could make:
Good Carlisle, Ferby and sir Stephen Scroope The Bishop of Carlisle. Montague
Earl of Salisbury.

With that most worthy Montague were al,
That were content with Majesty to fall.
27
O Time, commit not sacrilegious theft
Upon the holy faith of these good men:
Let not succeeding ages be bereft
Of such examples worthy of our Pen:
Nor thou magnanim'ous Leigh shall not be left
In darkness for thy constant honor then,
That then to save thy faith would loose thy head,
That reverent head that all men pitied.
28
Nor conscience would that I should injury
O Ienico thy memory so clear, Ienico d' Artois a Gascoyn.

For being not ours, though wish that Gascony
Claimd not for hers the faith we hold so dear;
So England should have this small company
Wholly her own, and she no partner here;
But lets divide this good betwixt us both,
Take she thy birth and we will have thy troth.
29
Grave Montague, whom long experience taught
In either fortune; this aduisd his king:
Dear Sovereign know, the matter that is sought
Is only now your Majesty to bring
From out of this poor safety you have got
Into their hands, that else hold every thing:
Nothing but only you they want of all,
And wanting you, they nothing theirs can call.
30
Here have you craggy rocks to take your part
That never will betray their faith to you;
These trusty mountains here will never start
But stand to obraid their shame that are untrue,
Here may you fence your safety with small art
Against the pride of that confused Crew:
If men will not, these very cliffes will fight
And be sufficient to defend your right.
31
Then keep you here, and here shall you behold
Within short space the sliding faith of those
That cannot long their resolution hold,
Repent the course their idle rashness chose:
For that same mercenarie faith they sold
With least occasions discontented grows,
And insolent those voluntary bands,
Presuming how by them he chiefly stands.
32
And how can he those mighty troops sustain
Long time where now he is, or any where?
Besides what discipline can he retain
Where as he dares not keep them under fear,
For fear to have them to revolt again?
So that it self when greatness cannot bear
With her own weight must needs confusdly fall
Without the help of other force at all.
33
And hither to approach h' will never dare
Where deserts, rocks, and hills no succors give,
Where desolation and no comforts are,
Where few can do no good, many not live:
Besides we have the Ocean to prepare
Some other place if this should not relieve;
So shall you tire his force, consume his strength
And weary all his followers out at length.
34
Do but refer to time and to small time,
And infinite occasions you shall find,
To quail the reble even in the prime
Of all his hopes beyond all thought of mind,
For many with the curse what they designed;
And bad sucesse obraiding their ill fact
Draws them that others draw from such an act.
35
For if the least imagind ouerture
But of conceiud revolt men once epsy,
Straight shrink the weak, the great will not endure,
The impatient run, the discontented fly,
The friend his friends example does procure,
And altogether haste them presently
Some to their home, some hide, others that stay
To reconcile themselves, the rest betray.
36
What hope have you that ever Bullingbrooke
Will live a subject that has tried his fate?
Or what good reconcilement can you look
Where he must always fear, and you must hate?
And never think that he this quarrel took
To reobtaine thereby his private state;
It Was greater hopes that hereto did him call
And he will thrust for all, or else loose all.
37
Nor trust this subtle Agent nor his oath,
You know his faith, you tried it before hand,
His fault is death and now to loose his troth,
To save his life he will not greatly stand:
Nor trust your kinsmans proffer, since you both
Show blood in Princes is no steadfast band:
What though he has no title, he has might
That makes a title where there is no right?
38
Thus he: when that good Bishop thus replies The Bishop of Castile

Out of a mind that quiet did affect,
My Lord, I must confess as your case lies,
You have great cause your subjects to suspect
And counterplot against their subtelties,
You all good care and honesty neglect
And fear the worst what insolence may do,
Or armed fury may incense them to.
39
But yet my Lord, fear may as well transport
Your care beyond the truth of what is meant,
As other wife neglect may fall too short
In not examining of their intent:
But let us weigh the thing which they exhort,
It Is Peace, submission and a parliament,
Which how expedient it is for either part
Twere good we judged with an impartial heart.
40
And first for you my Lord, in grief we see
The miserable case wherein you stand
Void here of succor, help or majesty,
On this poor promontory of your land,
And where how long a time your grace may be,
Expecting what may fall into your hand
We know not: sinceth' event of things do lie
Closed up in darkness far from mortal eye.
41
And how unfit it were you should protract,
Long time in this so dangerous disgrace,
As though that you good spirit and courage lackt
To issue out of this opprobrious place:
When even the face of kings do often exact
Fear and remorse in faulty subjects base,
And longer stay a great presumption draws
That you were guilty or did doubt your cause.
42
What subjects ever so inragd would dare
To violate a Prince, to offend the blood
Of that renowned race, by which they are
Exalted to the glory of this good?
What if some things by chance misguided were,
Which they have now rebelliously withstood?
They never will proceed with that despite
To wrack the state, and to confound the right.
43
Nor do I think that Bulling brook can do
So blind ambitious to affect the crown,
Having himself no title, and does see
Others, if you should fail, must keep him down:
Besides the Realm, though mad, will never gree
To have a right succession overthrown,
To raise confusion upon them and theirs
By preiudicing true and lawful beires.
44
And now it may be fearing the success
Of his attempts, or with remorse of mind,
Or else distrusting secret practices,
He would be glad his quarrel were resignd,
So that there were some orderly redress
In those disorders which the Realm did find:
And this I think he now fees were his best
Since farther actions farther but unrest.
45
And for the impossibility of peace
And reconcilement which my Lords objects:
I think when doying injury shall cease
(The cause pretended) then surcease the effects:
Time and some other Actions may increase
As may divert the thought of these respects;
Others law of forgetting injuries Lex Amnesti^s.

May serve our turn in like calamities.
46
And for his oath my Lord I think in conscience;
True honor would not so be found untrue,
Nor spot his blood with such a foul offense
Against his soul, against his God and you:
Our Lord for bid that ever with the expense
Of heaven and heavenly ioies that shall ensue,
Mortality should buy this little breath
T'indure the horror of eternal death.
47
And therefore as I think you safely may
Accept this proffer, that determine shall
All doubtful courses by a quiet way;
Needful for you, fit for them, good for all:
And here my sovereign to make longer stay
To Attend for what you are unsure will fall
May slip the occasion and incense their will,
For fear that's wiser then the truth does ill.
48
Thus he persuades even of a zealous mind,
Supposing men had spoken as they meant,
And unto this the king likewise inclinde
As wholly unto peace and quiet bent,
And yields himself to the earl, goes, leaves behind
Safety, Scepter, honor, government:
For gone, all is gone, he is no more his own;
And they rid quite offeare, he of the crown.
49
A place there is where proudly raisd there stands
A huge aspiring rock neighbou'ring the skies
Whose surly brow imperiously commands
The sea his bounds that at his proud feet lies:
And spurns the waves that in rebellious bands
Assault his Empire and against him rise:
Under whose craggy government there was
A niggard narrow way for men to pass.
50
And here in hidden cliffes concealed lay
A troop of armed men to intercept
The vnsuspecting king, that had no way
To free his foot that into danger stepped:
The dreadful Ocean on the one side lay,
The hardincroching mountain the other kept,
Before him he beheld his hateful foes;
Behind, him traitorous enemies enclose.
51
Enuiron'd thus the Earl begins to cheer
His all-amased Lord by him betraide:
Bids him take courage there is no cause offeare,
These troops but there to guard him safe were laid:
To whom the king: what needs so many here?
This is against your oath my Lord he said:
But now he fees in what distress he stood,
To strive was vain, to entreat would do no good.
52
And therefore on with careful heart he goes
Complains (but to himself) sighs, grieves and freats,
At Rutland dines, though feeds but on his woes,
The grief of mind hindered the mind of meats:
For sorrow, shame and fear, skorne of his foes,
The thought of what he was and what now threats,
Then what he should and now what he has done,
Musters confused passions all in one.
53
To Flint from thence unto a restles bed
That miserable night he comes conuayd,
Poorly provided, poorly followed,
Vncourted, unrespected, vnobayd:
Where if uncertain sleep but hoouered
Over the drooping cares that heavy weighed,
Millions of figures fantasy presents
Unto that sorrow, wakened grief augments.
54
His new misfortune makes deluding sleep
Say it was not so, false dreams the truth deny:
Where with he starts: feels waking cares do creep
Upon his soul, and gives his dream the lie:
Then sleeps again, and then again as deep
Deceits of darkness mock his misery:
So hard belieu'd was sorrow in her youth
That he thinks truth was dreams, and dreams were truth.
55
The morning light presents unto his view
Walking upon a turret of the place,
The truth of what he fees is proved too true;
A hundred thousand men before his face
Carne marching on the shore which thither drew:
And more to aggrauate his foul disgrace,
Those he had wronged or done to them dispight
As if they him obrayd, came first in sight.
56
There might he see that false for sworn vile crew,
Those shameless agents of unlawful lust,
His Pandars, Parasites, people untrue
To God and man, unworthy any trust:
Pressing unto that fortune that was nue
And with vnblushing faces foremost thrust
As those that live in sunshine of delights,
And fly the winter when affliction lights.
57
There he beheld how humbly diligent
New adulation was to be at hand,
How ready Falsehood stepped, how nimbly went
Basepick thank Flattery and preuents command:
He saw the great obey, the grave consent,
And all with this new-raisd Aspirer stand,
Which when he saw and in his sorrow waid
Thus out of grief unto himself he said
58
O faithless Cosen, here behold I stand
Spectator of that act my self have played,
That act of rule which now upon thy hand
This wavering mutability has laid:
But Cosen, know the faith of this false land
Stands sworn to me, that faith they have betrayed
Is mine, it is mine the rule, thou do me wrong
TO usurp the government I held so long.
59
And when thou have but tried what I have found,
Thou may repent to have bought command so dear,
When thou shall find on what unquiet ground
Greatness does stand, that stands so high in fear:
Where infinite occasions do confound
The peace of mind, the good thou look for here:
O fatal is the ascent unto a crown!
From whence men come not down, but must tall down.
60
O you that cherish fat iniquity,
Enriching sin, with store, and vice with gain
By my disgrace, see what you get thereby
To raise the bad, to make the good complain:
These vipers spoil the womb wherein they lie,
And have but impudence a grace to gain,
But bodies and bold brows no minds within
But mind of ill, that knows but how to sin.
61
And for the good which now do take thy part
Thou maiste rejoice, for the others I am glad
To think they may in time likewise subuart
The expectation which of thee men had:
When thou shall find how difficult an art
It is to rule and please the good and bad:
And seele the grieuance of this fatal sort,
Which still are borne for court are made in court.
62
More grief had said: when lo the Duke he saw
Entering the Castle come to parle there,
Which makes him presently from thence withdraw
Into a fitter place some other where:
His fortune now inforst an yielding awe
To meet him, who before in humble fear
Would have been glad to have staid, and to prepare
The grace of audience, with attendant care.
63
The Duke when come in presence of his king,
Whether the sight of majesty did breed
Remorse of wrong which reverence did bring;
Or whether but to formalize his deed,
He kneeles him down even at his entering,
Rose, kneeles again (for craft will still exceed)
When as the king approcht, put off his hood
And welcomd him, though wishd him little good.
64
To whom the Duke thus said: my Lord I know
That both unlooked for, and unsent unto
I have presumed to come hither now;
But this your wrong and rigor drove me to,
And being come I purpose now to show
You better how to rule, and what to do:
You have had time too much to work our ill,
But now redress is planted in our will.
65
As you shall please dear cousin said the king,
You have me in your power, I am content
And I am pleased, if my disgrace may bring
Good to my country which I ever meant:
But yet God grant your course held in this thing
Cause not succeeding ages to repent.
And so they left: the Duke had have to go,
It was no place to end the matter so.
66
Straight toward London in this heat of pride
The Duke sets forward as they had decreed,
With whom the Captive King constraind must ride,
Most meanly mounted on a simple steed:
Degraded of all grace and case beside,
Thereby neglect of all respect to breed;
For the ouer-spreading pomp of prouder might
Must darken weakness and debase his sight.
67
Approaching nere the City he was met
With all the sumptuous shows joy could devise,
Where new-desire to please did not forget
To pass the usual pomp of former guise;
Striving applause as out of prison let,
Runs on beyond all bounds to novelties:
And voice and hands and knees and all do now
A straung deformed form of welcome show.
68
And manifold confusion running greeces
Shootes, cries, claps hands, thrusts, strives and presses nero:
Houses impou'risht were t'inrich the streets,
And streets left naked that unhappy were
Placed from the sight where joy with wonder meets,
Where all of all degrees strive to appear:
Where diuers-speaking zeal, one murmr finds
In vndistinguisht voice to tell their minds.
69
He that in glory of his fortune fate,
Admiring what he thought could never be,
Did feel his blood within salute his state,
And lift up his reiouicing soul to see
So many hands and hearts congratulate
Th'aduancement of his long-desir'd degree:
When prodigal of thanks in passing by
He resalutes them all with cheerful eye.
70
Behind him all aloof came pensive on
The unregarded king, that drooping went
Alone, and but for spite scarce looked upon,
Judge if he did more envy or lament:
O what a wondrous work this day is done,
Which the image of both fortunes does present,
In the one to show the best of glories face,
In the other worse then worst of all disgrace.
71
Now I Sabell the young afficted Queen,
Whose years had never showed her but delights,
Nor lovely eyes before had ever seen
Other then smiling ioies and joyful sights:
Borne great, matched great, lived great and ever been
Partaker of the worlds best benefits,
Had placed her self, hearing her Lord should pass
That way where she unseen in secret was.
72
Sick of delay and longing to behold
Her long mist love in fearful ieoperdies,
To whom although it had in fort been told
Of their proceeding, and of his surprise,
Yet thinking they would never be so bold
To lead their Lord in any shameful wise,
But rather would conduct him as their king,
As seeking but the States reordering.
73
And forth she looks: and notes the form often train
And grieves to view some there she wished not there,
Seeing the chief not come, stays, looks again,
And yet she sees not him that should appear:
Then back she stands, and then desires was saine
Again to look to see if he were nere,
At length a glittring troop far off she spies,
Perceiues the thronge and hears the shoots and cries.
74
Lo yonder now at length he comes (says she)
Look my good women where he is in sight:
Do you not see him? yonder that is he
Mounted on that white courser all in white,
There where the thronging troops of people be,
I know him by his seat, he sits s' upright:
Lo now he bows: dear Lord with what sweet grace:
How long have I longd to behold that face?
75
O what delight my heart takes by mine eye?
I doubt me when he comes but something near
I shall set wide the window: what care I
Who does see me, so him I may see clear?
Thus does false joy delude her wrongfully
Sweet lady in the thing she held so dear;
For nearer come, she finds she had mistook,
And him she marked was Henry Bullingbrooke.
76
Then Envy takes the place in her sweet eyes
Where sorrow had prepared herself a feat,
And words of wrath from whence complaints should rise,
Proceed from egar looks, and brows that threat:
Traitor faith she: is it thou that in this wise
To brave thy Lord and king art made so great?
And have mine eyes done unto me this wrong
To look on thee? for this staid I so long?
77
O have they graced a perjured rebel so?
Well for their error I will weep them out,
And hate the tongue defilde that praisde my so,
And loath the mind that gave me not to doubt:
O have I added shame unto my woe?
I Will look no more; Ladies look you about,
And tell me if my Lord be in this train,
Least my betraying eyes should err again.
78
And in this passion turns her self away:
The rest look all, and careful note each wight;
Whilst she impatient of the least delay.
Demands again, and what not yet in fight?
Where is my Lord? what gone some other way?
I muse at this, O God grant all go right.
Then to the window goes again at last
And sees the chiefest train of all was past.
79
And sees not him her soul desired to see,
And yet hope spent makes her not leave to look,
At last her loue-quicke eyes which ready be,
Fastens on one whom though she never took
Could be her Lord: yet that sad cheer which he
Then showed, his habit and his woeful look,
The grace he does in base attire retain,
Causd her she could not from his sight refrain.
80
What might be she said that thus alone
Rides pensive in this universal joy:
Some I perceive as well as we do moan,
All are not pleased with every thing this day,
It may be he laments the wrong is done
Unto my Lord, and grieves as well he may,
Then he is some of ours, and we of right
Must pity him, that pitties our sad plight.
81
But stay, its not my Lord himself I see?
In truth if twere not for his base araie,
I verily should think that it were he;
And yet his baseness does a grace bewray:
Yet God forbid, let me deceived be;
O be it not my Lord although it may:
And let desire make vows against desire,
And let my sight approve my sight a liar.
82
Let me not see him, but himself, a king;
For so he left me, so he did remove:
This is not he, this feels some other thing,
A passion of dislike or else of love:
O yes it is he, that princely face does bring
The evidence of majesty to prove:
That face I have conferred which now I see
With that within my heart, and they agree.
83
Thus as she stood assured and yet in doubt,
Wishing to see, what seen she grieud to see,
Having belief, yet saine would be without;
Knowing, yet striving not to know it was he:
Her heart relenting, yet her heart so stout
As would not yield to think what was, could be:
Till quite condemnd by open proof of sight
She must confess or else deny the light.
84
For whether love in him did sympathize
Or chance so wrought to manifest her doubt,
Even just before, where she thus secret prize,
He stays and with clear face looks all about:
When she: it is o too true, I know his eyes
Alas it is my own dear Lord, cries out:
And with that cry sinkes down upon the flore,
Abundant grief lackt words to utter more.
85
Sorrow keeps full possession in her soul,
Locks him within, lays up the key of breath,
Reigns all alone a Lord without control
So long till greater horror threatens:
And even in danger brought, to loose the whole
His forced come forth or else to stay with death,
Opens a sigh and lets in sense again,
And sense at legth gives words leave to complain.
86
Then like a torrent had been stopped before,
Tears, sighs, and words, doubled together flow,
Confusdly striving whether should do more
The true intelligence of grief to show:
Sighs hindered words, words perished in their store,
Both intermixed in one together grow:
One would do all, the other more then is part
Being both sent equal agents from the heart.
87
At length when past the first of sorrows worst,
When calmed confusion better form affords
Her heart commands her words should past outfirst,
And then her sighs should interpoint her words;
The whiles her eyes out into tears should burst,
This order with her sorrow she accords,
Which orderles all form of order brake,
So then began her words and thus she spoke.
88
O do thou thus return again to me?
Are these the triumphs for thy victories?
Is this the glory thou do bring with thee
From that unhappy Irish enterprise?
O have I made so many vows to see
Thy safe return, and see thee in this wise?
Is this the looked for comfort thou do bring,
To come a captive that wentst out a king?
89
And yet dear Lord though thy ungrateful land
Has left thee thus, yet I will take thy part,
I do remain the same under thy hand,
Thou still do rule the kingdom of my heart;
If all be lost, that government does stand
And that shall never from thy rule depart:
And so thou be, I care not how thou be,
Let greatness go, so it go without thee.
90
And welcome come, how so unfortunate,
I will applaud what others do despise,
I love thee for thy self not for thy state,
More then thy self is what without thee, lies:
Let that more go, if it be in thy fate,
And having but thy self it will sussize:
I married was not to thy crown but thee,
And thou without a crown all one to me.
91
But what do I here lurking idly moan
And wail a part, and in a single part
Make several grief which should be both in one,
The touch being equal of each others heart?
Ah no sweet Lord thou must not moan alone,
For without me thou art not all thou art,
Nor my tears without thine are fully tears,
For thus vnioyn'd, sorrow but half appears.
92
Join then our plaints and make our grief full grief,
Our state being one, o lets not part our care,
Sorrow has only this poor bare relief,
To be bemon'd of such as woeful are:
O should I rob thy grief and be the thief
To steal a private part, and several share,
Defrauding sorrow of her perfect due?
No no my Lord I come to help thee rue.
93
Then forth she goes a close concealed way
As grieuing to be seen not as she was;
Laborst' attain his presence all she may,
Which with most hard a do was brought to pass:
For that night understanding where he lay
With earncst treating she procured her pass
To come to him. Rigor could not deny
Those tears, so poor a suite or put her by.
94
Entering the chamber where he was alone
As one whose former fortune was his shame,
Loathing the obraiding eye of any one
That knew him once and knows him not the same:
When having given express command that none
Should press to him, yet hearing some that came
Turns angerly about his grieved eyes
When lo his sweet afflicted Queen he spies.
95
Straight cleeres his brow and with a borrowed smile
What my dear Queen, o welcome dear he faies?
And striving his own passion to beguile
And hide the sorrow which his eye betraies,
Could speak no more but wrings her hands the while,
And then (sweetlady) and again he stays:
The excess of joy and sorrow both affords
Affliction none, or but poor niggard words.
96
She that was come with a resolved heart
And with a mouth full stoor'd, with words well chose,
Thinking this comfort will I first impart
Unto my Lord, and thus my speech dispose:
Then thus i will say, thus look, and with this art
Hide mine own sorrow to relieve his woes,
When being come all this proved naught but wind,
Tears, looks, and sighs do only tell her mind.
97
Thus both stood silent and confused so,
Their eyes relating how their hearts did morn
Both big with sorrow, and both great with woe
In labor with what was not to be borne:
This mighty burden where withal they go
Dies vndeliuered, perishes unborn;
Sorrow makes silence her best oratore
Where words may make it less not show it more.
98
But he whom longer time had learned the art
TO endure afflicton as a usual touch:
Strains forth his words, and throws dismay apart
To raise up her, whose passions now were such
As quite oppressed her ouerchardged heart,
Too small a vessel to contain so much,
And cheeres and mones, and fained hopes does frame
As if himself belieu'd, or hoped the same.
99
And now the while these Princes sorrowed,
Forward ambition come so nere her end,
Sleeps not nor slippes the occasion offered
TO accomplish what it did before intend:
A parliament is forthwith summoned
In Richards name, whereby they might pretend
A form to grace disorder and a show
Of holy right, the right to overthrow.
100
Ah could not Majesty be ruined
But with the fearful power of her own name?
And must abusd obedience thus be led
With powerful titles to consent to shame?
Could not confusion be established
But form and order must confirm the same?
Must they who his authority did hate,
Yet use his style to take away his state?
101
Order, o how predominant art thou!
That if but only thou pretended art,
How soon deceived mortality does bow
To follow thine as still the better part?
It Is thought that reverent form will not allow
Iniquity: or sacred right peruart:
Within our souls since o thou dwell'st so strong
How ill do they that use thee to do wrong?
102
So ill did they that in this formal course
Sought to establish a deformed right:
Who might as well effected it by force,
But that men hold it wrong what is wrought by might:
Offenses urged in public are made worse,
The show of justice aggrauates despite:
The multitude that look not to the cause
Rest satisfied, so it be done by laws.
103
And now does envy articles object
Of rigor, malice, private fauourings,
Exaction, riot, falsehood and neglect;
Crimes done, but not to b' answered by kings:
Which subjects may complain but not correct:
And all these faults which Lancaster now brings
Against a king, must be his own when he
By urging others sins a king shall be.
104
For all that was most odious was deuisd
And published in these articles abroad,
All the errors of his youth were here comprisd
Calamity with obloquie to lode:
And more to make him publicly dispisd
Libels, inuectiues, railing rimes were sowed
Among the vulgar, to prepare his fall
With more applause and good consent of all.
105
Look how the day-hater Mineruas bird
Whilst priuiledg'd with darkness and the night,
Does live securet' himself of others feared,
But if by chance discovered in the light
O how each little soul with envy stirred
Calls him to justice, vrges him with spite;
Summons the feathered flocks of all the wood
To come to scorn the tyrant of their blood.
106
So fares this king laid open to disgrace
Whilst every mouth full of reproach inuaies,
And every base detractor in this case
Upon the advantage of misfortune plays:
Downe-falling greatness urged on a pace
Was followed hard by all disgraceful ways,
Now in the point to accelerate an end
Whilst misery had no means to defend.
107
Upon these articles in parliament
So heinous made, inforst, and vrgd so hard,
He was a diugd unfit for government
And of all regal power and rule debarred:
For who durst contradict the Dukes intent,
Or if they durst should patiently be heard?
Desire of change, old wrongs, new hopes, fresh fear
Being far the mayor part, the cause must bear.
108
Yet must we think that some which saw the course
The better few, whom passion made not blind
Stood careful lookers on with sad commorse,
Amazd to see what headlong rage dessignd:
And in a more considerate discourse
Of tragical events there of deuind,
And did or might their grieved hearts to ease
Utter their sorrows in like terms as these.
109
What dissolute proceedings have we here?
What strange presumptuous disobedience?
What unheard sury void of awe or fear,
With monstrous unexampled insolence?
Durst subjects ever here or any where
Thus impiously presume so foul offense?
To violate the power commanding all
And into judgment majesty to call.
110
O same conceal and do not carry word
To after-comming ages of our shame,
Blot out of books and raze out of Record
All monuments memorials of the same:
Forget to tell how we did lift our sword,
And envious idle accusations frame
Against our lawful fou'raigne, when we ought
His end and our release have staid not sought.
111
Since better years might work a better care,
And time might well have cured what was amiss;
Since all these faults fatal to greatness are,
And worse deserts have not been punished thus,
But o in this the heavens we fear prepare
Confusion for our sins as well as his,
And his calamity begins our:
For he his own, and we abusd his power.
112
Thus grieved they: when to the king were sent
Certain that might persuade and urge him on
To leave his crown, and make with free consent
A voluntaric resignation,
Seeing he could no other way prevent
The danger of his own confusion,
For not to yield to what fear would constrain,
Would bar the hope of life that did remain.
113
And yet this scarce could work him to consent
To yield up that so soon men hold so dear:
Why let him take (said he) the government,
And let me yet the name, the title bear:
Leave me that show and I will be content,
And let them rule and govern without fear:
O can they not my shadow now endure
When they of all the rest do stand secure?
114
Let me hold that, I ask no other good:
Nay that I will hold, Henry do thy worst,
For ere I yield my crown i will loose my blood,
That blood that shall make thee and thine accursed:
Thus resolute a while he firmly stood,
Till love of life and fear of being forced
Vanquished the innated valor of his mind;
And hope and friends, so wrought that he resignd.
115
Then to the tower (where he remained) went
The Duke with all the Peers attended on:
To take his offer with his free consent,
And testify his resignation:
And there of to inform the parliament
That all things might more formally be done:
And men might rest more satisfide thereby
As not done of constraint but wilsingly.
116
And forth h' is brought unto th'accomplishme^t
Decked with the crown in princely robes that day,
Like as the dead in other lands are sent
Unto their graves in all their best array:
And even like good did him this ornament,
For what he brought he must not bear away,
But buries there his glory and his name
Intombd for evermore in others blame.
117
And there unto the assembly of these states
His sorrow for their long endured wrong
Through his abusd authority relates,
Excuses with confessions mixed among:
And glad he faies to finish all debates
He was to leave the rule they sought for long,
Protesting if it might be for their good
He would as gladly sacrifice his blood.
118
There he his subjects all in general
Assoyles and quites of oath and fealty,
Renounces interest, title, right and all
That appertaind to kingly dignity;
Subscribes thereto and does to witness call
Both heaven and earth, and God and saints on hie,
And all this did he but to have leave to live
The which was all he craved that they would give.
119
It Is said with his own hands he gave the crown
To Lancaster, and wished to God he might
Have better joy thereof then he had known,
And that his power might make it his by right:
And furthermore he craved of all his own
But life to live apart a private wight;
The vanity of greatness he had tried
And how vnsurely stands the foot of pride.
120
This brought to pass the lords return with speed
TO acquaint the Parliament with what is done,
Where they at large published the kings own deed
And manner of his resignation:
When Canterbury vrgd them to proceed
Forthwith unto a new election, Arundell Bishop of Canterbury

And Henry make his claim both by descent
And resignation to the government.
121
Who there with full and general applause
Is straight proclaimd as king and after crowned,
The other clean rejected by the laws,
As one the Realm had most unworthy found.
And yet o Lancaster I would thy cause
Had had as lawful and as sure a ground
As had thy virtues, and thy glorious worth
For Empire borne, for Government brought forth
122
Then had not o that sad succeeding age
Her fields engrain'd with blood, her rivers did
With purple streaming wounds of her own rage,
Nor seen her Princes slain, her Peers distroide:
Then had not thou dear country come to wage
War with thy self, nor those afflictions tried
Of all-consuming discord here so long,
Too mighty now against thy self too strong.
123
So had the blood of thirteen battles fought
About this quarrel, fatal to our land,
Have been reserved with glory to have brought
Nations and kingdoms under our command;
So should all that thy son and thou had got,
With glorious praise have still been in our hand,
And that great worthy last of all thy name
Had ioind the western Empire to the same.
124
So should his great imperial daughter now
The admired glory of the earth, hereby
Have had all this nere bordring world to bow
To her immortalized majesty:
Then proud Iberus Lord not seeking how
T'attaine a false-conceiued Monarchy,
Had kept his barraine bounds and not have stood
In vain attemptst' enrich the seas with blood.
125
Nor interposd his greedy meddling hand
In other men's affairs to advance his own,
Nor tyrannisd over so many lands
From late obscurity so mighty grown:
But we with our undaunted conquering bands
Had lent our Ensigns unto lands unknown,
And now with more audacious force began
To march against the earths-terror Ottoman.
126
Where thou (O worthy Essex) whose dear blood
Reserved from these sad times to honor ours,
Should have conducted Armies and now stood
Against the strength of all the Eastern Powers:
There should thy valiant hand performed that good
Against the barbarism that all deuoures,
That all the states of the redeemed Earth
Might thee admire, and glorise thy birth.
127
Thence might thy valor have brought in despite
Eternal Tropheis to Elizas name,
And laid down at her sacred feet the right
Of all thy deeds and glory of the same.
All that which by her power, and by thy might
Thou had attaind to her immortal fame
Had made thee wondered here, admired a far
The Mercury of peace, the Mars of war.
128
And thou my Lord the glory of my muse
Pure-spirited Mounti^^, the ornament of men,
Had had a large and mighty field to use
Thy holy gifts and learned counsels then:
Whole lands and Provinces should not excuse
Thy trusty faith, nor yet sufficient been
For those great virtues to have ordered
And in a calm obedience governed.
129
Nor had I then at solitary brook
Sat framing bloody accents of these times,
Nor told of wounds that grieved eyes might look
Upon the horror of their fathers crimes,
But rather a more glorious subject took
To register in everlasting rimes
The sacred glories of ELIZABETH,
TO have kept the wonder of her worth from death.
136
And like wise builded for your great designs
O you two worthies bewties of our state,
Immortal tombs of vnconsuming lines
To keep your holic deeds inuiolate:
You in whose actions yet the image shines
Of ancient honor near worn out of date,
You that have virtue into fashion brought
In these neglected times respected naught.
131
But whither am I carried with the thought
Of what might have been, had not this been so?
O sacred Fury how was I thus brought
To speak of glory that must tell of woe?
These acted mischiefs cannot be unwrought
Though men be pleased to wish it were not so.
And therefore leave sad Muse the imagined good,
For we must now return again to blood.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD BOOK.
Henry the fourth the Crown established,
The Lords that did to Glosters death consent,
Degraded do rebel, are vanquished:
King Richard unto Promfret Castle sent
Is murdered there. The Percies making head
Against the king, receive the punishment:
And in the end a tedious troublous reign
A grievous death concludes with care, and pain.
I
Tow risen is that head, by which did spring
The birth of two strong heads, two crowns, two rights;
That monstrous shape that afterward did bring
Deformed confusion to distracted wights:
Now is attained that dearly purchased thing
What filled the world with lamentable sights:
And now attained, all care is how to frame
Means to establish, and to hold the same.
2
Striving at first to build a strong conceit
Of his weak cause, in apt-abused minds,
He deckes his deed with colors of deceit
And ornaments of right, which now he finds:
Succession, conquest, and election straight
Suggested are, and proved in all three kinds:
More then enough he finds, that finds his might
Has force' to make all that he will have, right.
3
All these he has when one good would suffize
The worlds applause, and liking to procure,
But who his own cause makes does still devise
To make too much to have it more then sure:
Fear casts too deep, and ever is too wise,
The doubtful can no usual plots endure:
These selfe-accusing titles all he had
Seeking to make one good of maine bad.
4
Like foolish he that fears, and saine would stop
An inundation working on apace,
Runs to the breach, heaps mighty matter up,
Throws indigested burdens on the place,
Loades with huge waights, the outside and the top,
But leaves the inner parts in feeble case;
Thinking for that the outward form seems strong
It Is sure enough, and may continue long.
5
But when the under working waves come on
Searching the secrets of vnsenced ways,
The full maine Ocean following hard upon
Bears down that idle frame, skorning such stays;
Prostrates that frustrate pains as if not done,
And proudly on his silly labors plays,
Whilst he perceiues his error, and does find
His ill proceeding contrary to kind.
6
So fares it with our indirect diffeignes
And wrong-contriued labors at the last,
Whilst working time or Justice undermines
The feeble groundwork craft thought laid so fast:
Then when out-breaking vengeance vncombines
The ill-ioynd plots so fairly ouercast,
Turns up those strong pretended heaps of shows
And all these weak illusions overthrows.
7
But well he thought his power made al seem plain,
And now to his coronation he proceeds,
Which in most sumptuous fort (to intertaine
The gazing vulgar whom this error feeds)
Is furnished with a stately-glorious train,
Wherein the former kings he far exceeds:
And all to amuse the world, and turn the thought
Of what, and how it was done, to what is wrought.
8
And that he might on many props repose
He strengths his own, and who his part did take:
New officers, new counselors he chose,
His eldest son the Prince of Wales does make,
His second Lord high Steward, and to those
Had hazarded their fortunes for his sake
He gives them charge, as merits their desert;
Seeking all means to oppress the adverse part.
9
All Counselors unto the former king,
All the officers, and judges of the state,
He to disgrace, or else to death did bring
Lead by his own, or by the peoples hate:
Who evermore by nature mallicing
Their might whom not their virtues, but their fate
Exalted has, who when kings do what is naught
Because it is in their power, it is thought their faut.
10
And placed for these such as were popular
Beloved of him, and in the peoples grace,
Learned grave Shirley he makes Chauncellor,
One of great spirit, worthy his worthy race:
And Clifford he ordaines Lord Treasuror,
A man whose virtues well deserved that place:
Others to other rooms (whom people hold
So much more loved how much they loathd the old)
17
Then against those he strictly does proceed
Who chief of Glosters death were guilty thought,
(Not so much for the hatred of that deed)
But under this pretext the means he sought,
To ruin such whose might did much exceed
His power to wrong, nor else could well be wrought;
Law, Justice, blood, the zeal unto the dead
Were on his side, and his drist shadowed.
12
Here maine of the greatest of the land The (...)

Accusd were of the act, strong proofs brought out
Which strongly were refell'd, the Lords all stand
To clear their cause most resolutely stout:
The king perceiving what he took in hand
Was not with safety to be brought about
Desistes to urge their death in any wise,
Respecting number, strength, friends, and allies.
13
Nor was it time now in his tender reign
And infant-young-beginning government,
To strive with blood when lenity must gain
The mighty wight, and please the discontent:
New kings do fear, when old courts farther strain,
Established states to all things will consent:
He must dispense with his will, and their crime,
And seek t'oppresse and wear them out with time.
14
Yet not to seem but to have something done
In what he could not as he would effect,
To satisfy the people that begun
Revenge of wrong, and justice to expect:
He causd be put to execution
One that to do this murder was elect,
A base mean man whom few or none would miss,
Who first did serve their turn, and now serves his.
15
And to abase the too high state of those
That were accusd, and lessen their degrees,
Aumarle, Surry, Exceter, must lose
The names of Dukes, their titles, dignities,
And what soever honor with it goes:
The Earls their titles and their Signories,
And all they got in the end of Richards reign
Since Glosters death, they mustrestore again.
16
By this as if by Ostracisme t'abate
That great presumptiue wealth, whereon they stand;
For first hereby impou'rishing their state
He kills the means they might have to withstand:
Then equals them with other whom they hate,
Who (by their spoils) are raisd to hie command,
That weak, and envied if they should conspire
They wrack themselves, and he has his desire.
17
And by this grace which yet must be a grace
As both they, and the world, are made believe,
He does himself secure and them defuce,
Thinking not rigor that which life does give:
But what an error was it in this case
To wrong so many, and to let them live?
But errors are no errors but by fate,
For often the event make soul faults fortunate.
18
The parliament which now is held, decreed
What ever pleased the king but to propound;
Confirmed the crown to him and to his feed.
And by their oath their due obedience bound:
And o b' it sin to examine how this deed
How just it is done and on how fure a ground?
Whether that Court may change due course or no
Or ought the realm against the realm can do?
19
Here was agreed to make all more secure
That Richard should remain for evermore
Close-prisoner, least the realm might chance endure
Some new revolt, or any fresh vprone:
And that if any should such broile procure
By him or for him, he should die therefore.
So that a talk of tumult and a breath
Would serve him as his passing bell to death.
20
Yet reverent Carlisle thou did there oppose
Thy holy voice to save thy Princes blood,
And freely check'st this judgment and his foes,
When all were bad, yet thou dare to be good:
Be it inrold that time may never lose
The memory how firm thy virtues stood,
When power, disgrace, nor death could ought diuart
Thy glorious tongue, thus to reveal thy heart.
21
Grave, reverent Lords, since that this sacred place
Our Auentine, Retire, our holy hill;
This place, soul of our state, the Realms best grace
Does privilege me speak what reason will:
O let me speak my conscience in this case
Least sin of silence show my heart was ill,
And let these walls witness if you will not,
I do discharge my soul of this soul blot.
22
Never shall this poor breath of mine consent
That he that two and twenty years has raignd
As lawful Lord, and king by just descent,
Should here be judged unheard, and vnaraignd
By subjects two: Judges incompetent
To judge their king unlawfully detaind,
And vn-brought forth to plead his guiltles cause,
Barring the anointed liberty of laws.
23
Have you not done enough? blush to think,
Lay on your hearts those hands; those hands too rash,
Know that this stain that is made does farther sink
Into your souls then all your bloods can wash,
Leave with the mischief done and do not link
Sin unto sin, for heaven, and earth will dash
This ill accomplished work ere it be long,
For weak he builds that senses wrong with wrong.
24
Stopped there was his too vehement speech with speed,
And he sent close to ward from where he stood:
His zeal untimely deemed too much to exceed
The measure of his wit and did no good:
They resolute for all this do proceed
Unto that judgment could not be withstood:
The king had all he craved or could compel,
And all was done we will not say how well.
25
Now Muserelate a woeful accident
And tell the bloodshed of these mighty Peers
Who lately reconcild, rest discontent,
Grieved with disgrace, remaining in their fears
How euerseeming outwardly content,
Yet the inward touch that wounded honor bears
Rosts closely rankling and can find no ease
Till death of one side cure this great disease.
26
Means how to feel, and learn each others heart
By the Abbot now of Westminster is found,
Who secretly disliking Henry's part
Inuites these Lords, and those he meant to sound,
Feasts them with cost, and draws them on with art,
And dark, and doubtful questions does propound:
Then plainer speaks, and yet uncertain speaks,
Then wishes well, then off abruptly breaks.
27
My Lord faith he, I fear we shall not find
This long-desired king such as was thought:
But yet he may do well: God turn his mind:
It Is yet new days: but ill bodes new and naught:
Some yet speed well: though all men of my kind
Have cause to doubt; his speech is not forgot,
That Princes had too little, we too much;
God give him grace, but it is ill trusting such.
28
This open-close, apparent-darke discourse
Drew on much speech, and every man replies,
And every man ads heat, and words enforce
And urge out words, for when one man espies
Another mind like his, then ill breeds worse,
And out breaks all in the end what closest lies,
For when men well have fed the blood being warm
Then are they most improuident of harm.
29
Bewray they did their in ward boiling spite
Each stirring other to revenge their cause,
One says he never should endure the sight
Of that forsworn, that wrongs both land and laws:
Another vows the same of his mind right:
A third to a point more nere the matter draws,
Swears if they would, he would attempt the thing
To chaste the usurper, and replace their king.
30
Thus one by one kindling each others fire
Till all inflamed they all in one agree,
All resolute to prosecute their ire,
Seeking their own, and Countries cause to free:
And have his first that their blood did conspire,
For no way else they said but this could be
Their wrong-detained honor to redeem,
Which true-bred blood should more then life esteem.
31
And let not this our new-made faithles Lord
Says Surry think, that we are lest so bare
Though bare enough: but we will find a sword
To kill him with, when he shall not beware:
For he that is with life and will but stoor'd,
Has for revenge enough, and needs not care,
For time will fit and furnish all the rest,
Let him but even attend, and do his best.
32
Then of the manner how to effect the thing
Consulted was, and in the end agreed
That at a mask and common reuelling
Which should b' ordaind, they should perform the deed;
For that would be least doubted of the king
And fittest for their safety to proceed,
The night, their number, and the sudden act
Would dash all order, and protect their fact.
33
Besides they might under the fair pretense
Of Tilts and Turnements which they intend,
Provide them horse, and armor for defense,
And all things else convenient for their end:
Besides they might hold sure intelligence
Among themselves without suspect to offend:
The king would think they sought but grace in court
Withal their great preparing in this sort.
34
A solemn oath religiously they make
By intermutuall vows protesting there
This never to reveal; nor to forsake
So good a cause, for danger hope, or fear:
The Sacrament the pledge of faith they take,
And every man upon his sword does sweere
By knighthood, honor, or what else should bind,
To assecure the more each others mind.
35
And whenal this was done, and thought welldone
And every one assures him good success,
And easy seems the thing to every one
That naught could cross their plot or the^ suppress;
Yet one among the rest, whole mind not won
With the ouerweening thought of hot excess,
Nor headlong carried with the stream of will,
Nor by his own election lead to ill:
36
Sober, mild Blunt, whose learning, valor, wit Sir Thomas Bluns.

Had taught true judgment in the course of things,
Knew dangers as they were, and th humerous fit
Of ware-lesse discontent, what end it brings:
Counsels their heat with calm grave words, and fit
Words welfore thought that from experience springs,
And warnes a warier carriage in the thing
Least blind presumption work their ruining.
37
My Lords (says he) I know your wisdoms such
As that of my advise you have no need,
I know you know how much the thing does touch
The maine of all your states, your blood, your seed:
Yet since the same concerns my life as much
As his whose hand is chiefest in this deed,
And that my foot must go as far as his,
I think my tongue may speak what needful is.
38
The thing we enterprise I know does bear
Great possibility of good effect,
For that so many men of might there are
That venture here this action to direct:
Which meaner wights of trust, and credit bare
Not so respected could not look to effect;
For none without great hopes will follow such
Whose power, and honor does not promise much.
39
Besides this new, and doubtful government,
The wavering faith of people vain, and light,
The secret hopes of many discontent,
The natural affection to the right,
Our lawful sou'raignes life, in prison pent,
Whom men begin to pity now, not spite,
Our wel-laid plot, and all I must confess
With our just cause does promise good success.
40
But this is yet the outward fairest side
Of our disseigne: within rests more of fear,
More dread of sad event yet vndiscride
Then o most worthy Lords I would there were:
But yet I speak not this as to divide
Your thoughts from the act, or to dismay your cheer,
Only to add unto your forward will
A moderate fear to cast the worst of ill.
41
Danger before, and in, and after the act
You needs must grant, is great, and to be waigh'd
Before: least while we do the deed protract
It be by any of our selves be wraid:
For many being privy to the fact
How hard it is to keep it vnbetraid?
When the betrayer shall have grace and life
And rid himself of danger and of strife.
42
For though some few contioue resolute,
Yet many shrink, which at the first would dare
And be the foremost men to execute,
If the act, and motion at one instant were:
But intermission suffers men dispute
What dangers are, and cast with farther care
Cold doubt cauils with honor, skorneth fame,
And in the end fear waighes down faith with shame.
43
Then in the act, what perils shall we find
If either place, or time, or other course
Cause us to alterth' order now assigned?
Or that, then we expect things happen worse?
If either error, or a fainting mind,
An indiserect amazement or remorse
In any at that instant should be found,
How much it might the act, and all confound?
44
After the deed the dangers are no less,
Least that our forwardnes not seconded
By our own followers, and accomplices
Being kept back or flow or hindered:
The hasty multitude rush on t'oppresse
Confused weakness there vnsuccored,
Or raise another head of that same race
TO avenge his death, and prosecute the case,
45
All this my Lords must be considered
The best and worst of that which may succeed,
That valor mixed with fear, boldness with dread,
May march more circumspect with better heed:
And to prevent these mischiefs mentioned
Is by our faith, our secrefie and speed,
For even already is the work begun
And we rest all undone, till all be done.
46
And o I could have wished another course
In open field to have hazarded my blood,
But some are here whose love is of that force
To draw my life, whom zeal has not withstood:
But like you not of your disseigne the worse
If the success be good your course is good:
And ending well our honor then begins,
No hand of strife is pure, but that which wins.
47
This said, a sad still silence hold their minds
Upon the fearful project of their woe,
But that not long ere forward fury finds
Encouraging persuasions on to go:
We must said they, we will, our honor binds,
Our safety bids, our faith must have it so,
We know the worst can come, it is thought upon,
We cannot shift, being in, we must go on.
48
And on indeed they went, but o not sarre,
A fatal stop trauersd their headlong course,
Their drist comes known, and they discovered are,
For some of many will be False of force:
Aumarle became the man that all did mar
Whether through indisoretions chance or worse,
He makes his peace with offering others blood
And shows the king how all the matter stood.
49
Then lo dismayed confusion all possessed
The afflicted troop hearing their plot discride,
Then runs amazd distress with sad unrest
To this, to that, to fly, to stand, to hide:
Distracted terror knew not what was best
On what determination to abide,
At last despair would yet stand to the sword,
To try what friends would do or fate afford.
50
Then this then that man's aid they crave, implore,
Post here for help, seek there their followers;
Conjure the friends they had, labor for more,
Solicit all reputed favorers,
Who Richards cause seemed to affect before,
And in his name write, pray, send messengers;
To try what faith was left, if by this art
Any would step to take afflictions part:
51
And some were found, and some again draw back
Uncertain power could not it self retain,
Entreat they may, authority they lack,
And here, and there they march, but all in vain:
With desp'rat course, like those that see their wrack
Even on the Rocks of death, and yet they strain
That death may not them idly find to attend
Their certain last, but work to meet their end.
52
And long they stand not ere the chief surprizd
Conclude with their dear blood their tragedy:
And all the rest dispersed, run some disguisd
To unknown costs, some to the shores do fly,
Some to the woods, or whether fear aduisd,
But running from all to destruction hye,
The breach once made upon a battered state
Down goes distress, no shelter shroudes their fate.
53
O now what horror in their souls does grow?
What sorrows with their friends, and nere allies?
What mourning in their ruined houses now?
How many childrens plaints and mothers cries?
How many woeful widows left to bow
To sad disgrace? what perished families?
What heirs of hie rich hopes their thought smust frame
To bace-downe-looking poverty and shame!
54
This slaughter, and calamity forgoes
Thy eminent destruction woeful king,
This is the bloody comet of thy woes
That does fortell thy present ruyning:
Here was thy end decreed when these men rose
And even with their, this act thy death did bring
Or hastened, at the least upon this ground;
Yet if not this, another had beenbe found.
55
Kings (Lords of times and of occasions)
May take the advantage, when, and how they lift,
For now the Realm with these rebellions
Vexed, and turmyld, was thought would not resist
Nor feel the wound, when like confusions
Should by this means be stayed, as all men wist,
The cause be'ing once cut off that did molest,
The land should have her peace, and he his rest.
56
He knew this time, and yet he would not seem
Too quick to wrath, as if affecting blood;
But yet complains so far, that men might deem
He would twere done, and that he thought it good;
And wished that some would so his life esteem
As rid him of these fears wherein he stood: This knight was Sir Pierce of
Exton.

And therewith eyes a knight, that then was by,
Who soon could learn his lesson by his eye.
57
The man he knew was one that willingly
For one good look would hazard soul and all,
An instrument for any villainy,
That needed no commission more at all:
A great ease to the king that should hereby
Not need in this a course of justice call,
Nor seem to will the act, for though what is wrought
Were his own deed, he grieves should so be thought.
58
So soul a thing o thou injustice art
That tortrest both the doer and distressed,
For when a man has done a wicked part,
O how he strives to excuse to make the best,
To shift the fault, t'vnburthen his charged heart
And glad to find the least furmise of rest:
And if he could make his seem others sin,
O what repose what easelie finds therein?
59
This knight, but o why should I call him knight
To give impiety this reverent style,
Title of honor, worth, and virtues right
Should not be given to a wretch so vile?
O pardon me if I do not aright,
It is because I will not here defile
My unstained verse with his opprobrious name,
And grace him so to place him in the same.
60
This eaitise goes and with him takes eight more
As desperate as himself; impiously bold
Such villains as he knew would not abhor
To execute what wicked act he would,
And hastes him down to Pomfret wherebefore
The restles king conuaid, was laid in hold:
There would he do the deed he thought should bring
To him great grace and favor with his king.
61
Whether the soul receive intelligence
By her nere Genius of the bodies end,
And so impartes a sadness to the sense
Forgoing ruin whereto it does end:
Or whether nature else has conference
With profound sleope, and so does warning send
By prophetizing dreams what hurt is near,
And gives the heavy careful heart to fear:
62
How ever so it is, the now sad king
Tossed here and there his quiet to confound,
Feels a strange weight of sorrows gathering
Upon his trembling heart, and sees no ground:
Feels so dayne terror bring cold shiuering.
Lists not to eat, still muses, sleeps unfound,
His senses droope, his steedy eye vnquicke
And much he ails, and yet he is not sick.
63
The morning of that day, which was his last,
After a weary rest rising to pain
Out at a little grate his eyes he cast
Upon those bordering hills, and open plain,
And viewes the town, and sees how people past,
Where others liberty makes him complain
The more his own, and grieves his soul the more
Conferring captiue-Crownes with freedom pore.
64
O happy man, faith he, that lo I see
Grazing his cattle in those pleasant fields!
O if he knew his good, how blessed he
That feels not what affliction greatness yeeldes,
Other then what he is he would not be,
Nor chaung his state with him that Scepters weildes:
O thine is that true life, that is to live,
To rest secure, and not rise up to gricue.
65
Thou sit'st at home safe by thy quiet fire
And hear'st of others harms, but feel none;
And there thou telst of kings and who aspire,
Who fall, who rise, who triumphs, who do moan:
Perhaps thou talkst of me, and do inquire
Of my restraint, why here I live alone,
O know it is others sin not my desert,
And I could wish I were but as thou art.
66
Thrice-happie you that look as from the shore
And have no venture in the wrack you see,
No sorrow, no occasion to deplore
Other men's trauayles while your selves sit free.
How much does your sweet rest make us the more
To see our misery and what we be?
O blinded greatness! thou with thy turmoyle
Still seeking happy life, make life a toil.
67
But look on me, and note my troubled reign,
Examine all the course of my vexed life;
Compare my little joys with my long pain,
And note my pleasures rare, my sorrows rife,
My childhood difrent in others pride, and gain,
My youth in danger, farther years in strise,
My courses crossed, my deeds wrest to the worst,
My honor spoild, my life in danger forced.
68
This is my state, and this is all the good
That wretched I have gotten by a crown,
This is the life that costs men so much blood
And more then blood to make the same their own,
O had not I then better been to have stood
On lower ground, and safely lived unknown,
And been a herds man rather then a king,
Which inexperience thinks so sweet a thing.
69
O thou great Monarch, and more great therefore Dioclesian the Emperor.

For skorning that whereto vain pride aspires,
Reckning thy gardens in Illiria more
Then all the Empire; took'st those sweet retires:
Thou well did teach, that o he is not poor
That little has, but he that much desires:
Finding more true delight in that small ground
Then in possessing all the earth was found.
70
But what do I repeating others good
To vex mine own perplexed soul the more?
Alas how should I now free this poor blood
And care-worne body from this state restore?
How should I look for life or liuely-hood
Kept here distressed to die, condemnd before,
A sacrifice prepared for his peace
That can but by my death have his release?
71
Are kings that freedom give themselves not free,
As meaner men to take what they may give?
O are they of so fatal a degree
That they cannot descend from that and live?
Unless they still be kings can they not be,
Nor may they their authority surviue?
Will not my yielded crown redeem my breath?
Still am I feared? is there no way but death?
72
Scarce this word death had sorrow uttered,
But in rusht one, and tells him how a knight
Is come from court, his name delivered.
What news with him said he that traitorous wight?
What more remoues? must we be farther lead?
Are we not sent enough yet out of sight?
Or has this place not strength sufficient
To guard us in? or have they worse intent?
73
By this the bloody troop were at the door,
When as a sudden and a strange dismay
Inforst them strain, who should go in before;
One offers, and in offering makes a stay:
Another forward sets and does no more,
A third the like, and none durst make the way:
So much the horror of so vile a deed
In vilest minds hinders them to proceed.
74
At length, as to some great assault the knight
Cheeres up his fainting men all that he can,
And valiantly their courage does incite
And all against one weak unarmed man:
A great exployt worthy a man of might,
Much honor wretch therein thy valor wan:
Ah poor weak prince, yet men that presence fear
Which once they knew authority did bear.
75
Then on thrustes one, and he would foremost be
To shead another blood, but lost his own;
For entering in, as soon as he did see
The face of majesty to him well known,
Like Marius soldier at Minternum, he
Stood still amazd his courage overthrown:
The king seeing this, startes up from where he fate
Out from his trembling hand his weapon gate.
76
Thus even his foes that came to bring him death,
Bring him a weapon that before had none,
That yet he might not idly loose his breath
But diereuengd in action not alone:
And this good chance that this much favors
He slackes not, for he presently speedes one,
And Lion-like upon the rest he flies,
And here falls one, and there another lies.
77
And up and down he trauerses his ground,
Now wards a felling blow, now strikes again,
Then nimbly shifts a thrust, then lendes a wound,
Now back he gives, then rushes on amain,
His quick and ready hand does so confound
These shameful beasts that four of them dies slain,
And all had perished happily and well
But for one act, that o I greiue to tell.
78
This coward knight seeing with shame and fear
His men thus slain and doubting his own end,
Leapes up into a chair that lo was there,
The whiles the king did all his courage bend
Against those four that now before him were,
Doubting not who behind him does attend,
And plies his hands undaunted, vnaffeard
And with good heart, and life for life he stird.
79
And whiles he this, and that, and each man's blow
Does eye, desend, and shift, being laid to sore
Backward he beats for more advantage now,
Thinking the wall would safeguard him the more,
When lo with impious hand o wicked thou
That shameful durst not come to strike before,
Behind him gave that woeful deadly wound,
That laid that most sweet Prince flat on the ground.
08
Monster of men, o what have thou here done
Unto an ouerpressed innocent,
Laboring against so many, he but one,
And one poor soul with care, with sorrow spent?
O could thy eyes endure to look upon
Thy hands disgrace, or did thou then relent?
But what thou did I will not here divine
Nor strain my thoughts to enter into thine.
81
But leave thee wretch unto black infamy,
To dark eternal horror, and disgrace,
The hateful skorne to all posterity,
The outcast of the world, last of thy race,
Of whose cursed seed, nature did then deny
To bring forth more her fair works to deface:
And as ashamed to have produced that past
She stays her hand, and makes this worst her last.
82
There lies that comely body all imbrude
With that pure blood, mixed with that foul he shed:
O that those sacred streams with such vile rude
Unhallowed matter should be mingled!
O why was grossenes with such grace indude,
To be with that sweet mixture honored?
Or served it but as some vile grave ordaind,
Where an imbalmed corpse should be containd?
83
Those fair distended limbs all trembling lay,
Whom yet nor life nor death their own could call,
For life removed had not rid all away,
And death though entering seas'd not yet on all:
That short-tim'd motion (that soon finish shall
The mouer ceasing) yet a while does stay,
As the organ sound a time suruiues the stop
Before it does the dying note give up:
84
So holds those organs of that goodly frame
The weak remains of life a little space,
But ah full soon cold death poffest the same,
Set are those sun-like eles, bloudlesse that face,
And all that comely whole a lump became,
All that fair form which death could scarce disgrace
Lies perished thus, and thus untimely fate
Has finished his most miserable state.
85
And thus one king most nere in blood allide
is made the oblation for the others peace:
Now only one, both name and all beside
Entirely has, plurality does cease:
He that remains, remains vnterrifide
With others right; this day does all release:
And henceforth he is absolutely king,
No crowns but one, this deed confirms the thing.
86
And yet new Hydraes lo, new heads appear
TO afflict that peace reputed then so sure,
And gave him much to do, and much to fear,
And long and dangerous tumults did procure,
And those even of his chiefest followers were
Of whom he might presume him most secure,
Who whether not so graced or so preferred
As they expected, these new factions stird.
87
The Percyes were the men, men of great might,
Strong in alliance, and in courage strong
That thus conspire, under pretense to right
The crooked courses they had suffered long:
Whether their conscience vrgd them or despite,
Or that they saw the part they took was wrong,
Or that ambition hereto did them call,
Or others enuide grace, or rather all.
88
What cause soever were, strong was their plot,
Their parties great, means good, the occasion fit:
Their practice close, their faith suspected not,
Their states far off and they of wary wit:
Who with large promises draw in the Scot
To aid their cause, he likes, and yeeldes to it,
Not for the Jove of them or for their good,
But glad hereby of means to shed our blood.
89
Then join they with the Welsh, who fitly traind
And all in arms under a mighty head
Great Glendowr, who long warred, and much attaind, Omen Glenden

Sharp conflicts made, and many vanquished:
With whom was Edmond Earl of March retaind
Being first his prisoner, now confedered,
A man the king much feared, and well he might
Least he should look whether his Crown stood right.
90
For Richard, for the quiet of the state,
Before he took those Irish wars in hand Rich. 2.

About succession does deliberate,
And finding how the certain right did stand,
With full consent this man did ordinate
The heir apparent to the crown and land:
Then judge if this the king might nerely touch,
Although his might were small, his right being much.
91
With these the Percyes them confederate,
And as three heads they league in one intent,
And instituting a Triumuirate
Do part the land in triple government:
Dividing thus among themselves the state,
The Percyes should rule all the North from Trent
And Glendowr Wales: the Earl of March should be
Lord of the South from Trent; and thus they gree.
92
Then those two helps which still such actors find
Pretense of common good, the kings disgrace
Does fit their course, and draw the vulgar mind
To further them and aid them in this cafe:
The king they accusd for cruel, and unkind
That did the state, and crown, and all deface;
A periurde man that held all faith in skorne,
Whose trusted oaths had others made for sworn.
93
Besides the odious detestable act
Of that late murdered king they aggrauate,
Making it his that so had willed the fact
That he the doers did remunerate:
And then such taxes daily does exact
That were against the orders of the state,
And with all these or worse they him assaild
Who late of others with the like preuaild.
94
Thus does contentious proud mortality
Afflict each other and it self torment:
And thus o thou mind-tortring misery
Restles ambition, borne in discontent,
Turn st and retossest with iniquity
The unconstant courses frailty did invent:
And fowlst fair order and defilst the earth
Fostring up war, father of blood and dearth.
95
Great seemd the cause, and greatly to, did ad
The peoples love thereto these crimes rehearst,
That many gathered to the troops they had
And many more do flock from costs dispersed:
But when the king had heard these news so bad,
Th'vnlookt for dangerous toil more nearly perst;
For bent toward Wales to appease those tumults there,
H'is for'st divert his course, and them forbear.
96
Not to give time unto th'increasing rage
And gathering fury, forth he hastes with speed,
Left more delay or giving longer age
To the evil grown, it might the cure exceed:
All his best men at arms, and leaders sage
All he prepared he could, and all did need;
For to a mighty work thou go o king,
To such a field that power to power shall bring.
97
There shall young Hotespur with a fury lead The son to the Earl of
Northumberland.

Meet with thy forward son as fierce as he:
There warlike Worster long experienced
In foreign arms, shall come to encounter thee:
There Douglas to thy Stafford shall make head:
There Vernon for thy valiant Blunt shall be:
There shall thou find a doubtful bloody day,
Though sickness keep Northumberland away.
98
Who yet reserved, though after quit for this,
Another tempest on thy head to raise,
As if still wrong revenging Nemesis
Did mean to afflict all thy continual days:
And yet this field he happily might miss
For thy great good, and therefore well he stays:
What might his force have done being joined thereto,
When that already gave so much to do?
99
The swift approach and unexpected speed
The king had made upon this new-raisd force
In th'vnconfirmed troops much fear did breed,
Untimely hindering their intended course;
The joining with the Welsh they had decreed
Was hereby stopped, which made their part the worse,
Northumberland with forces from the North
Expected to be there, was not set forth.
100
And yet undaunted Hotspur seeing the king
So nere approch'd, leaving the work in hand
With forward speed his forces marshalling,
Sets forth his farther coming to withstand:
And with a cheerful voice encouraging
By his great spirit his well imboldned band,
Bringes a strong host of firm resolved might,
And placed his troops before the king in sight.
101
This day (says he) o faithful valiant friends,
What ever it does give, shall glory give:
This day with honor frees our state, or ends
Our misery with fame, that still shall live,
And do but think how well this day he spendes
That spendes his blood his country to relieve:
Our holy cause, our freedom, and our right,
Sufficient are to move good minds to fight.
102
Besides the assured hope of victory
That we may even promise on our side
Against this weake-constrained company,
Whom force and fear, not will, and love does guide
Against a prince whose soul impiety
The heavens do hate, the earth cannot abide,
Our number being no less, our courage more,
What need we doubt if we but work therefore.
103
This said, and thus resolved even bent to charge
Upon the king, who well their order viewd
And careful noted all the form at large
Of their proceeding, and their multitude:
And deeming better if he could discharge
The day with safety, and some peace conclude,
Great proffers sendes of pardon, and of grace
If they would yield, and quietness embrace.
104
But this refusd, the king with wrath incensd
Rage against fury does with speed prepare:
And o faith he, though I could have dispensd
With this days blood, which I have sought to spare
That greater glory might have recompensd
The forward worth of these that so much dare,
That we might honor had by the ouerthrown
That the wounds we make, might not have bin our own.
105
Yet since that other men's iniquity
Calls on the sword of wrath against my will,
And that themselves exact this cruelty,
And I constrained am this blood to spill:
Then on my masters, on courageously
True-harted subjects against traitors ill,
And spare not them who seek to spoil us all,
Whose foul confused end soon see you shall.
106
Straight moves with equal motion equal rage
The like incensed armies unto blood,
One to defend, another side to wage
Foul civil war, both vows their quarrel good:
Ah too much hear to blood does now inrage
Both who the deed prouokes and who withstood,
That valor here is vice, here manhood sin,
The forward st hands does o least honor win.
107
But now begin these fury-mouing soundes
The notes of wrath that music brought from hell,
The rattling drums which trumpets voice co^founds,
The cries, the encouragements, the shouting shrell;
That all about the beaten air reboundes,
Thundering confused, murmurs horrible,
To rob all sense except the sense to fight,
Well hands may work, the mind has lost his sight.
108
O war! begot in pride and luxury,
The child of wrath and of dissension,
Horrible good; mischief necessary,
The foul reformer of confusion,
Vniust-iust scourge of our iniquity,
Cruel recurer of corruption:
O that these sin-sicke states in need should stand
To be let blood with such a boystrous hand!
109
And o how well thou had been spared this day
Had not wrong counsaild Percy been peruers, The Prince of Wales,

Whose young vndanger'd hand now rash makes way
Upon the sharpest fronts of the most fierce:
Where now an equal fury thrusts to stay
And rebeat-backe that force and his disperse,
Then these assail, then those chase back again,
Till staid with new-made hills of bodies slain.
110
There lo that new-appearing glorious star
Wonder of Arms, the terror of the field
Young Henry, laboring where the stoutest are,
And even the stoutest forces back to yield,
There is that hand boldned to blood and war
That must the sword in woundrous actions weild:
But better had thou learnd with others blood
A less expense to us, to thee more good.
111
Had thou not there lent present speedy aid
To thy indaungerde father nerely tyrde,
Whom fierce incountring Douglas ouerlaid,
That day had there his troublous life expirde:
Heroycall Courageous Blunt araid Which was Sir Walter Blunt

In habit like as was the king attirde
And deemd for him, excusd that fate with his,
For he had what his Lord did hardly miss.
112
For thought a king he would not now disgrace
The person then supposd, but prince like shows
Glorious effects of worth that fit his place,
And fighting dies, and dying overthrows:
Another of that forward name and race Another Blunt which was the kings
Standard bearer.

In that hot work his valiant life bestows,
Who bare the standard of the king that day,
Whose colors overthrown did much dismaie.
113
And dear it cost, and o much blood is shed
To purchase thee this loosing victory
O trauayld king: yet have thou conquered
A doubtful day, a mighty enemy:
But o what wounds, what famous worthlyes dead!
That makes the winner look with sorrowing eye,
Magnanimous Stafford lost that much had wrought,
And valiant Shorly who great glory got. Sir Hugh Shorly.

114
Such wrack of others blood thou did behold
O furious Hotspur, ere thou lost thine own!
Which now once lost that heat in thine waxt cold,
And soon became thy Army overthrown;
And o that this great spirit, this courage bold,
Had in some good cause been rightly shown!
So had not we thus violently then
Have termd that rage, which valor should have been.
115
But now the king retires him to his peace,
A peace much like a feeble sickemans sleep,
(Wherein his waking pains do never cease
Though seeming rest his closed eyes does keep)
For o no peace could ever so release
His intricate turmoiles, and sorrows deep,
But that his cares kept waking all his life
Continue on till death conclude the strife.
116
Whose harald sickness, being sent before
With full commission to denounce his end,
And pain, and grief, enforcing more and more,
Besiegd the hold that could not long defend,
And so consumed all that imboldning store
Of hot gaine-striuing blood that did contend,
Wearing the wall so thin that now the mind
Might well look through, and his frailty find.
117
When lo, as if the vapors vanished were,
Which heat of boiling blood and health did breed,
(To cloud the sense that nothing might appear
Unto the thought, that which it was indeed)
The lightened soul began to see more clear
How much it was abusd, and notes with heed
The plain discovered falsehood open laid
Of ill persuading flesh that so betrayed.
118
And lying on his last afflicted bed
Where death and conscience both before him stand,
The One holding out a book wherein he red
In bloody lines the deeds of his own hand;
The other shows a glass, which figured
An ougly form of foul corrupted sand:
Both bringing horror in the highest degree
With what he was, and what he straight should be.
119
Which seeing all confusd trembling with fear
He lay a while, as overthrown in sprite,
At last commands some that attending were
To fetch the crown and set it in his sight,
On which with fixed eye and heavy cheer
Casting a look, O God (says he) what right
I had to thee my soul does now conceive;
Thee, which with blood I got, with horror leave.
120
Were thou the cause my climing care was such
To pass those bounds, nature, and law ordaind?
Is this that good which promised so much,
And seemd so glorious ere it was attaind?
Wherein was never joy but gave a touch
To check my soul to think, how thou were gaind,
And now how do I leave thee unto mine,
Which it is dread to keep, death to resign.
121
With this the soul rapt wholly with the thought
Of such distress, did so attentive weigh
Her present horror, whilst as if forgote
The dull consumed body senceles lay,
And now as breathles quite, quite dead is thought,
When lo his son comes in, and takes away
The fatal crown from thence, and out he goes
As if unwilling longer time to lose.
122
And whilst that sad confused soul does cast
Those great accounts of terror and distress,
Upon this counsel it does light at last
How she might make the charge of horror less,
And finding no way to acquit that's past
But only this, to use some quick redress
Of acted wrong, with giving up again
The crown to whom it seemed to appertain.
123
Which found, lightened with some small joy she hyes,
Rouses her servant that dead sleeping lay,
(The members of her house,) to exercise
One feeble duty more, during her stay:
And opening those dark windows he espies
The crown for which he looked was borne away,
And all-agrieu'd with the unkind offense
He causd him bring it back that took it thence.
124
To whom (excusing his presumteous deed
By the supposing him departed quite)
He said: o Son what needs thee make such speed
Unto that care, where fear exceeds thy right,
And where his sin whom thou shall now succeed
Shall still vpbraid thy' inheritance of might,
And if thou can live, and live great from woe
Without this careful travail; let it go.
125
Nay father since your fortune did attain
So hye a stand: I mean not to descend,
Replies the Prince; as if what you did gain
I were of spirit unable to defend:
Time will appease them well that now complain,
And ratefie our interest in the end;
What wrong has not continuance quite outworne?
Years makes that right which never was so borne.
126
If so, God work his pleasure (said the king)
And o do thou contend with all thy might
Such evidence of virtuous deeds to bring,
That well may prove our wrong to be our right:
And let the goodness of the managing
Race out the blot of foul attayning quite:
That discontent may all advantage miss
To wish it otherwise then now it is.
127
And since my death my purpose does prevent
Touching this sacred war I took in hand,
(An action wherewithal my soul had meant
To Appease my God, and reconcile my land)
To thee is left to finish my intent,
Who to be safe must never idly stand;
But some great actions entertain thou still
To hold their minds who else will practice ill.
128
Thou have not that advantage by my reign
To riot it (as they whom long descent
Has purchasd love by custom) but with pain
Thou must contend to buy the worlds content:
What their birth gave them, thou have yet to gain
By thine own virtues, and good government,
And that unless thy worth confirm the thing
Thou can not be the father to a king.
129
Nor art thou born in those calm days, where rest
Has brought a sleep sluggish security;
But in tumultuous times, where minds adrest
To factions are inurd to mutiny,
A mischief not by force to be suppressed
Where rigor still begets more enmity,
Hatred must be beguild with some new course,
Where states are strong, and princes doubt their force
130
This and much more affliction would have said
Out of the experience of a troublous reign,
For which his high desires had dearly paid
Th'interest of an euer-toyling pain
But that this all-subduing power here staid
His faultring tongue and pain r'inforc'd again,
And cut off all the passages of breath
To bring him quite under the state of death.
113
In whose possession I must leave him now,
And now into the Ocean of new toils,
Into the stormy Maine where tempests grow
Of greater ruins, and of greater spoils
Set forth my course to hasten on my vow
Over all the troublous deep of these turmoiles:
And if I may but live t'attaine the shore
Of my desired end, I wish no more.
132
Help on o sovereign Muse, help on my course
If these my toils be grateful in thy eyes;
Or but look on, to cheer my feeble force
That I faint not in this'great enterprise:
And you o worthy you, that take remorse
Of my estate, and help my thoughts to rise;
Continue still your grace that I may give
End to the work wherein your worth may live.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE FOVVRTH BOOK.
Henry the fifth cuts off his enemy
The earl of Cambridge that conspired his death:
Henry the fixed married vnluckely
His and his countries glory ruineth:
Suffolk that made the match preferred too hie
Going to exile a pirat murthereth:
What means the Duke of York obserud to gain
The worlds goodwill, seeking the crown t'attaine.
1
CLose smothered lay the low depressed fire,
Whose after-issuing flames confounded all
Whilst thou victorious Henry did conspire Hen. 5.

The wrack of France, that at thy feet did fall:
Whilst joys of gotten spoils, and new desire
Of greater gain to greater deeds did call
Thy conquering troops, that could no thoughts retain
But thoughts of glory all that working reign.
2
What do I feel o now in passing by
These blessed times that I am forced to leave?
What trembling sad remorse does terrefie
M' amazed thought with what I do conceive?
What? does my pen commit impiety
To pass those sacred tropheis without leave?
And do I sin, not to salute your ghostes
Great worthies, so renowned in foreign coasts?
3
Who do I see out of the dark appear,
Covered almost with clouds as with the night,
That here presents him with a martial cheer
Seeming of dreadful, and yet lovely fight?
Whose eye gives courage, and whose brow has fear
Both representing terror and delight,
And stays my course, and off my purpose breaks,
And in obraiding words thus fiersly speaks.
4
Ungrateful times that impiously neglect
That worth that never times again shall show,
What, merits all our toil no more respect?
Or else stands idleness ashamed to know
Those wondrous Actions that do so object
Blame to the wanton, sin unto the slow?
Can England see the best that she can boast
Ly thus vngrac'd, vndeckt, and almost loft?
5
Why do you seek for fained Palladins
Out of the sinoke of idle vanity,
That may give glory to the true dissignes
Of Bourchier, Talbot, Neuile, Willoughby?
Why should not you strive to fill up your lines
With wonders of your own, with verity?
TO inflame their offspring with the love of Good
And glorious true examples of their blood.
6
O what eternal matter here is found!
Whence new immortal Fliads might proceed,
That those whose happy graces do abound
In blessed accents here may have to feed
Good thoughts, on no imaginary ground
Of hungry shadows which no profit breed:
Whence music like, instant delight may grow,
But when men all do know they nothing know.
7
And why do thou in lamentable verse
Nothing but bloodshed, treasons, sin and shame,
The worst of timos, the extreme of ils rehearse,
To raise old stains, and to renew dead blame?
As if the minds of th'evill, and perverse
Were not far sooner trained from the same
By good example of fair virtuous acts,
Then by the show of foul ungodly facts
8
O that our times had had some sacred wight,
Whose words as happy as our swords had bin
To have prepared for us Tropheis aright
Of vndecaying frames to have rested in:
Triumphant Arkes of perdurable might
O holy lines: that such advantage win
Upon the Sieth of time in spite of years,
How blessed they that gain what never wears.
9
What is it o to do, if what we do
Shall perish nere as soon as it is done?
What is that glory we attain unto
With all our toil, if lost as soon as won?
O small requital for so great a do
Is this poor present breath a smoke soon gone;
Or these dombe stones erected for our sake,
Which formles heaps few stormy chaunges make.
10
Tell great ELIZA since her days are graced
With those bright ornaments to us denide,
That she repair what darkness has defaced,
And get our ruyn'd deeds reediside:
She in whose all directing eye is placed
A power the highest powers of wit to guide,
She may command the work and ouersee
The holy frame that might eternal be.
11
O would she be content that time should make
A ravenous pray upon her glorious reign;
That darkness and the night should overtake
So clear a brightness, shining without stain?
Ah no, she softens some no doubt that wake
For her eternity, with pleasing pain:
And if she for her self prepare this good,
O let her not neglect those of her blood.
12
This that great Monarch Henry seemd to crave; Hen. 5.

When (weighing what a holy motive here
Virtue proposd, and fit for him to have,
Whom all times ought of duty hold most dear)
I sighd, and wishd that some would take t'ingraue
With curious hand so proud a work to rear,
To grace the present, and to bless times past,
That might for ever to our glory last.
13
So should our well taught times have learned alike
How fair shind virtue, and how soul vice stood,
When now my self have driven to mislike
Those deeds: of worth I dare not vow for good:
I cannot moan who lose, nor praise who seek
By mighty Actions to advance their blood;
I must faie who wrought most, least honor had,
How ever good the cause, the deeds were bad.
14
And only tell the worst of every rain
And not the intermedled good report,
I leave what glory virtue did attain
At th'euermemorable Agincorte:
I leave to tell what wit, what power did gain
Th'assieged Roan, Caen, Dreux, or in what sort:
How maiestic with terror did advance
Her conquering foot on all subdued France.
15
All this I pass, and that magnanimous King
Mirror of virtue, miracle of worth,
Whose mighty Actions with wise managing
Forced prouder bosting climes to serve the North:
The best of all the best the earth can bring
Skarse equals him in what his reign brought forth,
Being of a mind as forward to aspire
As fit to govern what he did desire.
16
His comely body was a goodly seat
Where virtue dwelt most fair as lodgd most pure,
A bodic strong whene use of strength did get
A stronger state to do, and to endure:
Making his life the example to beget
Like spirit in those he did to good in ure,
Most glorying to advance true virtuous blood,
As if he greatness sought but to do good.
17
Who as the chief, and all-directing head,
Did with his subjects as his members live,
And them to goodness forced not, but lead
Winning not much to have, but much to give:
Deeming the power of his, his power did spread
As borne to bless the world and not to grieve:
Adornd with others spoils not subjects store,
No king exacting less, none winning more.
18
He after that corrupted faith had bred
An ill inured obedience for command,
And languishing luxuriousnes had spread
Feeble unaptness over all the land,
Yet he those long vnordred troops so led
Under such formal discipline to stand,
That even his soul seemd only to direct
So great a body such exployts to effect.
19
He bringes abroad distracted discontent,
Dispersed ill humors into actions hie,
And to unite them all in one consent
Placed the fair mark of glory in their eye,
That malice had no leisure to dissent,
Nor envy time to practice treachery,
The present actions do divert the thought
Of madness past, while minds were so well wrought.
20
Here now were pride, oppression, usury,
The canker-eating mischeifes of the state,
Called forth to pray upon the enemy,
Whilst the home-burthned better lightened sat:
Ease was not suffered with a gredie eye
T'examine states or private wealths to rate,
The silent Courts warred not with busy words,
Nor wrested law gave the contentious swords.
21
Now nothing entertaines th'attentiue care
But stratagems, assaults, surprises, fights;
How to give laws to them that conquered were,
How to articulate with yielding wights:
The weak with mercy, and the proud with fear
How to retain, to give deserts their right,
Were now the Arts, and nothing else was thought
But how to win and maintain what was got.
22
Here o were none that privately possessed
And held alone imprisoned majesty,
Proudly debarring entrance from the rest
As if the pray were theirs by victory:
Here no detractor wounds who merits best,
Nor shameless brow cheeres on impiety,
Virtue who all her toil with zeal had spent
Not here all unrewarded, sighing went.
23
But here the equally respecting eye
Of power, looking alike on like deserts,
Blessing the good made others good thereby.
More mighty by the multitude of hearts:
The field of glory unto all does lie
Open alike, honor to all imparts;
So that the only fashion in request
Was to be good or good-like, as the rest.
24
So much o thou example do effect
Being far a better master then command,
That how to do by doing do direct
And teach others, action by thy hand.
Who follows not the course that kings elect?
When Princes work, who then will idle stand?
And when that doing good is only thought
Worthy reward; who will be bad for naught?
25
And had not the earl of Ca^bridge with vain speed
Untimely practizd for another right,
With hope t'aduaunce those of his proper seed,
(On whom yet rule seemed destined to light)
The land had seen none of her own to bleed
During this reign, nor no aggrieued sight:
None the least blacknes interclouded had
So fair a day, nor any eye looked sad.
26
But now when France perceiving from a far
The gathering tempest growing on from hence
Ready to fall, threatening their state to mar,
They labor all means to provide defense:
And practicing how to prevent this war,
And shut out such calamities from thence,
Do softer here some discord lately grown
To hold Ambition busied with her own.
27
Finding those humors which they saw were fit
Soon to be wrought and easy to be fed,
Swollen full with envy that the crown should sit
There where it did, as if established:
And whom it touched in blood to grieve at it
They with such hopes and helps solicited,
That this great Earl was drawn t'attempt the thing
And practices how to depose the king.
28
For being of mighty means to do the deed
And yet of mightier hopes then means to do,
And yet of spirit that did his hopes exceed,
And then of blood as great to ad thereto:
All which, with what the gold of France could breed
Being powers enough a climing mind to woo,
He so imploid, that many he had won
Even of the chief the king relide upon.
29
The wel-known right of the Earl of March alurd
A leaning love, whose cause he did pretend;
Whereby he knew that so himself procurd
The Crown for his own children in the end:
For the Earl being (as he was assurd)
Unapt for issue, it must needs descend
On those of his being next of Clarence race,
As who by course of right should hold the place.
30
It was the time when as the forward Prince
Had all prepared for his great enterprise, At Southhaton.

And ready stand his troops to part from hence
And all in stately form and order lies:
When open fame gives out intelligence
Of these bad complots of his enemies:
Or else this time of purpose chosen is
Though known before, yet let run on till this.
31
That this might yield the more to aggrauate
Upon so foul a deed so vilely sought,
Now at this time t'attempt to ruinate
So glorious great disseignes so forward brought:
Whilst careful virtue seeks t'aduaunce the state
And for her everlasting honor sought
That though the cause were right, and title strong
The time of doing it, yet makes it wrong.
32
And straight an unlamented death he had,
And straight were joyfully the Anchors weighd
And all flock fast aboard, with visage glad,
As if the sacrifize had now been paid
For their good speed; that made their stay so sad
Lothing the least occasion that delayed.
And now new thoughts, great hopes, calm seas, fair winds
Whith present action intertaines their minds.
33
No other cross o Henry saw thy days
But this that touched thy now possessed hold;
Nor after long, till this man's son assaies Richard Duke of York.

To get of thine the right that he controwld:
For which contending long, his life he paies;
So that it fatal seemd the father should
Thy winning seek to stay, and then his son
Should be the cause to loose, when thou had won.
34
Yet now in this so happy a mean while
And inter lightning times thy virtues wrought,
That discord had no leisure to defile
So fair attempts with a tumultuous thought:
And even thy self, thy self did so beguile
With such attention upon what was sought,
That time affoordes not now with care or hare
Others to seek thee to secure thy state.
35
Else o how easy had it been for thee
All the pretendant race to have laid full low
If thou proceeded had with cruelty,
Not suffering any fatal branch to grow:
But vnsuspicious magnanimity
Shames such effects of fear, and force to show:
Busied in free, and open Actions still
Being great; for being good, hates to be ill.
36
Which o how much it were to be required
In all of might, if all were like of mind;
But when that all depraved have conspird
To be unjust, what saftie shall they find
(After the date of virtue is expird)
That do not practice in the selfsame kind,
And countermine against deceit with guile?
But o what mischief feels the world the while?
37
And yet such wrongs are held meet to be don,
And often for the state thought requisite,
As when the public good depends thereon,
When most injustice is esteemd most right:
But o what good with doing ill is won?
Who has of blood made such a benefit
As has not feared more after then before,
And made his peace the less, his plague the more?
38
Far otherwise dealt this undaunted king
That cheerished the offspring of his foes
And his competitors to grace did bring,
And them his friends for Arms, and honors, chose;
As if plain courses were the safest thing
Where upright goodness, sure, and steadfast goes
Free from that subtle mask't impiety,
Which this depraved world calls policy.
39
Yet how has fate disposed of all this good?
What have these virtues after times availd?
In what steed has hy-raised valor stood,
When this continuing cause of greatness faild?
Then when proud-growne the irritated blood
Enduring not it self it self assaild,
As though that Prowess had but learnt to spill
Much blood abroad to cut her throat with skill.
40
O does the Eternal in the course of things
So mix the causes both of good and ill,
That thus the one effects of the other bringes,
As what seems made to bliss, is borne to spill?
What from the best of virtues glory springes
That which the world with misery does fill?
Is the end of happiness but wretchedness,
Has sin his plague, and virtue no success?
41
Either that is not good, the world holds good,
Or else is so confusd with ill, that we
Abused with th'appearing likelihood
Run to offend, whilst we think good to be:
Or else the heavens made man, in furious blood
To torture man: And that no course is free
From mischief long. And that fair days do breed
But storms, to make more foul, times that succeed.
42
Who would have thought but so great victories,
Such conquests, riches, land, and kingdom gaind,
Could not but have established in such wise
This powreful state, in state to have remaind?
Who would have thought that mischief could devise
A way so soon to loose what was attaind?
As greatness were but showed to grieve not grace,
And to reduce us into far worse case.
43
With what contagion France did thou insect
The land by thee made proud, to disagree?
T'inrage them so their own swords to direct
Upon themselves that were made sharp in thee?
Why did thou teach them here at home t'erect
Trophies of their blood which of thine should be?
Or was the date of thy affliction out,
And so was ours by course to come about?
44
But that untimely death of this Great King,
Whose nine years reign so mighty wonders wrought
To thee thy hopes, to us despair did bring
Not long to keep, and govern what was got:
For those that had the affairs in managing
Although their countries good they greatly sought,
Yet so ill accidents unfitly fell
That their desseignes could hardly prosper well.
45
An infant king does in the state succeed
Skarse one year old, left unto others guide,
Whose careful trust, though such as showed indeed
They waighd their charge more then the world beside;
And did with duty, zeal and love proceed:
Yet for all what their travail could provide
Could not woo fortune to remain with us
When this her Minion was departed thus.
46
But by degrees first this, then that regaind
The turning tide bears back with flowing chance
Unto the Dolphin all we had attaind,
And fills the late low-running hopes of France,
When Bedford who our only hold maintaind
Death takes from us their fortune to advance,
And then home strife that on it self did fall
Neglecting foreign care, did soon loose all.
47
Nere three score years are past since Bullinbrooke
Did first attain (God knows how just) the crown:
And now his race for right possessors took
Were held of all, to hold naught but their own:
When Richard Duke of York, begins to look
Into their right, and makes his title known:
Wakening up sleeping-wrong that lay as dead
To witness how his race was injured.
48
His fathers end in him no fear could move
T'attempt the like against the like of might,
Where long possession now of fear, and love
Seemed to prescribe even an innated right,
So that to prove his state was to disprove
Time, law, consent, oath, and allegiance quight:
And no way but the way of blood there was
Through which with all confusion he must pass.
49
O then yet how much better had it been
T'indure a wrong with peace, then with such toil
T'obtaine a bloody right; since Right is sin
That is ill sought, and purchased with spoil?
What madness unconstrained to begin
To right his state, to put the state in broyle?
Justice her self may even do wrong in this,
No war be'ing right but that which needful is.
50
And yet that opportunity which led
Him to attempt, seems likewise him t'excuse:
A feeble spirited king that governed
Unworthy of the Scepter he did use;
His enemies that his worth maliced,
Who both the land and him did much abuse,
The poeples love, and his apparent right,
May seem sufficient motives to incite.
51
Besides the now ripe wrath (deferd till now,)
Of that sure and vnfailing Justicer,
That never suffers wrong so long to grow
And to incorporate with right so far;
That it might come to seem the same in show,
T'incourage those that evil minded are
By such success; but that at last he will
Confound the branch whose root was planted ill.
52
Else might the ympious say with grudging spright,
Does God permit the great to riot free,
And bless the mighty though they do unright,
As if he did unto their wrongs agree?
And only plague the weak and wretched wights
For smallest faults even in the highest degree?
When he but using them others to scourge,
Likewise of them at length the world does purge.
53
But could not o for bloodshed satisfy
The now well-ruling of th'ill-gotten crown?
Must even the good receive the penalty
Of former sins that never were their own?
And must a just kings blood with misery
Pay for a bad unjustly overthrown?
Then o I see due course must rightly go
And the earth must trace it or else purchase woe.
54
And sure this king that now the crown possessed
Henry the sixth was one, whose life was free
From that command of vice, whereto the rest
Of many mighty foueraignes subjects be:
And numbered might have been among the best
Of other men, if not of that degree:
A right good man, but yet an evil king
Unfit for what he had in managing.
55
Mild, meek of spirit, by nature patient:
No thought to increase or scarce to keep his own:
Apter for pardoning then for punishment,
Seeking his bounty, not his power to have known;
Far from revenge, soon won, soon made content:
As fitter for a cloister then a crown:
Whose holy mind so much addicted is
On the world to come, that he neglects this.
56
With such a weak, good, feeble, godly king
Has Richard Duke of York his cause to try:
Who by the experience of long managing
The wars of France with supreme dignity;
And by his own great worth with furthering
The common good against the enemy,
Had wrought that zeal and love attend his might
And made his spirit equal unto his right.
57
For now the Duke of Bedford being dead,
He is ordaind the Regent to succeed
In France for five years, where he travailed
Whith ready hand and with as careful heed
To seek to turn back fortune that now fled,
And hold up falling power, in time of need:
And got, and lost and reattaines again
That which again was lost for all his pain.
58
His time expird, he should for five years more
Have had his charge prolonged, but Sommerset The Duke of Somersit a great
enemy to the Duke of York and had ever envied his preferme^t.

That still had enuide his command before,
That place and honor for himself did get:
Which ans that matter to the already store
Of kindled hate, which such a fire does set
Unto the touch of that confounding flame
As both their bloods could never quench the same.
59
And now the weakness of that feeble head
That does neglect all care, but his souls care,
So easy means of practice ministered
Unto the ambitious members to prepare
Their own desires, to what their humors lead;
That all good Actions coldly followed are,
And seurall-tending hopes do wholly bend
To other now then to the public end.
60
And to draw on more speedy misery,
The king unto a fatal match is led
With Rayners daughter king of Sicilie, This Rainer was Duke of Aniou and only
inioid the title of the K. of Sicilia.

Whom with unlucky stars he married:
For by the means of this affinity
Was lost all that his Father conquered,
Even as if France had some Erynnis sent
T'auenge their wrongs done by the insolent.
61
This marriage was the Duke of Suffolks deed
With great rewards won to effect the same:
Which made him that he took so little heed
Unto his countries good, or his own shame:
Being a match could stand us in no steed Which were delivered up to her father
upon the match.

For strength, for wealth, for reputation, fame:
But cunningly contrived for their gain
To cost us more then Aniou, Mauns, and Maine.
62
And yet as if he had accomplished
Some mighty benefit unto the land;
He got his travails to be registered
In Parliment, for evermore to stand
A witness to approve all what he did:
To the end that if hereafter it were scand,
Authority might yet be on his side,
As doing naught but what was ratifide.
63
Imagining the allowance of that place
Would make that good the which he knew was naught,
And so would his negotiation grace
As none would think it was his private faut:
Wherein though wit dealt wary in this case,
Yet in the end it self it over raught,
Striving to hide he opened it the more,
His after care showed craft had gone before.
64
Dear did thou buy o king so fair a wife,
So rare a spirit, so high a mind the while:
Whose portion was destruction, dowry strife,
Whose bed was sorrow, whose embracing spoil:
Whose maintenance cost thee, and thine their life,
And whose best comfort never was but toil:
What Paris brought this booty of desire
To set our mighty Ilium here on fire?
65
I grieve that I am forced to say thus much,
To blame her, that I yet must wonder at;
Whose so sweet beauty, wit and worth were such,
As everlasting admiration gat:
Yet does my countries zeal so nerely touch
That I am drawn to say I know not what,
And yet o that my pen should ever give
Stain to that sex by whom her fame does live.
66
For sure those virtues well deserud a crown,
And had it not been ours, no doubt she might
Have matched the worthiest that the world has known
And now sat fair with fame, with glory bright:
But coming in the way where sin was grown
So foul and thick, it was her chance to light
Amidst that gross infection of those times,
And so came staind with black disgraceful crimes.
67
And some the world must have on whom to lay
The heavy burden of reproach, and blame,
Against whose deeds the afflicted may inuay
As the only Authors, whence destruction came:
When yet perhaps it was not in them to stay
The current of that stream, nor help the same;
But living in the eye of Action so
Not hindering it, are thought to draw on woe.
68
So much unhappy does the mighty stand
That stand on other then their own defense,
When as destruction is so near at hand,
That if by weakness, folly, negligence,
They do not coming misery withstand
They shall be thought the authors of the offense,
And to call in that which they kept not out,
And cursed as those, that brought those plagues about.
69
And so remain for ever registered
In that eternal book of infamy:
When o how many other causes lead
As well to that, as their iniquity:
The worst complots oftly close smothered,
And well meant deeds fall out unluckily:
Whilst the aggrieued stand not t'waigh the intent
But ever judge according to the event.
70
I say not this t'excuse thy Sin o Queen,
Nor clear their faults that mighty Actors are:
I cannot but affirm thy pride has been
A special means this commonwealth to mar:
And that thy way ward will was plainly seen
In vain ambition to presume too far,
And that by thee the only way was wrought
The Duke of Gloucester to his death was brought. His frer Duke of Gloucester.

71
A man though seeming in thy thought to sit
Between the light of thy desires and thee,
Yet did his taking thence plainly permit
Others to look to that they could not see
During his life, nor would adventure it:
When his remove quite made that passage free;
So by his fall thinking to stand alone
Hardly could stand at all when he was gone.
72
For this Duke as Protector many years
Had ruled the land, during the kings young age:
And now the self same charge and title bears
As if he still were in his pupillage:
With such disgrace unto the Queen appears
That all incensd with an ambitious rage
She does conspire to have him made away,
As who the course of her maine will does stay.
73
Thrust thereinto not only with her pride
But by her fathers counsel and consent,
That grieved likewise that any else beside
Should have the honor of the government:
And therefore he such deep advise applide
As foreign craft and cunning could invent,
To circumuent an vnsuspecting wight
Before he should discern of their despite.
74
And many ready hands she straight does find
To aid her deed, of such as could not brook
The length of one man's office in that kind
That to himself the affairs all wholly took:
And ruling all had never any mind
T'impart a part with others that would look
To have likewise some honor in their hands,
And grieved at such engrossing of commands.
75
And had he not had such a greedy love
Of still continuing of his charge too long,
Envy had been unable to reprove
His acted life without she did him wrong:
But having lived so many years above
He grieves now to descend to be less strong,
And kills that fame that virtue did beget,
Chose to be held less good, then seen less great.
76
O could the mighty but give bounds to pride
And weigh back fortune ere she pull them down,
Contented with enough, with honors satisfide,
Not striving how to make so much their own
As to leave nothing for the rest beside,
Who seem by their high spreading ouergrowne:
Whilst they themselves remain in all men's sight
The odious mark of hatred and dispight.
77
Then should not o so many tragedies
Burden our knowledge with their bloody end,
Nor their disgraced confounded families
From so hye pride to so low shame descend:
But planted on that ground where safety lies,
Their branches should to eternity extend:
But ever those that ouerlooke so much
Must ouersee themselves; their state is such.
78
Severe he was, and strictly did observe
Due form of Justice toward every wight,
Immovable, and never won to swerue
For any cause in what he thought was right:
Wherein although he did so well deserve,
In the licentious yet it bread despite;
So that even virtue seems an Actor too
To ruin those fortune prepares to undo.
79
Those, thus provided whom the Queen well knew
Hated his might, and glad to inoouate
Unto so great, and strong a party grew
As easy it was to overthrow his state:
And only hope of alteration drew
Many to yield that had no cause to hate:
For even with goodness men grow discontent
Where states are ripe to fall, and virtue spent.
80
And taking all the rule into her hand
(Under the shadow of that feeble king)
The Duke sh' excludes from office and command,
And in the reach of enmity does bring
From that respected height where he did stand,
Whilst malice scarce durst mutter anything:
When straight the worst of him comes all reueald
Which former fear, or rigor kept conceald.
81
Now is he taxed that he rather sought
His private profit then the public good,
And many things presumptuously had wrought
Other then with our laws, and customs stood:
As one that would into the land have brought,
The civil form in cases touching blood,
And such poor crimes that showed their spite was sound,
But yet bewraide, their matter wanted ground.
82
Yet served they well the turn, and did effect
That which is easy wrought in such a case,
Where what suborned Justice shall object
Is to the purpose, and must pass with grace:
And what the wretched bring of no effect
Whose heinous faults his matter must deface:
For where power has decreed to find the oftence
The cause is better still then the defense.
83
A Parliament at Berry summoned
Dispatched the deed more speedily then well,
For thither came the Duke without all dread
Or ought imagining of what befell:
Where as the matter is so followed
That he conuented is ere he could tell
He was in danger or had done offense,
And presently to prison sent from thence.
84
Which quick, and sudden action gave no time
For men to weigh the justice of the deed,
Whilst looking only on the urged crime
Unto the farther drift they take no heed:
For these occasions taken in the prime
Of courses new, that old dislikes succeed,
Leave not behind that feeling touch of wrong,
Sacietie makes passions still less strong.
85
And yet they seemed some mutiny to doubt
For thus proceeding with a man of might,
Seeing he was most popular and stout
And resolute would stand upon his right:
And therefore did they cast this way about
To have him closely murdered out of sight,
That so his trouble, and his death hereby
Might come together and together dye.
86
Reekning it better since his end is meant
And must be wrought, at once to rid it clear
And put it to the fortune of the event,
Then by long doing to be long in fear:
When in such courses of high punishment
The deed and the attempt like danger bear;
And often things done perhaps do less anoy
Then may the doing handled with delay.
87
And so they had it straight accomplished,
For that day after his committing he
Is dead brought forth being found so in his bed.
Which was by sudden sickness said to be
That had upon his sorrows gathered,
As by apparent to kens men might see:
And thus o Sickness thou art often belide,
When death has many ways to come beside.
88
Are these the deeds hye foreign wits invent?
Is this that wisdom whereof they so boast?
O then I would it never had been spent
Here amongst us, nor brought from out their coast!
O let their cunning in their limits pent
Remain amongst themselves that like it most!
And let the North they count of colder blood
Beheld more gross, so it remain more good.
89
Let them have fairer cities, goodlier soiles,
And sweeter fields for beauty to theeie,
So long as they have these ungodly wiles,
Such detestable vile impiety:
And let us want their vines, their fruits the whiles,
So that we want not faith and honesty,
We care not for those pleasures, so we may
Have better hearts, and stronger hands then they.
90
Neptune keep out from thy embraced I Will
This foul contagion of iniquity;
Drown all corruptions coming to defile
Our fair proceedings ordered formally;
Keep us mere English, let not craft beguile
Honor and Justice with strange subtlety:
Let us not think, that that our good can frame,
Which ruinde has the Authors of the same.
91
But by this impious means that worthy man
Is brought unto this lamentable end,
And now that current with maine fury ran
(The stop removed that did the course defend)
Unto the full of mischief that began
T'a universal ruin to extend,
That Isthmus failing which the land did keep
From the entire possession of the deep.
92
And now the king alone all open lay,
No underprop of blood to stay him by,
None but himself stands weakly in the way
Twixt York and the affected sou'raignty:
Gone is that bar that would have been the stay
To Have kept him back from mounting up so hie.
But o in what a state stand these men in
That cannot live without, nor with their kin?
93
The Queen has yet by this her full desire
And now she with her minion Suffolk reigns,
Now she has all authority entire,
And all affairs unto her self retains:
And only Suffolk is advanced hyre,
He is the man rewarded for his pains:
He that did her instead most chiefly stand,
And more advanced her, then he did the land.
94
Which when they saw who better did expect,
Then they began their error to descry,
And well perceive that only the defect
Was in their judgments, passion-drawne awry:
Found, formal rigor fitter to direct
Then pride and insolent inconstancy;
Better severity that is right and just
Then impotent affections led with lust.
95
And there upon in sorrow thus complain:
O what great inconvenience do they feel,
Where as such imbecility does reign
As so neglectes the care of common weal?
Where ever one or other does obtain
So high a grace thus absolute to deal:
The whilst th'aggreieued subject suffers still
The pride of some predominating will.
96
And ever one removed, a worse succeedes;
So that the best that we can hope is war,
Tumults and stirs, that this disliking breeds,
The sword must mend, what insolence does mar:
For what rebellions, and what bloody deeds
Have ever followed where such courses are?
What often remoues, what death of counsailers,
What murder, what exile of officers?
97
Witness the Spencers, Gaueston and Vere
The mighty minions of our feeblest kings;
Who ever subjects to their subjects were,
And only the procurers of these things:
When worthy Monarchs that hold honor dear
Master themselves, and theirs; which ever brings
That universal reverence, and respect:
For who waighes him that does himself neglect?
98
And yet our case is like to be far worse
Having a king though not so bent to ill,
Yet so neglecting good, that giving force
By giving leave does all good order kill:
Suffering a violent woman take her course
To manage all according to her will,
Which how she does begin, her deeds express,
And what will be the end, our selves may guess.
99
Thus well they deemed what after followed
When now the shameful loss of France much
Which unto Suffolk is attributed
As who in all men's sight most hateful lives: grieves,
He with the enemy consedered
Betraies the state, and secret knowledge gives Articles objected against de la
Poole Duke of Suffolk.

Of all our strength; that all which we did hold
By his corruption is or lost or sold.
100
And as he deals abroad, so likewise here
He robs at home, the treasury no less
Here, where he all authorities does bear
And makes a Monopoly of offices:
He is inricht, h'is raisd, and placed near
And only he gives counsel to oppress:
Thus men object, whilst many up in arms
Offer to be revenged of these harms.
101
The Queen perceiving in what case she stood,
To loose her minion or engage her state;
(After with long contention in her blood
Love and ambition did the cause debate)
She yeeldes to pride, and rather thought it good
To sacrifice her love unto their hate,
Then to adventure else the loss of all
Which by maintaining him was like to fall.
102
Yet seeking at the first to temporize,
She tries if that some short imprisonment
would calm their heat: when that would not suffize,
Then to exile him she must needs consent:
Hoping that time would salve it in such wise
As yet at length they might become content,
And she again might have him home at last,
When the first fury of this rage was past.
103
But as he to his judged exile went,
Hard on the shore he comes incountered
By some, that so far off his honor sent,
As put his backe-returne quite out of dread:
For there he had his rightful punishment
Though wrongly done, and there he lost his head,
Part of his blood has Neptune, part the sand,
As who had mischief wrought by sea and land.
104
Whose death when swift-wingd fame at full conuaid
Unto the trauaild Queen misdoubting naught,
Despite and sorrow such affliction laid
Upon her soul as wondrous passions wrought:
O God (says she) and art thou thus betrayed?
And have my favors thy destruction brought?
Is this their gain whom highness favors,
Who chief preferred, stand as preferred to death?
105
O fatal grace without which men complain
And with it perish, what preuailes that we
Thus bear the title of a sovereign,
And suffered not to be that which we be?
O must our subjects limit and constrain
Our sauors where as they themselves decree?
Must we our love at their appointment place?
Do we command, and they direct our grace?
106
O will they then our power, and will divide?
And have we might, but must not use our might?
Poor majesty that other men must guide
Whose discontent can never look aright:
For evermore we see those that abide
Gracious in ours, are odious in their sight,
Who would all-maistring majesty defeat
Of her best grace, that is to make men great.
107
Decre Suffolk, o I saw thy woeful cheer
When thou perceiu'dst no help but to depart:
I saw that look wherein did plain appear
The lamentable message of thy heart:
That seemd to say: O Queen, and can thou bear
My ruin so? the cause whereof thou art:
Can thou endure to see them work their will
And not defend me from the hand of ill?
108
Have I for thee adventured so much,
Made ship wrack of my honor, faith and fame?
And does my service give no deeper touch
To thy hard heart better to feel the same?
Or do thou fear, or is thy weakness such
As not of force to keep me from this shame?
Or else now having served thy turn of me,
Art well-content my overthrow to see?
109
As if my sight did read unto thy mind
The lecture of that shame thou would forget,
And therefore peradventure glad to find
So fit occasion do it forward set:
Or else thy self from dangerous toil t'vnwinde
Down on my neck do all the burden let;
Since kings must have some hated worse then they,
On whom they may the weight of envy lay.
114
No Suffolk, none of this, my soul is clear;
Without the thought of such impiety:
Yet must I needs confess that too much fear
Made me defend thee less courageously:
Seeing more Princes ever ruind were
By their immoderate favoring privately
Then by severity in general,
For best h'is liked, that is alike to all.
111
Thus in her passion lo she uttered,
When as far greater tumults now burst out,
Which close and cunningly were practiced
By such as sought great hopes to bring about:
For up in arms in Kent were gathered
A mighty insolent rebellious rout
Under a dangerous head; who to deter
The state the more, himself named Mortimer.
112
The Duke of York that did not idle stand
But seeks to work on all advantages,
Had likewise in this course a secret hand,
And hartned on their chief accomplices,
To try how that the people of the land
Would (if occasion served) b' in readiness.
To aid that line if one should come indeed
To move his right, and in due course proceed.
113
Knowing himself to be the only one
That must attempt the thing if any should,
And therefore lets the Rebel now run on
With that false name to effect the best he could
To make a way for him to work upon,
That but on certain ground adventure would:
For if the traitor sped, the gain were his;
If not, yet he stands safe, and blamelesis.
114
TO attempt with others dangers, not his own,
He countes it wisdom if it could be wrought:
And to have the honor of the people known
Was now that which was chiefly to be sought:
For with the best he knew himself was grown
In that account, as made him take no thought,
Having observed in those he meant to prove
Their wit, their wealth, their carriage, and their love.
115
With whom and with his own alliances
He first begins to open in some wise
The right he had, yet with such doubtfulnes,
As rather sorrow then his drift descries:
Complaining of his countries wretchedness
In what a miserable case it lies,
And how much it importes them to provide
For their defense against this woman's pride.
116
Then with the discontented he does deal
In sounding theirs, not uttering his intent,
As being sure not so much to reveal
Where by they might be made again content:
But when they grieved for the common weal
He does persuade them to be patient,
And to endure there was no other course,
Yet so persuades as makes their malice worse.
117
And then with such as with the time did run
He does in most upright opinion stand,
As one that never crossed what they begun,
But seemed to like what still they took in hand:
Seeking all causes of offense to shun,
Praises the rule, and blames the unruly land:
Works so with gifts, and kindly offices
That even of them he serves his turn no less.
118
Then as for those that were his followers
Being all choice men for virtues or deserts,
He so with grace, and benefits prefers,
That he becomes the monarch of their hearts:
He draws the learned for his Counsailers
And cherishes all men of rarest parts,
To whom good done does an impression strike
Of ioic and love in all that are alike.
119
And now by means of th'intermitted war
Many most valiant men impou'rished,
Only by him fed and relieved are,
Only respected, graced and honored:
Which let him in, unto their hearts so far,
As they by him were wholly to be led:
He only treades the sure and perfect path
To greatness who love and opinion has.
120
And to have one some certain province his
As the maine body that must work the feate,
Yorkshire he chose, the place wherein he is
By title, livings, and possessions great:
No country he preferres so much as this,
Here has his bounty her abiding seat,
Here is his Justice and relieuing hand
Ready to all that in destresse do stand.
121
What with his tenants, servants, followers, friends,
And their alliances, and amities,
All that Shire universally attendes
His hand held up to any enterprise:
And thus far virtue with her power extendes,
The rest touching the event in fortune lies.
With which accomplement so mighty grown
Forward he tendes with hope to attain a crown.
The end of the fourth book.
The fifth Book of the Civil wars between the two Houses of Lancaster and
York.
THE ARGUMENT.
The bad success of Cades rebellion,
Yorks open practice and conspiracy,
His coming in, and his submission,
The effect of Printing and Artillery,
Burdeux reuolts, craves our protection,
Talbot defending ours, dies gloriously.
The French Wars end, and York begins again,
And at S. Albones Sommerset is slain.
1
THE furious train of that tumultuous rout,
Whom close subayding power and good success,
Had made unwisely proud, and fondly stout,
Thrust headlong on, oppresion to oppress:
And now to fulness grown, boldly give out
That they the public wrongs meant to redress;
Formlesse themselves, reforming do pretend,
As if confusion could disorder mend.
2
And on they march with their false-named head, Jack Cade.

Of base, and vulgar birth, though noble fayn'd,
Who puffed with vain desires, to London led
His rash abused troops, with shadows trayn'd.
When as the King thereof assertained,
Supposing some small power would have restrained
Disordred rage, sends with a simple crew
Sir Humfry Stafford, whom they overthrew.
3
Which so increasd the opinion of their might,
That much it gave to do, and much it wrought,
Confirmed their rage, drew on the vulgar wight,
Called forth the timorous, fresh pertakers brought;
For many, though most glad their wrongs to right,
Yet durst not venture their estates for naught:
But see'ing the cause had such advantage got,
Occasion makes them styr, that else would not.
4
So much he errs, that scorns or else neglects
The small beginnings of arysing broils,
And censures others, not his own defects,
And with a self conceit himself beguiles:
Thinking small force will compass great effects,
And spares at first to buy more costly toils:
When true observing providence in war
Still makes her foes, far stronger then they are.
5
Yet this good fortune all their fortune mard
Which fools by helping ever does suppress:
For warelesse insolence whilst vndebard
Ofbounding awe, runs on to such excess,
That following lust, and spoil, and blood so hard,
Sees not how they procure their own distress:
The better, lothing courses so impure,
Rather will like their wounds, then such a cure.
6
For whilst this wild vnrained multitude
(Led with an vnfore-seeing greedy mind
Of an imagined good, that did delude
Their ignorance, in their desires made blind,)
Ransack the City, and with hands imbrude,
Run to all outrage in the extremest kind,
Heaping up wrath and horror more and more,
Adding fresh guilt, to mischiefs done before.
7
And seeing yet all this draw to no end
But to their own, no promisd aid t'appeare,
No such pertakers as they did attend,
Nor such successes as imagined were:
Good men resolved the present to defend
Justice against them with a brow severe.
Themselves feared of themselves, tired with excess,
Found, mischief was no sit way to redress.
8
Like when a greedy Pyrat hard in chase
Pursuing of a rich supposed prize,
Works for the winds, plyes sails, bears up a pace,
Out-runnes the clouds, scoures after her that flies,
Pride in his heart, and wealth before his face,
Keeps his hands wrought, and fixed keeps his eyes,
So long, till that engaged within some straight
He falls amid his foes laid close in wayt:
9
Where all too late discovering round about
Danger and death the purchase of his have;
And no back flying, no way to get out,
But there to perrish, or to yield disgrast,
Cursing his error, yet in th'error stout:
He toils for life, now charges, now is chaste:
Then quails, and then fresh courage takes again,
Striving t'vnwind himself, but all in vain.
10
So stands this rout in desperate comberment,
Enuirond round with horror, blood, and shame:
Crossed of their course, dispayring of the event
When pardon, that smooth bayt of baseness came:
Pardon, (the snare to catch the impotent)
Being once pronounced, they straight embrace the same,
And as huge snowy Mountains melt with heat,
So they dissolved with hope, and home they get.
11
Leaving their Captain to discharge alone
The shot of blood consumed in their heat:
Too small a sacrifice for mischiefs done
Was one man's breath, which thousands did defeat.
Unrighteous Death, why art thou but all one
Unto the small offender and the great?
Why art thou not more then thou art, to those
That thousands spoil, and thousands lives do lose:
12
This fury passing with so quick an end,
Disclosd not those, that on the advantage lay,
Who seeing the course to such disorder tend,
Withdrew their foot, ashamed to take that way;
Or else prevented whilst they did attend
Some mightier force, or for occasion stay,
But what they meant, ill fortune must not tell,
Mischief be'ing often made good by speeding well.
13
Put by from this, the Duke of York dissignes
Another course to bring his hopes about:
And with those friends affinity combines
In surest bonds, his thoughts he pours out,
And closely feels, and closely undermines
The faith of whom he had both hope and doubt:
Meaning in more apparent open course
To try his right, his fortune, and his force.
14
Love and aliance had most firmly joined
Unto his part, that mighty family
The fair descended stock of Neuiles kind,
Great by their many issued progeny;
But greater by their worth, that clearly shind
And gave fair light to their nobility:
A mighty party for a mighty cause
By their united amity he draws.
15
For as the spreading members of proud Po,
That thousand-branched Po, whose limbs embrace
Thy fertile and delicious body so
Sweet Lombardie, and beautifies thy face:
Such seemd this powreful stock; from whence did grow
So many great discents, spreading their race
That every corner of the Land became,
Enricht with some great Heroes of that name.
16
But greatest in renown does Warwick sit,
That great King-maker Warwick, so far grown
In grace with Fortune, that he gouerns it,
And Monarchs makes, and made, again puts down;
What reuolutions his first moving wit
Here brought about, are more then too well known;
That fatal kindle-fire of those hot days,
Whose worth I may, whose work I cannot praise.
17
With him, with Richard Earl of Salisbury,
Courtny and Brook, his most assured friends,
He intimates his mind, and openly,
The present bad proceedings discommends;
Laments the state, the peoples misery,
And that which such a pittyer seldom mends,
Oppression, that sharp two edged sword
That others wounds, and wounds likewise his Lord.
18
My Lord, says he, how things are carried here
In this corrupted state, you plainly see,
What burden our abused shoulders bear
Charged with the weight of imbecillitie;
And in what base account all we appear
That stand without their grace that all must be:
And who they be, and how their course succeeds,
Our shame reports, and time bewrayes their deeds.
19
Aniou and Maine, (O maine that foul appears,
Eternal scarre of our dismembered Land)
And, Guien's lost, that did three hundred years
Remain subjected under our command.
From whence, me thinks, there sounds unto our ears
The voice of those dear ghosts, whose living hand
Got it with sweat, and kept it with their blood,
To do us, thankles us, their offspring good.
20
And seem to cry; O how can you behold
Their hateful feet upon our graves should tread?
Your Fathers graves, who gloriously did hold
That which your shame has left recovered.
Redeem our Tombs, O spirits too too cold,
Pull back these Towers our Arms have honored:
These Towers are yours, these Forts we built for you,
These walls do bear our names, and are your due.
21
Thus well they may obrayd our rechlesnes,
Whilst we, as if at league with infamy,
Riot away for naught, whole Provinces;
Give up as nothing worth all Normandy,
Traffic strong holds, sell Fortresses,
So long, that naught is left but misery:
Poor Callice, and these water-walls about,
That basely pownds us in, from breaking out.
22
And which is worse, I fear we shall in the end
Thrown from the glory of inuading war,
Be forced our propper limmits to defend,
Where ever, men are not the same they are
Where hope of conquest does their spyrits extend
Beyond the usual powers of valor far:
For more is he that ventureth for more,
Then who fights but for what he had before.
22
Put to your hands therefore to reskew now
Th'indangered state, dear Lords, from this disgrace,
And let us in our honor, labor how
To brings this scorned Land in better case:
No doubt but God our action will allow
That knows my right, and how they rule the place
Whose weakness calls up our unwillingness,
As opening even the door to our redress.
24
Though I protest it is not for a Crown
My soul is moved, (yet if it be my right,
I have no reason to refuse mine own)
But only these indignities to right.
And what if God whose judgments are unknown,
Has me ordaynd the man, that by my might
My Country shall be blessed; if so it be,
By helping me, you raise your selves with me.
25
In those whom zeal and amity had bred
A fore-impression of the right he had,
These styrring words so much encouraged,
That with desire of innovation mad,
They seemed to run before, not to be led,
And to his fire do quicker fuel ad:
For where such humors are prepared before,
The opening them makes them abound the more.
26
Then counsel take they fitting their desire,
(For naught that fits not their desire is wayghd)
The Duke is straight advised to retire
Into the bounds of Wales to leauy aid;
Which under smooth pretense he does require
TO amoue such persons as the state betrayed,
And to redress th'oppression of the land,
The charm which weakness seldom does withstand.
27
Ten thousand straight caught with this bait of breath
Are toward greater lookt-for forces led,
Whose power the King by all means trauaileth
In their arising to have ruined:
But their preventing head so compasses,
That all ambushments warily are fled,
Refusing ought to hazard by the way,
Keeping his greatness for a greater day.
28
And to the City straight directs his course,
(The City, seat of Kings, and Kings chief grace)
Where finding of his entertainment worse
By far then he expected in that place,
Much disappoynted, draws from thence his force,
And toward better trust marches a pace;
And down in Kent (fatal for discontents)
Nere to thy banks fair Thames does pitch his Tents.
29
And there intrencht, plants his Artillery,
Artillery the infernal instrument,
New brought from hell to scourge mortality
With hideous roaring, and astonishment:
Engine of horror, framed to terrific
And tear the earth, and strongest Towers to rent;
Torment of Thunder, made to mock the skies,
As more of power in our calamities.
30
O if the fire subtle Promethius brought
Stolen out of heaven, did so afflict mankind,
That ever since plagued with a curious thought
Of styrring search, could never quiet find;
What has he done who now by stealth has got
Lightning and Thunder, both in wondrous kind?
What plague deserves so proud an enterprise?
Tell Muse, and how it came, and in what wise.
31
It was the time when fair Europa sat
With many goodly Diadems addressed,
And all her parts in flourishing estate
Lay beautiful, in order at their rest:
No swelling member vnproportionate
Grown out of form, sought to disturb the rest:
The less, subsisting by the greaters might,
The greater, by the lesser kept upright.
32
No noise of tumult ever waked them all,
Only perhaps some priuatiarrs within
For tytles or for confines might befall,
Which ended soon, made better love begin;
But no eruption did in general
Break down their rest with universal sin:
No public shock dysioynted this fair frame,
Till Nemesis from out the Orient came.
33
Fierce Nemisis, mother of fate and change,
Sword Bearer of the eternal providence,
That had so long with such afflictions strange
Confounded Asias proud magnificence,
And brought foul impious Barbarism to range
On all the glory of her excellence,
Turns her stern look at last unto the West,
As grieved to see on earth such happy rest.
34
And for Pandora calls presently,
( Pandora, Jove's fair gift, that first deceived
Poor Epimetheus imbecillitie,
That thought he had a wondrous boon received,
By means whereof curioius mortality
Was of all former quiet quite bereaved)
To whom being come, decked with all qualities,
The wrathful Goddess breaks out in this wise:
35
Do thou not see in what secure estate
Those flourishing fair Western parts remain?
As if they had made covenant with Fate
To be exempted free from others pain:
At one with their desires, friends with debate,
In peace with pride, content with their own gain,
Their bounds co^taine their minds, their minds applide
To have their bounds with plenty beautified.
36
Devotion, (mother of Obedience,)
Bears such a hand on their credulity,
That it abates the spirit of eminence,
And busies them with humble piety:
For see what works, what infinite expense,
What monuments of zeal they edify,
As if they would, if that no stop were found,
Fill all with Temples, make all holy ground.
37
But we must cool this all-beleeuing zeal,
That has enjoyed so fair a turn so long,
And other reuolutions must reveal,
Other desires, other designs among:
Dislike of this, first by degrees shall steal
Upon the souls of men persuaded wrong,
And th'abus'd power that such a power has got,
Shall give herself the sword to cut her throat.
38
Go thou therefore with all thy styrring train
Of swelling sciences, (the gyfts of grief)
Go loose the lynks of that soule-binding chain,
Enlarge this vninquisitiue belief;
Call up men's spirits, whom darkness does detain,
Enter their hearts, and Knowledge make the thief
To open all the doors to let in light,
That all, may all things see, but what is right.
39
Opinion Arm against opinion grown,
Make newborn contradiction still so rise
As if Thebes-founder Cadmus tongues had sown
In stead of teeth, for greater mutinies.
Bring like defended faith against faith known,
Weary the soul with contrarieties:
Till all Religion become retrograde,
And that fair tire, the mask of sin be made.
40
And better to effect a speedy end,
Let there be found two fatal instruments,
The one to publish, the other to defend
Impious contention, and proud discontents:
Make that instamped Characters may send
Abroad to thousands, thousand men's intents,
And in a moment, may dispatch much more
Then could a world of pens perform before.
41
Whereby all quarrels, tytles, secrecies,
May unto all be presently made known,
Factions prepared, parties allured to rise,
Sedition under fair pretentions sown;
Whereby the vulgar may become so wise,
That with a self presumption ouer-growne
He may of deepest mysteries debate,
Control his betters, censure acts of state.
42
And then, when this dispersed mischief shall
Have brought confusion in each mystery,
Called up contempt of all states general,
Ripened the humor of impiety,
Then have they the other Engine, where-with-all
They may torment their selfe-wrought misery,
And scourge each other, in the strangest wise
As time or Tyrants never could devise.
43
For by this stratagem they shall confound
All the ancient form and discipline of war:
Alter their camps, alter their fights, their ground,
Daunt mighty spirits, prowess and manhood mar;
For basest cowards from a far shall wound
The most courageous, forced to fight a far;
Valor rapt up in smoke, as in the night,
Shall perrish without witness, without sight.
44
But first, before this general disease
Break forth into so great extremity,
Prepare it by degrees; first kill this ease,
Spoil this proportion, mar this harmony
Make greater States upon the lesser seize,
Join many kingdoms to one sovereignty,
Raise a few great, that may with greater power
Slaughter each other, and mankind devour.
45
And first begin with factions, to divide
The fairest land, that from her thrusts the rest,
As if she cared not for the world beside,
A world within her self, with wonders blessed;
Raise such a strife as time shall not decide,
Till the dear blood of most of all her best
Be poured forth, and all her people tossed
With unkind tumults, and almost all lost.
46
Let her be made the sable Stage whereon
Shall first be acted bloody Tragedies:
That all the neighbor States gazing there on,
May make their profit by her miseries.
And those whom she before had marched upon,
(Having by this both time and mean to rise)
Made martial by her Arms, shall grow so great,
As save their own. no force shall them defeat.
47
That when their power unable to sustain
And bear it self, upon it self shall fall,
She may (recovered of her wounds again)
Sit and behold their parts as tragical:
For there must come a time that shall obtain
Truce for distress. When make-peace Hymen shall
Bring the conjoined aduers powers to bed,
And set the Crown made one, upon one head.
48
Out of which blessed union shall arise
A sacred branch, with grace and glory blessed,
Whose virtue shall her Land so patronize,
As all our power shall not her days molest:
For she, sayre she, the Minion of the skies,
Shall purchase of the highe'st to hers such rest,
(Standing between the wrath of heaven and them)
As no distress shall touch her Diadem.
49
Though thou shall seek by all the means thou may,
And Arm impiety and hell and all;
Stir up her own, make others to assay,
Bring says disguisd, the power of Pluto call,
Call all thy orafts to practice her decay,
And yet shall this take no effect at all:
For she secure, (as intimate with Fate)
Shall sit and scorn those base dissignes of hate.
50
And from the Rocks of safety shall discry
The wondrous wracks that wrath lays ruined,
All round about her, blood and misery,
Powers betrayed, Princes slain, Kings massacred,
States all-confusd, brought to calamity,
And all the face of kingdoms altered.
Yet she the same inviolable stands,
Dear to her own, wonder to other Lands.
51
But let not her defense discourage thee,
For never none but she, shall have this grace
From all disturbs to be so long kept free,
And with such glory to discharge that place:
And therefore, if by such a power thou be
Stopped of thy course, reckon it no disgrace;
Since she alone (being priuiledg'd from hie)
Has this large Patent of eternite.
52
This charge the Goddess gave, when ready straight
The subtle messenger accompayned
With all her crew of crafts that on her wayt,
Hastes to effect what she was counseled:
And out she pours of her mimens conceit,
Upon such searching spirits as travailed
In penetrating hidden secrecies,
Who soon these means of misery devise.
53
And boldly breaking with rebellious mind
Into their mothers close-lockt Treasury,
They mineralls combustible do find,
Which in stopped concaues placed cunningly
They fire, and fire imprisoned against kind,
Tears out away, thrusts out his enemy,
Barking with such a horror, as if wroth
With man, that wrongs himself and nature both.
54
And this beginning had this cursed frame,
Which York has now planted against his King,
Presuming by his power, and by the same,
His purpose unto good effect to bring;
When diverse of the grauest Counsel came
Sent from the King, to understand what thing
Had thrust him into these proceedings bad,
And what he sought, and what intent he had.
55
Who with words mildly-sharp, gently-seuere,
Wrought on those wounds that must be touched with heed,
Applying rather salues of hope then fear,
Least corasiues should desperate mischiefs breed.
And what my Lord, said they, should move you here
In this unseemly manner to proceed,
Whose worth being such, as all the Land admires,
Has sayrer ways then these to your desires?
56
Will you whose means, whose many friends, whose grace,
Can work the world in peace unto your will,
Take such a course as shall your blood deface,
And make by handling bad, a good cause ill?
How many hearts hazard you in this case,
That in all quiet plots would aid you still,
Having in Court a Party far more strong,
(Then you conceive) pressed to redress your wrong.
57
Fie, fie, forsake this hateful course, my Lord,
Down with these Arms that will but wound your cause
What peace may do, hazard not with the sword,
Fly from the force that from your force with-drawes,
And yield, and we will mediat such accord
As shall dispense with rigor and the laws:
And interpose this solemn faith of our
Betwixt your fault, and the offended power.
58
Which ingins of protests, and proffers kind,
Urged out of seeming greese, and shows of love,
So shook the whole foundation of his mind,
As it did all his resolution move:
And present seemed unto their course inclind,
So that the King would Sommerset remove;
The man whose most intolerable pride,
Trod down his worth, and all good men's beside.
59
Which they there vowed should presently be done;
For what will not pence-louers willing grant
Where dangerous events depend thereon,
And men unfurnished, and the state in want?
And if with words, the conquest will be won,
The cost is small: and who holds breath so scant
As then to spare, though against his dignity,
Better descend, then end in majesty.
60
And here-vpon the Duke dissolues his force,
Submits him to the King, on public vow.
The rather to, presuming on this course
For that his son the Earl of March was now
With mightier powers abroad, which would enforce
His peace, which else the King would not allow.
For seeing not all of him in him he has,
His death would but give life to greater wrath.
61
Yet coming to the King, in former place
His foe, the Duke of Sommerset he finds,
Whom openly reproching to his face,
He charged with treason in the highest kinds.
The Duke returns like speeches of dysgrace,
And fiery words bewrayd their flaming minds:
But yet the trial was for them deferd
Till fitter time allowed it to be heard.
62
At Westminster a Counsel gathered
Deliberats what course the cause should end
Of th'apprehended Duke of York, whose head
Does now on others doubtful breath depend;
Law fiercely vrgd his deed, and found him dead,
Friends fayld to speak where they could not defend:
Only the King himself for mercy stood,
As prodigal of lyse, nyggard of blood.
63
And as if angry with the Laws of death,
And why should you, said he, urge things so far?
You, that invr'd with mercinary breath,
And hired tongue so peremptory are?
Brauing on him whom sorrow prostrateth,
As if you did with poor affliction war,
And pray on frailty folly has betrayed,
Bringing the laws to wound, never to aid.
64
Dispense sometime with stern severity,
Make not the laws still traps to apprehend,
Win grace upon the bad with clemency,
Mercy may mend whom malice made offend:
Death gives no thanks, but checks authority,
And life does only majesty commend.
Revenge dies not, rigor begets new wrath,
And blood has never glory, mercy has.
65
And for my part, (and my part should be chief)
I am most willing to restore his state;
And rather had I win him with relief
Then loose him with despite, and get more hate:
Pity draws love, bloodshed as natures grief,
Compassion, follows the unfortunate.
And loosing him, in him I loose my power,
We rule who live, the dead are none of our.
66
And should our rigor lessen then the same
Which we with greater glory should retain?
No, let him live, his life must give us fame,
The child of mercy, newly borne again:
As often burials is Physicians shame,
So, many deaths, argues a Kings hard reign.
Why should we say, the law must have her vigor?
The law kills him, but quits not us of rigor.
67
You, to get more preferment by your wit,
Others, to gain the spoils of misery,
Labor with all your power to follow it,
Showing us fears, to draw on cruelty.
You urge the offense, not tell us what is fit,
Abusing wrong-informed maiestic:
As if our power, were only but to slay,
And that to sane, were a most dangerous way.
68
Thus out of pity spoke that holy King,
Whom mylde affections led to hope the best.
When Sommerset began to urge the thing
With words of hotter temper, this expressed:
Dear sovereign Lord, the cause in managing
Is more then yours, to imports the public rest,
We all have part, it touches all our good,
And lyfe's ill spard, that is spared to cost more blood.
69
Compassion here is cruolty, my Lord,
Pity will cut our throats for saving so.
What benefit shall we have by the sword
If mischief shall escape to draw on mo?
Why should we give what Law cannot afford
To 'be' accessaries to our proper woe?
Wisdom must judge twixt men apt to amend
And minds incurable, borne to offend.
70
It is no private cause (I do protest)
That moves me thus to prosecute his deed,
Would God his blood and mine had well releast
The dangers that his pride is like to breed:
Although at me, he seems to have addressed
His spite, it is not his end he has decreed:
I am not he alone, he does pursue
But through me, he means to shoot at you.
71
For this course ever they deliberate
Which do aspyre to reach the government,
To take advantage of the peoples hate,
Which ever hate those that are eminent:
For who can manage great affairs of state,
And all a wayward multitude content?
And then these people-minions they must fall
To work out us, to work themselves int'all.
72
But note my Lord, first who is in your hand,
Then, how he has offended, what is his end:
It is the man whose race would seem to stand
Before your right, and does a right pretend;
Who (Traytor-like) has raysd a mighty band
With coullor your proceedings to amend:
Which if it should have happened to succeed,
You had not now fate to adiudge his deed.
73
If oftentimes the person not the offense
Have been sufficient cause of death to some,
Where public safety puts in evidence
Of mischief, likely by their life to come;
Shall he, whose fortune and his insolence
Have both deseru' d to dye, escape that doom?
When you shall save your Land, your Crown thereby,
And since you cannot live unless he dye?
74
This spoke the agreeued Duke, that gravely saw
The incompatible powers of Princes minds;
And what affliction his escape might draw
Unto the state, and people of all kinds.
And yet the humble yielding and the aw
Which York there showed, so good opinion finds,
That, with the rumor of his sons great strength
And French affairs, he there came quit at length.
75
For even the fear to exasperat the heat
Of the Earl of March, whose forward youth and might
Well followd, seemed a proud revenge to threat
If any shame should on his Father light:
And then desire in Gascoyne to reget
The glory lost, which home-broyles hinder might,
Aduauntaged the Duke, and saved his head,
Which question less had else been hazarded.
76
For now had Burdeux offered upon aid
Present revolt, if we would send with speed.
Which fair advantage to have then delayed
Upon such hopes, had been a shameful deed:
And therefore this, all other courses stayed,
And outwardly these inward hates agreed:
Giving an interpause to pride and spite,
Which breathed but to break out with greater might.
77
Whilst dreadful Talbot terror late of France
(Against the Genius of our fortune) strove
The down-throwne glory of our state t'aduaunce;
Where France far more then France he now does prove.
For friends, opinion, and succeeding chance,
Which wrought the weak to yield, the strong to love,
Were not the same, as he had found before
In happyer times, when less would have done more.
78
For both the Britayne and Burgonian now The Dukes of Britany and Burgundio.

Came altered with our luck, and won with theirs
Those bridges and the gates that did allow
So easy passage unto our affairs.
Judging it safer to endeavor how
To link with strength, then lean unto dispayres;
And who wants friends, to back what he begins
In Lands far of, gets not, although he wins.
79
Which too well proved this fatal enterprise,
The last that lost us all we had to lose:
Where, though aduantag'd by some mutenies,
And petty Lords that in our cause arose,
Yet those great fayld; whose ready quick supplies
Ever at hand, cheerd us, and quaild our foes:
Succors from far, come seldom to our mind,
For who holds league with Neptune, or the wind?
80
Yet worthy Talbot, thou did so employ
The broken remnants of discattered power,
That they might see it was our destiny
Not want of spirit that lost us what was our:
Thy dying hand sold them the victory
With so dear wounds as made the conquest sour:
So much it cost to spoil who were undone,
And such a do to win, when they had won.
81
For as a fierce courageous mastiue fares
That having once sure fastened on his foe,
Lies tugging on that hold, never forbeares
What force soever force him to forgo;
The more he feels his wounds, the more he dares,
As if his death were sweet in dying so;
So held his hold this Lord, whilst he held breath,
And scarce but with much blood lets go in death.
82
For though he saw prepared against his side
Both unlike fortune, and unequal force,
Borne with the swelling current of their pride
Down the main stream of a most happy course:
Yet stands he stiff vndasht, vnterrified,
His mind the same, although his fortune worse;
Virtue in greatest dangers being best shown,
And though oppressed, yet never overthrown.
83
For reskuing of besieged Chatillion
Where having first constraind the French to fly,
And following hard on their confusion,
Comes lo incountred with a strong supply
Of fresh-ariuing powers, that back thrust on
Those flying troops, another chance to try;
Who double Armed, with shame, and fury, strain
To wreake their foil, and win their fame again.
84
Which seeing, the vndau^ted Talbot with more might
Of spirit to will, then hands of power to do:
Preparing t'entertaine a glorious fight,
Cheeres up his wearied soldiers thereunto:
Courage, says he, those brauing troops in sight
Are but the same that now you did undo.
And what if there be come some more then they?
They come to bring more glory to the day.
85
Which day must either thrust us out of all,
Or all with greater glory back restore.
This day your valiant worth adventure shall
For what our Land shall never fight for, more:
If now we fail, with us is like to fall
All that renown which we have got before:
This is the last, if we discharge the same,
The same shall last to our eternal fame.
86
Never had worthy men for any fact
A more fair glorious Theater then we:
VVhereon true magnanimity might act
Brave deeds, which better witnessed could be.
For lo, from yonder Turrets yet vnsackt,
Your valiant fellows stand your worth to see,
T'auouch your valor, if you live, to gain,
And if we die, that we did not in vain.
87
And even our foes, whose proud and powrefull might
Would seem to swallow up our dignity,
Shall not keep back the glory of our right
Which their confounded blood shall testify:
For in their wounds our gored swords shall write
The monuments of our eternity:
For vile is honor and a title vain
The which true worth, and danger do not gain.
88
For they shall see when we in careless sort
Shall throw our selves on their despised spears,
It Is not despair that does us so transport,
But even true fortitude, that nothing fears:
Since we may well retire us, in some sort,
But shame on him that such a foul thought bears;
For be they more, let Fortune take their part,
We'ill tugge her to, and scratch her, ere we part.
89
This said, a fresh infusd desire of fame,
Enters their warmed blood, with such a will
That they deemed long they were not at the same:
And though they marched, they thought they yet stood still,
And that their lingering foes too slowly came
To join with them, spending much time so ill:
Such force had words fierce humors up to call,
Sent from the mouth of such a General.
90
Who weighing yet his force and their desire,
Turns him about in private to his son, The Lo(...) Lisie.

A worthy son, and worthy such a Sire,
Tells him the doubtful ground they stood upon,
Aduising him in secret to retire;
Seeing his youth but even now begun,
Would make it unto him at all no stain,
His death small fame, his flight no shame could gain.
91
To whom the agreeued son as if dysgrac'd
Ah Father, have you then selected me
To be the man, which you would have displaced
Out of the role of immortality?
What have I done this day that has defaced
My worth: that my hands work dispisd should be?
God shield I should bear home a Cowards name,
I have lived enough, if I can dye with fame.
92
At which the Father touched with sorrowing-ioy,
Turns him about, shaking his head, and says:
O my dear son, worthy a better day
To enter thy first youth in hard assayes.
And now had wrath, impatient of delay
Begun the fight, and farther speeches stays:
Fury thrusts on, striving whose sword should be
First warmed in the wounds of the enemy.
93
Hotely these small, but mighty minded Bands
(As if ambitious now of death) do strain
Against innumerable armed hands,
And gloriously a wondrous fight maintain:
Rushing on all what ever strength with-stands,
Whetting their wrath on blood and on disdain;
And so far thrust, that hard 'twere to discry
Whether they more desire to kill, or dye.
94
Frank of their own, greedy of others blood,
No stroke they give but wounds, no wound but kills;
Near to their hate, close to their work they stood,
Hit where they would, their hand obeyes their wills,
Scorning the blow from far that does no good,
Loathing the crack unless some blood it spills:
No wounds could let out life that wrath held in,
Till others wounds revenged did first begin.
95
So much true resolution wrought in those
That had made covenant with death before,
That their small number scorning so great foes,
Made France most happy that there were no more
Since these made doubtful how Fate would dispose
That weary day, or unto whom restore
The glory of a conquest dearly bought,
Which scarce the Conqueror, can think worth ought.
96
For as with equal rdge, and equa'll might
Two aduers winds combat with billows proud
And neither yield: Seas, skies maintain like fight,
Wave against wave opposd, and clowd to clowd,
So war both sides with obstinate despite,
With like revenge, and neither party bowd:
Fronting each other with confounding blows,
No wound, one sword unto the other owes.
97
Whilst Talbot, whose fresh spirit having got
A marvelous advantage of his years.
Carries his unfelt age as if forgot,
Whirling about where any need appears:
His hand, his eye, his wits all present, wrought
The function of the glorious part he bears:
Now urging here, now cheering there he flies,
Unlocks the thickest troops where most force lies.
98
In midst of wrath, of wounds, of blood and death,
There is he most whereas he may do best.
And there the closest ranks he seueroth,
Drives back the stoutest powers that forward pressed:
There makes his sword his way, there labors
Th'infatigable hands that never rest,
Scorning unto his mortal wounds to yield
Till Death became best muister of the field.
99
Then like a sturdy Oak that having long
Against the wars of fiercest winds made head,
When with some forced tempestious rage, more strong,
His downe-borne top comes ouer-maistered,
All the near bordering Trees he stood among,
Crushed with his weighty fall, lie ruined:
So lay his spoils, all round about him slain
T'adorne his death, that could not dye in vain.
100
On the other part, his most all-daring son
(Although the inexperience of his years
Made him less skyld in what was to be done,
Yet did it thrust him on beyond all fears)
Flying into the main Batallion,
Near to the King, amidst the chiefest Peers,
With thousand wounds became at length oppressed,
As if he scornd to dye, but with the best.
101
Who thus both having gaynd a glorious end,
Soon ended that great day that set so red,
As all the purple playnes that wide extend
A sad tempestious season with essed:
So much a do had toyling France to rend
From us the right so long inherited,
And so hard went we from what we possessed,
As with it, went the blood we loved best.
102
Which blood not lost, but fast laid up with heed
In everlasting same, is there held dear,
To seal the memory of this days deed,
The Eternal evidence of what we were:
To which our Fathers, we, and who succeed,
Do owe a sigh, for that it touch us near:
Who must not sin so much as to neglect
The holy thought of such a dear respect.
103
Yet happy haples day, blest-ill-lost breath,
Both for our better fortune, and your own:
For what soul wounds, what spoil, what shameful death,
Had by this forward resolution grown,
If at S. Albons, Wakefield, Barnet-heath,
It should unto your in famie be shown?
Blessed you, that did not teach how great a fault
Even virtue is in actions that are naught.
104
Yet would this sad days loss, had now been all
That this day lost, then should we not much plain,
If hereby we had come but there to fall,
And that day ended, ended had our pain.
Then small the lost of France, of Given small,
Nothing the shame to be turned home again
Compard with other shames. But now France lost
Sheds us more blood then all her winning cost.
105
For loosing war abroad; at home lost peace,
Be'ing with our vnsupporting selves close pent.
And no dissignes for pride that did increase,
But our own throats, and our own punishment.
The working spyrit ceast not tho work did cease,
Having fit time to practice dyscontent.
And stir up such as could not long lie still,
Who not imployd to good, must needs do ill.
106
And now the grief of our received shame
Gave fit occasion for ambitious care,
They draw the chief reproach of all the fame
On such as naturally hated are,
Seeing them apt to bear the greatest blame
That offices of greatest envy bear.
And that in vulgar ears delight it breeds
To have the hated, Authors of misdeodes.
107
And therefore easily great Sommerset
Whom envy long had singled out before
With all the vollie of disgraces met,
As the maine mark Fortune had placed therefore:
On whose hard-wrought opinion spite did whet
The edge of wrath, to make it pierce the more.
Grief being glad to have gotten now on whom
To lay the fault of what, must light on some.
108
Whereon th'againe out-breaking York begins
To build new models of his old desire,
Se'ing the fair booty Fortune for him winnes
Upon the ground of this enkindled ire.
Taking th'aduantages of others sins
To aid his own, and help him to aspire:
And doubting peace should better scanne deeds past,
He thinks not safe, to have his sword our last.
109
Especially, since every man now pressed
To innovation do with rancor swell,
A styrring humor generally possessed
Those peace-spylt times, weary of being well:
The weak with wrongs, the happy tired with rest,
And many mad, for what, they could not tell.
The world even great with change, thought it went wrong
To stay beyond the bearing time so long.
110
And therefore now these Lords consedered
Being much increasd in number and in spite,
So shaped their course, that drawing to a head,
Began to grow to be offeare full might;
The Abused world so hasty gathered,
Some for revenge, some for wealth, some for delight,
That York from small-beginning troops soon draws
A world of men to venture in his cause.
111
Like as proud Seuerne from a private head,
With humble streams at first does gently glyde,
Till other Rivers have contrybuted
The springing riches of their store beside,
Wherewith at length high swelling she does spread
Her broad descended waters laid so wide,
That coming to the Sea, she seems from far
Not to have trybute brought, but rather war.
112
Even so is York now grown, and now is bent
T'incounter with the best, and for the best,
Whose near approach the King hastes to prevent,
Seeking to have had his power, far of suppressed:
Fearing the City, least some insolent
And mutinous, should harten on the rest
To take his part. But h'is so forward set,
That at S. Albones both the Annies met.
113
Whether their have far fewer hands did bring
Then else their better leisure would have done:
And yet too many for so foul a thing
Since who did best, has but dishonor won:
For whilst some offer peace sent from the King,
VVarwicks too forward hand has war begun:
A war that does the face of war deforme
Which still is foul, but soulest wanting form.
114
Never did valiant Leaders so well known
For brave performed actions done before
Blemish the reputation of renown
In any weak effected service more,
To bring such powers into so straight a Town
As to some Citty-tumulr or uproar:
Which slaughter, and no battle might be thought.
Where that side vsd their swords, and this their throat.
115
But this on VVarwicks wrath must needs be laid,
And upon Sommersets desire t'obtayne
The day with peace, for which he longer stayed
Then wisdom would, or then was for his gain:
Whose force in narrow streets once over laid,
Never recouerd head, but there came slain
Both he, and all the Leaders else besides:
The King himself alone a prisoner bides.
116
A prisoner, though not to the outward eye,
For that he must seem graced with his lost day,
All things be'ing done for his commodity,
Against such men as did the state betray:
For with such apt deceiving clemency
And seeming-order, York did so allay
That touch of wrong, as made him make great stealth
In weaker minds, with show of Common wealth.
117
Long-lookt-for power thus got into his hand,
The former face of Court now altered,
All the supreamest charges of command
Were to his ayders straight contributed:
Himself is made Protector of the land.
A title found, which only covered
All-working power under another style,
Which yet the greatest part does act the while.
118
The King held only but an empty name
Left with his life, where of the proof was such
As sharpest pride could not transpers the same,
Nor once, all-seeking Fortune durst to tuch:
Impiety had not enlarged shame
As yet so wide as to attempt so much:
Mischief was not full ripe for such a deed,
Left for the unbounded horrors that succeed.
The end of the fifth Book.
MVSOPHILVS: CONTAINING a general defense of learning.

SAMVEL DANIEL.

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Simon Waterson. 1599.

To the right worthy and judicious favorer of virtue, master Fulke Greuill.
I Do not here upon this hum'rous Stage,
Bring my transformed verse apparailed
With others passions, or with others rage;
With loves, with wounds, with factions furnished:
But here present thee, only modelled
In this poor frame, the form of mine own heart:
Here to revive my self my Muse is lead
With motions of her own, to act her own part
Striving to make, her now contemned art
As fair t'her self as possibly she can;
Least seeming of no force, of no desert
She might repent the course that she began,
And, with these times of dissolution, fall
From goodness, virtue, glory, fame and all.
MVSOPHILVS. CONTAINING A general defense of all learning.
PHILOCOSMVS. Fond man Musophilus, that thus do spend
In an vngainefull art thy dearest days,
Tyring thy wits and toiling to no end,
But to attain that idle smoke of praise;
Now when this busy world cannot attend
Th'vntimely music of neglected lays.
Other delights then these, other desires
This wiser profit-seeking age requires.

Musophilus. Friend Philocosmus, Iconfesse indeed,
I love this sacred art thou sett'st so light,
And though it never stand my life in steed,
It is enough, it gives my self delight,
The whiles my vnafflicted mind does feed
On no unholy thoughts for benefit.
Be it that my unseasonable song
Come out of time, that fault is in the time,
And I must not do virtue so much wrong
As love her ought the worse for others crime;
And yet I find some blessed spirits among,
That cherish me, and like and grace my rhyme.
Again that I do more in soul esteem
Then all the gain of dust, the world does crave;
And if I may attain but to redeem
My name from dissolution and the grave,
I shall have done enough, and better deem
To Have lived to be, then to have did to have.
Short-breathed mortality would yet extend
That span of life so far forth as it may,
And rob her fate, seek to beguile her end
Of some few lingering days of after stay,
That all this little All, might not descend
Into the dark a universal pray.
And give our labors yet this poor delight,
That when our days do end they are not done;
And though we die we shall not perish quite,
But live two lives where other have but one.

Philocosmus, Silly desires of selfe-abusing man,
Striving to gain the inheritance of air
That having done the uttermost he can
Leaves yet perhaps but beggerie to his heir;
All that great purchase of the breath he wan,
Feeds not his race, or makes his house more fair.
And what art thou the better thus to leave
A multitude of words to small effect,
Which other times may scorn and so deceive
Thy promised name of what thou do expect,
Besides some viperous Creticke may bereave
The opinion of thy worth for some defect,
And get more reputation of his wit
By but controlling of some word or sense,
Then thou shall honor for contriuing it,
With all thy travel, care and diligence;
Being learning now enough to contradict
And censure others with bold insolence.
Besides so many so confusedly sing,
Whose diverse discords have the music marred,
And in contempt that mystery does bring,
That he must sing alowd that will be heard;
And the received opinion of the thing,
For some unhallowed strings that vildly iar'd,
Has so vnseason'd' now the ears of men,
That who does touch the tenor of that vain
Is held but vain, and his vnreck'ned pen
The title but of leuitie does gain.
A poor light gain to recompense their toil,
That thought to get eternity the while.
And therefore leave the left and out-worne course
Of unregarded ways, and labor how
To fit the times with what is most in force,
Be new with men's affections that are new;
Strive not to run an idle counter-course
Out from the sent of humors, men allow.
For not discreetly to compose our parts
Unto the frame of men (which we must be)
Is to put off our selves, and make our arts
Rebles to Nature and society,
Whereby we come to bury our deserts,
In the obscure grave of singularity.

Musophiliss. Do not profane the work of doing well,
Seduced man, that can not look so hie
From out that mist of earth as thou can tell
The ways of right, which virtue does descrie,
That ouer-lookes the base, contemptiblie,
And low-laid follies of mortality:
Nor meat out truth and right-deseruing praise,
By that wrong measure of confusion
The vulgar foot: that never takes his ways
By reason, but by imitation;
Rolling on with the rest, and never way's
The course which he should go, but what is gone.
Well were it with mankind, if what the most
Did like were best, but ignorance will live
By others square, as by example lost;
And man to man must the hand of error give
That none can fall alone at their own cost,
And all because me^ judge not, but believe.
For what poor bounds have they whom but the earth bounds,
What is their end whereto their care attaines,
When the thing got relieues not, but co^founds
Having but travail to succeed their pains?
What joy has he of living that propounds
Affliction but his end, and grief his gains?
Gathering, incroching, wresting, ioining to,
Destroying, building, decking, furnishing,
Repairing, altring, and so much a do
To his souls toil, and bodies travailing:
And all this does he little knowing who
Fortune ordaines to have th'inheriting.
And his fair house raised hie in enuies eye,
Whose pillars reared perhaps on blood and wrong
The spoils and pillage of iniquity.
Who can assure it to continue long?
If rage spared not the walls of piety,
Shall the profanest piles of sin keep strong?
How many proud aspiring palaces
Have we known made the pray of wrath and pride,
Leuell'd with the earth, left to forgetfulness,
Whilst titlers their pretended rights decide,
Or civil tumults, or an orderles
Order pretending change of some strong side?
Then where is that proud title of thy name,
Written in ye of melting vanity?
Where is thine heir left to possess the same?
Perhaps not so well as in beggerie.
Some thing may rise to be beyond the shame
Of vile and unregarded poverty.
Which, I confess, although I often strive
To cloth in the best habit of my skill,
In all the fairest colors I can give;
Yet for all that me thinks she looks but ill,
I cannot brook that face, which dead-aliue
Shows a quick body, but a buried will.
Yet often we fee the bars of this restraint
Holds goodness in, which loose wealth would let fly,
And fruitless riches barrayner then want,
Brings forth small worth from idle liberty?
Which when disorders shall again make scant,
It must resetch her state from poverty.
But yet in all this interchange of all,
Virtue we see, with her fair grace, stands a fast;
For what hy races has there come to fall,
With low disgrace, quite vanished and past,
Since Chaucer lived who yet lives and yet shall,
Though (which I grieve to say) but in his last
Yet what a time has he wrested from time,
And won upon the mighty waste of days,
Unto the immortal honor of our clime,
That by his means came first adorned with Baies,
Unto the sacred Relics of whose rhyme
We yet are bound in zeal to offer praise?
And could our lines begotten in this age
Obtain but such a blessed hand of years,
And escape the sury of that threatening rage,
Which in confused clouds ghastly appears,
Who would not strain his travails to engage,
When such true glory should succeed his cares?
But whereas he came planted in the spring,
And had the Sun, before him, of respect;
We set in the Autumn, in the withering,
And sullen season of a cold defect,
Must taste those four distastes the times do bring,
Upon the fullness of a cloid neglect,
Although the stronger constitutions shall
Wear out the infection of distempred days,
And come with glory to out-liue this fall,
Recouring of another spring of praise,
Cleared from the oppressing humors, wherewithal
The idle multitude surcharge their lays.
When as perhaps the words thou scornest now
May live, the speaking picture of the mind,
The extract of the soul that labored how
To leave the image of her self behind,
Wherein posterity that love to know
The just proportion of our spirits may find.
For these lines are the veins, the Arteries,
And vndecaying life-strings of those hearts
That still shall pant, and still shall exercise
The motion spirit and nature both imparts,
And shall, with those alive so sympathize
As nourisht with their powers enjoy their parts.
O blessed letters that combine in one
All ages past, and make one live with all,
By you we do confer with who are gone,
And the dead living unto council call:
By you the unborn shall have communion
Of what we feel, and what does us befall.
Soul of the world, knowledge, without thee,
What has the earth that truly glorious is?
Why should our pride make such a stir to be,
To be forgot? what good is like to this,
To do worthy the writing, and to write
Worthy the reading, and the worlds delight?
And let the unnatural and waiward race
Borne of one womb with us, but to our shame
That never read to observe but to disgrace,
Raise all the tempest of their power to blame;
That puff of folly never can deface,
The work a happy Genius took to frame.
Yet why should civil learning seek to wound
And mangle her own members with despite?
Prodigious wits that study to confound
The life of wit, to seem to know aright,
As if themselves had fortunately found
Some stand from of the earth beyond our sight,
Whence ouerlooking all as from above,
Their grace is not to work, but to reprove.
But how came they placed in so high degree
Above the reach and compass of the rest?
Who has admitted them only to be
Free-denizons of skill, to judge the best?
From whom the world as yet could never see
The warrant of their wit soundly expressed.
T'acquaint our times with that perfection
Of high conceit, which only they possess,
That we might have things exquisitely done
Measured with all their strict obseruances:
Such would (I know) skorne a translation,
Or bring but others labors to the press;
Yet often these monster-breeding mountains will
Bring forth small Mice of great expected skill.
Presumption ever fullest of defects,
Fails in the doing to perform her part;
And I have known proud words and poor effects,
Of such indeed as do condemn this Art:
But let them rest, it ever has been known,
They others virtues skorn, that doubt their own:
And for the diverse disagreeing cords,
Of interiangling ignorance that fill
The dainty ears, and leave no room for words,
The worthier minds neglect, or pardon will;
Knowing the best he has, he frankly foords
And skornes to be a niggard of his skill.
And that the rather since this short-liu'd race,
Being fatallie the sons but of one day,
That now with all their power ply it apace,
To hold out with the greatest might they may
Against confusion that has all in chase,
To make of all a universal pray.
For now great Nature has laid down at last
That mighty birth, where with so long she went
And ouerwent the times of ages past,
Here to lie in, upon our soft content,
Where fruitful she, has multiplied so fast,
That all she has on these times, seemed to have spent.
All that which might have many ages graced,
Is borne in one, to make one cloid with all;
Where plenty has impressed a deep distaste,
Of best and worst, and all ingenerall:
That goodness seems, goodness to have defaced,
And virtue has to virtue given the fall.
For emulation, that proud nurse of wit,
Skorning to stay below or come behind,
Labors upon that narrow top to sit
Offole perfection in the highest kind;
Envy and wonder looking after it,
Thrust likewise on the self same bliss to find:
And so long striving till they can no more,
Do stuff the place or others hopes shut out,
Who doubting to overtake those gone before
Give up their care, and cast no more about;
And so in skorne leave all as fore possessed,
And will be none where they may not be best.
Even like some empty Greek that long has lain,
Left or neglected of the River by,
Whose searching sides pleased with a wandering, vain,
Finding some little way that close did lie,
Steal in at first, then other streams again
Second the first, then more then all supply,
Till all the mighty maine has borne at last
The glory of his chiefest power that way,
Plying this newfound pleasant room so fast
Till all be full, and all be at a stay;
And then about, and back again does cast,
Leaving that full to fall another way:
So fears this humorous world, that evermore
Rapt with the Current of a present course,
Runs into that which lay contemnd before;
Then glutted leaves the same, and falst'a worse:
Now zeal holds all, no life but to adore;
Then cold in spirit, and faith is of no force.
Straight all that holy was unhallowed lies,
The scattered carcasses of ruind vows:
Then truth is false, and now has blindness eyes,
Then zeal trusts al, now scarcely what it knows:
That evermore to foolish or to wise,
It fatal is to be seduced with shows.
Sacred Religion, mother offorme and fear,
How gorgeously sometimes do thou sit decked?
What pompous vestures do we make thee wear?
What stately piles we prodigal erect?
How sweet perfumed thou art, how shining clear?
How solemnly observed, with what respect?
Another time all plain, and quite thread bare,
Thou must have all within and naught without,
Sit poorly without light, disrobed, no care
Of outward grace, to amuze the poor devout,
Powrelesse vnfollowed, scarcely men can spare
Thee necessary rites to set thee out.
Either truth, goodness, virtue are not still
The self same which they are, and always one,
But alter to the project of our will,
Or we our actions make them wait upon
Putting them in the livery of our skill,
And cast them off again when we have done.
You mighty Lords, that with respected grace
Do at the stern of fair example stand,
And all the body of this populace
Guide with the only turning of your hand,
Keep a right course, bear up from al disgrace,
Observe the point of glory to our land:
Hold up disgraced knowledge from the ground,
Keep virtue in request, give worth her due,
Let not neglect with barbarous means confound
So fair a good to bring in night anew.
Be not, o be not accessory found
Unto her death that must give life to you:
Where will you have your virtuous names safe laid,
In gorgeous tombs, in sacred Cells secure?
Do you not see those prostrate heaps betrayed
Your fathers bones, and could not keep them sure?
And will you trust deceitful stones fair laid:
And think they will be to your honor truer?
No, no, vnsparing time will proudly send
A warrant unto wrath that with one frown
Will al these mock'ries of vain glory rend,
And make them as before, vngrac'd, unknown,
Poor idle honors that can ill defend
Your memories, that cannot keep their own.
And whereto serve that wondrous trophei now,
That on the godly plain near Wilton stands?
That huge domb heap, that cannot tell us how,
Nor what, nor whence it is, nor with whose hands,
Nor for whose glory, it was set to show
How much our pride mockes that of other lands?
Where on when as the gazing passenger
Has greedy looked with admiration,
And feign would know his birth, and what he were,
How there erected, and how long agone:
Enquires and asks his fellow trauailer
What he has heard and his opinion:
And he knows nothing. Then he turns again
And looks and sighs, and then admires afr esh,
And in himself with sorrow does complain
The misery of dark for getfuln esse;
Angry with time that nothing should remain,
Our greatest wonders, wonder to express.
Then ignorance with fabulous discourse
Robbing fair art and cunning of their right,
Tells how those stones were by the devils force
From Affricke brought to Ireland in a night,
And thence to Britannie by Magic course,
From giants hand redeemed by Merlins slight.
And then near Ambri placed in memory
Of all those noble Britons murthred there
By Hengist and his Saxon treachery,
Coming to parle in peace at unaware.
With this old Legend then credulity
Holds her content, and closes up her care:
But is antiquity so great a liar,
Or, do her younger sons her age abuse,
Seeing after comers still so apt t'admire
The grave authority that she does use,
That reverence and respect dares not require
Proof of her deeds, or once her words refuse?
Yet wrong they did us to presume so far
Upon our easy credit and delight:
For once found false they straight became to mar
Our faith, and their own reputation quite:
That now her truths hardly believed are,
And though sh'auouch y^ right, she scarce has right.
And as for thee, thou huge and mighty frame
That stands corrupted so with times despite,
And give false evidence against their fame
That set thee there to testify their right:
And art become a traitor to their name
That trusted thee with all the best they might;
Thou shall stand still belide and slandered,
The only gazing stock of ignorance,
And by the guile the wife admonished
Shall never more desire such heapest' advance,
Nor trust their living glory with the dead
That cannot speak, but leave their fame to chance;
Considering in how small a room do lie
And yet lie safe, as fresh as if alive
All those great worthies of antiquity,
Which long foreliu'd thee, and shall long survive,
Who stronger tombs found for eternity,
Then could the powers of all the earth co^triue.
Where they remain these trifles to obraid
Out of the reach of spoil, and way of rage,
Though time with all his power of years has laid
Long battery, backed with undermining age,
Yet they make head only with their own aid
And war, with his all conquering forces, wage:
Pleading the heavens prescription to be free
And to have a grant t'indure as long as he.

Philocosmus. Behold how every man drawn with delight
Of what he does, flatters him in his way;
Striving to make his course seem only right
Does his own rest, and his own thoughts betray;
Imagination bringing bravely dight
Her pleasing images in best array,
With flattering glasses that must show him fair
And others foul; his skill and his wit best,
Others seduced, deceived and wrong in their;
His knowledge right, all ignorant the rest,
Not seeing how these minions in the air
Present a face of things falsely expressed,
And that ye glimmering of these errors shown,
Are but a light to let him see his own.
Alas poor Fame, in what a narrow room
As an incaged Parrot, art thou pent
Here amongst us; where eue^ as good be domb
As speak, and to be heard with no attent?
How can you promise of the time to come
When as the present are so negligent?
Is this the walk of all your wide renown,
This little point, this scarce discerned I Will,
Thrust from ye world, with who^ our speech unknown
Made never any traffike of our style.
And is this all where all this care is shown,
T'inchant your fame to last so long a while?
And for that happier tongues have won so much,
Think you to make your barbarous language such
Poor narrow limits for so mighty pains,
That cannot promise any foreign vent:
And yet if here to all your wondrous veins
Were generally known, it might content:
But lo how many reads not, or disdaines
The labors of the chief and excellent.
How many thousands never heard the name
Of Sydney, or of Spencer, or their books?
And yet brave fellows, and presume of fame
And seem to bear down all the world with looks:
What then shall they expect of meaner frame,
On whose endeavors few or none scarce looks?
Do you not see these Pamphlets, Libels, Rymes,
These strange confused tumults of the mind,
Are grown to be the sickness of these times,
The great disease inflicted on mankind?
Your virtues, by your follies, made your crimes,
Have issue with your indiscretion ioin'd
Schools, arts, professions, all in so great store,
Pass the proportion of the present state,
Where being as great a number as before,
And fewer rooms them to accommodate;
It cannot be but they must throng the more,
And kick, and thrust, and shoulder with debate.
For when the greater wits cannot attain
The Expected good, which they account their right,
And yet perceive others to reap that gain
Of far inferior virtues in their sight;
They present with the sharp of Envy strain
To wound them with reproaches and despite:
And for these, cannot have as well as they
They scorn their faith should daigne to look that way.
Hence discontented Sects, and Schisms arise,
Hence interwounding controversies spring,
That feed the simple, and offend the wife,
Who know the consequence of cauilling:
Disgrace that these to others do devise,
Contempt and scorn on all in the end does bring
Like scolding wives reckning each others fault
Make standers by imagine both are naught.
For when to these rare dainties time admits,
All comers, all Complexions, all that will,
Where none should be let in, but choicest wits,
Whose mild discretion could comport with skill,
For when the place their humor neither fits,
Nor they the place: who can expect but ill?
For being unapt for what they took in hand,
And for ought else where to they shalb'addrest
They even become th'incombrance of the land
As out of rank disordring all the rest:
This grace of theirs to seem to understand,
Marres all their grace to do, without their rest.
Men find that action is another thing
Then what they in discoursing papers read,
The worlds affairs require in managing
More arts then those wherein you Clearks proceed,
Whilst timorous knowledge stands considering,
Audacious ignorance has done the deed.
For who knows most, the more he knows to doubt
The least discourse is commonly most stout.
This sweet in chaunting knowledge turns you cleene
Out from the fields of nature all delight,
And makes you hide unwilling to be seen
In the open concourse of a public sight:
This skill where with you have so cunning been,
Vnsinewes all your powers, vnmans you quite.
Public society and commerce of men
Require another grace, another port:
This eloquence, these rymes, these phrases then
Begot in shades, do serve us in no sort,
Th'vnmateriall swellings of your pen
Touch not the spirit that action does import:
A manly style fitted to manly ears
Best grees with wit, not that which goes so gay,
And commonly the gaudie liu'rie wears
Of nice corruptions which the times do sway,
And waits on th'humor of his pulse that bears
His passions set to such a pleasing kay;
Such dainties serve only for stomachs weak,
For men do fowlest when they finest speak.
Yet do I not dislike that in some wise
Be sung the great heroycall deserts
Of brave renowned spirits, whose exercise
Of worthy deeds may call up others hearts,
And serve a model for posterities
To fashion them fit for like glorious parts:
But so that all our spirits may tend hereto
To make it not our grace, to say, but do.

Musophilus. Much thouhast said, and willingly I hear,
As one that am not so possessed with love
Of what I do, but that I rather bear
An ear to learn, then a tongue to disprove:
I know men must as carried in their sphere
According to their proper motions move.
And that course likes them best which they are on,
Yet truth has certain bounds, but falsehood none.
I do confess our limits are but small
Compared with all the whole vaste earth beside,
All which again rated to that great All,
Is likewise as a point scarcely discride;
So that in these respects we may this call
A point but of a point where we abide.
But if we shall descend from that high stand
Of ouer-looking Contemplation,
And cast our thoughts but to, and not beyond
This spacious circuit which we tread upon,
We then may estimate our mighty land
A world within a world standing alone.
Where if our fame confind cannot get out,
What shall we then imagine it is penned
That has so great a world to walk about,
Whose bounds with her reports have both one end:
Why shall we not rather esteem her stout
That farther then her own scorn to extend?
Where being so large a room both to do well
And eke to hear the applause of things well done,
That farther if men shall our virtues tell
We have more mouths, but not more merit won,
It does not greater make that which is laudable,
The flame is bigger blown, the fire all one.
And for the few that only lend their care,
That few is all the world, which with a few
Does ever live, and move, and work and stir,
This is the heart does feel, and only know.
The rest of all, that only bodies bear
Roll up and down, and fill but up the row:
And serve as others members not their own,
The instruments of those that do direct.
Then what disgrace is this not to be known
To those know not to give themselves respect?
And though they swel with pomp of folly blown,
They live vngrac'd, and die but in neglect.
And for my part if only one allow
The care my laboring spirits take in this,
He is to me a Theater large ynow,
And his applause only sufficient is:
All my respect is bent but to his brow,
That is my all, and all I am is his.
And if some worthy spirits be pleased to,
It shall more comfort breed, but not more will;
But what if none; it cannot yet undo
The love I bear unto this holy skill:
This is the thing that I was borne to do,
This is my Scene, this part must I fulfill.
Let those that know not breath esteem of wind,
And set t'a vulgar air their servile song,
Rating their goodness by the praise they find,
Making their worth on others firs belong,
As virtue were the hyreling of the mind,
And could not live if fame had never a tongue.
Has that all-knowing power that holds within
The goodly prospectiue of all this frame, Virtue.

(Where whatsoever is, or what has bin,
Reflects a certain image of the same)
No inward pleasures to delight her in,
But she must gad to seek an alines of fame?
Must she like to a wanton Curtezan
Open her breasts for show, to win her praise,
And blaze her fair bright beauty unto man,
As if she were enamourd of his ways?
And knew not weakness nor could rightly skan
To what defects his humorous breath obaies.
She that can tell how proud ambition
Is but a beggar, and has naught at all
But what is given of mere devotion;
For which how much it sweats, how much it is thrall?
What toil it takes, and yet when all is done,
The ends in expectation never fall.
Shall she join hands with such a servile mate,
And prostrate her fair body to commit
Folly with earth, and to defile that state
Of cleerenes, for so gross a benefit?
Having reward dwelling within her gate,
And glory of her own to furnish it.
Her self a recompense sufficient
Unto her self, to give her own content.
Is It not in ought that she has raisd so hie
Those that be hers, that they may sit and see
The earth below them, and this All to lie
Under their view: taking the true degree
Of the just height of swollen mortality
Right as it is, not as it seems to be,
And vndeceiued with the paralax
Of a mistaking eye of passion, know
By these masked outsides what the inward lacks
Meas'ring man by himself not by his show,
Wondering not at their rich and golden backs
That have poor minds, and little else to show.
Nor taking that for them, which well they see
Is not of them, but rather is their lode:
The lies of fortune, where withal men be
Deemed within, when they be all abroad:
Whose ground, whose grass, whose earth have cap and knee,
Which they suppose, is on themselus bestowed.
And think like Isis Ass, all honors are
Given unto them alone, the which are done
Unto the painted I doll which they bear,
That only makes them to be gezod on:
For take away their pack and show them bare,
And see what beast this honor rides upon.
Has knowledge lent to hers the privy kay,
To let them in unto the hiest stage
Of causes, secrets, Councels; to suruay
The wits of men, their heats, their colds, their rage,
That build, destroy, praise, hate, say and gain say;
Believe, and vnbeleeue, all in one age.
And shall we trust goodness as it proceeds
From that unconstant mouth; which with one breath
Will make it bad again, unless it feeds
The present humor that it favors?
Shall we esteem and reckon how it heedes
Our works, that his own vows vnholloweth?
Then whereto serves it to have been enlarged
With this free manumission of the mind,
If for all that we still continue charged
With those discovered errors, which we find?
As if our knowledge only were discharged,
Yet we our selves staid in a servile kind.
That virtue must be out of countenance,
If this gross spirit, or that weak shallow brain,
Or this nice wit, or that distemperance,
Neglect, distaste, vncomprehend, disdain;
When such sick eyes, can never cast a glance
But through the colors of their proper stain.
Though I must needs confess the small respect,
That these great-seeming best of men do give,
(Whose brow begets the inferior sorts neglect,)
Might move the weak irresolute to grieve:
But stronger, see how justly this defect
Has ouertooke the times wherein we live;
That learning needs must run the common fate
Of all things else, thrust on by her own weight,
Comporting another self in her estate
Under this burden of a self conceit:
Our own dissentious hands opening the gate
Unto Contempt, that on our quarrels wait,
Discovered have our inward government,
And let in hard opinion to disgrace
The general, for some weak impotent
That bear out their disease with a stolen face,
Who (silly souls) the more wit they have spent,
The less they showed not bettring their bad case.
And see how soon this rolling world can take
Advantage for her dissolution,
Feign to get loose from this with holding stake
Of civil science and diseretion:
How glad it would run wild, that it might make
One formelesse form of one confusion?
Like tyrant Ottomans blindfolded state,
Which must know nothing more but to obey:
For this, seeks greedy ignorance t'abate
Our number, order, living, form and sway;
For this, it practices to dissipate
Th'vnsheltred troops, till all be made away.
For since our fathers sins pulled first to ground
The pale of their disseuered dignity,
And overthrew that holy reverent bound
That parted learning and the laiety,
And laid all flat in common to confound
The honor and respect of piety:
It did so much invile the estimate
Of th'opened and invulgard mysteries,
Which now reduced unto the basest rate,
Must wait upon the Norman subtleties,
Who (being mounted up into their state)
Do best with wrangling rudeness sympathize.
And yet though now set quite behind the train
Of vulgar sway (and light of power wai'd light)
Yet would this giddy innovation feign
Down with it lower to abase it quite:
And those poor remnants that do yet remain
The spoiled marks of their divided right:
They wholly would deface, to leave no face
Of reverent distinction and degree,
As if they waigh'd no difference in this case
Betwixt Religions age and infancy;
Where the one must creep, the other stand with grace
Least turned to a child it ouerturned be.
Though to pull back the on-running state of things,
(Gathering corruption as it gathers days)
Unto the form of their first orderings,
Is the best means that dissolution stays,
And to go forward backward, right, men brings,
T'obserue the line from whence they took their ways.
Yet being once gone wide, and the right way
Not level to the times condition:
To alter course may bring men more astray;
And leaving what was known to light on none,
Since every change the reverence does decay
Of that which always should continue one.
For this is that close kept Palladium,
Which once removed brings ruin evermore:
This stird makes men fore-setled to become
Curious to know what was belieu'd before:
Whilst faith disputes that used to be dombe,
And more men strive to talk then to adore.
For never headstrong reformation will
Rest till to the extreme opposite it run,
And ouer-run the mean distrusted still
As being too near of kin, to that men shun:
For good and bad, and all must be one ill,
When once there is another truth begun.
So hard it is an even hand to bear,
In tempering with such maladies as these,
Least that our forward passions lance to near,
And make the cure prove worse then the disease?
For with the worst we will not spare the best,
Because it grows with that which does displease:
And faults are easier looked in, then redrest;
Men running with such eager violence
At the first view of errors fresh in quest,
As they to rid an inconvenience,
Stick not to raise a mischief in the steed,
Which after mocks their weak improuidence:
And therefore o make not your own sides bleed
To prick at others, you that would amend
By pulling down; and think you can proceed
By going back unto the farther end,
Let stand that little Covert left behind,
Where on your succors and respects depend.
And bring not down the prizes of the mind,
With vnder-rating of your selves so base:
You that the mighties doors do crooching find,
To sell your selves to buy a little grace,
Or wait whole months to out-bid Simonie,
For that which being got is not your place:
For if it were, what needed you to buy
What was your due, your thursting shows your shift,
And little worth that seeks injuriously
A worthier from his lawful room to lift?
We cannot say that you were then preferred,
But that your money was, or some worse gift.
O scattring gath'rers that without regard
Of times to come, will to be made, undo:
As if you were the last of men, prepared
To bury in your graves all other to.
Dare you profane that holy portion
Which never sacreligious hands durst do?
Did forme-establishing devotion,
To maintain a respective reverence
Extend her bountiful provision
With such a charitable providence,
For your deforming hands to dissipate
And make Gods due your impious expense?
No marvel then though th'ouer pestred state
Want room for goodness, if our little hold
Be lessned unto such a narrow rate
That reverence cannot sit, sit as it should;
And yet what need we thus for rooms complain,
That shall not want void room if this course hold:
And more then will be filled, for who will strain
To get an empty title to betray
His hopes and travail for an honor vain
And gain a port without support or stay?
What need has envy to malign their state
That will themselves so kind, give it away?
This makes indeed our number pass the rate
Of our provisions; which if dealt aright
Would yield sufficient room t'accommodate
More then we have in places requisite.
The ill disposing only does us set
In disaray, and out of order quite.
Whiles other gifts then of the mind shall get
Under our colors that which is our dues,
And to our travails neither benefit,
Nor grace, nor honor, nor respect accrewes:
This sickness of the states soul, Learning, then
The bodies great distemprature insues.
For if that learnings rooms to learned men
Were as their heritage distributed,
All this disordred thrust would cease, for when
The sit were called, th'vn worthy frustrated
These would b'asham'd to seek, those to b'vnsought
And stay'ng their turn were sure they should be sped.
Then would our drooping Academies brought
Again in heart, regaine that reverend hand
Oslost opinion, and no more be thought
Th'vnnecessarie furnish of the land,
Nor disincourag'd with their small esteem,
Confused, irresolute, and wavering stand.
Caring not to become profound, but seem
Contented with a superficial skill
Which for a slight reward enough they deem,
When the one succeedes as well as the other will,
Seeing shorter ways lead sooner to their end,
And others longer travails thrive so ill.
Then would they only labor to extend
Their now vnsearching spirits beyond these bounds
Of others powers, wherein they must be pend
As if there were besides no other grounds:
And set their bold Plus vltra far without
The pillars of those Axioms age propounds.
Discou'ring daily more, and more about
In that immense and boundless Ocean
Of Natures riches, never yet found out
Nor fore-clos'd, with the wit of any man.
So far beyond the ordinary course
That other vnindustrious ages ran,
That these more curious times they might deuorce
From the opinion they are linckt unto
Of our disable and inactive force,
To show true knowledge can both speak and do:
Armed for the sharp, which in these days they find,
With all provisions that belong thereto.
That their experience may not come behind
The times conceit, but leading in their place
May make men see the weapons of the mind
Are states best strengths, and kingdoms chiefest grace,
And rooms of charge, charged full with worth and praise
Makes majesty appear with her full face,
Shining with all her beams, with all her rays
Vnscanted of her parts, vnshadowed
In any darkened point: which still bewrayes
The waine of power, when powr's unfurnished
And has not all those entire complements
Wherewith the state should for her state be sped.
And though the fortune of some age consents
Unto a thousand errors grossly wrought,
Which flourisht over with their fair events
Have past for current, and good courses thought;
The least whereof in other times again
Most dangerous inconveniences have brought,
Whilst to the times, not to men's wits pertain
The good successes of ill managed deeds,
Though th'ignorant deceived with colors vain
Miss of the causes whence this luck proceeds.
Foreign defects giving home-faults the way,
Make even that weakness sometimes well succeeds.
I grant that some unlettered practique may
(Leaving beyond the Alps faith and respect,
To God and man) with impious cunning sway
The courses fore-begun with like effect,
And without stop maintain the turning on
And have his errors deemd without defect:
But when some powrefull opposition
Shall, with a sound incountring shocke, disioint
The fore-contriued frame, and theroupon
The Experience of the present disappoint,
And other stirring spirits, and other hearts
Built-huge, for action, meeting in a point;
Shall drive the world to sommon all their arts
And all too little for so real might,
When no advantages of weaker parts
Shall bear out shallow councels from the light;
And this sence-opening action (which does hate
Unmanly crast) shall look to have her right.
Who then holds up the glory of the state
(Which lettered arms, and armed letters won)
Who shall be fittest to negotiate
Contemned Justinian, or else Littleton?
When it shall not be held wisdom to be
Privately made, and publicly undone:
But sound deseignes that judgment shall decree
Out of a true discern, of the clear ways
That lie direct, with safe-going equity
Imbroyling not their own and others days.
Extending forth their providence beyond
The circuit of their own particular;
That even the ignorant may understand
How that deceit is but a cauiller,
And true unto it self can never stand,
But still must with her own conclusions war.
Can truth and honesty, wherein consists
The right repose on earth, the surest ground
Of trust, come weaker armed into the lists,
Then sraud or vice, that does it self confound?
Or shall presumption that does what it lists,
Not what it ought, carry her courses sound?
Then what safe place out of confusion
Has plain proceeding honesty to dwell?
What suit of grace, has virtue to put on
If vice shall wear as good, and do as well?
If wrong, if craft, if indiscretion,
Act as fair parts with ends as laudable?
Which all this mighty volume of events
The world, the universal map ofdeedes
Strongly controwles, and proves from all discents,
That the directest courses best succeedes
When craft, wrapped still in many comberments
With all her cunning thriues not, though it speedes.
For should not grave and learned experience
That looks with the eyes of all the world beside,
And with all ages holds intelligence,
Go safer then deceit without a guide?
Which in the bypath of her diffidence
Crossing the ways of Right, still runs more wide:
Who will not grant? and therefore this observe,
No state stands sure but on the grounds of Right,
Of virtue, knowledge, judgment to preserve,
And all the powers of learnings requisite;
Though other shifts a present turn may serve,
Yet in the trial they will wey too light.
And do not thou contemn this swelling tide
And stream of words that now does rise so hie
Above the usual banks, and spreads so wide
Over the borders of antiquity:
Which I confess comes ever amplifide
With th'abounding humors that do multiply:
And is with that same hand of happiness
Enlarged as vices are out of their bands;
Yet so, as if let out but to redress
And calm, and sway the affections it commands:
Which as it stirs, it does again repress
And brings in, th'outgone malice that with stands.
Power above powers, O heavenly Eloquence,
That with the strong reine of commanding words,
Do manage, guide, and master th'eminence
Of men's affections, more then all their swords:
Shall we not offer to thy excellence
The richest treasure that our wit affoords?
Thou that can do much more with one poor pen
Then all the powers of princes can effect:
And draw, divert, dispose, and fashion men
Better then force or rigor can direct:
Should we this ornament of glory then
As th'vnmateriall fruits of shades, neglect?
Or should we careless come behind the rest
In power of words, that go before in worth,
When as our accents equal to the best
Is able greater wonders to bring forth:
When all that ever hotter spirits expressed
Comes bettered by the patience of the North?
And who in time knows whither we may vent
The treasure of our tongue, to what strange shores
This gain of our best glory shall be sent,
T'inrich unknowing Nations with our stores?
What worlds in th'yet unformed Occident
May come refined with th'accents that are ours?
Or who can tell for what great work in hand
The greatness of our style is now ordained?
What powers it shall bring in, what spirits command,
What thoughts let out, what humors keep restrained
What mischief it may powrefully withstand,
And what fair ends may thereby be attained:
And as for Poesy (mother of this force)
That breeds, brings forth, and nourishes this might,
Teaching it in a loose, yet measured course,
With comely motions how to go upright:
And fostring it with bountiful discourse
Adorns it thus in fashions of delight,
What should I say? since it is well approved
The speech of heaven, with who^ they have co^merce
That only seem out of themselves removed,
And do withmore then humane skils converse:
Those numbers where with heaven and earth are'mou'd,
Show, weakness speaks in prose, but power in verse.
Where in thou like wise seem to allow
That th'acts of worthy men should be preserved;
As in the holiest tombs we can bestow
Upon their glory that have well deserved,
Wherein thou do no other virtue show
Then what most barbrous countries have observed:
When all the happiest nations hitherto
Did with no lesser glory speak then do.
Now to what else thy malice shall object,
For schools, and Arts, and their necessity:
When from my Lord, whose judgment must direct
And form, and fashion my ability
I shall have got more strength: thou shall expect
Out of my better leisure, my reply.
And if herein the curious sort shall deem
My will was carried far beyond my force,
And that it is a thing does ill beseem
The function of a Poem, to discourse:
Thy learned judgment which I most esteem
(Worthy Fulke Greuil) must defend this course.
By whose mild grace, and gentle hand at first
My Infant Muse was brought in open sight
From out the darkness wherein it was nursed,
And made to be partaker of the light;
Which peradventure never else had durst
T'appeare in place, but had been smothered quite.
And now herein encouraged by thy praise,
Is made so bold and ventrous to attempt
Beyond example, and to try those ways,
That malice from our forces thinks exempt:
To see if we our wronged lines could raise
Above the reach of lightness and contempt.

FINIS.
A LETTER FROM OCTAVIA TO MARCUS ANTONIUS.

SAMVEL DANIEL.

AT LONDON Printed by P. Short for Simon Waterson. 1599.

To the right Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret Countess
of Cumberland.
Although the meaner fort (whose thoughts are placed
As in another region, far below
The Sphere of greatness) cannot rightly taste
What touch it has, nor right her passions know:
Yet have there aduentur'd to bestow
Words upon grief, as my griefs comprehend,
And made this great afflicted Lady show
Out of my feelings, what she might have pend.
And here the same, I bring forth, to attend
Upon thy reverent name, to live with thee
Most virtuous Lady, that vouch saf'st to lend
Ear to my notes, and comfort unto me,
That one day may thine own fair virtues spread
Be'ing secretary now, but to the dead.
The Argument.
Upon the second agreement (the first being broken through jealousy of a
disproportion of eminency) between the Triumuiri Octauius Caesar, Marcus
Antonius, and Lepidus: Octauia the sister of Octauius Caesar, was married to
Antonius, as a link to combine that which never yet, the greatest strength of
nature, or any power of nearest respect could long hold together, who made
but the instrument of others ends, and delivered up as an Ostage to serve the
opportunity of advantages, met not with that integrity she brought: but as
highly preferred to affliction encountered with all the greeuances that beat
upon the misery of greatness, exposed tossed and betwixt the diverse tending
humors of unquiet parties. For Antonie having yet upon him the letters of
Egypt, laid on by the power of a most incomparable beauty, could admit no
new laws into the state of his affection, or dispose of himself being not
himself, but as having his heart turned Eastwarde whither the point of his
desires were directed, touchte with the strongest allurements that ambition,
and a licencious soueraintie could draw a man unto: could not truly descend to
the private love of a civil nurtred Matrone, whose entertainment bounded with
modesty and the nature of her education, knew not to cloth her affections in
any other colors then the plain habit of truth: wherein she ever suited alher
actions, and used all her best ornaments of honesty, to win the good liking of
him that held her but as a Curtain drawn between him and Octauius to shadow
his other purposes withal; which the sharp sight of an equally ie alous
ambition could soon pierce into, and as easily look through and over blood and
nature as he to abuse it: And therefore to prevent his aspiring, he arms his
forces either to reduce Antonic to the rank of his estate, or else to disranke
him out of state and al. When Octauia by the imploiment of Antonie (as being
not yet ready to put his fortune to her trial) throws her self, great with
child, and as big with sorrow, into the travail of a most labor some
reconciliation: taking her journey from the farthest part of Greece to find
Octauius, with whom her care and tears were so good agents that they effected
their commission beyond all expectation: and for that time quite disarmed their
wrath, which yet long could not hold so. For Antonius falling into the relaps
of his former disease, watching his opportunity got over again into Egypt,
where he so forgot himself, that he quite put off his own nature, and wholely
became a pray to his pleasures, as if he had wound himself out of the respect
of Country, blood and alltance, which gave to Octauia the cause of much
affliction, and to me the Argument of this letter.

A Letter sent from Octauia to her husband Marcus Antonius into Egypt.
1
To thee (yet dear) though most disloiall Lord,
Whom impious love keeps in a barbarous land,
Thy wronged wife Octauia sends word
Of th'vnkind wounds received by thy hand,
Grant Antony, o let thine eyes asford
But to permit thy heart to understand
The hurt thou do, and do but read her tears
That still is thine though thou will not be hers.
2
Although perhaps, these my complaints may come
Wilst thou in the arms of that incestious Queen
The stain of Egypt, and the shame of Rome
Shall dallying sit, and blush to have them seen:
Whilst proud disdainful she, gessing from whom
The message came, and what the cause has been,
Will skorning say, faith, this comes from your Dear,
Now sir you must be shent for staying here.
3
From her indeed it comes, delitious dame,
(Thou royal Concubine, and Queen of lust)
Whose Arms yet pure, whose breasts are void of blame,
And whose most lawful flame proves thine unjust:
It Is she that sendes the message of thy shame,
And his untruth that has betrayed her trust:
Pardon, dear Lord, from her these sorrows are
Whose bed bringes neither infamy nor war.
4
And therefore hear her words, that too too much
Has heard the wrongs committed by thy shame;
Although at first my trust in thee was such
As it held out against the strongest fame;
My heart would never let in once a touch
Of least belief, till all confirmd the same:
That I was almost last that would believe
Because I knew me first that most must grieve.
5
How often have poor abused I took part
With falsehood only for to make thee true?
How often have I argued against my heart
Not suffering it to know that which it knew?
And for I would not have thee what thou art
I made my self, unto my self untrue:
So much my love labourd against thy Sin
To shut out fear which yet kept fear within:
6
For I could never think the aspiring mind
Of worthy and victorious Antonie,
Could be by such a Siren so declind,
As to be traynd a pray to Luxury:
I could not think my Lord would be f'vnkind
As to despise his Children, Rome and me:
But o how soon are they deceiud that trust
And more their shame, that will be so unjust.
7
But now that certain fame has open laid
Thy new relaps, and strange revolt from me,
Truth has quite beaten all my hopes away
And made the passage of my sorrows free:
For now poor heart, there is nothing in the way
Remains to stand betwixt despair and thee;
All is thrown down, there comes no succors new
It is most true, my Lord is most untrue.
8
And now I may with shame enough pull in
The colors Iaduanced in his grace
For that subduing power, that him did win
Has lost me too, the honor of my face:
Yet why should I bearing no part of sin
Bear such a mighty part of his disgrace?
Yes though it be not mine, it is of mine;
And his renown being clips'd, mine cannot shine.
9
Which makes me as I do, hide from the eye
Of the misiudging vulgar that will deem,
That sure there was in me some reason why
Which made thee thus, my bed to disesteeme:
So that alas poor undeserving I
A cause of thy unclean deserts shall seem,
Though Just takes never joy in what is due,
But still leaves known delights to seek out new.
10
And yet my brother Caesar labored
To have me leave thy house, and live more free,
But God forbid, Octauia should be led
To leave to live inthine, though left by thee
The pledges here of thy forsaken bed,
Are still the objects that remember me
What Antony was once, although false now,
And is my Lord, though he neglect his vow.
11
These walls that here do keep me out of sight
Shall keep me all unspotted unto thee,
And testify that I will do thee right,
I Will never stain thy house, though thou shame me:
The now sad Chamber of my once delight
Shall be the temple of my piety
Sacred unto the faith I reverence,
Where I will pay my tears for thy offense.
12
Although my youth, thy absence, and this wrong
Might draw my blood to forfeit unto shame,
Nor need I frustrate my delights so long
That have such means to carry so the same,
Since that the face of greatness is so strong
As it dissolues suspect, and bears out blame,
Having all secret helps that long thereto
That seldom wants there ought but will to do:
13
Which yet to do, ere lust this heart shall frame
Earth swallow me alive, hell rap me hence:
Shall I because despisd contemn my shame,
And ad disgrace to others impudence?
What can my power but give more power to fame?
Greatness must make it great incontinence;
Chambers are false, the bed and all will tell,
No door keeps in their shame that do not well.
14
Has greatness ought peculiar else alone
But to stand fair and bright above the base?
What does divide the cottage from the throne,
If vice shall lay both level with disgrace?
For if uncleanness make them but all one
What privilege has honor by his place?
What though our sins go brave and better clad,
They are as those in rags as base as bad.
15
I know not how, but wrongfullie I know
Has undiscerning custom placed our kind
Under desert, and set us far below
The reputation to our sex assigned;
Charging our wrong reputed weakness, how
We are unconstant, fickle, false, unkind:
And though our life with thousand proofs shows no
Yet since strength says it, weakness must be so.
16
Unequal partage to b'allow'd no share
Of power to do of life's best benefit;
But stand as if we interdicted were
Of virtue, action, liberty and might:
Must you have all, and not vouchsafe to spare
Our weakness any intrest of delight?
Is there no portion left for us at all,
But sufferance, sorrow, ignorance and thrall?
17
Thrice happy you in whom it is no fault,
To know, to speak, to do, and to be wife:
Whose words have credit, and whose deeds though naugh
Must yet be made to seem far otherwise:
You can be only heard whilst we are taught
To hold our peace, and not to exercise
The powers of our best parts, because your parts
Have with our fredome robbed us of our hearts.
18
We in this prison of our selves confined
Must here shut up with our own passions live
Turned in upon us, and denied to find
The vent of outward means that might relieve:
That they alone must take up all our mind;
And no room left us, but to think and grieve,
Yet often our narrowed thoughts look more direct
Then your loose wisdoms borne with wild neglect.
19
For should we to (as God forbid we should)
Carry no better hand on our desires
Then your strength does; what interest could
Our wronged patience pay you for your hires?
What mixture of strange generations would
Succeed the fortunes of uncertain Sires?
What foul confusion in your blood and race
To your immortal shame, and our disgrace?
20
What? are there bars for us, no bounds for you?
Must leuitie stand sure, though firmnes fall?
And are you priuiledg'd to be untrue,
And we no grant to be dispensed withal?
Must we inviolable keep your due,
Both to your love, and to your falsehood thrall?
Whilst you have stretched your lust unto your will
As if your strength were licensed to do ill.
21
O if you be more strong then be more just,
Clear this suspicion, make not the world to doubt
Whether in strong, or weak be better trust,
Iffrailtie, or else valor be more stout:
And if we have shut in our hearts from lust
Let not your bad example let them out,
Think that there is like feeling in our blood,
If you will have us good, be you then good.
22
Is it that love does take no true delight
In what it has, but still in what it would,
Which draws you on to do us this unright,
Whilst fear in us of loosing what we hold
Keeps us in still to you, that set us light,
So that what you unties, does us infold?
Then love it is thou that do confound us so
To make our truth the occasion of our woe.
23
Distressed woman kind that either must
For loving loose your loves, or get neglect;
Whilst wantons are more cared for, then the just
And falsehood cheerisht, faith without respect:
Better she fares in whom is lesser trust,
And more is loved that is in more suspect.
Which (pardon me) shows no great strength of mind
To be most theirs, that use you most unkind.
24
Yet well it fits for that sin ever must
Be tortured with the rack of his own frame,
For he that holds no faith shall find no trust,
But sowing wrong is sure to reap the same:
How can he look to have his measure just
That fills deceit, and reckons not of shame,
And being not pleased with what he has in lot
Shall ever pine for that which he has not?
25
Yet if thou could not love, thou might have seemed,
Though to have seemed had like wise been unjust:
Yet so much are lean shows of us esteemed
That often they feed, though not suffice our trust:
Because our nature grieueth to be deemed
To be so wronged, although we be and must.
And it is some ease yet to be kindly used
In outward show, though secretly abused.
26
But woe to her, that both in show despised,
And in effect disgraced, and left forlorn,
For whom no comforts are to be devised,
Nor no new hopes can evermore be borne:
O Antony, could it not have suffiz'd
That I was thine, but must be made her skorne
That enuies all our blood, and does divide
Thee from thy self, only to serve her pride?
27
What fault have I committed that should make
So great dislike of me and of my love?
Or does thy fault but an occasion take
For to dislike what most does it reprove?
Because the conscience gladly would mistake
Her own misdeedes which she would feign remove,
And they that are unwilling to amend
Will take offense because they will offend.
28
Or having run beyond all pardon quite
They fly and join with sin as wholly his,
Making it now their side, their part, their right,
And to turn back would show to have done amiss:
For now they think not to be opposite
To what obraides their fault, were wickedness:
So much does folly thrust them into blame
That even to leave of shame, they count it shame.
29
Which do not thou, dear Lord, for I do not
Pursue thy fault, but sue for thy return
Back to thy self; whom thou have both forgot
With me, poor me, that does not spite but mourn:
And if thou could as well amend thy blot
As I forgive, these plaints had been forborne:
And thou should be the same unto my heart
Which once thou were, not that which now thou art.
30
Though deep does sit the hard recovering smart
Of that last wound (which God grant be the last)
And more does touch that tender feeling part
Of my sad soul, then all th'vnkindnes past:
And Antony I appeal to thine own heart,
(If th'hart which once was thine thou yet still have)
To judge if ever woman that did live
Had iuster cause, then wretched I, to grieve.
31
For coming unto Athens as I did,
Weary and weak with toil, and all distressed,
After I had with sorrow compassed
A hard consent, to grant me that request:
And how my travail was considered
And all my care, and cost, thy self knows best:
That would not move one foot from Just for me
That had left all was dear to come to thee!
32
For first what great a do had I to win
My' offended brother Caesar's backward will?
And praid, and wept, and cride to stay the sin
Of civil rancorrising twixt you still:
For in what case shall wretched I be in,
Set betwixt both to share with both your ill?
My blood said I with either of you goes,
Who ever win, I shall be sure to lose.
33
For what shame should such mighty persons get
For two weak women's cause to disagree?
Nay what shall I that shall be deemed to set
Th'inkindled fire, seeming inflamed for me?
O if I be the motive of this heat
Let these vnguiltie hands the quenchers be,
And let me trudge to mediate an accord
The Agent twixt my brother and my Lord.
34
With prayers, vows and tears, with urging hard
Iwrung from him a slender grant at last,
And with the rich provisions I prepared
For thy (intended Parthian war) made haste
Weighing not how my poor weak body fared,
But all the tedious difficulties past:
And came to Athens; whence I Niger sent
To show thee of my coming and intent.
35
Where of when he had made relation:
I was commanded to approach no near;
Then sent I back to know what should be done
With th'horse, and men, and money I had there:
Where at perhaps when some remorse begun
To touch thy soul, to think yet what we were,
Th'Inchantres straight steps twixt thy heart and thee
And intercepts all thoughts that came of me.
36
She arms her tears, the ingins of deceit
And all her battery, to oppose my love:
And bring thy coming grace to a retraite
The power of all her subtlety to prove:
Now pale and faint she languishes, and straight
Seems in a sound, unable more to move:
Whilst her instructed followers plie thine ears
With forged passions, mixed with fained tears.
37
Hard-harted lord, say they, how can thou see
This mighty Queen a creature so divine,
Lie thus distressed, and languishing for thee
And only wretched but for being thine?
Whilst base Octauia must entitled be
Thy wife, and she esteemed thy concubine:
Advance thy heart, raise it unto his right
And let a scepter baser passions quit.
38
Thus they assail thy natures weakest side
And work upon the advantage of thy mind,
Knowing where judgment stood least fortified
And how t'incounter folly in her kind:
But yet the while O what do thou abide,
Who in thy self such wrestling thoughts do find?
In what confused case is thy soul in
Rackt betwixt pity, sorrow, shame and sin?
39
I cannot tell but sure I dare believe
My trauails needs must some compassion move:
For no such lock to blood could nature give
To shut out pity, though it shut out love:
Conscience must leave a little way to grieve
To let in horror coming to reprove,
The guilt of thy offense that caused the same,
For deepest wounds the hand, of our own shame.
40
Never have unjust pleasures been compleet
In joys entire, but still fear kept the door
And held back something from that full of sweet
To intersowre unsure delights the more:
For never did all circumstances meet
With those desires which were co^ceiu'd before
Something must still be left to check our sin,
And give a touch of what should not have bin.
41
Wretched mankind, wherefore has nature made
The lawful, vndelightfull, th'vniust shame?
As if our pleasure only were forbade,
But to give fire to lust, t'ad greater flame;
Or else but as ordained more to lade
Our heart with passions to confound the fa^me,
Which though it be, yet ad not worse to ill,
Do, as the best men do, bound thine own will.
42
Redeem thy self, and now at length make peace
With thy divided heart oppressed with toil:
Break up this war, this breast dissension cease,
Thy passions to thy passions reconcile;
I do not only seek my good to increase,
But thine own ease, and liberty the while:
Thee in the circuit of thy self confine,
And be thine own, and then thou will be mine.
43
I know my pitied love, does aggrauate
Envy and wrath for these wrongs offered:
And that my sufferings add with my estate
Coals in thy bosom, hatred on thy head:
Yet is not that, my fault, but my hard fate,
Who rather wish to have been unpitied
Of all but thee, then that my love should be
Hurtful to him that is so dear to me.
44
Cannot the busy world let me alone
To bear alone the burden of my grief,
But they must intermeddle with my moan
And seek to offend me with unsought reliese?
Whilst my afflictions labored to move none
But only thee; must pity play the thief,
To steal so many hearts to hurt my heart,
And move apart against my dearest part?
45
Yet all this shall not prejudice my Lord
If yet he will but make return at last,
His sight shall raze out of the sad record
Of my inrowled grief all that is past;
And I will not so much as once afford
Place for a thought to think I was disgrac'st:
And pity shall bring back again with me
The Offended hearts that have forsaken thee.
46
And therefore come deer lord, least longer stay
Do arm against thee all the powers of spite,
And thou be made at last the woeful pray
Of full inkindled wrath, and ruined quite:
But what presaging thought of blood does stay
My trembling hand, and does my soul affright?
What horror do I see, prepared to attend
The Event of this? what end unless thou end?
47
With what strange forms and shadows ominous
Did my last sleep, my grieved soul intertaine?
I dreamt, yet o, dreams are but frivolous,
And yet i will tell it, and God grant it vain.
Me thought a mighty Hippopotamus A Sea Horse.

From Nilus floting, thrusts into the maine,
Upon whose back a wanton Mermaide fate,
As if she ruld his course and steerd his fate.
48
With whom t'incounter, forth another makes,
Alike in kind, of strength and power as good:
At whose ingrappling Neptunes mantle takes
A purple color did with streams of blood,
Whereat, this looker on, amazed forsakes
Her Champion there, who yet the better stood;
But se'ing her gone straight after her he hies
As if his heart and strength Iaie in her eyes.
49
On follows wrath upon disgrace and fear,
Where of the event forsook me with the night,
But my waked cares, gave me, these shadows were
Drawn but from darkness to instruct the light,
These secret figures, natures message bear
Of coming woes, were they desciphered right;
But if as clouds of sleep thou shall them take,
Yet credit wrath and spite that are awake.
50
Prevent great spirit the tempests that begin,
If lust and thy ambition have lest way.
But to look out, and have not shut all in,
To stop thy judgment from a true suruay
Of thy estate; and let thy heart within
Consider in what danger thou do lay
Thy life and mine, to leave the good thou have,
To follow hopes with shadows ouercast.
51
Come, come away from wrong, from craft, from toil,
Possess thine own with right, with truth, with peace;
Break from these snares, thy judgment vnbeguile,
Free thine own torment, and my grief release.
But whither am I carried all this while
Beyond my scope, and know not when to cease?
Words still with my increasing sorrows grow;
I know to have said too much, but not ynow.
Wherefore no more but only I commend
To thee the heart that is thine, and so I end.
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF CLEOPATRA.

Aetas prima canat ueneres, postrema tumultus.

SAM. DANYELL:

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Simon Waterson. 1599.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady Mary, Countess of PEMBROOKE.
Lo here the work the which she did impose,
Who only does predominate my Muse:
The star of wonder, which my labors chose
To guide their way in all the course I use.
She, whose clear brightness does alone infuse
Strength to my thoughts, and makes me what I am;
Called up my spirits from out their low repose,
To sing of state, and tragic notes to frame.
I, who (contented with an humble song,)
Made music to my self that pleased me best,
And only told of DELIA, and her wrong,
And praised her eyes, and plaind mine own unrest:
(A text from whence my Muse had not degrest)
Madam, had not thy well graced Anthony,
(who all alone, having remained long,)
Required his Cleopatras company.
Who if she here do so appear in act,
That for his Queen and Love he scarce will know her,
Finding how much she of her self has lackt,
And mist that glory wherein I should show her,
In majesty debased, in courage lower;
Yet lightning thou by thy sweet favoring eyes
My dark defects, which from her spirit detract,
He yet may guess it is she; which will suffice.
And I hereafter in another kind,
More fitting to the nature of my vain,
May (peradventure) better please thy mind,
And higher notes in sweeter music strain:
Seeing that thou so graciously do daine,
To countenance my song and cherish me,
I must so work posterity may find
How much I did contend to honor thee.
Now when so many pens (like Spears) are charged,
To chase away this tyrant of the North:
Gross Barbarism, whose power grown far enlarged,
Was lately by thy valiant brothers worth
First found, encountered, and provoked forth:
Whose onset made the rest audacious,
Whereby they like wise have so well discharged.
Upon that hideous beast incroching thus.
And now must I with that poor strength I have,
Resist so foul a foe in what I may:
And arm against oblivion and the grave,
That else in darkness carries all away,
And makes of all our honors but a pray.
So that if by my pen procure I shall
But to defend me, and my name to save,
Then though I die, I cannot yet die all;
But still the better part of me will live,
Decked and adorned with thy sacred name,
Although thy self do far more glory give
Unto thy self, then I can by the same.
Who do with thine own hand a Bulwark frame
Against these monsters, (enemies of honor)
Which euer-more shall so defend thy Fame,
That Time nor they, shall never pray upon her.
Those Hymns that thou do consecrate to heaven,
Which Isreal's Singer to his God did frame:
Unto thy voice eternity has given,
And makes thee decre to him from whence they came.
In them must rest thy ever reverent name,
So long as Syons God remaineth-honoured;
And till confusion has all zeal be-reauen,
And murdered Faith, and Temples ruined.
By this (great Lady,) thou must then be known,
When Wilton lies low leuell'd with the ground:
And this is that which thou may call thine own,
Which sacrilegious time can not confound;
Here thou suruiu'st thy self, here thou art found
Of late succeeding ages, fresh in fame:
This monument cannot be ouer-throwne,
Where, in eternal Brass remains thy Name.
O that the Ocean did not bound our style
Within these strict and narrow limits so:
But that the melody of our sweet He,
Might now be heard to Tyber, Arne, and Po:
That they might know how far Thames does out-go
The Music of declined Italy:
And listening to our songs another while,
Might learn of thee their notes to purify.
O why may not some after-comming hand,
Unlock these limits, open our confines:
And break asunder this imprisoning band,
T enlarge our spirits, and publish our deseignes;
Planting our roses on the Apenines?
And teach to Rhene, to Loyre, and Rhodanus,
Our accents, and the wonders of our Land,
That they might all admire and honor us.
Whereby great Sydney and our Spencer might,
With those Po-singers being equalled,
Enchaunt the world with such a sweet delight,
That their eternal songs (for ever read,)
May show what great Elizas reign has bred.
What Music in the kingdom of her peace
Has now been made to her, and by her might,
Whereby her glorious fame shall never cease.
But if that fortune does deny us this,
Then Neptune, lock up with thy Ocean key
This treasure to our selves, and let them miss
Of so sweet riches: as unworthy they
To taste the great delights that we enjoy.
And let our harmony so pleasing grown,
Content our selves, whose error ever is,
Strange notes to like, and disesteeme our own.
But, whither do my vows transport me now,
Without the compass of my course inioind?
Alas, what honor can a voice so low
As this of mine, expect hereby to find?
But, (Madam,) this does animate my mind,
That favored by the worthies of our Land,
My lines are liked; the which may make me grow,
In time to take a greater task in hand.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the death of Antonius, Cleopatra (living still in the Monument she had
caused to be built,) could not by any means be drawn forth, although
Octauius Caesar very earnestly labored it: and sent Proculcius to use all
diligence to bring her unto him: For that he thought it would be a great
Ornament to his tryumphes, to get her alive to Rome. But never would she put
her self into the hands of Proculeius, although on a time he found the
means, (by a window that was at the top of the Monument,) to come down unto
her: where he persuaded her (all he might) to yield her self to Caesar's
mercy. Which she, (to be rid of him,) cunningly seemed to grant unto.
After that, Octauius in person went to visit her, to whom she excused her
offense, laying all the fault upon the greatness, and fear she had of
Antonius, and withal, seemed very tractable, and willing to be disposed of by
him.

VVhereupon Octauius, (thinking himself sure) resolved presently to send her
away to Rome. Whereof, Dolabella a favorite of Caesar's, (and one that was
grown into some good liking of her,) having certified her, she makes her
humble petition to Caesar, that he would suffer her to sacrifice to the ghost
of Antonius: which being granted her, she was brought unto his Sepulcher,
where after her rytes performed, she returned to the Monument, and there dined
with great magnificence. And in dinner time, came there one in the habit of a
Countryman, with a Basket of Figs unto her who (unsuspected) was suffered
to carry them in. And in that Basket (among the Figs) were conveyed the
Aspicks wherewith she did herself to death. Dinner being ended, she
dispatched Letters to Caesar, containing great lamentations: with an earnest
supplication, that she might be entombed with Antonius. Whereupon Caesar
knowing what she intended, sent presently with all speed, Messengers to have
prevented her death, which not withstanding, before they came was dispatched.

Caesario her son, which she had by Julius Caesar, (conuaied before unto
India, out of the danger of the wars,) was about the same time of her death,
murdered at Rhodes: trained thither by the falshoode of his Tutor, corrupted
by Caesar. And so hereby, came the race of the Ptolomies to be wholly extinct,
and the flourishing rich kingdom of Egypt utterly ouer-throwne and subdued.

The Scaene supposed Alexandria.
THE ACTORS.
Cleopatra. Octauius Caesar. Proculeius. Dolabella. Titius, servant to
Dolebella. Arius, Philosopher. Philostratus, Philosopher. Seleucus, secretary
to Cleopatra. Rodon, Tutor to Caesario. Nuntius. The Chorus, all Egyptians.

THE TRAGEDY OF CLEOPATRA.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
CLEOPATRA. YET do I live, and yet does breath extend
My life beyond my life, nor can my grave
Shut up my griefs, to make my end my end?
Will yet confusion have more then I have?
Is the honor, wonder, glory, pomp and all
Of Cleopatra dead, and she not dead?
Have I out-liu'd my self, and seen the fall
Of all upon me, and not ruined?
Can yet these eyes endure the ghastly look
Of desolations dark and ougly face,
Wont but on fortunes fairest side to look,
Where naught was but applause, but smiles, and grace?
Whiles on his shoulders all my rest relide
On whom the burden of m'ambition lay,
My Atlas, and supporter of my pride
That did the world of all my glory sway,
Who now thrown down, disgraced, confounded lies
Crushed with the weight of shame and infamy,
Following the unlucky party of my eyes,
The trains of lust and imbecilitie,
Whereby my dissolution is become
The grave of Egypt and the wrack of all;
My vnforeseeing weakness must intoome
My Countries fame and glory with my fall.
Now who would think that I were she who late
With all the ornaments on earth enriched,
Enuiron'd with delights, compast with state,
Glittering in pomp that hearts and eyes bewitched;
Should chus distressed, cast down from of that height
Leuell'd with low disgraced calamity,
Under the weight of such affliction sigh,
Reduced unto the extremest misery?
Am I the woman whose inuentiue pride,
Adorned like Isis, skornd mortality?
Is It I would have my frailty so belide
That flattery could persuade I was notd?
Well now I see they but delude that praise us,
Greatness is mocked, prosperity betraies us.
And we are but our selves, although this clowd
Of interposed smokes make us seem more:
These spreading parts of pomp whereof we are proved,
Are not our parts, but parts of others store:
Witness these gallant fortune-following trains,
These Summer Swallows of felicity
Gone with the heat, of all see what remains,
This monument, two maids, and wretched I.
And I t'adorne their triumphs am reserved.
A captive, kept to honor others spoils,
Whom Caesar labors so to have preserved,
And seeks to entertain my life with wiles.
But Caesar, it is more then thou can do,
Promise, flatter, threaten extremity,
Employ thy wits and all thy force thereto,
I have both hands, and will, and I can die.
Though thou of both my country and my crown,
Of power, of means and al do quite bereave me;
Though thou have wholly Egypt made thine own,
Yet have thou left me that which will deceive thee.
That courage with my blood and birth innated,
Admired of all the earth as thou art now,
Can never be so abiectly abated
To be thy Slave that rull'd as good as thou.
Think Caesar I that lived and reigned a Queen,
Do skorne to buy my life at such a rate,
That I should under neath my self be seen,
Basely enduring to survive my state:
That Rome should see my scepter-bearing hands
Behind me bound, and glory in my tears,
That I should pass whereas Octauia stands,
To view my misery that purchased hers.
No, I disdain that head which wore a crown
Should stoop to take up that which others give;
I must not be, unless I be mine own.
It Is sweet to die when we are forced to live,
Nor had I staide behind my self this space,
Nor paid such intrest for this borrowed breath,
But that hereby I seek to purchase grace
For my distressed seed after my death.
It Is that which does my dearest blood control,
That Is it alas detaines me from my tomb,
VVhiles nature brings to contradict my soul
The argument of mine unhappy womb.
You luckles issue of an woeful mother,
The wretched pledges of a wanton bed,
You Kings designed, must subjects live to other;
Or else, I fear, scarce live, when I am dead.
It is for you I temporize with Caesar,
And stay this while to mediate your saftie:
For you I feign content and sooth his pleasure,
Calamity herein has made me crafty.
But this is but to try what may be done,
For come what will, this stands, I must die free,
And die my self vncaptiu'd, and vnwon.
Blood, Children, Nature, all must pardon me.
My soul yields honor up the victory,
And I must be a Queen, forget a mother,
Though mother would I be, were I not I;
And Queen would not be now, could I be other.
But what know I if the heavens have de cred,
And that the sins of Egypt have deserved
The Ptolomies should fail and none succeed,
And that my weakness was thereto reserved
That I should bring confusion to my state,
And fill the measure of iniquity,
Luxuriousness in me should raise the rate
Of loose and ill-dispensed liberty.
If it be so, then what need these delays?
Since I was made the means of misery:
Why should I strive but to make death my praise,
That had my life but for my infamy?
And let me write in letters of my blood
A fit memorial for the times to come,
To be example to such Princes good
As please themselves and care not what become.
And Antony, because the world takes note
That my defects have only ruined thee:
And my ambitious practices are thought
The motive and the cause of all to be:
Though God thou know, how just this stain is laid
Upon my soul, whom ill success makes ill:
Yet since condemned misfortune has no aid
Against proud luck that argues what it will,
I have no means to vndeceiue their minds,
But to bring in the witness of my blood,
To testify the faith and love that binds
My equal shame, to fall with whom I stood.
Defects I grant I had, but this was worst,
That being the first to fall I died not first.
Though I perhaps could lighten mine own side
With some excuse of my constrained case
Drawn down with power: but that were to divide
My shame: to stand alone in my disgrace.
To clear me so, would show m'affections naught,
And make th'excuse more heinous then the fault.
Since if I should our errors disunite,
I should confound afflictions only rest,
That from stearn death even steals a sad delight
To die with friends or with the like distressed;
And since we took of either such firm hold
In th'ouerwhelming seas of fortune cast,
What power should be of power to reunfold
The arms of our affections locked so fast,
For grapling in the ocean of our pride,
We sunk each others greatness both together;
And both made shipwreck of our fame beside,
Both wrought a like destruction unto either:
And therefore I am bound to sacrifice
To death and thee, the life that does reprove me:
Our like distress I feel does simpathize,
And even affliction makes me truly love thee.
Which Antony, I must confess my fault
I never did sincerely until now:
Now I protest I do, now am I taught
In death to love, in life that knew not how.
For whilst my glory in her greatness stood,
And that I saw my state and knew my beauty;
Saw how the world admired me, how they wooed,
I then thought all men must love me of duty;
And I love none: for my lascivious Court,
Fertile in ever fresh and new-choise pleasure,
Affoorded me of so bountiful disport
That I to stay on love had never leisure:
My vagabond desires no limits found,
For lust is endless, pleasure has no bound.
Thou coming from the strictnes of thy City,
And never this loose pomp of monarchs learnest,
Inu'rd to wars, in women's wiles vnwitty,
Whilst others faynd, thou fell'st to love in earnest;
Not knowing how we like them best that houer,
And make least reckning of a doting lover.
And yet thou came but in my beauties waine,
When new appearing wrinkles of declining
Wrought with the hand of years, seemed to detain
My graces light, as now but dimly shining
Even in the confines of mine age, when I
Failing of what I was, and was but thus;
When such as we do deem in jealousy
That men love for themselves and not for us,
Then and but thus, thou did love most sincerely
O Antony, that best deseru'st it better,
This Autumn of my beauty bought so dearly,
For which in more then death, I stand thy debtor,
Which I will pay thee with so true a mind,
(Casting up all these deep accoumpts of mine)
That both our souls, and all the world shall find
All recknings cleared, betwixt my love and thine.
But to the end I may prevent proud Caesar,
Who does so eagerly my life importune,
I must prevail me of this little leisure,
Seeming to suit my mind unto my fortune;
Thereby with more conuenience to provide
For what my death and honor best shall fit:
An yielding base content must wary hide
My last dissigne till I accomplish it,
That hereby yet the world shall see that I,
Although unwise to live had wit to die.
Exit.
CHORUS, Behold what furies still
Torment their tortured breast,
Who by their doing ill,
Have wrought the worlds unrest.
Which when being most distressed,
Yet more to vex their sp'rite,
The hidious face of sin,
(In forms they must detest)
Stands ever in their sight.
Their conscience still within
The Eternal larum is
That euer-barking dog that calls upon their miss.
No means at all to hide
Man from himself can find:
No way to start aside
Out from the hell of mind.
But in himself confined,
He still sees sin before:
And winged-footed pain,
That swiftly comes behind,
The which is euer-more,
The sure and certain gain
Impiety does get,
And wanton loose respect, that does it self forget.
And Cleopatra now,
Well sees the dangerous way
She took, and cared not how,
Which led her to decay.
And likewise makes us pay
For her disordred lust,
The interest of our blood:
Or live a servile pray,
Under a hand unjust,
As others shall think good.
This has her riot wunne,
And thus she has her state, herself and us vndunne.
Now every mouth can tell,
What close was muttered:
How that she did not well,
To take the course she did.
For now is nothing hid,
Of what fear did restrain.
No secret closely done,
But now is uttered.
The text is made most plain
That flattry glos'd upon,
The bed of sin revealed
And all the luxury that shame would have concealed.
The scene is broken down,
And all vncou'red lies,
The purple actors known
Scarce man, whom men despise.
The complots of the wise,
Prove imperfections smoke:
And all what wonder gave
To pleasure-gazing eyes,
Lies scattred, dashed, all broke.
Thus much beguiled have
Poor inconsiderate wights,
These moment arie pleasures, fugitive delights.

ACTVS SECVNDVS:
CAESAR. PROCVLEIVS. KIngdoms I see we win, we conquer Climates,
Yet cannot vanquish hearts, nor force obedience,
Affections kept in close-concealed limits,
Stand far without the reach of sword or violence.
Who forced do pay us duty, pay not love:
Free is the heart, the temple of the mind,
The Sanctuary sacred from above,
Where nature keeps the keys that loose and bind.
No mortal hand force open can that door,
So close shut up, and locked to all mankind:
I see men's bodies only ours, no more,
The rest, another right, that rules the mind.
Behold, my forces vanquished have this Land,
Subdued that strong Competitor of mine:
All Egypt yields to my all-conqu'ring hand,
And all their treasure and themselves resign.
Only this Queen, that has lost all this all,
To whom is nothing left except a mind:
Cannot into a thought of yielding fall,
To be disposed as chance has her assigned.
But Proculei, what hope does she now give,
Will she be brought to condescend to live?

Proc. My Lord, what time being sent from you to try
To win her forth alive (if that I might)
From out the Monument, where woefully
She lives enclosed in most aficted plight:
No way I found, no means how to surprise her,
But through a grate at th'entry of the place
Standing to treat, llabour'd to advise her,
To come to Caesar, and to sue for grace.
She said, she craved not life, but leave to die,
Yet for her children, prayed they might inherit,
That Caesar would vouchsafe (in clemency)
To pity them, though she deserved no merit.
So leaving her for then; and since of late,
With Gallus sent to try another time,
The whilst he entertaines her at the grate,
I found the means up to the Tomb to clime.
Where in descending in the closest wise,
And silent manner as I could contriue:
Her woman me descri'd, and out she cries,
Poor Cleopatra, thou art taken alive.
With that the Queen raught from her side her knife,
And even in act to stab her martred breast,
I stepped with speed, and held, and saved her life,
And forth her trembling hand the blade did wrest.
Ah Cleopatra, why should thou, (said I)
Both injury thy self and Caesar so?
Bar him the honor of his victory,
Who ever deals most mildly with his foe?
Live and rely on him, whose mercy will
To thy submission always ready be.
With that (as all amazed) she held her still,
Twixt majesty confuz'd and misery.
Her proud grieved eyes, held sorrow and disdain,
State and distress warring within her soul:
Dying ambition dispossessed her reign,
So base affliction seemed to control.
Like as a burning Lamp, whose liquour spent
With intermitted flames, when dead you deem it,
Sendes forth a dying flash, as discontent,
That so the matter fails that should redeem it:
So she (in spite) to see her low-brought state,
(When all her hopes were now consumed to naught)
Scorns yet to make an abject league with Fate,
Or once descend into a servile thought.
The Imperious tongue unused to beseech,
Authority confounds with prayers, so
Words of command conioin'd with humble speech,
Showed she would live, yet scorned to pray her foe.
Ah, what has Caesar here to do, said she,
In confines of the dead in darkness lying?
Will he not grant our sepulchers be free,
But violate the privilege of dying?
What, must he stretch forth his ambitious hand
Into the right of Death, and force us here?
Has misery no covert where to stand
Free from the storm of pride, is it safe no where?
Cannot my land, my gold, my crown suffice,
And all what I held dear, to him made common,
But that he must in this fortty tyrannize,
The Afflicted body of an woeful woman?
Tell him, my frailty, and the Gods have given
Sufficient glory, if he could content him:
And let him now with his desires make even,
And leave me to this horror, to lamenting.
Now he has taken all away from me,
What must he take me from my self by force?
Ah, let him yet (in mercy) leave me free
The kingdom of this poor distressed corse.
No other crown I seek, no other good.
Yet wish that Caesar would vouchsafe this grace,
To favor the poor offspring of my blood.
Confused issue, yet of Roman race.
If blood and name be links of love in Princes,
Not spurs of hate; my poor Caesario may
Find favor notwithstanding mine offenses,
And Caesar's blood, may Caesar's raging stay.
But if that with the torrent of my fall,
All must be rapt with furious violence,
And no respect, nor no regard at all,
Can ought with nature or with blood dispense:
Then be it so, if needs it must be so.
There stays and shrinkes in horror of her state:
When I began to mitigate her woe,
And thy great mercies unto her relate;
VVishing her not despair, but rather come
And sue for grace, and shake off all vain fears:
No doubt she should obtain as gentle doom
As she desired, both for, her self and hers.
And so with much a-do, (well pacifide
Seeming to be,) she showed content to live,
Saying she was resolved thy doom to abide,
And to accept what favor thou would give,
And here-with all, craved also, that she might
Perform her last rites to her lost beloved.
To sacrifice to him that wrought her plight:
And that she might not be by force removed.
I granting from thy part this her request,
Left her for then, seeming in better rest.

Caes. But do thou think she will remain so still?

Pro. I think and do assure my self she will.

Caes. Ah, private men sound not the hearts of princes,
Whose actions often bear contrary pretenses.

Pro. Why, it is her safety for to yield to thee.

Caes. But it is more honor for her to die free.

Pro. She may thereby procure her childrens good.

Caes. Princes respect their honor more then blood.

Pro. Can princes power dispense with nature tha^?

Caes. To be a prince, is more then be a man.

Pro. There Is none but have in time persuaded been.

Caes. And so might she too, were she not a Queen.

Pro. Diverse respects will force her be reclaimed.

Caes. Princes (like Lions) never will be tarn'd.
A private man may yield, and care not how,
But greater hearts will break before they bow.
And sure I thinkesh' will never condescend,
To live to grace our spoils with her disgrace:
But yet let still a wary watch attend,
To guard her person, and to watch the place.
And look that none with her come to confer:
Shortly my self will go to visit her.

CHORUS. OPINION, how do thou molest
Th'affected mind of restles man?
Who following thee never can,
Nor ever shall attain to rest,
For getting what thou say is best,
Yet lo, that best he finds far wide
Of what thou promisedst before:
For in the same he looked for more,
Which proves but small when once it is tried
Then something else thou find st beside,
To draw him still from thought to thought:
When in the end all proves but naught.
Farther from rest he finds him than,
Then at the first when he began.
O malecontent seducing guest,
Contriuer of our greatest woes:
Which born of wind, and fed with shows,
Do nurse thy self in thine unrest.
Judging vngotten things the best,
Or what thou in conceit design'st.
And all things in the world do deem,
Not as they are, but as they seem:
Which shows, their state thou ill defin'st:
And live to come, in present pin'st.
For what thou have, thou still do lack:
O minds tormentor, bodies wrack,
Vain promiser of that sweet rest,
Which never any yet possessed.
If we unto ambition tend,
Then do thou draw our weakness on,
With vain imagination
Of that which never has an end.
Or if that lust we apprehend,
How does that pleasant plague infest?
O what strange forms of luxury,
Thou straight do cast t'intice us by?
And tell us that is ever best,
Which we have never yet possessed.
And that more pleasure rests beside,
In something that we have not tried.
And when the same likewise is had,
Then all is one, and all is bad.
This Antony can say is true,
As Cleopatra knows it is so,
By the experience of their woe.
She can say, she never knew
But that lust found pleasures new,
And was never satisfide:
He can say by proof of toil,
Ambition is a Vulture vile,
That feeds upon the heart of pride:
And finds no rest when all is tried.
For worlds cannot confine the one,
The Other, lists and bounds has none.
And both subvert the mind, the state,
Procure destruction, envy, hate.
And now when all this is proved vain,
Yet Opinion leaves not here,
But sticks to Cleopatra near,
Persuading now, how she shall gain
Honor by death, and fame attain.
And what a shame it were to live,
Her kingdom lost, her Lover dead:
And so with this persuasion led,
Despair does such a courage give,
That naught else can her mind relieve,
Nor yet divert her from that thought:
To this conclusion all is brought.
This is that rest this vain world lends,
To end in death that all things ends.

ACTVS TERTIVS.
PHILOSTRATVS. ARIVS. HOW deeply Arius am I bound to thee,
That sau'dst from death this wretched life of mine:
Obtaining Caesar's gentle grace for me,
When I of all helps else dispaird but thine?
Although I see in such a woeful state,
Life is not that which should be much desired:
Since all our glories come to end their date,
Our Countries honor and our own expired.
Now that the hand of wrath has ouer-gone us,
Living (as 'twere) in the arms of our dead mother,
With blood under our feet, ruin upon us,
And in a Land most wretched of all other,
When yet we reck on life our dearest good.
And so we live, we care not how we live:
So deep we feel impressed in our blood,
That touch which Nature with our breath did give.
And yet what blasts of words has learning found,
To blow against the fear of death and dying?
What comforts vnsicke eloquence can sound,
And yet all fails us in the point of trying.
For whilst we reason with the breath of safety,
Without the compass of destruction living:
What precepts show we then, what courage lofty
In taxing others fears in counsel giving?
When all this air of sweet-contriued words
Proves but weak armor to defend the heart.
For when this life, pale fear and terror boords,
Where are our precepts then, where is our art?
O who is he that from himself can turn,
That bears about the body of a man?
Who does not toil and labor to adiorne
The day of death, by any means he can?
All this I speak to the end my self t'excuse,
For my base begging of a servile breath,
Wherein I grant my self much to abuse,
So shamefully to seek t'auoide my death.
Arius. Philostratus, that self same care to live,
Possesses all alike, and grieve not then
Nature does us no more then others give:
Though we speak more then me^, we are but me^.
And yet (in truth) these miseries to see,
Wherein we stand in most extreme distress:
Might to our selves sufficient motives be
To loath this life, and weigh our death the less:
For never any age has better taught,
What feeble footing pride and greatness has.
How' improuident prosperity is caught,
And clean confounded in the day of wrath.'
See how dismayed Confusion keeps those streets,
That naught but mirth and music late resounded,
How nothing with our eye but horror meeres,
Our state, our wealth, our pride and all confounded.
Yet what weak sight did not discern from far
This black-arisingtempest, all confounding?
Who did not see we should be what we are,
When pride and riot grew to such abounding.
When dissolute impiety possessed
Th'vnrespectiue minds of prince, and people:
When infolent Security found rest
In wanton thoughts, with lust and ease made feeble.
Then when unwary peace with fat-fed pleasure,
New-fresh invented ryots still detected,
Purchac'd with all the Ptolomies rich treasure,
Our laws, our gods, our mysteries neglected.
Who saw not how this confluence of vice,
This inundation of disorders, must
At length of force pay back the bloody price
Of sad destruction, (a reward for lust.)
O thou and I have heard, and read, and known
Of like proud states, as woefully incombred,
And framed by them, examples for our own:
Which now among examples must be numbered.
For this decree a law from high is given,
An ancient Cannon, of eternal date,
In Consistory of the stars of heaven,
Entered the book of vnauoided Fate;
That no state can in height of happiness,
In the exaltation of their glory stand:
But thither once ariu'd, declining less,
Ruin themselves, or fall by others hand.
Thus does the euer-changing course of things
Run a perpetual circle, ever turning:
And that same day that hiest glory brings,
Brings us unto the point of back-returning.
For senseless sensuality, does ever
Accompany selicitie and greatness.
A fatal witch, whose charms do leave us never,
Till we leave all in sorrow for our sweetness;
When yet our selves must be the cause we fall,
Although the same befirst decreed on hie:
Our errors still must bear the blame of all,
This must it be, earth ask notheauen why.
Yet mighty men with wary jealous hand,
Strive to cut off all obstacles of fear:
All whatsoever seems but to withstand
Their least conceit of quiet, held so dear;
And so entrench themselves with blood, with crimes,
With all injustice as their fears dispose:
Yet for all this we see, how oftentimes
The means they work to keep, are means to lose.
And sure I cannot see, how this can stand
With great Augustus safety and his honor,
To cut off all succession from our land,
For her offense that pulled the wars upon her.

Phi. Why must her issue pay the price of that?

Ari. The price is life that they are rated at.

Phi. Casario to, issued of Caesar's blood?

Ari. Plurality of Caesar's are not good.

Phi. Alas what hurt procures his feeble arm?

Ari. Not for it does, but that it may do harm.

Phi. Then when it offers hurt, repress the same.

Ari. It Is best to quench a spark before it flame.

Phi. It Is inhumane, an innocent to kill.

Ari. Such innocents, sildome remain so still.
And sure his death may best procure our peace,
Competitors the subject dearly buies:
And so that our affliction may surcease,
Let great men be the peoples sacrifice.
But see where Caesar comes himself, to try
And work the mind of our distressed Queen,
To apprehend some falsed hope: whereby
She might be drawn to have her fortune seen.
But yet I think, Rome will not see that face
(That queld her champio^s,) blush in base disgrace.

SCENA SECVNDA.
CAESAR. CLEOPATRA, SELEVCVS, DOLABELLA. Caes. WHat Cleopatra, do thou doubt
so much
Of Caesar's mercy, that thou hid'st thy face?
Or do thou think, thy' offenses can be such,
That they surmount the measure of our grace?

Cleo. O Caesar, not for that I fly thy sight
My soul this sad retire of sorrow chose:
But that my'oppressed thoghts abhorring light
Like best in darkness, my disgrace t'inclose.
And here to these close limits of despair,
This solitary horror where I bide:
Caesar, I thought no Roman should repair,
More after him, who here oppressed did.
Yet now, here at thy conquering feet I lie,
Poor captive soul, that never thought to bow:
Whose happy foot of rule and Majesty
Stood late on^y same ground thou stand now.

Caes. Rise Queen, none but thy selfis cause of all.
And yet, would all were but thine own alone:
That others ruin had not with thy fall
Brought Rome her sorrows, to my triumphs moan.
For breaking off the league of love and blood,
Thou make my winning joy a gain unpleasing:
Since the eye of grief must look into our good,
Through the horror of our own blood shedding.
And all, we must attribute unto thee.

Cleo. To me? Caesar, what should a woman do
Oppressed with greatness? what was it for me
To contradict my Lord, being bent thereto?
I was by love, by fear, by weakness, made
An instrument to such disseignes as these.
For when the Lord of all the Orient bade,
Who but obeyed? who was not glad to please?
And how could I withdraw my succouring hand
From him that had my heart, and what was mine?
The intrest of my faith in streightest band,
My love to his most firmly did combine.

Caes. Love? alas no, it was th'innated hatred
That thou and thine have ever born our people:
That made thee seek all means to have us scattred,
To disunite our strenght and make us feeble.
And therefore did that breast nurse our dissentio^,
With hope t'exalt thy self, t'augment thy state:
To pray upon the wrack of our contention,
And (with the rest our foes,) to joy thereat.

Cleo. O Caesar, see how easy it is t'accuse
Whom Fortune has made faulty by their fall,
The wretched conquered may not refuse
The titles of reproach he is charged withal.
The conquering cause has right, wherein thou art,
The vanquished, still is iud'g the worser part.
Which part is mine, because Ilost my part.
No lesser then the portion of a Crown.
Enough for me, alas what needed art
To gain by others, but to keep mine own?
But here let weaker powers note what it is,
To neighbor great Competitors too near,
If we take part, we often do perish thus,
If neutrall bide, both parties we must fear.
Alas, what shall the forced partakers do,
When following none, yet must they perish to?
But Caesar, since thy right and cause is such,
Be not a heavy weight upon calamity:
Depresse not the afflicted overmuch,
The chiefest glory is the Victors lenity.
Th'in heritance of mercy from him take,
Of whom thou have thy fortune and thy name:
Great Caesar me a Queen at first did make,
And let not Caesar now confound the same,
Read here these lines which still I keep with me,
The witness of his love and favors ever:
And God forbid this should be said of thee,
That Caesar wronged the favored of Caesar.
For look what I have been to Antonie,
Think thou the same I might have been to thee.
And here I do present thee with the note
Of all the treasure, all the jewels rare
That Egypt has in many ages got;
And look what Cleopatra has, is there.

Seleus. Nay there is not all set down within that roll,
I know some things she has reserved apart.

Cleo. What vile ungrateful wretch, dare thou co^troule
Thy Queen and sovereign, caitife as thou art. (hands.

Caes. Hold, hold; a poor revenge can work so feeble

Cleo. Ah Caesar, what a great indignity
Is this, that here my vassal subject stands
T'accuse me to my Lord of treachery?
If I reserved some certain women's toys,
Alas it was not for my self (God knows,)
Poor miserable soul, that little joys
In trifling ornaments, in outward shows.
But what I kept, I kept to make my way
Unto thy Liuia and Octauias grace,
That thereby in compassion moved, they
Might mediate thy favor in my case.

Caes. Well Cleopatra, fear not, thou shall find
What favor thou desir'st, or can expect:
For Caesar never yet was found but kind
To such as yield, and can themselves subject.
And therefore give thou comfort to thy mind;
Relieve thy soul thus over charged with care,
How well I will entreat thee thou shall find,
So soon as some affairs dispatched are.
Til when farewell. Cl. Thanks thrise-renowned Caesar,
Poor Cleopatra rests thine own for ever.

Dol. No marvel Caesar though our greatest spirits,
Have to the power of such a charming beauty
Been brought to yield the honor of their merits?
Forgetting all respect of other duty.
Then whilst the glory of her youth remained
The wondering object to each wanton eye:
Before her full of sweet (with sorrow wain'd,)
Came to the period of this misery.
If still, even in the midst of death and horror
Such beauty shines, through clouds of age and sorrow,
If even those sweet decaies seem to plead for her,
Which from affliction moving graces borrow:
If in calamity she could thus move,
What could she do adorned with youth and love?
What could she do then, when as spreading wide
The pomp of beauty, in her glory dight?
When armed with wonder, she could use beside,
Th'ingines of her love, Hope and Delight?
Beauty daughter of Marvel, o see how
Thou can disgracing sorrows sweetly grace.
What power thou show in a distressed brow,
That make affliction fair, give tears their grace.
What can vntressed locks, can torn rent hair,
A weeping eye, a wailing face be fair?
I see then, artlesse feature can content,
And that true beauty needs no ornament.

Caes. What in a passion Dolabella? what take heed:
Let others fresh examples be thy warning;
What mischiefs these, so idle humors breed,
Whilst error keeps us from a true discrening.
In deed I saw she labored to impart
Her sweetest graces in her saddest cheer:
Presuming on the face that know the arre
To move with what aspect so eu'r it were.
But all in vain, she takes her aim amiss,
The ground and mark, her leuel much deceiues;
Time now has altered all, for neither is
She as she was, nor we as she conceiues.
And therefore now, twere best she left such badnes,
Folly in youth is sin, in age, it is madness.
And for my part, I seek but to entertain
In her some feeding hope to draw her forth;
The greatest Trophey that my travails gain,
Is to bring home a prizall of such worth.
And now, since that she seems so well content
To be disposed by us, without more stay
She with her children shall to Rome be sent,
Whilst I by Syria thither take my way

CHORUS, O Fearful frowning Nemesrs,
Daughter of Justice, most severe,
That art the worlds great arbitresse,
And Queen of causes reigning here.
Whose swift-sure hand is ever near
Eternal justice, righting wrong:
Who never yet deserest long
The proudes decay, the weakes redress.
But through thy power every where,
Do raze the great, and raise the less.
The less made great do ruin to,
To show the earth what heaven can do.
Thou from darke-clos'd eternity,
From thy black clowdy hidden seat,
The worlds disorders do descry:
Which when they swel so proudly great,
Reuersing the order nature set,
Thou give thy all consounding doom,
Which none can know before it come.
The inevitable destiny,
Which neither wit nor strength can let,
Fast chained unto necessity,
In mortal things does order so,
The alternate course of weal or woe.
O how the powers of heaven do play
With travailed mortalitis:
And does their weakness still betray,
In their best prosperity?
When being lifted up so hie,
They look beyond themselves so far,
That to themselves they take no care;
Whilst swift confusion down does lay,
Their late proud mounting vanity:
Bringing their glory to decay,
And with the ruin of their fall,
Extinguish people, state and all.
But is it justice that all we
The innocent poor multitude,
For great men's faults should punished be,
And to destruction thus pursude?
O why should the heavens us include,
Within the compass of their fall,
Who of themselves procured all?
Or do the Gods (in close) decree,
Occasion take how to extrude
Man from the earth with cruelty?
Ah no, the Gods are ever just,
Our faults excuse their rigor must.
This is the period Fate set down
To Egypts fat prosperity:
Which now unto her greatest grown,
Must perish thus, by course must die.
And some must be the causers why
This revolution must be wrought:
As borne to bring their state to naught.
To change the people and the crown,
And purge the worlds iniquity:
Which vice so far bath ouer-growne.
As we, so they that treat us thus,
Must one day perish like to us.

ACTVS QVARTVS.
SELEVCVS. RODON. Sell. Never friend Rodon in a better hour,
Could I have met thee the^ even now I do
Having affliction in the greatest power
Upon my soul, and none to tell it to.
For it is some ease our sorrows to reveal,
If they to whom we shall impart our woes
Seem but to feel a part of what we feel:
And meet us with a sigh but at a cloze.

Rod. And never (friend Seleucus) found'st thou one
That better could bear such a part with thee:
Who by his own, knows others cares to moan,
And can, in like accord of grief, agree.
And therefore tell the oppression of thy heart,
Tell to an ear prepared and tuned to care:
And I will likewise unto thee impart
As sad a tale as what thou shall declare.
So shall we both our mournful plaints combine,
I Will wail thy state, and thou shall pity mine.

Sell. Well then, thou know how I have liu'din grace
With Cleopatra, and esteem'din Court
As one of Counsel, and of chiefest place,
And ever held my credit in that sort:
Till now in this confusion of our state,
When thinking to have used a mean to climb,
And fled the wretched, flowne unto the great,
(Following the fortune of the present time,)
Am come to be cast down and ruined cleene;
And in the course of mine own plot undone.
For having all the secrets of the Queen
Reueald to Caesar, to have favor won:
My treachery is quited with disgrace,
My falsehood loathed, and not without great reason
Though good for him, yet Princes in this case
Do hate the Traitor, though they love the treason
For how could he imagine I would be
Faithful to him, being false unto mine own?
And false to such a bountious Queen as she,
That had me raised and made mine honor known
He saw it was not for zeal to him I bare,
But for base fear, or mine own state to settle.
Weakness is false, and faith in Cowards rare,
Fear finds out shifts, timiditie is subtle,
And therefore scorned of him, scorned of mine own,
Hateful to all that look into my state:
Despised Seleucus now is only grown
The mark of infamy, that is pointed at.

Rod. It Is much thou faist, and oo too much to feel,
And I do grieve and do lament thy fall:
But yet all this which thou do here reveal,
Compared with mine, will make thine seem but small
Although my fault be in the selfsame kind,
Yet in degree far greater, far more hateful;
Mine sprung of mischief, thine from feeble mind,
I staind with blood, thou only but ungrateful,
For unto me did Cleopatra give
The best and dearest treasure of her blood,
Lovely Caesario, whom she would should live
Free from the dangers wherein Egypt stood.
And unto me with him this charge she gave,
Here Rodon, take, convey from out this Coast,
This precious Gem, the chiefest that I have,
The jewel of my soul I value most.
Guide him to INDIA, lead him far from hence,
Safeguard him where secure he may remain,
Till better fortune call him back from thence,
And Egypts peace be reconciled again.
For this is he that may our hopes bring back;
(The rising Sun of our declining state:)
These be the hands that may restore our wrack,
And raise the broken ruins made of late.
He may give limits to the boundles pride
Of fierce Octauius, and abate his might:
Great Julius offspring, he may come to-guide
The Empire of the world, as his by right.
O how he seems the model of his Sire?
O how I gaze my Caesar in his face?
Such was his gate, so did his looks a spire;
Such was his threatening brow, such was his grace.
High shouldred, and his forehead even as hie.
And o, (if he had not been borne so late,)
He might have ruled the worlds great Monarchy,
And now have been the Champion of our state.
Then unto him, o my dear Son (she says,)
Soon of my youth, fly hence, o fly, be gone,
Reserve thy self, ordained for better days,
For much thou have to ground thy hopes upon.
Leave me (thy woeful Mother) to endure
The sury of this tempest here alone:
Who cares not for her self, so thou be sure,
Thou may revenge, when others can but moan:
Rodon will see thee safe, Rodon will guide
Thee and thy ways, thou shall not need to fear.
Rodon (my faithful servant) will provide
What shall be best for thee, take thou no care.
And o good Rodon, look well to his youth,
The ways are long, and dangers every where.
I urge it not that I do doubt thy truth,
Mothers will cast the worst, and always fear.
The absent danger greater still appears,
Less fears he, who is near the thing he fears.
And o, I know not what presaging thought
My sp'rit suggests of luckles bad event:
But yet it may be it is but love does dote,
Or idle shadows with my fears present.
But yet the memory of mine own fate
Makes me fear his. And yet why should I fear
His fortune may recover better state,
And he may come in pomp to govern here.
But yet I doubt the Genius of our race
By some malignant spirit comes ouer-throwne
Our blood must be extinct, in my disgrace,
Egypt must have no more Kings of their own.
Then let him stay, and let us fall together,
Since it is fore-decreed that we must fall.
Yet who knows what may come? let him go thither,
What Merchaunt in one Vessel venters all?
Let us divide our stars. Go, go my son,
Let not the fate of Egypt find thee here:
Try if so be thy destiny can shun
The common wrack of us, by being there.
But who is he found ever yet defense
Against the heavens, or hid him any where?
Then what need I to send thee so far hence
To seek thy death that maystas well die here?
And here die with thy mother, die in rest,
Not travailing to what will come to thee.
Why should we leave our blood unto the East,
When Egypt may a Tomb sufficient be?
O my divided soul, what shall I do?
Where on shall now my resolution rest?
What were I best resolve to yield unto
When both are bad, how shall I know the best?
Stay; I may hap so work with Caesar now,
That he may yield him to restore thy right.
Go; Caesar never will consent that thou
So near in blood, shall be so great in might.
Then take him Rodon, go my son farewell.
But stay; there is something else that I would say:
Yet nothing now, but o God speed thee well,
Least saying more, that more may make thee stay.
Yet let me speak: It may be it is the last
That ever I shall speak to thee my Son.
Do Mothers use to part in such post-haste?
What, must I end when I have scarce begun?
Ah no (dear heart,) it is no such slender twine
Wherewith the knot is tide twixt thee and me,
That blood within thy veins came out of mine,
Parting from thee, I part from part of me:
And therefore I must speak. Yet what? O son.
Here more she would, when more she could not say,
Sorrow rebounding back whence it begun,
Filled up the passage, and quite stopped the way:
When sweet Caesario with a princely spirit,
(Though comfortles himself) did comfort give,
With mildest words, persuading her to bear it.
And as for him, she should not need to grieve.
And I (with protestations of my part,)
Swore by that faith, (which sworn I did deceive)
That I would use all care, all wit and art
To see him safe; And so we took our leave.
Scarce had we trauail'd to our iourneies end,
When Caesar having knowledge of our way,
His Agents after us with speed does send
To labor me, Caesario to betray.
Who with rewards and promises so large,
Assailed me then, that I grew soon content;
And back to Rhodes did reconuay my charge,
Pretending that Octauius for him sent,
To make him King of Egypt presently.
And thither come, seeing himself betrayed,
And in the hands of death through treachery,
Wailing his state, thus to himself he said.
Lo here brought back by subtle train to death
Betraide by Tutors faith, or traitors rather:
My fault my blood, and mine offense my birth,
For being son of such a mighty Father.
From India, (whither sent by mothers care,
To be reserved from Egypts common wrack,)
To Rhodes, (so long the arms of tyrants are,)
I am by Caesar's subtle reach brought back:
Here to be made the oblation for his fears,
Who doubts the poor revenge these hands may do him:
Respecting neither blood, nor youth, nor years,
Or how small safety can my death be to him.
And is this all the good of being borne great?
Then wretched greatness, proud rich misery,
Pompous distress, glittering calamity.
Is it for this the ambitious Fathers swear,
To purchase blood and death for the^ and theirs?
Is this the issue that their glories get,
To leave a sure destruction to their heyros?
O how much better had it been for me,
From low descent, derived of humble birth,
To Have eat the sweet-sowre bread of poverty,
And drunk of Nilus streams in Nilus earth:
Under the cou'ring of some quiet Cottage,
Free from the wrath of heaven, secure in mind,
Untouched when sad events of princes dotage
Confounds what ever mighty it does find.
And not to have stood in their way, whose condition
Is to have all made clear, and all thing plain
Between them and the mark of their ambition,
That nothing let, the full sight of their reign.
Where nothing stands, that stands not in submission;
Where greatness must all in it self contain.
Kings will be alone, Competitors must down,
Near death he stands, that stands too near a Crown.
Such is my case, for Caesar will have all.
My blood must seal the assurance of his state:
Yet ah weak state that blood assure him shall,
Whose wrongful shedding, Gods and men do hate.
Injustice never scapes unpunished still,
Though men revenge not, yet the heavens will.
And thou Augustus that with bloody hand,
Cutt'st off succession from another race,
May find the heavens thy vows so to withstand,
That others may deprive thine in like case.
When thou may see thy proud contentious bed
Yielding thee none of thine that may inherit:
Subvert thy blood, place others in their sted,
To pay this thy injustice her due merit.
If it be true (as who can that deny
Which sacred Priests of Memphis do fore-say)
Some of the offspring yet of Antonis,
Shall all the rule of this whole Empire sway;
And then Augustus, what is it thou gainest
By poor Antillus blood, or this of mine?
Nothing but this thy victory thou slainest,
And pull'st the wrath of heaven on thee and thine.
In vain does man contend against the starr's,
For that he seeks to make, his wisdom marr's.
Yet in the mean-time we whom Fates reserve,
The bloody sacrifices of ambition,
We feel the smart what ever they deserve,
And woindure the present times condition.
The justice of the heavens revenging thus,
Does only satisfy it self, not us.
Yet it is a pleasing comfort that does ease
Affliction in so great extremity,
To think their like destruction shall appease
Our ghosts, who did procure our misery.
But dead we are, uncertain what shall be,
And living, we are sure to feel the wrong:
Our certain ruin we our selves do see.
They joy the while, and we know not how long.
But yet Caesario, thou must die content,
For men will moan, and God revenge the innocent.
Thus he co^plain'd, and thus thou hear'st my shame.

Sell. But how has Caesar now rewarded thee?

Rod. As he has thee. And I expect the same
As fell to Theodor to fall to me:
For he (one of my coat) having betrayed
The young Antillus, son of Anthony,
And at his death from off his neck conuaid
A jewel: which being asked, he did deny:
Caesar occasion took to hang him straight.
Such instruments with Princes live not long.
Although they need such actors of deceit,
Yet still our sight seems to vpbraid their wrong;
And therefore we must needs this danger run,
And in the net of our own guile be caught:
We must not live to brag what we have done,
For what is done, must not appear their fault.
But here comes Cleopatra, woeful Queen,
And our shame will not that we should be seen.
Exeunt.
Cleopatra. WHat has my face yet power to win a Lover?
Can this torn remnant serve to grace me so,
That it can Caesar's secret plots discover
What he intends with me and mine to do?
Why then poor Beauty thou have done thy last,
And best good service thou could do unto me.
For now the time of death revealed thou have,
Which in my life did serve but to undo me.
Here Dolabella far forsooth in love,
Writes, how that Caesar means forthwith, to send
Both me and mine, the air of Rome to prove:
There his Triumphant Chariot to attend.
I thank the man, both for his love and letter;
The one comes fit to warn me thus before,
But for the other, I must die his debtor,
For Cleopatra now can love no more.
But having leave, I must go take my leave
And last farewell of my dead Anthony:
Whose deerly honored tomb must here receive
This sacrifice, the last before I die.
O sacred euer-memorable stone,
That have without my tears, within my flame,
Receive th'oblation of the wofull'st moan
That ever yet from sad affliction came,
And you dear relics of my Lord and Love,
(The sweetest parcels of the faithfull'st liver,)
O let no impious hand dare to remove
You out from hence, but rest you here for ever.
Let Egypt now give peace unto you dead,
That living gave you trouble and turmoile:
Sleep quiet in this euer-lasting bed,
In foreign land preferred before your soil.
And o, if that the spirits of men remain
After their bodies, and do never die,
Then hear thy ghost thy captive spouse complain
And be attentive to her misery.
But if that labor some mortality
Found this sweet error, only to confine
The curious search of idle vanity,
That would the deapth of darkness undermine:
Or rather to give rest unto the thought
Of wretched man, with th'after-comming joy
Of those conceived fields whereon we dote,
To pacify the present worlds anoy.
If it be so, why speak I then to the air?
But it is not so, my Anthony does hear:
His everliving ghost attends my prayer,
And I do know his houering sp'rit is near.
And I will speak, and pray, and mourn to thee,
O pure immortal love that daign'st to hear:
I feel thou answer'st my credulity
With touch of comfort, finding none elsewhere.
Thou know these hands cotomb'd thee here of late,
Free and vnsorc'd, which now must servile be,
Reserved for bands to grace proud Caesar's state,
Who seeks in me to triumph over thee.
O if in life we could not seuerd be,
Shall death divide our bodies now asunder?
Must thine in Egypt, mine in Italy,
Be kept the Monuments of Fortunes wonder?
If any powers be there where as thou art,
(Since our own Country Gods betray our case,)
O work they may their gracious help impart,
To save thy woeful wife from such disgrace.
Do not permit she should in triumph show
The blush of her reproach, joined with thy shame:
But (rather) let that hateful Tyrant know,
That thou and I had power t'auoyde the same.
But what do I spend breath and idle wind,
In vain inuoking a conceived aid?
Why do I not my self occasion find
To break the bounds where in my'selfe am staid?
Words are for them that can complain and live,
Whose melting hearts composed of baser frame,
Can to their sorrows, time and leisure give,
But Cleopatra may not do the same.
No Anthony, thy love requires more:
A lingering death, with thee deserves no merit,
I must my self force open wide a door
To let out life, and so vnhouse my spirit,
These hands must break the prison of my soul
To come to thee, thereto enjoy like state,
As does the long-pent solitaric Foul,
That has escapt her cage, and found her mate.
This Sacrifice to sacrifize my life,
Is that true incense that does best beseem:
These rites may serve a life-desiring wife,
Who doing them, to have done enough does deem.
My heart blood should the purple flowers have been,
Which here upon thy Tomb to thee are offered,
No smoke but dying breath should here been seen,
And this it had been to, had I been fufired.
But what have I save these bare hands to do it?
And these weak fingers are not iron-poynted:
They cannot pierce the flesh be'ing put unto it,
And I of all means else am disappointed.
But yet I must away and means seek, how
To come unto thee, what so ere I do.
O Death art thou so hard to come by now,
That we must pray, entreat, and seek thee too?
But I will find thee where so ere thou lie,
For who can stay a mind resolved to die?
And now I go to works the effect indeed,
He never send more words or sighs to thee:
He bring my soul my self, and that with speed,
My self will bring my soul to Antbonie.
Come go my Maids, my fortunes sole attenders,
That minister to misery and sorrow:
Your Mistress you unto your freedom renders.
And will discharge your charge yet ere to morrow.
And now by this, I think the man I sent,
Is near returned that brings me my dispatch.
God grant his cunning sort to good event,
And that his skill may well beguile my watch:
So shall I shun disgrace, leave to be sorry,
Fly to my love, escape my foe, free my soul;
So shall I act the last of life with glory,
Die like a Queen, and rest without control.
Exit.
CHORUS. Mysterious Egypt, wonder breeder,
strict religions strange obseruer,
State-ordrer zeal, the best rule-keeper,
Fostring still in temperate feruor:
O how came thou to lose so wholly
All religion, law and order?
And thus become the most unholy
of all Lands, that Nylus border?
How could confused Disorder enter
Where stern Law suit so sewerely?
How durst weak lust and riot venture
the eye of Justice looking nearly?
Could not those means that made thee great
Be still the means to keep thy state?
Ah no, the course of things requires
change and alteration ever.
That same continuance man desires,
th'vnconstant world yields never.
We in our counsels must be blinded,
And not see what does import us:
And oftentimes the thing least minded
is the thing that most must hurt us.
Yet they that have the stern in guiding,
it is their fault that should prevent it.
For often they seeing their Country sliding,
take their ease, as though contented.
We imitate the greater powers,
The Princes manners fashion ours.
The Example of their light regarding,
Vulgar loosenes much incences:
Vice uncontrolled, grows wide enlarging,
Kings small faults, be great offenses.
And this has set the window open.
unto license, lust and riot:
This way confusion first found broken,
whereby entered our disquiet.
Those laws that old Sesostris founded,
and the Ptolomies observed,
Hereby first came to be confounded,
which our state so long preserved.
The wanton luxury of Court,
Did form the people of like sort.
For all (respecting private pleasure,)
universally consenting
To abuse their time, their treasure,
in their own delights contenting:
And future dangers naught respecting,
whereby, (o how easy matter
Made this so general neglecting,
confused weakness to discatter?)
Caesar found the effect true tried,
in his easy entrance making:
Who at the sight of arms, descryed
all our people, all forsaking.
For riot (worse then war,) so sore
Had wasted all our strength before.
And thus is Egypt servile rendered
to the insolent destroyer:
And all their sumptuous treasure tendered,
All her wealth that did betray her.
Which poison (O if heaven be right full,)
may so far infect their senses,
That Egypts pleasures so delightful,
may breed them the like offenses.
And Romans learn our way of weakness,
be instructed in our vices:
That our spoils may spoil your greatness,
overcome with our devises.
Fill full your hands, and carry home
Enough from us to ruin Rome.

ACTVS QVINTVS.
DOLABELLA. TITIVS. Dol. Come tell me Titius every circumstance
How Cleopatra did receive my news:
Tell every look, each gesture, countenance,
That she did in my Letters reading, use.

Tit. I shall my Lord, so far as I could note,
Or my conceit observe in any wise.
It was the time when as she having got
Leave to her Dearest dead to sacrifize;
And now was issuing out the Monument
With Odors, Incense, Garlands in her hand,
When I approcht (as one from Caesar sent,)
And did her close thy message t'vnderstand.
She turns her back, and with her, takes me in,
Reads in thy lines thy strange vnlooke for tale:
And reads, and smiles, and stays, and does begin
Again to read, then blushed, and then was pale.
And having ended with a sigh, resoldes
Thy Letter up: and with a fixed eye,
(Which steadfast her imagination holds)
She mused a while, standing confusedly:
At length. Ah friend, (says she), tell thy good Lord,
How dear I hold his pitying of my case:
That out of his sweet nature can afford
A miserable woman so much grace.
Tell him how much my heavy soul does grieve
Merciless Caesar should so deal with me:
Pray him that he would all the counsel give,
That might divert him from such orueltie.
As for my love, say Antony has all,
Say that my heart is gone into the grave
With him, in whom it rests and ever shall:
I have it not my self, nor cannot have.
Yet tell him, he shall more command of me
Then any, whosoever hiuing can.
He that so friendly shows himself to be
A right kind Roman, and a Gentleman.
Although his Nation (fatal unto me,)
Have had mine age a spoil, my youth a pray,
Yet his affection must accepted be,
That favors one distressed in such decay.
Ah, he was worthy then to have been loved,
Of Cleopatra whiles her glory lasted;
Before she had declining fortune proved,
Or seen her honor wrackt, her flower blasted.
Now there is nothing left her but disgrace,
Nothing but her affliction that can move:
Tell Dolabella, one that is in her case,
(Poor soul) needs rather pity now the^ love.
But shortly shall thy Lord hear more of me.
And ending so her speech, no longer stayed,
But hasted to the tomb of Antony.
And this was all she did, and all she said.

Dol. Ah sweet distressed Lady. What hard heart
Could choose but pity thee, and love thee too?
Thy worthiness, the state wherein thou art
Requires both, and both I vow to do.
Although ambition lets not Caesar see
The wrong he does thy majesty and sweetness,
Which makes him now exact so much of thee,
To add unto his pride, to grace his greatness,
He knows thou can no hurt procure us now,
Since all thy strength is seaz'd into our hands:
Nor fears he that, but rather labors how
He might show Rome so great a Queen in bands:
That our great Ladies (envying thee so much
That stained them al, and held them in such wonder,)
Mightioy to see thee, and thy fortune such,
Thereby exrolling him that brought thee under.
But I will seek to stay it what I may;
I am but one, yet one that Caesar loves,
And o if now I could do more then pray,
Then should thou know how far affection moves.
But what my power and prayer may prevail,
I Will join them both, to hinder thy disgrace:
And even this present day I will not fail
To do my best with Caesar in this case.

Tit. And sir, even now her self has letters sent,
I met her messenger as I came hither,
With a dispatch as he to Caesar went,
But know not what imports her sending thither.
Yet this he told, how Cleopatra late
Was come from sacrifice. How richly clad
Was served to dinner in most sumptuous state,
With all the brauest ornaments she had.
How having dyn'd, she writes, and sends away
Him straight to Caesar, and commanded than
All should depart the Tomb, and none to stay
But her two maids, and one poor Countryman:

Dol. Why then I know, she sends to have audience now,
And means to experience what her state can do:
To see if Majesty will make him bow
To what affliction could not move him to.
And o, if now she could but bring a view
Of that fresh beauty she in youth possessed,
(The argument where with she overthrew
The wit of Julius Caesar, and the rest,)
Then happily Augustus might relent,
Whilst powreful Love, (far stronger then ambition)
Might work in him, a mind to be content
To grant her asking, in the best condition.
But being as she is, yet does she merit
To be respected, for what she has been:
The wonder of her kind, of rarest spirit,
A glorious lady, and a mighty Queen.
And now, but by a little weakness falling
To do that which perhaps sh'was forced to do:
Alas, an error past, is past recalling,
Take away weakness, and take women too.
But now I go to be thy advocate,
Sweet Cleopatra, now I Will use mine art.
Thy presence will me greatly animate,
Thy face will teach my tongue, thy love my heart.

SCENA SECVNDA.
Nvntivs. AM I ordained the careful Messenger,
And sad newes-bringer of the strangest death,
Which self hand did upon it self infer,
To free a captive soul from servile breath?
Must I the lamentable wonder show,
Which all the world must grieve and marvel at
The rarest form of death in earth below,
That ever pity, glory, wonder gat.

Chor. What news bring'st thou, can Egypt yet yield (more
Of sorrow then it has? what can it add
To the already ouerflowing store
Of sad affliction, matter yet more sad?
Have we not seen the worst of our calamity?
Is there behind yet something of distress
Unseen, unknown? Tell if that greater misery
There be, that we wail not that which is less.
Tell us what so it be, and tell at first,
For sorrow ever longs to hear her worst.

Nun. Well then, the strangest thing relate I will,
That ever eye of mortal man has seen.
I (as you know) even from my youth, have still
Attended on the person of the Queen:
And ever in all fortunes good or ill,
With her as one of chiefest trust have been.
And now in these so great extreamities,
That ever could to majesty befall,
I did my best in what I could devise,
And left her not, till now she left us all.

Chor. What is she gone. Has Caesar forced her so?

Nun. Yea, she is gone, and has deceived him to.

Chor. What, fled to INDIA, to go find her son?

Nun. No, not to INDIA, but to find her son.

Chor. why then there is hope she may her state recover.

Nun. Her state? nay rather honor, and her Lover.

Chor. Her Lover? him she cannot have again.

Nun. Well, him she has, with him she does remain.

Cho. Why then she is dead. Is It so? why speak not thou?

Nun. You guess aright, and I will tell you how.
When she perceived al hope was clean berest her,
That Caesar meant to send her straight away,
And saw no means of reconcilement left her,
Work what she could, she could not work to stay:
She calls me to her, and she thus began.
O thou, whose trust has ever been the same
And one in all my fortunes, faithful man,
Alone content to attend disgrace and shame.
Thou, whom the fearful ruin of my fall,
Never deterred to leave calamity:
As did those others smooth state-pleasers all,
Who followed but my fortune, and not me.
It Is thou must do a service for thy Queen,
Wherein thy faith and skill must do their best:
Thy honest care and duty shall be seen
Performing this, more then in all the rest.
For all what thou have don, may die with thee,
Although it is pity that such faith should die.
But this shall evermore remembered be,
A rare example to posterity.
And look how long as Cleopatra shall
In after ages live in memory,
So long shall thy clear fame endure withal,
And therefore thou must not my suit deny;
Nor contradict my will. For what I will
I am resolved: and this it is thou must do me:
Go find me out with all thy art and skill
Two Aspicqs, and convey them close unto me.
I have a work to do with them in hand,
Enquire not what, for thou shall soon see what,
If the heavens do not my disseignes withstand,
But do thy charge, and let me shift with that.
Being thus coniur'd by her t'whom I'had vowed
My true perpetual service, forth I went,
Devising how my close attempt to shrowde,
So that there might no art my art prevent.
And so disguised in habit as you see,
Having found out the thing for which I went,
I soon returned again, and brought with me
The Aspicqs, in a basket closely pent.
Which I had filled with figs, and leaves upon.
And coming to the guard that kept the door,
What have thou there? said they, and look thereon.
Seeing the figgs, they deemed of nothing more,
But said, they were the fairest they had seen.
Taste some, said I, for they are good and pleasant.
No, no, said they, go bear them to thy Queen,
Thinking me some poor ma^y brought a present.
Well, in I went, where brighter then the Sun,
Glittering in all her pompous rich array,
Great Cleopatra sat, as if sh'had won
Caesar, and all the world beside this day:
Even as she was when on thy cristall streams,
O Cydnos she did show what earth could show.
When Asia all amazed in wonder, deemes
Venus from heaven was come on earth below.
Even as she went at first to meet her Love,
So goes she now at last again to find him.
But that first, did her greatness only prove,
This last her love, that could not live behind him.
Yet as she fate, the doubt of my good speed,
Detracts much from the sweetness of her look:
Cheer-marrer Care, did then such passions breed,
That made her eye bewray the care she took.
But she no sooner sees me in the place,
But straight her sorow-clowded brow she cleeres,
Lightning a smile from out a stormy face,
Which all her tempest-beaten senses cheeres.
Look how a strayed perplexed trauailer,
When chased by thieves, and eue^ at point of taking,
Descrying suddenly some town not far,
Or some unlooked for aid to him-ward making;
Cheers up his tired spirits, thrusts forth his strength
To meet that good, that comes in so good hour:
Such was her joy, perceiving now at length,
Her honor was t'escape so proud a power,
Forth from her seat she hastes to meet the present,
And as one ouer-ioy'd, she caught it straight.
And with a smiling cheer in action pleasant,
Looking among the figs, finds the deceit.
And seeing there the ugly venomous beast,
Nothing dismayed, she stays and viewes it well.
At length the extremest of her passion ceast,
When she began with words her joy to tell.
O rarest beast (says she) that Afric breeds,
How deerly welcome art thou unto me?
The fairest creature that fair Nylus feeds
Me thinks I see, in now beholding thee.
What though the euer-erring world does deem
That angered Nature framed thee but in spite?
Little they know what they so light esteem,
That never learned the wonder of thy might.
Better then Death, Deaths office thou dischargest,
That with one gentle touch can free our breath:
And in a pleasing sleep our soul inlargest,
Making our selves not privy to our death.
If Nature erred, o then how happy error,
Thinking to make thee worst, she made thee best:
Since thou best freest us from our lives worst terror,
In sweetly bringing souls to quiet rest.
When that inexorable Monster Death
That follows Fortune, flies the poor destressed,
Tortures our bodies ere he takes our breath,
And loads with pains the already weak oppressed.
How often have I begged, prayed, entreated him
To take my life, and yet could never get him?
And when he comes, he comes so ugly grim,
That who is he (if he could choose) would let him?
Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chief,
That open can with such an easy key
The door of life, come gentle cunning thief,
That from our selves so steal'st our selves away.
Well did our Priests discern something divine
Shadowed in thee, and therefore first they did
Offerings and worships due to thee assign,
In whom they found such mysteries were hid.
Comparing thy swift motion to the Sun,
That mou'st without the instruments that move:
And never waxing old, but always one,
Do sure thy strange divinity approve.
And therefore to, the rather unto thee
In zeal I make the offering of my blood,
Calamity confirming now in me
A sure belief that piety makes good.
Which happy men neglect, or hold ambiguous.
And only the afflicted are religious.
And here I sacrifice these arms to Death,
That Lust late dedicated to Delights:
Offering up for my last, this last of breath,
The complement of my loves dearest rites.
With that she bares her arm, and offer makes
To touch her death, yet at the touch with-drawes,
And seeming more to speak, occasion takes,
Willing to die, and willing to to pause.
Look how a mother at her sons departing
For some far voyage bent to get him fame,
Does intertaine him with anidle parling
And still does speak, and still speaks but the same;
Now bids farewell, and now recalls him back,
Tells what was told, and bids again farewell,
And yet again recalls; for still does lack
Something that love would feign and cannot tell.
Pleased he should go, yet cannot let him go.
So she, although she knew there was no way
But this, yet this she could not handle so
But she must show that life desired delay.
Feign would she entertain the time as now,
And now would feign that Death would seize upon her,
Whilst I might see presented in her brow,
The doubtful combattry'd twixt Life and Honor.
Life bringing Legions of fresh hopes with her,
Armed with the proof of time, which yields we say
Comfort and help, to such as do refer
All unto him, and can admit delay.
But Honor scorning Life, lo forth leads he
Bright immortality in shining armor:
Through the rays of whose clear glory, she
Might see Life's baseness, how much it might harm her.
Besides she saw whole armies of Reproaches,
And base Disgraces, Furies fearful sad,
Marching with Life, and Shame that still incroches
Upon her face, in bloody colors clad.
Which representments seeing, worse then death
She deemed to yield to Life, and therefore chose
To render all to Honor, heart and breath;
And that with speed, least that her in ward foes
False flesh and blood, joining with life and hope,
Should mutiny against her resolution.
And to the end she would not give them scope,
She presently proceeds to the execution.
And sharply blaming of her rebel powers,
False flesh (says she,) and what do thou conspire
With Caesar to, as thou were none of ours,
To work my shame, and hinder my desire?
Will thou retain in closure of thy veins,
That enemy Base life, to let my good?
No, know there is a greater power constraines
Then can be countercheckt with fearful blood.
For to the mind that is great, nothing seems great:
And seeing death to be the last of woes,
And life lasting disgrace, which I shall get,
What do I lose, that have but life to lose?
This having said, strengthened in her own heart,
And union of herself, senses in one
Charging together, she performs that part
That has so great a part of glory won.
And so receives the deadly poisoning touch;
That touch that tried the gold of her love, pure,
And has confirmed her honor to be such,
As must a wonder to all worlds endure.
Now not an yielding shrink or touch offeare,
Consented to bewray least sense of pain:
But still in one same sweet vnaltred cheer,
Her honor did her dying thoughts retain.
Well, now this work is done (says she,) here ends
This act of life, that part the Fates assigned:
What glory or disgrace here this world lends,
Both have I had, and both I leave behind.
And now o Earth, the Theater where I
Have acted this, witness I die vnforst.
Wirnes my soul parts free to Anthony,
And now proud Tyrant Caesar do thy worst.
This said, she stays, and makes a sudden pause,
As twere to feel wheher the poison wrought:
Or rather else the working might be cause
That made her stay, and intertain'd her thought.
For in that instant I might well perceive
The drowsy humor in her falling brow:
And how each power, each part oppressed did leave
Their former office, and did senseless grow.
Look how a new plucked branch against the Sun,
Declines his fading leaves in feeble sort;
So her disioyned ioyntures as undone,
Let fall her weak dissolved limbs support.
Yet lo that face the wonder of her life,
Retains in death, a grace that graceth death,
Color so lively, cheer so lovely rife,
That none would think such beauty could want breath.
And in that cheer the impression of a smile
Did seem to show she scorned Death and Caesar,
As glorying that she could them both beguile,
And telling death how much her death did please her.
Wonder it was to see how soon she went,
She went with such a will, and did so haste it,
That sure I think she did her pain prevent,
Foregoing pain, or staying not to taste it.
And senseless, in her sinking down she wryes
The Diadem which on her head she wore,
Which Charmion (poor weak feeble maid) espies,
And hastes to right it as it was before.
For Eras now was dead, and Charmion too
Even at the point, for both would imitate
Their Mistress glory, striving like to do.
But Charmion would in this exceed her mate,
For she would have this honor to be last,
That should adorn that head that must be seen
To wear a Crown in death, that life held fast,
That all the world might know she did a Queen,
And as she stood setting it fitly on,
Lo in rush Caesar's Messengers in haste,
Thinking to have prevented what was done,
But yet they came too late, for all was past.
For there they found stretched on a bed of gold,
Dead Cleopatra, and that proudly dead,
In all the rich attire procure she could,
And dying Charmion trimming of her head,
And Eras at her feet, dead in like case.
Charmion, is this well done? said one of them.
Yea, well said she, and her that from the race
Of so great Kings descends, does best become.
And with that word, yields to her faithful breath,
To pass th'affurance of her love with death.

Chor. But how knew Caesar of her close intent?

Nun. By Letters which before to him she sent.
For when she had procured this means to die,
She writes, and earnestly intreates, she might
Be buried in one Tomb with Antony.
Where by then Caesar gess'd all went not right.
And forthwith sends, yet ere the message came
She was dispatched, he crossed in his intent,
Her providence had ordered so the same
That she was sure none should her plot prevent

CHORUS. THen thus we have bepeld
The Accomplishment of woes,
The full of ruin and
The worst of worst of ills:
And seen all hope expeld,
That ever sweet repose
Shall re-possesse the Land
That Desolation fills,
And where Ambition spils
With uncontrolled hand,
All the issue of all those
That so long rule have held:
To make us no more us,
But clean confound us thus.
And can o Nylus thou,
Father of floods endure,
That yellow Tyber should
With sandy streams rule thee?
Will thou be pleased to bow
To him those feet so pure,
Whose unknown head we hold
A power divine to be?
Thou that did ever see
Thy free banks uncontrolled,
Live under thine own care:
Ah will thou bear it now?
And now wilt yield thy streams
A pray to other Reames?
Draw back thy waters flo
To thy concealed head:
Rocks strangle up thy waves.
Stop Cataractes thy fall.
And turn thy courses so,
That sandy Deserts dead,
(The world of dust that craves
To swallow thee up all,)
May drink so much as shall
Revive from vastie graves
Aliuing green which spread
Far flourishing, may gro
On that wide face of Death,
Where nothing now draws breath.
Fatten some people there,
Even as thou us have done,
With plenties wanton store,
And feeble luxury:
And them as us prepare
Fit for the day of moan
Respected not before.
Leave leuell'd Egypt dry,
A barren pray to lie,
Wasted for euer-more.
Of plenties yielding none
To recompense the care
Of Victors greedy lust,
And bring forth naught but dust.
And so O leave to be,
Since thou art what thou art:
Let not our race possess
The Inheritance of shame,
The fee of sin, that we
Have left them for their part:
The yoke of whose distress
Must still vpbraidour blame,
Telling from whom it came.
Our weight of want onnesse
Lies heavy on their heart,
Who neuer-more shall see
The glory of that worth
They left, who brought us forth.
O thou all-seeing light,
High President of heaven,
You magistrates the stars
Of that eternal Court
Of Providence and Right,
Are these the bounds y'haue given
Th'vntran spassable bars,
That limit pride so short,
Is greatness of this sort,
That greatness greatness marres,
And wracks it self, self driven
On Rocks of her own might?
Does Order order so
Disorders ouer-thro?

FINIS.
THE COMPLAINT OF ROSAMOND.
OVT from the horror of Infernal deepes,
My poor afflicted ghost comes here to plain it,
Attended with my shame that never sleeps,
The spot wherewith my kind and youth did stain it.
My body found a grave where to contain it.
A sheet could hide my face, but not my sin,
For Fame finds never tomb t'inclose it in.
And which is worse, my soul is now denied,
Her transport to the sweet Elisian rest,
The ioifull bliss for ghosts repurified,
The euer-springing Gardens of the blessed:
Caron denies me waftage with the rest.
And says, my soul can never pass the River,
Till Lovers sighs on earth shall it deliver,
So shall I never pass, for how should I
Procure this sacrifice amongst the living?
Time has long since worn out the memory
Both of my life, and lives unjust depriving,
Sorrow for me is dead for aye reviving.
ROSAMOND has little left her but her name,
And that disgraced, for time has wronged the same.
No muse suggests the pity of my case,
Each pen does ouerpasse my just complaint,
Whilst others are preferred, though far more base;
Shores wife is graced, and passes for a Saint;
Her Legend iustifies her foul attaint.
Her wel-told tale did such compassion find,
That she is passed, and I am left behind.
Which seen with grief, my miserable ghost,
(Whilome invested in so fair a veil,
Which whilst it lived, was honored of the most,
And being dead gives matter to bewail.)
Comes to solicit thee, (since others fail,)
To take this task, and in thy woeful song
To form my case, and register my wrong.
Although I know thy just lamenting Muse,
Toild in the affliction of thine own distress,
In others cares has little time to use,
And therefore may esteem of mine the less:
Yet as thy hopes attend happy redress,
Thy ioies depending on a woman's grace,
So move thy mind a woeful woman's case.
DELIA may hap to deigne to read our story,
And offer up her sigh among the rest,
Whose merit would suffice for both our glory,
Whereby thou might be graced and I be blessed;
That indulgence would profit me the best.
Such power she has by whom thy youth is led,
To joy the living, and to bless the dead.
So I (through beauty) made the wofull'st wight,
By beauty might have comfort after death:
That dying fairest, by the fairest might
Find life above on earth, and rest beneath.
She that can bless us with one happy breath,
Give comfort to thy Muse to do her best,
That thereby thou maistioy, and I might rest.
Thus said: forthwith moved with a tender care,
And pity, (which my self could never find,)
What she desired, my Muse deigned to declare,
And therefore, willed her boldly tell her mind.
And I (more willing,) took this charge assignd,
Because her griefs were worthy to be known,
And telling hers, might hap forget mine own:
Then write (quoth she) the ruin of my youth,
Report the downfall of my slippry state,
Of all my life reveal the simple truth,
To teach to others what I learnt too late.
Exemplify my frailty, tell how Fate
Keeps in eternal dark our fortunes hidden,
And ere they come, to know the^ it is forbidden.
For whilst the sunshine of my fortune lasted,
Iioy'd the happiest warmth, the sweetest heat
That ever yet imperious beauty tasted,
I had what glory ever flesh could get:
But this fair morning had a shameful set.
Disgrace darkt honor, sin did clowd my brow,
As note the sequel, and I Will tell thee how.
The blood I staind, was good and of the best,
My birth had honor, and my beauty fame:
Nature and Fortune ioin'd to make me blessed,
Had I had grace to have known to use the same.
My education showed from whence I came,
And all concurd to make me happy first,
That so great hap might make me more accursed.
Happy lived I whilst parents eye did guide
The indiscretion of my feeble ways,
And Country home kept me from being eide,
Where best unknown I spent my sweetestdaics:
Til that my friends mine honor sought to raise
To higher place, which greater credit yields,
Deeming such beauty was unfit for feelds.
From Country then to Court I was preferred,
From calm to storms, from shore into the deepes:
There where I perished, where my youth first erred,
There where I lost the flower which honor keeps;
There where the worser thriues, the better weeps;
Ah me (poor wench,) on this unhappy shelfe,
I grounded me and ^^st away my self.
For thither com'd, when years had armed my youth,
With rarest proof of beauty ever seen:
When my reviving eye had (...) the truth,
That it had power to make the winter green,
And flower affections whereas none had been;
Soon could I teach my brow to tyrannize,
And make the world do homage to mine eyes.
For age I saw, (though years with cold conceit,
Congeald their thoughts against a warm desire,)
Yet sigh their want, and look at such a bait.
I saw how youth was wax before the fire.
I saw by stealth, I framed my look a lyre.
Yet well perceived, how Fortune made me then
The envy of my sex, and wonder unto men.
Look how a Comet at the first appearing,
Draws all men's eyes with wonder to behold it;
Or as the faddest tale at sudden hearing,
Makes silent listening unto him that told it,
So did my speech when Rubies did unfold it.
So did the blazing of my blush appear,
T'amaze the world, that holds such sights so dear.
Ah beauty Siren, fair enchaunting good,
Sweet silent rhetorique of perswading'eies:
Dombe eloquence, whose power does move the blood,
More then the words, or wisdom of the wife;
Still harmony, whose diapason lies
Within a brow, the key which passions move,
To ravish sense, and play a world in love.
What might I then not do whose power was such?
What cannot women do that know their power?
What women knows it not (I fear too much)
How bliss or bale lies in their laugh or lowre?
Whilst they enjoy their happy blooming flower,
Whilst nature decks them in their best attires
Of youth and beauty which the world admires.
Such one was I, my beauty was mine own,
No borrowed blush which bank-rot beauties seek:
That newfound shame, a sin to us unknown,
The adulterate beauty of a falsed cheek:
Vilde stain to honor, and to women eeke,
Seeing that time our fading must detect,
Thus with defect to cover our defect.
Impiety of times, chastities abator,
Falsehood, wherein thy self thy self deniest:
Treason to counterfeit the seal of nature,
The stamp of heaven, impressed by the hiest.
Disgrace unto the world, to whom thou lie.
Idol unto thy self, shame to the wise,
And all that honor thee idolatrise.
Far was that finne from us whose age was pure,
When simple beauty was accounted best,
The time when women had no other lure
But modesty, pure cheeks, a virtuous breast.
This was the pomp where with my youth was blessed.
These were the weapons which mine honor wun
In all the conflicts which my eyes begun.
Which were not small, I wrought on no mean object,
A Crown was at my feet, Scepters obeide me,
Who^ Fortune made my King, Love made my subject,
Who did command the Land, most humbly praid me,
HENRY the second, that so highly weighed me,
Found well (by proof) the privilege of beauty,
That it had power to counter-maund all duty.
For after all his victories in FRANCE,
And all the triumphs of his honor wun:
Vnmatch'd by sword, was vanquished by a glaunce,
And hotter wars within his breast begun.
Wars, whom whole Legions of desires drew on:
Against all which, my chastity contends
With force of honor, which my shame defends.
No armor might be found that could defend,
Transpearcing rays of Crystal pointed eyes:
No stratagem, no reason could amend,
No not this age; (yet old men should be wise.)
But shows deceive, outward appearance lies.
Let none for seeming so, think faints of others,
For all are men, and all have sucked their mothers.
Who would have thought a Monarch would have ever
Obeyed his handmaid of so mean estate;
Vultur ambition feeding on his liver,
Age having worn his pleasures out of date,
But hap comes never, or it comes too late,
For such a dainty which his youth found nor,
Unto his feeble age did chance a-lot.
Ah Fortune, never absolutely good,
For that some cross still counter-checks our luck;
As here behold the incompatible blood,
Of age and youth was that whereon we stuck:
Whose lothing, we from natures breasts do suck,
As opposite to what our blood requires.
For equal age, does equal like desires.
But mighty men, in hiest honor sitting,
Naught but applause and pleasure can behold:
Soothed in their liking, careless what is fitting,
May not be suffered once to think the 'are old:
Not trusting what they see, but what is told.
Miserable fortune to forget so far
The state of flesh, and what our frailties are.
Yet must I needs excuse so great defect
For drinking of the Lethe of mine eyes,
H'is forced forget himself, and all respect
Of majesty, whereon his state relies:
And now of loves, and pleasures must devise.
For thus revived again, he serves and su'th,
And seeks al means to undermine my youth.
Which never by assault he could recover.
So well encamped in strength of chaste desires:
My cleane-arm'd thoughts repelled an unchaste lover.
The Crown that could command what it requires,
I lesser prized then chastities attires.
Th'vnstained veil, which innocents adornes,
Th'vngathred Rose, defended with the thorns.
And safe mine honor stood, till that in truth,
One of my sex, of place, and nature bad,
Was set in ambush to entrap my youth.
One in the habit of like frailty clad.
One who the liu'ry of like weakness had.
A seeming Matron, yet a sinful monster,
As by her words the chaster sort may conster.
She set upon me with the smoothest speech
That court and age could cunningly devise:
The One autentique made her fit to reach,
The other learnt her how to subtelise.
Both were enough to circumuent the wise.
A document that well might teach the sage,
That there is no trust in youth, nor hope in age.
Daughter (said she,) behold thy happy chance,
That have the lot cast down into thy lap,
Whereby thou may thy honor great advance,
Whilst thou (unhappy) wilt not see thy hap:
Such fond respect thy youth does so inwrap.
To Oppose thy self against thine own good fortune,
That points thee out, and seems thee to importune.
Do thou not see, how that thy King (thy Jove,)
Lightens forth glory on thy dark estate:
And showers down gold and treasure from above,
Whilst thou do shut thy lap against thy fate?
Fie fondling fie, thou will repent too late
The error of thy youth; that can not see
What is the fortune that does follow thee.
Thou must not think thy flower can always flourish,
And that thy beauty will be still admired:
But that those rays which all these flames do nourish,
Canceld with Time, will have their date expired,
And men will scorn what now is so desired.
Our frailties doom is written in the flowers,
Which flourish now, and fade ere many hours.
Read in my face the ruins of my youth,
The wrack of years upon my aged brow,
I have been fair, (I must confess the truth,)
And stood upon as nice respects as thou;
I lost my time, and I repent it now.
But were I to begin my youth again,
I would redeem the time I spent in vain:
But thou have years, and privilege to use them,
Thy privilege does bear Beauties great seal,
Besides, the law of nature does excuse them,
To whom thy youth may have a just appeal.
Esteem not Fame more then thou do thy weal.
Fame, (whereof ye world seems to make such choice,)
Is but an Echo, and an idle voice.
Then why should this respect of honor bound us,
In the imaginary lifts of reputation?
Titles which cold severity has found us,
Breath of the vulgar, foe to recreation:
Melancholies opinion, Customs relation;
Pleasures plague, beauties scourge, hell to the fair,
To leave the sweet, for Castles in the air.
Pleasure is felt, opinion but conceau'd,
Honor, a thing without us, not our own:
Whereof we see how many are bereaved,
Which should have reaped the glory they had sown!
And many have it, yet unworthy, known.
So breathes his blast this many-headed beast,
Whereof the wisest have esteemed least.
The subtle Citty-women, better learned,
Esteem them chaste enough that best seem so:
Who though they sport, it shall not be discerned,
Their face bewraies not what their bodies do;
It Is wary walking that does safeliest go.
With show of virtue, as the cunning knows,
Babes are beguild with sweets, and men with shows.
Then use thy tallent, youth shall be thy warrant,
And let not honor from thy sports detract:
Thou must not fondly think thy self transparent,
That those who see thy face can judge thy fact,
Let her have shame that cannot closely act.
And seem the chaste, which is the chiefest art,
For what we seem each see, none knows our heart.
The mighty, who can with such sins dispense,
In steed of shame do honors great bestow:
A worthy author does redeem the offense,
And makes the scarlet sin as white as snow.
The majesty that does descend so low,
Is not defilde, but pure remains therein,
And being sacred, sanctifies the sin.
What, do thou stand on this, that he is old?
Thy beauty has the more to work upon.
Thy pleasures want shall be supplied with gold,
Cold age dotes most when heat of youth is gone:
Enticing words prevail with such a one.
Alluring shows most deep impression strikes,
For age is prone to credit what it likes.
Here interrupt she leaves me in a doubt,
When lo began the combat in my blood,
Seeing my youth inuirond round about,
The ground uncertain where my reasons stood;
Small my defense to make my party good,
Against such powers which were so surely laid,
To ouer-throw a poor unskillful Maid.
Treason was in my bones, my self conspiring,
To sell my self to lust, my soul to sin:
Pure blushing shame was even in retiring,
Leaving the sacred hold it glori'd in.
Honor lay prostrate for my flesh to win,
When cleaner thoughts my weakness began vpbray
Against my self, and shame did force me say;
Ah ROSAMOND, what does thy flesh prepare?
Destruction to thy days, death to thy fame;
Will thou betraie that honor held with care,
T'entombe with black reproach a spotted name?
Leaving thy blush the colors of thy shame?
Opening thy feet to sin, thy soul to lust,
Graceless to lay thy glory in the dust?
Nay, first let the earth gape wide to swallow thee,
And shut thee up in bosom with her dead,
Ere Serpent tempt thee taste forbidden Tree,
Or feel the warmth of an vnlawfuli bed;
Suffering thy self by lust to be misled;
So to disgrace thy self and grieve thine heirs,
That Cliffords race should scorn thee one of theirs.
Never wish longer to enjoy the air,
Then that thou breathe the breath of chastitio:
Longer then thou preseru'st thy soul as fair
As is thy face, free from impuritie.
Thy face, that makes th'admir'd in every eye,
Where Natures care such rarities inroule,
Which used amiss, may serve to damn thy soul.
But what? he is my king and may constrain me,
Whether I yield or not, I live defamed.
The world will think authority did gain me,
I shall be judged his Love, and so be shamed.
We see the fair condemned, that never gamed.
And if I yield, it is honorable shame,
If not, I live disgraced, yet thought the same:
What way is left thee then (unhappy maid,)
Whereby thy spotless foot, may wander out
This dreadful danger, which thouseest is laid,
Wherein thy shame does compass thee about?
Thy simple years cannot resolve this doubt.
Thy youth can never guide thy foot so even,
But (in despite) some scandale will be given.
Thus stood I balanced equally precize,
Til my frail flesh did weigh me down to sin;
Till world and pleasure made me partialize,
And glittering pomp my vanity did win,
When to excuse my fault my lusts begin.
And impious thoughts alleged this wanton clause,
That though I sinned, my sin had honest cause.
So well the golden balls cast down before me,
Could entertain my course, hinder my way:
Whereat my retchlesse youth stooping to store me,
Lost me the gole, the glory, and the day.
Pleasure had set my well schooled thoughts to play,
And bade me use the virtue of mine eyes,
For sweetly it fits the fair to wantonise.
Thus wrought to sin, soon was I traind from Court,
T'a solitary Grange, there to attend
The time the King should thither make resort,
Where he Loves long-desired work should end.
Thither he daily messages does send,
With costly Jewels (Orators of Love,)
Which (ah too well men know) do women move.
The day before the night of my defeature,
He greets me with a Casket richly wrought;
So rare, that art did seem to strive with nature,
TO express the cunning work-mans curious thought;
The mystery whereof I prying sought,
And found engraven on the lidde above,
Amymone, how she with Neptune strove.
Amymone, old Danaus fairest Daughter,
As she was fetching water all alone
At Lerna: whereas Neptune came and caught her,
From whom she strived and strugled to be gone,
Beating the air with cries and piteous moan.
But all in vain, with him she is forced to go,
It Is shame that men should use poor maidens so.
There might I see described how she lay,
At those proud feet, not satis-fied with prayer:
Wayling her heavy hap, cursing the day,
In act so pitious to express despair.
And by how much more grieved, so much more fair.
Her tears upon her cheeks (poor careful gerle,)
Did seem against the Sun crystal and pearl.
Whose pure clear streams, (which so fair appears;)
Wrought hotter flames, (O miracle of love,)
That kindles fire in water, heat in tears,
And makes neglected beauty mightier prove,
Teaching afflicted eyes affects to move;
To show that nothing ill becomes the fair,
But cruelty, which yields unto no prayer.
This having viewd, and there with something moved,
Figured I find within the other squares,
Transformed Io, Jove's decrelie loved,
In her affliction how she strangely fares.
Strangely distressed (O beauty, borne to cares.)
Turned to a Heiffer, kept with jealous eyes,
Always in danger of her hateful spies.
These presidents presented to my view,
Wherein the presage of my fall was shown,
Might have fore-warned me well what would ensue,
And others harms have made me shun mine own.
But fate is not prevented, though fore known.
For that must hap, decreed by heavenly powers,
Who work our fall, yet make the fault still ours.
Witness the world, wherein is nothing rifer,
Then miseries unkind before they come:
Who can the characters of chance decipher,
Written in clouds of our concealed dome?
Which though perhaps have been reueald to some,
Yet that so doubtful, (as success did prove them,)
That men must know they have ye heavens above the^.
I saw the sin wherein my foot was entering,
I saw how that dishonor did attend it,
I saw the shame whereon my flesh was ventring,
Yet had I not the power for to defend it.
So weak is sense when error has condemned it.
We see what is good, and thereto we consent,
But yet we choose the worst, and soon repent.
And now I come to tell the worst of ilnes,
Now draws the date of mine affliction near.
Now when the dark had wrapped up all in stilnes,
And dreadful black had dispossessed the clear,
Com'd was the night, (mother of sleep and fear;)
Who with her Sable-mantle friendly couers,
The sweet-stolne sports, of ioifull meeting Lovers.
When lo, Iioy'd my Lover, not my Love,
And felt the hand of lust most undesired:
Enforced th'vnprooued bitter sweet to prove,
Which yields no mutual pleasure when it is hired.
Love's not constrained, nor yet of due required.
Judge they who are unfortunately wed,
What it is to come unto a loathed bed.
But soon his age received his short contenting,
And sleep sealed up his languishing desires:
When he turns to his rest, I to repenting,
Into my self my waking thought retires:
My nakedness had proved my senses liers.
Now opned were mine eyes to look therein,
For first we taste the fruit, then see our sin.
Now did I find my self vnparadis'd,
From those pure fields of my so clean beginning:
Now I perceived how ill I was advised,
My flesh began loathe the new-felt touch of sinning,
Shame leaves us by degrees, not at first winning.
For nature checks a new offense with loathing,
But use of sin does make it seem as nothing.
And use of sin did work in me a boldness,
And love in him, incorporates such zeal,
That jealousy increased with ages coldness,
Fearing to loose the joy of all his weal,
Or doubting time his stealth might else reveal,
H'is driven to devise some subtle way,
How he might safeliest keep so rich a pray.
A stately Palace he foorth-with did build,
Whose intricate innumerable ways,
With such confused errors so beguild
Th'vnguided entrers with uncertain straies,
And doubtful turnings kept them in delays,
With bootlesse labor leading them about,
Able to find no way, nor in, nor out.
Within the closed bosom of which frame,
That served a Center to that goodly round:
Were lodgings, with a Garden to the same,
With sweetest flowers that eu'r adorned the ground
And all the pleasures that delight has found,
T'intertaine the sense of wanton eyes,
Fuel of love, from whence lusts flames arise:
Here I enclosed from all the world asunder,
The Minotaure of shame kept for disgrace,
The Monster of Fortune, and the worlds wonder,
Lived cloistred in so desolate case:
None but the King might come into the place,
With certain Maids that did attend my need,
And he himself came guided by a thread:
O Jealousy, daughter of Enuy' and Love,
Most wayward issue of a gentle sire;
Fostred with fears, thy fathers joys t'improue,
Mirth-marring Monster, borne a subtle lier;
Hateful unto thy self, flying thine own desire:
Feeding upon suspect that does renew thee,
Happy were Lovers if they never knew thee.
Thou have a thousand gates thou enterest by,
Condemning trembling passions to our heart;
Hundred eyed Argus, euer-waking Spy,
Pale Hagge, infernal Fury, pleasures smart,
Envious Obseruer, prying in every part;
Suspicious, fearful, gazing still about thee,
O would to God ye love could be withuot thee.
Thou did deprive (through false suggesting fear,)
Him of content, and me of liberty:
The only good that women hold so dear,
And turnst my freedom to captivity,
First made a prisoner, ere an enemy.
Enioynd the ransom of my bodies shame,
Which though I paid, could not redeem the same.
What greater torment ever could have been,
Then to enforce the fair to live retired?
For what is beauty if it be not seen?
Or what is it to be seen, unless admired?
And though admired, unless in love desired?
Never were cheeks of Roses, locks of Amber,
Ordained to live imprisoned in a Chamber.
Nature created beauty for the view,
(Like as the fire for heat, the Sun for light:)
The fair do hold this privilege as due
By ancient Charter, to live most in sight,
And she that is debarred it, has not right.
In vain our friends from this, do us dehort,
For beauty will be where is most resort.
Witness the fairest streets that Thames does visit,
The wondrous concourse of the glittering Fair:
For what rare women decked with beauty is it,
That thither couets not to make repair?
The solitary Country may not stay her.
Here is the center of all beauties best,
Excepting DELIA, left t'adorne the West.
Here does the curious with judicial eyes,
Contemplate beauty gloriously attired:
And herein all our chiefest glory lies,
To live where we are praised and most desired.
O how we joy to see our selves admired,
Whilst niggardlie our favors we discover.
We love to be beloved, yet scorn the Lover.
Yet would to God my foot had never moved
From Country safety, from the fields of rest:
To know the danger to be highly loved,
And live in pomp to brave among the best,
Happy for me, better had I been blessed;
If I vnluckilie had never straide,
But lived at home a happy Country Maid.
Whose unaffected innocence thinks
No guilefull fraud, as does the Courtly liver:
She Is decked with truth, the River where she drinks
Does serve her for her glass, her counsel giver:
She loves sincerely, and is loved ever.
Her days are peace, and so she ends her breath,
(True life that knows not what is to die til death.)
So should I never have been registered,
In the black book of the unfortunate:
Nor had my name enrold with Maids misled,
Which bought their pleasures at so hie a rate.
Nor had I taught (through my unhappy fate,)
This lesson, (which my self learnt with expense)
How most it hurts that most delights the sense:
Shame follows sin, disgrace is duly given,
Impiety will out, never so closely done:
No walls can hide us from the eye of heaven,
For shame must end what wickedness begun;
Forth breaks reproach when we least think thereon.
And this is ever proper unto Courts,
That nothing can be done, but Fame reports.
Fame does explore what lies most secret hidden,
Entering the closet of the Palace dweller:
Abroad revealing what is most forbidden.
Of truth and falsehood both an equal teller.
It Is not a guard can serve for to expel her.
The sword of justice cannot cut her wings,
Nor stop her mouth from vtt'ring secret things.
And this our stealth she could not long conceal,
From her whom such a forfeit most concerned:
The wronged Queen, who could so closely deal,
That she the whole of all our practice learned,
And watched a time when least it was discerned,
In absence of the King, to wreake her wrong,
With such revenge as she desired long.
The Laberinth she entered by that thread,
That served a conduct to my absent Lord,
Left there by chance, reserved for such a deed,
Where she surpised me whom she so abhord.
Enraged with madness, scarce she speaks a word,
But flies with eager fury to my face,
Offering me most unwomanly disgrace.
Look how a Tygresse that has lost her whelpe,
Runs fiercely raging through the woods astray:
And seeing her self deprived of hope or help,
Furiously assaults what is in her way,
To satisfy her wrath, (not for a pray;)
So fell she on me in outrageous wife,
As could disdain and jealousy devise.
And after all her vile reproaches used,
She forced me take the poison she had brought,
To end the life that had her so abused,
And free her fears, and ease her jealous thought.
No cruelty her wrath would leave unwrought,
No spightfull act that to revenge is common;
(No beast being fiercer than a jealous woman.)
Here take (says she) thou impudent unclean,
Base graceless strumpet, take this next your heart;
Your loue-sick heart, that ouer-charg'd has been
With pleasures surfeite, must be purged with art.
This potion has a power that will conuart
To naught, those humors that oppress you so.
And (Gerle,) I Will see you take it ere I go.
What stand you now amazed, retire you back?
Tremble you (minion?) come dispatch with speed;
There is no help, your Champion now you lack,
And all these tears you shed will nothing steed;
Those dainty fingers needs must do the deed.
Take it, or I will drench you else by force,
And trifle not, least that I use you worse.
Having this bloody doom from hellish breath,
My woeful eyes on every side I cast:
Rigor about me, in my hand my death,
Presenting me the horror of my last;
All hope of pity and of comfort past.
No means, no power, no forces to contend,
My trembling hands must give my self my end.
Those hands that beauties ministers had been,
They must give death that me adorned of late,
That mouth that newly gave consent to sin,
Must now receive destruction in thereat,
That body which my lust did violate,
Must sacrifice it self to appease the wrong.
(So short is pleasure, glory lasts not long.)
And she no sooner saw I had it taken,
But forth she rushes, (proud with victory,)
And leaves m' alone, of all the world forsaken,
Except of Death, which she had left with me.
(Death and my self alone together be.)
To whom she did her full revenge refer.
Oh poor weak conquest both for him and her.
Then straight my conscience summons up my sin,
TO appear before me, in a hideous face;
Now does the terror of my soul begin,
When every corner of that hateful place
Dictates mine etror, and reueales disgrace;
Whilst I remain oppressed in every part,
Death in my body, horror at my heart.
Down on my bed my loathsome self I cast,
The bed that likewise gives in evidence
Against my soul, and tells I was unchaste,
Tells I was wanton, tells I followed sense.
And therefore cast, by guilt of mine offense,
Must here the right of heaven needs satisfy,
And where I wanton lay, must wretched die.
Here I began to wail my hard mishap,
My sudden, strange unlooked for misery.
Accusing them that did my youth entrap,
To give me such a fall of infamy.
And poor distressed ROSAMOND, (said I,)
Is this thy glory got, to die forlorn
In Dezarts, where no ear can hear thee morn?
Nor any eye of pity to behold
The woeful end of thy sad tragedy;
But that thy wrongs unseen, thy tale untold,
Must here in secret silence buried lie.
And with thee, thine excuse together die.
Thy sin revealed, but thy repentance hid,
Thy shame alive, but dead what thy death did.
Yet breathe out to these walls the breath of moan,
Tell the air thy plaints, since men thou can not tell.
And though thou perish desolate alone,
Tell yet thy self, what thy self knows too well:
Utter thy grief where with thy soul does swell.
And let thy heart pity thy hearts remorse,
And be thy self the mourner and the Corse.
Condole thee here, clad all in black despair,
With silence only, and a dying bed;
Thou that of late, so flourishing, so fair,
Did glorious live, admired and honored:
And now from friends, from succor hither led,
Art made a spoil to lust, to wrath, to death,
And in disgrace, forced hecre to yield thy breath.
Did Nature (O for this) deliberate,
To show in thee the glory of her best;
Framing thine eye the star of thy ill fate,
And made thy face the foe to spoil the rest?
O beauty, thou an enemy professed
To chastity and us that love thee most,
Without thee how we are loathed, and with thee loft?
O you that proud with liberty and beauty,
(And o may well be proud that you be so,)
Glitter in Court, loved and observed of durie;
O that I might to you but ere I go
Speak what I feel, to warn you by my woe,
To keep your feet in pure clean paths of shame,
That no enticing may divert the same.
See'ng how against your tender weakness still,
The strength of wit, of gold, and all is bent;
And all the assaults that ever might or skill,
Can give against a chaste and clean intent:
Ah let not greames work you to' consent.
The spot is forde, though by a Monarch made,
Kings cannot privilege a sin forbade.
Lock up therefore the treasure of your love,
Under the surest keys of fear and shame:
and let no powers have power chaste thoughts to move
To make a lawless entry on your fame.
Open to those the comfort of your flame,
Whose equal love shall march with equal pace,
In those pure ways that lead to no disgrace.
For see how many discontented beds,
Our own aspiring, or our Parents pride
Have caused, whilst that ambition vainly weds
Wealth and not love, honor and naught beside:
Whilst married but to titles, we abide
As wedded widows, wanting what we have,
When shadows cannot give us what we crave.
Or whilst we spend the freshest of our time,
The sweet of youth in plotting in the air;
Alas how often we fall, hoping to clime;
Or wither as unprofitably fair,
Whilst those decaies which are without repair,
Make us neglected, scorned and reprou'd.
(And o what are we, if we be not loved?)
Fasten therefore upon occasions fit,
Least this, or that, or like disgrace as mine,
Do ouer-take your youth to ruin it,
And cloud with infamy your beauties shine:
Seeing how many seek to undermine
The treasury that is vnpossest of any:
And hard it is kept that is desired of many.
And fly (o fly,) these Bed-brokers unclean,
(The monsters of our sex,) that make a pray
Of their own kind, by an unkindly mean;
And even (like Vipers,) eating out a way
The Row th'wombe of their own shame, accursed they
Live by the death of Fame, the gain of sin,
The filth of lust, uncleanness wallowes in.
O is it not enough that we, (poor we)
Have weakness, beauty, gold, and men our foes,
But we must have some of our selves to be
Traitors unto our selves, to join with those?
Such as our feeble forces do disclose,
And still betray our cause, our shame, our youth,
To lust, to folly, and to men's untruth?
Hateful confounders both of blood and laws,
Vilde Orators of shame, that plead delight:
Ungracious Agents in a wicked cause,
Factors for darkness; messengers of night,
Serpents of guile, devils, that do inuit
The wanton taste of that forbidden tree,
Whose fruit once plucked, will show how foul we be.
You in the habit of a grave aspect,
(In credit by the trust of years,) can shoe
The cunning ways of lust, and can direct
The fair and wily wantons how to go,
Having (your loathsome selves) your youth spent so.
And in uncleanness ever have been fed,
By the revenue of a wanton bed.
By you, have been the innocent betrayed,
The blushing fearful, boldned unto sin,
The wife made subtle, subtle made the maid,
The husband scorned, dishonored the kin:
Parents disgraced, children infamous been.
Confused our race, and falsi-fied our blood,
Whilst fathers sons, possess wrong Fathers good.
This, and much more, I would have vttred then,
A testament to be recorded still,
Signd with my blood, subscribed with Conscience pen,
To warn the fair and beautiful from ill.
And o I wish (by the example of my will,)
I had not left this sin unto the fair,
But did intestate to have had no heir.
But now, the poison spread through all my veins,
Began dispossess my living senses quite:
And naught respecting death, (the last of pains,)
Placed his pale colors, (th'ensigne of his might,)
Upon his new-got spoil before his right;
Thence chased my soul, setting my day ere noone,
When I least thought my ioies could end so soon.
And as conuaid t'vntimely funerals,
My scarce cold corse not suffered longer stay,
Behold, the King (by chance) returning, falls
T'inconnter with the same upon the way,
As he repaird to see his dearest joy.
Not thinking such a meeting could have been,
To see his Love, and seeing been unseen.
Judge those who^ chance depriues of sweetest treasure,
What it is to lose a thing we hold so dear:
The best delight, wherein our soul takes pleasure,
The sweet of life, that penetrates so near.
What passions feels that heart, enforced to bear
The deep impression of so strange a sight,
That over whemls us, or confounds us quite?
Amazed he stands, nor voice nor body stcares,
Words had no passage, tears no issue found,
For sorrow shut up words, wrath kept in tears,
Confused affects each other do confound:
Oppressed with grief, his passions had no bound.
Striving to tell his woes, words would not come;
For light cares speak, when mighty griefs are dombe.
At length extremity breaks out a way,
Through which the imprisoned voice with tears attended,
Wailes out a sound that sorrows do bewray,
With arms a-crosse, and eyes to heaven bended,
Vaporing out sighs that to the skies ascended.
Sighs, (the poor ease calamity affoords,)
Which serve for speech when sorrow wants words.
O heavens (quoth he,) why do mine eyes behold
The hateful rays of this unhappy funne?
Why have I light to see my sins controld,
With blood of mine own shame thus vildly done?
How can my sight endure to look thereon?
Why does nor black eternal darkness hide,
That from mine eyes, my heart cannot abide?
What saw my life, wherein my soul might joy,
What had my days, whom troubles still afflicted,
But only this, to counter poize annoy?
This joy, this hope, which Death has interdicted;
This sweet, whose loss has all distress inflicted;
This, that did season all my sour of life,
Vexed still at home with broiles, abroad in strife,
Vexed still at home with broiles, abroad in strife,
Diffention in my blood, iarres in my bed:
Distrust at board, suspecting still my life,
Spending the night in horror, days in dread;
(Such life has Tyrants, and this life I led.)
These miseries go masked in glittering shows,
Which wise men see, the vulgar little knows.
Thus as these passions do him ouer-whelme,
He draws him near my body to behold it.
And as the Vine married unto the Elm
With strict embraces, so does he infold it.
And as he in his careful arms does hold it,
Viewing the face that even death commends,
On senseless lips, millions of kisses spends.
Pitiful moutla (says he) that living gave
The sweetest comfort that my soul could wish:
O be it lawful now, that dead thou hauest,
This sorrowing farewell of a dying kiss.
And you fair eyes, containers of my bliss,
Motives of love, borne to be marched never,
Entombed in your sweet circles sleep for ever.
Ah how me thinks I see Death dallying seeks,
To entertain it self in Loves sweet place;
Decayed Roses of discolored cheeks,
Do yet retain dear notes of former grace:
And ugly Death sits fair within her face;
Sweet remnants resting of vermillion red,
That Death it self doubts whether she be dead:
Wonder of beauty, oh receive these plaints,
These obsequies, the last that I shall make thee:
For lo, my soul that now already faints,
That loved thee living, dead will not forsake thee,)
Hastens her speedy course to ouer-take thee.
I Will meet my death, and free my self thereby,
For (ah) what can he do that cannot die?
Yet ere I die, thus much my soul does vow,
Revenge shall sweeten death with ease of mind:
And I will cause post ritie shall know.
How fair thou were above all women kind.
And after-ages monuments shall find,
Showing thy beauties title, not thy name,
Rose of the world that fwoetned so the fame.
This said, though more desirous yet to say,
For sorrow is unwilling to give over,)
He does repress what grief would else bewray,
Least he too much his passions should disouer.
And yet respect scarce bridles such a Lover.
So fair transported that he know not whither,
For Love and Maiestied dwell ill together,
Then were my funerals not long deferred,
But done with all the rites pomp could devise,
At Godstow, where my body was interred,
And richly tomb'd in honorable wise,
Where yet as now scarce any note descries
Unto these times, the memory of me,
Marble and Brass so little lasting be.
For those walls which the credulous devour,
And apt-beleeuing ignorant did found;
With willing zeal, that never called in doubt,
That time their works should ever so confound,
Lie like confused heaps as underground.
And what their ignorance esteemed so holy,
The wiser ages do account as folly.
And were it not thy favorable lines
Re-edified the wrack of my decays,
And that thy accents willingly assigns
Some farther date, and give me longer days,
Few in this age had known my beauties praise.
But thus renewed, my fame redeemes some time,
Till other ages shall neglect thy rhyme.
Then when confusion in her course shall bring
Sad desolation on the times to come:
When mirth-lesse Thames shall have no Swan to sing,
All Music silent, and the Muses dombe.
And yet even then it must be known to some,
That once they flourisht, though not cherisht so,
And Thames had Swannes as well as ever Po.
But here an end, I may no longer stay thee,
I must return to attend at Stigian flood:
Yet ere I go this one word more I pray thee,
Tell DELIA, now her sigh may do me good,
And will her note the frailty of our blood.
And if I pass unto those happy banks,
The^ she must have her praise, thy pen her thanks.
So vanquished she, and left me to return
To prosecute the tenor of my woes:
Eternal matter for my Muse to mourn,
But (ah) the world has heard too much of those,
My youth such errors must no more disclose.
I Will hide the rest, and grieve for what has been,
Who made me known, must make me live unseen.
FINIS.

