A BRIEF APOLOGY PROVING THE POSSESSION OF WILLIAM SUMMERS.

Written by JOHN DORRELL, a faithful Minister of the Gospel: but published
without his knowledge, With a Dedicatorie Epistle disclosing some disordered
procedings against the said JOHN DORRELL.

Quod in religionem committitur, in omnium fertur iniuriam.

1599.

To the right Honorable St Thomas Eggerton Knight, L. Keeper of the great
Seal of England, Sr John Popham Knight, L. chief Justice of England: Sir
William Periam Knight, Lord chief Baron of the Eschequer, and other the most
reverend Judges of the Common Laws of England.
MY LL. I do not doubt, but your HH. have heard of the possession and
dispossession of William Summors, a youth of Notingha^, but in what sense
these things have been carried unto you, by reason of the manifold varieties
of reports spread abroad, it may be well doubted. Wherefore to the end, that
your HH. might take knowledge of the truth herein, and according to your
knowledge by that hie authority derived unto you from her Sacred Majesty, for
the government of her subjects, according to your accustomed justice and
integrity, justify the truth, and discountenance the contrary: I have
therefore presumed to prefer unto your LL. this plain Apologeticall treatise,
penned by Master John Dorrell, a principal party in this matter, but
published altogether without his priuitie or consent therein.

The maine point of the controversy is, Whether William Summers was possessed
and dispossessed, yea or no. Whereby there is called into question a matter of
fact, a greater then which, can not almost fall out to be decided among the
sons of men, namely touching the malice of Satan, and marvelous authority
of our Lord JESUS. They that imagine Summer was not possessed, but did
counterfeit, do by consequence and indirectlie deny the malice of Satan, and
the Soueraintie of our Savior in this action. But if it fall out contrary,
that he was possessed and dispossessed in deed, what their sin is, and what
their reward shall be that blaspheme this great work of God, I leave to the
secret judgment of the great day, when they that now judge, shall be judged.
Only, hereby it is evident, that so many hie or low as profess them selves
Christians, are greatly interessed in this matter, that so much concerns
Christ their Master: and ought therefore inform them selves herein, in as much
as what soever is done against the Head, must needs strecht unto the Members.

Now, every matter of fact (as this is) most usually is determined by the
oaths of men: It is therefore to be respected what has been and may be proved
by the depositions of credible men, touching this matter.

By commission from the Archbish of York, directed to 12. especial John
Therold Esquire. hie Sheriff of Nottinghan. Sir John Biron Knight. John Stanop.
Robert Markham. Rich. Parkins Es. Peter Clerk, Mayor of Noting. Archd. Walton.
Miles Leigh, offic. Ioh. Treton, John Brown. Rob. Evington, and Tho. Bolton,
preachers.
persons near to Notingham, 17. witnesses were deposed, who directly prove
such admitable things to be done or suffered by the said Summer, that neither
Art nor Nature can compass the like. Besides these 17. the names of others to
the number of 60. or thereabouts, were taken in writing, ready to be deposed
of the same and the like. But the Commissioners being wearied with examinations
of witnesses, and seeing Summer before their faces violently cast into one of
his sitts, so as he wallowed with his body stretched out at length with an
exceeding swiftnes from one end of the rowme where they sat unto another, and
being pulled by the cares and pricked with pinnes in his leg and hand, of
purpose to try whether he had any feeling or not, yet he remaining senseless,
and no blood following, the^ they thought it needless to proceed any further

Namely, Miles Laigh, Ioh. Treto^ Tho. Bolton.
At the same time there was seen to three of the Commissioners only (the
rowme being also full of people) a black dog running about Sum. head as he
lay before them snuffing at his mouth, which the three Commissioners supposed
to have been a dog in deed, and that others had seen him as well as they,
which was not so. To this vision accords the speech which Some. uttered when
the Commissioners willed him to declare unto them, who had persuaded him to say
he did counterfeit, whereunto (being interrupted as it seemed by the Devil) he
stutteringlie answered, That the black dog which brought him the bag of
gold, did bid him say so.

To second the truth of the extraordinary handling of this Some. Master
Treton, Master Brown, and Master Ivington, commissioners, M. Hildersham, M.
More, and M. Brincesley, all godly preachers, and some of them of great renown
for learning and grauiue, besides many Gentlemen and others of good credit,
volu^tatilie have offered to testify the truth in the premises, but they have
been rejected and sharply censured. Petitions have been made for copyes of the
allegations and depositions against this matter, and for awarding of new
Co^missions to indifferent persons for more full satisfaction: but hitherto
none of these could be obtained, no not much as patient audience, or any
judicial course of proceeding.

On the other side, the bare report of Some that he did counterfeit, and was
instructed thereunto by M. Darrell (though it be impossible to be true without
the impeachment of the oaths of infallible witnesses) is held for
authentical, and long libells or legendis drawn thereupon, which may be
confuted by manifold witnesses, if they might be heard. But as if it were more
then high treason to affirm the contrary to that which one man relying upon
Some. relation has avouched to the L. Archb of Canterb and it may be to your
LL. and other personages of hie estate to be true, all witnesses without
respect of their authority in the common wealth, their learning, gravity, and
approved credit, are scornfullie contemned, or insolentlie charged to meddle no
more in this matter, although it has pleased her most excellent Maiestic, by
one of the Gentlemen of her privy Chamber M. Fulk Crowill.
to give special commandment, that the cause receive indifferent hearing.

If the boys words be of such credit that none may impugn them, why should
not his words sealed at other times with oaths and exec^ations be of like
value? After his dispossession and repossession, being sometimes come to him
self, he voluntarily with his own hand writing (which is yet to be seen)
shows how it came to pass that he was induced to give out that he had been a
cou^terfeit, not upon any ground of the truth, but by the threats of Satan
and his instruments. His own words are these: Being at A house of correction
in Notinghars.
Sent Jones, there came unto me a thing like unto a Dog, and said unto me, And
if I would consent unto him and say that I was a cou^terfeit, he would give me
a bag of gold, and if I would not, he would make me be hanged, or else he
would tear me in pieces: Note this.
And if I would, I should do any thing that I would take in hand. And he would
come to me like a Mouse, and would * an ass he means.
help me. And there came to me a thing like a Nass, and said, if I would not
say that I was a Counterfeit, he would cast me into the well, and so went
away. And Nicholaies Shepand said, and if I were in a fit again, he would
fetch a pair of Knipknapes and a roape, and he would make me co^fess. that he
was a cou^terfet
confess, or else hang me. And John Couper and Shepeard said, and if I would
say, that I was a Counterfeit, that Master Me^re and the Aldermene would give
M. Mayor.
me ten pound, and I should set up any trade what I would, and I had better say
that I was a Counterfeit, and live like a man, then to have nothing. For if I
should say, that I was not a Counterfeit, and go into the Clergies haude, I
should have nothing. Out of which words of his, may be observed, that this
apparition of the Dog, consorteth with that which the three Commissioners
aforesaid did see, and Some. did utter in the audience of diverse: Also that the
Devil and his agents conspire in one complott against this mighty work of the
Lord Jesus. Lastly, that it is no marvel though Some. delude the unbelievers
by some rare actions, seeing the Devil promised to help him in any thing he
would take in hand. Thus Some. is confuted by Some. him self.

Yet because experience has proved that this Some. is a viz. to his M. etc.
known by the name of Friar. H.
villainous wretch, and has discredited him self to his friends by sundry lewd
practices of theeuerie and knauerie since the Bish. of L. was possessed of him
(which yet are concealed as Secreta imperij, Matters of State, and may not be
spoken of in any case) therefore for more surety least these prankes should be
disclosed, Commissions have been addressed into Notingham, to gather better
ground for these surmises. But contrary to the commendable course of
proceedings under your LL. in the Commissions sent to Noting.
courts of Justice, those Commissions have been directed to the maine
Adversaries and informers against the defendant: he not joining in commission
with them, not having knowledge when they were granted, or when or where they
were to be sit upon. The witnesses that voluntarily offered to be deposed for
the truth, were repulsed: all partial persons that could be thought upon,
were presently called. Such as were unwilling to depose, to satissie their
malice, were threatened to be sent Katherine Wright.
to London, and one was put in fear that she should be burned, because she
would not falselie depose against her knowledge. These and such like exorbitant
courses (tedious to be recounted) have been used: every term and vacation
(for the space of a year) yielding straung example of new greeuance. To omit
many particulars. Only I commend one or two particulars to your LL.
consideration. Thomas Gray of Langloy in the County of Leicester, Esquier,
having bin heretofore Master unto Some. was by the Bish. of Land. etc. although
the Gentleman was bold to tell him, that his dealing should be made known unto
his betters likewise. Whereas Master Darrell had been employed about the
dispossessing of Thomas Darling of Burton upon Trent, into who^ one Alice
Goodridg had sent her familiar Spirit called Minnie (as her self confessed,
and for the same was condemned as a witch by the Queens Justices, according
as in the Treatise following is declared) Now to the end there might be gained
some supplement of proof to give color to the pretended counterfeiting
between M. Darrell and Some. the said Darling and others have bin examined upon
their oaths by the aforenamed Bish. and drawn to confess contrary to the
truth, as them selves have avouched, that Darling was a mere counterfeit, and
was neither possessed nor bewitched. Whereby the judgment given by the Queens
Justices against the said Alice, for bewitching of Darling, is directly
deseated and impeached, especially, if Sentence should be given herein. For if
Darling did counterfeit, then he was not bewitched: and if he was not
bewitched, then was the judgment and execution against Alice Goodridge
erroniously and wrongfullie awarded. Whether this practice may stand with the
statute of Provision and Praemunire, and with the honor which is due to the
Temporal Courts, your LL. wisdoms ca^ best determine. Or if it be not in case
of Praemunire, it is an abuse which your LL. being now acquainted therwithall,
will see redressed.

By this short recapitulation of indirect proceedinges, and that in a matter
concerning Christ our common Savior, contrary to the Royal commandment of
our most gracious and soucraine Lady the Queens Majesty, her Jaws and
lawful liberties of her loyal subjects, you see what cause I have to exhiblie
this short Apology unto your LL. humbly craving that you would allow some
spare time to read it over: assuring my self, that though it be penned in
simplicity without colors and pomp of humane learning, yet it will leave
such impression in you, as you will not only incline to the cause, but also by
your authority, clear it of scandal.

It will be (perhaps) objected, that by publishing this A cunning praectise to
entitle the state to private abuses.
Treatise, I go about to raise mutinies among ye Queens subjects, or to
discredit the Ecclesiastical sta^e, or her Majesty's commission for
ecclesiastical causes, which never came within the intention of my purpose.
All mutinies either among the Subjects or against my dear Sovereign, I detest
from my heart to the lowest hell. And if one ecclesiastical person among the
Commissioners be challenged before your LL. who are his betters, and equal in
commission, and have authority to redress his abuses, what is this to the
Ecclesiastical estate or hie Unskillful men are never good Iusticers.
Commission, which ought to be honored of all loyal subjects? Again,
although by the means of the foresaid party (as being unacquainted and
ignorant how to proceed orderly in matter of Justice) it has been already
Sentenced before hearing.
given out, for this year last past, that all is counterfeit and Dorrell a
cousener, as if he had been deliberatelie heard, the witnesses on both sides
indifferently Discrete Iusticers chide not before the party be co^uicted.
examined and produced, and the Sentence in fine iudicially and solemnly
pronounced, yet in very truth the matter depondeth "undecided: Therefore I
trust that without offense, we not being admitted to inform your LL. according
to the course of ordinary proceedinges, Inauditi tanquam innoce^tes percunt.
may somewhat extraordinarily in duetifull submission, endeavor to arrest
judgment, which being so vnduelie followed, cannot be lawful.

Thus referring the consideration of these things to your HH. I beseech the
Lord almighty, to continue and increase your cares for the service of her
Majesty, the benefit of this Church and common Wealth, to the enlargement of
all true honor to your selves with comfort at the time of your death, a
blessed memory after life, and eternal happiness to your bodies and souls
in the life to come for evermore. AMEN.

Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur, aut disseisietur de libero
toneme^to, vel libertatibus, vel liberis Enquire Whether this royal law does
not bind a Bishop
consuetudinibus suis, aut utlagetur aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo destruatur
nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittenius, nisi per legale iudioium parium
suorum, vel per legam tortae. Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus
iustitiam aut rectum. Magna Carta. Cap. 29.
That William Summers did not counterfeite a possession, but was in deed
stranglie and snpernaturally afflicted by the operation of Satan (as we verily
think) actuallie possessing him.
IN the Gospel there are diverse signs set down of Satan his actual
possessing one, as Mark. 5. 5. Luke 9. 39.
cryinge, Mark 9. 18.
gnashinge the teeth, Mark. 9. 18. 20.
vvallowing, Mark 9. 18, 20. Luke 9. 39.
foming, Mar. 17. 25. Mar. 9: 22.
extraordinary and Mar. 5. 3. 4. Acts 19. 16.
supernatural strength, Mar. 5. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7. Act. 16 16, 17. Mar. 1. 25, 26.
and 9. 26 Act. 8. 7.
supernatural knowledge, with sundry others to the number of 18. but these
and every of the rest, have been seen in Summer, it must needs therefore be,
that Satan possessed him: for where the proper sign, or signs of a thing
is, there is also the thing signified thereby: where smoke is, there is fire.

That he was dispossessed, the signs thereof confirm: which are, Crying
aloude, renting sore, and lying as dead: these were seen and heard at the
instant of his deliverance.

Against this it is objected, That he has only counterfeited a possession,
being thereunto schooled by me.

To the former part thereof I answer, That sundry of these things, which
have been done, or rather suffered by him, are such, as are impossible to be
counterfeited, that is to be done by any art of man how cunning soever he be:
as the extraordinary and supernatural Actions or passions of his body,
strength and knowledge.

1 The manner of Some. handling during his pos.
There has been seen and felt a swelling which did run through all the parts
of his body: in some part Supernatural actions or passions.
of his body it was of the bigness of an egg, in some other bigger or lessen:
being now in the one arm, it would be forth with in the other, and so of the
legs: it was seen in his forehead and other parts of his face, yea in his
tongue. Being in his eye or toe, and he uttering these words, I will go out
at his eye, or, I will go out at his toe, it was seen presently to vanish,
or remove out of that place.

2 When this Swelling was in his arm or legs and made any stay there, as
often it did, then, and during that time, the same member was as heavy and
inflexible as so much iron.

3 His body was of that exceedinge weight, that diverse at once could scarsly
lift him.

4 He fomed abundantly (like unto the horse) and that for an hour together,
so as it roped down all along on his breast, and yet ever and anon was wiped
away.

5 In his fit neither did the temples of his head, nor the pulses of his hands
beat or move.

6 He lay for the space of an hour as if he had been dead, cold as ye, his
face and hands black, no breath being perceived to come from him.

7 Being oftentimes cast into the fire, with his hands sometimes in the fire,
sometimes his face, lyeing there also a while, He was not burnt at all.

8 He did speak distinctlie with a continual speech for a quarter of an
hour, his mouth being shut close.

9 He spoke with his mouth wide open, yea his tongue tetorted into his throat,
and namely these words: Ego sum Deus, ego sum Rex: that is, J am God, I am
King. Whichhe retortinge was usual with him, and so done, as no parcel of
his tongue was to be seen in his mouth.

10 He was in his fitts without feeling to the judgment of those which saw
him. Pinnes being thrust deep into sundry parts of his body (sometimes up to
the head,) he stirred not at all, neither did any blood issue at the places so
pricked.

Supernatural strength.
His Strength was often such, that 3. 4. 5. sometimes 6. men could not rule
him. Three men for an hour together sweating and laboring much, he struggling
with them, was not perceived to pant, or blow: yea scarselio to take breath: he
holding his finger upright: a man of great strength could not bend it toward
the palm of his hand, nor hold and keep it downo when it was bended.

Supernatural knowledge.
His Knowledge was such, that by vettue thereof he told of those things which
were done and spoken diverse miles of him at the same instant they fell out, and
foretold things to come. From hence also it was that diuinelike he continued
his speech in expounding the Creed for an hour together.

Hereunto add that most rare accident, That under the Couerlet where he lay,
there were certain things sometime four or five at one instant stirring and
moving under our hands as if they had been kittlings, whelps, or such living
creatures: the couerlet being fuddenly cast up, they vanished away: but thrown
down, they were presently there again, and this continued about ten days
and nights by times.

The first of these has bin deposed by 11. the Test some by 4. by 5. and some
by more or less witnesses, these few excepted where this mark (x) is, which
notwithstanding are as true as the rest, and to be deposed.

There are besides these diverse others, as the drawing of his mouth awry,
sometimes to the one ear, sometimes to the other: the setting of his face
against his back: a violent beating of his face and head to the ground, and
the casting of him self headlong against the wales, and posts of the house,
so as one would have thought he would have spoiled or bruised him self
greatly thereby, yet received he no hurt at all: the gatheringe of him self of
a rouud heap, and bou^sing up a good height being so geathered, a strange
voice which was sensibly heard to come out of his body: his unnatural
swelling, his body being twice so big as naturally it is, and his strange
wallowing or swift rolling of him self, with his body stretched out to his
full length.

If these things, most strange and admirable, can be done by any human
skill, I deny not but that he may be a counterfeite: but until that shall
appear, I must needs subscribe them to some supernatural power, and that is
the Devil: for some cause of these rare effects must be had, and that must be
either natural or supernatural, but a natural cause hereof can not be given,
of necessity therefore there must be some supernatural, which was an evil
spirit possessing him, for the reason aforesaid.

Against these impossibilities much is said, but let the same be well examined
by the premises as a rule, and it will manifest the same makes nothing
against us.

Objection, That Some. Co^sesseth he did conuterfeit.
But the main thing that is objected for the proof of his dissembling is his
own confession.

Answer.
Thereto I answer, that no man cu^fessing or reporting any impossibility, of
him self is to be credited, which Summers does in this report of him self.
If Some. should say that he (by good footemanship) has gone on foot in one
day from Barwick to Dover, none would believe him: why then do any credit him
in this his confession? for it is no more possible for him to go that journey
in that time, then by his own will and power to do those things which are
about specified, which he in saying he has cou^terfeited affirms he has
done. If this be a certain truth, that these things he could not possibly
do, which all men may grant, then forasmuch as 20. witnesses or therabout,
have upon their oaths ascribed the same unto him, or some other power in, or
by him, it must necessarily and inevitably follow, that if they have sworn
truly, and the hundred say truly which daily bear witness thereto, and are
ready to depose the same, if they might be called, then he is a Iyar in saying
he counterfeited: Choose now whether you will believe W. Some. or this other
company. If he say crvelie, they are perjured: for upon their oaths they
have avouched these things by him, which can not possibly be cou^terfeited. And
if they swear truly, he lies (...) he dissembled. And here we (...) ^^member
that the question is not ^^^ther Some. did (or suffered) the thing above
specified, as whether he had such a variable swelling, running up and down
along his body, and so of the rest. For that such things were seen in him,
is already deposed by many: that therefore is out of all question, and most
true, except they be perjured, which is most uncharitable to conceive, and
dangerous to affirm, but the state of our controversy or question is
whether Some. himself by some slight or cunninge of his, did the^: or (that
being impossible) some other power in or by him: they therefore that go from
this point, speak nothing to the matter or against it.

What moved So^. to say that he did counterfeit a possession.
Secondly, the means whereby this confession was compassed, are to be
considered of: First thorough the malice of some, Some. was charged (but most
unjustly) to have bewitched one Sterland to death, whereupon he was called
before the Mayor and Aldermen of Notingham, by the^ for a time imprisoned, so
as his father in law entered bond for his appeara^ce at the Assizes.

2 To this end Satan visibly appearing unto him (as his usual manner is to
those he possesses) sometime promised him gold, and that he would be at hand
to do those things for him he had done howsoever he would have him, if he
would say he had cou^terfeited: at other times threatened to pull him in pieces
if he would not say so. 3. For the obteyning thereof Couper and Shepherd (two
most lewd and evil disposed persons) threatened him: the one to whippe him, the
other to pinch him with a pair of pincers, as appears both by Some.
confession and their own upon their oaths before 12 Commissioners. These
baytes thus laid by Satan and wicked men, caught him, for presently after and
not before, he made the cursed confession of cou^terfeiting: and no marvel,
these things well considered, though he used his tongue against the truth and
God him self and the great work which he had wrought for him, seeing that
thereby he should not only escape (as he no doubt thought) that which Satan
threatened, and have that he promised, which he has hitherto performed: but
also to avoid the present punishment. his keepers threatened to inflict upon
him, and, which was most of all, thereby he should save his life: for he in
saying he had dissembled, was thereby freed from all suspicion (or rather
that malicious and false accusation) of witchcraft, and thereupon made not so
much as any appearance before the Judge of Assise: Whereas undoubtedly if he
had stood to the truth, and never acknowledged any cou^terfeiting, he had
been arraigned and sore laid at for his life. Now the proverb is, life is
sweet: and who (almost) will not make a lie for the saving of his life? If then
any ask the question why he should say he counterfeited, if it were not so? he
has his answer here, for hereby we may plainly see, that there was in
carnal reason much to lead him to that confession, though it was altogether
against the truth.

3. As before so after he had made this wretched confession, and stood in it
for the space of a month, he acknowledged that he never counterfeited, yea in
wretched manner he has betaken him self body and soul to the Devil, if ever
he dissembled, and this he did for x. days, during which time the work of God
was manifest, and that by the confession of the greatest adversary. Now
seeing he has said both ways, and varied so often, even four times. For
first he said and protested, that he did not cou^terfeit, the^, that he did
dissemble, after again that he did not, and lastly, he says and faceth it
out, that he did counterfeit: Why should we rather believe him affirming then
denying, seeing (I say) he has said both ways and alike times of both: yea
who that is wise will give credit to such a double and false tongue?
Considering also how notoriously wicked he is: For take him at the best, and
as him self and others would feign have you: He is an infamous deceauer, having
feigned to be possessed with a Devil, and thereby (if it were so) profaned the
holy word of God, and the holy exercise of prayer and fasting: besides he is
as notorious a liar as ever was heard or read of, and by consequent the child
of the Devil, yea not only a liar but a forsworn wretch, for he has sworn
both ways: lastly, he is an horrible blasphemer, for he has said that
there is no God, and sometimes these words, I am God, as is deposed. These
things considered, do not they greatly forget themselves which will have Will.
Some. a counterfeiter, and my self to have taught him, because Will. So. says
so? Is it not a strange thing that whatsoever this graceles boy says shall be
held for truth: If he say he has Counterfeited, it must be so, though God
and men affirm the contrary, and reason it self say, it is not possible so
to be. When he for pretense hereof alleges many false, foolish, and absurd
things, not once worthy the hearing or aunswering, they are received for true
and invincible arguments thereof. If he say, Jo. Dorrell. taught him, and for
show thereof allege many things as false as false can be, which Io. Dorrell
offers, and is as well able to prove them false, as to prove it true that
ever he was in the Gatehouse, yet that must needs be true. In a word, if Some.
and he alone say many things for his dissembling a possession, and my
schooling him, though against him, and that he says, Many, even hundreds
affirm the contrary, and above 20. have sworn that which proves the same,
and among those some were learned and reverend men, of great wisdom and
godliness: yet behold Will. Some. is believed before them all, What marvel is
it the^ though he be credited and his word, and oath received before mine,
though I be a Minister of Christ Jesus, and such (by the grace of God) as they
which seeking advantage against me, can find none: yet in a word you shall
hear what I say in mine own defense.

That Io. Dor. did not teach Some. to counterfeit.
First, besides that upon mine oath I have denied that I taught him, which
indeed should suffice both the law of God, and that law by which I am to be
judged (except there were some further proof then Some. accusation, as there is
not) I affirm and reason for my self thus: That forasmuch as the aforesaid
strange accidents which were seen in him, cannot possibly be taught or
learned by any, It is impossible therefore that I should have instructed him
therein. 2. He was so straungly handled a month before I set eye on him, how
the^ is it possible that he should have bin taught by me? For whereas it is
alleged against me, that for 4. years or more he and I had our secret
meetings (let that be proved that to my knowledge I ever saw him before the
sift of November 1597. which was but 2. days before his dispossession) and I
refuse no punishment: and before I did see him, I was importuned thereunto by
diverse letters, whereof one came from the Mayor. I am able also to prove by
good witness that I was not desired thither by any direct or indirect means
from my self: now let every one judge, whither it is not likely that I would
not have winded my self into the action by some devise or other, if I had had
any such abomination in hand as is laid to my charge. Moreover, Some. says,
that when he, to this said end, repaired to me (I mean, to be taught) he came
from one Mr Grayes of Langly (with who^ as he says he then dwelt) to Ashby de
la zouche, where I then dwelt, as he affirms, and in a park there we met,
and this our meeting began about 4. years past. Now the truth is that he was
gone 2. or 3. years from Mr. Grayes, before I came to dwell at Ashby, and 5.
years before our pretended meeting, for it is ix. years or therabouts, since
he went from M. Grayes, and but 6. years since I went to Ashby. And during my
aboade at Ashby, he never dwelled in that country wherein Ashby stands, nor
nearer it, then Notingha^ is, which is 14. miles distant, and from whence he
himself does not say yt ever he came to me: Thus then the case stands, the
lying youth having charged me with instructing him, and being charged thereupon
of necessity where and when we met to that end, and not knowing what place to
name, at length he bethought him of his dwellinge sometimes with the aforesaid
gentleman, and mine at Ashby: and having none other he named the aforesaid
place, because then as he thought, we dwelt within 5. miles one of another, but
therein he was deceived, as is already by oath proved: this his accusation
therefore is manifestly false. But admit he had dwelt with Mr Gray when I dwelt
at Ashby, does that so greatly confirm our meeting in the park, and my
instructing him there: and yet besides his bare oath (who is such as we hear,
and has sworn the contrary) there is nothing to strengthen his accusation
but this, yea, this is all that is laid to my chardge, save that he adds
that upon the 6. and 7. of November 97. at Nottingham I acted his tricks unto
him, which I have offered (and still do) to disprove by a multitude of
witnesses. And is it not to be vvondred at, that such an open and notorious
liar, as this boy is, should prevail so long and so far against a Preacher
of the Gospel, by so palpable a lie and false accusation as this is. Further
more So. Some. varieth in his testimony.
his own tale herein does so vary, that his accusation can deserve no
credit at all, for to some he reported that he being at Nottingham, vexed
with a strange collike, through much going into the water, I should dome to him
thither from Ashby, and persuade him to say that he was possessed, and that so
we first became acquainted. To others he said, that the first time that he
became acquainted with me, was when I was with Katherino Wright in Darbishire,
which was about 12. years past, at which time he was some 8. years old, unfit
as any man would think, to communicate such a matter unto. Furthermore he
told the Bishop of London (as it may apappeare by one of the articles) that
our first meeting and acquaintance was in the streets at Ashby, I talking with
2. strangers, and that about Katherine Wright forsooth, who departing upon his
coming, we two (as he says) went into the fields together. And now he
says, that our first acquaintance May. Dorrell known to be a man that
hau^teth no alehouses.
was in an alehouse at Ashby, among other boys: Which allegacions as they
severally confute one another, so I am well able (helped by circumstances) to
confute the^ all: wherein if I fail, yea further if I make not mine innocence
and righteousness herein manifest as the day light at midday, so that I may
be heard and have leave to produce my proofs, as I trust in time I shall,
then let me be held guilty, and dealt with accordingly. In the mean season
I will use 2. reasons more in the defense both of the work of God, and my
self. If So. counterfeited, and was instructed thereunto by me, the^ in all
reason the same is true of Th. Darling of Burton, and of those 7. in
Lancashire, for they were Seven dispossessed in Lanc. by M. Dorrels ministry.
al handled alike, and I dealt with them all, and they were all helped by the
same means, that is, prayer and fasting but that is not so, as God and they
will bear me witness: yea, it is a thing abhorring from common sense, so to
conceive of the^; Some. therefore has nor counterfeited, nor I instructed him.
That Th. Darling was no counterfeit.
Against those 7. in La^cashire nothing is objected, but of Darling it is said
that he also cou^terfeited. I answer, that that ca^ not possibly be: for in
the book which is printed concerning him, it is reported that he (being a boy
of 13. years of age) was of that strength that 2. strong men could not hold
him down, or rule him. And in another place, that 3. men could scarslie do
it, which is impossible to cou^terfeit, for no man can add any thing to his
strength by cou^terfeiting. 2. It is said here in sundry places, that his
arms and shoulder bones were in many of his fitts thrust out of joint, and
indeed this has been seen and felt many a time, and by many who are ready
to depose it. Now besides the painfulnes, how is it possible that he should
thrust his bones out of their iointes, and in again, and presently after use
his arms all one, as if no such thing had been done, I can not conceive nor
think any other. 3. It is there reported, in his traunces he uttered
certain speeches there mentioned, with his mouth wide open, Tho. Darring
bewitched.
which is impossible to be done by man. Moreover, the Witch Alice Goodridge by
name, sundry times confessed, that she mistaking Tho. Darling for one Sherrats
boy, sent her familiar or spirit in form of a dog (party colored, redd and
white) called Mynny, to torment him in his body, and that she had caused his
vexation: and further that at her sending of him, she streyned all her body,
and vomited, bidding her Minny to go and do so to the boy, who returning,
said, he had done so. Now the truth is, that besides the child was most
fearfullie tormented in and thorough all the parts of his body, he was much
troubled with vomiting, and making show thereof. It is also to be remembered,
that she named the time, place, occasion, and the words she used, when she
sent the Devil to vex and torment him in his body, as appears page 26.
Herevpo^ this Alice Goodridge was committed to Derby jail, indicted,
arraigned, by the Jury found guilty thereof, and by the Judge sentence
Verdictes and judgments at common law impcached.
given of her to imprisonment: where shortly after she died. These things
considered to say that Darling cou^terfeited, is not only to deny the truth
of the book printed, which (for the substance of it) has been offered to be
confirmed by the oaths of a great many, as is still, if by authority Inquire
whether the Bish. of L. be not in a Praemunire, 27. E. cap. 1.
they shall be thereunto called, but to condemn also besides the Jury, the
Judge, if not of injustice, yet of simplicity. Besides, if the boy
conterfeited, what an intolerable abusing of Judge, Justices of peace, and
Jury is there? And why is not that counterfeiting boulted out by some of the
Worcester in that County, and the parties therein offending punished according to
their deserts? But it may be there is none so wise in that coast. Let them
send then to Nottingham, and crave help from some there: they that found out
Somer his dissimulation, can (no doubt) do as much for Darling too, if they
would but take the pains to make diligent search and inquiry into it. My
second reason is this: If Some. be a cou^terfeit, and I have taught him, then
undoubtedly Marie Cooper his Marie Cooper
sister is such, and has also confederated with us herein, for she cannot
only do some of his tricks (as they call them) but besides, for a time began
her fittes when he ended his: he in like sort following her, having their sitts
by course, and this they did, although they were in several rooms, as I am
able, and offer now to prove by a multitude of witnesses. But hereof as she
will clear me, so it has not hitherto bin said, that she has any hand in
this counterfeit accusation, why then do any charge that upon me? For she in
all reason is (at least) as surely confederate with him as I, or any private
christian: And therefore also I undertook not the means for So. his
dispossession, till I had three other Preachers to join with me: yea I am
persuaded that the faithful prayers of the parties friends may prevail with
God in this case: though no Preacher be present, as in the dispossession of
Thom. Darling it was evident. Only this I hold, that one being possessed,
prayer and fasting is to be used for the casting out of Satan, as a means
appointed of God to that end. And this I doubt not, but I am able to prove by
the holy scriptures, and further to confirm by the testimonies of ancient and
late Writers, and by the practice of the Church in all ages, and the good
success thereof.

Casting out of Devils no miracle.
1 And whereas many co^ceyue of this matter as a Miracle, and therevppon speak
hardly of it, because miracles are ceased, they are therein (by their
patience) as I take it, greatly deceived. To cast out Devils by a word, so
as one no sooner commands the spirit to go out, but sorthwith he departs,
as Christ and his Apostles did, is not only a miracle, but of them the
greatest: but by the means of prayer and fasting to drive out Satan, or
rather to entreat Christ (to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth) to
cast Satan forth is no miracle, because of the said means, for whatsoener is
brought to pass by means, is no miracle, because of the said means, be it
never so wonderful, as might be showed (but for brevities sake) in a thousand
instances. This is mirandum, non miraculum, that is a wonderful work, but not
a wonder. 2. When Satan is cast out, the Church (or any member of it) works
no miracle, for that she cannot in the using of the means, be assured to
prevail. For although the assurance is, or may be great in this case, yet we
can not be sure that the party shall be delivered, the means being used,
because GOD is at liberty to bless the means he has appointed to this, or
that end, and to withhold and to keep back his blessing from it: and in this
latter case, what will any means profit or prevail. As touching my opinions
herein, and matter of learning, I submit my self to the judgment of the
learned, as one most ready to give ear unto them, if they shall inform me
better. And as concerning the matters of fact, and other things reported by
me, If I prove them not ttue in whole and in part, Let Some. be held for a
Counterfeit, and my self his instructor, and both of us condingely punished.

Is it not the manner of the Romans for favor to deliver any man to death,
before that he which is accused have the accusers before him, and have place to
defend him self, concerning the crime. Act. 25. 16.
A brief of the depositions taken at Notingham, the 20. of March 1597. by ver
tue of a commission from the Archb. of York and others her Majesty's hie
Commissioners, before 12. Commissioners of worship, proving that William Summers
of Nottingham, of the age of 20. years, was possessed by Satan, and did not
counterfeit as some pretend.
1 THat there seemed to run along his leg, and thence into his toe, belly,
throat, tongue, cheek, eye, and other parts, a lu^pe sometimes bigger or
lesser then an egg being soft. Deposed by Thom. Hayes, art. 1. Rob. Aldridge,
art. 2 William Hind, art. 3. Tho. Westfield, art. 4 Ioane Pie, artic. 6.
Willi. La^gford, art. 5 John Strelley, art. 12 Richard Me, art. 13 John Pare,
artic. 15. John Clerk, artic. 16 William Hunt, art. 17.


2 The lump being in his leg, it was heavy, and inflexible like iron.
Depos. by John Strelley, art. 12 Ioane Pie, artic. 6. Eliz. Milward, art. 14
John Clerk, artic. 16


3 He had such extraordinary strength, that sometimes 3. 4. 5. 6. or more were
scarce able to rule him. Deposed by Rob. Aldridg, art. 2. Ioane Pie, artic. 6.
John Wood, art. 111 John Strelley, art. 12 Richard Me, art. 13 Willi.
La^gsord, art. 5


4 When 4. or 5. strugled with him, so as they were wearied, he did not sweat,
pante, or cha^gecolour. Deposed by William Langforde, artic. 9. Richard Me,
art. 13 John Wood, art. 11.


5 He walowed, gnashed with his teeth, stared with his eyes, and fomed at his
mouth excessiuelie, having neither eat nor drunk all the day before, as
Langford depos. Robert Aldridge, articu. 2. Willi. Aldred, art. 5. John
Strelley, art. 12 Richard Me, art. 13. William Langforde, artic. 9.


6 There seemed to run under the couerlet where he lay, as it were
kittlinges, to the number of four or five Deposed by Robert Aldridge, artic.
2. Ioane Pie, artic. 6. Thom. Gray, art 10


7 His face and mouth fearfullie distorted, one lipp toward one ear, and
another toward the other, deposed by William Aldred, artic. 5. Ioane Pie, artic.
6. Richard Me, art. 13


8 His face turned directly backward, not moving his body at all, Deposed by
Richard Me, art. 13 Ioane Pie, artic. 6.


9 His neck doubled under him, Deposed by Richard Me, art. 13


10 His body doubled, his head between his legs, suddely plucked round like
a round brown loaf: he was cast up like a ball from the bed 3. or 4. times
together, half a yard hic, depo. by Ioane Pie, artic. 6.


11 Being cast into the fire, where he lay sometimes against the walls and
iro^ bars of the chimney with great violence, he received no appearance of
hurt at all, de. by Ioane Pie, artic. 6. John Strelley, art. 12 Richard Me,
art. 13


12 His body seemed to be extended to the height of the talest man, when once he
endeavored to hang himself, Deposed by Ioane Pie, artic. 6.


13 That he told of diverse things done in his absence, without notice give by
any person, Deposed by Elizabeth Milward, artic. 13 Ioane Pie, artic. 6.


14 Strange speeches uttered by him in his fits, in a strange voice, as, that
he was his, that he was God, Christ, and a King: that he made baptism: I will
use W. So. tongue and members for 3. days: Ego sum Rex, ego sum Deus: That
there was no God, that he was King and Prince of darkness. And in saying the
Lords prayer, could not say, lead us not into temptation, but lead us into
temptation. Also before Master Dorrell had seen him, he said, Dorrel comes,
Dorrell comes, he will have me out, but I will come again, for Notingham and
Lenton are jolly towns for me: Deposed by Robert Aldred, art. 2. Richard
Newton, artic. 5. Richard Me, art. 1^ Elizabeth Milward, artic. 14.


15 Being recovered out of his fitts, he knew not what he had said or done:
Deposed by John Wood, art. 11. Ioane Pie, artic. 6.


16 In his fitts strange smelles were in the place where he lay, sometimes
like brimstone, sometimes very sweet: Deposed by Ioane Pie, art. 6. Richard Me,
art. 1^


17 A straung knocking perceitted about his bed, in his fitts: both his feet
and hands being held immovable: Deposed by Robert Aldred, art. ^ Ioane Pie,
artic 6. Elizabeth Milward, artic. 14. John Parc, artic. 15.


18 He did cry hideouslie, sometimes like a bull, bear, swine, and in a small
voice impossible to be cou^tetfeited: Deposed by William Langford, artic. 9.
Robert Aldridg, artic. 2. Richard Me, art. 1^


19 His leg would be crooked with his falls, and remain unflexible: Depo.
by Richard Me, artic. 13. Thomas Haics, artic. 4.


20 He spoke in a continued speech, his mouth being wide open, his tongue
drawn into his throat, neither his lips nor chaps moouinge: Deposed by Richard
Newton, artic. 7. Henry Nusiey, art. 6. Ioane Pie, art. 6. John Strelly, art.
12.


21 He spoke a quarter of an hour, his mouth being shut close: Deposed by
William Hunt, artic. 17.


22 In his fittes his pulses and temples did not beat: he lay for dead, cold as
Ice: Deposed by William Langford, artic. 9. (...) Milward, artic. 14.


23 His eye was black, and changed color in his fitts: Deposed by William
Hind, ar. ^ Thomas Westfield, artic 4. Richard Me, art 13.


Folio 8. Lin 38. libero tenemento add suo.


