A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE SPANISH STATE, WITH a Dialogue annexed entitled
PHILOBASILIS.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke-Friers near
Ludgate. 1590.

TO THE MOST HIGH MIGHTY AND VIRTUOUS PRINCESS ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD
QVEENE OF ENgland, France and Ireland, etc. be a most prosperous, long and
victorious reign.
IF Caesar, most gracious Sovereign Lady, encouraged his Pilot being fearful
in a tempest at sea, by saying to him, Fear not thou cariest Caesar: how much
more may we be comforted, and fear no wind of fortune, your sacred person
being in our arc, and your royal hand at the stern of our government: for
greater is your Majesty then Caesar, and of more power to give life to the
fifth Monarchy which shall have no end; then he to the fourth almost ended.

To subdue mighty nations remains only in the monuments of time: but to
conquer men with piety (the guidon of all the virtues) is to leave a Trophaea
of your Majesty's victories, so great as no age can comprehend. The
consideration of this moves the world with a reverent regard of your Majesty's
proceedings; which being houed under the wing of God, can suffer no alteration
of time or fortune.

Who would an instance hereof, he can have none more honorable then the
resolution of all men to withstand the Spaniards intended invasion; they being
then most inclined to your Majesty's service when the danger seemed greatest by
the near approach of the Spanish Armado.

Seeing then most mighty Princess, the blason of your virtues is best known
by expressing their barbarous tyranny, contraries being perceived by their
contrary effects, I thought meet in regard thereof (my duty to your Majesty
commanding no less) to display some Spanish colors, whereby the brightness
of your glory issued from your qualified government, may the sooner appear to
all men.

This collection I most humbly Dedicate unto your most excellent Majesty,
beseeching him who has placed you in the royal seat, and miraculously
preserved your Majesty from sundry sorts of great danger, to give your
Highness a most prosperous and long life in assured tranquillity, to the
glory of his name, and comfort of your faithful and loving subjects.

Your Majesty's most faithful, humble and obedient subject, EDWARD DAVNCE.

TO THE NOBLE AND virtuous Reader.
THose may muse, who suck the breasts of change, that by an odious inuectiue
dravving envy, I should stir them who (by the indisposition of time) make
the world tremble before them: but let those know, who, to their loss
desire novelties, that, I being a natural subject of this realm, esteem
nothing my hurt, that may discover the peril and reproach of a common enemy.
Common I term him, who, under color of reformation, seeks to enlarge his
Empire, with the blood of his own sort. Let them then (who affect that
faction) rather desire to have such a common weal (which by false positions)
they think to be dismembered, then none at all. Let them be moreover
persuaded, that there is no religion where there is no care of country,
which I conclude from these principles. First that we can not love God whom
we have not seen, if we love not our neighbors whom we do see. Secondly
that he that regards not his household is worse then an Ethenicke. To procure
then the ruin of a region, and to be guides to that enemy (against whose
avarice being entered, there is no provision to be made) it is to be sea
monsters, and such as scour in the sands of Tagus* Farevvel Noble and virtuous
Reader, with this caution, that upon any danger of thy country, thou place
thy mind in heaven, thy heart in Court, and thy body in thy cuyrasse.

E. D. Gent.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE SPANISH STATE.
PHILIP (the father of great Alexander) having increased his small kingdom of
Macedonia to the Empire of Greece: and considering how needful the favor of
all men was for the life of his reputation in that romth; commanded that daily
ere he came from his chamber, a boy standing at the door should say with loud
voice, Philip remember thou art a mortal man: a course beyond any expectation
of that time; he being derived from Hercules, whom for his excellency, they
feign was translated amongst the gods.

Some who have since that time preferred justice before the other virtues, do
name humility; (as that which belongs only to man) to be the meanest
notwithstanding that she linketh the rest, and is mother to clemency, who
chiefly brings forth the favor of the people.

The regard which this prudent king had to make his succession immovable, and
to raise them to the highest top of glory (as he did by making their foord, by
his affability, tempetance and clemency) is of excellent president for all
Princes: who to effect the like, are to appear before God as men clothed with
humility; and before men as God adotned with clemency: they being both men
and gods respecting their condition of humane frailty; and high place of their
royal dignity.

The error which grows by the abuse of these things is dangerous, as that
which leads either into a manifest tyranny, or a remissness of
government. For how may he that perceives not the passions of men, or
feels not in him self an inclination to mercy; either relieve the people of
their miseries as man, or provide for their infirmities as God?

To seem therefore such who seek a reformation and benefit of the people (a
report very plausible) and covertly to devour many provinces, is a practice
neither of man or God, but of Devils incarnate. I would there were not any unto
whom this might be objected: and that her Majesty whose most noble Progenitors
have deserved well of Spain, might, if for no other cause then the ancient
league between the Crown of Castill and the house of Frossart.
Lancaster, have enjoyed their good neighborhood and friendship of times past.
But seeing that their cheerful countenance (being oppressed with the ill
humors of their ambition) is turned into a melancholy dark, I have thought
good for the benefit of her Majesty's subjects, (some of them having vain
imaginations of the Spaniards excellent gifts and greatness) to draw the
lineaments of their Empire and good nature, by which it may appear how
monstrous the proportion of both is, which they would should seem most
exquisit and comely to all men.

It is certain that Spain is of great antiquity, bearing that name under the
first Monarchy; but when we shall consider the significations of her and of
her first inhabitant, we shall find her age no ornament (as it has been in the
names of the four Monarchies, and of some other nations) but a great
deformity considering her incommodities, and perverse qualities of that people
all natural defects being made more imperfect by continuance or alteration of
times. Touching therefore the significations Gieronimo Ruscelli ^el Ptolomeo.
of that country: (...) (being a Greek word) is interpreted needinesse,
penury and raritie; and was not long after the division of tongues, first
inhabited by the third son of Iaphet named Iobel or Tubal, signifying
worldly, Josephus lib. 1. antiq. cap. 11.
or of the world, confusion and ignomie: which significations meet so iumpe
regarding the state of that counrie, and customs of that nation, as nothing
could be devised apter.

Of this contemptible beginning (which in respect of their meannesse was long
without suspicion of tyranny have they (lothing the streights of Hercules
pillars, and his Plus vltra) extended their limits to the utmost Indians; where
they have erected this Trophaea of Alexanders conceit, Non sufficit orbis; but
how far from the temperance of good Princes, let any barbarian judge, who
would have been glutted with half the miseries of them, with whose evils the
Spaniard is not yet satisfied.

For better expressing the particularities of their policy let us (before we
come to the significations of (...) and Tubal, only for an introductio^ to the
nature of both) observe these four points: First how that that nation rising 1
like the bettle from the cowshern, hurtleth against al things Secondly that
they being of the nature of shadows, which 2
are short the Sun ascending the Meridian; and long, being near the Horizon,
make a deceiptfull proportion of their greatness. Thirdly, that whilst the
great kings of 3
Europe lived, they were obscure, and have only since their time been seen,
like glowe worms shining in the dark. Fourthly, that this region of Spain
(though very 4
ancient) was after the report of Polybius unknown to the Lib. 3. Hist.
old Romans, (the South part excepted) as well in respect of the
unfruitfulness of the soil, as savage and rude life of the inhabitants: all
which concern the significations of that country and inhabitant: but first of
(...).

It is convenient, that we perceive the effects of this name by nearer
circumstances of ages then the former general poincts: in respect whereof, we
must first look 1
backward as far as three thousand years: at which time the Phaenicians
(who were then of the greatest navigations) Diodorus Sicu. rerum anti. lib. 6.
cap. 9.
did buy of them their metal for things of no account and small price: an
argument that either the Spaniards then were of great simplicity (a quality
never growing to a habit in them) or that they had great want of those things
which are ordinary for the life of man, which is an inseparable accident of
the greatest part of their country. Secondly who considers their natural 2
disposition to robbery in the maiden years of Spain, Diodorus Sic. rerum
anti. lib. 5. cap. 2. and li. 6. cap. 9.
would think they had only studied that law Licurgus made in the benefit of
secret theft; neither Hercules though he maistered their countrymen Gerion and
the sons of Chrysaurus; or the Romans who often restrained them, being able
to suppress their theeuerie. But they depend upon this ground, that those
things in which many offend, are always forgiven, and that there is no law
prescribed to necessity.

Thirdly behold their small multitude of people regarding 3
the bigness of their country, being one of the greatest kingdoms of Europe:
which proceeds of the significations of Spain; caritie, penury and want.
For as it is natural that those females that give suck, may bring so many of
their kind as they have tets: so is it monstrous to produce more than they have
means to relieve: this being always a rule, that there is no region which is
fruitful (unless mortality be a depriving cause) but that according to the
good providence of nature it is also populous.

Fourthly, suruay the situation of Spain, which generally 4
yields more rocks and barren hills, than champain and plain fields, from
which (after the midst of June) they reap no profit till the next spring:
their trees and vines excepted, neither have they any great use of their river
waters, which are so troubled and extreme cold in Frossard.
the first part of summer by snowes, that descend from the hills by the heat of
the sun, that they do not only morfound and kill horses, but also men if
they have not the daily use of Garlike, which is esteemed very profitable for
them that drink corrupted water.

Fifthly, observe some causes of their rebellion in the 5
time of the emperor Charles the 5. which were (amongst other mislikes) for
that their coin was transported into Italy, Flanders and Almaine: and their
grain into Portingall Antonio di Gueuara.
their next neighbor: and note also how they are yearly relieved from the
Esterlings and Normandy with corn, and from Brittani with Poultrie.

Sixthly, mark their covetousness: which vice though 6
it be not always in the poor, yet have they more cause to offend therein,
respecting their needy state, than others.

This fault of avarice is no less peculiar to the Spaniards than theft: both
issuing from one fountain, and having their difference but in circumstance of
time, and persons: the first belonging to their Princes, is somewhile named
ambition: the other appertaining to the meaner sort, they would should be
called a military liberty: but we know it by no other name then pilfring and
robbery.

Touching their covetousness, it partly appears in fraudulent shifting their
creditors: partly by their ravenous desire to oppress all parts, and partly by
offending against the affections and dignity of parents.

As concerning the cousinage of their creditors, our Princes have deeplier
tasted their deceit then any others.

Don Piero, being restored to his kingdom of Castill by the only cheualrie
and sole charges of the Duke of Aquitaine Frossard.
then Prince of Wales; entertained his most noble patron and good benefactor
only with promises, and after dispatched him into France with that payment:
which being not current amongst the Gascon and English soldiers, he was
compelled to practice diverse things contrary to the custom of those parts,
which bred many novelties to the loss of those provinces.

The Duke of Lancaster pursuing in Galitia the title of Frossard.
his wife Constance, daughter to Don Piero and heir of Castile: sent the
Archbishop of Bordeaux to Piero king of Aragon, for the arrerages of those
sums he was to pay Edward the third and his heirs Dukes of Aquitan, for
the yearly discharge of 500. horse: but he had no other payment (the
alterations of this Realm not permitting to bring this king to reason) but the
imprisonment of his Ambassador in Barcelona.

The Emperor Charles the 5. as king of Spain, to draw Henry the eight into a
war against France, who had paid him yearly from thence 133. thousand
crowns for John Slei. lib. 3.
his sisters dower and pencion; made himself debtor to the king for that
annual sum; couenanting moreover that if he married not in convenient time,
Marie then Princes, of the age but of seven years, to pay the king four
hundred thousand crowns, besides three hundred thousand crowns that were lent
him: which bills for any thing I know lie in the deck, unless Queen Marie,
to please her husband, cancelled them.

How the French king Charles the 8. released the king L'esiat des maisons
illustres de France.
of Aragon 50000. crowns, his father Lewis the 11. lent upon the Counties of
Roussilion and Parpignan, by mean of that cousining friar, Oliver Maillard, I
let pass with these notes, that as it behooves the kings of France to suspect
the hypocrisy of friars in regard of the ambition Diodorus Sicu. re anti. lib.
1. cap. 3.
of Spain and Lorran: so it stands the king of Spain in hand not to dye in
Egypt, no man being buried there, by an ancient law of that region, (if his
government has bin tyranous) or his debts unpaid.

To return to the second part of their covetousness, overthrowing the
foundation of Justice: if this ground be true that nothing is profitable that
is not honest, these men are too devout seruitors of the Pope, he crying this
Prince sweats, or fetch, to leap like water spaniels at the sacred dignities
of kings, and to enter violently their Domaines established by his divine
order, who said by me Proverb. 8.
kings do reign.

I will justify it, that if the right of Millaine appertain not to the kings
of France, who claimed that Duchy by Valentina grandmother to Lewis the
twelfth, and daughter and heir to John Galeazzo, who had it of the gift of the
Emperor Sigismund, that then it belongs to the Empire. It is also certain
that the Spanish claim to the kingdom of Naples and Sicilia (if the treaty
at Madrick help not) is voidable: the same growing upon the adoption Bernard
de Girard.
of Alphonso king of Aragon, by John the daughter of Lancelot the son of
Charles de la Paix, an usurper of those realms: which for good cause she
retracted in her life, and conuaied her title to Lewis the third, son to
Lewis the second, son to Lewis the first, being Duke of Aniou; and before
adopted by Joan the daughter of Lewis the son of Robert: all which were
lawfully possessed of those Realms. After which Lewis the third Duke of
Aniou, having in him the right of the two Queens, and dying without issue,
left the^ to his brother Rene, who having no issue male, gave his interest to
his brother Charles who dying likewise without issue, left his title by
testament to the french king Lewis the 11. in respect whereof Charles the 8.
his son entered Italy and recovered Naples, where he was crowned. Moreover
the Spaniard neither as king of Spain or Duke of Burgundy has any right to
Holland, Zeland, and Henault, the same having been the patrimony of Iaquet
daughter and heir to Guilliam Duke of Bauiers and wife to John Duke of
Brabant, who died without issue; since which time Philip the Duke of Burgundy
his cosen, and his heir (having their will for law) have violently detained
those provinces. Furthermore, their title to Maiorica, Minorica, and to the
higher Nauar, rests upon these doubts: first that if king Philip were taken
in battle, or intrapped by other means, and imprisoned during his life,
whether Spain should be forfait to him whose captive he were. Secondly, if
Spain were prescribed by the holy father (who many times is implacable)
whether that kingdom were his, who first laid hand thereon. I am persuaded
they would reck on these questions absurd: but if the case be altered with
names, it is cock on the hoope for them, and clearer then the midday. For the
king of Aragons conquest of Maiorica, and Minorica was by no other mean then
by keeping the king of both in prison till his death: of which wrong the king
his son complained to Edward Duke of Aquitan, who assured him, (his wars
Frossard.
ended for Don Piero of Castile) he would yield him all favor possible.

Their chivalry in their thieuish surprising the higher Navarre (which they
hold by force of the Popes proscription) is of like condition: whereby it may
appear that notwithstanding these Caualeros have their Rapiers hanging point
blancke, that it is their penury at home, that gives them stomach, according
to their name that they are Sagaces Hispani, to wind, or smell their neighbors
cupbords abroad.

The late Prince of Orange has declared their injury to Don Anthonio for
Portingall, and God himself, (wherein we have to boast and be thankful) has
with hautie style penned our Apology for England: wherefore I omit both, to
show the last branch of their covetousness, then which there is nothing that
more touches their indignity: for if it be proper to the Lion and Tiger to
pursue with incredible fury, those that bereue them of their whelps: what
greater beastlines can there be in man who has reason, and is not borne for
himself, then contrary to the natural instinct of brute beasts, to make his
issue captive, whom nature made free? as the Spaniards by selling the Indian
women conceived with child by them, have done to their great obloquie.

This kind of avarice caused the Indians to practice new matter: but rather it
may be the divine punishment, considering the simplicity of that people; who
as they could opportunely take the Spaniards, powered melted gold into their
mouths, using Thomyris words to Cyrus head in blood, now drink your fill

To return from whence I digressed, touching their qualities expressing the
significations of Spain. Next to their covetousness their envy is to be
regarded, a vice proper to men of base account, and peculiar above all Prossard.
others to this nation: as well by testimony of Gaston the Earl of Foix (a
Prince of singular magnificence and valor) who (dehorting the Lords of Biern
from serving the king of Castill against the Portingall) told them the
Spaniards were filthy, lousy, and envious of the prosperity of strangers:
which at Iuberoth the French desiring to have the vanward found true: the king
of Castill not being able (in regard of their place) to bring his Spaniards
though 20000. to make supply: by mean whereof, the Lords of Biern with their
retinue, being 12000. were slain. As also by the Duke of Albas reproouing
County Egmond, (who with the aid of our artilery from sea) overthrew the
Frenchmen between Grauelin and Dunkercke: which victory the Spaniard imputed
only to the Counties temerity, and for recompense of his valor, could not
after aford him his life.

Hitherto have I proved the significations of Spain as causes by their
effects, or maxims by their consequences: now remains to speak of Tubal,
signifying, of the world, worldly, confusion, and ignomy.

Some may think that what has been said for Spain belongs also to Tubal;
but I am of another mind: for as it follows not necessarily, that whosoever
is rich, is therefore proud, high minded and insolent, no more is it
consequent, that the poor are worldly, confuse, and ignominious: many of both
sorts being such whom God does love: in respect whereof, it behooves me to
handle this, as the other a part; to make apparent that they are no less
confuse, and ignominious, than naturally poor and miserable.

As for these words, worldly, or of the world; although their gross ignorance
of divine things may be proved thereby, yet for that they belong to my Masters
the Divines, I let them pass.

First therefore as touching confusion, it is a perverting or confounding the
comeliness and order of things Divine, natural, and civil; by mean whereof a
detriment or deformity of our persons, dignities, or states presently ensues.

As concerning things Divine, there is no nation that so confounds their use,
and seems religious not being so, as the Spaniard for an instant.

Ferdinando and Isabella after they had recovered Granado from the Mores, were
presently entitled the most Christian Princes: which being stomached by
France, they had after the name of Catholic, which did no less hurt then the
title of universal or supreme bishop: for having so glorious an addition
annexed to their new kingdom, they studied to do somewhat, savoring also of
novelty, that might seem worthy of the holy fathers favor, and their
Epitheton: in respect whereof they established a company of the order of
Dominicks, to look into the corrupt life and manners of the Mores and Jews of
Spain, whom they named fathers of the holy Inquisition.

These Fathers as dropped from heaven, gave great hope of their proceeding to all
men; for in short space, all Mahumatisme and Iudaisme, seemed by their diligent
search to be extirped in Spain: neither was there any thing expected from
them, but the effects of piety, and propagation of Christianity: their
advantage to this sentence, The workman is worthy his hier, excepted; which
greatly enriched their holy house with confiscate goods, but after their trade,
in which they had found some sweetness, began to decay at home; they thought
good (as grayhounds missing wolves do fall to sheep) to make it current at
Naples, which the Princes and people of that kingdom a while withstood: but
being after terrified, partly with the Popes censures, partly with the power of
the Emperor Charles the 5. they accepted it, Sed iniquis conditionibus.

Having gotten free passage for this new creature in Italy, they attempted to
make it known to our world, where it bred such Antiphisicall effects, by
tearing the union of Belgia, and renting our peace, that if ever this saying
were found true that Religion brought forth riches, and the daughter deuovvred
the mother, it was then when their avarice, cloked with Christian reformation,
filled all places with proscriptions, slaughter, and flame.

Moreover, where the Greek Tau (having some form of a cross) was amongst the
Egyptian Hierographicall letters in great admiration, as containing divine
mysteries: and furthermore, where the Emperor Constantine had Eusebius. lib. 9.
cap. 9. Eccle. Hist.
revealed unto him that he should vanquish the tyra^t Maxentius in the same
sign: these minions notwithstanding they magnify these presidents, naming all
Lutheranos, and Burrachios that adore not the same: yet without any religious
fear, (which no Jew would do, esteeming swine unclean) drue the Judge of
Tordissillas out of a Church, and strangled him upon a gallows between two
hogs, as Christ was crucified between two thieves, wherein they blasphemed
not the sign, but the thing signified.

This report Antonio di Gueuarra (a man of more qualified condition than their
country yields, made in his Oration at Braxinia to the Knights of the
assembly.

He affirmed also in his Epistle to the bishop of Zamona, chieftaine of the
rebels in Spain, that one of his priests standing behind a window at
Tordissillas, overthrew eleue^ of the Emperors soldiers with his Hargabusse:
with which each time before he slew one with the bullet, he crossed himself.

Let Charles the fifth censure their Pageants with their holy father, and his
venerable company under Bourbon, at that time his son Philip was borne: he
doubting whether he had more cause to glory in the birth of his son, or to
lament their contempt of the Pope, and holy places.

I deny not but some Almaines had their hands also in that matter, but the
fault belonged to no other then the Spaniards: (who the Duke of Bourbon being
slain) commanded the army, and were masters of the field.

In reproouing of their abuse, either of the Cross or Pope, let no man take me
that I esteem them as things Divine or holy: I speaking only according to
their opinion of both, which they reckon divine and holy.

Now comes in place the second part of confusion, which consists in
violating that order which has bin prescribed by nature, for preservation of
honesty, and the excellency of man.

This schoolemistris, was of her self dainty and most excellent, till the
serpent deflowred her, and the Spaniard abused her favor: notwithstanding
which, she aloweth not the desire of man to increase his like, in unlawful or
uncomely sort: both which are against the dignity and intention of Nature,
whose object is honesty. Her laws are, that we be followers of modesty, that
a Parent should cherish his child, a husband his wife, and all living
creatures should live pacified with them of their own kind. But to use women
forcibly in public places, or in the presence of many, as some phrenticke
persons accustom Sansoninus de Regnis.
in Fez: or for Parents to kill their children, husbands their wives, and one
people many Nations, she detesteth, as customs unfit for men, and not used
(the first excepted) by fierce and unreasonable creatures.

I mean to cite but few examples, yet such as may no less express this
confusion, then the print of Hercules foot his whole stature.

At their first arrival in the West Indes (there accounting nothing unlawful)
exercised all tyranny on that people, who having till then enjoyed a long
liberty, esteemed the Spaniards more dangerous than wild beasts: in respect
whereof many flying their servitude, cast themselves from rocks: other pined
themselves with famine, and some cut their throats with sharp stones: neither
spared the Indian women that were with child to take venomous potions, and to
rippe their wombes to set free their infants from the cruel bondage of Spain.

But this booted not, the Spaniards minding rather to reserve them to foul
uses, and to aid them in their slaughters, then they should pine, or end their
lives by any other mean then their chivalry.

Having therefore recovered such as Fortune spared, they shamed not, driving
them as droues of beasts, to ravish the women having children fastened to
their necks, both their own bands and the Indians beholding them.

But what durst not these rutters do amongst a naked, and simple people, that
omitted no outrage in a country having laws, walled towns, and armed men? for
many thousand of like stuff receive this one for proof of the rest.

At Insul a town in Flaunders, three of these gallants entered a citizens
house wholly of their faction; where two of them held the husband, whilst the
third ravished his wife in his presence: who crying for help, and having two
neighbors come to his rescue, the Spaniardes also cried Spain (a watch word
to assist their villainies) whereupon diverse of their company repaired to them,
accusing the husband and his neighbors of riot, for which the one was adjudged
to be whipped, and the other to be hanged.

Let this much suffice for that vice, wherein they contend only with
unreasonable creatures: somewhat being to bespoken also of their murder and
cruelty, which belongs to this part of confusion, wherein they alone have top
and top gallant.

Solon having given laws to the Athenians, was demanded why he made not one
for parricide: for that says he, I think no man so beastly to commit it. The
Philosopher thought nature to have great authority in this matter; but seeing
that love only descends, she commands little.

That the child has murdered the parent, moved by a covetous desire, either
of patrimony or government, is more apparent in the line of Othomano then
piety would: but for the father to kill his innocent son, or the husband his
chaste wife, besides that family and the act of Herod, I know no authentike
proof, unless Spain can yield some president for both.

In the year 1568. the Duke of Alba descending with the Terrezans of Milan and
Naples into the lower countries, upon pretense of pacifying that state: and
leaving no kind of tyranny unexercised, gave great mislike of his doings to all
men: especially to the young Prince of Spain, who often complained of his
cruelty in those provinces: the government of which belonged (as he said no
less to him in the life of his father, then it did to Philip (who had the
same) in the time of Charles the fifth.

This complaint though it seemed just to some, yet others, chiefly the fathers
of the Inquisition, reproved it as matter to be suspected, and savoring more of
novelty then appertained to one of his years: by which slander they brought
him into common hatred, specially of his father, who being wholly addicted to
his secreat pleasures, easily believed any thing: in respect whereof, and that
he had made committies for hearing all matters of State: it was thought meet
by them to restrain the Prince of liberty, as a man without other practice,
knowing the greatness of his mind, to shorten his time, although he died not
without suspicion of poison.

The Queen of Spain during his restraint (presuming much on her place, and
pitying his innocence and tender years) solicited the king to receive him
again into favor: but the malice of the Princes adversaries prevailed both
toward him and the Queen, whom they found no less zealous for the peace of
Belgia, then for the kings honor: for which cause they ordered that both their
hearses were within one month, which I saw at Antvvarpe lamented with tears,
and at Naples solemnized with joy: so great a matter it was for the provinces
to loose good Princes, and for the Spaniards to be rid of them, by whose
piety and wise providence their avarice and cruelty had been bridled, and so
small a thing it is in Spain, for a father to murder his son, and a husband
his wife: the one being after the French phrase Le petit fills of two Emperors
and the son of a king: the other the daughter of a king, the sister of kings,
and wife of a king.

Some may object that these reports are scandalous, and belong rather to the
Council of Spain, and fathers of the Inquisition, then to the king.

I confess that besides public fame, which suffizeth to drive the accusant
to his purgation; I can oppose but these grounds. First, that he who propelleth
not an injury if he may, is no less faulty then he that offers the wrong:
secondly that those subjects, whose Prince regards not by what mean his
son and wife were oppressed, are not to hope the defense of his civil or
martial sword.

Now remains their confusion of things civil, which I ascribe not only to
the subversion of positive laws, privileges and customs; but to the
overthrow also of that society, which ought to be between men of one nation, or
several countries, for maintaining their particular quiet.

That they have subverted the civil state by altering of ancient ordinances, I
hope they will not deny: which if they do, their policy in Belgia (framed by
Escou^do secretary to Don John of Austria) ( vz. that the king must chastise
one Province by an other to be made absolute in all) being compared with the
privileges and customs of those Provinces, granted in the Bull of gold, and
since confirmed by their Princes, will convince them of great impudency. For
if amongst other things contained in that Bull, the Princes of Belgia are
prohibited to amplify the Ecclesiastical state further then has been
prescribed, or to leauie any money, or to make any innouatio^ in matter of state
without consent of the Nobility and people: or to place forenners in the
civil government, unless in some small offices, with this caution, that if
they fall into any of these errors, their subjects (making due protestation)
are absolved from their obedience: what is it to enjoin diverse towns of
Brabant to receive Bishops, the united Provinces the Spanish Inquisition, and
Spanish and Italian governors? and to impose this burden, that besides the
yearly tenth of men's goods, nothing is bought and sold to the use of the
body, out of which the kings officers try not a part of silver? What other
thing I say is this alcumie, then the rooting up of a State planted by the
hands of good Princes, then which there is no injustice more capital?

To antiquate these things seems no other, then the cancelling of society,
but they are distinct, and but in part like: some obeying no ordinance, and yet
having mutual society; which grows by a secret agreement of nature making
them conversant.

By which I collect the confusion of society amongst men living under one law,
is their morositie only.

This vice is rife amongst them, and wherein the Spaniard has his difference
from all men, as well for offending therein their own persons, as private
persons the Sovereign, and the Sovereign the subject: as also private persons
one another: in all which they have predominatiou, and if it were possible
exceed them selves.

For sinning against their own persons behold a rare example. Don Piero of
Castill the son of Alphonso the xi. leading the vantgard of a battle against
the Mores of Granado, and being advertised that his uncle Don John, who was in
the arergard, was like to be distressed by a sudden eruption of Mores: and
finding him self unable to relieve Piero Messie.
his uncle, his soldiers departing the field, was so surprised with
beastlines, that he fell from his horse dead: which when Don John was certified,
he died also. A matter says the author, not before heard, that a man should
die of displeasure: yet presidents no less rare in their sort do follow: but
first of offenses against the Sovereign.

A Spaniard beholding Ferdinando (grandfather to Charles the fifth) in
procession at Barcelona, that day they name Corpus Christi feast, struck him so
furiously with a dagger on the neck, that he had slain him if the greatness
of his chain had not put by the thrust: and that for no other cause, as he
confessed being taken, but that the king stood not in his good grace, and that
he liked not his countenance: an opinion no less dainty then that of the
Roman Senate: for as they esteemed not on a God, who Eusebius. Eccl. hist.
was not allowed by their authority, no more would this yonker that any should
have the name of king, that had not dignity of person agreeable to his romth:
which villanus temeritie has given just cause for Princes to withdraw their
ordinary presence from the common subject; and to bring in this custom, that
no man wears a dagger in Spain.

But now to their confounding of society with the subject: for the sequel,
of singular president for all princes.

Ferdinando the fourth of Castill, for displeasure only against two knights of
good name, made their process of execution; and though supplications were
offered with tears for pacifying that rigor, yet contrary to the lions nature
(who spares the humble) he proceeded with all severity: in respect whereof
the two knights appealed to the great judge, before who^ they summoned the king
to be in person within twenty days; the last of which, Ferdinando appeared.

Time may rather want then just matter to blase their vices, which are not
common, but rare and in the highest degree of beastliness: leaving therefore
their murdering the Nobility of the sacred order of Burgundi, their cutting
out, and searing with hot irons the tongues of honest Citizens, their drawing
the mouths of some a sunder with other instruments, their wilful murdering
a father at Traiect beyond the Mose, for lodging his son one night; their
banishing chaste matrons, for receiving their husbands, an act condemned by no
good law, for the inseparable bonds of their love: their furious beastliness
at Turnace upon the citizens and a widow named Potier whom they slew with her
daughter and niece; and their massacring with bullets the unarmed people at
Ipre beholding a godly minister put to death: I will touch only their
barbarous inhumanitie toward the naked Indians, a people very tractable, if
they had found good masters, and such as had skill of honesty.

Setting the acts of Moses and Joshua a part, I think there is no president that
the godly have rooted out the natural inhabitants of any country: but that the
wicked have chastized sinners, many passages, both of divine and profane
writings have testified. It is then apparent that the Spaniards as idolaters
were suffered to chastise idolaters, and not to enlarge the faith: for had
their intention been to have learned those simple souls the true knowledge of
God, (as they made show at the first by erecting in some regions diverse
Bishoprics and schools) they would either have continued that order, or have
bin conversant with them in all mildness and humanity: piety being no way
better taught then by demonstration: but as they could seem no others then
they were: no more could the Indians gather grapes of thorns: in respect
whereof though at the first this naked people might have been molded into any
form, yet after they had tasted the Spanish Creados, they abandoned their
company, with all rites and ceremonies of the Romish religion, which many of
them had reverently before received: neither was there any death so fearful,
whether by poison, famine, or other mean before mentioned, that in respect of
the cruelty of those Don Diegos, they would not have willingly embraced as
their sure port of rest and end of their evils.

In describing the miserable state of these wretched people, Metellus says,
that to a very ill president, many of the Spanish soldiers punished their
servants most grievously; if either they brought not home their day hier, or
finished not their task in the gould and silver mines, or had committed smaler
faults yealding them (their hands and feet being bound to a cross pale) in
steed of their supper, many stripes with cord, or the sinnewes of a Buphal;
dropping on them either boiling pitch or oil: and after washing them with salt
water they would lay them so long upon a table, as they imagined those wretches
might bear the pain: after this kind of cookerie, if a more cruel master
hapened to some of them, they were buried all night in earth to the neck, as a
present remedy for their stripes. If any of them died in this new diet (as it
chanced very often) the master accompting to the King the heds of his slain
servants was quited of the pain of manslaughter. This cruelty some excuse
says Metellus by the law of Baion: But it appears upon just cause wicked to
all men, as being void of all piety.

Touching this barbarous cruelty he brings in also one Alquinotec baptized
Cacicnis of the province of Iucatana, complaining to Monteius general of that
province in these or the like words.

Our nation, Monteius, whilst I was a boy, was grievously afflicted with a
disease causing them to vomit worms, whereof the greatest part died: after
which (falling by degrees from on evil to another) we had wars with them of
Mexico; wherein we lost mo then an hundred and fifty thousand; all which, in
respect of the slaughter and cruelty that we receive of thee, Monteius, and of
thy soldiers, we esteem nothing. Metellus further affirms, that the
Spaniards having wasted many provinces with their cruelty; and transporting by
sea (from other places better peopled) sundry of those miserable and wretched
Indians) murdered many by pestering them in the bottomes of their ships: some
by famine, and some by their daily stripes, so that few or not one of the^
landed, that were embarked.

He moreover specially notes for the rest, one Piero Calis, who (in driving
whole droues of that naked people) slew all that were not able to travel,
without regard of age, sex, or their use of labor, which in respect of a
continual ease, was most hard and intolerable to them.

He lastly concludes with Macchiauel (who maintains that where the Pope and
Cardinals set footing, they leave most fearful printes of confusion) that in
what place the Spaniards display their ensigns, nothing is to be looked for
but cruelty and slaughter, and all misery: The province of Cumanus, of
700000. having scarce any remaining: Hispaniola of 2000000. having left but
200. or 150. and Hondurensis of 400000. but 8000. besides the slaughters of
Cuba, Iamica, and Portus diuitis.

Thus far Metellus, by which I collect, in respect of a Sympathia between
the creatures of several kinds, that the Spaniards are no less dangerous, in
regard of their cruelty, then the Basilisc, both having a desolate and wast
Empire: as also that those Indians having beheld more miseries then all the
Nations of the earth, have been reserved for the hands of this cruel and
proud Nation, whose condemnation may appear just, and most great.

I also note the sagacitie of this politic and wise people, that if they
establish any law tending to reformation, they convert it for the most part to
their private commodity: for as they dealt by the Inquisition, specially
provided for the Moors and Jews of Spain, so have they done by the Law of
Baion made by Ferdinando and Isabella for the Canibals only: not one in these
days feeling the smart of either, has not more piety, or is not more simple
then others.

Omitting for that I would draw to an end, their cruelties Petrus Martyr de
angleria.
which have no end: as their hunting the Indians with dogs, and other like
villainies, (having spoken before of men offending against their own persons,
the subject the Magistrate, and the Superior the inferior.) The next is of
confounding society amongst private persons, of one Nation, for which I will
cite one example, as it was reported to me at Venice 1569. by a Gentleman of
the house of Mantua, of great credit: His other additions I pass with
silence, least he yet live, and may thereby be in danger of the bugges of
Millan his neighbors.

The manner thereof was, as he said, in this sort. One of these monsters
meeting his enemy unarmed, threatened to kill him if he denied not God, his
power, and essential properties, vz. his mercy, sufferance, etc. the which
when the other desiring life, pronounced with great horror, kneeling upon his
knees: the Brano cried out, now will I kill thy body and soul, and at that
instant thrust him through with his Rapier.

The last part of confusion is left to their confounding the society of
Nations, belonging also to civil society, maintained by Ambassadors,
intercourse of traffic, justice ministered strangers, open denouncing of
war, and mercy to the vanquished.

As for the first, though it has been in use to bear with whatsoever an
Ambassador (not exceeding his commission,) or an Herault (wearing the
Cote-armor of his Prince) delivered, (as the French king, Charles the sixth,
suffered a proud defiance from the Duke of Geldres) yet have the Spaniards (as
men tied to no rule) not only murdered Ambassadors passing their country (as
Alphonso Johan. Slai. lib. 14.
d'Aual their Lieuetnant in Lumbardy, slew Caesar Fregoso, and Antony Rinson,
sent from France toward Constantinople) but also have killed some sent to
themselves: Philip du Comines.
as Ferdinando of Aragon, who usurped Naples, murdered one Segnior Iacobo the
Ambassador of Francis Duke of Millan, and imprisoned others, as the king of
Aragon did the Archbishop of Buxdeaux, sent from the Duke of Lancaster before
named.

Neither have they been less injurious to our merchants: they having arrested
some, burnt others, and stayed the goods of many without restitution: upon this
pretense, they had in their ships or chambers, the Psalms of David, or some
treatise of Scripture in the vulgar: the same being either the Earl of Surries
sonets, or some other like matter: but neither were our country men so happy
to be afflicted for righteousness, or the Spaniards so just in censuring
their lightness, which should have bin reformed at home: for if the reading a
Sonet, or the books of Amadis du Gaul, which they have incresed to a great
volume b^e death, which of them are free from judgment? their chiefest
Lectures consisting (unless in the superstitious judicials of Astronomy) in
such light and vain matter: sed hinc ille lacrymae, that they are of all men
most contemptible, if they loose the counterfeit of holiness.

To seem good and be so, is hard: but to be evil and seem good is easy, and
the only thing that has made them great.

To seize therefore on the foxes case, it was requisite to name him a horned
beast entering the lions den: which rule makes much for their oppression of
all nations by stealth.

Neither is this name Lutheran unprofitable for them, they meaning to overthrow
thereby this position: Contra hosts non est nisi legitime dimicandum, (which
partly is by devouring war to them whom they invade) and to draw us either as
heretics, or traitors to their persons, into a degree higher then those that
are termed hosts. But how that may be I see not, the one being in question,
and the other untrue: unless the regard of neighborhood Genesis cap. 14
be an offense, which Abraham with the testimony of a good conscience used.

But grant we were worthily excluded the privileges of arms, for not being of
that church (we thank God) they are of. What moved them to pretend an
indefesible peace (by mean of no less State than Philip the Archduke of
Austria) with Lewis the twelfth, named for his piety L'estat des maisons
ilstres de France.
the father of his country, and being as they term their friends buenos
Catholicos, they surprising at that time the kingdom of Naples? surely no
other thing then which caused the Duke of Parma to entertain her Majesty's
Ambassadors with a long parle, till their great Armado was upon our coast.

These things are inexcusable, and therefore I am of this mind, that if they
had that bell named Martinella, Nic. Macch lib. 2. hist.
which the ancient Florentines rong one month continually before they entered
into any war, they would say they could not make her sound for want of a rope.

Their want of compassion toward the vanquished, is of one scantling with
their injustice to strangers, to whom the law of Nations has always had
special regard.

The laws permit to take arms against enemies, but to spoil them who have
submitted their lives to us, is ignoble, and far from the generositie of our
elders.

Some object for their cruelty, the slaughter of the French prisoners at
Iuberoth, wherein (I show my opinion) they had double wrong: first for that
they were Portingals that did that deed, a Nation for this eight hundred
years distinct from Spain: Secondly, if they had bin Spaniards, they had bin
without blame, having to do with a new enemy that was fresh and thrice their
number. I therefore omit this, and Francis the French king complaining in
Guicciardin of his entertainment in Spain: and will for their acts done, put
the reader in mind of their gracious behavior (before recited) toward the
simple Indians: and for their purpose to do, show him the intention of the
Marquise of Guasto.

It is in controversy whether a Christian taking a Christian in battle may
give his arms: so is it determined, he may not simply detain his prisoner
paying his ransom; much less oppress him being yielded: the Marquise
notwistanding these rules, encountering Francis of Bourbon, Earl of Anguien at
Sirrizolles, intended L'estat des maisens ilstres de France.
(had he gotten the victory) to send all the frenchmen in chains to the
galleys: a most cruel thought, considering the noblenes of the French Nation,
and his own profession of knighthood.

Thus much of their confounding things divine, natural, civil, and foreign;
the same appertaining to one of the significations of Tubal: now remains to
say somewhat of the other and last signification, which is Ignomy; This may be
named a reproach or blot belonging to the foulness of any act before done: a
description not disagreing with the French proverb, Orguiell cheuauche deuant,
and honte vene apres.

That Ignomy follows our vices as shadows our bodies, though it needs no
proof, experience teaching no less, yet not to leave men to conjectures,
behold a position made by Philip de Comines Lord of Argentai, whose singular
honesty and valor sufficed to give his sentences the authority of maxims.

Whosoever is a tyrant (says he) is also a coward: for an instance of which,
after he had cited sundry cruelties of Alphonso the father, and Ferdinando the
son (kings Philip de Comines.
of Aragon, and usurpers of Naples,) he shows that upon the approach of the
French king Charles the eight to Naples: they both departed the realm in such
haste that many of their soldiers lept out of the windows having not seen
the enemy: Alphonso believing that all things took part against him in favor
of the French king: and that the moving of the leaves of trees, sounded in the
behalf of Charles (as a watchword of party) France, France.

Ferdinando his son (after Charles had taken his pleasure in the kingdom,
and was departed toward France, leaving for his viceroy the Duke Monpensier)
returned, and having alied himself with the Venetians and the Marquise of
Mantua (who could not digest the greatness and neighborhood of the French
nation) he fell to ill arts, for recovery of that kingdom he lost by
cowardice. This disgrace he recompensed with a greater, tending to his
perpetual infamy.

For after the French had cleared all parts from apparent hostility, they were
notwithstanding conquered by diseases, gotten by eating the flesh of dead me^,
which Ferdinando had procured to be sold them for Tunny: the use of which,
corrupting the liver by extreme moisture, and matter of too near quality;
brought forth most foul ulcers, with other pains, of which many miserably
died: leaving for Trophies of their victories, their country name to the
disease.

This is fearfully described by Guicciardin, (in respect Lib. 2. Hist.
the disease was infectiue, and then incurable) and as sincerely laid down by
Giouanni Fioreuanti a Philosopher of that time; who beholding the deformity of
that sickness, and hearing of their new diet, endeavored to find the reason
by the effects.

He kept (for that he would not be deceived in the diversity of kinds) a tame
Pie and a Dog so long without meat, that the one refused not to eat the flesh
of another Pie; and the Dog to feed of an other Dog: by mean whereof the Pie
within few days lost her feathers, and the Dog his hair, both having most
filthy soars breaking forth in sundry parts of their bodies.

The want of victual being accessarie to this calamity, drove the French to
accept no less dishonorable conditions for their departure, than their disease
was horrible; the most part of them dying in their return.

Some reply, that if that contagion were as Fioreuanti coniectured, the
Canibals would have the like: which objection proves no less then is
affirmed, no people being more subject thereto then they that are within that
tract: in which (as in the scorpion there is his sting to kill, and his oil to
cure) is found the wood Guaicum, a most present remedy for that disease.

This practice has deeply touched the renown of Exodus 22. Lex Corneliaff.
lib. 46. titu. 8.
this Nation, which being in the highest degree of socery, has for the
inevitable danger, hapening by the abuse of things natural, been always
severely punished, both by divine and human laws; I am therefore persuaded
that of all villainies it is the greatest, and most worthy of chastisement.

As for that which is named Magia infamis, or what else may be concluded by
impr^cation, or incantation; or any other thing meeting with the shrewdness of
our nature, it is not to be esteemed: but this only is to be feared, which
being received for food enters the veins and entrals, either inflaming
unlawful lust, or abating the power of generation, to cut off discents, or
presently killing, or breeding diseases worse then death; and more to be
regarded at this instant, in which they strive who shall be, and not who shall
reign, then in that age, in which neither their malice or power had taken so
deep root as at this time.

To return from whence I digressed: the Archbishop of Treues, withstanding the
election of the emperor Charles the fifth (whose greatness was extolled by
Maience, in respect of his new kingdom of Spain) affirmed that the Spaniards
seldom aford them selves in field without the aid of strangers: a report
very sclaunderous to chiualry, for which (though they be often well backed as
they were at Naueret by the Lords of France) they deserve no soldiers crown
or garland.

This cowardice at Nauaret, where they had 60000. of their own people, was
after objected against them by Monsieur du Lignac in a consultatio^ of war
amongst the French men that served king John of Castill (son to Henry the
bastard) against the Duke of Lancaster. It has bin also remembered by Frossard,
against whom and Monsieur du Lignac, they can take no exception.

He first cites the words of one Hartesel an English man at Iuberothe to the
king of Portingall, whom he told that the Spaniards were flying calves without
wings, bearing banners wauing with the wind: and lastly shows his own
opinion of them as follows.

At the first encounter, says Frossard, they are fierce, (and if they have
advantage) high minded: they fight well on horseback; but as soon as they have
cast two or three darts, and given a stroke with the sword, and see that
their enemies be not discomfited, they turn their horses and fly. This far
Frossard, woh in other places does altogether discommend their footmen, as such
that are utterly unprofitable for battle. The like report in a manner Florus
makes, saving that he speaks somewhat more reuere^tly of the Numa^tines,
Portingals and Celtiberians, from who^ Florus lib. 2 cap. 17. 18.
Marcus Porcius Cato, and Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus, conquered seven hundred
of their walled towns in few years, as Plutarche, Strabo and Polybius
witness.

The great antiquarie and historian Antonio di Gueuarra, in his epistle to Don
Alphonso of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, affirms that the Mores in eight
months conquered Spain to the rock Horadada, and that the Spaniards were
eight hundred years before they recovered that loss: during which time, we
must not think that the Negros sent for women out of Aphrick, or that the
Spaniards were in those days very martial.

By comparing these numbers, I find them no less unable to defend, then to
recover a thing lost; so there be an election of seasons, and a provision of
other necessaries: which is to be regarded by our nation, as well for that we
being brought up in a more temperat and colder clime then Spain, have our
natural moisture easily exhausted by the heat of that country opening our
poets in the summer: by which that quick and subtle air named Serena enters
the vital parts, and sleyeth the body: as also for that we being not
accustomed to their strong wines, and having no other waters to mingle with
them, then snow broth descending in the spring from the hills into the rivers,
fall into pestilent feauers, fluxes, and inflammations of all the inward parts:
as moreover, for that after May (about which time they have their harvest)
nothing remains out of their towns (unless some fruits) to sustain either
man, or horse, their fields being extremely parcht with the Sun till the
return of the Equinoctial.

Who therefore minds to invade Spain, having no acquaintance with that air;
it behooves him to take the field in March, or at the least in April: so
councelled John the king of Portingale his father in law the Duke of Lancaster,
who having in few weeks conquered Galitia, after contended only with the air
and scarsitie of the fields; the Spaniards having brought their corn, hay, and
other provisions into their walled towns; by mean whereof he lost twelve
Barons, four score knights, and two hundred Esquires, besides the common
soldiers, and horse of service. Yet are not these discommodities of air or
country, or loss of so many great personnages and resolute men, to deter us
hereafter, we being not to measure at any time our attempts by the events, but
by what reason they were enterprized; which, being of late to divert a capital
and stubburne enemy, are (necessity commanding) oportunely to be renewed:
nothing being impossible to a prudent deliberation, accompanied with true
fortitude. Say then, noble countrymen, with resolute Cato speaking to his
soldiers in the deserts of Libya,

These are my mates in arms, whom dangers only lead. Luca. lib. 9.
But what hear I? Great is the Hesperian god Plutus, Spain not only abounding
with fruitful fields and rich mines, but with such men as have been parents
of all good customs.

It suffiseth; but let this be tried by Lazarillo di Tormes, he being less
partial then Hieronimo Ruscello, Rodirigo di Toledo, or Taraphe, and by the
travelers in Spain, who find nothing in their hosteries but a mat to lie
upon, and a candle to bring them to bed. It is no good consequent, there be
birds, because there is a nest: or he is a gentleman, for that he never leaves
riding But grant the South of Spain may be compared with the fruitful parts
of Italy, and that some of them were of like seed as Pallas: yet it makes no
more for the fertility of the rest, and good breeding of that people, then the
teeth of an Ethiopian for the whiteness of his body. Neither does the
variety of their mines prove the fatness of the soil, but the contrary: for
all metals being engendered by influence of the Planets (of which they have
their properties) and apt temperature of the earth inclined to the disposition
of those Planets, of which she is impressed, do show the nature of their cause
by their effects, which being in the third and fourth degree of drought,
proves their ground more barren (unless in some part) then any region about
them. Moreover their mines (which by men skillful in minerals) are likened to
trees having roots, trunkes, boughs, branches, blossoms, or flowers) they
have been wasted by sundry nations in all ages: as the mines of seacole and
kannel, which have their bounds, and are subject to an end.

First the Phoenecians had (for things of small price) great store of their
metal, by the help whereof, they erected diverse colonies in Sicilia,
Sardinia, Libya, and Spain it self.

Secondly the Carthagenians did traffic their brass Ezech. cap. 27.
with the Tyrians, and enlarged thereby, and their commodities in other
metal, their Empire against the Libyans, Sicilians, and Romans.

Lastly the Romans mined many furlongs with great Diodorus Sicu. lib. 6.
rerum anti. cap. 9.
vaults in sundry parts of Spain, an argument of scarsitie in their time, and
that the birds were then flowen: which is now a cause also the king of Spain
prevails little for the lower countries: treasure, as some hold, being the
sinews of war.

As for this opinion that other nations should take light Girolomo Ruscelli.
from their courtly port and martial behavior, it is vain, and Girolomo
Ruscelli.
argues a yearly pention: Antonio di Gueuarra affirming that to give
perfection to the Spaniards it behooves to draw him that is bred in the
mountains, to be trained in Castill: which I guess is for no other cause then
that the Montanese is by nature rough, and the Castillian efeminat: but what
state this man will bear, let them report who have either seen beggars set on
horseback; or have beheld a man's head placed on a horses neck, etc.

This my self can say, that I have known fifteen hundred Biscaies (which
people Florus names the chivalry of Spain) at their first landing in
Antvvarpe to be men contemptible of person, filthy in apparel, and rude in
behavior; and within one month after they had tasted the pay of that town,
and relished the cates of that country, to be terrible of countenance,
magnificall in gesture, and seeming of so hautie conceit; as though all things
were vile which they esteemed not: and therefore dare auowe that who so was
entertained with their customs, prospered as a tree embrased with iuie.

This barbarous natural of the Spaniard, was better known to Hanibal, then to
men of our time; for he after Appianus Alexandrinus libr. L^bico.
his discomfiture at Cilla, having some Spanish horsemen remaining; and fearing
in respect of their virtuous training, their readiness to chaffer the state of
their friends, fled with on horseman in two days and two nights to Adrumetum
distant from the battle three thousand furlongs, which comes to three
hundred seventy five of our miles: an argument he loved and trusted them well
from whom he fled in such have.

It is a ground that a compound is less perfect, and more dangerous for nature
then a simple, if therefore those Spaniards which descended only of Tubal,
have, in respect of their parent or soil, but the image of perfect men: what
shall we think of the Spaniards of these days, which are confected of the
pilferers of the would? truly that there is no vice in which they have not a
surplussage above any other nation of the earth: I mean the South of Spain
(now containing Catalonia, Aragona, Castilia nueua, Valenza, Granado and
Andaluzia) to which only the Romans before Polybius time gave the name of
Spain.

As for Galitia and Portingale, the one taking name of those French men that in
the time of Charles the great entered Spain against the Mores, and the other of
those French and Normans that in the year 700. past against the Sarasins; as
also the Biscais descended of those Gauls which were called Celtae, and of
those Spaniards named Iberi, as Diodorus in his sixth book of antiquities, and
Lucan in his fourth hook make mention: I number them a part, as being each way
more honorable then the rest.

But to return to the South of Spain, (the rest not being known to the
learned antiquity) the Goths and Alani (being of those Scythians that dwelt
near the river Danubius, who in the time of Honorius came under the leading of
Gensericus into Spain) inhabited that part, which is now called Catalonia, a
word compounded of both their Girolomo Ruscelli in la Geo. di Ptolo.
names; and was at the first named Gottalania.

Of these Scythes who have their name as vacantes scyphis are descended those
that inhabit Castilia nueua, and Arragon named at the first Terracona. Next to
these is the province of Valenza, so called by the Mores, who about nine
hundred years past took footing in that kingdom, and since ouerflowed
Spain. About eight hundred years past another company of Mores possessed that
part which they named Granado of a city they built.

The next are the Vandals, a people of the North, calling that part, after
their name Vandaluzia, which by loosing the first letter and corruption of
speech is called Andaluzia, as Arrogona has T, being before Terracona. But
here I must not forget a report of their own touching the etimologie of
Andaluzia: which is, that the Mores landing in Spain, demanded a pesant
driving an ass, the name of that province: but he understanding them not,
spoke to his ass, Anda luzia, which is, go luzia: according to which the Mores
named that country: but to return. Of these is a like quintessence drawn as
Alexander drank out of the hoof of an horse: for what vicesoeuer has bin
peculiar to any of them (besides those they had in common) is now proper to
them all.

As I said before that a simple is more perfect then a compound: so affirm I,
that those beasts which are engendered of sundry kinds, are most cruel. If a
lion match with a Parde, there remains in the issue some generositie of the
parent: but if the Leopard couple him self with a Tiger, nothing is to be
looked for in their brood, but a barbarous fierceness. The natural Spaniard,
being as a simple, is of a confuse and beastly conceit, of diet miserable and
furious, nourished to increase those humors in scarsitie: but mixed with the
Goths and Vandals, given to the every and drunkenness: mingled with the Mores
cruel and full of treachery: and consequently, tasting of every one, a spring
of all filthiness.

The Italian has this proverb, that a thing begun is half ended: and
experience teaches, that after the sun has climed the Meridian, he
declineth. All things have their infancy, riper years, decrepitage, and are
subject to alteration; yet pass not with like celeritie to their period. The
Spaniards began to be of some reputation but in the time of Ferdinando and
Isabella, (who united Aragon and Castilia) before which they were either
subject to the Carthaginians, Romans or some other nation: or else so divided
into small kingdoms, that they were of no force.

It is therefore no marvel that Antonio di Gueuara in regard of their weakness,
and want of valiant personages, cited, (in his epistle to Don Ian di Padillia a
Captain of the rebels in Spain) one Cid, Fernan Gonsalis and the knight Tiran:
and in his epistle to Sir Antoni of Cuniga (prior of S. John) named Viriato a
Spaniard; he being a natural Portingall, whom the Spaniard above all men
hates, as Philip de Comines.
Comines maintains, unless it be to rob him of his honor and dignity.

In the time then of Ferdinando, after the rapine of the kingdoms of Naples,
Sicilia and Navarre; were they first esteemed: neither would their fortunes
have had longer life then his age, had they not ben after houed under the wings
of the eagle (during which time they increased their empire with Milan) and
caught some heat of the Lion. In their prosperity they are of the nature of
gourds which ouerlooke those things by which they clime. England has yielded
them the greatest countenance (besides their comoditie of sheep, the King
having for the duties of wool 30 quentos) and the lower contries the greatest
revenues, and these two are they at which they have first leuelled.

They esteem the kingdoms of Castill and Aragon to be the chiefest of their
Diadem, yet do the commodities of Belgia contrepois more then the weight of
both: the due of the provinces being seven hundred quentos, the kingdom of
Castill but four hundred and fifty: and of Aragon and Catalonia but one
hundred and fifty: whereby it should seem that before they had rauened
Malorques, Nauar, Milan, Sicilia and Naples, that their proper right
(notwithstanding their mine of Guadalcanal) was of no great account; the
kingdom of Naples yelding three hundred and fifty quentos, and the state of
Milan three hundred quentos, (or after the opinion of Philip de Comines six
hundred and fifty thousand Ducats) which comes near to one reckning
(exceeding the rest of their ancient Domains of Spain.

I speak nothing of the States of Parma and Florence, for that since their
match with the house of Austria, they yealded the Spaniards but the lone of
some citadells. Yet was the surprising of Piazenza by the Emperors lieutena^t
Sleidan. lib. 19.
of Lu^bardy; treacherous and cruel, and the Emperors answer framed by a
Spanish friar Iacobin his confessor, to the Bishop of Phano (the Popes nuncio)
who solicited the restitution L'esta^ des maisons illustres de France.
thereof, no less cautelous and dishonerable, vz. that in a doubtful or
obscure title, the condition of the possessor is to be preferred before the
other. Lo here divinity fit for Spain, and martial policy of Ferdinando
Gonzaga. But most infamous was their attempt toward their general lieutena^t
of Belgia, who had deserved better of their nation, which has been often
fatal to his house: but so use they to make happy their friends. It should
seem the king of Spain exceeds in greatness and revenues, the mightiest
kings in Europe; but remember with all that virtue united is stronger, and
being dispearsed, weaker; and that also many things fall between the upper
lip and the cup.

That garment therefore (in my conceit) is most comely that is of one cloth,
and most strong that is least peeced. How then their robe will hang together, I
may guess, and what the event of all will be, the wiser may foresee.

I alleged that as all things had their risings, so had they also their fall,
though not after one motion

I gather thereby and the former circumstances, that the empire of Spain
declineth: but my chiefest ground is; that nothing which is vehement is durable.

To divine of those things which are in the secret purpose of God, is impiety:
but to use conjectures against conjectures, answers the injustice of their
ambition: no man taking hurt but by mean of him self.

I could use an incident for this, which though it may Diodorus Sic. Bibliothe.
lib. 17.
seem of small weight, yet may it have his mystery with his act, who being of
base condition placed himself (with out any perturbation of mind) in the
royal seat of Alexander, which the Caldeans prognosticated to portend the
death of Alexander.

The actors were, that Bergamasco (for his fantastic humors) named Monarcho,
and two of the Spanish ambassadors retinue, who being about four and twenty
years past in Paul's church in London, contended who was sovereign of the
world: the Monarcho maintained him self to be he, and named their king to be
but his viceroy for Spain: the other two with great fury denying it. At which
my self, and some of good account now dead, wondered in respect of the subject
they handled, and that want of judgment we looked not for in the Spaniards. Yet
this moreover we noted, that notwithstanding the weight of their controversy;
they kept in their walk the Spanish turn: which is, that he which goes at
the right hand shall at every end of the walk turn in the midst, the which
place the Monarcho was loath to yeald (but as they compelled him, though they
gave him sometimes that romthe) in respect of his supposed Majesty; but I
would this were the worst of their ceremonies; the same keeping some decorum
concerning equality.

As I have (for some proportion between the two princes Alexander and Philip)
compared him who sat under the cloth of state of Alexander with the Monarcho,
so would I for conclusion express my conceit in a matter of great appearance,
and nearer similitude.

Caesar Borgia the son of Roderigo a Spaniard, who named himself after he
came to the Papacy Alexander V I. (which some read Alexander ui) to that end
as Sabellicus notes, they having the names of those two that were the greatest
emperors, might make the world tremble before them: after he had renounced his
fathers bishopric of Valentia in Spain (of which he was named Cardinal) and
to attain by degrees the Majesty of Caesar, was created Duke of that place,
gave for his poesy, Aut Caesar, aut nihil. which being not favored from the
heavens, had presently the event the same predicted.

Philip of Macedonia at a banquet he made the ambassadors Diodorus Sic.
Biblio^^. lib. 16.
of Greece (the day before he was slain by Pausanias) enjoined one Neoptolemus
(a tragedian of great name) to recite some poem before composed that might
prognosticat the good success of his journey against the Persians. Neoptolemus
supposing he had apt matter to extol his enterprise and greatness of the
Persian empier, which was then like to fall, began in this sort.

For you (which rashly hold,
The given course of life,
And carefully aspire
T invade Olimphus top:
The champion fields, and courts
Which lift their turrets high)
The time now moves regard,
For lo a way not known
He goes, now third of hope,
Though long he cuts in two.
And utmost day of death,
Vnbid, presents it self.
How this may be applied to their late enterprise by sea; their penons,
banners, stremers and enseignes having sundry figures portending a doubtful
event: I leave to their judgments who have seen both them and their success;
as also the poesy of Borgia, for a near resemblance of their device (at S.
Domingo) to the censure of the great judge. There is no oracle, beside the
divine, more certain for signifying our estate, or which more binds us to
the condition of the thing signified, then that which is pronounced either by
our selves, or our means: of both which there is no difference. Of this are
infinite examples besides those before cited, which for breuity I omit. From
these particles I framed this ground, that whatsoever is doubtfully laid down
(being not founded upon the base of justice) is infirm and of small life. In
respect whereof, I judge we may lawfully affirm by application from the former
examples; that the name of the first inhabita^t of Spain and that country,
fatally signifying confusion and penury: the avarice of that people, being, by
mean thereof, made insatiable; their policy to enlarge their empire cruel,
their later proceedings and resolutions terrible; and their emblem of a horse
(alluding to the name of their king and his ambition) standing on his hinder
legs upon the globe of the whole earth, his former parts advanced as though
he would leap from thence, with this written scroll in his mouth, Non sufficit
orbis,) proud and not contained in order: expresses, according to the
particular circumstances and blason, that God (having restored every bird her
fether) has left for this proud and stubburne nation, the reward of his wrath,
and just effects of the signification of Spain and Tubal: howsoever he has
of late dealt with us for our unthankfulness, he before pouring upon us with full
measure, so rare blessings as no nation received like, his peculiar people
excepted. So that we may justly bost with Caesar, Ante victum hostem esse quam
visum.

A DIALOGVE INTITVLED PHILOBASILIS.
Philobasilis, Philopolis. ANatharsis a Scythian, desiring to be numbered at
Athens amongst the friends of Solon, was answered, that he was to procure
himself friendship in his own country: which rule, virtue being the
lodestone, or polestarre of perfect love, we find of no weight: for as wines
made of good grapes are more wholesome being drawn from their lies: so those
which for a good cause depart their country, are as men of singular and divine
quality to be embraced of all sorts.

I fear not Theophilus to affirm this much by my experience of Philopolis,
who having been with the king in that battle, where Duke Ioieux was slain: and
after minding to return to his house in Paris, escaped from thence with great
ieoperdie of himself to this city; with whom since that time, for his rare
parts which draw to him the favor of all men, (he being both of counsel and
fact,) I have been still conversant.

With this our Philopolis, I would Theophilus you were acquainted, for that I
think him worthy your friendship and favor of good men: in respect whereof,
I have commended to you the speeches of our first conference, though not so
well pend, as spoken by him.

After therefore he had inquired the form of our government, which in respect
of our factions, he thought miraculously preserved by God: I answered, true
Philopolis, the same is neither casual, or framed by man, but ordained of God,
according to the prediction of Sibylla Phrygia, who above two thousand years
past left these verses in letters of gold.

In fruitful I Will beyond the Gauls shall rule,
More chaster one, than ever Dian savv:
The Muses shall depart Parnassus hill,
To haunt her Court, where all the Graces flow.
Dame Pallas shall give place, and Juno blush,
To see that time in which their virtues dim,
By beam of brighter star than earth did know:
whose cheerful gleames shall glad the exiles vvoe.
And somewhat after:

She shall with us adore a virgins son,
And he her sacred head shall crown with Bays:
She shall not bovv, O Thetis to thy doom,
Or yield in light to Phoebus cleerest rays:
Thrice happy he, O Queen, that shall behold,
Thy parts more rare then due to mortal vvight.
By which notwithstanding your Nation notes our people ceremoniously given to
matter of prophecy, I collect the justice of the present policy; which
receives not only strangers being good men, but some of our own people for
Citizens, who would not if they might be subjects.

Philopo. All Oracles not being divine are doubtful: but the event of this
has raised the holy Sibyllae from death, who many ways foreshewed the deep
mysteries of our religion, for which our adversaries by sleight oppress us and
our Princes, according to the Poet.

He terror bred with fained crimes, hence doubtful voice
He spread in peoples ears, and guilty sought for arms.
This have we with tears proved and seen thereof, their bloody Trophaeas,
who leading us as a Buphal by the nose, seek our health as he that sought his
wife against the stream: yet in these calamities we envy not, but reverence
your godly and flourishing peace, which is great knew you the use thereof: and
most rare, provided you she were not devoured of ease.


Philoba. This happiness is not continued by our policy, but according to the
eternal providence of the sovereign lawgiver: neither can the same be altered
by any constellation, fatal computation of years, or mighty preparation of
our enemies: but by the Angel of the great Council, who moderateth not either
after the will or manner of men, howsoever they dream of times, or nations: as
your Heraults have done of the form of your Armories, which resembling three
swords, signify say they, persecution to your kings, princes, and people:
which conjecture with many like I condemn, as being ill rules for the
multitude, who are easily deluded by phanaticall men, who hunt only for
ostentation, though it be to the danger of themselves and their country.


Philopo. Our Heraults perhaps deal herein like some Physicians, who
discerning not their patients infirmity, attribute it either to witchcraft, or
their last diet: but we who can best yield the reason of our disease, say sin
to be the cause, and the Epilepsi of our late king in discipline the signs
thereof, who having taken no other Physic then the flattery of diverse great
Lords, and officers of the crown, felt not in that resolution, the heavy hand
of his mothers government, contrary to the custom of our Nation and Salick
Law, then which we for antiquity, and our common quiet, judge not any more
excellent.


Philoba. Pardon me though I esteem that law without praise of either.


Philopo. Though it stands not with the humors of your Nation, yet ours
reverently receives the same as an honorable testimony of Pharamunds prudence,
who for our stronger union ordained that Law: that we, by mean thereof,
beholding in the families of our Princes which we call of the blood, the race
of our kings, might be void of those factions, with which your Nation and
others either have, or may hereafter take hurt.


Philoba. You lead me as Sibylla Cumana did Eneas to view a phantasticke
apparition of men: or as Syrus taught old Demea the way to his brother.


Philopo. Not so but as the great artificer showed the Assyrian his counterfeit
of the four Monarchies: or as our first parent learned, that his cohelper was
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: the union not being unlike between
the Prince and people, they differing neither in religion, law, custom, or
language: all which are never consequent, if women attaining the royal seat
yield the same to straungets: for though the goodness of Nature be not
extinguished in them by those matches, yet are they not (their superiority
being restrained) masters of their own affections: neither will their husband
so naturally regard their new subjects as were requisite, as well for that in
seeking to place their men of court in the highest rooms, they expel the
natural subject: which alteration never happens without great danger to the
state, as also for that they whom they prefer of their own train being
ignorant of the laws, language, and rites of the people, are in respect
thereof, either remiss in the execution of justice, or so inclined to their
own profit, that the common weal takes no less hurt thereby, then if it
were wasted with sundry enemies: those states which have fallen into the
Spaniards hands by the like mean (which are all they have in Europe some part
of Spain and the higher Navarre excepted) being servile presidents of this
argument: especially Naples, Millain, and the lower Germany: where the meanest
companion being a stranger, lived with greater liberty than the nobility,
being natives of the Country.


Philoba. It is clear that the government of those places (if it be not
reformed) answers not the dignity of free men: but such is the policy of
Spain, rather to be feared then loved: which Paradox has hitherto made good
their affairs in Italy, as the continual aid the Duke of Florence yields
the king, and the faithful service of the Duke of Parma to him has made
apparent: notwithstanding that in the States of both, though the one were his
alie, and the other his cosen german, he has intruded several garrisons of
Spaniards, thereby to keep both the Princes at his devotion: in what sort
therefore he either has or will use strangers, that so nearly regards the
Princes of his house, may be greatly doubted. But to return to your Salick
Law, which profits so little in common opinion, that many of your own people
fear not to publish the vain title of a Lorainer to that Crown, he being
neither Frenchman, Pair of France, or Prince of the blood, but one, who for
effecting his purpose, would bring in a proud nation to supply the French
nobility: which act contrarying the divine law that Deuteronomy. 17.
commands you to choose no stranger to your king, what is to be said thereof
and of your Salick law, seeing Number. 27.
to conspire against the holy ordinance, that judges daughters for want of
sons (and not strangers) capable of government: but that the one by the
effects is full of impiety, and the other not only unprofitable, but also
most dangerous by those wars it draws on your country.


Philopo. As we may grant you the first part, so deny we the second, though
the overthrows given to Philip and John de Valois, are made equal with any
that happened between the ancient Gauls and Romans: since which great
slaughters, that law being the^ sealed with the blood of many valiant persons,
has so freed us from all alterations of succession, that few nations can
therein compare their happiness with ours: the same answering the holy decree
you named, which forbids the election of forre^ Princes, most like by a
secreat consent to ensue, if daughters succeeded. But what lets the later
law, being of more Majesty, should not in a cause of kings cancel the first
specially ordained for private persons? and withal the inordinate passions of
women, who being less qualified than men, are therefore more unapt to rule.


Philoba. To grant their defection makes not against my purpose: the like
happening also to men.


Philopo. I would their virtues were equal, and you not lead with a
partiality of humors.


Philoba. I am not, but with the matches of your second Henry with the house
de Medicis, and of your third Henry with the Lords of Guise: after the fancy
of which families, your affairs have since then been governed, and France by
mean thereof either named Itagallia, or la France perdue, even to the loss of
him, who fearing a long time to displease those Lords, gave them opportunity to
offend himself. To impugn therefore the succession of daughters, and to allow
your kings marrying such by whose authority all things are administered, it
being not material by what sex foriners should tyra^nize, is a matter of no
weight: the retinue of your kings wives ouerflowing all places of Justice,
being no less dangerous to your peace, than the punicke faith to the ancient
Romans. And likewise, that if Prudence and Fortitude be peculiar to men, that
Justice and Temperance are as proper to women: for which we need no other
presidents than our sovereign Lady, whose divine graces are as the sun
beams, spread into all parts of the world: as Scotland in the minority of her
king and many other Nations can witness, if she and they be not unthankful
for that benefit.


Philopo. I gladly allow your opinion of this one, and of some other of that
kind of most excellent quality: all which notwithstanding are no swallows to
make our summer: you know what the learned antiquity both divine and profane
have thought of the weakness of this sex, whose government elsewhere I
reverence, as the ordinance of God, and agreeing with the laws of other
Nations? Yielding therefore all due honor to your star of peace, which I pray
may long shine in the Church of God: I will (leaving that Bruenhault, who
according to her Nation, was most dangerous for our Country) name but one of
the house de Medicis: who after the comicall Poet, was the calamity of our
land. This Lady having (by the death of her husband and discretion of diverse
Lords) opportunity to look into the government of her children: not only
abused (for desire of rule, of of which she was impatient) their young years,
but also the authority of the Princes of the blood, to whom during the
minority of the king the same belonged: causing moreover her sons (for
serving her ambition) to play all parts of a dreadful tragedy, in which she
was a severe actor till her last breath: having unto that time hid many
dangers from the king which might greatly have profited him and the realm,
had they been reueiled in season, which she concealed for her own profit: not
one being more able to dissemble then she, who had by that mean deceived many
great Princes and Captains of her time, especially the Admiral Chastilion,
who affirmed in all speeches of her, that he greatly doubted her unstable wit.
And though that wind be ill that turns none to good, yet her arts greatly
auailed Spain; which she evermore regarded for preferring her particular
(notwithstanding the loss of her daughter) before the nobility and common
profit of France, entertaining in respect thereof diverse (upon other men's
cost) with the hope of many excellent titles and great Signiories; the desire
of which are not yet forgotten, nor will be, till God moderate our troubles,
and take compassion of our poor afflicted France.


Philoba. Fear not Philopolis for if there were ever time to pacify the
broiles of your country it is in the reign of the fourth Henry, your third
Henry having bin unmeet to repair the house of God being imbrued with the
blood of his Saints.


Philopo I have thought as much, and therefore have always relied my self upon
the good providence of God, which never fails his people. But at this one
thing I tremble to behold the diunine judgment in the Duke of Guise and late
king, who being companions at the great murder at Paris ended their lives, in
a sort, the one by the others sword. Of this our Bardi of one authority with
the ancient Gauls, as the Sibyllae with the reverent antiquity have long since
given some testimony in these rithmes.

When men that sprung of serpents teeth are slain,
Then leave, O Gauls, to mourn: for sound of Trumpe
Shall cease, with civil hate, and doleful war.
His foes shall give him place, and yield their rooms,
The most of them by stroke of others svvord.
He holy league shall have with neighbor I Will,
Where crowned maid shall daily pay her vows,
Unto the eternal God, her God of old.
For this Apollo tune thy golden harp,
And sound with silver quill their high renown;
You Muses still assist this goddess praise,
And Fauns that hau^t the vvoods, with water Nimphs
That often treadon pleasant green the rounds,
In rounds still sing long may that Lady live,
And double do thou bashful Ecchocrie,
Live, Live.

Philoba. I daily pray no less, and should be also of that conceit for the
peace of your France, and our realm: if Egles disclosed doves: but you know
that factions are the porters of war: of this your kings are not ignorant,
whose sufferance increased their number, who would wreath their chaplets with
your Fluerdelices, and twist their Garlands with our Roses.


Philop. Nothing is more probable than which you lastly alleged: as their
execrable practice touching the death of the godly and valiant Prince of Conde,
has to to the universal hurt of the Church sorrowfully confirmed, and the
slaughter of the late king to an ill president for all Princes that acknowledge
not their indignity of place, made apparent to all men: yet is there not any
thing less to be feared then the effecting of their ambition: for he who
planted those flowers, which for beauty and smell are excellent, will also
keep them to their use, who are the true owners of both.


Philob. Those speeches ended, I took occasion (fearing to abuse his time,
which he being alone bestows most religiously) to depart: minding as I have
given you some feel by this conference (intermedled with diverse matter) of his
good meaning to the Christian public weal, to acquaint you, Theopilus, with
himself: who (as the lightning cannot be counterfaited, or glimmering of
swords shadowed,) is never well perceived but by the weight of his own words.


FINIS.

