To the honorable Assembly of the Commons house in Parliament.
The humble Petition of Dame Grace Darcie widow, mother, and one of the
Committes of the body and lands of Edward Darcie Esquire, his Majesty's Ward.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas his Majesty by Indenture under the Seal of the Court of Wards,
dated xxiij die Iunij Anno xvij Iac. Reg. Angl. did in express words grant
unto the Petitioner, and one George Wilmore Esquire, the other Committee of the
said Ward (amongst other lands) the Manor of Sutton, in Com. Surr. and the
Advowson and next presentation to the Parsonage thereunto belonging.

Which Parsonage became void in August 1621. and the Petitioner (so soon as
she could have notice thereof) presented a Clerk thereto, but the Ordinary
could not admit him, for that the Church was full, by reason of the Lord
Keepers presenting of one Doctor Grant unto it, one of the Prebends of Westminster.
who was Examiner also in his Lordships house, who had closely got his
Institution, and his Induction also in the Church of Sutton aforesaid; so the
Petitioner was constrained to send to the Cursitor of Surrey for a Quare
Impedit, her only course to avoid this usurpation of the said Doctor; but the
Cursitor refused to make the said Writ, for that he had a Caveat under the Lord
Keepers hand to stay the same.

Whereupon the Petitioner preferred sundry petitions to his Lordship to recall
his direction, and to give way to the Writ, but he still denied the same; only
in the time of the last Parliament (in answer to one of her petitions) he
seemed willing to be certified by two of his Majesty's learned Council,
whether or no it belonged to her, and the other Committee in this case to
present; which answer she showed to his Majesty's Attorney and Solicitor
general, and made choice of them to consider of the matter, and at length
(though with great charge) by her Counsel so plainly instructed them, that
they told her they conceived it to be her right, and had signified as much to
his Lordship, and were persuaded his Lordship would in no wise long stay the
said Writ. But all this proved but to delay the Petitioner, till the
dissolution of the Parliament, and wasting of the six months, in which time
only by the Common law (as his Lordship well knew) she had time to present; yet
before that time was quite spent, she sent again to the Cursitor for the Writ,
who answered, he had made it, and offered it to the seal, but still his
Lordship had rejected it.

And further, she being unwilling to leave any means unattempted, whereby to
preserve the Wards right, in February following, in a wet and cold season, to
her further charge and neglect of her health, also iourneyed to Royston, and by
humble petition acquainted his Majesty with the extremity of her case, and
wrong done to her by his Lordship, who graciously accepted the same; and being
moved therewith, gave direction for the writing of a letter to his Lordship,
with the petition enclosed, which was delivered into his Lordships hands*
howbeit he deferred to answer the same.

Now forasmuch as the presentation is so wrongfully wrested from the
Petitioner, and the very gate of Justice (which ought to all, and always be
open) shut against her, by being denied the original Writ of Quare Impedit in
so just a case, which Writ is free to all his Majesty's subjects to su^ out
(have they right or no right,) and seeing she has done her own utmost endeavor
to have procured the same in due time, but by the might of the Lord Keeper was
hindered and opposed, and denied all benefit of the Common law, contrary to many
the good and ancient laws of this kingdom: so that now not only the
Petitioner is prejudiced in her present presentation, but the Ward also for
ever in his Inheritance, for that he claims the same as by descent from his
Grandfather, who was a purchaser of the said Manor and Parsonage, and no
auoidance sithence happening, neither Quare Impedit, Assize of Darrain
presentment, nor writ of right of Advowson will at any time hereafter lie.

Wherefore her most humble suite to this Honorable Senate is, that their
wisdoms would favorably be pleased to take notice of her cause, (considering
it may be the case of many the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom) and
thereupon give such relief, as may be as well for the righting of her in her
present presentation, as the Ward in his Inheritance, as also make such
provision for the general ill consequences growing thereby, as shall be most
agreeable to honor, justice, and that high trust, which the whole Kingdom has
worthily reposed in them.

And seeing all those that were heretofore of Council with the Petitioner in
this case, are now of this Honorable House, she desires that Sir Henry
Yeluerton, and Master Stone of London, may be assigned to be of her Council
herein.


