TRVE and Christian Friendship. With all the branches, members, parts, and
circumstances thereof, Godly and learnedly described. Written first in Latin
by that excellent and learned man, Lambertus Danaeus, and now turned into
English.

Together also with a right excellent Inuectiue of the same Author, against the
wicked exercise of Diceplay, and other profane Gaming.

Imprinted at London for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Lamb. 1586.

To the Worshipful, my very good friends, Master William Bromley, and
Master Reginald Skreuen, Secretaries to the right Honorable, the Lord
Chauncelor of England.
DANAEVS mine Author, chose for ye Patron of this his Treatise in Latin, a
Gentleman, Secretary to the King of France. I, for my tra^slatio^ thereof
into English, have made choice of you twain, Gentlemen, as well as the other,
and Secretaries, though not to a King, yet to a Personage of Honor next to a
King: and in virtue, wisdom, zeal, gravity, authority and knowledge so
rarely furnished, as I would yt all Kings were. Your friendly courtesies toward
me, deserve this and a far more thankful remembrance, and the very title of
this Pamphlet emboldened me, to woe you for pardon, in thus far presuming and
aduenturing upon your patience. I have chosen, not the one, but both twain of
you, because firm, steadfast and perfect friendship cannot be between either
more or less then twain: and because also I am not ignorant, in what a sweet
league of mutual love, and Christian sympathy, you twain be linked together.
Fare ye heartily well.

At Butley in Chesshyre the 22. of July. 1586. Your unfeigned well willer,
Thomas Newton.

A Discourse of true and Christian Friendship: with all circumstances thereof,
godly and learnedly discussed.
The first Chapter. Of the ground and foundation of true and Christian
friendship.
THe ground and foundation of true and Christian Friendship, is the
admiration of virtue, or of some special gift of God that is in an other: the
praise and use whereof, respects either God himself, or else man. 1. Sam. 18.
verse 1. and 27. and. 30.
This moved Jonathan to knit himself in most firm friendship with David:
whom for his valiant heart and noble courage in vanquisshing proud Goliath, he
highly esteemed, honored and entierly loved. Such persons therefore as either
for some singular gift of true Godliness, or for some special praise of some
moral virtue (as namely, Justice, fortitude, liberality, etc.) do excel
others, and are worthily therefore invested with the title of deserved
commendation, we do thoroughly love, entierly reverence, and heartily favor.
And this later is the nearest and the next cause, that we commonly use to
respect, and to have regard unto. But the former of the twain is that, which
is occasioned, bredde and brought forth by a secret instinct of the Spirit
from God: to wit, the mutual knitting together of minds, and a like
inclination and conformity of wills. For all true and holy Friendship has his
ground from GOD, in whom it is firmly established, and by whom only it
continues sure, steadfast and permanent.

The second Chapter. Who be fit to lincke together in fast friendship, and
between what persons it may be.
ALthough many sorts and kinds of Familiarity be termed by the name of
Friendship, yet of them all, is there but one only kind, that of right may
challenge the name of true Friendship. And this can be among none others,
saving only those, which be faithful and true hearted Christians: such (I
say) as are led by the Spirit of God, and have his fear before their eyes.

For when Infidelles and unbelievers do join together in consent about any
matter among themselves, they do it either for reward, hyre and gain sake: or
else for their private pleasures: or finally, for their advancement and honors
sake: all which ends are most far from true Friendship. Therefore (I say)
it can be among none others, the^ only such, as be godly and faithful, and
fear the Lord effectually. For there can be neither fellowship nor agreement
of mynds between a believer and an Infidel: yea, 2. Cor. 6.14.
the Apostle Paul warns us not to company with such: but to come out from
them, and to separate our selves from their familiarity. Now, although we be
in some sort allowed, and not altogether flatly forbidden a certain kind of
common conversation with Infidelles and unbelievers, so far forth as the
society and necessity of this our human life for mutual intercourse of
commodities and courtesies one with an other requires: yet may we not linck our
selves in that near familiarity, or use that ordinary company, and friendly
conversation with them, 1. Cor. 5.1.2. 2. These. 3.14.
whereby any inward hearty friendship or good liking one of an other may grow
and be engendered. In this godly sort was the fast friendship between David
and Jonathan made and confirmed, which were both of them godly persons, and
fearing the Lord. For like with like (according to the old Proverb) do best
agree, and are easiliest brought to keep company together.

The third Chapter. What true and Christian friendship is.
WE must therefore plainly declare, what true Friendship is. Wherein we must
first note the distinction and difference that is made between favorable
goodwill called Beneuolentia: and perfect Friendship termed Amicitia. For a
favorable goodwill is that, when men being absent one from an other, yea,
which never saw one an other, do yet heartily love one an other, drawn
thereunto by a kind of admiration of virtue, or some notable and singular gift
of God, which ye one does perceive, espy and know to be resiaunt in the
other. So, when as Paul had as yet neither seen Peter, Gala. 1.18.19.
James, nor John, yet did he love the^: and this kind of love, was this
favorable good will, and this Beneuolentia, which we speak of, being knitte
and combined together between persons absent.

But Friendship requires both the company, the sight, and the familiar
conversation of friends together among themselves. Therefore it is only among
them, which are either daiely conuersaunt one with an other: or else such as
have aforetyme lived long tyms together. For, familiar conversation, and
frequent company keeping, increases (as the Proverb says) this friendship,
and sowdreth men together in this indissoluble agreement of minds. Now,
Friendship is such a kind of love and inward affection, as that there can not
possibly be any greater, and unto which, there cannot any thing be either
added or put unto more. It requires therefore a mutual frequentation and
familiar conversation, because thereby our goodwill, liking and affection is
usually increased, strengthened, and made greater. In this sort was that
friendship between David and Jonathan, not only at the first occasioned and
begun, namely, by that their domestical and familiar conversation at home in
Saules house: but was also thereby much increased and furthered. 1. Sam. 18.
and. 20.5.
For this same dailey being in company together (which I speak of) or at
least, Psalm. 41.9.
this often meeting and conference together, does feed (as it were) this new
kindled fire or flame of ardent affection, which burns alike in the breasts
of either party.

Neither yet does friendship cease or utterly perish, through absence, growing
upon just and reasonable causes: as we may see in David and Jonathan, whose
friendship continued and lasted still, the one (notwithstanding) being absent
from the other: for such deep rooted goodwill, and such ardent affection can
not be easily quenched. Therefore, Friendship being first well and surely
grounded between persons present, 1. Sam. 23.16.
continues still even between them being absent: and the further they be
asunder, the greater commonly is the longing desire of either party to other:
and the more vehemently does their enflamed minds increase. But if this
absence and discontinuaunce be long deferred, protracted or delayed: or if this
Friendship were not at the beginning well and thoroughly settled and grounded,
then truly (such is the fickle condition and inconstancy of the world now
adays) it is wont commonly either to slide quite away and take his leave, or
at least to wax cold, and not to have such great heates and desires as before.
For Aristotle says, and that very truly, Silence and absence dissolueth many
friendships.

What is therefore this true and Christian Friendship whereof we now speak?
Many men do bring many reasons, whereby they go about (if not altogether and
plainly to explicate and at large to displaye, yet at least wise) to depaynt
and somewhat to shadow out the force and nature thereof. Some therefore define
it with too large circumstaunces, and some again, hemme it in within too
narrow a compass. For they which say, that Friendship is a consent of minds
in all causes and all matters whatsoever, do not well advise themselves, what
they say: for that, they do stretch the force of Friendship further then
they ought to do. For, there may be many things, wherein two men or more do
not always agree together in one, but be of diverse and sundry opinions. As
namely, they may at some times agree together to do some good thing, and
oftentimes again, they may consult together to do some things naughty and
wicked: So that in such a case, this consent of minds in them ought rather to
be termed a secret compact, a whispering assembly, or a close conference,
rather then true and steadfast Friendship. For they that so define Friendship,
that they make it to be a consent of goodme^ among themselves, touching their
private affairs and dealings only, do make of Friendship as it were a
kind of Merchandise.

But we do think that Friendship may very well be thus defined, if we say,
that it is a Pact or Covenant made between two persons, (God himself being
called to witness) wherein they faithfully promise, the one to the other,
mutually to love, cherish, and entierly to conserve, protect, maintain and
defend one the others person, estate, and goods, so far forth as it may
lawfully be done, without breach of God his law, or dishonor to his word.
Which definition being particularly examined, shall the better appear, and be
found to carry in it the more certainty and truth. Hierome in his 5. Epistle
does thus define it: Friendship is a mutual love engraffed in the mind, and
a strong linking of the hearts together, chaste, sincere, and without emulation.

And first it is called a Pact or Covenant, because in Friendship this
seems to be a thing thereunto singularly and peculiarly appropriate, that
there is always between faithful vowed Lovers, a certain bargain or
agreement solemnly made. So did Jonathan and David agree and consent between
themselves, making a Covenant between them, and that not only once, but many
times renewed and repeated. For, 1. Sam. 18.3. and. 20.8. and. 17. and 23 18.
1. Cor. 1.10.
as love and charity does generally commau^d and will every one of us to be
knit together in a most firm consent of minds and agreement of judgments: so
specially and namely in true Friendship, it is among Friends most chiefly
required, that their faithful hearts and true affections may not be
smoothered in secrecy, or kept unknown, but be apparaunted, made open and
manifested.

For, such is the force and efficacy of this love and affection which knitteth
and linketh them together, that it will not in any wise be hidd, but will
break forth into open show. Whereby it comes to pass, that the one
utters and testifies to the other, what affection reigns in him, and what
desire he has to be loved again of the other, whom he so ardently favors.
Among other kinds of men, the mutual goodwill that one bears to an other
may many times be kept secret and vnuttered: But between Friends it can not
in any case so be. Therefore they do use this testification of their mutual
affection and will, as it were, the lively voice of both their hearts, and the
firmer bond and stronger Buttresse for perpetuity and continuance.

Now, the name of God is used, and in this case called to witness, because he
is the true Author and very Fountain of al firm, faithful and steadfast
Friendship, without whom no manner of Friendship can be good, godly, or
comme^dable. For a higher, greater, mightier or surer witness, pledge, or
token, of their inward mind and will, then God himself is, can they have none:
and therefore do they reverently in this behalf, and for this purpose call him
as Witness to their Conscience and protestation. And what better witness of
their professed promise can they bring then God himself? Whose name or
authority can they use, that can and will more severely and sharply punish
their breach and contempt, then he? For, their desire and wish is, that the
covenant, pact, league, promise, vow, protestation agreeement and consent so
between them mutually made, and enterchaungeablie received and taken, should
not be for a time but for ever: not momentanie, but perpetual: not fleeting
and fading, but permanent and stable. For this intent therefore (I say) do
they use and enterpose the name of God, building their matters upon him, who is
the strongest and surest foundation. And thus do we read that Jonathan and
David knit their Friendship and made their covenant before the Lord. 1. Sam.
23.18.


It is further also written of the same Jonathan, that he gave unto David, as a
pledge, bond or pawn of their new begone Friendship, not only the solemn
cyting of the name of God, but also other visible gifts and outward
testifications, to wit, his Robe, 1. Sa. 18.3.
Girdle, Sword, Bow, and such other garments and furniture, as at that time he
had: for such hearty courtesies makes men, not only the mindfuller, but also
more religious keepers and obseruers of their promise and covenant.

It is said in the definition to be between two: because never or very seldom
is firm and fast Friendship among more then twain. And therefore for the
preserving of it stable, steadfast and unviolated, there must not a third be
taken into this knot of true Friendship. Now, whereas it is written of
Dionysius King of Sicile, that he earnestly requested to be taken into the
perfect bond of sincere amity together with Damon and Pythias, it makes
nothing against this our saying. For, there was no such nere conjunction of
mynds with him, as was between them two them selves, the one with the other:
but it was rather an admiration of that most rare Friendship and surpassing
goodwill of men among themselves: which unto a most mighty King seemed
admirable, happy and entierly to be wished for, and which also seemed far
safer and blessedder then that his royal estate and condition. So were
Jonathan and David friends together, being but only two. For, Friendship
between more then two, grows out of estimation, loses of his dignity and
price, is contemned and less accoumpted of, and in truth forfaiteth his
wonted force and proper virtue.

It follows in the definition: Of mutually loving, defending, cherishing, and
mainteyning one an other. For these be the very chiefest and principallest
effects of Friendship, that such as be true friends in deed, must mutually
love one the other, and that not faynedlie and clokedlie, but even truly and
sincerely: and because of such their mutual sincerity and true love, they do
also mutually defend, cherish, maintain and protect one an other.

Last of all, there is added in the definition: so farte forth as may lawfully
be done without offense to GOD, or dishonor to his most glorious Majesty.
Wherein be set down the ends whereunto, and the bounds how far Friendship
may stretch: beyond which bounds it is not in any wise lawful to pass. So
that hereby we see three especial points most necessary and behoouefull for
the better explication and further opening of the force, virtue, efficacy and
nature of Frendshippe, namely, to be here opened, handled and discussed, viz.

1 The scope and mark whereat Friends do aim. 2 The very effects of
Friendship. 3 The Ends and bounds that must be laid out: and of Frindes in
their Friendship to be kept and observed.
Which three points I purpose here particularly to prosecute, after that I have
first laid down mine opinion and judgment of this question: Whether an
holy, firm and near friendship, lincked and vowed between certain godly and
faithful persons, be any way repugnaunt to that charge and Commandment of
our heavenly Father, touching the loving of all men in general.

The fourth Chapter. Containing a question: Whether the law of Friendship do
any whit oppugn the general Commandment of God, touching love and charity
to all men.
FIrst, such men as hold opinion that there is herein a repugna^cie, do
allege two reasons: The one is, The general Commandment of God, Romans 13.8
whereby we are charged to love one an other. Now, if it be lawful for some
particular persons to contract within them selves a kind of more streict and
nere amity then with others, then think they, that this general Rule of
loving all men indifferently, is transgressed and broken.

Their second reason is this: Our duties, (commanded and enjoined unto us in
that general Commandment of Love) ought to be so great toward all men, yea
toward our very Enemies, that greater, better, or faithfuller can there not,
ne possibly ought there to be showed unto those, whom we call and term
Friends. What force or effect then (say they) is there in this singular and
special goodwill, mutual agreement and inward Friendship only between some
two, Mat. 5.44.
and no more? By these two Arguments they think this same near bond,
infringible consent, firm love and singular force of special Friendship is
encountered and taken away: because it makes us (say they) the more remiss,
negligent and slack to love, aid, assist and relieve others, which are not so
fastlie joined in heart unto us: and because thereupon we have more mind to
please and benefit those whom we have specially chosen for our dear and near
Friends: letting all others (in a manner) to pass by, without any help at our
hands at all.

For answer whereunto, we say, Answer.
that there be other, and the same most strong and invincible Arguments to
confirm, approve, establish and warrant this special kind of entier Amity
among men: proving the same to be to the godly not only lawful and
allowable, but also honest, lawdable and necessary.

First, the authority of the Sacred Scriptures, which teaches us that we
ought to love such as we admit and receive into our inward Friendship. And
therefore the Spirit of GOD, thundreth out threats, Psalm. 41.9. Psalm. 55.21
Isaiah. 3.5. Mic. 7.5.6. Eccl. 22.25
comminations and punishments against violaters and breakers of this inward
amity and profession of special Love.

Secondly, the example of godly men, who both publicly and privately have
sundry times sole^nely entered into, and religiously with mutual consent
professed this near and strict bond of Amity. Which deed and purpose of
theirs, God himself both praises and also sets the same forth unto us, as a
pattern to imitate. 1. Sam. 18.3. and. 19.1.
In this sort were David and Jonathan lincked together in a most firm bond
of perfect Friendship. And those covenants which among Kings and Princes and
high Estates are called Leagues, are among private persons termed Amity. But
Leagues are allowable and warrantable by the law of God: 1. Kin. 4.5.
And therefore Amity and Friendship also.

Thirdly, Nature her self: together with the common speech and settled opinion
of al Nations: for there is no people but highly extolleth the virtue of
Friendship, and has devised notable sentences of praise in condemnation
thereof: as namely this: We have no less need for the use of this life of
Friendship, then we have of water and fire. Notably and excellently is the
same discoursed upon, and co^me^ded unto us in their learned works, both by
Aristotle and Cicero. And it is the common received opinion and usual term
of Nature, and of all people of the world generally: against the which,
whosoever resists and again says, speaks even against his own
Conscience.

Finally, these former Arguments of the againsayers, are insufficient and
prove nothing: because they may both of them be easily answered and quickly
confuted. As first, I say and answer that (by entering into a certain hearty
and inward friendship with some one particular person) the general
Commandment and Precept of almighty God is neither hindered nor taken away.
For, God himself who teaches us to love all men, has (notwithstanding) by his
Law appointed certain degrees of Love, for us to follow, whereby we are to
love some more tenderly and dearly then other some. For, he wills us not to
yield alike and equal love unto all men indifferently and without respect:
Genesis 2.24. Mat. 19.5. Ephe. 5.25. Col. 3.20. Gal. 6.10.
seeing that, we are commanded to love our wife more then our parents: our
Children above Strangers: and them which be of the household of Faith, more
then Infidels. Seeing therefore in respect of consanguinitie, kindred and
proximitie of blood, it is lawful for us to make a difference, by loving our
nearest friends more ardently and with greater affection then others: and to
discern between the inward hearty love which we bear to them, and the
common general love which universally we bear to all others: why may we not
also be allowed the same, in respect of our vowed promise, sworn covenant and
professed Amity? And our Savior Jesus Christ, Ioh. 21.20. and. cha. 13.23.
being the pattern of all true Love, is said to have loved John above all the
rest of his Disciples.

Their second Argument is vain, and frivolous. They demand this question:
what is there left for any special Friendship, when as all men in general
(yea our very Enemies) ought of us to be unfeignedly loved? To whom let this
briefly suffice for answer: that albeit we love all, and show our selves
ready and willing to help, relieve and defend all: yet be some more specially
commended unto our care then other some. Therefore the goodliest and fairest
fruit of Love, is this noble virtue Friendship.

The fifth Chapter. To what scope and drift true friendship tends.
THE common and vulgar sort of men join together in friendship, one with an
other for many considerations and for sundry ends and purposes. For either
they knit themselves in league together in respect of some private gain,
commodity and profit that the one hops to reap by the other: or else for
some respect of pleasure: or finally because they seek thereby to attain some
preferment honor, dignity, praise or countenance. The true Christian friend
of whom we here speak is far from any of these ends: neither respects he
any of all these aforesaid purposes: but his chief and principal drift is,
that in this his Friendship, God specially may be truly honored, and his
Neighbor unfeignedly loved. For, this only thing do all the godly specially
care for, and this mark do they in the whole course of their love chiefly
aim and shoot at.

But as there may be assigned many ends and scopes wherefore Friendship is
sought for and concluded among men: so is there one special, and (as it were)
a proper, chief and peculiar end thereof. And that is this: look whom GOD
has adorned and blessed with some special gifts above others, and thereby
moved us to have the same party for his rare qualities in admiration, unto
such an one do we willingly adioyne our selves, and with him desire we most
gladly to enter into entier familiarity.

The first means therefore, that firmly knitteth this most friendly
agreement of minds together, is the will of God, which moves and draws our
hearts so to do. And next is the admiration of the rare virtues and singular
gifts, which we see in an other: in so much that we earnestly desire (because
of the same) to be in his company, to have his unfeigned love, and to stand
assuredly in his favor. And because we commonly admire and most especially
love those virtues, wherein we chiefly take most delight, and whereunto we
feel in our selves by God his good gift, some sparks and inclinations: it
comes therefore to pass thereby, that there is seen in those that enter into
this fast bond of friendship, a similitude and likeness of manners and
affections, the one with the other: and that being thus linked together, they
do (by a certain inward testimony and secret judgment) retain one and
the same consent in all things, and still iumpe together in one opinion.

This third cause therefore for the procuring and piecing of firm and true
Friendship, is of most excellent force, and bears most effectual sway, I
mean, the similitude of manners, and like delight in studies and affections.
For, to will and just alike, (that is to say, what the one wills, the other
to will the same: and what the other nilleth, the other to be alike affected,)
is firm and steadfast Friendship. Friends therefore commonly take delight in
things alike, and chiefly for the most part frame themselves by natures
conduction and inclination, unto the love and study of one and the self same
virtue.

The first foundation therefore of Friendship, is grounded upon likeness of
studies and similitude of manners. For, in that we hope to be defended,
maintained and protected by our friends: in that, we our selves desire to be
amiable and admirable to the good and godly: in that, finally we seek a
faithful companion and helper, unto whom to impart our whole devises and
counsels, all these are rather effects of true Friendship, then ends thereof.
Certes, in that firm and fast agreement of mynds between David and Jonathan,
there was none other scope or end respected, then this which we here mention.

As touching that sentence of our Savior Christ, Make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, 1. Sa. 18.3. Luc. 16.9.
it is not to be otherwise understood, then that we must learn to bestow our
wealth and money better, then the common sort of men do: namely upon the
poor and needy, which may comme^d us unto God by their prayers: and not upon
the rich and wealthy, whom we commonly (notwithstanding) are more ready to
pleasure and benefit. To conclude therefore with Cicero: Where is this holy
Amity and godly Friendship, if the party whom we profess to love and choose
to our friend, be not truly, sincerely, unfeignedly, and only for himself
and by himself, ardently, affectionatly, and heartily loved? Lib. 1. de ^ragib.


The sixth Chapter. Of the effects of true Friendship.
THere be three especial effects of true Friendship: to wit, mutual love
in God: an holy consent of minds: and an interchaungeable or reciprocal
defense, maintenance, assistaunce and protection one of an other to the
uttermost of ability and power.

First, as touching Love: It is an affection of the heart, by the which we
especially love some one, more the^ others: wishing unto him all welfare and
prosperous success. And this Love is called Dilectio, as who should say,
Delectio, which signifies a choice or an election and culling out: and the
word Diligere to love, is so named of an other like word Deligere, which
signifies to pick or choose out: because that party who^ we tenderly love, we
specially pick and choose out from among all others, and have a special care
and desire for his well doing and prosperity more then for all others besides.
Therefore we love all men in a generality, but we tenderly and affectionatly
embrace but few, or but some one only, or paraduenture none at all. For there
is a greater vehemency, and a more effectual signification in this word
Diligere, then there is in the word Amare, although to love be the
signification both of the one and the other: which difference is well noted by
that most eloquent Marcus Cicero in one of his familiar Epistles, written to
Paetus.

Whereby we may see, that force and violence is not the way to procure and
knit firm Friendship between parties: nor yet fear: but rather a free choice
of the mind, and an hearty good liking toward some peculiar person, upon whom
(God so disposing our heart) we frankly and in full measure bestow the whole
zeal of our entier favor. For, a man that enrolleth himself once in the
Register of a perfect and sincere friend, does so effectuously and dearly love
his friend, that he even accoumpteth and acknowledges him, as an other
himself: and wishes no better in any respect to himself, then he does unto
that his new chosen Friend. For, if there should be allowed never so little
difference herein, the name of Frendshippe were utterly gone and quight
quayled, and might no longer enjoy that title: Lib. 1. de tragib.
as the same Cicero no less eloquently then truly has set down.

For, such is the force of Friendship, that whenever a man wishes any better
hap to himself, then he does to his friend, it by and by ceasseth and dies.
And such effect does this Love work in the mynds of faithful friends, that the
one rejoices at ye prosperous estate and welfare of the other: and
contrariwise, soroweth and is greatly grieved at his mishap and adversity:
even as we see, came to pass in Jonathan, 1. Sam. 20. verse 34. and. 41.
who greatly sorowed at the calamity and affliction of David. Yea, so mighty
is the force of this Love and conjunction of minds, that they weep together,
and rejoice together.

Finally, when a man is faithfully professed in this league of sincere and true
Friendship, he prefers and more esteems his friend then he does any other
whomsoever: and bears unto him a far greater affection and zeal then to
all other men, (for so seemed Jonathan to prefer his dear friend David
before his own natural father) so far forth as Gods glory is not thereby
eclipsed, nor his holy will and commandment wilfully transgressed. For, he be
wrayed and opened his fathers secret counsel unto David, and tried out by
devises, what his fathers purpose sayings and meaninges were toward him: yea,
1. Sam. 20.4. and. 9.
this Jonathan feared not a whit to discover and open unto him such practices
as greatly sounded to the shame and reproach of his own father King Saul.

This so vehement mutual Love, breeds likewise among friends a mutual
consent and an holy agreement of mynds in all things yea, it ingendreth also
between the^ a sweet pleasure and lo^ging desire of the one toward the other.
And the further that they be asunder by distaunce of place, the more ardently
do they desire and long the one for the other: as it were, one entier Soul,
being separated and vehemently desiring the other half of it self being
absent. Finally, the nearer they be together, the more is ye flame of their
inward mutual affection inkindled, and through daily conuersing together, is
still made sweeter, and pleasaunter.

This kind of vehement Affection is not lightly seen among any other persons:
for it commonly falls out, that this daily conversation and frequent
familiarity together, breeds and sows among them either flat hatred, or at
least apparent contempt. But between Friends it is the means that binds and
tyeth them the surer and the faster together. For, their natural dispositions
so rightly agree together, that what the one thinks good, the other thinks
not amiss: and in all things they commonly retain one and the self same
judgment, striving within themselves, whether of them may surmount and
overcome the other in courtesies and benefits.

They draw moreover in one equal yoke, they have one will, one mind, one
purpose and meaning, whereby their mutual consent in all respects is not only
inuiolably conserved, but also much the more increased. Therefore there is no
iarring, no dissension, no brawling, no chyding, no contention, no froward
ouerthwarting between them that be friends in deed: but the one bears with
the other: the one yields to the other: in giving of honor the one goes
before the other: the one not so wedded to his opinion, but that he suffers
himself to be easily persuaded or dissuaded by the other, so far as the honor
of God is not thereby any way empayred or emblemished.

The third and last effect of true Friendship, is the interchangeable courtesy,
defense, protection, assistaunce, aid, maintenance and conservation to the
very uttermost of ability and power, of one Friend for an other: with no less
care for his preservation, safety, preferment, commodity, and all other
benefits whatsoever, both touching himself, and also all them that depend
upon him.

For, if by that society and love which ought to be between all the godly
among them selves, we accoumpt those that by nature are joined and lincked unto
us as our own, and do study which way we may do them any good, either in
mainteyning them with necessaries, or defending them from extremities: how much
more ought one Friend to be careful for the good estate and welfare of an
other, and to accoumpt him as his own, yea as himself: specially having vowed
and promised (and that with an oath) so to do? Therefore he will be ready in
truth to say and to promise the same that David spoke and vowed to Abiathar:
^. Some. 22.23.
He that seeks thy life, shall seek my life also. Their Guestes, their
familiars, their friends, and their enemies shall be common between them, and
no more to the one then to the other. And to conclude: All things among
friends (according to the old Proverb) are common.

Chiefly, principally and before all things, the one ought to have an especial
care for the salvation and soul health of the other: next, for the safety and
welfare of the body: and thirdly, for their other goods jointly appertayning
unto them, either in common, in the right of faithful Friendship: (of which
sort be worldly goods, Cattaile, money, wealth, and the francke use thereof
at either of their pleasures) or else privately and singularly belonging unto
the one of them: as for example, his wife. Therefore, if the one shall
understand of any conspiracy or practice devised, imagined, or intended to the
hurt and hinderaunce of the other, he will discover and reveal it. For so
dealt Jonathan toward David. 1. Sam. 19.2. and. 20. verse. 2.12.


They will also hazard themselves the one for the other, and put themselves in
present danger for their defense and rescue, as well in their absence as in
their presence. 1. Sa. 1.20.30. Ioh. 15.13.
For so did Jonathan put himself into most apparent peril for his faithful
friend David. In all respects, and at all assaies they are helpful and
assistaunt, the one to the other.

To conclude, by their most friendly and sincere admonitions, aduises,
assistaunce and aid (so far as by the warrant of the Word of God and of a
good Conscience is lawful) they unfeignedly relieve, succor, help, cherish,
comfort, encourage, maintain, nourish, cheer up and sustain the one the
other. For, Friends do mutually help the one the other, either with their
wealth and goods: or else with their advise and counsel: or finally with their
travail, and labor.

In their giving of counsel, and advise, or in their admonitions and friendly
directions, one Friend does not flatter an other: neither does he co^ceale and
hide from him, if he espy and know in him any faults worthy of
reprehension. For, Christian Friendship tends unto, and respects the
advancement of Gods glory, and not the fostring and nourishing of men in
their errors. He that is a godly friend, remembers and uses this notable
sentence of Phocion the Athenian: Thou can not have me to be both a
Flatterer, and a Friend to thee also.

For a Flatterer and a Friend do not only differ in deed and in name: but
sure and certain it is, that Flattery is the rankest poison and the most
dangerous plague to Frendshippe that possibly can be. The which, although it
carry an outward show of great affection and sincere goodwill, yet
(doubtless) does it utterly undo the bond of Friendship, utterly weaken and
enfeeble his strength, and utterly each way destroy and mar the nature
thereof. For, the Flatterer resembles and counterfaiteth the words of an
unfeigned Friend, but not his honest mind, neither his sincere love, nor his
true hearted Affection.

Moreover, all these three points above specified, ought among Friends to be
common. For, Friends not only strain them selves mutually to requite
courtesies, but also in these their courtesies, covet the one to surmount and
pass, yea, and to prevent (as much as in them is) the one the other. And
therefore these perfourmances of mutual Love, of mutual Consent, and of
mutual Defense, Protection and Assistaunce, be actions enterchaungeable, and
reciprocal. But yet not so, as that a Friend should purposelie bestow a
courtesy upon his Friend, in hope of as good a turn or as large a benefit at
his hands again: (for no other godly honest man extends his love and
charity toward his neighbor, mercenarywise, or as it were, letting and
fearming it out for hyre and gain) but because the force and nature of
Friendship is such, that it will not have these things otherwise, then mutually
and reciprocally returnable.

All courtesies therefore are between them given, taken, restored, and requited
mutually: howbeit (and let this be well noted) not always alike, not always
equally, nor in semblable proportion. For many times the one receives at the
hands of the other, more courtesy and greater benefit, then he is able again
in the like measure to requite and repay: either by reason of the great odds
of the estate and condition of friends, or else for the difference of their
wealth and ability. As for example: the one peradventure is very rich, the
other poor: the one fortunate, the other miserable: the one exiled and
banished, the other living at home in his native Country. But (all these
notwithstanding) he that has less stoare and smaller pittaunce of ability,
although (perchance) he requite not so amply and beneficially as he
received, yet requiteth he and returns as much as he is able. Whereupon I
say, that courtesies and benefits among Friends, are always mutual and
enterchangeable, but yet not always alike and equal, as appears in Jonathan
and David. 1. Sam. 20.41.


Yea, Friends do not only mutually protect, defend and maintain one an
others person, credit, state, wealth and possessions, but also (as much as
they are able) procure the same to be bettered and augmented. And therefore
there is no manner of rancorous envy or spightful disdain between them. For
there is not a greater nor a certainer plague, nor a more fretting Canker unto
sincere and true Friendship (next to Adulation and Flattery) then is Spite and
Envy.

The seventh Chapter. The right Ends of true and Christian Frendshippe.
IN discussing the Bounds and Ends of true and Christian Friendship, there
be two especial points to be decided, that are commonly brought into
question. The first is, of the Time: how long it ought to remain and be
continued. The second, of the manner and way how it ought to be observed,
retained and kept: that is to say, what, how far and how much one friend is
to perform and to do for an other.

Concerning the first, which is of the Time: let this stand for a definitive
and resolute answer, that (if the sincere vow and unfeigned goodwill of them
that godly enter into this Christian league of Friendship be advisedly
considered) it ought to be endless, and to continue between them perpetually,
even so long as they both shall live in this world.

And yet many times without any fault of theirs, by some casual error and
mishappe, it may so fall out, that there may be good cause, either utterly to
renounce and break of, or at least to withdraw and relent Friendship. For,
what if the one of the Friends should renye his faith, and of a faithful
believer, become a faithless Infidel? and of a Christian become a Turk or a
Pagan? Certes, in this case all Friendship is utterly to be forsaken, and all
Amity (if after sundry exhortations and admonitions he still persist in his
obstinate miscreancie) must be quight renounced. Howbeit, such a grievous
Apostacy and such an horrible backsliding, breeds in the mind of a Friend,
no small heaviness and sorrow, yea, and many times also causes him for a time
to suspende his determination, and to linger some while in hope of amendment
and repentance. For, even so likewise, at the death of our Friend, (although
we verily believe and rest assured that his soul is received into everlasting
bliss) yet do we sorrow and lament, 1. Sa. 1.26.
and that sometime very much, as we may see in David. But yet must we obey
the laws of God and of our frailty: Least otherwise, we should (like the
old Gyaunts) go about to make war against God, or irreligiously to prefer
our own affections before the fear of the Lord our maker.

Therefore, there may oftentimes be given most just occasion to break and
renounce Friendship: but yet the vow and purpose at the first, ought so
syncerely to be made and intended, as that it should last, continue, and be
retained for ever. And therefore that term and sentence which by some is
used, is most beastly and reprooueable: Love, as though thou should one day
hate. Which sentence and advise, if it should prevail and be allowed, then
farewell all fast Friendship: for then is all the force, pith and strength
thereof vanished: then be all the synewes of it loosed and weakened: and all
that firm trust and assured opinion yt ought to be among Friends, (safely,
boldly and willingly to impart and communicate together their minds one with
an other, and one to reveal and open his secrets unto an other) is utterly
dashed and put to flight. For why? neither will they, neither dare they
adventure so to do, for fear of afterclappes.

Finally, to the end they may thankfully, pleasantly, trustily and boldly live
together, this silthie Deuilish term of diffidence and distrust (Love, as
though thou should one day hate) must be quight banished and utterly
removed out of their mynds: although (as I said before) it may sometime so fall
out, that we may and ought to hate those whom aforetyme we have right dearly
loved: but this thing happens contrary to the hope, desire and wish of
Friends. Therefore let this sentence of trust and good opinion rather take
place and be heard, Love, as though thou should never hate.

So long therefore, as those two Friends do live together, they ought in
heart and vow to co^serue, keep and maintain their Frendshippe with all
manner of behoouefull courtesies: and not to conceive so much, as any suspicion,
either of breaking, or utter dissoluing thereof. For this course do they still
take, that are true and faithful Friends within themselves.

But there is an other question here moved: When the one of the Friends is
dead, what ought the other Friend being alive, to do with the deceased parties
Children? and how is he in respect of the Friendship which he bare to their
father, to deal with them? and whether, the same Friendship ought to be
continued toward the Children of him being dead or no?

Truly, it very well stands with the rule of Equity and Reason, that as
Children be heirs of their fathers Lands and Goods, so also to enherite
their fathers Friendship: accordingly as Isocrates writing to Demonicus has
most excellently set down. Because among the fathers Goods, his Friendship is
also reckened, and is many times far better and profitabler, then all the
enheritance that the Father leaves or can bequeath unto his Children. And to
such effect commonly, is Friendship embraced and entered into, with an hearty
desire and affectionate vow of the Parents: that the fruit thereof may
redound and be continued even unto their posterity and Children.

Thus did the Friendship between Jonathan and David reach and extend unto the
Children of Jonathan. 2. Sam. 9. verse. 1. and. 7 1. Sam. 20. verse. 15. and 42.
Which although it may seem to be done by Pact and Covenant, at the first
agreed upon between them: yet (doubtless) is this ever included in the wish
and desire of all Friends, that the fruict of their mutual Friendship and
love, should also after a sort appertain and be entailed unto their children:
for that, every godly and faithful person has special respect to provide,
not only for himself, but also for his Children and those that depend on him.
Therefore are both the Wife and Children of the deceassed Friend to be tenderly
loved, and all other things besides, that appertained unto him: yea, the very
Dogs and the Cattaile that belonged unto him: and all this, through an inward
affection of hearty goodwil borne unto the late owner, and by the law and
duty of perfect Friendship: Howbeit not in such measure and proportion as
the party Friend himself being deceassed: but the exceeding great love and
vehement zeal of their late firm Amity and steadfast conjunction lives still
in the breast of him that remains alive, and sends forth many sparks of
his unfeigned love, wheresoever he beholds and is brought into godly
remembrance of his deceassed Friend, by his true and lively Images, which be
his Children left behind.

Hereupon there grows yet an other question, about that gift of Goods, which
David bestowed on Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth: which (gift notwithstanding
that he was afterward better enfourmed of ye truth of the matter, and of Ziba
his treacherous infidelity toward his Master): yet did he not wholly and
entierly revoke. For, the Goods which in right belo^ged unto Mephibosheth (who
was the Son of Jonathan,) he gave unto Ziba: whereas he had before, in
remembrance of his Friend Jonathan appointed the same unto this his Son, and
had given commandment that the same should be assigned and assured unto him:
thereby to show himself thankful and myndfull of the firm Friendship
between himself, and Jonathan, 2. Sam. 9. verse. 7.
father of the said Mephibosheth. Yet David being afterward suttly beguiled
and craftily deceived by Ziba, revoked his former gift made to Mephibosheth,
and took away from him, 2. Sam. 16. verse. 4.
all that he had before bestowed upon him.

Now, the question is this, whether this last fact of David may be defended:
or how can he any ways be excused, but that he dealt herein, directly and
flatly against the laws and ends of true Friendship?

First and foremost, when as the same David might easily have espied the
falsehood of Ziba, and how cunningly he had been deceived and circumuented by
his treachery and false tales: yet showed he not so much favor and
compassion unto his dear Friends Son, as either severely to punish and
sharply revenge so notable a villainy and fraudulent cosenage, wrought
against him by his own servant: 2. Sam. 19. verse. 29.
nor yet to restore unto him all his Goods again.

Certes, in this case, (as I think) David cannot at any hand be excused, but
that he greatly offended and sinned, and that more ways then one: to wit,
first in respect of being a King: and secondly as being the professed and
sworn Friend of Jonathan the father of this Mephibosheth.

In that, he was a King, his office and duty had been to have punished and
revenged the open treachery and manifest falsehood of the Servant against his
Lord and Master. And in that he was a Friend: his duty had been to have
relieved and protected the Son of his deceassed Friend, being shamefully
abused and lewdly deceived through the fraud of his own Servant, and
pitifully despoyled of all his Goods by him that was his Vassal. His office
and duty (I say) had been, in remembrance of the great Friendship
between him and Jonathan, to have defended and supported his Son being
oppressed and afflicted: and being well able, to have restored him to his
fathers inheritance.

But in that, David neglected and omitted so to do, surely therein he is
worthy of great reprehension, and to be deemed and accoumpted as one utterly
unmindful of his office and duty. Furthermore to have transgressed the
Bounds, and to have sinned against the laws of true Friendship, yea and
quight to have forgotten both his promise and the benefits which he had before
received. Therefore this fact of David is not by any that are professed
Friends to be imitated and followed, neither to be drawn into example.

If any man to excuse David, will say: that because he had bound himself by an
Oath, and had now already given the same Goods unto Ziba, that therefore he
could not lawfully call back his promise: the answer hereunto is easily
shaped. For David had before given the very same Goods unto Mephibosheth: and
therefore in that partition of them which he granted to be equally made
between them both, he cleared not himself from the Conscience of his Oath
before God. For, he swear also unto Ziba, that he would give unto him all the
whole Goods of Mephibosheth, and not a moytie or portion of them only. And
yet he assigned unto him but only a part, and took an other part away from
him. And therefore, even in this same partition, David brake his Oath, and
therein is he manifestly culpable before God, for taking his Divine name in
vain.

To be short, there can no excuse be pretended, nor any reason (as I think)
alleged, whereby David in this case can be cleared either from the foul
fault of breach of Friendship, or of his solemn Oath long before sworn unto
Jonathan.

The second thing, that in the discussing of the Ends of Friendship, is
brought into question, is of the Manner and Way, how and in what sort, and how
far, by the laws of Friendship, Friends must do one for an other.
Su^marily, such Manner, such Bounds, such Ends, such Limits and Marks must to
the same be appointed, and so far must mutual courtesies among Friends be
enterchaungeably performed, as that at no hand the Majesty, Will, and glory
of God be any way hindered or in anywise dishonored. For further then so,
neither ought they to go, neither is it in anywise lawful for a Christian man
further to presume.

For, although among us men, that Friend is highly and dearly to be loved,
unto whom by Vow and Oath we have most strictly bound our selves: yet is God
more to be loved, unto whom we owe both our selves, and our Friends, and all
things else that we have: and in whose name and authority all the force,
substance and effect of Friendship is founded and established. Gal. 2.14.
So did Paul love Peter, but yet he loved the glory of God more. So did
Aristotle love Plato, but yet (as he him self says) he loved the truth
more. And the very Heathen and Paynim people, being demanded concerning the
bounds of Friendship, and how far one Friend were to deal and to do for an
other, could eloquently and pithily answer, even as did Pericles, that they
would both speak, do, and go for their Friend, but yet no further then to the
Altar, that is, no further then Religion and Conscience should warrant them.
Their opinion therefore and their doctrine was this, that a man lawfully may
do for his Friend all the pleasure he possibly can, saving and forprising his
conscience and obedience to the word of God: but no further. And herein truly
said they well. As also Aulus Gellius has likewise noted.

For, Noct Attic. lib. 1. cap. 3.
although we be to hazard the loss of our own state and wealth, yea and of
our life also, for our Friends sake (neither ought this loss and danger to
be refused, Ioh. 15.13.
if we will be true Friends in deed) yet the glory of God, and ye eternal
salvation of our Soul, ought more to be esteemed and regarded then any cause
of our Friend whatsoever it be. And we neither may, neither ought to be
thought herein to fail, or to come short in the office and duty of a
faithful Friend, if we deny, at our Friends request (be it never so earnest)
to do any thing that is unlawful and unjust, or against the law of God and
Godliness: yea we must rather do the part of a godly and Christian Friend, in
showing our selves ready rather to obey God then Man: and also to have more
care of our Friends salvation and Soul health, then of any worldly wealth or
transitory commodity.

And let him (whosoever he be that requesteth us to do for him any unlawful
act) blame and accuse himself for asking: rather then us for denying and for
not obeying and feeding his humor. For, he it is which transgresses and
breaks the true bounds of perfect and faithful Friendshid, and not we.

We must not stick many times to suffer our name and fame to be unjustly
reported and spoken of, among the vulgar sort of People: but never must we
either for Friend or any man else, commit that which is filthy, ungodly,
fraudulent, dishonest or wicked. Whereby it evidently appears, that that
sentence of Marcus Tullius Cicero in his Book of Friendship, and other
Philosophers also, is erroneous, false, and utterly to be rejected: for they
say: If the case so stand, or if the matter so fall out, that our Friends
wills in unjust causes must be furthered and helped, whereon either depends
their life and death, or their fame and credit: We may in such a case for
their sakes digress, swerue and wander somewhat out of the path of honesty,
so that it be not in a matter extreemely villainous, or wherein utter shame and
reproach may grow. For there be certain bounds: how far to wade in our
Friends behalf, and wherein a man in respect of Friendship is pardonable.

We both may, and also ought (I say) to gratify and pleasure our Friend: but
by committing sin, or offending the Commandments of God, to cast away both
our Friend and our selves, we may not, nor ought not in any wise. Therefore
may we not for our Friends cause, or at his request, either waste, spoil,
consume and set on fire Churches, Palaces and houses, neither ought we to war
and bear Arms against our Country, neither violently to assault or
contemptuously abuse the Magistrate, neither any way injuriously to hurt any
private person. For Love (says the Apostle) rejoices not in iniquity. 1
Cor. 13.6.


Neither is it lawful to lie for our friends sake, thereby to help his cause,
or to bring him out of any extremity: albeit at some time, and in some cases,
it is not forbidden us in our Friends cause to dissemble a matter, or to make
semblaunce and countenance as though some things were true, which in deed are
not so: such things I mean, as whereby neither God is dishonored, nor our
Neighbor damnisted. An example whereof we have in Jonathan, as appears 1.
Sam. 20. verse. 29. 1. Sam. 20.29.


So that, we neither allow the example and fact of Hushai the Archite,
neither in any wise think it meet and lawful to be imitated: who for that
duetifull service that he would seem to do unto David, and for that entier
and loyal Friendship that he bore unto him, circumuented and entrapped an
other, 2. Sam. 16. verse. 16.17 18.19.
(to wit, Absolon) by craft and subtlety. For, he lied, and dissembled with
Absolon, and therein he greatly sinned, although he was not only advised and
admonished, but also requested and earnestly entreated by David so to deal and
so to do. 2. Sam. 15.34.


But in all these things we must diligently mark, and carefully respect not
only what our Friend requesteth at our hands to be done for him: but much
rather to consider what beseems us or any Christian man in duty and
Conscience to perform.

And thus much of Friendship, and of the Ends, Bounds and Circumstaunces
thereof, briefly and summarily have we hitherto discoursed, upon advised
consideration and diligent meditation of that faithful Friendship that was
between David and Jonathan.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.
Tho: Newtonus, Cestreshyrins.

Ad adyta, virtuti aditus.
A TREATISE, touching Dyceplay and profane Gaming. Wherein, as Godly
recreations and moderate disportes be Christianly allowed and learnedly
defended: so, all vain, idle, unlawful, offensive and profane Exercises, be
sharply reproved and flatly condemned.

Written in Latin by Lambertus Danaeus: Englished by Tho: Newton.

Filia auaritiae, Nutrix est alea surti,
Pestis amicitiae, triste furoris opus.
Imprinted at London for Abraham Veale. 1586.

To the right Worshipful his very good Friend: Master William Higham Esquier,
one of her Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the County of Essex.
Unkind is he, that having received courtesy at an other man's hands, denies
it: unkind (again) is he, that dissembleth and will not seem to know it:
unkind likewise is he, that studieth not one way or other to requite it: but
of all others, the most unkind and unthankful is he, that quite forgets it.

Much to blame therefore were I (good Master Higham) if for the manifold
benefits received from you, I should either deny, conceal, misregard or
forget, how deeply I stand in your debt Book: or what a number of Arrerages I
am behind withal in your Iournall, in respect of that great heap of
courtesies, which I frankly and willingly confess in full measure to have
flowed from you toward me.

Neither may I (without blushing) pretermit, how deeply I rest beholding to
your Worshipful father in law, my especial good Friend Master Richard
Stonley: neither yet can J in honesty conceal the great courtesy that I
daily to my comfort receive, by and from your good Cosen my dear Friend and
loving neighbor Master W. Waldgraue. I will not here speak of your learned
brother in law, Master D. Dunne, to whom also I owe greater things, even my
self. No way am I able (J confess) to requite any of you, but you remember (I
doubt not) what one says: Mola salsa lita^t, qui thura non habent.

Jn part of payment, and for some discharge of duty, lo here (good Sir) I
boldly present unto you (and in you also to them) this my simple travail of
three days, in translating this godly and profitable work of Danaeus. What
effect it shall work in others I know not: but (surely) if they like no worse
of it in reading, then I my self have done both in reading, aduising and
translating of it, their labor shall not be lost, nor their diligence
wastfully bestowed. Commending therefore both it and my poor self unto you J
end: wishing you and your good wife, no worse to fare, then your virtue
requires, the favor of men wishes, and your own dexterity promises.

From my house at Little Ilford this 24. of July. 1586. Your bounden Thomas
Newton.

The Authors Preface.
THE dissolute and licentious disorder of manners and Christian behavior now
adays in this our corrupt Age being grown so great, that among other
mischieues swarming among us, the odious and detestable exercise of Dyceplay
has hitherto been either neglige^tly unespied, or not (as it ought to be)
co^dignely punished, has presently occasioned me somewhat to write concerning
this Argument: and to testify to the world (for that Christian affection that
I bear to all good and godly me^, desiring reformation of things amiss) what
wickedness and danger rests in this vile and Deuilish play. Albeit I am not
ignorant, that there will start up some busy bodies and wilful fellows,
which will not stick to deride this my labor, and frumpe me for my pains
herein taken: neither regarding what shall be said by me, nor yet caring for
any amendment in themselves. Though (I say) I know there will be some such
disordered Persons, yet doubt I not on the other side, but there be sundry
good and zealous men, fearing God, who understanding the lewdness and
looseness of this damnable Exercise, will gladly and willingly suffer them
selves to be reclaymed from the same, whereunto (perhaps) aforetyme they
were given and addicted: and will receive some profit by this my discourse.
Give admonition to the wise (says Solomon) Pro. 9.9. and he will be the
wiser, teach a righteous man and he will increase in learning.

FINIS.
A Discourse of Gaming, and specially of Dyceplay.
The first Chapter. Whether it be lawful at all, for a Christian man or woman
to play and use recreation of their mind.
FOr the better ripping up and plainer opening of all such points as are
necessarily required in this Argument to be spoken of: let us first lay down
our opinion (by way of answer) unto a certain question demanded and moved by
some, yea and the same, very grave and wise Personages: Whether it be in any
wise, lawful, allowable, or tolerable for a godly Christian to recreate
himself with any manner of game or pastime. Neither does this their question
and motive, altogether want some color of reason to lean unto.

For, first they allege, That we must yield an accoumptes unto God, not only
of this our whole life, but also of every singular actio^ thereof, and how we
have bestowed every small moment of time in this present world. And what good
accoumpts (say they) can he yield of his Idleness, that has spent his time in
playing?

Furthermore, seeing we are commanded to refrain from every idle word, Mat.
12.36
as Christ himself teaches us: for that all our triefling toys and fond
vanities do greatly displease and offend God, although in them we neither
swear, neither blaspheme his holy name: How shall we be accoumpted guiltless
and blameless before the same our heavenly Father, if we ydlie, vainly,
unthriftily and unfruitfully misspende our time (which is a thing most
precious) in play and disporting? For, whatsoever we do, we must so do it, as
that it may tend to the glory of God and advancement of his honor, as that
blessed Apostle S. 1. Cor. 10.31.
Paul most divinely teaches us.

Now, if we spend our time in vanities* and consume our life in Play, may it
be well said (I pray you) that we therein respect Gods glory, or have
regard to his honor?

Ephe. 5.16.
The same Apostle also diligently and earnestly in an other place admonishes
us, to redeem the time. For we have bestowed the same aforetyme in vain
studies and fantastical devises, all the while that we were drowned in the
dregs of Idolatry, and soyled with the suddes of Superstition.

Being now therefore through the inestimable benefit and goodness of God
become Christians, and enlightened with the bright beams of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, shall we, or is it meet we should bestow the residue of
our time in playing, trifeling, toying, and idle loytering? 1. Pet. 4.3.
It is sufficient for us (says the Apostle Peter) that we have spent the
time past of the life after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness,
lusts, drunkenness, gluttony, drinkinges and abominable Idolatries: that
henceforth we should not live (as much time as remains) in the flesh, nor
after the lusts of me^, but after the will of God.

And truly there be so many virtuous duties of Christian life, which God
requires at our hands: and so many occasions every hour ministered unto us,
whereby we may premote and advance the glory of God, and also procure the
benefit and commodity of our Neighbor: that every hour and minute of an
hour still brings with it some one new occasion or other, to such end and
purpose.

Therefore, to omit those so many and so holy exercises both of mind and
body: and in steed thereof, ydlie, vainly, securely and Dronelike, to
embusie our selves with sporting, pastime, play and daliaunce, is a thing,
that many think not to be allowed of, in us that be Christians. And if we
will know what those many good exercises be, we will here note some certain
of them for example sake: to wit, diligent reading and hearing of the holy and
blessed Word of God: conferring and perusing of the ancient Fathers and
Catholic writers: knowledge of Histories, which are most profitable for the
orderly direction of our life: visiting of the Sick: comforting of them that
are in Prison: and finally the diligent exercise and meditation of that Art,
Trade and Function which every man particularly professes. Math. 25.35.36.
All which the Lord in his Word commands.

Now, that we should either altogether, or for the most part omit these things,
and be (in lieu thereof) addicted to bestow our selves and our time in
vanities: this is a thing (I say) that some men and the same both virtuous and
godly, cannot well allow of: but do think it to carry matter of great
inconvenience that any Christian should so vainly bestow any part of his life
in Play and idleness.

And for ye better confirmation of this their opinion, they bring the sentence
and judgment of that reverend Father Ambrose, in his first Book of Offices.
Chap. 23. and also in his exposition of the 118. Psalm: where that holy man
and grave Father seems flatly and absolutely to condemn all kinds of Play,
generally. And so also an other ancient Father, S. Chrysostom, in his 6.
Homily upon Mathewes Gospel, disalloweth in a generality all manner of
sportes and plays. And these be the reasons which they briefly allege and
bring for confirmation of their assertion.

Notwithstanding, we do not altogether so think, but are rather of an other
opinion, and say, that some convenient recreation may very reasonably be
allowed, and pardoned unto human imbecillitie: and herein have we on our
side, joining in judgment with us, the authority of other ancient Fathers,
no less reverend and accoumpted of, then they: namely Augustine in his second
Book de Musica: whose mind and opinion we rather following, do deny, that
it is utterly forbidden a Christian man, to play at all, or not to use any
recreation. Yea, we say, that it is every wise man's part to recreate and
refresh his mind and body, being ouerwearied with studies, accumbred with
cares, and cloyed with labors, by laying aside (for a while) his earnest and
serious business, and to betake him self to some comely and decent
recreation: whereby he may (as it were) breathe a while from his burden, to
the intent afterward with the fresher courage and liuelier mind to renew his
former toil, and give the lustier onset upon his intermitted business.

Their reasons therefore before, may easily and with one word be answered: to
wit, by distinguishing between such things as be allowed unto a Christian
man, and be merely indifferent. For, some things be of such kind and nature,
that to be still occupied therein, is not at any hand allowable: of which
sort is Play: which for some short time only and some very small while, may
be well allowed and borne withal in a Christian man. But to spend much time
therein, or to make a continual practice thereof, is (undoubtedly) unlawful,
intolerable, and vttetly discommendable.

Therefore as that worthy Warrior said of Philosophy, that he delighted to
reason of Philosophy, but yet in few words and briefly: so the same and in
better right may we say of Play, viz. that to Play now and then is lawful,
but yet for a small while, not for any long space.

For, utterly to abandon, banish, and take away Play from this life of ours,
is a thing more rigorous, severe and cruel, then the nature of man can easily
bear. Neither may a Christian man cloyed with long travails and much labors
be any whit less denied and debarred Play, for the refreshing of his mind and
reviving his wits, then being weary, to be allowed to sleep: being
thirsty, to drink: being hungry to eat, etc.

Yea, the Scriptures of God (which be left and delivered unto us as ye best
rule to know what things we are bounden to do, and what to eschew and
forbear) make mention hereof, as of a thing lawful and allowable, and sets
it down as a great benefit and blessing of God. Zech. 8.5. Zech. 8.5.
And in that sentence which is aduouched and brought out of the Epistle of
Paul to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 10.1.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God,
it cannot be denied but that Plays and Sportes are inclusiuely comprehended in
these words, or whatsoever other things ye do: considering that intermission
of labor and honest recreation of mind is no less profitable, and oftentimes
also no less necessary, for the recovery and comfort of the weak Powers
and exhausted strength of our seely bodies, then is Rest, Sleep and Meat,
wherewith we are nourished. And our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ most
excellently teaching us that man was made for the glory of God, Mat. 2.27.
says, that the Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath.

The which self same thing is also to be thought of Play and disport. For it
was devised for man, to refresh his decayed strength and to revive his wearied
sprightes, and also by this kind of rest and recreation to preserve his body
in health and soundnes, the better, therelier and freelier afterward to serve
God and apply his vacation.

Certes, in the number of such things as are termed Indifferent, and are
allowed by God unto a Christian man, ought Play to be reckened: and yet may not
the same be abused, as also no other of those things ought to be, that are
called Mean, Indifferent, and Adiaphorall.

For doubtless, those men are too strait laced, and are too precisely wedded
unto an ouerharde censure and opinion, which flatly and absolutely deny and
debar a Godly faithful man (being oppressed and almost forespent with
infinite cares of the mind, and otherwise wearied with bodily labor) al manner
of recreation and disport, which might be (as it were) a profitable and
wholesome remedy for his disease and inconvenience.

Neither may that man be said not to regard and respect Gods glory, who
refreshes and recreateth himself with an intent, and to the end he may
afterward with perfecter strength, lustier cheer, and greater courage both of
body and mind, return to his former charge, and afresh betake himself unto
that calling, whereunto he is by God assigned: and may also the readier serve
his Country, benefit the Common wealth, and provide for his household and
family, for that his health is strong, perfect and sound.

For, the wit and nature of man may very well and aptly be likened unto a Bow,
according to yt excellent verse and saying of the Poet.

The body and wit of man may well be
Resembled and fitly comparde to a Bow:
Which still standing bent, and at no time free,
Must needs (and that shortly) grow weak, soft and slow.
Therefore, as a Bow if it be not sometime unbent, becomes soft, sluggish,
weak and unprofitable: so fares it with the quickness and finenesse of the
wit: if sometime it have not his convenient rest and relaxation, it soon
shrinketh under his burden, and in short while becomes both dull, blunt and
loggish. We do not therefore generally condemn all Play, neither do we
deny the same to a Christian man, but that he may in some honest sort recreate
and refresh himself. For, honest Sportes and comely Plays we do well allow
even unto Godly and faithful men: howbeit we will and wish that a measure and
moderation be therein also orderly kept and Christianliie observed.

The second Chapter. Whether it be lawful for a man to play for money: and the
same being won, to keep to his own use.
THis must first and foremost be set down for a rule, that in no manner of
Play (for of Plays some be honest, decent, and Gentlemanlie: some (again)
dishonest, unlawful, and unseemly, as hereafter we shall further show) a
Christian may not play for money, with an intent to make it his own, to keep
it to his private use: or (as we say) to put it up in his own purse for his
own private gain and commodity.

The reasons moving us hereunto be many, and the same also very manifest: of
the which, some we will at this time and in this place allege and declare.

First, Play was not at the beginning devised among men for any Commerce,
barter, buying or selling, chopping or changing, traffic or intercourse,
whereby to procure and catch unto our selves any thing that belonged to any
other: but only to be a kind of means and way for recreation of the mind,
and a refreshing or exercising of the body: in so much that whosoever uses
Play to any other end or purpose, does not rightly use, but filthilie and
disorderly abuse it, exchaunging that which serves for an honest recreation of
Man, into a most vile and filthy kind of gain and covetousness, Ephesians. 5.3.
Collo. 3.5.
which (as the Apostle teaches) we ought chiefly to eschew.

Neither by any law either divine or human, has Play ever been reckened
and accoumpted among those sorts and kinds of Contracts, whereby we lawfully
may barter or alienate our goods. If there be any human Laws, which reckon
up all the honest kinds of contracts, and manners of bargayninges, they be
those, that are at this day called the Civil Laws of the Romans. But they
only reckon up Buying, selling, letting out, hiering and ferming, making and
taking of Leases with Couenaunts, and infinite other contracts beside: by the
which we may by Law both conueigh that which is ours to others, and also
assure that which is other men's, to us.

As for Play, it is not once named among them. For why? Play is none of those
kinds of things and actions, if we thoroughly consider and truly look into
either the nature or the end of Play. Whosoever therefore detayneth and
keeps to his own use an other man's money or goods, only because he has by
Play gained and won the same: that man truly does uniustly and wrongfully
detain it: and with no better right or conscience, then a Thief keeps and
possesses the thing that he falslely has stolen.

For, if it might be lawful for us (after this sort, that is to say, by Play)
to catch and get other men's goods or money: what other thing (I pray you)
should we bring in, then in steed of Play, to set up a kind of insatiable
and greedy covetousness: and thereby utterly pervert the very right nature of
things, while of a matter of sport and pastime we make, not only a matter of
serious earnest, but also of raking gain and filthy lucre?

By Play therefore to gain other folks money, is all one with stealing. And
lawful is it not any way: no, although the manners, or private custom of any
particular City or Country did permit and allow it. For that permission and
allowance (if any such should be) is encountered, met with all, oppugned and
repealed by the Law of Nature her self: which being of far greater force
and equity then any private or municipall Law, ought much more to be obeyed.

Albeit, I do not remember that I have ever read, that it has been enacted,
constituted and allowed by the Law written of any City or Country, that such
kind of money as was gotten by Play, might either be kept and detained: or (if
it were not paid) might by law from the debtor be recovered. For, there lay
no action for any such debt, neither was there ever any judicial Plea by the
laws allowed to be commenced and recorded, whereupon the Judge proceeded to
any sentence: unless (perhaps) it were the Tenise play, (which has found so
much favor, to be specially privileged in some Cities and places, by the
private laws of their Country) that if a man do win thereat some little
portion or small pittaunce of money, (as namely a groate or six pence, or
thereaboutes) he may indicially demand and recover the same. Which Play
seems hereupon to have found this special favor, for that there is in it
(as Galene affirms) an excellent good and wholesome exercise of the Body,
and no less industry of the mind.

But as for other sorts of Play and Games, or of any gain or money thereupon
promised, there lies neither Action nor Judgment. Yea which is more: if the
money staked and laid down be kept back, detayned or pursed by the winner
after the victory or game ended, the looser shall have his remedy by law,
and may lawfully sue the winner as an unjust withholder and wrongful detayner
of that which is none of his. And this our assertion is plainly and evidently
confirmed by Franciscus Hottomanus one of the learneddest and notablest Lawyers
of our Age, Lib. 2 ca. 2 de Vs^^^s.
and right godly and Christian writer. For, he plainly there affirms, that
all that is gained by Play, is by the Civil Law condemned, and also forbidden
to be claymed or asked.

Augustine also commands and wills all that is gained this way to be
taken from the Winner, and to be bestowed on the poor. Epist. 54. ad Macedon.
But to him that has once lost it, he will not that it should in any wise be
restored: that by this means both the Winner may be defeated from that which
he lewdly wanne, and so disappoynted of his purpose and hope: and that also the
rash, hardy and foolish Looser, may thereby bear a kind of punishment.

Whose sentence and opinion as I willingly embrace and like: so also would I
further think it very convenient, that both the one and the other, should be
deeply payned and amerced by the Judge in some round sum of money, to be
certainly converted and levied to the use of the Common Treasury, or the
Princes Exchequier.

For what manner of dealing and beastly fashion of life is this among
Christians? what madness (I pray you) is it? first, that a thing invented and
devised only for recreation of the mind, should for the satisfying of men's
greedy covetousness, be converted into a practice of most filthy gain?

Again, that so many of the poor members of Christ being daily and howerly
even in the midst of the Church, and for lack of relief, ready to statue
through want of necessary sustentation, being both men as we are, and
Christians, and our brethren also, yea our own flesh, as the Prophet Isaiah
calls them: Isay. 58.7.
yet we beholding and seeing this their grievous case and pitiful penury, and
passing by them without relieuing and succouring them, can find in our hearts
to save our money this way, and to spend and consume the same upon Play and
other trifling Guegawes?

Woe unto this unmercifulness, sensuality and vain pleasure, which we shall
hereafter (without earnest and speedy repentance) most grievously and
smartingly pay for. Woe unto this wilful loosing of money: which, not only
God himself, but those poor Creatures also (whom we in their misery and
necessity contemned and regarded not, because we would satisfy our own
wicked lusts in Playing) shall before all the blessed Angels, cast in our
teeth and lay to our charge, as it is evidently written and plainly set forth
in the Gospel. Mat 25.44


What shame is it for those whom GOD has blessed with store of worldly wealth,
and are called Christians, not only daintilie to wallowe in all pleasures and
delights, but also for fulfilling of their sensual lusts and affections
ryotously and disorderly by Play to spend and consume abundant riches, and
wilfully in vanity to cast away huge Su^mes of Money: dealing therein not
unlike unto that miserable rich Glutton, Luc. 16.1^
whereof Saint Luke speaks. Whereas in the mean while poor afflicted and
diseased Lazarus, our brother, lying at their gate begging relief and making
pitiful moan for food, is nothing at all regarded but rather utterly
contemned and despitefully rahated, and suffered miserably to sterue for
hunger. Upon whom, the very Dogs by licking his wounds, showed a kind of
human affection, and bestowed on him that alms, that belonged to their
nature any way to yield.

Shall we that be men and Christians, show no manner of compassion, no
succor, no relief to our Christian brother, distressed with want, and
afflicted with poverty as Lazarus was? What a shame is it that we should have
money to waste and consume upon Play: and to have none charitablie to bestow
upon the seely poor members of Christ, to relieve them in their need and
extremity?

Let us therefore (brethren) follow that counsel or rather commandment of
our Savior Christ: that is, of the unrighteous Mammon to make us friends:
Luc. 16.9
not those which win our money and so catch our Mammon from us by Play: (for,
such kind of persons are never a whit the more our friends, neither do they
think themselves any thing the more bounden to thank us therefore) but the
poor Creatures of God, the members of Christ, and our brethren: for which
bounty to them showed, God himself will become our Paymaister, Matthew. 19.
and restore unto us an hundredth fold.

And certainly very excellent is that sentence of Lactantius. lib. 6. ca. 17
It skilleth much (says be) what manner of persons they be that help thee to
spend thy thrift: whether Makeshifts, Dycers and Bawdes do catch it from thee,
or whether thou do bestow the same upon godly uses and for Gods sake: and
whether thou prodigally spend it in gluttony and cramming thy belly, or else
lay it up for store in the Treasury of Righteousness. Therefore as it is a
vice, wastfully for ill purposes to spend and consume our wealth: so is it a
virtue, to bestow the same to good uses.

Augustine forbids us to bestow any money for the seeing of Stage Plays
and Enterludes: or to give any thing unto the Players therein, and yet these
kind of persons do after a sort let out their labor unto us, and their
industry many times is laudable. What shall we say then to our selves, if we
lash out the same upon these jolly Gamesters and frolic companions, whose
humor we feed and delight, as well as they do ours: and from whom we receive
none other manner of thing, but loss of time, and wasting of our life?

All these things being most true, we may boldly thus conclude, that all this
kind of gain and advantage, gotten by Play, is no whit better then plain
Theft: and that whatsoever we detayne and keep to our selves being thus
gotten, is (in truth) none of ours, neither can it be justly, and with good
conscience by us possessed.

The third Chapter. Of Games, Plays and public Exercises: and of the
Rewards thereunto assigned by the Common wealth.
BUT least hereby any man (mistaking our meaning) should think we went about
to bind, clogge and ensnare the conscience: we will here in this case set down
two exceptions.

The first whereof is this: That those public Exercises and Games which are
appointed by authority of the Magistrate (although they be termed and known
by the name of Plays) yet are not comprehended within the compass of that
general Rule, before by us set down and delivered: neither that the gains
and rewards publicly appointed and assigned by authority of the Magistrate
for benefit of the Common wealth, to be thereby condemned. For, such Games
and Exercises are lawful for us, not only to follow and frequent, and for
the same to strive and do our uttermost deuoyre: but also, if we can in the
same win the victory, we may honestly carry the prize away, and detain and
reserve it to our selves, and lawfully keep it as our own well and truly
gotten goods.

Neither needs any doubt thereof to be made, but that it is both lawful, and
may also be done with a good and safe conscience. For, such manner of Prizes and
rewards are proposed and appointed by the Magistrate, and not by private
persons. And if they were (as many times they be) assigned and set out by
private persons, yet are they warranted by public authority. Again, these
Exercises of mind and body are profitablie meant and appointed, for the
whetting, sharpening and increasing of men's industry: whereby both the private
person is solaced and recreated, and also a public benefit to the Country
and Common wealth procured and provided.

For, these public Exercises and even Shows, Games, Sportes and Prizes, be
(as it were) certain preludes, preparatiues, assaies and traynings of Warfare:
and may stand in great steed for sundry occasions: that when the
Commonwealth shall have any need of our help, we may be the readier to
serve, and the riper in our charges: and therefore the trayning up of the
people therein, (to help when need is, their Country) is a thing not only
tolerable, but also very necessary and commendable.

To this end, and for this purpose is it at this day in most Countries used,
to train and exercise their serviceable persons in ha^dling their Pieces,
their Caliuer, their Muskee or the Harquebuse, to prime, charge or shoot in
great Ordnaunce, to traile and toss the Pike, to shoot in the long Bow or
Crossebowe: because these be the things that have many times stood the
Country in notable steed, when it has by foreign invasion or inward
garboyles been endaungered.

And to the end, the people should the more willingly frame themselves to the
same exercises, there are Prizes and rewards by public authority proposed and
set out: yet not of any great sum, but rather of some small value, and to be
as it were, a certain cheering or honest allurement unto them for their
industry: or as a token of an open praise and commendation given unto them for
their well doing: which is a thing greatly profitable for the Common wealth.
For, honor, preferment, reward and dignity nourishes Arts, and increases
knowledge: and Glory is the Spur that pricketh all men forward to well
doings. And therefore in all Ages such kind of public Exercises and Wagers
have been appointed, allowed and practiced.

And albeit those which were in the old time exercised, were far differing
from such as we now adays have in use: yet were they ordained, and had a
respect unto the manner of Warfare and Martial service then among them used.
For although they then had devises and Engines to throw Darts and Iauelins to
annoye their Enemies a far of, yet had they no Gunnes, but fought it out, man
to man, with down right blows, joining foot to foot and hand to hand: And
among them also, they had sundry sorts of public Exercises and Games for
wagers, but yet especially these five: Wrestling, hurling a Coyte who could
hurl it farthest or highest, of length or height: Running or leaping:
Co^bating with leatheren bags having plummets hanging at the ends thereof:
Barriers and Torneaments on Horseback, Lib. 8. Odiss. Aeneid. 5.
all which are mentioned as well by Homer as also by Virgill and Pausanias.

Unto these, did the Romans afterward add an other, which was, fighting
with Ships on the water: exhibited and solemnly kept, specially in the Reign
of Augustus Caesar, to conserve in fresh memory his noble victory at Actium:
and the show thereof was on the River of Tyber.

Afterward there was also added an other kind of warlike exercise on Horsback,
which in the old time was termed Troy, and was accustomed to be openly showed
in the usual Field of Exercise called Campus Martius: It was also called
Pyrrhica. Vide Tranquil. and Polyd. Virg. lib. 2. cap. 13. de inuentor. rerum.
but the name of this kind of Exercise was afterward called Torneyments:
which for that there grew many times much harm and danger thereof, and also
was found to be an occasion to draw aspiring minds unto ambicious desiers, it
was afterward by public authority of the Laws worthily put down and
discontinued.

But to return again to our purpose: those Rewards, Wagers, Prizes and offers
which were publicly set out and proposed for such me^ as should put forward
themselves in these kinds of exercises to play and strive for ye same, were
commonly and for the most part of small value: so yt they might seem to be
rather as a token of victory and a praise to the party that wanne the same,
Lib. 5. Symposiac. quaest. 3. and lib. 8. cap. 4
then any great gain. For our forefathers (as Plutarch writes) used for
Rewards (and thought the same very large and bountiful) at public Shows
and open Games, none other things then these four: viz, an Olive, a Pyne tree,
Parselie and Apples. Which small gifts and trifeling Prizes were for very long
space accoumpted for a great reward of praise: as the same Plutarch in the
life of Cato Vticensis witnesses in these words: The rewards that were
publicly given at Games in the old time, and deemed as right bountiful and
large among the Greeks were, Beete, Lettice, Radish and Pears: among the
Romans, flagons of Wine, Porke, Figs, Cucumbers, Faggots and bundelles of
Wood. But these have in process of time through Ambition and Covetousness
been changed and altered. For, in place of them there are now other things
grow^ (...) ^se, and customablie given to the winners.

The fourth Chapter. Of them, that bestow their winnings gained by play, upon
a Banquet, or good cheer for the whole Company.
THE other exception from our former Rule is this: That no man should think us
so hardly to mean, as that we flatly condemned or misliked ye custom, of
having some small sum of money gained by Play (not with any intent of the
winner to keep it to his own use) to be freely bestowed upon common cheer
between them. For, such winning may not be construed to be mere gain and
private profit, seeing it is forthwith lated out and bestowed upon a
continuation of friendlines, and maintaynaunce of neighborhood: and whereby
also after a sort, the looser has some kind of benefit. For, although he be
the looser, yet has he his part and share of the gain it self, because he
eats and drinks his portion. And all that is this way gotten, is and may
well be called Expense, and not the gain of the Winner: because he
courteously and friendly therewith entertaineth the whole company: and for the
more confirmation of friendship and mutual good will among themselves,
frankly bestows the cheer upon them.

Which courtesy and custom among Christians may (doubtless) without any
scruple of Conscience be lawfully done: forseene, that there be no lavish
expense or wilful wast: but only some small sum of money that is played for,
and the same to be converted to these uses. But, if either the Sum of it self
be big: or in respect of the estate of the Players and Gamesters, excessive
and too much: in such case, both the winner and the looser ought by the
Magistrate to be punished: and in such persons, both such cost as I have
spoken of, and such Play also, is by us in this place flatly forbidden and
utterly (as unlawful) condemned.

The fifth Chapter. What kind of Games and Plays be lawful, and what be
forbidden and unlawful.
BUT now let us came to speak of such Games and Plays as are lawful and
permitted, or unlawful and prohibited: least (otherwise) all this our discourse
and treatise might seem vainlie enterprised and to small purpose taken in
hand. The question (surely) is hard and difficult, and diversely by diverse
persons maintained and decided. Whereunto when any question is moved unto me
for my opinion therein to be had, my custom and order is this to answer. If
we first set down and show what kinds thereof be forbidden, it shall be an
easy matter to pronounce of all the rest: to wit, that all others he lawful
and directly permitted to a Christian.

Of Games and Plays therefore which are unlawful, the sorts be sundry and
diverse. For, first, whatsoever Games or Plays are prohibited and forbidden by
the laws and customs of that Country or City wherein we live, are generally
to be accoumpted unlawful: although otherwise, in respect of their action,
they be not dishonest: yet for so long time as we shall dwell or seiourne in
that Country and place, we must and ought of refrain them. For, such is the
condition to Christian liberty, concerning things of them selves merely
indifferent, that according to the diverse circumstances of matters, places,
times and persons, it may be restrained.

Neither ought we to violate and break such laws, as particular Countries,
Seigniories and Cities have established, enacted and made concerning the same:
specially if therein we may keep a good and clear conscience, without
stooping or yielding to any Superstition. We must be sure therefore that such
Decrees, Laws, Statutes, Permissio^s or prohibitions be grounded upon some
good reasons and just cause: and applied for the better government of the
state of that place and Country.

If therefore we transgress those Laws, we commit a very great fault, and by
our evil example, giving cause of offense to others, do procure and draw them
into the like contemptuous dealing.

Secondly, I call all those Games and Plays dishonest, unseemly and unlawful,
wherein there is any evil, dishonest, filthy, unchaste or unseemly actio^,
practice or pranke, as namely, lascivious talk and wanton words, unchaste
groapings and ribald handlings, unshamefast gestures and fancieful behauiours:
because Christians ought not only to abstain from every thing whatsoever, that
is by nature evil, but also from all that, which has any manner of show or
appearaunce of loosenes and dishonestie, as the Apostle warns us. 1. These.
5.22.


All such Plays, Games and Sportes therefore, wherein there is any manner
representation, counterfayting, imitation, or pronunciation of filthiness and
unchastity, are, as lewd and lascivious, to be utterly condemned, and worthily
to be banished. For they be the flaming fierbrandes of all beastly lusts, and
the shameless occasions of many outrageous disorders.

Thirdly, all such Games and Plays as merely consist upon blind hazard and
doubtful chance, are flatly by us (as unlawful) rejected and condemned. And
such are all those, that stand upon haphazard, and wherein the victory
hangs, as chance falls out and allotteth. Under this kind, are contained
and comprehended almost an infinite number and sort of Plays and Games,
specially and namely Cards and Dyce: which therefore all good and godly
persons, whether they be rich or poor, learned or ignorant, Governors or
Artificers: publicly or privately: at home or abroad: in time of War or in
time of Peace, ought to forbear and eschew. For, this kind of Play and Gaming,
thus depending upon hazard, is most manifastly reproved and condemned, not
only by the laws devised by man: but also by most strong and inevitable
reasons out of the sacred word of God.

The Frenchmen under the names of Cards and Dyce comprehend all manner of Play
consisting upon hazard: and that there are and were in the old time more sorts
of this wicked and unlawful Play, Lib. 8. Nomenc. cap. vlt.
Julius Pollux plainly witnesses.

The sixth Chapter. What the meaning of this word Alea properly is: and what
Games and Plays are contained and comprehended under the name thereof.
But in these Games, Pastymes, Sportes and Plays at Cards and Dyce, there is a
certain distinction to be used. For, some of them, are after such a sort
played and passed over, that to the winning and obteyning of the victory,
honest industry of the mind helps more, then any blind casualtie or
chaunceable hazard: in so much that the acward luck which falls out
contrary to desire, is supplied, amended and reformed by Art and cunning.
These kinds of Play may not properly be termed Alea or Hazardrie, neither
are they absolutely to be forbidden: only let measurable mean therein be
used.

Others there be that hang and depend (as it were) upon mere chance and
casting: wherein a man's industry (if there be no packing, falsehoode and
cogging deceit used) can nothing avail. This kind of Play is properly called
Alea: and this is it, that we say is utterly disallowable, and to be banished
and cast out of the Banquettes, Feasts, Meetinges, Assemblies, Families and
hands of all Christians: for that, whatsoever luck gives and blind chance
herein allotteth, the Players and Gamesters take up and deteyne: and the loss
or chance hereby sustained cannot by any Art that is lawful and honest, be
recovered or amended.

For, if there be any cogging Panion or shifting mate, that by sleight and
paltry goes about to help the chance, or strike the Dyce, (as many foysting
Coseners and deceiptfull Packers in playing both can do and use to do) such
an one is accoumpted for a lewd fellow and a cogging Verlet: and being once
known or taken with the manner, he is worthily expelled and abandoned of all
men, out of all honest companies.

These cogging tricks and subtle shifts in Play whosoever uses, is ever
the causer of much brabbling, wra^gling, skoulding and fighting: which to be
true, appears by the example of one Temenus, of whom Pausanias writes in his
Book, entitled Messaniaca.

And therefore all such kinds of Plays and Games, we must confess to be
properly and truly termed Alea: for that, all the hope of victory and winning
thereby, consists in the doubtful hazard, event, and casting, whether it be
at Cards or Dyce: and not in any laudable, commendable or lawful industry of
man. And the ancient Writers are of the same opinion with us: for they like
wise affirm this word Alea, to signify all that what soever, wherein casual
luck, uncertain event and doubtful hazard bears sway.

For, where the winners themselves cannot tell how they shall speed, nor what
good success they shall have, till they see it plainly so come to pass,
there must luck, chance and hazard needs altogether take place and bear
sway: and therefore is this manner of Play called Alea. And this is that
naughty and vile Play, which we in this place and in all this our present
Treatise have pronounced and protested to be unlawful and disallowable: and
do heartily wish it to be far of from al Christian men's practice: and if it
have through too much licentious oversight been at any time heretofore
frequented and used, that it be now from henceforth renounced, forsaken,
loathed and detested.

Now, that we may the sooner be ashamed of this so ugly and so beastly an
Exercise, let us show forth and set down the wickedness and the harms that
grow thereof. And first, let us hear what opinion and judgment, even
profane and Heathen men, which lacked the clear light of the word of God, had
thereof: who yet (notwithstanding) will teach us, what to deem and think of
such a filthy and vile practice.

Against Dyceplay The vij. Chapter. Dycing and Carding reproved and condemned
even by the Heathen and Infidelles that knew not God.
Philipp. 2.
CIcero objected unto Marcus Antonius the Consul, sitting in the Counsel
Chamber among all the noble Senators, and laid it to his charge as ye
greatest reproach that could be, that he was a Dycer and a Gamester, and that
he fostered and countenaunced such kind of persons about him. Suetonius
Tranquillus in the life of Augustus. Cap. 71. writes, that this kind of Play
was noted and reputed in that mighty Monarch (being otherwise a most excellent
Prince) for a great disgrace and dishonorable blemish: in so much that his
delight in this filthy exercise greatly eclipsed and dimmed the rest of his
notable virtues.

Claudius Caesar gave no way more occasion to the world to accoumpt and judge
him for a Blockhead and Dolt, then by his great delight that he took in
Dyceplay.

Gobilo the Lacedaemonian being sent in the behalf of his Country, as
Ambassador to the Corinthians to join friendship and league with them: and
finding the Princes and People there, playing at Dyce, made no longer tariance,
but presently returned home without either declaring his message or concluding
any League: saying that he would not so distaine and dishonor his noble
Countrymen of Lacedaemonia with such an infamy, to be said that they had
concluded friendship and made League with Gamesters and idle Dyceplayers.

The King of Persia sent (in mockage and derision) unto Demetrius the King of
Asia, for his lightness in playing, a pair of golden Dyce.

Asconius Paedianus writes that such as were known in Rome to be common
Dycers, Ascon. Paedian. in secund diuinat Ciceronis.
in those days were amerced and condemned to pay four fould the value of the
money that they had lost by play: to the intent others by their example and
penalty should take warning and be terrified.

By the law Roscia, al such as either played or lost at Dyceplaye more then
their ability might well bear, were banished the Country.

And Plato says in his Treatise entitled Conuiuium: that those men which at
their Feasts must have Stageplayers, and Actours of Enterludes, showed
themselves therein to be men ignorant of al good knowledge: who having
(themselves) no furniture of matter nor store of words, were glad (as it were)
to beg and borowe, or rather to hyre pleasure at the hands of a sort of
sottish and looseminded fellows.

The same doom may we likewise very aptly and well give upon Dycers: to
wit, that they addict themselves to these trifeling exercises, for that they
have no better nor honester recreation of the mind to betake them selves unto.
And therefore are glad to seek pleasure, even in these vainetromperies and
idle devises.

But what need we hereupon to stand any longer, 11. Paudect. tit. 5.
sithence that one only law of the Romans evidently shows how odious the
same was accoumpted? the words be these: If any one shall be found to have
beaten or otherwise to have hurt him that shall be said to keep a Dycing house:
or if during that time, any thing fortune to be taken or stolen out of his
house, I will give no judgment on his behalf. And him, that shall offer any
outrage or show violence to any man about Dyceplay: I will according as I find
the matter, severely punish.

These be the words of the Law, whereby it appears, that all that gain
which grows by this kind of Play, cannot lawfully in any wise be demanded
or recovered, neither in place of Judgment nor elsewhere. So harmefull, and so
directly against all good manners was it deemed, even among the profane and
heathen people.

Iuuenal also a grave and excellent Poet accoumpteth Dyceplaye am^^^ ^^ose
(...) that easiliest corrupt and (...) a whole household.

If that the old Sire d^e take delight
To play at wicked Dyce: Juue^^^ Satyr. 1 ^

His dapper Son will quickly learn
To use the self same vice.
But now let us see what the Emperors themselves in the Laws have enacted and
set down touching this beastly, shameful and idle Play. And that very plainly
appears, Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43.
and is to be seen in these words: We tendering and carrying a special care
for the benefit and weal of our Subjects, do enact, and by this present Law
decree, that no manner of person shall either play himself, or be a looker on,
of others that play at Dyce, neither publicly abroad, nor privately in their
own houses. If any thing have been attempted to the contrary, let not the
loosers be damnified and condemned: but let the money so lost be restored to
them again: and for want of due payment, let it be recovered by competent
actions and formal pleas by the loosers, that it may reuert to the^ or to
their heirs after them. And a little after in the same place: Let the
Bishops of those places where this shall be tried, be helpful and assistant
unto them for the better accomplishment hereof, and the Presidents, Prouostes
and Governors likewise.

Bishops therefore and Ecclesiastical Pastors if they will effectually
execute their duties and maintain Religion in her purity and soundness,
must have a diligent care hereunto, that this wicked exercise and paltrie Play
may be banished out of all men's companies within their charge and
jurisdiction: Interdici. Authen. De sacrosanc. Episcopis.
as here (for example) they see it plainly enjoined unto them by the Edicts
and Commandments of the Emperors.

Whereunto they were specially moved: for that they perceived in this kind of
Play such an heap of mischeeues and inconveniences always attending thereon:
over and beside the horrible blaspheming of Gods holy name, and other most
detestable and insufferable outrages, usually practiced in these so filthy and
unchristian exercises.

But what? does the Canon Law, (as it is called) which was gathered and packed
together by Papists, any whit more favor them, then does the Civil Law?
although the Bishops of Rome would gladly be coumpted mild, and seek for
the title and praise of clemency and gentleness, yea and then also, when as
manners were most corrupt and al good orders in the Church out of square? I say,
no. For, even the Canon Law does most severely condemn them, Canon. Episcop.
distinct. 35. in Decreto. Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 1. c. Clerici.
and utterly detest them as the most hurtful and pestilent people that can be.

So that al men in general with one common assent, and (as it were) with the
mouth of Nature her self, have flatly ever condemned this Dyceplay, and
banished it out from among all godly Christian men's company: for that it has
been the utter overthrow not only of many a private person, but also the very
subversion of sundry whole Kingdoms, and namely, the Kings of Asia and all
their royal estate.

Against Dyceplay The viij. Chapter. That the ancient fathers of the Church
have ever misliked and written against Dyceplay.
AS this vile kind of Deuilish exercise and idle Play is detested, condemned
and spoken against by heathen persons, profane Magistrates, and laws both
Civil and Canon: so also and no less, is it abhorred, reproved and written
against, by diverse ancient Fathers and reverend Pillars of Christian
Religion. Yea, they have with much more vehemency thundered and inueighed
against it, as a pastime in no wise among them that fear God, allowable or
sufferable.

Cyprian.
That good Father Cyprian, (then whom in his time there was none either more
learned or holy) says plainly that the Devil him self was the first author
and inuenter of this pestilent and pernicious Play. And therefore his advise
and warning is, that it ought with all diligence, care and endeavor of the
heart and mind to be detested and abhorred: because we are strictly
commanded, not to have any fellowship or dealing with the Devil, or any of
his wicked practices.

Barnard also writing to certain Soldiers, touching those godly Christians
which were in Jerusalem, says thus: They defy, Barnard ad Milites.
reject and abhor Dyce and Dycers, Mu^mers, Interlude and Stageplayers,
Sorcerers, Wyzardes, Fablers, Taletellers, and singers of Ribald ditties, as
the breeders of many Vanities, or rather of much phra^ticke madness.

The Canons also that are fathered upon the Apostles, and which (as some do
say) are of very great antiquity, Canon. 41. and 42.
do must plainly likewise forbid this manner of play. So that, there has been
no. Age of the Church, no faithful men at any time, that we can read of, but
have flatly, directly and plainly prostigated, reproved, and condemned this
kind of Deuelish Game.

But let us hear some of the reasons of these grave and godly Fathers, which
caused them so sharply and so worthily to inueigh against this odious Play:
that the stiffest, wilfullest and obstinatest defenders of ye same, may thereby
at length learn to hold their peace, and to be ashamed of themselves. And
least any man should think us to be in this point more precise and Stoicall
then needs: or to speak so much against it, as we do, without just cause or
reason, there is a little Book of Nicolas de Lyra (a man accou^pted the
learnedest in his time) touching the same, entitled Praeceptorium: wherein he
alleges nine special reasons, gathered and collected out of diverse Writers,
why this Dyceplay among Christians ought not in any wise to be suffered. Out of
whom, and also out of other Writers besides, we here have culled and selected
the chiefest and most special: which may fully suffice to persuade al those
that be godly minded, and not wilfully wedded to their own foolish opinions,
how entierly and effectually we ought to abhor this kind of lewd and
Deuelish exercise.

The ix. Chapter. That Dyceplay is directly condemned and reproved by manifest
textes of the sacred Scriptures.
FIrst, there be some that think, (and very well truly) that this manner of
Play is directly against the Law of God, contained in the third Commandment
of the Decalogue. First reason against Dyceplay.
Wherein we are preciselie commanded not to take the name of the Lord God in
vain. And thereupon they gather, that in Lotte casting (in which kind
(doubtless) Dyceplaye is contained,) we ought not in any wise for
maintenance of our peevish pleasures, to use vain and idle matters, in steed
of grave and godly exercises: for that therein we do after a sort make a
mock of Gods providence, Pro. 16.33.
and rashly abuse the greatest testimonies and effects thereof, such as
Lotterie is. By this means therefore, they hold opinion that the power and
Majesty of God, is profaned and taken in vain.

For, thus are we taught both by the examples of holy men, and by the very
Commandments of God himself, that we should not use these Lottes (wherein
there rests a singular argument and token of Gods divine providence, as
before was said) in vain, trifeling or fantastical matter: but rather then
and at such time only, when as there falls out some matter of great moment
and weighty importance: wherein God himself (as an extraordinary moderatour,
Ruler and Vmpier) must interpose his doom, strike the stroke and decide the
case: least otherwise, if we rashly and lightly cast out Lottes, we seem
not only to go about to tempt God, but also wickedly to offer some notable
injury and villainous dishonor unto his extraornarie power and providence.

In deed, for the electing of Magistrates, dividing of Goods, partition of
Lands among Coheires, or in making a choice of Pastors in the Church, there
may be cause sometime to use Lottes: because in these, oftentimes the voice
and consent of GOD is more necessary, the^ of men: and also, for that, there
appears many times therein an, extraordinary means of Gods will and
pleasure: and is a good way also to end al quarrels and to avoid all
corruption of voices. But in sporting toys and frivolous causes (as though we
would make God, servant to our vanities and pastimes) to use Lots, they hold
it utterly unlawful.

Now, there is no man will deny, but that Dyce is one of ye chief kinds of
Lot casting. And therefore thereby if not in plain terms, yet necessarily and
inclusiuelie by way of manifest circumstaunce, the name and Majesty of God,
is by Dyceplaye expressly profaned and blasphemouslie dishonored.

Second reason.
Secondly, they say, this kind of Play is reproueable, for that it is used and
instituted contrary to the true nature and end of Patyme. For, seeing that the
end and scope of Play is or should be, either to exercise the industry of the
mind, or else to cherish and revive the strength and powers of the body:
truly Dyceplay is most far from either of them both. For therein we neither
exercise the Body, as we do in Wrestling or Running, yea we many times
therein do not so much as stir or move our Body, nor any part of the same,
excepting our hands and fingers: but rather sit still gaping and staying for
the chance of the Dyce, sitting in the mean while like idle Drones playing all the day, and giving our selves to no manner of actiuitie in the world: in so
much that many times for a just reward of this our loytering occupation, we are
paid home with the grievous pain of the Gowtes and other Joint diseases.

And as for industry of the mind, who can say, that Dyceplayers do use or
increase any at all? seeing that in this play there is no manner of exercise for
the wit at all: but all the hope of victory and winning, depends upon
Chance: in so much, that the Winner many times is driven to wonder how he
wanne, and for the winning of any hand or stake afterward, cannot (in
certainty) any thing at al assure himself. And thus also it comes to pass,
that he which goes away a looser, does not so much marvel, as chafe and fret
that he has lost: seeing that he could not perceive (in that conquest and
victory made on him) any manner of industry or ouerreaching wit in the Winner.
And therefore they sit the longer and play thereat the eigerlier, for that they
cannot see any probable reason, nor yield any sufficient cause either of their
winning, or of their loosing. Whereupon they cannot moderate and satisfy
themselves herein, but the more they play, and the longer they continue
thereat, the greedier they are, and the willinger to hold out: for that, in
this wretched and slothful idleness, they perceive neither their bodies
wearied, nor their minds exercised and occupied.

Third reason.
Thirdly, they allege the Laws of the Magistrate, which forbids these
Plays, as offensive and wicked. A law therefore being once enacted and made
against it, this Play cannot be used, nor defended without offense. And
notable is that saying of the Apostle, and for this present purpose very fit to
be applied: 1. Cor. 8.13.
If meat (says he) be a cause to offend my brother, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands, that I may not offend my Brother. Now, seeing it is a
great de^le easier for us to refrain these trifeling toys, then to abstain
from flesh, which is a thing so commodious and necessary for the sustentation
of our bodies in this life, who needs to doubt, but that these paltring
vanities are much more to be renounced and forborne, for fear of offending our
Brethren? For there is no kind of pleasure, which we ought so much to esteem,
as thereby and for the same to give offense unto our Brother. Furthermore,
although we altogether forbear and for ever abstain from this kind of Play,
yet be there other means enough, whereby we may honestly and decently
recreate both our Bodies and also our Minds.

Fourthly, we are charged and commanded by the Apostle, to redeem the time,
Fourth reason. Ephe. 5.16. Colo. 4.5.
and to bestow it in honest matters and Christian exercises. For, when God
grants us time, and gives us leisure either to read his holy word, to
visit the sick, to comfort our friends, or to do other charitable deeds,
we ought not to omit this fit occasion, which (according to the Proverb) is
balde behind, but to do the same quickly and out of hand: because (being
forslowed) one let or other may happen, and draw our minds from those godly
actions. Yea, many causes may fall out, and so carry away our meanings, that we
shall not afterward so much as once think of these our duties, our
fluggishnesse and dullness this way is so great. And therefore this our idle
time and convenient leisure, which ought to be so precious unto us, may not so
wastfullie and vnthriftilie be spent in Dyceplay.

Fifth reason.
Fifthlie, the very nature of this Play is such, that above all other Games it
has this filthy property, peculiarly entailed unto it, to wit, that it
makes men of all others most idle, most sluggish, most covetous, and most
desirous of other men's goods, and finally most loath and unwilling to leave
it. For, with much ado can we be drawn therefrom, after we have once settled
our delight therein, partly for that through laziness of sitting still, it
brings with it no manner of wearines or labor to the body: and partly for
that, through the uncertain hazard and chance of the Dyce (whereupon only
depends the whole hope of victory) it brings no manner of sound pleasure to
the mind, nor perfect co^tentment to the Conscience. Therefore the loosers,
still hoping for better luck, and change of fortune (which he sees easily to
come to pass and often to happen) continue play still, trusting to recover
their losses, and feeding themselves with a greedy expectation of alterable
chance. Likewise, the Winners, are still in hope and think their good luck
will continue and never change. Whereby it comes to pass, that neither
party is willing to desist and leave, but persevere and lay on load most
eigerlie and earnestly. Whereas, in all other exercises either of the Body or
of ye Mind, there is at length some end made, and the issue thereof soon
espied: either by reason of the weariness of the limbs, or for the odds of
their wits: whereby the one plainly perceiving the other to be stronger and
himself the weaker, courteously yields himself, and willingly leaves work.
Dyceplay therefore having no ho, admits neither end nor measure.

Sixtlie, The sixth reason.
it is to be abhorred and detested for the filthy covetousness and griping
desire of gain, which therein is more notoriously usual, then in any other
game. Where is there more insaciable or miserable seeking to win one an
others money? Where is there such gaping, which way one may defeat and wipe an
other of all that he has? Where is there more practices how they may deceive,
yea undo the one the other? What hard hold is there to seek the utter spoil
and decay one of an other? Wherein be there more cogging tricks and cosening
shifts used the^ in this vile, deuelish and ungracious play? In so much that
the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians uses this word (...) and
Alea for deceit, Ephe. 4.14.
craftiness and shifting devises. Certes, there is no Game in the world,
wherein more ryotous wast of money is made then in this. None, wherein is more
apparaunt proof of wilful and witless loytering. For we have heard of some,
read of others, yea and known not a few, that by this wicked game have played
a way their Lordshippes, Dukedomes, Seigniories, Manors, Houses and Lands:
over and besides their Horses, Apparel, Gold, Silver, Iewelles, household
stuff, and all that they had beside or could borowe. Yea, we read of some,
that have set their own Bodies at the Stake, and thrown for the property of
their own selves at a cast at Dyce, in steed of money, when they have lacked
it: and loosing the chance, and thereby themselves, have afterward lead the
remaunder of their days, as Slaves, in miserable servitude, at the discretion
of the winners. So that this kind of Play ends at length (as Justinian
says) in the lamentable overthrows of many noble and renowned houses, and
brings many an honest family to weeping cheer, when all their wealth and
substance is thus rufullie and pitifully ransacked.

Finally, there is no kind of Usury more wicked, more detestable, or any way
comparable to this kind of Gain, that is, thus damnablie gotten by Dyceplay.
For, here without any lending and without any labor on our part, we get an
excessive gain and unmeasurable increase: yea, as much and peradventure much
more then our principal stock that we began withal: and that also not in
any long tract and process of time, but even quickly, presently, and as it
were in a moment. All which, do plainly prove an intolerable kind of
Covetousness to reign specially in this Play: and that a great deal worse,
then the taking of Usury upon Usury: which in all Ages has been always
accou^pted and reputed for one of the vilest and deuelishest practices that
could be.

Last of all: The seventh reason.
the seventh reason why this wicked Game is to be utterly condemned and
banished out of the rank and number of all honest and Christian disportes is:
because the same is usually accompaignied with horrible blaspheming of Gods
most holy name, terrible banning and cursing, spightfull chafing and railing,
cursed invocation and naming of the Devil, dreadful and abominable denyings
and defyings of God himself, and rechlesse misregarding of his severe
judgments: al which horrible outrageous enormities are so incident to this
most hellish Dyceplay, that they are seldom or never asunder from it. Which
thing the Emperor Justinian by an authentical law thereupon made, does
manifestly and plainly give us to understand. Whereupon, Dyceplay grew so
odious in the judgments of all good and godly persons, that order was taken
and by law confirmed, that the places and houses where it was used, were
commanded and adjudged first to be consisked and forfeited, and afterward to
be utterly ruinated and thrown down: and commandment given that never
afterward any man should dwell therein: because ye heavy wrath of God was
thought to be still over that place.

To conclude, I might here bring a great many of other hurtes and mischieues
occasioned hereby: but what need we more? seeing those that we have already
alleged, be sufficient (as we hope) to persuade all honest and well given
minds, that both can and have learned to be ruled by reason, and to listen to
Christian instruction.

As for the stubborn crewe of wilful persons borne rather to pursue beastly
pleasures and savage sensuality, then to embrace human society and honest
orders, there can nothing suffice at all. To persuade therefore such monstrous
people we will not go about, for we know therein we shall but loose our
labor. We rather think such Dingthriftes and Makeshiftes worthy to be
grieuouslie punished by the Magistrate with sundry and many penalties both
pecuniarie and corporal, and by severity of Laws to be terrified and
restrained from this Play. Other reasons a great sort, to confirm so much as
we have here said, are alleged and cited by that reverend man Peter Martyr in
his learned Commentaries upon the Book of Judges. Cap. 14. But we have here
brought such only, as we had of our own stoare, and devised by our own
industry.

The x. Chapter. An answer to their objections, that stoutly and stiffely
maintain this kind of Play.
BUT least these fellows should complain, as their manner and fashion is, that
they are hardly dealt withal in this case, at our hands: and that they are
condemned by us before their cause be heard, or at least thoroughly waighed and
sufficiently discussed, let us hear what reasons they are able to bring for
themselves.

First and foremost, they exclame against us and say that we are too severe, too
precise and almost too supersticious, under a pretense of being too righteous.
Of which thing we are warned to beware and take heed of, by the Preacher.
Eccle. 7.17
Cap. 7. verse. 17. We (truly) do confess that saying, written by the
Preacher, to be most true and godly. But yet we answer, that we ought to
abstain, not only from that which is evil of it self and by his own
nature: but also from all show, semblaunce and appearaunce of evil, as the
blessed Apostle S. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Paul expressly teaches us. And we have showed before, that Dyceplay is not
only harmefull, pernicious and damnable to them that play thereat, but also
that it is of it self filthy and wicked, and of it own nature shameful and
detestable. What severity therefore, or too much preciseness may this seem
to be, if this Dyceplay and Carding be reproved by us, and wished not to be
used by those that are godly Christians? Is this Superstition, or a taking away
of Christian liberty from Christians (for so they also object) when as we both
allow honest disportes and seemly Games? not only tolerating, but
commending also moderate exercises as well for the mind as for the body,
whereby the powers both of the one and of the other may conveniently be
conserved? Chrysostom. Hom. 1.
Chrysostom the learnedest and eloquentest of all the Fathers of the Greek
Church in his Homily of the looseness and corrupt manners of his Time,
answering unto such like certain objections of wilful minded persons in those
days, says, That when we restrain from the godly their superfluities and
excesses of life, we may not therein be thought to be severe, or to deal any
thing more hardly then we ought to do.

And as concerning that Christian Liberty, which they so much pretend and make
show of, we say yt even in these indifferent things it ought so to be
moderated and construed, as that it neither at any time tend to the contempt
of good and politic Laws of the Country profitablie enacted, neither to the
offense of our Neighbor: much less ought we to use the same licentiously in
any things that of their own nature be hurtful, inconvenient, dishonest,
forbidden or unlawful.

Secondly they object unto us: That they see no harm to grow by this Play,
so that there he no swearing, no blaspheming, no chasing nor covetousness
therein used. A very proper and fine exception (I promise you) and wittily by
them alleged. As though the playing for money, can possibly be without some
spyce of covetousness, or desire of gayuing that which is an other man's? Nay,
we flatly say, that it is not at any hand lawful, (whether the Games be
honest or dishonest) to play for money.

And whereas they say, they see no cause, why Dyceplay should worthily be
reproved and condenmed: therein are they very greatly deceived. For, over and
besides their using of Dyceplaye, which is a most plain kind of Lotte
casting, and which in vain and frivolous matters they are expressly forbidden
to practice: There is also an other reason that makes against them: which is,
that this same Dyceplay has ever been proved and found pernicious and
miserable to the very Dycers and Gamesters them selves. Also it has scarcely
(yea lightly not at al) been seen, that it has ever been used without
swearing and blaspheming of the name of God: so that as the Wise man says,
the end of this short pleasure leads unto al wickedness, and the issue of
such mirth (besides the consuming of a man's wealth) brings always with it,
Pro. 14.1^.13.
heaviness of the mind and sorowfulnes of heart. And although being blinded
in their own folly, they think not of this gear presently, yet shall they
hereafter (if they speedily repent not, and turn over the lease into a new
lesson) feel by experience the smart of their deserts, and shall find this
our admonition and saying to be most true and certain.

Thirdly, they say and aduouch, that Dyceplay is not simply, and of it self,
harmefull or reprooueable: but only yt the immoderate and excessive use thereof
is to be condemned and disallowed, and such Dycing houses and Tabling houses as
purposelie serve for this idle and loytering trade. But I would gladly learn
of the^, what this word Alea in Latin does truly signify? Is not the Game
as well as the place condemned, and expressly in the Law forbidden? And whence
proceeds this ordinary and immoderate custom of Play, but from these small
beginninges at the first, which must therefore be cut away and avoided.

And whereas they further say, that there is a Virtue (called in Greek
Eutrapelia, and in English Courtesy) which consists in men's sporting and
recreating themselves together: I affirm likewise that there is such a virtue
in deed: but that it allows any man to play at any lewd and unlawful Games
(such as Dyceplaye is) I utterly deny: for it respects only such, as are
warrantable by the right rule of Honesty. And moreover, it is such a Virtue,
as moderateth and governs those good Games and honest disportes also whereof
I even now speak, that we give not our selves to them beyond measure, nor
keep our selves therein occupied, longer then becomes.

Finally, they ask this question: Where in all the whole Scripture is there
specially any such odious mention made of Dyceplaying, as we would seem to
urge? Wherein (verily) they unawares bewraye their great ignorance. For, there
be two most manifest places in the Scriptures, expressly making mention
thereof, and that with as great horror and detestation as possibly can be. The
first is in the Psalms: Psalm. 22 19
The other in the Gospel after S. John: where it is said, Ioh. 19.24.
that they played for our Savior Christ's Coat, and that they cast lottes
(which was Dyce) who should have it. And truly this Game is a wide window,
and almost the first gappe unto all loosenes and dissoluteness of manners,
which Satan to disturb the unity of the Church, is wont commonly to set wide
open.

Briefly, and to make an end, let us conclude this our present Treatise, with
that place of that ancient Father Cyprian, in his Book de Alea, wherein he
plainly shows that Satan the Devil was the first deviser of this Play.
For, when as Satan the Enemy of Mankind went about deeply to root and
imprint Idolatry in the hearts of men: and to make it an ordinary Ghest also
at Banquets, Disportes and Meriments, to the end that he might thereby the
more freely reign and carry rule among them, and bring them to his lure by a
kind of pleasure, (or as it were a sweet poison) he devised and hatched this
detestable and wicked kind of Game.

And therefore the Kings, Queens and Verlettes which are now with us the
Coatecardes, were in old time and at the beginning, the Images of Idolles, and
were called by the very names of the Idolles and false Gods themselves. Which
now since, because men be Christians, they have (for stark shame) skowred,
burnished, and new furbished the names thereof only, but as for the plausible
memorial and very monument it self of Idolatry, is still retained. For,
because they would not be thought to imitate the Heathenish Idolatry of the
other, and yet nevertheless maintain the play it self, they have changed
those old Idolatrous names and Images, and call them now by the names of
Charlemaine, Lancelot, Hector, or some other valiant Captains, Dukes or
Kings: but (as I aforesaid) the thing it self, and the use of this Deuelish
devise they keep still, and do disguise the horrible inconvenience grown
thereby, under the cloak of such gaye terms, to the no small danger of
Idolatry among Christians even at this day.

The name therefore is only changed, that is to say, the color, phisnamie,
purtrature and countenance, but the thing it self, together with the
lewdness and beastliness hereof, remains the self same, and is al one and
alike among all such Christians, as addict themselves to Dyceplay.

Seeing therefore that it has here been proved and sufficiently showed,
that Dyceplay is directly and flatly repugnaunt to the written word of God,
utterly harmefull and pernicious to the Players and Gamesters themselves:
accompanied and fraughted with such a sort of discommodities and offenses:
contrary to all good Laws: sweruing from all wholesome established orders:
offering defiaunce to all reformation: bidding battle to all honesty: and
finally being nothing else, then (as it were) the most filthy excrements and
hellish invention of Satan the Devil, there is no Christian man needs to
doubt, but that he ought with all endeavor to abandon, forsake, renounce,
defye, and utterly to abstain from it.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

FINIS.
Ludens taxillis, been respice quid sit in illis:
Mors tua, sors tua, res tua, spes tua pendet in illis.
Aleator quanto in art est melior, tanto est nequior.

A Table, showing the Contents of every Chapter in this Treatise of Dyceplay
and Gaming.
WHether it be lawful at al, for a Christian man or woman to play and use
recreation of their mind. Chap. 1. Whether it be lawful for a man to play for
money, and the same being won to keep to his own use. Chap. 2. Of Games,
Plays, and public Exercises: and of the Rewards thereunto assigned by the
Magistrate and Common wealth. Chap. 3. Of those that bestow their winninges
gained by Play, upon a Banquet or cheer for the whole Company. Chap. 4. What
kinds of Games and Plays be lawful, and which be forbidden and unlawful.
Chap. 5. The true meaning and signification of this word Alea, and what Games
and Plays be comprehended under the name thereof. Chap. 6. Dycing and Carding
reproved and condemned even by the Heathen and Infidelles that knew not God.
Chap. 7. That the ancient Fathers of the Church have ever misliked and written
against Dyceplay. Chap. 8. That Dyceplay is directly condemned and flatly
reproved by manifest textes of the sacred Scriptures. Chap. 9. An answer to
their objections, that stoutly defend and stiffely maintain this kind of
Play. Chap. 10.
FINIS.

