A BRIEF DISCOVRSE DIALOGVEVVISE, SHEVVING how false and dangerous their
reports are, which affirm, the Spaniards intended invasion to be, for the
reestablishment of the Romish religion; for her Majesty's succors given to the
Netherlanders, and for Sir FRANCES DRAKES enterprise three years past into the
West Indies.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field, dwelling in the Black Friars near
Ludgate. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES LORD HOWARD, BARON OF EFFINGHAM, Lord high
Admiral of England, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, E. Da. wishes long life, with
increase of all honor and virtue.
WHO so shall duly observe Homer describing contention (whom he names the
sister of Mars, Lib. 4. Ilia.
being at her birth little, but after, though keeping her feet on the earth,
yet increasing till she touch the heavens with her head: procuring in this
grouth, noises, debates, discensions, tears, sighs and late repentance) vvil
say, notvvithstanding that the Poet were blind, that he savve as far as our
time in which this foolish Goddess shakes like a fearful earthquake the
foundations both of the Ecclesiastical and civil state. In consideration
whereof (right honorable Lord) and that many are moved by some aspects of
contention injuriously to report her Majesty's proceedings with the Spaniard
(she having lived in greater temperance then any Prince of her time) I thought
meet (those rumors extenuating his ambition and avarice long preceding any act
done by her Majesty to him) to prove that his enterprises and desire of this
kingdom were of longer life then her Majesty's attemptes: to the end that our
people (apprehending his injustice for piety, offered against the dignity of
Kings, and equity of nations) may, knovving the counterfeit, abide in their
place of obedience and duty. This labor, though neither for matter or volume,
worthy your honorable vievve, I notvvithstanding (as bound heretofore for your
L. favors toward me to yield some agreeable service) humbly dedicate to your
good L. whose noble bearing draws to it by a forcible power of virtue, the
hearty and good affections of all men. Take therefore my good Lord the same in
good part of him, who prays to your L. increase of long health, honor and
all the virtues of true Nobility.

Your Lordships most bounden in duty EDWARD DAVNCE.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE DIALOGVEVVISE SHEVVING HOW FALSE AND DAVNGEROVS their
reports are, which affirm the Spaniards intended invasion to be, for the
reestablishment of the Romish religion; for her Majesty's succors given to the
Netherlanders, etc. and for Sir Frances Drakes enterprise three years past
into the West Indies.
Epoenetus, Philemon. AFTER her Majesty had taken (though at the worst hand)
the offers of the lower countries; many, whom nothing (if not fathered by them
selves) can please, affirmed that she received by that mean a sword (as the
proverb is) anointed with honey; inferring thereby not only a sweetness, by
retaining them mingled with danger; but also, that howsoever she governed;
whether by lenity or rigor, they as a people impatient of order, would not be
prescribed, but would either with the crabfish, being held loosly creep forth;
or hard strained with the eele slip away: by mean whereof she might not only
live doubtful of them; but also for their sakes, raise a cruel and intractable
enemy against her.

These things (as noting the injurious sclaunders of this time) I proposed in
the presence of diverse, amongst whom there was then by occasion, a gentleman of
those parts named PHILEMON, who after long fixing his eyes on me, with such
countenance as he had again beheld the deep wounds of his country newly
bleeding; at last turned to the rest and said. Nothing (Gentlemen) has in this
life been dearer to me then the liberty of my country, the which with others,
whilst I might, I endeavored to make eternal: neither had we failed to effect
so much, had not the ambition of strangers, meeting with our discension,
brought forth the first fruicts of our miseries: since which time our provinces
have been so tossed with the contrary winds of fortune, that few could keep
their ores, or hold the stern of government: for whilst many commanded,
fewer having learned to obey, we were distracted into sundry favors: some as
never acquainted with the condition of liberty, preferring the title of
Burgu^die, some the neighborhood of the Empire, some of France, and others the
alliance with England, each one bestowing their apologies, either in the
conceits of Guses, Patriats, or malcontents: by mean whereof all parts in
steed of our country sports, were so filled with tokens of war, that no
place was left for good men to bewail this change. But when after long
deliberation, we had, as well for our union with you in matters of religion, as
our present necessity both of defense and intercourse of traffic, cast our
selves into the arms of England: some hope remained of better speed had not
the division of opinions for a time stayed her Majesty's laudable endeavors:
during which consultation, the Duke of Parma having speedilier deliberated,
bereued us of Antwerpe (the key of our provinces) by which he has since
entered other towns and forts of account. And though we took hurt by her
Majesty's cunctatio^, who according to her wonted piety, sought to reconcile
our provinces to Spain, yet we intermitted not any thing that might concern
either our ancient alliance, or duties of subjects, but have preferred the
honor of her nation before any, as our importunat suit to be shadowed under her
wing of justice, and our service daily attendant, have made apparent. After
which speeches PHILEMON with his eyes full of tears turning again toward me,
said, How miserable is our time in which avarice and tyranny keep weight, and
are higher priced then honesty? and wherein wolves quarrel with lambs for
troubling the stream: and the mouth, hands, and other members conspire against
the belly? and herein moreover is our sorrow inexplicable, that whilst her
Majesty endeavored to have due place among the best Princes, and we to live in
the order of good subjects, that yet both have been subject to one sclaunder,
far unmeet for her royal dignity, our innocence and loyalty. To which I
answered. It is true PHILEMON that many by often lying believe they speak the
only oracles of God, by mean whereof all good enterprises are either
suppressed, or so obscured, that the light of honor due to them and their
authors, seems either eclipsed, or clean put out: a practice drawn, as I
think, from the custom of ill women, who to be less blamed, accuse all
virtuous and chaste matrons of lightness, and herein is our disgrace the greater,
in that we have bred those birds that have not only peckt at our eyes, but
also have defiled their own nest with all infamy, not fearing (though they
would seem the loving sons of our country, and ready sacrifices for her
health) to be the obliged pensioners of Spain, injuriously reporting that the
motions of that kingdom, are for matter of religion, her Majesty's favors
toward your people, and her enterprise into the West Indies: slanders of so
apparent danger, the same extenuating the precedent avarice and ambition of
Spain, meeting with the ill humors of our people, that I marvel those
feigners should no less in their conuenticles lament their practice, then
Cicero wondered the Aruspices could in deluding the people, forbear laughter
beholding one another. To which PHILEMON; the sun has not beheld any thing
more unseemly then this pretense of justice, cloked with a deep desire of
novelty: those rumors being not only factious, but also false, and regarding
the time, full of peril and danger, as you EPOENETVS, said he, may know, if
you look but as far as the emperor Charles the fifth, when Granuellanus in our
provinces, and Philip not long after in this realm, sought to make our golden
fleece and your Lion a pray for the Egles of Austria.

Then I. I am not ignorant PHILEMON of either: for whilst all places (as with
bright tropheis of papacy) were lightened with the burnt bodies of the people;
Philip hoised his first sail of ambition, which as a skillful master he bare
so low, that many favored his course, and wished him the good winds of
fortune, especially his wife Mary, who being persuaded by him, it would greatly
advance her authority, were he crowned and made her companion of dignity,
seriously endeavored (not knowing how much that ceremony would prejudice her
succession) to effect his purpose. To this she was also greatly incited by the
clergy, who to make sure their particular, by that mean, cared not to hazard
the general state of the realm. But the Lords, who by an ancient policy had
greater interest in matters of government, having more cause to regard the
reputation of their houses (likely to diminish by his neighborhood) then the
Prelates their momentanie dignities, withstood it as a matter dangerous, and not
without common peril. This purpose being overthrown by their providence, he
takes occasion by tumults happening about that season, to persuade his wife to
new matter, seeming not only profitable, but also necessary for both,
alleging that he often departing this realm for the affairs of his own
countries, could not without danger perform the parts of a loving husband
toward her, the blockhouses standing which might prohibit his return, and the
want of common favor remaining. For greater credit whereof he cited a late act
then of the valorous Baron the Lord William Howard of Effingham high Admiral
of England, who being sent to conduct him with the navy, brought the kings
ship in peril, by delivering some great shot, for that he wouldnot, as the
custom is, strike sail, by which ceremony he was to acknowledge the Queens
sovereignty in these seas. I was, said PHILEMON, at that time in the shipping
of our country with the Spanish fleet, and know that to be the only cause why
that noble Baron was after removed from his romth: but proceed EPOENETVS. This
motion (said I, returning where I left) seeming just, was forthwith effected:
and what lets soever to his return, either rased, or translated into his
several countries, under color of furnishing him for the wars of France: so
that for atchieuing his intention (having the favor of his wife and Prelates) he
wanted little more then time (we being in a manner disarmed) to be made
absolute, and to apply the significant posie of the golden fleece, PRETIVM NON
VILE LABORIS, to the order of our George and Garter, which perhaps (being
touched in conscience with the honorable device and meaning of our order, HON Y
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE) he would have refused.

These proceedings were then suspected as tending to disbranch the natural
cions to ingraffe him self, which he had in nearer sort attempted, had he not
been tript by the death of his wife. And notwithstanding that he had thereby
lost many occasions of time and place, and that his pray ready to be devoured,
was by that mean taken from between his teeth, he yet desisted not to take
occasion by the forehead, when, and wheresoever he met her: for which cause,
and to impresse an opinion in all nations of his right to our country, he
joined many years after her Majesty's happy entrance to the Royal seat,
the title of England with that of his own dominions: which could not be with
any good meaning, or without great prejudice to her Majesty, her heirs, and
lawful successors.

These things are well known to many yet living: neither will the Spaniards
by color of the authority they had gotten amongst us, deny it as a thing
unjust, considering that the limitation of tyrants consists in things they
can not get: but if these good bodies should (appealing to the favor of
malcontents) complain they are sclandered, let us enter into a scrutiny of
times, and we shall find them charged with the munition, artillery, and other
abillements of war, which could not be embezeled to any other end then the
increase of their empire. But if they deny the having of it, or that they had
it to any such use, I will join with them in issue for both. If they had it
not, let them (they running through the store of the realm) account how it was
bestowed. For Henry the eight, being one of the victorious kings of that age,
and still in action with France and Scotland, (the least of which is able to
abate the high thoughts of a proud enemy) could not, in respect of his
conquests, be unfurnished of provision to withstand the power of so great
adversaries. Again the time between this triumphant king, and his daughter
Mary was (in regard of our expectation) but short, in which there was no
diminution of any thing within the realm, as might appear as well by the
victories of that good king Edward, being the hope of Europe, as his bettering
of the gold, and silver coins. But how great her Majesty's charges grew by a
new provision of all thing immediately after her royal entry, no man is
ignorant, no not strangers: the dukes Memorancie and Cassimer greatly praising,
upon their view only of her store in the Tower, her careful and most wise
providence; which they would not have done had they known any part thereof not
to have been of her Majesty's cost. Now the question is to be asked of these
temperat persons (our warlike furniture being at that time their king married
with her Majesty's sister Mary comparable with any of the greatest Princes of
the west part) who eloigned the same? I must answer for them (they being
occupied in hastening the fifth monarchy) eue^ they who have vowed to make
desolate our country, and to murder a most sacred and Christian Princess.

The seizure of armor, treasure and munition with the rasure of places
defensive upon conditions of peace; is an old stratageme, and used by the Turk
in the times of his friendship with them, who^ he minds to subdue: which if
any would excuse in the Spaniard as a matter impossible to his justice: how
answer they his usurpation of the title of this realm, often reproved by
Master Man, her Majesty's liger in Spain, to the great hazard of his person,
as I heard him and some of his train affirm, before the same was laid a part.
But they may reply, that he being permitted during his abode in this kingdom
by general assent to use that title, might without her Majesty's prejudice
continue the same. But there we may, as the proverb is, lay a straw: for
whatsoever is allowed by any authority, may be disanulled by the same: again,
the causes of any thing ceassing, the effects of the same proceed no further:
whereby may be concluded, that not only the Princes and people of this
kingdom, by whose favors he had that title, have power to retract the same;
but also that his wife dying without issue by him, could leave Phillip no
greater interest then she had; which was but for term of her natural life.

These matters, say they (for that they have made their will a law) require
neither answer nor excuse: no more does their bost made seven years past in
the duke of Parmas Camp before men of account (who by the great prudence of
that honorable cou^seller Sir Francis Walsingham now dead, were appointed for
special service to that place) that they would leave their trade to Peru, our
country being a shorter cut, from whence they might draw equal treasure. At
this time there was no speech of religion, neither of her Majesty's alliance
with the Netherlanders, or of Sir Francis Drake (who as the^ had not been in
the Indies) but of their avarice, cruelty, and ambition; the effects of
which, preceded any act done by her Majesty, whose mildness of neighborhood
and contentment of state, have exceeded the temperance of all Princes of this
or any other age.

Now gentlemen, said I, consider of the Spanish proceedings, which were broched
in the time of papacy, and our greatest devotion to Philip and his nation:
before either the reestablishment of the reformed religion, or of her Majesty's
receiving the Netherlanders, for their ancient alliance with her kingdom, into
her sauegard, or any enterprise made into the Indies by her authority.

Weigh moreover the state and quality of justice, which, whether she
governs between nations, or a people of one country, never imposes any
law, or punishes by the same, till offenses be committed: Exodus cap. 24. sect.
4. and 7.
which law must then also be recieued by the general and free consent of
nations and people.

Judge also whether his enterprises do stand with his pretense of piety, for
if he had been (as he feigneth) devoured with the zeal of his religion, were
there not great occasions given him in the time of the French king Charles the
ninth his brother in law and neighbor, to show some effects of his Catholic
title, Cassimer then departing France twice, upon the only pay of the French
king? Nay has he not since then maintained at his charge the Dukes of GVISE
and MAINE against his other brother in law Henry the third, a devout Romanist,
and chief ringleader at the great murder in Paris? yea and which more is, has
he not consented to the murder of the said Henry (I will not say procured it)
contrary to the dignity of all kings? did he after (according to the justice
and custom of good princes) either reprove the Duke du Maine or his accomplices
for that fact? or has he not since the^ aided the said Duke rather more openly
then before, not only with treasure, but also with soldiers sent from the duke
of Parma? To conclude, has not his policy been by nourishing factions in that
and our realm, to be made absolute in the west contine^t of Europe and Islands
adjacent? and has he not for that purpose renewed his league with the Turk,
who slily smiling at his madness, pants to devour him and the rest of
Christendom by that mean? No man can deny it, time has proved it, and the
blood of thousands cries against it.

A reformation then of Religion, or our ill neighborhood to him, are no causes
of his motions (he having plotted our ruin, and rasure of his Catholic alie,
in his nearest friendship with both) but the avarice, cruelty, and pride of
his people, which neither the penury of Spain can satisfy, or the Pyrene
hills, or wide Ocean can limit.

Believe me EPOENETVS (said PHILEMON) a gentleman of good quality told me,
that he heard in Rome that the cardinal named Buono compagno (called since
then, Pope Gregory) being demanded at his return from Spain, how he liked
that kingdom: answered, there were plains of luxury, vales of misery, and
hills of pride.

To which I answered, I am, PHILEMON, easily persuaded to believe you, Monsieur
la Noue a man so well qualified that few come near him in all the virtues, and
not one goes beyond him in any, confirming some part thereof.

This noble gentleman composing during his captivity amongst the Spaniards
diverse discourses both politic and martial, Paradoxe troisiesme.
notwithstanding that he gives honorable testimony of their discipline,
drawn from the great fortunes and military prudence of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, yet affirms that very often one shall hear in their armies a new
soldier but of three crowns pay the month, say in great majesty (if he has
not those favors he expects) that he is as good as the king: he further for
proof of their insolency makes this question: what will then a Captain do,
in like case, that has been found at assaults and battles? He will,
answers la Noue, say I am better then the Pope. From this figure, may our
countrymen, who are yet free, frame their argument of word and fact against
them that would make them captive; that honorable and famous person speaking so
liberally of their pride in his durance. They may also foresee what insolency
the great officers of Spain would use toward strangers, their meanest
companions standing amongst themselves, so much upon their pantofles, we may be
also persuaded, that they who compare with their natural king, will smally
esteem their friendship, which traffic the state of their country: unless
they may after maintain that amity which they have gained by gold, by their
water imperial, drawn from the hardness of iron: many having been pleased
with the foul pleasures of some in the night, whose beauties, they have after
lothed in the day.

Then PHILEMON: I would EPOENETVS that all men were (for the common quiet) of
your mind: nothing breeding a greater resolution in this sort, then to think
they are esteemed sacred of them, by whose promises they are corrupted: as
though they were of the deepest trust, which have offended in the highest
degree of treachery

They are not PHILEMON, said I, tyrants (although they make no semblant
thereof) ever fearing those by whom they are advanced: Philip of Macedonia
allowing for his profit those that would betray their country, but not those
that had betrayed it. And for that their greediness is seldom satisfied,
whose country contenteth them not, it may be still doubted (no place being
esteemed so dear as the place of birth and education) that their lightness
can not be stayed by change; but rather impaired by loosing their first faith:
the just recompense of which, amongst those that are prudent, is chastisement.

Vortiger could well band with this racket, Flor. Hist.
he putting to death an hundred Picts at one bandy, whom he procured to kill the
king Constantius.

Selim the great Turk had also great skill at this game; Sans. de vitis Tur.
who promising Vstarabi a physician, ten Ducats a day during his life, to
poison his father Baisit the second, did for recompense of the fact, cut of his
head, saying, the physician would no more spare him then he did his father, if
any would require him.

The like Caesar Borgia the Spaniard practiced with Messire Remiro Dorco, whom
he only used in all murders, treasons, and oppressions of the people.

If this were the bounty of tyrants to traitors, good kings I hope will not be
behind them in just punishments, whom they have exceeded in due mainteining
justice: as the testimonies of David that caused the Amalec to die that bosted
to have slain Saul; Reg. 2. cap. 1.
and of good Dane Canutus, who (being companion in this kingdom with Edmond,
named for his cheualry Ironside) put to death Eudricus the Saxon, who had slain
his sovereign, to bring the whole empire into Canutus hands, Flor. Hist.
do plentifully witness.

These are, said PHILEMON, presidents of rare justice, and most excellent to be
followed of them that care to maintain the high reputation of their calling:
for according to the opinion of ciuilians, who affirm, that their laws permit
a ge^tleman to make any injury done to one of his order, no less his, then if
it were proffered him self: which interest and similitude of dignity (were it
duly regarded by persons of equality) would greatly abate the bold offers of
these disturbers of government: as well for that they ariue not amiss either
into the hands of bad, or good Princes in regard of chastiseme^t, as that wise
kings may suspect, that as they many times rise, they may also fall by factious
followers: to whom (in respect of their countries health) to neglect money,
Adelpho. Act. 2.
would be sometimes (according to the comicall Poet) a great gain.

Then I. It is most true, that where this moath of faction enters, she eats
through the garments of peace, whether of the long or short robe. Of this
opinion was that noble gentleman Monsieur du Lant, who (being sent by the
French king Jews the 12. into Italy to restore diverse castles to the
Florentins, taken from them by the Duke Valentino, and the Vitelli in the vales
of Treuere and Chiana; and finding there many which bosted to be of the faction
of one Marzoco) greatly blamed them; alleging that if the subjects of France
should name them selves partakers with the king his Master (though spoken with
duty) they should be chastised, as such which suppose a contrary party in
that realm against the king: an admonition worthy to be written with letters
of gold in public places, as monuments of his singular prudence. For if the
unity of elements, humors, or qualities mainteineth the life either of bodies
natural, or politic, it cannot be, but a disagreement does breed a
resolution, spasme, or some other most dangerous infirmity in both. Examples
of antiquity need not, we having too many that be modern of our near
neighbors: amongst which these tokens of murder, IE SVIS ROYAL, and, IE SVIS
GVISIAN, have woefully concluded their tragedy.

For conclusion, to maintain that the motions of Spain issue from our
actions, is to make accent upon these words, I favor the Spaniard; which are
no less to be forborne the^ these, I take part with Marzoco, or I am a
Guisian; all four by implication being of one nature. In regard whereof, and
that all subjects are to esteem their natural Prince, as the General of God:
I would that those who have not observed the course of times, should (with the
ancient French which esteemed all things lawful their kings did in favor of the
people) humbly reverence their Princes proceedings, as his, who standing for
the public benefit of his country, is always blameless, though his
pretenses (to the ignorant multitude) have some show of injustice. For how may
he that leads a private life, and never handled public affairs, be able to
reason in things meet, lawful, or necessary for government? the true
knowledge of which, drawing near the divine providence, is not to be disputed
in the schools of Thersites, unless there be some Ulysses to moderate. Home.
Lib. 2. Ilia.
For who so attributes the effects of things present, to causes next going
before, may be deceived with him who not knowing his patients infirmity, and
finding neither oister shelles or the parings of apples, by which he might
conjecture the sick had surfeted, but after spying a saddle under the bed,
feared not to wager his life, that his patient had eaten a horse: or more
properly, to ascribe the hostility of Spain to the injuries of our nation, is
to be no less mad then he, who thought his frenzy happened by washing his
head the day before in cold water. For nothing gentlemen, said I, is plainer
then that their natural avarice and pride, and not our injuries, have
furiously incited the^ (according to their emblem of Burgundy having two
hands with a steel and flint stricking fire, with these words, Ante ferit
quam flamma micet) to esteem no law of society, or bond of nature; whereby
they may more securely oppress all parts by violence and stealth.

This has been touched by many, but very aptly by the expert and valiant
knight Sir Roger Williams, who having served long time in their wars, has
with quick colors described their cruelty toward their faithful
seruitours not being of their nation. With these therefore that keep no
mediocritie, it is most dangerous in matter of state, to use a way consisting
in a mean; the same being neither able to procure friends or to propell a
weak or feeble enemy.

Which speeches ended, PHILEMON, in the behalf of the rest, which seemed by
their silence desirous to depart; answered; well EPOENETVS, the time rather
requiring to consider what we ought to do, then what we have done; let both
our nations, to express the good affections of honest men, have in their
standerds, guidons and ensigns, the devise of a soldiers match burning, with
these words about the wreath, al fine loial: which spoken, he and the company
departed with countenances promising the accomplishment and performance of
great matters.

FINIS.

