THE TRAGEDY OF ALBOVINE, KING OF THE LOMBARDS: By Wm. D'auenant.

LONDON, Printed for R. M. and are to be sold in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard.
1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF SOMMERSET, etc.
My Lord,
YOu read this Tragedy, and smiled upon it, that it might live: and therein,
your mercy was divine; for it exceeded Justice. My Numbers I not show unto the
public Eye, with an ambition to be quickly known; (for so I covet noise, not
fame) but that the world may learn, with what an early haste, I strive to
manifest my service to your Lordship. I have imaginations of a greater height
then these, which I do also dedicate to your Lordship. And I shall live in
vain, unless you still continue to acknowledge*

Your humblest Creature, D'auenant.

UPON THE TRAGIC MUSE OF MY HONOVR'D FRIEND, Mr. Wm. D'AVENANT.
Our stately Tragic Scene (whose high disdaines
Slight humble Muses) courts thy lofty strains:
And with ambitious love does clime thy Bays,
Whose ample branches her bright glory rays:
Whence (as from Heaven) her spacious Eye does view
Of storyed tears, and blood, the heavy crew,
How low they crawle, while she (far more Divine!)
Sides great Seianus, and fierce Cateline:
Where, in calm virtue, she more sweet does show
Then Jove, when he in Golden drops did flow:
But if in Stygian Lake her veins she steep,
Her act infernal runs so horrid deep,
As saints Medea: makes the Herculian rage
Seem a tame patience to thy ravished Stage.
Had stern Achilles breast such fury known;
His Story had turned Miracle, and grown
Too much for his great Poet, unless Fate
Had rackt his spirit up to thy high rate.
Rash Imitation at thy heavenly Air,
Intombes faint Envy in a just despair.
Hen: Blount.

To his friend, Mr. Wm. D'auenant.
WHy should the fond ambition of a friend,
With such Industrious accents strive to lend
A Prologue to thy worth? Can ought of mine
Enrich thy Volume? The have reared thy self a Shrine
Will out-liue Piramids; Marble Pillars shall,
Ere thy great Muse, receive a funeral:
Thy wit has purchased such a Patrons name
To deck thy front, as must derive to Fame
These Tragic raptures, and indent with Eyes
To spend hot tears, t'inrich the Sacrifice.
Ed: Hyde.

To my honored Friend, The Author, on his Tragedy of the warlike Albouine.
GReat Albouine, whose Fate in war had cut
His passage through the neighboring Earth, and shut
Large Provinces within his grasping palm,
Had sunk from honor in the patient calm
Of a long silenc't Fame, had not thy pen
(With soaring language) raised him up again.
He vows, by cool Elizeum (from whence
He breathed the valiant oath) he would dispense
With all those joys that court his soul, to fling
His opened breast upon the poisonous sting
Of rougher wars, if the triumphant Bays
Sprung from thy ink, might crown his second praise.
This is a Poets height; conquest by thee
Described, becomes a double victory.
Rich: Clerk.

To my deserving Friend, the Author.
WEre those Tragedians, whom the world so fame,
For their ingenious and admired strain,
Alive, to see this Poem, and thy Name;
Ashamed they would dye, finding their Lines too vain.
Were that pure Spring the winged hoof brought forth,
Wanting supply, dried up, thy abler Pen
Would work a second wonder by it is worth,
In making it a running stream again.
Be then assured, this Tragic strain shall live
A pattern for the next age to imitate,
And to the best wits of our times shall give
Just cause of envy, for thy learned Fate.
Rob: Ellice.

To his noble Friend, The Author on his Tragedy of Albouine.
THe gelid North grows warm, and by thy fire
Cold ignorance exiled. The Virgin Quire
OF the soft-hayr'd Muses leaee the Thespian Spring,
To tread a fun'rall Measure, whilst you sing
This Tragic Story* With sad plaints of love
Famed Orpheus charmed rude heaps, did Cedars move,
Forced Mountains from their station: but thy Pen
Has now amazed the fiery souls of men.
Will: Habington.

To my Friend, Mr. D'auenant.
SCarce home returned, but straight I find great Fame
Ayring her wings to spread abroad thy Name.
One of the Nine (before of me never seen,
Sure sent by thee) assaults my merry spleen
With mighty Verse; and makes me laugh at those
That are so dull, to melt their thoughts in Prose.
I wish her prosperous flight, may she return
With happier wings, if happier may be worn.
My flame is spent. I dare not undertake
Thy praise, who am but newly for thy sake
A fierce Poet, and doubtless had been one
Never but for thee, or else had been unknown.
Rog: Lorte.

To his much-honour'd friend, the Author.
LEt not loud Enuy's sulfurous blasts cast forth
Venomed aspersions, on thy noble worth:
Against saucy Critics thou need'st no defense,
Whose sacred lines, armed with sweet eloquence,
Are proof against their censures, whoo'd profane.
With their bold breath, the glory of thy strain:
Wise came shall sing the praise of thy deserts,
And voice thee glorious both in Arms and Arts.
Whilst thou, releast from the Wars sad mishaps,
Rests in soft dalliance on the Muses laps;
Those beauteous Ladies love shall high advance
Thy fame, whose worth exceeds my utterance.
Their Tragic falls, who in thy Scenes appear,
Shall on these Monuments fair Trophies rear
Unto their Fame. Thus are thy works become
To be to them, as their Elysium.
Tho: Ellice.

To his worthy friend, Mr. Wm. D'auenant.
Have thou unmasked thy Muse? And shall the Air
Breathe on her matchless Fabric? then repair.
To some soft censure, lest the churlish sense
Of Ignorance accrues thy recompense;
And hudwinkt Error do surprise the Fame
Due to thy Story, and Verona's name,
Whose limits Plinies and Catullus bred,
But in thy Muse her joys are centupled:
For her invention, truth, rare wit, and state;
Copper-lac'd Christians cannot personate.
Her Tragic Scenes, like well-tuned Chimes in the Sky,
Leave Time loud Echoes of thy memory.
H: Howard.

The Actors in this Tragedy.
Albouine, King of the Lombards. Paradine, A captive Soldier, his Favorite.
Hermegild, A captive Statesman, the Queens Favorite. Grimold, A rough old
Captain. Gondibert, A Captain, his friend. Vollterri, A Soldier, friend to
both. Cunymond, A Courtier. Conrade, His Companion. Frollo, His Companion. The
Governor Of Verona. Rhodolinda, Captine, and Queen to Albouine. Valdaura,
Wife to Paradine. Thesina, A Court-Lady. A Page To Paradine. A Gentleman, A
Messenger. The Guard, Servants, and Attendants, etc.
The Scene, Verona.

THE TRAGEDY OF ALBOVINE, KING OF THE LOMBARDS.
Act the first. Scene first.
Enter Paradine, Grimoald, Gondibert; the Drums ceasing. Paradine. Give the
word aloud?


Grimo. Stand?


Within. 1. Stand! 2. Stand! 3. Stand!


Parad. Our motion has been swift: we
out-march Time.
Verona, (which with the mornings dim eye
We seemed to view like Landschaip, afar off)
Is our full object now. She must repent;
Our King is Steward unto Fate; the world
Receive from him their destinies.

Grimo. Sure, the Governor sleeps. My Lord, is'^ fit
We wait upon such Silkewormes, crepp'd in wool?

Parad. Since we attaind the Town not by assault,
But composition free, he shall express
Humility enough to meet us at the Gate.

Enter Hermegild. Gondib. Here comes Hermegild.


Herm. Hail, young soldier! My noble Paradine!
The King must hold my nature much excused,
If I do greet his safe approach with love,
Less violent then I express to thy
Rich soul. I am resolved thou art in health,
And favor with thy stars.

Parad. Ere I return your kind salute, I would
After your fair charge inquire. Say the Queen
Smiles in captivity, my Valdaura
Hurts not her health with grief; then I have heard
Enough to make me cherish life.

Hermig. Rhodolinda does become her title
And her birth. Since deprived of popular
Homage, she has been Queen ore her great self.
In this captivity nere passionate
But when she hears me name the King, and then
Her passions not of anger taste, but love:
Love of her Conqueror: he that in fierce
Battle (when the Cannons sulpherous breath
Clouded the day) her noble Father slew:
Our Royal Master once; now sunk into
His soil; where like the Lilly withered,
He never shall renew his growth again.
My memory disturbes my Tongue! Your fair
Valdaura makes the Queen her rare and just
Example, and is in patience skillful.

Parad. Know, Hermegild, no hasty minute passed
(Since their captivity) wherein I failed
To be a suitor to the King for both.
But he is in kindness prompt, and still does speak
Like Music, when he Rhodolinda names:
You hear it is his edict we call her Queen?

Herm. Thy vanquished Country owes unto thy fame
A tall Pyramid! The captived virgins
Of our Nation shall in their last Dirges
Sing thy praise with mirth. O, I could grow old
Within thy sight. Something we now must talk
Together, and heaven will listen to it,
As to the breath of Saints --

Parad. I knew we should have use of conference:
Which made me beg the leading of the Vanne,
The more t'assist our opportune meeting.

Herm. Afford your ears in private.


Grim. Though Paradine look flourishing, and like
A thing new brushed; a flame of triumph,
(As if his father surfetted in some
O're-growne City when he got him) yet he
Has in him seeds of war, bold thoughts, and we
In The Camp, esteem him honest too.

Gond. He is our Kings Minion, sleeps in his bosom.


Grim. True, and the Royal fool greets him with such
Ravenous kisses, that you would think, he meant
To eat his lips.

Gond. The Captive captiuates the Conqueror.
Three Moons have not expired their usual change,
Since he was prisoner to the King; though now
His Favorite.

Grim. Thou Art too loud! If thou wilt talk safely, go get
A sore throat; hoarce men speak low.
The captived Rhodolinda, (whose father
Albouine deprived of life and kingdom)
Has with such amorous subtlety behau'd
Her gesture, that Albouine is now her
Prisoner. This martial progress was but made
To visit her. She makes him guilty of
Idolatry, and knows the thrifty use
Of time: as she ascends, her Countrymen
Must rise.

Gond. You have called that Hermegild her Creature?


Grimo. He was her fathers Councellor; a man
Created in the dark: he walks inuisibly;
He dwells in Labyrinths; he loves silence:
But when he talks, his language carries more
Promiscuous sense, then ancient Oracles.
So various in his shapes, that often he is
Disgu^z'd from his own knowledge. An error
Much incident to humane Politics,
Who strive to know others more then themselves.

Gond. Observe their complement.


Grimo. Pox of these French ligges? Courtiers always dance.
This is to Hermegild mere lechery:
This wanton gesture does obscure
Thoughts of such consequence and weight, as hang
Like Plummets on his heart. Paradine is
A soft, easy fool, and must be guld.

Herm. O my sweet Lord --

Grimo. Now the Motion speaks.


Herm. Such indeerements would too much impouerish
My gratitude: yet, it is meet our actions
Carry smooth equality: your consent
Must further all my Suits You are the Kings
Jewel, and hang richly in his ear.

Parad. You are precious unto her, whom loud noise
Already calls our Queen: fair Rhodolinda!
We may (if they prove natural and kind)
Govern the Nation that has conquered us;
Gain our Country liberty, and yet
Not stray from noble Arts: such hopes our free
Embraces prophecy. The King.

Loud music. Enter Albouine, Frollo, Conrade, Vollterri, etc. Frollo. Your
Troops (Sir) are so divided into
Mixed files, that to the City you do march
Between thick walls of men.

Albou. Let my Horse-guard bring up the Rere. We Will sport
With war. We have no use of safety now,
But of magnificence.

Vollterri. The order is already given. It was
Your Royal will, we hasten in our March,
Therefore each Squadron double their paces.

Albou. My Boy, I bring thee home my chief Trophy:
Thou do delight me more then victory.
Retire. I am in love too violent.
My embraces crush thee, thou art but yet
Of tender growth --

Parad. My Countriman would kiss your Royal hands,
And then expect no greater happiness
Till he arrive in heaven. He has done your
Rhodolinda service -- Presents Hermeg. on his knee to the King.

Herm. Rhodolinda is your humblest captive.
She inserts you often in her prayers,
And called it my chief duty to present
Her true service to your Majesty.

Albou. Her name does enrich our Language. My boy
Can witness that I love her: she makes me
Prattle in my sleep: I Have drunk Mandragora,
To become drowzie, in hope that I might
Dream of her. Rise, and expect Honor.

Enter Governor of Verona. Governor. High and sacred Majesty! Verona
Has vnhindg'd her wide Gates: proud to admit
The fate of Kingdoms. Our crooked Matrones
Forget their age: and (as the ragged Earth
At the Springs warm approach) look fresh, and young,
To intertaine you. Our timorous Virgins
(With the bold Youth) join in one wanton Quire
To sing your welcome.

Grimo. How the Spaniell fawnes, 'cause he dares not bark?


Gouer. Th'amorous Vine clips not the shady Poplar
With such regard (about whose mossie waste
She hangs a smiling Lover.) Our City is
By the reflection of your blessed approach
Like Pelion decked, whom Tython's Mistress
(Leaving the weeping East) with brightness guilds.
There Is not a wrinkle left in all Verona,
Wherein pale sorrow, or rebellious envy
Can find their loathed Mansion. Flattering joy
Swells big each loyal bosom. All implore
You as their safety; who has hushed the noise
Of discord, and loud war.

Grim. The Rascal flatters, as if he had served
His prentiship in Court.

Albou. Thou Have done me justice, Governor, and know
The way to make me thankful, but not proud.
I understand thou have with honored safety
Preserved those Jewels to thy charge committed,
(My Rhodolinda, and my Boys Valdaura.)
And so increased new motives of our thanks.

Gouer. Heaven has made your memory too humble,
Thus to record your creatures service.

Albou. Let now the knotty Laborer rust with ease,
And aloud proclaim, that the vpland Boore
Release his Teeme, and his industrious Plough.
Let him sing glad Ios to the rustic
Powers that guard his fields, and unto me.

Govern. It is by you we are: no warlike Ram,
Nor battering engine forced a bloody entrance
Through our thick walls. It was the powerful breath
Of your victorious fame, that conquered us.
To that we yielded: which as a rough blast
That poasts from the cold Artick Pole, has borne
Before it captived Nations.

Albo. By heaven a good old man! if he be learned,
I Will have him write my Annals.

Grim. Indeed he looks like a Chronicler.


Albou. Paradine? Inform him of my deeds.
Thou have beheld my discipline full of
Shape and order, when confusion did oppress
The foe, and stifled them in throngs. Hah! Look!
Rhodolinda's come to guild our Triumph!

Enter Rhodolinda, Valdaura, Thesina, and Attendants in mourning. Parad. And my
Valdaura too! let Nature show
A third object so delightful, we will swear
She is not old, nor her first materials
Wasted, but in creation still retains
Her former strength and skill.

Albou But why (my beauteous Captive) art thou still
In Sables wrapped?

Rhodo. Your stars bid you be happy. My cross fa^e
Like the Raven, croaks a funeral note:
This swarthy habit, but paints forth the grief
That chains my soul in darkness. And filial love
Commands me mourn for him, whom you too soon
Deprived of life, my conquered father.

Albou. Let his ashes rest
At quiet in their Vrne. His ghost long since
Has washed away the memory of his fate
In slow-paced Laethe. Take me, modest fair,
Into thy bosom. O hide me there!
My glad soul, how full is thy content?
Now thou feared thing, that guid'st the heavenly Empire,
Rend all the murmuring clouds, and dart
Thy Thunder at me: I am safe.

Rhodo. My captivity must needs seem easy,
Whilst the Conqueror proves so kind.

Albo. I could gaze thus on thee, till my wonder
Did convert me into marble; and yet
My soul would in her self retain a fire,
Lively as that which bold Prometheus stole.
Were the Sea coagulate, and the world
Returned to the antic Chaos, a blind Lump;
Thy look would force the warring elements
Into a sacred order; and beget
A harmony like this they now enjoy.

Rhodo. You are too powerful in you speech.


Albo. Yet when I value thus thy excellence,
Let me not forget my own high being.
I Have humbled all the Nations of the earth;
Brought home as spoils the whole wealth of Nature:
Yet, Rhodolinda, naught like thee. Let me
Whisper my content, for soft music most
Delights the female ear. They walk aside.

Parad. Why, my dear Valdaura, do thou suspect
My warm embraces? Let hungry death ceaze
On my honor, before it ceaze on me,
If in my breast I intertaine a thought
Unlawful.

Vald. I esteem you (Sir) a friend to virtue,
And in that hope would cherish all your love.

Parad. In thy fair brow, there is such a Legend writ
Of timorous chastity, that it does blind
Th'adulterous Eye. Not the Mountain Ice,
(Congealed to Crystal) is so frosty chaste
As thy victorious soul, which conquers Man,
And Man's proud Tyrant-passion. But I am
Too rough for Courtship, the soft harmony
Which wanton Peace instructs the Tongue to make,
I have forgot. Trust me (bright Maid!)
I love thee dearly. Though I Have found thy heart
Like Pibble, smooth, but stony.

Valda. I Have heard my mother say: the curled Youth
Of Italy, were prompt in wanton stealths,
And sinful Arts. Till Time had given me
Assurance of your noble thoughts; 'twas safe
To doubt your love. But now I wish I were
More worthy, and then would prove more liberal
Of my self.

Parad. Let me enjoy thy hand! that moist Adamant
That so attracts my soul! We will (ere night
Her black Curtain draws) make complete this love,
With marriage Rites.

Albo. How now, Boy! Is my interest so decayed
In your young person, that you give away your self
Without my leave!

Parad. Humbly on my knee, I beg the vulgar
Privilege due to all hearts. To love, and not enjoy,
Is a torture, I cannot suffer long,
And still remain possessed with breath.

Albou. Thou have showed me physic for my passion.
Take him, Valdaura, and be proud! It Is I
That love him: nor shall your joys be single.
I Will make the number yet more full. This day
We Will consecrate to Hymen's use. Behold
Your Queen (who though my Captive) for her birth
And beauty, is the first of Queens.

Gouer. High Heaven increase your joys!


Herm. And may you live together until Time
Shall sicken with his age.

Frollo. Conrad. Long live Albouine, King of the Lombards!


Herm. Cry up Rhodolinda too!


Frollo. Conrad. Live Rhodolinda, Queen of the Lombards!


Alb. Governor! It Is our will that you expect
Honor, and true safety. Your Cities love
I shall perceive by popular noise, and your
Behavior in this great solemnity.
Let the Sun smile; the Wind sport with our Plumes!
This day let sick-men too forget to groan.
Let all glad Hymns in one mixed concord sound,
And make the ecchoing heaven your mirth rebound.

Exeunt all, but Grimold, Vollterri, Gondibert. Grim. The King's head must now
convert to rotten wood.


Gond. Why, Grimold?


Grim. That Court Earewiggs may live there, and devour
His brains. Do not perceive how they begin
To creep into his ears?

Gond. Generous souls are still most subject to
Credulity.

Grim. He is a Germane in his drink: busied
With a wanton pride, which his Flatterers
Admire for mirth, but his friends do pity.

Vollt. He should be told his sins.


Grim. By whom? Vollterri, now the King forsakes
The Camp, he must maintain luxurious mouths,
Such as can utter perfumed breath, and these
Strait compose a faction, engrosse his ears.
They limit still his conversation.
Even as the slow finger of the Dial
Does in its motion circular remove
To distant figures: so by a subtle
Leisure, they do prefix the hours,
When he must change his rotten Parasite,
For one more skillful, how t'admire, and praise.
No honest Tongue can ever interpose
To tell him he is mortal.

Gond. It is the chief misery of Princes,
Nere to understand their own crimes, to sin
In ignorance.

Grim. True, his Confessor, that in sight externe
A Patriarch seems, will gain by flattery,
And superscribe unto the King, as to the Pope
(His holiness.) But Gondibert,
Whom Conclaues here in Court do canonize
For Saints, will scarce be admitted in heaven
For Angels.

Vollter. Now Rhodolinda is become his Rival
In high Sovereignty, she will permit
No errors but her own: The King must mend
What she mislikes.

Grim. She gives us leisure to expect
Her character. Women make themselves more known
When they do rule, then when th'obey.

Gond. Valdaura is enriched with a sweetness
So religious, that Paradine must sin
In private, or need no mercy.

Grim. Thou Have named her! Though my obdurate sufferance
In active war has quite deprived me of
All amorous gesture. Though not these forty
Winters, I have seen any of her sex
But Suttlers wives, who, in stead of Fillets,
Wrap their sooty hair in Horses girts. Though
My marrow is frozen in my bones,
Yet I melt before her eyes. When I see her,
I grow proud below the Navel. For she
Is none of the French Noursery, that practice
The sublime friske. None of your ijgging Girls,
That perch Paraqueeto's on their fists,
And ride toth' Court like Venus Falconers.

Gond. Grimold, hoarce men speak low, thou have not caught
A cold yet.

Grim. She Is none of those that on their heads advance
High, swagg'ring Plumes, like a gay Forehorse
In a Country Teeme. O, she is worth the tempting!

Vollter. Do thou so commend her virtues, and yet
Would thou tempt her unto vice?

Grim. That Is a trick I learnt of the devil. Those
That are virtuous, need his temptation,
The wicked have power enough to damn themselves.

Gond. Hark how they showte! Away Grimold* or we
Shall lose the Triumph!

Showting within. Grim. Room for Cuckolds, whose horns are so high*
They bore the Moon, as she friskes in the sky*

Exeunt omnes. Act the second. Scene first.
Enter Grimold, Gondibert, Vollterri. Grim. This Peace makes me rotten, dusty
As a Cobweb. I live like a Cricket
Ith'corner of an Oven. Pox of these oregrowne
Cities. To be valiant here, is to forfeit
The Statute: and these furred gowns hold,
There is no sin so great as poverty.

Gond. Thou art as melancholy as a lean Judge!


Grim. I, or a corrupted Officer, at the noise
Of a Parliament. In this division
Of vnualewed Tropheys, Territories
Vast and ample, (gained partly by my sweat)
Not a single Acre falls to my share.

Enter Cunymond, Frollo, Conrade, Servants with a Banquet. Cuny. Bear back
there! They thrust as if they meant
To get me with child --

Frollo. You sirrah! do you get the Kings officer
With child?

Conr. Bear back there! or we will put ye to the charge
Of Surgery --

Cuni. Dispatch* fellows!


Gondib. Is not that Cunymond?


Grim. The same. He is a great Astrologer.
The mere Anotamy in the front o'th Calendar.
You may know where the Sign is, by some toy
In's habit, which he remoues, as the Sign
Remoues.

Cuny. Frollo, did they enter here by your permission?


Frollo. Not by mine, Sir.


Cuny. Nor yours, Conrade?


Conrad. They are men of China for ought I know.


Cuny. Then they must out. Gentlemen, pray avoid
The Presence.

Grim. 'S death Sir! do you make us your Voyders?


Vollter. Must we carry away your Cheese-parings?
Thrust your Bodkins forth!

Gond. Draw in the Presence? Art thou mad?


Grim. How he stands? he is created of Starch,
And dares not use a boisterous motion,
Lest he should fall in Rumples.

Cuny. Sir, you may speak like a Cannon! but you
Shall either go, or --

Grim. Or what, Sir?


Cuny. Or stay, Sir.


Conrad. By heaven he shall do one, Sir --

Frollo. Nay, Captain, do not look, as if you had drunk
Vinegar. You must, or go, or -- stay Sir --

Loud knocking. Cuny. Hey! we are tumbling in a Drum.
Within. Fellows of the Guard, make way there! Officers!
Open the door --

Cun. Bear back there! Gentlemen! what do you mean?
Pray' bear back --

Loud Music. Enter Albouine, Rhodolinda, Paradine, Valdaura, Hermegild,
Thesina, etc. Herm. Phoebus will be thought more rash then Phaeton,
If now he hasten to the West. Sir, this
Glorious day, merits well a longer age,
Then what is limited to all within
Our Calendar.

Albo. Hermegild, thy free heart adds to our triumph!


Grim. Sir, I Have some few words, I needs must utter:
Since my last services in Hungary,
You remain on my Tally six thousand
Ducats: I Am loath to skore up still, and pay
My self with my own Chalk.

Albo. Would have thy Soul dismissed a natural way?


Gri. I would not starve, look, like a parched Anotamy
Sowed in a Kid-skin. Pay your debts, Sir!

Albo. I never met with boldness, until now!
My courage is quite puzzled!

Grim. Do your ears blister to hear this? My breath is
Wholesome. I cannot tipple like a Duck
In a green Poole. Nor feed on Berries in
A Hedge, like some lost remnant of my fathers
Scatterd lust. Sir, pay your debts!

Albo. Sure, thou art some spirit! I cannot kill thee!


Grim. In this division of the Lands, I helped
To conquer; I am not furnished with
A Molehill for a pillow.

Albo. Hermegild sat chief in the Committee
For division of those Lands: bid him reward
Your service: besides, I mistake the custom,
Or it is my Treasurers office to pay
My debts, not mine.

Grim. No Sir, (thanks to your Royal thrift) it is
Your office to pay all; your Treasurers
Custom to pay nothing. Thrusts him away.

Albo. Do not interrupt my marriage Rites!


Grim. I cannot take your reference for payment.


Albo. Would thou were dead!


Grim. Sir, I Will make my Ghost, my Executor,
And walk after death, ere I Will lose my money.

Albo. Sit, my Rhodolinda: This is thy Sphere!
In th'absence of the Sun, we must receive
Our light from thee. Paradine, thy Bride expects
Thy service.

Parad. She Has an ill bargain on it, to rule one night,
And ever after to obey.

Her. Captain, though the King be prompt in mercy,
Yet has he so much anger in him,
As will express him mortal. It Is for your
Safety, to avoid the Presence.

Grim. I Will bribe your Lordship with a Ginny Toothpick!


Herm. You must repent this language.


Parad. He must not, Hermegild!


Herm. How, my Lord!


Parad. These whom you number in your faction,
Enjoy, by your assistance, proud structures;
And fertile Granges, to maintain their gaudy
Riot. Sir, you had a frail memory,
Or a degenerate heart, when you forgot
His merit; might you incorporate those in one,
The sordid bulk could nere make up his shadow.

Hermeg. I am prescribed my discipline in Court!


Parad. Grimold, away! It Is my desire you leave
The Presence.

Grim. I am obedient (Sir) to your desire.


Gond. 'Slight, thou have made a brave retreat.


Vollt. I looked when both of us should taste
Of immortality.

Exeunt Grimo. Gond. Vollt. Herm. He that inflamed this fire, will scorch his
busy
Fingers. My Lord, it was unkindly done
T'affront my anger thus: but I have hope
It is your last fault.

Parad. I cannot reckon it among my faults.
Sir, you inuolue your meaning in your speech.
The world shall find me honest.

Herm. You are a Bridegroom now.


Albo. Hermegild, make your anger known,
For else your frowns will cause your loyalty
To be suspected. This night should be as smooth
And pleasant, as that to which we owe our blessed
Nativity.

Herm. Sir, you are great on Earth! I am merely
Your creation. My passions do afford
Your high delight all sympathy.
Old Time has thrown his feathers from his heels,
And slowly limps in's motion to prolong
This Triumph: but if Paradine affront
Hymen, and me with sullen rage, it shall
Be called my piety to suffer.

Rhodo. stands up. Rho. How! your Excellence ought t'excuse my speech!
When your victorious sword deprived me of
My Father; I entered to captivity,
As to th'oblique shade, where death inhabits.
Till you allowd me Hermegild; who with
His high Philosophy did make
My bondage sweet. My Father loved him well:
He was his noblest Servant, and must not
For his virtues suffer, until your sacred tongue
Forbid me share with you in Sovereignty.

Albo. Boy, this was a bold crime. You must not give
Me cause to chide my fond heart. Valdaura,
Urge him to proffer friendship
Unto Hermegild; you are powerful
Ore his nature. I have deserved to lose
My chief prerogative --

Vald. I am too timorous to deal with anger:
If he prove stern of nature, my Marriage
Is my funeral. My Lord!

Herm. Paradine, I Have an humble love. I will
Present it first to your refusal --

Parad. I want your phrase, to make my manners seem
Less rugged. All that is love, I cherish
With such religious heat, as my Valdaura
Claims, since our young Nuptial --

Albo. This embracement is a sacrifice
To thee my Queen: whose deity
Consists of love. Sit, and with your
Persons, straight entrench the Table. Some wine!
Fill in my Germane Plate; I Will drink as when
I Am hot with victory. This to my Bride --

Cuny. Sound high!


Albo. More wine, and noise! Now Boy, I celebrate
Valdaura's health --

Cuny. Bid their Instruments speak louder.
They Are afraid to wake the Neighbors.

Albo. This is legitimate blood of the rich
Corsick Grape: precious as thy tears
(My Royal Girl) when thou art penitent
To heaven. Whilst the King talks, they drink.

Herm. Spare me in the next, and I Will esteem you
Courteous; so much wine will put me to the charge
Of Physic.

Cuny. Your Lordship ownes it as a prime virtue --


Albo. Shall the world bleed? but frown, and thou renew'st
A Chaos. Malign the pride of some far
Eastern Queen, whom Travelers belly,
And I will forage there, like loud thunder!
Or like the Northern wind upon the Maine,
Where lazy Hulkes are tossed like chips.

Rhodo. I merit no such complement.


Albo. I Will do it. It Is thought, I am immortal.
The chief of my great Ancestors, that made
A wild incursion ore this fertile soil,
Was but a tipe of me. More wine! -- Thy breath
Is as the smoke of spices. I taste thy
Melting lips, and straight engender kisses.
Heart! Boy, you are too ravenous!

Parad. I ever held your Majesty my best
Example. Kisses nimbly gathered,
The faster grow.

Herm. The Lombards use to share this sport! He kisses Thesina.


Albo. Is not your name Pigwiggin?


Cuny. Pigwiggin! your Grace was wont to call me
Cunymond: I am no Faery.

Albo. Nor I the King of Faeries. 'Slight, sir, do you
Present me with a Cup, made, o'th bottom
Of an Akehorne, or Queen Mabbs Thimble?
Fill me a bowl, where I may swim,
And bathe my head, then rise like Phoebus from
The Ocean, shaking my dewy Locks.
A health to Cesars memory. Boy, do me
Justice, or thou afrontst my Triumph!

Parad. Conrade, the King will drown us all!


Conr. Y'haue now, Sir, but the moiety of his draught.


Rhodo. Though Fame lends you her Trumpet, gives you leave
To speak your own praise, you cannot utter more
Then my belief shall warrant.

Albo. Now thou whisper'st like the amorous Lute!
I am the Broom of Heaven, when the world grows foul,
I Will sweep the Nations into'th Sea, like dust.
Thy father was magnanimous, and great
King of the Girpides. Yet his title
Sat not so nobly on him, as my conquest.
Know, his unkind fate, was his chief glory:
For it was I that slew him; and thou his
Captived Daughter art my Queen.

Rhod. Sir, if you continue this narration,
I shall weep.

Albou. Do, weep! then on my heart strings I will thread
Thy tears in stead of Pearl: such a wealthy
Bracelet, love would present unto his Queen:
And she tuck up her sleeves, to show her gaudy wrists.
More wine! Bring us the Bowl of Victory.

Exit Cunymond. Paradine kneeles. Parad. Sir, you engaged your Royal word,
never
To present that fatal object.

Albo. Paradine, do not resist my pleasure.
I Will crush thee into Air.

Parad. I am in my ambition virtuous,
If I desire t'expire a sacrifice
To loyalty. Sir, ruin what you made,
But do not violate your Vow.

Albou. Hence! I shall delight in fury!
Enter Cunymond with a Skull, made into a drinking-Bowle. Welcome, the horrid
Trophey of my chief war!
Rhodolinda, I Will try thy fortitude.
This was thy Fathers Skull: thou shall pledge a health
Unto his Ghost. He drinks* all rise up.

Rhod. O fatal! my eyes shrink within my brow!
I gather Agues like the Spring, and tremble
Like the vnlick'd Lamb, newly yeand upon
A sheet of Snow.

Vald. Hide me, Paradine! the object does so
Penetrate, that when I wink, I spy it
Through my Lids.

Albou. Tame, feeble Soul! Will she not pledge
What we do celebrate? Return her person --

Cunym. Madam, the King -- Strikes him, and exit.

Rhod. The King's a Tyrant, and thou his slave.


Frollo. That Is a favor, Signior.


Cunym. I wear it as a Jewel in my ear.


Parad. Fly, dear Valdaura; sweeten her censure
Of this act, and mediate for the King.

Vald. Thesina, prithee help me in discourse;
My wonder (Wench) does so disturb my speech,
I fear I shall grow dumb.

Thesi. The work is pious we attempt.


Exeunt Vald. These. Her. The harmony of your sweet tongue is his
Best physic: divorce him from those black thoughts,
Whilst I employ my utmost skill, to win
The Queen to his embraces. She Is great of Soul,
And may determine what my fond heart laments
To prophecy.

Parad. You Are my best Countriman, kind and loyal.


Exit Herm. Albo. So pale and timorous! I Will sooner couple
With a Mandrake, and beget groans.

Parad. My Royal Lord!


Albo. Hah! Am I alone? Have they all left me?
Where is my Empire? Do I govern in
The vacant Air?

Parad. Sir, am I lost unto your memory?
You were wont to trust my service: the way
Unto your Couch lies here --

Albo. None shall be proud but I. My smiles revive
The dead: but when I frown, the living straight
Melt into Ghosts.

Cunym. Lights for the King there!


Parad. Cunymond, you are too officious! The Kings
Departure must be private.

Exeunt Albo. Parad. Frollo. The King is light enough himself: he needs
No Torches.

Cunym. And heavy enough! for he seems to reele
With his own weight.

Conrad. No Maskes! No Epithelamion now!
Call for a Bonesetter, for Time has sprain'd
His feet, and goes awry.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Rhodolinda, Hermegild. Rhodo. O Hermegild! a general
eclips
In Nature, would not seem so horrid!
To cut those cordial strings which Hymen had
But newly tied.

Her. I, there is the horror! whilst his Vows sat warm
Upon his Lips; his breath not mingled yet
With cooler Air; thus to perturbe by stern
Practice your sweet rest, was worse then perjury.

Rhod. To present my Royal Fathers Skull,
In drunken Triumph.

Herm. Take heed! you will distract your memory.
There Is a Record, Time strives to lose; and Fame
To hide beneath some oblique fold in her
Thick Volume, as loath to discredit all
Mankind. Your father valewed you next to
His interest in heaven. I Have seen the good
Old King search for his picture in your eyes; then --

Rhod. No more: Patience is sinful now. Thou art
Deeply read and wise: instruct me to be bold,
For Albouine has taught me to be cruel.

Hermeg. You Are now by holy Church incorporate;
Therefore Divinity forbids me use
My natural motions. How e're I think
It fit, you give him direful cause, soon to
Repent: Repentance sure is physic for his soul.
Enter Paradine, Valdaura. Paradine and 's young Bride! Your excellence
Shall please that we retire: whilst I disguize
My kind gesture, and seem to flatter in
The Kings behalf --

Parad. To bed soft modesty! I will my self
Deliver to the Queen the King's intent.

Vald. Sir, the King is cruel. Should you prove so
To me, I Would soon distill my soul to tears,
And weep an Ocean deep enough to drown
My sorrows, and my self.

Parad. 'Twere stern guilt to doubt my nature. Fair Saint,
To bed, I long to lose my Youth in warm
Embraces, and ere the pearly Morn appear,
Make thee a teeming Mother. To bed! with winged have
Expect my presence.

Exit Valdaura. Herm. How smooth appears the Brow of Youth!


Parad. Hail Rhodolinda! the Royal Mistress
Of this night. Thus Albouine (our great King) bade
Me say, You Are dearer to his eyes then light.
Though every Bride may claim from Hymen
Privilege to rule her Lord, till Hesperus
Appear, and cancel her brief Charter.
Yet he does humbly beg, you will not infringe
The Lombards custom, whose Virgins never vow
A continence the Nuptial night.

Rhod. I yet want your meaning.


Par. It Is his chief hope that you will straight expect
His person in your bed.

Rhod. How! lie with him? I Will sooner choose a Mansion
In a sepulcher: There commit incest
With the raw remnant of my fathers bones:
Sooner embrace an ayrie Incubus:
Mingle Limbs with some vlcerous Cripple,
Able to infect an Hospital.

Parad. O take heed! Take heed, fair Majesty! let not
His rash sin provoke you to intend so dire
An abstinence: ere yet the wine has lost
Th'vnruly operation. The King disclaimes
His wanton pride, and mortifies himself
With sullen grief.

Rhod. Can thou suspect, I will prove inconstant,
To what in cold temperance I determine?

Parad. Heaven auert you should approve your error.


Rhod. I Will kneel, and vow with all solemnity --

Herm. O hold! 'twere black impiety in us
To suffer such a horrid crime. You may
Inform the King of my religious loyalty,
Already I have used perswasiue speech
To reconcile this ods: but she grows wild,
Repugnant to all mercy.

Parad. As you esteem your Royal self, or us,
Who (when kinder Planets ruled) were servants
To the unhappy King your father; cherish
No more this anger in your breast, lest Time
Afford it growth and violence, till it
Disturb the world.

Herm. He councels like a sacred Oracle.


Parad. I will inform the King, your continence
You only celebrate to this black night,
And give him hope, that you will hereafter smile,
His kind inticements meet with equal heat,
And fertile love. Though I Am vnhewne, and shaped
In war, this softens all my faculties --

Rhod. Stay, Paradine; did thou not name my Father?


Parad. I did with a devout remembrance!


Rhod. And thou know how thy good Country suffers?


Parad. I think on it, and my heart hangs heavy
On its strings; galls them with its sullen weight.

Rhod. Hermegild often receives certificate
From some in bondage there, which writ in Prose, do,
In The reading into Verse dissolve: so sad
The business is, so fit for elegy.

Hermeg. So sad a Requiem yet was never sung,
Though the hoarce Raven, and the Whistler shrill,
The Howlet, and the evening Dorr made up
The fatal Quire. The young men there are yoked
In payres, and stretch their sinnews in a Teeme,
To draw the wealthy harvest to the Grange,
Where the insulting foe resides. The aged
(Heretofore in purple clothed) that disposed
Of Law and Justice; are now sowed up
In dunghill clouts; and dwell on parched hills,
To tend the flocks; whose fleece the Victor wears
In gaudy triumph.

Parad. O harsh captivity! Our Country groans!
Till now I thought the Conqueror began to ease
Their bondage, not add to the weight of their
Compelled burdens.

Rhod. The King's a stern Tyrant.


Parad. Yet he has used me still with gentle power,
Taken me from the cold Earth, and warmed me in
His bosom: and Hermegild has full cause
To bless his bounty. But you (now our Queen)
He valewes next to heaven; however this rash
Error strives to disgrace his love. We are
His captives too; heretofore not heeded
By our Stars; though we now grow tall with titles
And his favor.

Herm. My Lord, the King is kind! Our memories
Were frail, should we forget what has so much
Pertain'd unto our knowledge. I Am so fond
Over my Religion, I dare not taste
Ingratitude: yet give me leave to say,
You may mistake his love unto the Queen.
The dry Tartar, who yoakes his females neck
With rusty Iron, not with Carckanets
Of threaded Pearl; whom he preserues for physic
More then increase; will the first night of their
Conjunction, feast her in's imbroader'd tent;
Call her Sovereign; and like some amorous wind,
Sport with her hair.

Rhod. But my Nuptial the King did celebrate
In Golgotha, where Skulls, and dusty bones
Inhabit.

Herm. You Are skillful in the deeds that appertain
To strength and fury; but they that aim
At victory in Court, must practice smooth
And subtle Arts. Wise Favorites do walk
In The dark, and use false lights. Nay, often disguize
Their breadth and stature; seem lesser then they are:
For know, the slender Worm, or nimble Grig,
May wriggle down into the oblique, and low
Descent o'th narrow hole; whilst th'oregrowne Snake
Peepes at the brimme, but never can view the bottom.

Rhod. Think on thy Country, Paradine! Is there
In Story no mention of some great Soul,
That did his Country prize above his own
Mortality, and died to gain his Nation Freedom?

Herm. The Noble Brutus for his Countries health,
Made Caesar bleed; Cassius was heroique too,
And had in war loud Fame, which he increased
By mingling in this Act. -- It Is wrought with skill,
And apt leisure. His thoughts grow numerous,
And engender horrid shapes; such as fright
His fancy.

Rhod. Paradine, good night!


Herm. Hymen and your Bride, will blame your tardy
Service. Sweet Lord, a thousand times good night.

Exeunt Herm. and Rhodolinda. Parad. False unto me! when Thunder wakes the dead:
When the Sky looks swarthy: the clouds like ink
In water powered: when the Earth seems to stand
As in a gloomy shade. When the wind blows
Till it grows hoarce: till it convert
And sprinkle Seas even to a Dew; then I
Shall try the King, and fathom his wide Soul.
If he start, complain of his mortality,
Kneel often; and pray aloud, as Heaven
Were deaf: if thus, I will conclude him false.
For horrid storms that Tyrants waking keep,
Do rock the noble Conscience safe asleep. Exit.

Act the third. Scene first.
Enter Rhodolinda, Valdaura, Thesina. Vald. I knew your Excellence did visit me
For mirth and laughter.

Rhod. So early up? Your Lord is temperate.


These. I should like their tempers better, if she
Were down, and her Lord up.

Vald. Fie, Thesina, your tongue's unruly.


Rhod. The morning might have shown me too for mirth,
Had not the false King made the night so sad.
Black fancy fly!

These. She moves as she were sick, this skirmish has
Much weakened her.

Rhod. Do thou called a skirmish?


These. I, Madam, a French skirmish; where the onset
Is hot and fiery, but the retreat cold and tame.

Enter Hermegild. Herm. Madam, the King?


Rhod. Hah!


Herm. He greets your Excellence in a smooth phrase,
And begs, you will permit his early visit.

Rhod. I Would rather lose my eyes then see him.


Valdaura kneeles. Vald. When you did triumph in your fathers Court,
My entreaty then had power to alter
Your commands; reward my young service
With kindness to your self. When the tall
Cedar falls, with burly weight it strikes
The neighboring shrubs, low, into the ground:
So we that spring like Rushes near your root,
Must in your death receive a funeral.

Rhod. What Is this? Do You moralize?


Vald. The King may have his anger warranted.
For heaven forbids such wild division*
'Tweene those whom holy Church unites.

Rhod. Hark, Thesina! She has been gossiping*
With the holy Sisters: she preaches to me
Of Matrimonial zeal. Troth Valdaura,
If thy husband do infuse such schism,
I Will practice a divorce.

Thesina. We Court Ladies grow so squeamish after
We have tasted Man. Your Majesty may
Much profit her behavior, if you
A while divide her from her Lord.

Herm. So soon? Ere Time permits them second
Their embraces?

Rhod. I Hermegild. If those embraces do
Include such high delight, such rapsody;
She makes me envious then* since all my hopes
Are widdowed by the King. To night, Valdaura*
You are to sleep beneath my Roof. This I
Impose as a command.

Exeunt Rhodo. Thesin. Herm. Is not this a harsh compulsion?


Vald. Sir, I willingly obey it. But as
You Are Noble, use your ablest skill, t'instruct*
The Queen how of her anger to dispose
A safer way, then against the King.

Herm. Alas! I Would rather cut my Eyelids off
To prevent sleep then lose one minute that
Could advantage a design so pious.
And be it part of your kind charity,
TO indeere me to your Lord. It Is all the pride
In my ambition to do him service.

Vald. Sir, he already knows your worth, and thinks
Your friendship precious. Exit.

Her. I kiss your fair hands. The King already come?
I must seem pensive as the night.

Enter Albouine, Paradine, Cunymond, Frollo, Conrade. Albo. She Is lost, my Boy:
blown from my fist: her wings
Have gathered wind: they fly (like those of Time)
Swiftly forward, but never back return.

Parad. Sir, I have hope, she will repent this breach
Of duty, and court your Royal smiles again.

Albo. Is it a sin to drink? Nature has given
To fishes a prerogative, greater
Then we enjoy. They can ever tipple
And not be drunk.

Cuny. Fishes are dumb (Sir) they never fox themselves
With talk.

Albo. Slave! thy mirth is treacherous! Paradine!
Thou have consumed to night the wealth of love,
Wasted thy lips in moist kisses, embraced
A warmth, that would give life to marble.
Whilst I, (like the solitary Phoenix)
Expect no heat but in my funeral flame:
And strive t'ingender of my self. Yet Boy,
Thou can not make me envious; thou art more
Delightful; then my Rodolinda's sins.
Let me suruay those blue circles: his lids
Fall down, as if weighty Plummets hung on
Their sins. Thou art not temperate. Preserve
Thy dear eyes. Love was pictured blind, because
It makes men blind. I hug thee as my health --

Parad. He bruised me in his arms. Can love express
Such violence, and yet be false? Hermegild
Still whispers in my ear, the King does hate
Thee, Paradine. But Hermegild is read in all
The Arts of Court, and strives perhaps
My sense to poison with lean jealousy.

Herm. Sweet Lord! Y' appear blushing like the Morn!
Something your Bride and you have done to increase
The number of the Worthies.

Parad. He courts me too! I want a Perspectiue,
To draw these distant figures near my sight.
I never shall sleep again.

Albo. Hermegild, thy aspect shows ominous!
How thriues our embasie?

Herm. I have consumed my breath, till I grew faint,
And wept to inuit her mercy; but tears
Were spilt like water in the Forge, only
TO inrage the fire. She does abjure your visit.

Albo. Harsh, Iron, nature!


Her. The King seems fettered in his lims: he wreathes
His arms, as if he meant to bruise his heart.
And Paradine does find my charms predominant.

Albo. He that drinks, forfeits his mortality!


Enter Grimold. Grim. How Sir, must we not drink?


Albo. Soldier, to keep thy bladder moist, I will
Permit thee gape in the mornings face, and catch
Her mizzling tears.

Grim. If you will extirpate this vice of drinking,
Give order for a privy search in the the Ocean;
There dwell the greatest drinkers. The VVhale (Sir)
Drinks deeper let us hale her on shore, and impownd her
In a Cesterne.

Albo. Good! we will imbarke for Sea. I press thee up
For this employment.

Grim. Stay (Sir) ere I engage my self in new
Services, pay me for my old. You rest
Upon my Ticket, six thousand Ducats;
And I have not seen your Majesty's face
In any other metal, but your own
Flesh and blood these three months.

Albo. Thou grumblest like a gray Wolf.


Grim. It Is then for hunger, Sir.


Herm. Captain, you mistake the King. He Is Royal
As his blood, and liberal as the Sun
That shines on all. This unruly breath, where
The City meet in council, might perhaps*
Blow their Purse-strings loose, so fill the Exchequer.
And then you shall number your pay with your own
Fingers.

Grim. I will out-rore thunder, or the Cannon!
Must they still walk in wealthy Furs; whilst men
Of merit here are clothed in Cabidge leaves?

Parad. Grimold, you endanger your friends.


Grim. My Lord, give losers leave to speak. I Have lost
My youth and blood ith'warres, and I want food,
A reverend Ass bears my wife and her young eggs
In Paniers up and down the streets. I travail
Like a Tartar, with all my family
About me. Nay, nay, nay! you would be gone!

Albo. Art thou not yet dead?


Gri. You must not move, till y'haue paid me. I know,
You may be angry with more safety then I.
Bid some Colossus of your Guard cleave me
With his Falchon; yet I shall steal a passage
Ore the black River, when Charon slumbers,
And fright your Grace.

Alb. I dare not strike thee (old man) lest thou should fall
To dust, and choke me.

Grim. Good King, pay me. I love thy Grace:
And will fight for thee, whilst I Have motion left
To stir a feather. My want constraines me to it.
By this hand, I Am feign to eat Branne and Parsley
Like a tame Rabbit.

Herm. Lend me your ear, Captain!


Grim. You Will entice me now t'enter into bond?


Herm. You look indeed like a young heir. Well, Sir,
Value me according to my true rate.
I am your friend. You make ill choice of hours
For help of your design. The King has now
Sad and tumultuous thoughts about his heart.

Grim. Great men are always sad, when they should pay
Their debts.

Herm. Sir, you interpret ill. Grow more sober,
Then challenge all my power in your behalf.

Grim. He that receives a kindness from the Devil,
Shall be sure to lose by his gains.

Cuny. Captain, you should choose a luckier minute:
The King is now in love.

Grim. With whom?


Frollo. With the Queen.


Grim. In love with his own wife! that is held incest
In Court: variety is more luscious.

Albo. Be powerful in thy speech, my Paradine,
Yet gentle too. She is the Star that rules
My faculties.

Par. The Queen will bless your temperance, and repent.
Hermegild is too busy: he must be more
At leisure, and I more active.

Exit Parad. Albo. Hermegild, wear thy senses near us --


Grim. Your Majesty has a frail memory
To forget me so soon --

Her. You Will forfeit me, and the Kings mercy! away!


Exeunt Albouine, Hermegild. Grim. It Is no piece of unkindness to wish thee
In hell, for all thy friends dwell there. Thou Have none
Upon the earth. Gentlemen will you be open to me?

Cuny. In all parts, Sir, but our purses.


Grim. Draw near! let us communicate our hearts!
Does not that wealth, which you disburse for powders,
Perfumes, clothes, and physic for the face,
Return with gain?

Frollo. Expound your Riddle, Sir.


Grim. Have you not each a Mistress that maintains
You in expense and riot? Hah? Fame gives
It out, you smooth Gallants are much obliged
Unto the sins of Ladies.

Cuny. Conrade can prattle somewhat, Sir, to that
Purpose.

Conr. Good faith you do me wrong. I Have worn, Sir,
A Ladies slipper in my hat, or so.
Frollo is the man that gets their Pendants,
Armelets, Rings, and all the Toys of value.

Frollo. Excuse me, sir, not I. Signior Cunymond
Has all the voice at Court. We know, Sir, when,
And where, a certain Duchess, Sir;
You copulate with Titles, you.
The Heralds are your Bawds.

Cuny. Hold! grow particular in such a Theme as this!


Grim. Well, Gentlemen, I must be furnished too.


Cuny. With a Mistress?


Grim. Yes, inquire me out some old Land-Carack.
I am content to stretch my loins for a
Pension.

Cuny. At what rate do you value your self?


Grim. I was never pawned, Sir.


Cuny. How, Captain!


Grim. In this lean age, we value all things
According to the rate, they pawn for.

Frollo. But we must know, how much you would receive
In price of your actiuitie?

Conrad. You must never stray after fresh pasture.


Grim. Some eight; I, I, eight hundred Crowns a year will do it.
I am desirous of no more then will
Maintain my Genet, and my Dwarf.

Cuny. Your excuse procured, it is fit you now tell,
How far in your defense I may engage
My honor: is not your flesh a little tainted!
Are you not unwholesome?

Grim. O death, no; no, no, no! Do not think I have
A conscience so ill bred, to put my self
Upon a Lady, when unfit for the affair.

Cuny. Well, Captain, now with your own eyes suruay
Your limbs; what use can a Lady have
Of you? To propagate the Cough o'th lungs?

Frollo. Or beget Cripples, to people an Hospital?


Conrad. Or produce another Nation that may
Wage fierce battle against the Cranes?

Grim. Yet I can follow your bodies with rough
Motion, and not shed my limbs by the way --

Cuny. I told ye, he would make a jest on it.


Grim. But I will kick ye in earnest, -- kick ye
For my exercise and warmth -- till my toes
Grow crooked --

Exeunt omnes. Enter Valdaura, reading to her self, then Albouine, Hermegild.
Herm. Pursue Valdaura, Sir.


Albo. I hate these Iiggeries.


Herm. You know, I am material in my speech,
Full of duty; you want the silken garb,
That must indeere you to the Ladies eyes.

Albo. Yet I am loving in my drink.


Herm. Greet her kindly, Sir: it is Paradines Bride.
You have not seen her since she indeuour'd
To increase the number of your subjects,
With loss of her virginity.

Albo. Rhodolinda does so ingrosse my love,
That on other Ladies I Have but little
To bestow.

Herm. Sir, practice but your Courtship here. In troth
You must affect the amorous Cringe, gestures
Smooth and pliant; it will never do else.
I Have heard the Queen complain, you are too rough:
And what these Ladies do observe, will take
A sudden flight unto her ear. Strike but
Their senses gently with your tongue. Often
Flatter'em, and with a vigorous breath;
They Will then implore the Queen in your behalf:
And, Sir, the endeavor of their praise will soon
Procure your peace.

Albo. If they would soften Rhodolinda's heart,
And reconcile me to her smiles, I would
Grow fond, and dally then with all the Sex.

Herm. Begin your trial. If you salute this,
(And other Ladies too) with some impression on
Their lips; with managing their fingers thus, --
With seysure on her wrist; as if you had
Some business with her Pulse: then you inchant.
Be flexiue in your smiles, and wanton like,
Seek pictures in their eyes: and when they move,
Then with personal conduct, guide their feet.
Amongst them you cannot seem too cheap. They will
Admire you for it, and sing your praises to
The Queen.

Albo. I shall be taught to spin, and starch!


Herm. The engin's now compact; each wheel does move
With silent screwes. The Mole's the subtle Pioner:
For when she undermines the earth, her slow
Motion makes no noise. Exit.

Albo. You Are devout, Vauldaura. Teach me to pray:
We have no leisure for it in war; and 't has
Been long time out of fashion here in Court.

Vald. I fear I make some breach of duty with
Your Excellence, to hinder thus
The passage of your Royal thoughts.

Albo. You teach me now, t'excuse my own abrupt
Demeanor; but I can do it. My harsh Queen
(Whom the perspicuous Eye of heaven forgive)
Does much mistake the posture of my limbs,
And gesture of my tongue among your Sex.
I never use, like rugged Polypheame,
To dandle Cubs. Thus, I can gently touch
A Ladies lips -- yet make no battery on
Her teeth. Was it not an ayrie pressure?
Tell my proud Queen, I Have lost my Iron garb,
And now am grown thus fond and smooth.

Vald. O Royal Sir, her cruelty has put
My eyes unto the expense of many tears.

Albo. I, but in vain! Those clouds must weep apace,
That mean to penetrate the Marble, or
The Flint. I wear no Gauntlet on my hand,
Why should you think that I would bruise
Your fingers with my touch -- Sports with her hand.

Enter Hermegild, Rhodolinda. Rhod. Is this Paradines Garden?


Herm. I Madam, and your Excellence may find
A sudden growth, in all that shadows us.

Rhod. Hah I look there!


Herm. What is 't your eyes so eagerly discern?


Rho. The King! How sportfull he is grown? how full
Of amarous game and dalliance?

Herm. I spy Valdaura there: but is that the King?


Rhod. Thou do inquire, t'affront my sight.


Albo. You must inform the Queen of this: Say, I
Am smooth, and musical, and trim, and that
I talk no more of war, nor drink.

Vald. It Is my duty to urge all circumstance,
That may credit you in her esteem.

Albo. It is a piece of courtship to salute
At parting -- Kisses her. exit Valdaura.

Rhod. Is that a safe conjunction in so hot a climate!


Albo. Hell and death! What raw discipline is this?
I should conduct her in her way -- Exit.

Rhod. So violent in pursuit of your game?
Let Us follow, Hermegild?

Herm. Not for all the Sun beholds in's journey
Through the world --

Rhod. Why? be nimble in thy speech!


Herm. It shows but silly art in industry,
To seek what you would not find.

Rhod. I pre thee grow particular! Do think
They purpose ought in the dark? or, was this same
But ceremonious form! such a greeting
As courtship will admit in public interuiew?

Herm. The King was never given to complement,
You know. As for Valdaura --

Rhod. What of her?


Herm. I think that she is chaste, but --

Rhod. Do not inuolue thy language thus
In periods of suspense.

Herm. I wish the King had not deserved to be
Deprived of your soft embraces, then
He might have kept his constitution tame.

Rhod. O, is it so?


Herm. It ill becomes the garb of Majesty,
To run thus neighing (like a riotous Horse)
After each female that he spies.

Rhod. Why, does he use it?


Herm. Madam, you question me, as if what I
Declare, were to your knowledge new and strange.

Rhod. By heaven and so it is.


Herm. O my officious Soul! must it be my crime
To give the information up? would I
Had known the King was here, you should have made
Another path, your walk.

Rhod. Hermegild, you did mis-spend that breath.


Herm. Alas, you had enough of grief before.
This addition will but show a tyranny
In fate and me. It works with hight, like new
Mighty wine! as if 't would split the Caske.

Rhod. O perjured, black, adulterous King! affront
My Fathers Ghost? Disturb his Ashes in
His tomb? When drunk with pride, he mocked me with
The gaudy title of a Queen, and now
I am become a stale for all his lust.
Valdaura too! so pure of heart (forsooth)
That she would blush to see her own hand, if naked:
They are proscribed. Know, Hermegild,
Our Country shall be free.

Herm. This is a noble rage! Heaven knows how I
Have grieved at your decay of soul. 'T was my
Sad fear, that all the angry sparks, which were
By Justice kindled in your breast, had been
Extinguished quite, now they grow up in flames.
You now like Phoebus show, when he has washed
His face with Dew. Your influence does infuse
A noble heat, such as would motion give
Unto aged Statues; make them pluck up
Their Mossie feet, and walk.

Rhod. Thou give my senses pride! What in this great
Business will thou do, to encourage hope?

Herm. I will mingle poison in my Ink, write
With a Ravens Quill! 't will be a fatal
Scripture: and shall charm like to those wise Iigs
The Sirens sing. Some must direction bear
TO our Pensioners, that in our Country rule
The stern Edicts of Law: some to Martial
Spirits, who with their able skill do lead
Those Regiments, the King has garrisoned
In The bordering Towns. They shall revolt, my Queen,
And seat thee in thy Fathers Chair: they must
Be drunk with the Elixir of my Gold.

Rhod. When first I chose thee out for this great work,
I saw thee through a Perspectiue reuerss'd;
For thou did seem much lesser then thou art.
Kneel, and be happy! -- Before
The Genius of this place, and what is here
Immortal, I vow to assist with my
Most active skill, all thy designements against
The King; and when my just hopes are finished,
To be thy Wife. Such as do perjured prove,
Lightning will surely clothe with subtle flames,
And they shall burn like glimmering Tapers
In dark hell: pale, and sickly as that fire
The Ghost of Nero makes.

Herm. This new ambition has so exalted
All my faculties, that I seem taller
Kneeling, then when I stood. But here with strict
Solemnity I vow to teach my Soul
New ways of merit: to revenge with stern,
And horrid wrath, the Kings proud tyranny.
To make your Greatness absolute, and high,
Or sink my self lower then a Plummet,
In the Baltic Sea. Should I not this perform,
The Stars would fall like Cinders on my head:
And winds imprisoned in the Earth; break forth,
In a wild ruin, and shake me into sand:
Then blow me in your Eyes; where if in tears
You drown me, I am entombed in Pearl: and then
My obsequies requite my death.

Rhod. Enough. I proffet to thy lip, the first
Taste of my affection -- They kiss, then rise.

Herm. 'T was moist and luscious! I will cherish this
Indeerement. Trees that tallest grow, do take
The deepest root; so I must first sink low
In The Earth; and after climb to fathom clouds.
First, praise her mimick laughter: when she weeps,
Then gather up with covetous regard
Her tears for scattered Pearl. Lick her spittle
From the ground: this disguised humility
Is both the swift, and safest way to pride --

Rhod. Sure, Hermegild, I have amazed thy sense,
Thou look like some ore-growne Fiend, chained up
Within a silent cave. Let us retire, and I Will
Discover how I Have practiced my revenge.

Herm. I project to make you mighty! You shall
Ascend my beauteous Sovereign, till you
Can reach the Moon, and pick those seeds of light
(The lesser Stars) from forth their wandering Spheres;
To wear as new imbroadery on your sleeue.
I long to hear your fatal Arts. Let Us mix
Our senses, and contriue. A woman's will,
Is not so strong in anger, as her skill.

Exeunt. Enter Paradine, a Gentleman and Page. Parad. You bring no letters from
Cracouia, Sir?


Gent. None, my Lord.


Parad. Nor from Sienna?


Gentlem. Your Lordship in those few, receives th'intire
Purpose of my journey.

Parad. Alas, my Countrymen! Captivity
Is hoarce, they have more griefs then tongue: they speak
Not loud enough to wake the ear of heaven.
Henceforth to Hermegild bid them direct
Their sighs; for I Am so dull, so weary, and
Neglectfull of ambitious ends, that I
Shall lose my strength, and favor with the King.

Gent. My noble Lord, our prayers will overrule that prophecy.


Par. You may expect, whilst I am able to
Perform. Boy, bespeake the Gentleman a free
And bounteous welcome. Sir, I will hasten
Your dispatch.

Exeunt Gent. Page. Enter Thesina. These. My Lord; I have tired my self in your
search.


Parad. The fair Thesina? You are rarely here
A visitant! Where have you left my Bride?

These. With the Queen, my Lord, who is so fond
Of her attendance, she will scarce allow her space
To wink in her own service, and to night
She lies within her chamber.

Par. Hah! so soon divided! Th'approching night
Should help to second our embraces.

These. You Are now to trust my Art. For Valdaura
Sent me to express her joy, in the delivery
Of this message. You shall lie with her to night.

Parad. How can my faith admit of this, since she
Is billited where the Queen sleeps?

These. I Will perfect my assurance; so you will please
To Obey what I inioyne. When you approach
The Sphere, where your bright Phoebe rules, do not
Occasion so much noise, as shall express
You living. You must not speak to her, nor
By your gestures, inuit her speech. All this
Perform, lest you should wake the Queen.

Parad. To be dumb in copulation! This is
A fine receipt to get a silent Girl.
But I shall prove obedient.

These. And (Sir) as y' are merciful to Ladies
(Ripe in growth) do not breathe too loud, lest we
In The neighboring room, ore-heare the harmony,
And sin in wishes.

Parad. Fear not, Thesina: I shall be temperate.


These. But you young soldiers are so boisterous,
You Will think anon, you are battering some Towne-wall.
Follow, Sir, I Will direct ye to the place,
Where, when the dark hour arriues, you must
Address your visit.

Exeunt omnes. Act the fourth. Scene first.
Enter Paradine dressing himself. Parad. The early Lark climbes higher then
his voice;
And whispers into Phoebus ear, a glad
Welcome; who smiles, and seems to prophecy
A gaudy day. Valdaura? Madame? speak,
Sweet Lady! or, if for concealment of
Our stolen rapture you silence still assume;
Yet rise, and bless my eyesight with thy fair
Presence. Come, and eclipse the envious day!
Not talk in the business, nor yet behold
The ground we till, as if we both were blind
And dumb. I Will no more by stealth engender;
Cripples are got thus. Kind Valdaura, speak!
A hand is thrust out between the Arras. See, a new day breaks in her hand!
These are
The rosy fingers of the Morn!
Pulls in Rhodolinda. Hah! the Queen! Valdaura! Bride, where art thou?
Looks in.
Rhod. In vain thou call'st. The Cannons Iron throat,
Although high mounted on you' Pinnacle,
Scarce could reach her ear. She Is in Pauia now,
Two Leagues situate from hence.

Parad. Thou art mysterious as an Oracle!


Rhod. I sent her thither, with pretense she should
Suruay the model of a Garden-worke.
But 'twas done, that Thesina might entice
With apter leisure, thy person to my bed.
At noone thy wife returns.

Parad. I Have mistaken then my warm embraces,
And sinned with thee the adulterous Queen!

Rhod. Thou have inioy'd what Albouine with all
His Royal sighs, his tears swollen bigger then
His eyes, despaired to merit.

Parad. O horror! gape, rugged Earth! Suck me in
Like some old Pyramid, whose ponderous limbs
Have been thy burden since the Flood, and now
Their own foundation sink. Could you make
No choice to quench your ravenous lust, but me?
Where were the broad-chin'd Zwitzers of your Guard?

Rhod. This ( Paradine) denotes a melting brain:
Which out of vulgar pity I forgive.
'Twas not the wanton taste of thy smooth limbs,
That could provoke me use this stratagem.
But love of my revenge. I Have strongly now
Engaged thy power, to kill the King.

Parad. Hah!


Rhod. Which do: and ere the Sun arrive ith'West;
Or with disheuell'd hair, my vestments torn
(As if I Would wandered through some Hathorne hedge)
I will approach the Tyrant, acquaint him
With this deed, and call my own adultery
Thy foul rape.

Parad. Who 's within there, hoa! My Hogs-head's empty.
I was not borne with so much brains, as would
Bedew a clout, that my cold Nosthrill stopped.
These Court smocks contain the very Devil.
Good heaven! how lean should I have made my heart
With studious thoughts, ere I the skill had reached
Of such a damned proiection.

Rhod. Collect thy scattered thoughts. What thy respect
To thy captived Country, could never charm thee
To revenge; be prompted to, by a kind
Affection of thy own dear life: revenge
Upon a Tyrant; One, that loves not me,
Nor thee; unless in speech: he has a smooth
Tongue, but a rugged heart. My Hermegild
Perceiues this truth, and can deliver it
With all the pride of knowledge.

Parad. Sure Time grows humerous with age: for things
Do differ much from the sincerenesse of
Their first creation. I will go weep
Till I am blind --

Rhod. Stay, Paradine. If thou do mock my hopes
With a slow motion in this just design,
Expect to find my anger fatal. I Will to
The King, and make a forfeiture of both
Our lives: but if with hardy sinnewes thou do march
To 's Throat, and slit the swarthy Pipe, I Will call
Thee then my Soldier. Besides thy Countries thanks,
Thou shall enjoy me for thy Queen, thy Wife,
Paradine.

Parad. New Arts, t'inuolue imagination!
How can this be, and my own wife strongly
Possessed of health and nature!

Rhod. Would thou embrace so eminent a bliss,
Without some danger to thy soul?

Parad. My memory betrays my skill! I know
There are a thousand ways to discard her,
From this foul, durty Orb.

Rhod. Alas, good easy Soul! She Will never be missed
Among the living. Know, Valdaura's false.

Parad. How! False!


Rhod. She is a open whore, and has taught me
This Art of lust.

Parad. More horrible then Hell!
Now furnish but my hands with an Hower-glasse,
And a long Dart, then seat me on some rotten
Monument for the picture of lean Death.
Make me the common Executioner
Of Nature. For ere long I shall become
The Sextons Pensioner to fill his Graves.
Valdaura false!

Rhod. Will thou thus leave me in a wild suspense,
Whether I shall find thy courage active?

Parad. For credit of your own humanity,
Do not infringe the vulgar privilege
Due to all hearts. Give me but leave to think;
And never doubt your business! Though I Am a young
Sinner; yet I shall soon inquire the way
To hell. It Is a continued thorow-fare
From this Climate thither. Or let me but
Delay my journey, till the triuiall rage
Of Christian Princes, meet in horri'd battle;
And then I shall have company enough:
Whole throngs to choke the throat of hell.
Good night, Madame.

Rhod. Ere yet the Morn 's fair cheek has lost her tears,
Do call it night?

Parad. To me it seems the Eye of heaven does wink.
All things are clothed in darkness, black as your
Design.

Rhod. Stay, for else my rage will not permit
That we survive another meeting.
If thou suspectst we are too loud, I will
Distill my thoughts into thy ear.

She hangs about his neck whispering. Enter Hermegild, Valdaura. Her. Though
t'assist my great hopes with opportune
Induction, I consented to this act:
Yet now I chide my fond spirits. For who
Dares trust the unruly appetite of youth?
What I decreed she should but taste, she may
Delight to surfeit on. It shows fulsome!
Here Is the precious medicine that must restore
Health to my hopes. Follow, gentle Lady.
You see 'em now?

Vald. Fall, fall, you thick and spungy clouds, until
You choke my sight. Do not my eyes begin
To bleed at this object?

Herm. Mark how close they meet: what variety
They use in lust: now she has melted quite his lips
With her hot breath, she hangs upon his ear.
Suruay their gestures still. Now they depart.

Exeunt Parad. Rhod. Vald. I Will summon all the hierarchy of heaven
To censure'em!

Herm. Who knows but they are gone to wallow in
Their active sweats again? Alas, pure soul!
You perceive these figures no Idea,
No object of the mind, or air incorporate
To cheat imaginary view.

Vald. Was this the cause, that made th'adulterous Queen
So strictly urge my swift journey unto
Pauia?

Herm. I, and the motive that prouok'd my soft
Conscience to hasten your return, that you
Might tell sad tales to heaven. For I
(That still was nourc'd upon a Sybils Lap)
Who with prophetic Milk did nourish me,
Can deeply guess at th'ominous portent
Of sin. I hate such loose-rein'd Stallions;
Such lascivious harmony in guilt.

Vald. So soon prove false? ere the celebration
Of our marriage Rites were fully ended?
Ere the Sun in's journey over this Region
Had twice beheld thus incorporate
By holy Church, and smiled upon the hopes
Of our increase?

Herm. I, there is a contemplation that would crack
Even heart strings made of wire. Hymen's Taper
But newly lighted, and he with rude breath
Blows from the quickening week the gaudy flame.
Then in the dark, thus wilfully misse-takes
Your bed, and riots 'tweene unlawful sheets.
Horror! horror!

Vald. O my sinister Stars! Thus I shall weep
Till I have emptied all my veins.

Herm. What should such white and harmless souls as we
Do crawling over this mountainous Earth? Alas,
We cannot drink, till we intoxicate
A Whale, nor surfeit, till our greazie cheeks
Do swell like Th'vdders of a Cow. Nor can
We kneel like warm Idolaters, unto
The rusty metal in a bag. We want
These helps to gain us honor and esteem.

Vald. I have a resolute intent to die,
And seek my Mansion in a purer Orb.

Herm. But ere you do begin your last walk, in the path
Invisible, some meritorious act
(Joined to the Charter of your Creed) should help
T'assure your future bliss.

Vald. O name it, ere my sorrow shall decay
Me strength: for I would mix ability
With will.

Herm. Your Lord (foul, and sinful as mortality
Can make him) Salamander-like, shall bathe
In blue fires, unless by sufferance here
On earth, he penetrate the hearth of heaven,
And soften their decree. It will be called
Your merit to revenge his crime, even with his death.

Vald. Would you have me kill him?

Herm. Since I am strict to virtue, I must needs
Be cruel unto vice. Let him not live
To increase his own guilt, and betray more
Ladies.

Vald. But shall I justice take from powerful Heaven,
And use it with such cruelty?

Herm. Believe me skill in sacred Oracles,
My piety to warrant the design
Nor will I fright the frailty of your Sex,
With horrid circumstance; he shall not bleed,
This Violl does contain a draught; which if
In's usual Beueridge powered, will coozen him
Of's leprous soul in his most quiet sleep.

Vald. I do suspect my courage!

Her. Take It, fair Pupil! think on it in your prayers.
If you but enjoy one single motion
That informs you it is good: do it with pride
And boldness masculine. Distinguish thus
Its operation. Four days must fully take
Their room ith'Kalendar, ere it effect
Our hopes. Before that hour ariue, he must
Be wrought to kill the King.

Aside. Vald. The Violl liquid Lead contains, or else
Some far more ponderous Metal: for whilst
I bear it thus, the wieght seems to infuse
A Palsy in my hand. I tremble like
A string touched on my Lute.

Herm. It is the Fiend, that would dehort you from
A pious act: trust not his whispring charms
But with a hardy courage, (more then is
Natural in thy modest Sex) proceed
To merit heaven. And now requite my forward zeal
To virtue, with concealment of my name,
And interest in this act. Let not the Queen
Nor your false Lord, know me the Perspectiue,
Through which you saw their ravenous lusts, but say,
The King revealed it to your ear. 'Twill make
Them wild, and doubt their own confedrate Bawds.
Think not I forbid it as a danger
To my person; for I affect not life.
So soft and easie-metald is my heart,
So well I love your sinful Lord, that when
I hear the surly Bell proclaim his death,
Like some new weand Babe, I shall dye crying.

Vald. Would you have him killed, yet love him thus?

Herm. I, but I love heaven better. Where, when
I come, troth I shall prove too fond a Saint.
Those Votaries that pray to me, shall find
Their business soon dispatched: here, let this key
Obscure ye in my Clozet until noone:
For then the Queen expects you will return
From Pauia. Farewell, the most abused,
But noblest Lady in the world.
Exeunt.
Enter Grimold (in an old rug gown, muffled with cloutes) Gondibert,
Vollterri. Gond. This is the privy Gallery: place the Chair,
Vollterri, where it needs must interrupt
The Kings passage.

Vollt. If thy disguize should fail us, Gondibert
And I must be attached for Impostors.

Grim. And then be crop-card too, like Irish Nags.
You Will both prove fleet in a Race, provided
The foe charge ye in the Rere. Seat me with
Tender motion -- This luxurious City
Has made me so rotten, I dare not walk
Ith'winde, lest I should be blown in pieces.

Enter Hermegild. Gond. Quick now counterfeit! Here comes Hermegild. Grimold
groans.
Groan out like a Bore.

Herm. Who ownes that sick clamor?


Gond. One (Sir) presented here to tempt compassion
From all charitable eyes.

Vollt. Want has betrayed him to hunger, hunger
To this disease.

Grim. O, O, O, the Crampe! the Crampe!


Herm. Where, Sir?


Grim. In my stomach.


Herm. That Is indeed a clear symptom of famine.


Grim. I Have eaten nothing this month but raw air,
And that gives but weak nourishment to age.

Herm. It is my wonder, in a State so rich
As ours, a climate still befriended thus
By nature (flourishing with hopeful Springs,
And Summers chok'd with wealth) a Soldier should
Be forced to make his hunger a disease.
A prodigy unparalleled, that want
Should e're occasion such a dangerous fast.
Wast not devotion made him thus abstain
From meat?

Grim. Pure want, Sir, I know small devotion, I.
For though I fast much, I pray as little
As most Christians of my Calling. Groans again.

Herm. He must be sent unto some Hospital,
There eat warmth broths, till he recover health:
And then I will procure him from the State
Some thrifty pension, to maintain the short
Remainder of his life in sober works.
He shall sing Hymns, and pray to the kind Saints
In a blue gown.

Grim. Alas, Sir, I am grown so hoarce, the Saints
Can hardly hear my Orizons.

Gond. He will prove (my Lord) a chargeable Cure:
For the Physicions do prescribe him naught
For medicine, but Aurum-Palpabile.

Grim. The Elixir of Gold would surely much
Assuage the grief in my stomach -- Groans.

Herm. He must needs be hungry, that like th'Ostridge
Can digest Metal.

Vollt. The King for his last services remains
His debtor six thousand Ducats. My Lord,
You shall express much charity, if you
Procure it in a sudden payment. The same will
Defray his sickness charge, and maintain him
Well in's health.

Gond. Your Lordship shall engage us then to drown
Your chief Title in the best Grape. We Will drink
Your health, until we raise the price of wine.

Herm. Let him continue there his seat. Perhaps
They (whom I shall straight conduct this way)
Will so commiserate his want, that he
Will soon relieue't, though he increase his own.
There is some Art in this, which I must needs
Discover, or forfeit my pains. Exit.

Gond. The Fiend is gone!


Grimold rises. Grim. Will all the vast accruements I project
From this disguize, convert into
The slender purchase of an Hospital?

Vollt. Thou turn Votary?


Gond. He Will pray in no language but the High Dutch,
The angry Tongue, which seems to threaten more,
Then implore.

Grim. Six thousand Ducats for a Mansion in
An hospital, no bigger then a coffin:
Where like Carthusians, we must feed, not to
Prevent hunger, but to hinder lust. Princes
May easily pay their debts, when they enforce
Their Creditors to buy Titles and Place
At their own rates.

Vollt. Hark! there is somebody approaching hither.
It Is no safe game to sport with Kings. I Will be gone.

Gond. Grimold, now trust to your own performance,
I may have use for my ears, I would not
Yet leave them in the Pillory.

Exeunt Gond. Vollt. Grim. Gondibert, Vollterri! forsake the storm
Ere ye are wet? Weezels! Monkeys! Dogs!

Drops down in 's Chair. Enter Albouine, Hermegild, Thesina. Herm. Madame,
you are now fully satisfied
Ith'intention of this visit. I wish
You Would be as free, and sportiue with him, as
Your modesty will give you leave.

These. Trust my obedience, and my skill, Sir.


Albo. He looks like a watchman in that Rugge.


Herm. Your Majesty receives new cause to doubt
The truth of his disease, from my Servants
Information. Who swears, this very Morn
He has been seen in all the violence
Of drink, and in the Burdelli too. For, Sir,
Though he be old, he is given much to propagation.

Albo. Let us retire 'tweene th'Arras, and we
Shall share, ith'whole discovery. He groans.

These. Alas, who is it, that so prouokes the tongue
Of pity!

Grim. An old soldier of the Kings --

These. Hah! Captain Grimold! how come you thus
Imprisoned in a Chair? have you the Gowte?

Grim. I am not rich enough t'inioy the Gowte.


These. What name then do you give to your disease!


Grim. The Physicions call it famine.


These. How? Heaven secure the State! I hope we are
Not guilty of a sin so horrible,
To deny a Soldier fit materials
For conservation of his life.

Grim. It Is fourteen days since I have had a just
Occasion but to pick my teeth.

These. Alas the day!


Grim. Each of my thighs are dried, and hardened like
An old West-Falia Flitch. All m'interals
Are shrunk up. My bladder is no bigger then
A Pigs: and were my lean jaws vnmuffled,
You should see me mumpe, like a Matrone that
Had lost her teeth.

Th^s. O cruel stars! --


Grim. Hah! Does she weep?


These. Could you on this wide Earth, find no object
For your fury, but brave Grimold? Or is it
Because you saw, it was my chief virtue
To affect a Soldier?

Grim. If she should be in earnest now?


These. I hope you do not utterly despair of life?


Grim. I may linger out a score of years, or so;
But I cannot live long.

These. Since you are marked for sudden death, cold death
That silenceth all tongues: and since this place
Is so secure from neighboring ears, I will
Disclose, what until now my modesty
Enforced me to conceal.

Grim. I shall forget to counterfeit!


These. Know, Sir, that I have loved you long; loved you
With soft and tender passion.

Grim. O Rogue! What do I like the picture
Of VVinter, in this withered habit? I must
Recover my health. But alas, Madame,
Do not deride his destiny, that now
Is taking flight to reach that place, where your
Best Star inhabits, and shall have power
To tell loud tales: if you prove thus cruel.
How could you e're love me? I have been old,
Even since your first original growth.

These. But if you will permit, I may express
A little vanity in love, I can
Inform you, Sir, how much we Ladies prize
Age before Youth in Lovers. Old men are
Discreet sinners, and offend with silence.
But young men, when the game is done, do crow
Like pregnant Cocks: boast to the world their strength
In folly. Besides (Sir) an authentic
Lady says in her Problemes thus:
The Young and slender Graft is easly broke,
But who can shake, or bruise the aged Oak?

Albo. A rare Adage.


Herm. The Lady Author sure, is o'th'Moddernes.


Grim. My joy is turned to a disease; it makes
Me speechless! I ever thought these Court-Tits
Were much taken with my smooth looks; but that
Their modesty still kept them from my reach.
Foolish modesty! It has hindered my
Preferment much for since I left the Camp,
I have been in love with some three hundred
Of Them, yet never durst lay claim to one.
Vh! vh! If Heaven should so affect
Our mutual appetites, as to restore
My health, would you continue still to doat
Upon an old sinner?

These. O, I should grow more fond; preserve you long
Alive with zealous Orizons!

Grim. Las! poor Maulkin! She Is caught! I shall grow rich.
For I have heard, these Court-Ladies allow
Large pensions to their Paramors. Help! help!
To move me higher in my seat --

She takes him by the hand, he rises. These. Bless us! me thinks, Sir, you
begin to use
Your legs with active strength.

Herm. A precious Ape!


Albo. He will show fine tricks anon!


Grim. Some strange influence from your touch, has given
A second Youth unto my faculties:
Before, I seemed to crawle like to a Crab:
Now my joints grow supple, as if I were
Provided for a Race. This hand inspires my strength --

Enter Cunymond, Frollo, Conrade. Cuny. I have a Key, will give us passage here
to th'Park!


These. Vnhand me, Sir, for I shall forfeit all
My fame else. They Will think, I am immodest --

He spies them, then drops down in's Chair. Conrad. Captain Grimold!


Frollo. He sits like a Witch, sailing in a sieve.


Cuny. Hah! sick! Gentlemen, avoid the windy side,
Lest he infect ye with his breath. I know
His disease, and whence it came, shortly
You Will see him wear a Curtain sore his Nose;
That Is now the newest fashion that came from Paris.

Frollo. I, it is it: he has them growing on his
Temples here -- They Will shortly be as big
As Turnips.

Conrad. He must to Roterdam, to the fat Doctor there,
And be stewed in a Stoue, until he spit
His venom out.

Cuny. And whilst you are in physic (Captain)
You fare like Oberon. It Is a very
Slender diet. The lean thigh of a Waspe
To dinner; and some two or three of your
Own penitent tears for your beueridge.

Grim. I Have but so much breath left, as would make up
A short prayer to secure my last iaunt:
Yet I will spend it in a hearty curse
For your dear sakes.

Cuny. March on! If he do find himself agrieu'd,
Let him send me a challenge after his death;
And I will meet him, In The Elizian Fields.

Exeunt Cunimond, Conrade, Frollo. Grim. I will eat that Cunymond!


Albo. How prompt the Slave is, in 's metamorphosis?


Herm. To him again, Madame?


These. Alas, dear Captain, what bodily hope
Can a young Lady have of your performance,
That fall so soon in a relapse?

Grim. When you deprived me of your hand, you took
Away my strength and heat: touch me again,
And I shall walk stiff as Cacus. She lifts him up.

These. Take leisure in your motion, Sir.


Grim. Look, Madame. I creep as other mortal do,
On the surface of the Earth --

These. Me thinks you stand upright too.


Grim. I, a Ladies warm hand will make it stand.
A little physic from your Lip, and then
My cure is quite finished -- Hem! Sure this was
Nestors receipt to recover his Youth. Hem! --

These. I shall be fainted for this miracle.


Grim. I am as wholesome as a Nut, and have
As proud flesh about me, as the youngest
Gamester of 'em all.

These. Fie, Sir!


Grim. If this heat continue, I must even call
For a Iulip, or sow my wild Oats
In the next soil I meet.

These. Your tongue is blister'd*


Grimo. When shall we solace our bodies?


These. Your meaning, Sir?


Grim. I mean in the dark. Speak, pretty Finch with the
Green tail? Hah! Must we kiss close, and often?
Wriggle up and down like young Eeles --

Hermegild comes behind him, and pulls him by the arm. Her. Captain, I have
brought the King here to view,
And to commiserate your lean sickness,
And your feeble wants.

Albo. Thou old ravenous Goat!


Herm. He looks now like an Alchymist, that is
Broyling o'red Herrings.

These. Or like the brazen head, when 'twas about
To speak -- He takes the King aside.

Grim. You mean to hang me now!


Albo. Have thou deserved an easier sentence?


Grim. When I am dead, then all my debts are paid.
For I leave small Lands and Chattels behind me.
But hark ye (my Liege) you may pay your debts
In your life time, so deprive your Executor
Of a trouble.

Albo. O what a triuiall exit shall I make
From my own world? for when I die, I die
For love.

Grim. And I for lechery. Sir, I would feign
Depart in quiet like other young Chrysomes:
Feign make all even between the world and me.
I beseech your Highness discharge my areres
For my last service in Hungary,
Then hang me when you please.

Herm. Captain, I will be a Suitor for your reprieue.
You shall only forfeit what his Grace owes you;
And then your life's secured.

Grimold kneeles. Grim. I will rather die twice. O Sir* pay me
Six thousand Ducats, and then proclaim
Your sentence here aloud. I would feign dye
Merrily. I have not been drunk at my own charge
This four months.

Enter Rhodolinda. Albo. Hermegild, iterate now thy sweet raptures.
Speak to her; for, by the gentle carriage of
Her eyes, I do perceive she 'gins to penetrate.

These. Away Captain! be gone whilst you are yet
Mortal. I have much power with Hermegild,
And will upon your patient sufferance
Redeem my credit with your thoughts. Quick then,
Move with silence.

Exeunt Grim. These. Herm. Madame, the feathered Arrow sings in the Air,
Ere it ariue where it must wound; so this
Sweet harmony, I 'ld have you counterfeit,
But tempts him to security in sleep,
Before his death.

Albo. I Am much obliged to that good soul.


Herm. True, my Royal Lady! yet now peruse
The greatness of his being* his fate in battles,
And by your own remembrance be informed
Of our captivity.

Albo. Honest Hermegild?


Rhod. He was too cruel to a nature so
Remiss, and timorous as mine?

Herm. Alas, this crime he expiats with sighs
So hot, that they would sindge his Royal Beard,
Did not his numerous tears opportunely drop,
To quench the flame.

Albo. That Is complement!


Herm. These angry frowns upon your brows make you
Appear aged.

Rhod. Could I assure my heart; he would no more
Triumph over my dear Fathers memory;
I then should meet his love with too much passion.

Albo. When I am more my Chronicle, or speak
My deeds with pride, may my tongue blister, till't
Infect my breath with Epidemick-heate.

Herm. You hear his vows? -- Seem fond. If you can shead
A tear, or two, the more to credit this
Atonement, 'twill much advantage our pretense.
Sir, now enjoy what your indulgent grief
Merits to keep, even from the hands of death.
Good heart, see how she weeps?

King kisses her. Albo. I Am soon overcome in this soft war. God's Death all
Can thaw but I. I never wept, but when
Th'vnruly wind blew in my eyes; and it is
No argument for stern battle: else I
Would fight. To testify the joy my soul
Conceiues, I Will drink --

Herm. Sir, you neglect to use her like a Lover;
With amorous gestures.

Albo. Fill me a Bowl with Negro's blood, congealed
Even into Livers! Tell her, Hermegild,
I Will swallow Tar, to celebrate her health!

Herm. Sir, this dull Germane phrase, makes her suspect
Your temperance. Mark how she trembles.

Albo. I must go learn to complement. Do hear?
Is It fit I proffer her to mingle limbs -- Thou know --

Herm. Sir, not to night. That was a serious suit
She bade me make, when first she purposed this
Atonement.

Albo. I do obey. Though I have thoughts would feign
Persuade me to rebellion.

Exeunt Albo. Rhod. Herm. This was a subtle caution! else my hopes
Had twice been Cuckolded. Let Them revel
With their salt Lips. The other sport is fulsome.
But Paradine disturbes my sleep: he is young,
Enriched with all the fertile strength of nature:
And needs must prove more riotous in sin,
Then I. My dark practice, and use
Of silent contemplation; has made
My marrow thin and black; like Ink within
My bones. I want the prompt alacrity. The Queen
Has tasted him, and may (perhaps) still to
Possess his lust; remove Valdaura from
This foggy Soil; then make him Lord of all
My hopes. This to prevent, I have decreed,
Valdaura first shall minister his death.
I u'e taught her too; to insinnuate to his Creed,
That the King told her of 's adulterous lust;
Good, for when he thinks the King does know that guilt,
His own safety then, will soon provoke him
Hasten our prodigious murder. This may
Be done, before the Poison operate
In dire effect; for that delays its power;
Till fourscore hours expire their course: which then
No Antidote, nor humane skill resists.
Mount, mount my thoughts, that I may tread on Kings,
Or if I chance to fall, thus soaring high;
I melt like Icarus, in the Suns Eye. Exit.

Enter Paradine, and his Page. Par. The Sun does melt us with his scorching
beams.
Go fill my usual Beuiridge: I Will drink
Till I am cold. Exit Page.
The constitution of my Soul, agrees
Not with this Climate. I grow weary
Of mortality. Even in my first growth
(Since my Corselet was my load) I have took
My breeding in the Camp; where had I still
Remained a dull practike soldier, and nere seen
A Woman, nor the Court, I might have had
Some hope, to gain by faith, but now I reach
At wild despair. Enter Page with a Bowl.

Page. My Lady, Sir, commends her love, and this
To your acceptance; she made the mixture
With her own hands.

Par. The Queen prescribed this hour for her return.
That she grows black with sin, peruerts my sense,
I must seem not to know it. Say, I greet her health- drinks.

Exit Page. Enter Valdaura in close mourning. Parad. Hah! why, Valdaura, do
thou appear like
A funeral night, in dark, and swarthy weeds!

Valdau. I mourn for you, since you must hasten your
Eternal absence now from me, and all
That else are mortal.

Par. Speak things, that are less dangerous to my sense.
This wonder will distract me.

Vald. Ere winged Time, shall with swift motion add
Another hour, to the life of this sick day;
Thou shall begin thy last sleep.

Parad. A pale Swanne has sung my Dirge! O fatal
Music! but how comes this intelligence
To Ears of flesh and blood? have you of late
Been gossiping with the grim Stygian Dames,
And seen their Cisers gall my vital Thread?
For to my own sense I need no Physic.
My faculties enjoy that pleasant strength
Which appertains to youth and temperance;
Why should I yet die?

Vald. How, Paradine? Art thou so full of guilt,
(Most vlcerous and deformed) yet think to keep
Thy life at Natures charge, to exist till age
Makes thee a Cripple: then in thy bed,
(Like some good old Patriarch) thy soul dismiss
With a divine rapture? No, no; just Heaven
Prouides more rash and horrid deaths for such,
As in adultery bathe their silken limbs.

Parad. Hah!


Vald. I know thy guilt; the King has told me all.
'Twas wondrous strange! Our vows but new arrived
In heaven, that did obliege our mutual Faiths
In love: and thou with savage lust to break them?
Though grief has much consumed my tears, yet I
Have some still left to express my pity.

Parad. My adultery already known, both to
The King and her? why, these are prodigies
Indeed. How sin imboldens the aspect!
She does accuse me for a guilt, which yet
Remains vnpardon'd in her self. Mine was
A dire mistake: but hers -- that must be known,
And then her veins shall weep.

Vald. You are poisoned, Paradine.


Parad. With that cold draught you sent me now in the Bowl?


Vald. The Vipers vomit, nor the blue steame,
Which fat Toades do breathe in tired motion,
Bears not such a dangerous enmity
Against humane Nature, as that you drunk.

Parad. Stay! Me thinks I feel no insurrection
In my blood, nor need an Iron Corselet
To contain my flesh; sure it swells not yet.

Vald. It takes a subtle leisure to disperse
Through all your Organs, and your Arteries,
That it may strait with abler violence
Consume your strength.

Parad. And then I shall look goggle-ey'd! and stretch
In The cheeks, till my face show like a Pompeon,
Round and yellow?

Vald. Far, far more deformed.


Par. Will It make my eyes start from my skull, or drop
Like bullets at my feet? Speak, shall I foam
At mouth like some young Courser, that is hot
And angry with his bit?

Vald. Not the first Chaos was so ugly and
Confused, as you will appear, when this distilment works.

Parad. Yet I forgive you all, even from my heart:
Whilst my cogitations now are sober,
And can distinguish things with pregnant sense.
I do applaude this cruel benefit.
These subtle vanities of Court have tired
My observation. I was nourc'd within
Some Armory, and took a proud delight
In active War; but since our Drums have ceased
Their noble clamor, I find no business
Upon Earth for me; it is fit I grow immortal.

Vald. I did not think, his fancy, at this news,
Could prove so temperate.

Par. To sleep in cold earth, whilst my dead neighbor
Never at my Coffin knocks, to inquire my health,
By way of visit: for all are silent
In the grave. Harsh destiny! Such as I
Could never expect from thee, Valdaura.

Vald. My nature you shall find much different,
From what your knowledge heretofore discerned.
I have contrived another way to punish
Thy adulterous heat.

Par. You find my sufferance tame enough. Publish all!


Vald. To meet your sin with apt revenge, I Am grown
A foul loose whore.

Par. Hah! contain thy speech. Express but so much
Modesty, as may secure thy life: for
My death does not concern my rage so much,
As this foul murder of thy fame.

Vald. It Is truth: and I confirm't with pride.


Par. Oh, oh! these are the Mandrakes groans (fatal!)
For whosoever hears them, straight incounters death.
Now smile (sweet Heaven) since thus I but return
Her own justice. For my adulterous act,
She takes my life, and shall I let that bold
Adulteress live? -- Stabs her with 's Poniard.

Vald. Oh, oh! Hold, hold! Leave me a little breath
To use in prayer.

Parad. I am not fraught with devils spleen; I would
Not hurt thy soul: here solitary sit,
Whilst I send up an humble sacrifice,
That shall bespeake a pardon for thy crime,
Ere thou ariue near heaven. Puts her in a Chair.

Vald. Dare you trust my last utterance?


Par. O speak, ere thou do catch an everlasting cold,
And shall be heard no more.

Vald. I am not false unto your bed: I never
In act, nor guilty thought, did violate
My Marriage vows.

Parad. Art thou not a Whore?


Vald. No Vestall that preserved with quickening oil,
The sacred flame, was in her chastity
More cold, more timorous then I: nor are
You poisoned.

Parad. Hah! was not that a mixture of distilled
Venom, which I drunk?

Vald. 'Twas healthful, as the blood of Grapes to age,
And all your faculties do still preserve
Their wonted harmony.

Parad. Sweet spirit, do not riddle thus with Heaven,
Nor sport thy soul away. Why did accuse
Thy self of stern murder, and pernicious lust;
Yet art thus clear from both?

Vald. 'Twas to inrage your violence, with hope
To make you soon my executioner.
For hearing you were false, I found no joy
In life: your hand has sealed my wishes.

Par. New Arts to increase my wonder: I Am orereach'd,
Where I thought my nature was most skillful!
Even in love! O stay: had not distraction
Ceaz'd my memory; I should at first have told you
The mistake, by which the sinful Queen
And Hermegild betrayed my chaste Honor.

Vald. Named you Hermegild, guilty of that sin?
He Is then a horrid hypocrite: he did
Entice me by a poisonous practice to
Contriue your death, but found my nature loyal.

Parad. New wonders still!


Vald. I feel the frozen hand of death. Oh! oh! oh!


Parad. Valdaura! Bride! Onoble Girl!


Vald. Mercy! mercy!


She dies. Parad. Already turned a Ghost! There Is rare music
Now in heaven, since thou art gone to increase
The sacred Quire. I may behold thee in
The purple sky, mixed there with other Stars,
But never on this soil again. Be this
Thy Tomb awhile. The Curtains softly drawn --
Hermegild treacherous! with poison too?
That was her word. It Is fit I seem to have drunk
The medicine up. Good! The rough young Soldier
May spy at last these spirits of the Court,
That walk in artificial clouds: or if
Their high conceptions soar above my reach,
Yet they have mortal hearts; such as our own
Country steel, may with feeble motion prick,
Prick till they groan: for I have now decreed,
Whom my dull sense cannot subdue, shall bleed. Exit.

Act the fifth. Scene first.
Enter Hermegild, Thesina, Paradine, Rhodolinda. These. Shall I belie my own
silence?


Her. Be sudden in your speech! confirm my words:
Then dispose even of my wealth and person.
I will consent to matrimony; make
Any use of this new interest.

These. Sir, you will forget my merit in this danger?


Herm. Never. -- My Lord, I have discovered all.
See, how aguish her guilt has made her.
How she trembles like a frosty Russian
On a hill. Nay, Lady, nere scatter thus
Your wild looks. Confess the truth, and you will gain
Mercy. Valdaura (whose Soul Heaven keep
From purging fires) has told her Lord; the King
Knows of his wanton stealth with our good Queen.
You were the Instrument that betrayed him
To th'mistake, and whose secrecy to doubt
But yours, our reason cannot yet inform us.

These. Thus kneeling, I confess with penitence,
'T was I revealed it to the King.

Rhod. Tear forth her eyes, and let her then grope out
Her way to hell --

Herm. Stay, dear Madame!


Rhod. Paradine is poisoned, who knows, but she
Does amply share in that guilt too?

Herm. At my humble suit, contain your fury!
We shall discover all. My noble Lord,
It is a grief that will deprive my life
Of many years, to think, I Am held by your
Suspect, an Agent in that practice.

Parad. I have revealed the evidence, that does
Persuade my Creed.

Her. What, Lady, do you know of this? -- Speak with
Courage, I am your safety.

These. I saw the King reach to Valdaura's hand
A poisonous violl; and with religious hints,
Taught her to mix it in her husbands draught.

Parad. Hah!


Herm. Persist in my instructions! Aside.


These. 'T was that night when he enjoyed her person --

Parad. Inioy'd her! how?


These. As you inioy'd the Queen.


Parad. Heaven! will these miracles never cease?


Rhod. I shall convert to stone!


Herm. Now retire, Thesina, till I have begged
Your free restorement to the Queene's mercy.

These. My Lord, you will not forget your kind promise
Of matrimony.

Herm. I Have naught else, to trouble my remembrance.
Away, Away!

Exit Thesina. Rhod. What did remain suspense, is here confirmed:
My forehead feels as rugged now as his.

Herm. Now Sir, y'haue heard such real circumstance,
As needs must settle your belief, and free
My heart, from your unkind dislike.

Par. Valdaura's damned! she howles so loud, that she
Disturbes all hell! O perjured Whore!

Rhod. Now Paradine! Instruct thy self with thoughts.
Is It evident he ever could affect
Thy person with sincere dotage, yet thus
Betray thy strength in thy Fort? Where thy
Honor still stood sentinel?

Herm. I have other motives to teach you doubt
His loyalty in love. Which my fond heart
Cannot conceal, though it would advantage much
My own profit. He has of late, hung thus --
Upon my neck; until his amorous weight
Became my burden: and then lay slabbering over
My lips; like some rhumatick Babe. This sport
My serious brain abhorred. 'Twas my wonder
(Since you are called his Minion) he could ere
Affect my look. I that am like coffing
Winter, old, and froward; you the darling
Of the lusty Spring.

Rho. Speak, is that Bag, that should contain thy Gall,
Shrunk up; have thou nothing bitter in thee?
Thou art far, far more opportunely stored
With time and place for thy revenge, then we.
In The middle age of day; when the bright Sun
Most powerfully does warm the world; in thy
Secret Clozet he takes his usual sleep.
Go, drill his heart! and make the Couch whereon
He lies, his easy monument.

Herm. And then enjoy a Queen, with all that does
Belong to her atchieuement, or her birth.
As for my services, they merit no
Reward. I know my own creation much
Unfit for Court affairs. If you but wrap
Me in a shirt of hair, then seat me in
A dark and gloomy Cell, where I may tumble over
Some deep voluminous Rabbin, you make
Me safe, and happy.

Rhod. Do It, Paradine! and Fame no Trumpet then
Shall need to speak thy praise. Thy Country will
Afford thee power to sanctify the chief
Of The days within our Calendar.

Herm. And to thy memory high Statues build,
'Bout which our Noblest virgins once a year
Shall dance in Circles, and sing, until they make
The Marble move, like to those loose Quarries;
Which ore-heard Orpheus and his Harp. Or if
These cannot inspire heroique fury,
Yet argue thus; you knew his Bed, but by
Mistake; which was our guilt, not yours; and for
Our Countries benefit contrived. But he
Defiled your sheets in the salt pride of lust.
Horror! this would incense the temperate Dove;
Turn all his moisture into gall; teach him
To wear spurs on his heels, and make him fierce
In Duel, as a British Cock.

Parad. Fire! fire! and warm blood! Exit.

Herm. Follow, follow him, my dear Sovereign!
Add new heat unto his rage. And do you hear!
Since he is poisoned, 'twere most fit, some learned
Physicion, did endeavor to secure
His health.

Rhod. I heard him say, he is already furnished
With a powerful medicine.

Herm. Should you now forget your Royal promise,
I lose all my industrious merit,
And remain a sacrifice to love.

Rhod. Do thou grow jealous?


Herm. Valdaura now is seuer'd from her Soul:
And Paradine is abler in delights
Of Youth, more moist and amorous then I.

Rhod. Away fool! I seal thy safety with my lip. exit.


Herm. Thus Nurces hush their froward babes asleep.
Shortly she will present me with a Corall-club,
A Whistle strung with Bells. These femall Arts
Can never my dark authenticke practice cheat.
Paradine must die! So I still secure
My hopes. When that sad hour arriues,
Wherein the poisonous draught must work,
No charmed medicine can resist its strength.
I hug my Genius! 'T was a subtle reach,
To tell him, that the King has horned his brow:
For that will more incense his wrath, and aggrauate
The Queens revenge. The weight I bear, does make
My motion slow: slow as the Snaile I tread,
Who travails with his tenement on 's head. Exit.

Enter Grimold in new Clothes, Gondibert, Vollterri. Gond. The King has paid
him all 's arreres.


Vollt. 'T was by Thesina's suit to Hermegild:
The Snake has cast his skin too now.

Grim. I, Sir, it is a poor Snake that cannot cast,
His skin once in a Summer.

Enter Cunymond, Conrade, Frollo. Cun. 'Slight, here is Grimold! Did not thou
say he was dead?


Conr. But I have heard since, his ghost walks.


Frol. Look! 't has found the hidden treasure then, which
Made it walk; for the Ghost has bought it self
New clothes.

Grimo. Nay, nay, stay, Gentlemen! Let us forget
Old quarrels, then end our new acquaintance.
We are for the Country now. I Will but tell ye
A few of your faults, and leave the amendment
To your own leasures: but you all think
You Are wiser then I.

Cuny. We should abuse our judgments else.


Grim. Mark! This is a new Court-thrift: when you are
Loath to maintain flatterers, you publish
Your selves with your own praise. Lay your fingers
Here -- Not a word, lest I return ye a blow.
I know ye cannot speak without a complement.

Vollt. They use it in their prayers, they.


Gond. Cunymond, in one single complement
So much wasted his Lungs, that I was feign
To call for Aqua vita to recover
His breath.

Grim. I Have heard you have transported from Paris
The Geometrical cringe, and the Art
Of numbering the hairs upon your chins.

Vollt. And of starching your Beards.


Gond. Yes, and of perfuming your very shadows.


Grim. And they say, it is your custom to sleep
In Pomatum Masks.

Vollt. And that you paint your pretty Vis'gnomies.


Grim. Yes, and color them so red, that you seem
To blush more, then the Sign of the Kings head
Before a Country Inn.

Gond. Y'abuse Astrology too; for you clip
Black-Taffeta into Stars; and for a foil
To your beauty; fix 'em in several Regions
Of your face.

Gri. Which makes it look, like the picture of Doomes-day;
When all the Planets are darkened.

Vollt. Nay, nay, stay awhile!


Grim. Leave off your ijgging motion, when you mix
Your selves in a salute; your bodies seem
To dance upon your knees. You pinion up
Your Elbowes thus: -- like Pullets trust upon
A spit. Then wreath your Hammes in thus; and move
With a discreet leisure, as if you meant
To number all the Pibbles in the street.
And then you fleere, as if y' had washed your gummes
In vinegar. This you admire for gesture
Of the newest fashion. I say, it is skiruy!
For he that greets a Lady so, does look
Like a Sope-boyler, upon a Close-stoole.

Vollt. If you will take Physic for your soules-health,
Retire into that part of the Kingdom
Which lies farthest from France.

Gond. He counsels well: for the French air has made
Many of our Gentry drunk.

Gri. And now move hence; but with your lips sowed up,
For fear of a complement. You two shall strait
Take horse with me, and be billited in
My Quarter. Stay, Gentlemen! One word more!
This is a hot Climate: when you must needs
Marry to increase your Tribe, your best way
Is to go a wooing in the City:
For certain rich widows there, love Court-fooles;
And use to play with their bables.

Exeunt omnes. A Canopy is drawn, the King is discovered sleeping over papers:
enter Paradine with his sword drawn. Parad. To make him bleed, and leave his
arteries
(Where the delighted spirits walk) shrunk up,
Until they curle with heat. The withered frame
Strait to convert to dust. Then the vmerous wind,
To fan it over the world. Speak, just Heaven!
Is this fit usage for a King? Cassius
Was rash: perhaps to gain noise at's funeral;
Or in 's Elizian fields; beneath a pleasant Hedge
To tell some prattling ghost what he had done --
Hah! but Brutus, noble Brutus! the pride
Of Arts and War: so temperate, his soul
Was more harmonious then the Spheres. Instruct
(Heroique Lord) thy young Pupil! Why did
The mighty Caesar fall, by thy cold wrath?
All silent as the night! He sleeps: before
Him too, those papers that concern my house
Affairs; and my Official rule in State.
Here he comments on my Letters! here with
Thrifty documents limits my expense.
Can this indulgent care be counterfeit?
And merely carry a pretense of love? he made
My wife a black adulteress. O horror!
Yet who knows, but 'twas rather his revenge,
Then lust; a furious riot, after that
He knew I whor'd his Queen --
He blinds his own face with a scarf, sheathes his sword, and then kneeles.
Sir! My Lord the King! Sir!

Albo. Hah! Paradine! What witty emblem's this?
The more to certify thy love, do thou
Appear blind.

Parad. O Sir, do not mock my penitence, nor seem
Thus to disguize the knowledge of that crime,
Which has defiled my modest blood, and makes
Me now ashamed to encounter with your eyes.

Albo. He is drunk! Maudlin drunk!


Parad. Sir, I could creep alive into my Tomb,
And mix society with Ghosts, whilst I
Have yet warm motion left, could I but hide
My guilt from your perspicuous sight.

Albo. By heaven drunk with Cider, or with thin Beer;
That looks like the urine of a Babe: I Am sure
The Corsicke Grape infuseth no
Such whining passion.

Par. Those immateriall powers, that see the thoughts of men,
When growing in their hearts, can witness I
Abused your Royal bed, but by a dire
Mistake.

Albo. Hah!


Parad. Your black adulterous Queen betrayed
Me to her lust by wicked Arts.

Albo. This is a sober passion, but implies
Something that is horrid.

Parad. Had not heroique war taught me to affect
No rage, but noble; she and Hermegild
Had enticed me now to lengthen this your sleep,
Until the day of general accounts.

Alb. Suspect must now be rash. Make your face known!
Snatches off his Scarf. He blushes like a Bride; whom through her thin
Curtains, the peeping Sun beholds in soft
Skirmish with her Lord. I must counterfeit,
And seem to know all. Paradine, 'twas far
From my conjecture, that a heart so much
Obliged unto my love as thine, should wrong
My Honor in a sense, which but to mould
In words would teach my tongue to stammer, and
Deafen all that hear it.

Parad. Thunder and sulpherous fire snatch my cold limbs
From this dull earth. Sir, whilst my soul affords
Me reason, and can direct me unto whom
My true allegiance is a debt, kill me!
When I am mad, I shall forget all duty,
And refuse to obey your Royal Charter.
Thrust your good Sword home, till my heart shall kiss
Your Hilts. Are you so slow in justice? Think,
How by a dark mistake, I whor'd your Queen:
Whor'd your Queen! O prodigious phrase!

Albo. Houle, meager Wolves! empty Tigers! let the hoarce
Thracian Bull bellow, till he rent his throat;
And the hot mountaine-Lion rore, until
Their clamor wake the dead. The resurrection
Is too long delayed, since we want horror
To celebrate this news. Good! I have now
Decreed it. Draw thy bright weapon! --

Parad. For what dire use?


Albo. That we may meet in single battle here,
And struggle till we want our Souls.

Parad. Though this high inticement charms my blood, like
The music of the Drum. Yet my remembrance
Calls you King; My Royal Master. I would
Not join rebellion and ingratitude
To the prolixe number of my sins.

Albo. O fond, indulgent Boy! I mourn at this
Decay of thy humanity and sense.
Does it become my great being, and my
Glorious name in story, to offend
Without resistance? Draw: and be nimble
In thy motion --

Parad. I dare not so disgrace my Religion,
And my love.

Albo. It Is time that I were dead, for I shall else
Outliue my chief prerogative. I have
Forgot how to command. Vnsheath thy Sword!
Or this breach of Duty shall teach me think,
I never inioy'd thy real love, and 'twas
Not a mistake, that vsher'd thee to sin between
My sheets, but a considerate lust --

Parad. No provocation like to this, could tempt
A danger from my Arm -- He draws.

Albo. Why do thou dally thus with feeble motion?
Bear up! and use more violence!

Parad. Some surgery from heaven! Are you hurt, Sir?
You willingly opposed your breast against
My steel, and never sought to endanger me
With yours.

Albo. 'Thast performed, what my wish did prophecy:
I Am prickd here, about the heart; and my veins
Grow empty.

Par. Then glorious war, and all proud circumstance,
That gives a soldier noise, for evermore farewell --

Falling on his sword. Albo. Hold, Paradine. It Is my last suit, that thou survive
To minister a just revenge on those
Whom I proscribe, help my quiuering Limbs,
And seat me in the Chair --

Parad. Shall posterity read it in story
And believe; a Prince that does deserve to be
The first in the List of those, that gatherd noise
In war, can be thus covetous to expire
In silence dark. Fall on my fatal point,
And yet command that I survive the Tragedy!

Albo. 'Twere in me an affectation triuiall
To cherish life, now Rhodolinda's false.
For should I still preserve my soul in flesh,
I know my mercy is so fond to her;
I should forgive her all: and were thou dead,
My hope were then deprived of future justice.
Live to revenge her falsehood. I know thy heart
So sincere and noble, that I suspect not thee
A sharer in her guilt. When thou
Did first confess th'adulterous crime, joined with
Thy own mistake, through Hermegilds deep Art,
My faith conceived the truth: for thy Nature
Is much too blunt, and credulous for Court.

Par. Should I but speak each cunning circumstance --

Albo. Contain thy breath! To hear that told, would make
My soul wander in my last journey.
'Till thy relation brought it to my Ear,
I never knew her false.

Parad. Still my amazement does increase! Were you
Not told of this before!

Albo. My knowledge only learnt it of thy Tongue.


Par. Stay! Nor with Valdaura, you did never project
My death by poison?

Albo. Never.


Parad. Yet one reply, then make my joy exceed
My wonder. Did you never in my bed,
Commit a lustful stealth?

Albo. Angels in that, are not more free from guilt.


Parad. What Potter made this earthy Skull! pardon
(Dear Valdaura) my dull suspect! Sing out
Thy Hymns in heaven* and never listen more
To my fond speech; for they have made me mad!

Albo. I cannot gripe the Air. Mark how it steals
Through all my knotty Fingers --

Parad. Ecstasy!


Albo. Now my last, and short minute is ariu'd;
I do, resign my Crown --

Parad. To whom sir?


Albo. To him I hate. But be thou sure, he wear
It not 'till near his death: for it is a happiness
To live enthroned, but it is not safe to dye
A King.

Parad. He does pervert my sense.


Albo. Let the Drum cease! I Will have no more battles.
He that to waste his triuiall rage, does fight
A battle, rides a Hawking with the devil.

Parad. Mad as the Northern wind!


Albo. He sends a thousand drinking Animals
To take their flight in the air, whilst little black
Devils (do you not see 'em?) They look like Ravens.
Mark how they prey on those immortal Foul,
And plume 'em in their Talents! I do not like
This Falconry: it is too sad a game
For sinners -- Oh, oh, oh! -- Dies.

Parad. There died the noblest Trophey of our war!
The Lombards now have lost their victory.
So hardy of creation, his heart strings
Were as Cordage, tough; cracked like a Cable,
When the frighted Bark starts from the Anchor.
All that are nours'd in war, shall mourn for thee.
Our Ensigns now we will of Cypress make* knocking.
Hah! It is the wind that whispers* he must
Be hid. I Am sure this noise can never wake him --
He puts him behind the Arras, opens the door, enter Rhodolinda. O, are ye
come?

Rhod. Thou have a wild aspect! Is it done?


Parad. He has paid for his wharfage already,
And is now entering Charons Boat.

Rhod. Thou Art precious as my Soul! He opes the Arras.


Parad. There Is the old Face.


Rhod. He looks like a pale Country Virgin
That longed to eat Mortar. Our chief design
Is finished: but thou must add one knot more
TO obliege my gratitude, and then we shall
Triumph with safety. Hermegild must die*
He knows too much.

Parad. It is as if the Parca spoke. If there
Be any other whom your envy, or
Your hate would have dismissed the world, make him
But known, and he is numbered with the dead.

Rhod. Dear Paradine, I sure shall (...) thee,
My appetite is grown so fierce. Let me
Begin with thy moist lip -- Pulls her to kiss him in the Chair.

Par. Let Us to it like Monkeys, or the reeking Goat.


Rhod. Oh! oh! oh! Help! help!


Both are bloody about their mouths. Parad. Cease your loud clamor, Royal
Whore.


Rhod. Thou did eat my lips.


Parad. Thy flesh is sour, musty; more tainted then
A Carrion in a phlegmatic ditch for else
Like the Anthropophagus, I had devoured thee up.
This made Valdaura bleed, and must let forth
Thy swarthy soul -- Stabs her with his Poniard.

Rhod. Oh! oh! oh! --


Parad. For Albouine my Royal Master, this --
And this to pacify Valdaura's Ghost --

Rhod. Oh, oh, oh!


Parad. So hard and stony is thy heart, that it
Reuerts the point of my bright steel.

Rhod. Mercy Heaven! She dies.


Parad. Since thou have received my justice, I wish
Thee mercy too -- Knocking.

Hermegild within. My Lord.

Parad. It Is Hermegild, now I shall end my chief
Discovery. What a full Sepulcher is this -- Carries her in. Knocking again.
Now I must practice my disguize. Reuert
The Spring twice, and you may enter.

Counterfeits a sick voice, sitting. Enter Hermegild, Thesina. These. My Lord,
I have lost my honor in your service,
You may choose one that shall affect you worse.

Herm. Lady, this is no time to woo: but
Do You think I Am so profane to violate
My vow? Nimbly depart, I do conjure
Your absence with this kiss --

These. If you should prove false --

Exit Thesina. Herm. 'Slight, these Wenches at
Fifteen, are as riotous as Elephants.
Marry a Court Kitten! There he sits! Hah, sick!
My sweet Lord, how thriues your health? D'your pulses
Still preserve their temperate music? have you
Effected yet our great business?

Parad. The King is dead, that sanguine instrument
Did set his Soul at liberty.

Herm. The Laurel, Mertle, and the Bay shall still
Cold and naked stand before the Winters
Frosty breath; still strip their Boughs, to make
Your head triumphant wreathes. Where is the Queen?
Me thinks (my Lord) your body and your mind
Seem much disturbed.

Parad. Oh, oh! the poison works --

Her. Alas, my sweet dear Lord! (precious medicine!)
He cannot possibly survive the next
Minute. Does it destroy your strength?

Parad. Oh, oh! It skorches all my entrails up:
As if like Porcia I had swallowed coals.
I spit scumme, such as over the hot Caldron boyles --

Her. And are you fastened in the chair with weakness?


Parad. I cannot rise. A stiff conuulsion in
My Sinnewes fetters all my limbs --

Herm. Hah! hah! ha!


Parad. O heaven, will you permit him laugh?


Her. I know th'Ingredients of thy poysnous draught.
'Twas I that gave it to thy wife. 'Twas I
Did counsel her to mingle it in thy wine,
When thou were hot, and all thy Pores open
As thy mouth.

Parad. Oh, oh, oh!


Herm. Do, groan, till thou raise an echo in this
Square roof. Ere long thy Ribs will start from thy
Loose Chine, thy lanke Belly swell into a hill.

Parad. O horror! horror! Is Heaven asleep?


Herm. The King never knew of thy adultrous crime*
'Twas I told it to Valdaura, and made
Her think, thy guilt proceeded not from a
Mistake, but from thy wilful lust* I Have strung
Thy Nosthrill with a spinners thread, so led
Thee through subtle Labyrinths, t'inuolue
Thy senses; and now I triumph over thy fate.
This is Italian Spleen.

Parad. Had I but strength to actuate my revenge?


Herm. Good, dull Soldier! why did thou leave the Camp,
Thy rusty Morio^ there; thy battered Corselet;
And thy shiuer'd Lance, to amble here at Court
In slippery silks; to walk in cloudy mists
Of perfumed air? It Is I have shak'd thy brains
That heretofore were thick as Curds, into
A pale, thin whay.

Parad. Draw near, and let me then but kill thee --

Herm. Troth, thou art so feeble now, that were I killed
By thee, I scarce should think that I were dead.

Paradine rises, and snatches Hermegilds sword from his side. Parad. No! that
shall arrive unto the (...). Dog! grim
As the angry Fiend, that must devour thy soul!
I am not poisoned.

Herm. Hah! does he counterfeit?


Parad. See here, what abject ruins thou have made
Of The noblest structures in the world --

He draws the Arras, and discouers Albouine, Rhodolinda, Valdaura, dead in
Chaires. Her. The Queen there too! O triuiall Arts with my
Own Mine I Have blown my self even into dust!

Parad. I will now see, if thou can bleed like things mortal --

Herm. Deprived of my defense! If thou have a soul
(Great as thy fame) restore my Sword.

Parad. Thou bark'st against the Moon! I will requite
Thy own tyrannous scorn. That destiny
Was just, that thus betrayed thee to my mirth.
There, Stygian Dog -- Wounds him.

Herm. Oh, oh! whilst I have warmth, I Will move with violence --

Parad. Where now are all the subtle Tropheys of
Thy brain? Plots, dark as hell! proiections grimme!
Such, as threatened Nature, and seemed to fright
The Genius of the world. Now, now prevent
These dire salutes --

Herm. Return my Sword, then manage Steeples like
To Pikes; yet, I Will affront thy fury --

Par. Hardy as the Scythians race, I greet thy heart --

Her. I stagger, and am drunk with my own blood! --


Parad. Take my last anger, and good night! Falls.


Herm. Oh, oh! thou have stuck Needles in my heart!


Parad. Now I do swell with horror and stern rage:
I will distract the whole world. Fire! fire! fire!
Murder, Treason, and incestuous rapes! Fire! fire! Exit.

Herm. I spy
A white Soul houering in the air! one when
Corporeal, was sure some humble Hermit
Here on earth. He Is acquainted with the way
To Heaven: should mine take flight alone, I fear
'T would stray! Hoa! you, you that ascend the Spheres!
We sinners still seem hoarce to Angels ears.
What, hoa! he turns not yet: who knows but he
Still lived in low Valleys, built his Mansion
In some aged wall? but my path ever lay
On hills, where the good Patriarchs never trod.
Vain Arts! Ambition in all sacred Schools,
Is held the sin of Heathens, and of Fools. He dies.

Enter Paradine, Governor, Cunymond, Conrade, Frollo, the Guard, etc. Gouer. O
dire and tragic sight! The King, the Queen
And fair Valdaura slain!

Parad. Here Is another object fit for wonder,
Though not for pity. Spurns Hermegild.

Gou. Hah! he dead too? Whence should these sorrows flow?
Lay hold on Paradine.

Parad. All stay. I Will bore his haggard soul that strives
With saucy strength, to captiuate my Limbs:
Hark, the big drum recouers breath, and speaks!
March on! The scattered foe retires, and all
The glorious Horse are slain. I am magnanimous,
And high! O ye unkind false stars! ye mock
Poor Paradine! A few clean Tears to wash
My sins away, and I am seen no more.

Govern. Ceaze on him; on forfeit of your lives!


Parad. Their lives are forfeited to me --
He fights with the Guard, they wound and disarme him. Here, here, it gauld
my very heart! --

Governor. Convey him gently in, and use all help
Of surgery to stop his wounds: for from
His mouth, we must receive the knowledge of
These fatal deeds. Some give th'Allarum to
The Ports! You Siginors, lead to th'Cittadell;
Where, we will proclaim Albouines young Issue
By's former wife, to be his lawful heir.
Wild Fancy may project things strange and new:
But Time records no Tale so sad, and true.

FINIS.

