HYMEN'S TRIVMPH.

A Pastoral Tragicomaedie.

Presented at the Queens Court in the Strand at her Majesty's magnificent
intertainement of the Kings most excellent Majesty, being at the Nuptials of
the Lord Roxborough.

By SAMVEL DANIEL.

LONDON

Imprinted for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the white Lion. 1615.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY OF THE HIGHESTborne-Princesse, ANNE of Denmark,
Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
HEre, what your sacred influence begat
(Most loved, and most respected Majesty)
With humble heart, and hand, I consecrate
Unto the glory of your memory:
As being a piece of that solemnity,
Which your Magnificence did celebrate
In hallowing of those roofes (you reared of late)
With fires and cheerful hospitality
Whereby, and by your splendent Worthiness
Your name shall longer live then shall your walls,
For, that fair structure goodness finishes,
Bears off all change of times, and never falls.
And that is it has let you in so far
Into the heart of England as you are.
And worthily, for, never yet was Queen
That more a peoples love has merited
By all good graces, and by having been
The means our State stands fast established
And blessed by your blessed womb, who are this day
The highest borne Queen of Europe, and alone
Have brought this land more blessings every way,
Then all the daughters of strange Kings have done.
For, we by you no claims, no quarrels have,
No factions, no betraying of affairs:
You do not spend our blood, nor states, but save:
You strength us by alliance, and your hairs.
Not like those fatal marriages of France,
For whom this kingdom has so dearly paid,
Which only our afflictions did advance:
And brought us far more miseries, then aid.
Renowned Denmark, that have furnished
The world with Princes, how much do we owe
To thee for this great good thou did bestow,
Whereby we are both blessed, and honored?
Thou did not so much hurt us heretofore
But now thou have rewarded us far more.
But what do I on this high subject fall
Here, in the front of this low Pastoral?
This a more grave, and spacious room requires
To show your glory, and my deep desires.
Your Majesty's most humble servant SAMVEL DANIEL.

The Prologue.
Hymen opposed by Avarice, Envy, and Jealousy the disturbers of quiet
marriage, first enters. Him. IN this disguise and Pastoral attire,
Without my saffron robe, without my torch,
Or other ensigns of my duty:
I Hymen am come hither secretly,
To make Arcadia see a work of glory,
That shall deserve an everlasting story.
Here, shall I bring you two the most entire
And constant lovers that were ever seen,
From out the greatest sufferings of anoy
That fortune could inflict, to their full joy:
Wherein no wild, no rude, no antique sport,
But tender passions, motions soft, and grave,
The still spectators mast expect to have.
For, these are only Cynthias recreatiues
Made unto Phoebus, and are feminine;
And therefore must be gentle like to her,
Whose sweet affections mildely move and stir.
And here, with this white wand, will I effect
As much, as with my flaming torch of Love:
And with the power thereof, affections move
In these fair nymphs, and shepherds round about.

Envy. Stay Hymen, stay;
you shall not have the day
Of this great glory, as you make account:
We will herein, as we were ever wont,
Oppose you in the matches you address,
And undermine them with disturbances.

Him. Now, do thy worst, base Envy, thou can do,
Thou shall not disappoint my purposes.

Avarice. Then will I, Hymen, in despite of thee,
I will make Parents cross desires of love,
With those respects of wealth, as shall dissolve
The strongest knots of kindest faithfulness.

Him. Hence, greedy Avarice; I know thou art
A hagge, that do bewitch the minds of men:
Yet shall thou have no power at all herein.

Jealousy. Then will I, Hymen, do thou what thou can;
I will steal closely into linked hearts;
And shake their veins with cold distrustfulnesse;
And ever keep them waking in their fears,
With spirits, which their imagination reares.

Him. Disquiet Jealousy, vile fury, thou
That art the ougly monster of the mind,
Auant, be gone, thou shall have naught to do
In this fair work of ours, nor evermore
Can enter there, where honor keeps the door.
And therefore hideous furies, get you hence,
This place is sacred to integrity,
And clean desires: your sight most loathsome is
Unto sowell disposed a company.
Therefore be gone, I charge you by my power,
We must have nothing in Arcadia, sour.

Envy. Hymen, thou can not chase us so away,
For, look how long as thou make marriages,
So long will we produce encumbrances.
And we will in the same disguise, as thou,
Mix us among these shepherds, that we may
Effect our work the better, being unknown;
For, ills show other faces then their own.

The Speakers.
Thyrsis. Palaemon, friend to Thyrsis. Clarindo, Siluia disguised, the beloved
of Thyrsis, supposed to be slain by wild beasts. Cloris, a Nymph whom Clarindo
served, and in love with Thyrsis. Phillis, in love with Clarindo. Montanus, in
love with Phillis. Lidia, Nurse to Phillis. Forresters.
Dorcas. Siluanns.
Medorus, father to Siluia. Charinus, father to Thyrsis. Chorus of Shepherds.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Thirsis. Palaemon. SO to be reft of all the joys of life,
How is it possible Palaemon, I
Should ever more a thought retain
Of the least comfort upon earth again?
No, I would hate this heart, that has received
So deep a wound, if it should ever come
To be recur'd, or would permit a room
To let in any other thing then grief.

Pal. But Thirsis you must tell me what is the cause?

Thy. Think but what cause I have; when having passed
The heates, the colds, the trem bling agonies
Of fears, and hopes, and all the strange assaults
Of passion, that a tender heart could feel
In the attempt, and pursuit of his love.
And then to be undone, when all was done,
To perish in the haven, after all
Those Ocean sufferings, and even then to have
My hopeful Nuptial bed, turned to a grave.

Pal. Good Thirsis by what means, I pray thee tell

Thy. Tell thee? alas Palaemon, how can I tell
And live? do thou not see these fields have lost
Their glory, since that time Siluia was lost?
Siluia, that only decked, that only made
Arcadia shine; Siluia who was (ah woe the while)
So miserablierent from off the world.
So rapt away, as that no sign of her,
No piece was left to tell us by what means:
Safe only this poor remnant of her veil,
Alltorne, and this dear lock of her rent hair;
Which holy relics here I keep with me,
The sad memorials of her dismal fate.
Who sure devoured was upon the shore
By ravenous beasts, as she was walking there
Alone, it seems; perhaps in seeking me
Or else retired to meditate apart
The story of our loves, and heavy smart.

Pal. This is no news, you tell, of Siluias death.
That was long since: why should you wail her now?

Thy. Long since Palaemon? think you any length
Of time can ever have a power to make
A heart of flesh not mourn, not grieve, not pine?
That knows, that feels, that thinks as much as mine

Pal. But Thirsis, you know how her father meant
To match her with Alexis, and a day
To celebrate the nuptials was prefixed.

Thy. True, he had such a purpose, but in vain,
As oh it was best known unto us twain.
And hence it grew that gave us both our fears,
That made our meeting stealth, our parting tears.
Hence was it, that with many a secret wile,
We robbed our looks th'onlookers to beguile
This was the cause, oh miserable cause,
That made her by her self to stray alone,
Which else God knows, she never should have done.
For had our liberty as open been,
As was our loves, Siluia had not been seen
Without her Thirsis, never had we gone
But hand in hand, nor ever had mischance
Took us asunder; she had always had
My body interposed betwixt all harms
And her. But ah we had our liberty
Laid fast in prison when our loves were free.

Pa. But how know thou her love was such to thee?

Thy. How do I know the Sun, the day from night?

Pal. Women's affections do like flashes prove,
They often show passion when they feel small love.

Their. Ah do not so profane that precious sex,
Which I must ever reverence for her sake,
Who was the glory of her kind; whose heart
In all her actions so transparant was
As I might see it clear and wholly mine,
Always observing truth in one right line.
How often has she been urged by fathers threats,
By friends persuasions, and Alexis sighs,
And tears and prayers, to admit his love,
Yet never could be won? how often have I
Beheld the brauest heardsmen of these plains,
(As what brave heardsman was there in the plains
Of all Arcadia, that had not his heart
VVarm'd with her beams) to seek to win her love.
Ah I remember well (and how can I
But ever more remember well) when first
Our flame began, when scarce we knew what was
The flame we felt, when as we sat and sighed
And lookd'vpon each other, and conceived
Not what we ayld, yet something we did ayle.
And yet were well, and yet we were not well,
And what was our disease we could not tell.
Then would we kiss, then sigh, then look: and thus
In that first garden of our simpleness
We spent our childhood: but when years began
To reap the fruit of knowledge; ah how then
Would she with grauer looks, with sweet stern brow,
Check my presumption and my forwardnes,
Yet still would give me flowers, stillwould me show
What she would have me, yet not have me know.

Pal. Alas with what poor Coin are lovers paid,
And taken with the smallest bayte is laid?

Thy. And when in sports with other company,
Of Nymphs and shepherds we have met abroad
How would she steal a look: and watch mine eye
Which way it went? and when at Barley break
It came unto my turn to rescue her,
With what an earnest, swift, and nimble pace
Would her affection make her feet to run
And farther run then to my hand? her race
Had no stop but my bosom where to end.
And when we were to break again, how late
And loath her tre^bling hand would part with mine,
And with how slow a pace would she set forth
To meet the'ncountring party, who contends
T'attaine her, scarce affording him her fingers ends?

Pal. Fie Thirsis, with what fond remembrances
Do thou these idle passions entertain?
For shame leave off to waste your youth in vain,
And feed on shadows: make your choice anew.
You other Nymphs shall find, no doubt will be
As lovely, and as fair: and sweet as she.

Thy. As fair and sweet as she? Palaemon peace:
Ah what can pictures be unto the life,
What sweetness can be found in Images?
Which all Nymphs else besides her seems to me.
She only was a real creaturee, she,
Whose memory must take up all of me.
Should I another love, then must I have,
Another heart, for this is full of her,
And evermore shallbe: here is she drawn
At length, and whole, and more, this table is
A story, and is all of her; and all
Wrought in the liueliest colors of my blood;
And can there be a room for others here?
Should I disfigure such a piece, and blot
The perfectst workmanship love ever wrought.
Palaemon no, ah no, it cost too dear,
It must remain entire whilst life remains,
The monument of her and of my pains.

Pal. Thou may be such a fond I dolater
To die for love; though that were very strange.
Love has few Saints, but many confessors.
And time no doubt will raze out all these notes,
And leave a room at length for other thoughts.

Thy. Yes when there is no spring, no tree, no grove
In all Arcadia to record our love:
And tell me where we were (the time we were)
How we did meet together, what we said;
Where we did joy, and where we sat dismayed.
And then I may forget her, not before.
Till then I must remember one so dear,
When every thing I see tells me of her.
And you dear Relics of that martred Saint,
My heart adores, you the perpetual books
Whereon when tears permit, mine eye still looks:
Ah you were with her last, and till my last
You must remain with me; you were reserved
To tell me she was lost, but yet alas,
You cannot tell me how: I would you could.
White spotless veil, clean, like her womanhood,
Which whilome covredst the most lovely face
That ever eye beheld. Was there no message sent
From her by thee? Ah yes, there seems it was;
Here is a T made with her blood, as if
She would have written, Thirsis, I am slain
In seeking thee; sure so it should have been,
And so I read it, and shall ever so.
And thou sweet remnant of the fairest hair,
That ever wau'd with wind. Ah thee I found
When her I hoped to find, wrapped in a round,
Like to an O, the character of woe;
As if to say, O Thirsis, I die thine.
This much you tell me yet, dumb messengers,
Of her last mind; and what you cannot tell
That I must think, which is the most extreme
Of woefulness, that any heart can think.

Pal. There is no dealing with this man, I see,
This humor must be let to spend it self
Unto a lesser substance, ere that we
Can any way apply a remedy.
But I lament his case, and so I know
Do all that see him in this woeful plight:
And therefore will I leave him to himself,
For sorrow that is full, hates others sight.

Their. Come boy, whilst I contemplate these remains
Of my lost love, under this myrtle tree,
Record the dolefull'st song, the sighingst notes,
That music has to entertain bad thoughts.
Let it be all at flats my boy, all grave,
The tone that best befits the grief I have.
The Song.
Had sorrow ever fitter place
To act his part,
Then is my heart,
Where it takes up all the space?
Where is no vein
To entertain
A thought that wears another face.
Nor will I sorrow ever have,
Therein to be,
But only thee,
To whom I full possession gave:
Thou in thy name
Must hold the same,
Until thou bring it to the grave.
So boy, now leave me to my self, that I
May be alone to grief, entire to misery.

SCEN. II.
Cloris. Clarindo. NOw gentle boy Clarindo, have thou brought
My flocks into the field?

Cla. Mistress I have.

Clo. And have thou told them?

Cla. Yes.

Clo. And are there all?

Cla. All.

Clo. And have thou left them safe my boy?

Cla. Safe.

Clo. Then whilst they feed, Clarindo, I must use
Thy service in a serious business.
But thou must do it well my boy.

Cla. The best I can.

Clo. Do thou know Thirsis?

Cla. Yes.

Clo. But know him well?

Cla. I have good reason to know Thirsis well.

Clo. What reason boy?

Cla. I often have seen the man.

Clo. Why then he knows thee too?

Cla. Yes I suppose, unless he has forgotten me of late.

Clo. But has he heard thee sing my boy?

Cla. He has.

Clo. Then doubtless he does well remember thee.
Well, unto him thou must a message do
From thy sad mistres Cloris; but thou must
Doeit exactly well, with thy best grace,
Best choice of language, and best countenance.
I know thou can do well, and have a speech
And fashion pleasing to perform the same.
Nor can I have a fitter messenger
In this employment then thy self my boy.
For sure me thinks, noting thy form and grace,
That thou have much of Siluia in thy face:
Which if he shall perceive as well as I,
Sure, he will give thee audience willingly.
And for her sake, if not for mine, hear out
Thy message; for he still (though she be dead)
Holds sparkles of her vnextinguished.
And that is death to me: for though sometimes
Siluta and I most dear companions were,
Yet when I saw he did so much prefer
Her before me, I deadly hated her;
And was not sorry for her death, and yet
Was sorry she should come to such a death.
But to the purpose, go to Thirsis, boy:
Say, thou art Cloris servant, sent to be
The messenger of her distressed tears:
Who languishes for him and never shall
Have comfort more, unless he give it her.

Cla. I will.

Clo. Nay but stay boy, there is something else.
Tell him, his cruelty makes me undo
My modesty, and to put on that part
Which appertains to him, that is to woo:
And to disgrace my Sex, to show my heart,
Which no man else could have had power to do.
And that unless he do restore me back
Unto my self, by his like love to me,
I cannot live.

Cla. All this I Will tell him too.

Clo. Nay but stay boy, there is yet more:
Tell him, it will no honor be to him,
When ever it shall come to be made known,
That he has been her death that was his own.
And how his love has fatal been to two
Distressed nymphs.

Cla. This will I tell him too.

Clo. Nay but stay boy, will thou say nothing else,
As of thy self, to waken up his love?
Thou may say something which I may not say,
And tell him how thou holdst me full as fair,
Yea and more fair, more lovely, more complete
Then ever Siluia was. More wise, more stayed,
How she was but a light and wavering maid.

Cla. Nay there I leave you, that I cannot say.

Clo. What say thou boy?

Cla. Nothing, but that I will
Endeavor all I can to work his love.

Clo. Do good my boy: but thou must yet add more,
As from thy self, and say, what an unkind
And barbarous part it is to suffer thus
So beauteous and so rare a nymph to pine
And perish for his love; and such a one,
As if she would have stooped to others flame,
Has had the gallantst heardsmen of these fields
Fall at her feet: all which she has despised,
Having her heart before by thee surpised.
And now does nothing else, but sit and mourn:
Speak Thirsis, weep Thirsis, sigh Thirsis, and
Sleep Thirsis when she sleeps, which is but rare
Besides, good boy thou must not stick to swear,
Thou often have seen me sown, and sink to ground
In these deep passions, wherein I abound.
For something thou may say beyond the truth,
By reason of my love, and of thy youth.
Do, good Clarindo swear, and vow thus much.
But do thou now remember all I say,
Do thou forget no parcel of my speech,
Shall I repeat the same again to thee?
Or else will thou rehearse it unto me?
That I may know thou have it perfect, boy.

Cla. It shall not need: be sure I will report,
What you enjoin me, in most earnest sort.

Clo. Ah do good boy. Although I fear it will,
Avail me little: for I doubt his heart
Is repossessed with another love.

Cla. Another love? Who may that be, I pray?

Clo. With Amarillis, I have heard: for they
Are thought, will in the end make up a match.

Cla. With Amarillis? Well, yet will I go,
And try his humor whether it be so?

Clo. Go good Clarindo, but thou must not fail
To work effectually for my avail.
And do not stay, return with speed good boy,
My passions are to great t'indure delay.

ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Clarindo sol. THirsis in love with Amarillis? then
In what a case am I? what does avail,
This altered habit, that belies my Sex?
What boots it to have escaped from pirates hands
And with such wiles to have deceived their wills,
If I return to fall on worser ills?
In love with Amarillis? is that so?
Is Siluia then forgot? that has endured
So much for him? do all these miseries
(Caused by his means) deserve no better hire?
Was it the greatest comfort of my life,
To have returned that I might comfort him?
And am I welcomed thus? ah did mine eyes
Take never rest, after I was arrived
Till I had seen him, though unknown to him?
Being hidden thus, and covered with disguise
And masculine attire, to temporize
Until Alexis marriage day be past,
Which shortly as I hear will be: and which
Would free me wholly from my fathers fear:
Who if he knew I were returned, would yet
Undo I doubt that match, to match me there.
Which would be more then all my sufferings were.
Indeed me thought when I beheld the face
Of my dear Thirsis, I beheld a face
Confounded all with passion, which did much
Afflict my heart: but yet I little thought
It could have been for any others love.
I did suppose the memory of me,
And of my rapture, had possessed him so,
As made him show that countenance of woe.
And much ado had I then to forbear
From casting me into his arms, and yield
What comfort my poor self could yield, but that
I thought our joys would not have bin complete,
But might have yielded us anoyes as great,
Unless I could come wholly his, and cleared
From all those former dangers which we feared:
Which now a little stay (though any stay
Be death to me) would wholly take away.
And therefore I resolved my self to bear
This burden of our sufferings yet a while,
And to become a servant in this guise,
To her I would have skorned otherwise:
And be at all commands, to go, and come,
To trudge into the fields, early, and late.
Which though I know, it misbecomes my state:
Yet it becomes my fortune, which is that,
Not Phillis whom I serve: but since I serve,
I will do what I do most faithfully.
But Thirsis, is it possible that thou
Should so forget me, and forgo thy vow;
Or is it but a flying vain report,
That slanders thine affection in this sort?
It may be so, and God grant it may be so:
I shall soon find if thou be false or no:
But ah here comes my Fury, I must fly.
ACT. I. SCEN. IIII.
Phillis. Clarindo. Ah cruel youth, whither away so fast?

Cla. Good Phillis do not stay me, I have haste.

Phi. What haste should thou have but to comfort me,
Who has no other comfort but in thee?

Cla. Alas thou do but trouble mein vain,
I cannot help thee: it is not in my power.

Phi. Not in thy power Clarindo? ah ifthou
Had any thing of manlines, thou would.

Cla. But if I have not, what does it avail
In this sort to torment thy self and me?
And therefore pre thee Phillis let me go.

Phi. Ah whither can thou go, where thou shall be
More dearly loved and cherisht then with me?

Cla. But that my purpose cannot satisfy,
I must be gone, there is no remedy.

Phi. O cruel youth, will thy heart nothing move?
Show me yet pity, if thou show not love.

Cla. Believe me Phillis I do pity thee;
And more, lament thy error, so farewell.

Phi. And art thou gone hard-hearted youth? have thou
Thus disappointed my desires, and Ieft
My shame t'afflict me worser then my love?
Now in what case am I, that neither can
Recall my modesty, nor thee again?
Ah were it now to do again, my passions should
Have smothred me to death, before I would
Have showed the smallest sparkle of my flame.
But it is done, and I am now undone.
Ah had thou been a man, and had that part
Of understanding of a woman's heart,
My words had been unborn, only mine eyes
Had been a tongue enough to one were wise.
But this it is, to love a boy, whose years
Conceiues not his own good, nor weighes my tears:
But this disgrace I justly have deserved

SCEN. V.
Lidia. Phillis. SO Phillis have you, and you are rightly served.
Have you disdained the gallanst Forresters,
And brauest heardsmen all Arcadia has,
And now in love with one is not a man?
Assure your self this is a just revenge
Love takes, for your misprision of his power.
I told you often there would come a time,
When you would sure be plagued for such a crime:
But you would laugh at me, as one you thought
Conceived not of what metal you were wrought.
Is this you, who would wonder any nymphs
Could ever be so foolish as to love?
Who is so foolish now?

Phil. Peace Lidia, peace,
Add not more grief t'a heart that has too much,
Do not insult upon her misery,
Whose flame, God wot, needs water, and not oil.
Thou see I am undone, caught in the Toil
Of an intangling mischief: tell me how
I may recover, and unwind me now.

Lid. That does require more time, we will apart
Consult thereof, be you but ruled by me,
And you shall find, I, yet, will set you free.
Exeunt.
The song of the first Chorus.
Love is a sickness full of woes,
All remedies refusing:
A plant that with most cutting grows,
Most barren with best using.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies,
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries,
Hey ho.
Love is a torment of the mind,
A tempest everlasting;
And Jove has made it of a kind,
Not well, nor full nor fasting.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies,
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries,
Hey ho.
ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Siluanus. Dorcas. Montanus. IN what a mean regard are we now held,
We active and laborious forresters?
Who though our living rural be and rough,
Yet heretofore were we for valor prized,
And well esteemed in all good companies:
Nor would the daintiest nymphs that valleys haunt
Or fields inhabit, ever have despised
Our siluane songs, nor yet our plain discourse;
But gracefully accepted of our skill,
And often of our loves, when they have seen
How faithful and how constant we have been.

Dor. It Is true Siluanus, but you see the times
Are altered now, and they so dainty grown,
By being adored, and wooed, and followed so
Of those vnsinowed amorous heardsmen, who
By reason of their rich and mighty flocks,
Supply their pleasures with that plenteousnesse,
As they disdain our plainness, and do scorn
Our company, as men rude and ill borne.

Sil. Well, so they do; but Dorcas if you mark
How often they do miscarie in their love,
And how disloyal these fine heardsmen prove;
You shall perceive how their aboundaut store
Pays not their expectation, nor desires.
Witness these groves wherein they often deplore
The miserable passions they sustain:
And how perfidious, wayward, and unkind,
They find their loves to be; which we, who are
The eyes, and ears of woods, often see and hear.
For hither to these groves they much resort,
And here one wayles apart the usage hard
Of her disordred, wild, and wilful mate:
There mournes another her unhappy state,
Held ever in restraint, and in suspect:
Another to her trusty confident,
Laments how she is matched to such a one
As cannot give a woman her content.
Another grieves how she has got a fool,
Whose bed although she loath, she must endure.
And thus they all unhappy by that means
Which they account would bring all happiness;
Most wealthely are plagued, with rich distress.

Dor. And so they are, but yet this was not wont
To be the fashion here; there was a time
Before Arcadia came to be diseased
With these corrupted humors reigning now,
That choice was made of virtue and desert,
Without respect of any other ends:
When love was only master of their hearts,
And ruled alone: when simple thoughts produced
Plain honest deeds, and every one contends
To have his fame to follow his deserts,
And not his shows; to be the same he was,
Not seemed to be: and then were no such parts
Of false deceiuings played, as now wesee.
But after that accursed greediness
Of wealth began to enter and possess
The hearts of men, integrity was lost,
And with it they themselves, for never more;
Came they to be in their own power again.
That Tyrant vanquished them, made them all slaves,
That brought base servitude into the world,
Which else had never bin; that only made
Them to endure all whatsoever weights
Power could devise to lay upon their neck.
For rather the^ they would not have, they would not be
But miserable. So that no device
Needs else to keep them under, they themselves
Will bear far more then they are made, themselves
Will add unto their fetters, rather then
They would not be, or held to be great men.

Sil. Then Dorcas, how much more are we to prize
Our mean estate, which they so much despise?
Considering that we do enjoy thereby,
The dearest thing in nature, Liberty.
And are not tortured with those hopes and fears,
Th'afflction laid on superfluities,
Which make them to obscure, and serve the times:
But are content with what the earth, the woods
And rivers near do readily afforde
And therewithal furnish our homly board.
Those unbought cates please our unlearned throats
That understand not dainties, even as well
As all their delicates, which do but stuff
And not sustain the stomach: and indeed
A well observing belly does make much
For liberty; for he that can but live,
Although with roots, and have no hopes, is free
Without the verge of any sou'raintie.
And is a Lord at home, commands the day
As his till night, and then reposes him
At his own hours. thinks on no stratagem
But how to take his game, has no deseigne
To cross next day: no plots to undermine.

Dor. But why Montanus do you look so sad?
What is the cause your mind is not as free
As your estate? what, have you had oflate
Some coy repulse of your disdainful nymph,
To whom love has subdued you? who indeed
Our only master is, and no Lord else
But he, has any power to vex us here;
Which had he not, we too too happy were.

Mon. In troth I must confess, when now you two
Found me in yonder thicket, I had lost
My self, by having seen that which I would
I had not had these eyes to see; and judge
If I great reason have not to complain:
You see I am a man, though not so gay
And delicately clad, as are your fine
And amorous dainty heardsmen; yet a man,
And that not base, not vn-allyde to Pan;
And of a spirit does not degenerate
From my robustious manly ancestors,
Being never foild in any wrestling game,
But still have borne away the chiefest prize
In every brave and active exercise.
Yet notwithstanding that disdainful maid,
Proud Phillis, does despise me and my love,
And will not daigne so much as here me speak,
But does abjure, forsooth, the thought of love.
Yet shall I tell you (yet ashamed to tell;)
This coy unloving soul, I saw ere while
Soliciting a youth, a smooth faced boy,
Whom in her arms she held (as seemed to me,
Being closely busht a pretty distance off,)
Against his will; and with strange passion urged
His stay, who seemed, struggled to get away,
And yet she staid him, yet entreats his stay.
At which strange sight, imagine I that stood
Spectatour, how confoundedly I stood,
And hardly could forbear from running in
To claim for mine, if ever love had right,
Those her embraces cast away in sight:
But staying to behold the end, I staid
Too long; the boy gets loose, her self retyres,
And you came in; but if I live, that boy
Shall dearly pay for his misfortune, that
He was beloved of her, of whom I would
Have none on earth beloved, but my self.

Dor. That were to bite the stone, a thing unjust,
To punish him for her conceived lust.

Mon. Tush, many in this world we see are caught,
And suffer for misforrnne, not their fault.

Sil. But that would not become your manlines,
Montanus, it were shame for valiant men
To do unworthily.

Mon. Speak not of that, Siluanus, if my rage
Irregular be made, it must work like effects.

Dor. These are but billows, tumbling after storms,
They last not long, come let some exercise
Divert that humor, and convert your thoughts
To know your self; scorn her who scorneth you;
Idolatrize not so that Sex, but hold
A man of straw, more then a wife of gold.

Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Lidia. Phillis. YOu must not, Phillis, be so sensible
Of these small touches which your passion makes.
Phi. Small touches Lidia, do you count the small?
Can there unto a woman worse befall
Then has to me? what? have not I lost all
That is most dear to us, love and my fame?
Is there a third thing Lidia you can name
That is so precious as to match with these?

Lid. Now fily girl, how fondly do you talk?
How have you lost your fame; what for a few
Ill-fauour'd loving words, vttred in jest
Unto a foolish youth? Cannot you say
You did but to make trial how you could,
If such a peevish qualme of passion should
(As never shall) oppress your tender heart,
Frame your conceit to speak, to look, to sigh
Like to a heart-strooke lover; and that you
Perceiving him to be a bashful youth,
Thought to put spirit in him, and make you sport.

Phi. Ah Lidia, but he saw I did not sport,
He saw my tears, and more, what shall I say?
He saw too much, and that which never man
Shall ever see again whilst I have breath.

Lid. Are you so simple as you make your self?
What did he see? a counterfeited show
Of passion, which you may, if you were wise,
Make him as easily to vnbeleeue,
As what he never saw; and think his eyes
Conspired his understanding to deceive.
How many women, think you, being espide
In neerer-touching cases by mischance,
Have yet not only faced their lovers down
For what they saw, but brought them to believe
They had not seen the thing which they had seen,
Yea and to swear it too; and to condemn
Themselves? such means can wit devise
To make men's minds vncredit their own eyes.
And therefore let not such a toy as this
Disease your thoughts: and for your loss of love,
It is as much as nothing. I would turn
A passion upon that should ouerturne
It clean, and that is wrath; one heat
Expels another. I would make my thoughts of skorne
To be in height so much above my love,
As they should ease and please me more by far.
I would disdain to cast a look that way
Where he should stand, unless it were in skorne,
Or think a thought of him, but how to work
Him all disgrace that possibly I could.

Phi. That Lidia can I never do, let him
Do what he will to me: report my shame,
And vaunt his fortune, and my weakness blame.

Lid. Nay as for that he shall be so well charmd
Ere I have done, as you shall fear no tales.

Phi. Ah Lidia, could that he without his harm,
How blessed should I be? But see where comes
My great tormentour, hat rude Forrester.
Good Lidia let us fly, I hate his sight
Next to the ill I suffer: let us fly,
We shall be troubled with him woefully.

Lid. Content you Phillis, stay and hear him speak:
We may make use of him more then you think.

Phil. What use can of so gross a piece be made?

Lid. The better use be sure, for being gross,
Your subtler spirits full of their finesses,
Serve their own turns in others businesses.

ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Montanus. Lidia. Phillis. What pleasure can I take to chase wild beasts,
When I my self am chased more egarly
By mine own passions, and can find no rest?
Let them who have their heart at liberty,
Attend those sports. I cannot be from hence,
Where I received my hurt, here must I tread
The maze of my perplexed misery.
And here see where she is the cause of all?
And now, what shall I do? what shall I say?
How shall I look? how stand? which utter first?
My love or wrath? Alas I know not which.
Now were it not as good have been away,
As thus to come, and not tell what to say?
Phil. See Lidia see, how sauagely he looks,
Good let us go, I never shall endure
To hear him bellow.

Lid. Prithee Phillis stay
And give him yet the hearing, in respect
He loves you, otherwise you show your self
A savage more then he.

Phil. Well, it I hear,
I will not answer him a word, you shall reply,
And prithee Lidia do, reply for me.

Lid. For that we shall, Phillis, do well enough
When he begins, who seems is very long
To give the onset, sure the man is much
Perplexed, or he studies what to say.

Phil. Good Lidia see how he has trickt himself,
Now sure this gay fresh suite as seems to me
Hangs like green Iuy on a rotten tree.

Lid. Some beasts do wear gray beards beside your goats:
And bear with him, this suit bewraies young thoghts

Mon. Ah was it not enough to be oppressed
With that confounding passion of my love
And her disdain, but that I must be torn
With wrath and envy too, and have no vein
Free from the rack of sufferings, that I can
Nor speak nor think but most distractedly?
How shall I now begin, that have no way
To let out any passion by it self,
But that they all will thrust together so
As none will be expressed as they ought?
But something I must say now I am here.
And be it what it will, love, envy wrath,
Or all together in a comberment,
My words must be like me, perplexed and rent,
And so I Will to her. Phi. Lidia, see he comes.

Lid. He comes indeed, and as me thinks does
More trouble in his face by far, then love.

Mon. Fair Phillis, and too fair for such a one, show
Unless you kinder were, or better then
I know you are: how much I have endured
For you, although you skorne to know, I feel,
And did imagine, that in being a man
Who might deserve regard, I should have bin
Preferred before a boy. But well, I see
Your seeming and your being disagree.

Phi. What Lidia, does he brawle? what means he thus
To speak and look in this strange sort on me?

Mon. Well modest Phillis, never look so coy,
These eyes beheld you dallying with a boy.

Phi. Me with a boy, Montanus? when? where? how?

Mon. To day, here, in most lascivious sort.

Lid. Ah, ha, belike he saw you Phillis, when
This morning you did strive with Cloris boy
To have your garland, which he snatched away,
And kept it from you by strong force and might:
And you again laid hold upon the same,
And held it fast until with much ado
He wrung it from your hands, and got away.
And this is that great matter which he saw.
Now fie Montanus fie, are you so gross,
T'imagine such a worthy nymph as she
Would be inloue with such a youth as he?
Why now you hauc undone your credit quite,
You never can make her amends for this
So impious a surmise, nor ever can
She, as she reason has, but must despise
your grossness; who should rather have come in
And righted her, then suffer such a one
To offer an indignity so vile,
And you stand prying in a bush the while.

Mon. What do I hear? what, am I not my self?
How? have mine eyes double undone me then?
First seeing Phillis face, and now her fact,
Or else the fact I saw, I did not see?
And since thou have my understanding wronged,
And traytour-like given false intelligence,
Whereby my judgment comes to pass amiss.
And yet I think my sense was in the right:
And yet in this amaze I cannot tell,
But howsoere, I in an error am,
In loving, or believing, or in both.
And therefore Phillis, at thy feet I fall,
And pardon crave for this my gross surmise.

Lid. But this, Montanus, will not now suffice.
You quite have lost her, and your hopes and all.

Mon. Good Lidia yet entreat her to relent,
And let her but command me any thing
That is within the power of man to do,
And you shall find Montanus will perform
More then a Giant, and will stead her more
Then all the heardsmen in Arcadia can.

Lia. She will command you nothing; but I wish
You would a little terrify that boy
As he may never dare to use her name
But in all reverence as is fit for her.
But do not you examine him a word;
For that were neither for your dignity,
Nor hers, that such a boy as he should stand
And justify himself in such a case,
Who would but feign untruths unto your face.
And herein you some service shall perform,
As may perhaps make her to think on you.

Mon. Alas, this is a work so far, so low
Beneath my worth, as I account it none,
Were it t'incounter some fierce mountain beast
Or monster, it were something fitting me.
But yet this will I do, and do it home,
Assure you Lidia: as I live I will.

Phi. But yet I would not have you hurt the youth,
For that were neither grace for you nor me.

Mon. That as my rage will tolerate must be.

ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Cloris. Clarindo. Here comes my long expected messenger,
God grant the news he brings may make amends
For his long stay; and sure, I hope it will.
Me thinks his face bewraies more iollytie
In his returning then in going hence.
Cla. Well, all is well; no Amarillis has
Supplanted Siluias louein Thirsis heart,
Nor any shall: but see where Cloris looks
For what I shall not bring her at this time.

Clo. Clarindo though my longing would be feign
Dispatched at once, and hear my doom pronounced
All in a word of either life or death,
Yet do not tell it but by circumstance.
Tell me the manner where, and how thou foundst
My Thirsis, what he said, how looked, how fared,
How he received my message, used thee;
And all in brief, but yet be sure tell all.

Cla. All will I tell as near as I can tell.
First after teadious searching up and down,
I found him all alone, like a hurt Dear,
Got under cover in a shadie grove,
Hard by a little crystal purling spring,
Which but one sullen note of murmur held;
And where no sun could see him, where no eye
Might ouerlooke his lovely primacy.
There in a path of his own making, trod
Bare as a common way, yet led no way
Beyond the turns he made (which were but short)
With arms acrosse, his hat down on his eyes
(As if those shades yielded not shade enough,
To darken them) he walks with often stops,
Uneven pace, like motions to his thoughts.
And when he heard me coming, for his ears
Were quicker watches then his eyes, it seemed;
He suddenly looks up, stays suddenly,
And with a brow that told how much the sight
Of any interrupter troubled him,
Beheld me, without speaking any word,
As if expecting what I had to say.
I finding him in this confused dismay,
(Who heretofore had seen him otherwise:
I must confess, (for tell you all I must,)
A trembling passion ouerwhelmd my breast,
So that I likewise stood confused and dumb,
And only looked on him, as he on me.
In this strange posture like two statues we
Remaind a while; but with this difference set:
He blushed, and I looked pale; my face did show
Joy to see him, his trouble to be seen.
At length bethinking me for what I came,
What part I had to act, I rowzd my spirits,
And set my self to speak; although I wished
He would have first begun; and yet before
A word would issue, twice I bowd my knee,
Twice kissed my hand; my action so much was
More ready then my tongue: at last I told
Whose messenger I was, and how I came
To intimate the sad distressed case
Of an afflicted nymph, whose only help
Remaind in him: he when he heard the name
of Cloris, turns away his head, and shrinkes,
As if he grieved that you should grieve for him.

Clo. No, no, it troubled him to hear my name,
Which he despises, is he so pervers
And way ward still? ah then I see no hope.
Clarindo, would to God thou had not gone,
I could be, but as now, I am undone.

Cla. Have patience Mistres, and but hear the rest.
When I perceived his suffering, with the touch
And sudden stop it gauc him, presently
I laid on all the waights that motion might
Procure, and him besought, adiur'd, invoked,
By all the rights of Nature, piety,
And manlines, to hear my message out.
Told him how much the matter did import
Your safety and his fame. How he was bound
In all humanity to right the same.

Clo. That was well done my boy, what said he then?

Cla. He turns about, and fixed his eyes on me,
Content to give his ears a quiet leave,
To hear me. when I faild not to relate
All what I had in charge, and all he hears,
And looks directly on me all the while.

Clo. I doubt he noted thee more then thy words,
But now Clarindo, what was his reply?

Cla. Thus. Tell fair Cloris, my good boy, how that
I am not so disnatured a man,
Or so ill borne, to disesteeme her love,
Or not to grieve, (as I protest I do)
That she should so afflict her self for me.
But.

Clo. Ah now comes that bitter word of But
Which makes all nothing, that was said before.
That smoothes and wounds, that strokes and dashes more
Then flat denyals, or a plain disgrace.
But tell me yet what followed on that But?

Cla. Tell her (said he) that I desire she would
Redeem her self at any price she could,
And never let her think on me, who am
But even the bark, and outside of a man,
That trades not with the living, neither can
Nor ever will keep other company.
Then with the dead. My Siluias memory
Is all that I must ever live withal.
With that his tears, which likewise forced mine,
Set me again upon another rack
Of passion so, that of my self I sought
To comfort him the best I could devise.
And I besought him that he would not be
Transported thus. But know that with the dead
He should no more converse: and how his love
Was living, that would give him all content,
And was all his entire, and pure, and wished
To live no longer then she should be so.
When more I would have said, he shook his head
And wild me speak no further at that time,
But leave him to himself, and to return
Again anon, and he would tell me more;
Commending me for having done the part
Both of a true and moving messenger.
And so I took my leave, and came my way.

Clo. Return again? no, to what end,
If he be so conceited, and so fond
To intertaine a shadow; I have done,
And wish, that I had never done so much.
Shall I descend below my self, to send
To one is not himself? Let him alone
With his dead image: you shall go no more
Have I here framed with all the art I could
This garland decked with all the various flowers,
Arcadia yields, in hope he would send back
Some comfort, that I might therewith have crowned
His love, and witnessed mine, in thendles round
Of this fair ring, the Character of faith?
But now he shall have none of it, I rather will
Rend it in pieces, and dishatter all
Into a Chaos, like his formeles thoughts.
But yet thou faist he wild thee to return,
And he would tell thee more.

Cla. Yes so he said.

Clo. Perhaps thy words might yet so work with him
As that he takes this time to think on them,
And then I should do wrong to keep thee back.
Well thou shall go, and carry him from me
This garland, work it what effect it will.
But yet I know it will do nothing. Stay
Thou shall not go, for sure he said but that
To put thee off, that he might be alone
At his idolatry, in worshipping
A nothing, but his self made images.
But yet he may be wearied with those thoughts
As having worn them long, and end they must:
And this my message coming in fit time,
And moouingly delivered, may take hold:
He said thou were a moving messenger
Clarindo, did he not?

Cla. Yes so he said.

Clo. Well, thou shall go; and yet if any thought
Of me should move him, he knows well my mind
(if not too well) and where he may me find.
Thou shall not go Clarindo, nor will I
Disgrace me more with importunity:
And yet if such a motion should take fire,
And find no matter ready, it would out,
And opportunities must not be slackt
Clarindo, thou shall go, and as thou go,
Look to my flock, and so God speed thee well.

SCEN. V.
Clarindo, alias Siluia sol. WEll, this employment makes for my avail,
For hereby have I means to see my love;
Who likewise sees me, though he sees me not;
Nor do I see him as I would I did.
But I must by some means or other make
Him know I live; and yet not so as he
May know that I am I, for fear we might
Miscary in our joys by over haste.
But it is more then time his sufferings were
Releeu'd in some close sort; and that can I devise
No way to do, but by relating how
I heard of an escape a nymph did make
From pirates lately, and was safe returned.
And so to tell some story that contains
Our fortunes and our loves, in other names;
And wish him to expect the like event;
For I perceive him very well content
To hear me speak; and sure he has some note,
Although so darkly drawn, as that his eyes
Cannot expressly read it; yet it shows
Him something, which he rather feels, then knows.
The song of the second Chorus.
Desire that is of things vngot,
See what travail it procures,
And how much the mind endures,
To gain what yet it gains not:
For never was it paid,
The charge defraide,
According to the price of thought.
ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Charinus, the father of Thirsis. Palaemon. PAlaemon, you me thinks might
something work
With Thirsis my aggreeued son, and sound
His humor what it is: and why he thus
Afflicts himself in solitariness.
You two were wont to be most inward friends,
And glad I was to see it; knowing you
To be a man well tempred, fit to sort
With his raw youth; can you do nothing now,
To win him from this vile captivity
Of passion, that withholdes him from the world?

Pal. In troth, Charinus, I have oftentimes,
As one that suffered for his grieuances,
Assayd to find a way into the cause
Of his so strange dismay; and by all means
Advised him make redemption of himself,
And come to life again, and be a man
With men: but all serves not, I find him locked
Fast to his will, allege I what I can.

Char. But will he not impart to you the cause?

Pal. The cause is love; but it is such a love,
As is not to be had.

Cha. Not to be had?
Palaemon, if his love beregular,
Is there in all Arcadia any she,
Whom his ability, his shape, and worth
May not attain, he being my only son?

Pal. She is not in Arcadia whom he loves,
Nor in the world, and yet he dearly loves.

Cha. How may that be, Palaemon? tell me plain.

Pal. Thus plainly; he is in love with a dead woman,
And that so far, as with the thought of her
Which has shut out all other, he alone
Lives, and abhorres to be, or seen, or known.

Cha. What was this creature could possess him so?

Pal. Fair Siluia, old Medorus daughter, who
Was two years past reported to be slain
By savage beasts upon our country shore.

Cha. Is that his grief? alas, I rather thought
It appertained unto another part
To wayle her death: Alexis should do that
To whom her father had disposed her,
And she esteemed only to be his.
Why should my son afflict him more for her,
Then does Alexis, who this day does wed
Fair Galatea, and forgets the dead?
And here the shepherds come to celebrate
His joyful nuptials with all merriment,
Which does increase my cares, considering
The comforts other parents do receive:
And therefore good Palaemon work all means
You can to win him from his peevish will,
And draw him to these shows, to companies,
That others pleasures may inkindle his.
And tell him what a sin he does commit,
To waste his youth in solitariness,
And take a course to end us all in him.

Pal. Assure your self Charinus, as I have
So will I still employ my utmost power,
To save him; for me thinks it pity were,
So rare a piece of worth should so be lost,
That ought to be preserved at any cost.

ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Charinus. Medorus. MEdorus come, we two must sit, and mourn
Whilst others revel. We are not for sports,
Or nuptial shows, which will but show us more
Our miseries, in being both deprived,
The comforts of our issue, which might have
(And was as like to have) made our hearts
As joyful now, as others are in theirs.
Med. In deed Charinus, I for my part have
Just cause to grieve amidst these festiuals,
For they should have been mine. This day I should
Have seen my daughter Siluia how she would
Have womand it; these rites had been her grace,
And she had sat in Galateas place.
And now had warmed my heart to see my blood
Preserved in her; had she not been so rapt
And rent from off the living as she was.
But your case is not pararell with mine,
You have a son, Charinus, that does live,
And may one day to you like comforts give.

Cha. Indeed I have a son; but yet to say he lives,
I cannot; for who lives not to the world,
Nor to himself, cannot be said to live:
For ever since that you your daughter lost,
I lost my son: for from that day he has
Imbrak d in shades and solitariness,
Shut himself up from sight or company
Of any living: and as now I heard,
By good Palaemon, vows still so to do.

Med. And did your son, my daughter love so dear?
Now good Charinus, I must grieve the more,
If more my heart could suffer then it does;
For now I feel the horror of my deed,
In having crossed the worthiest match on earth.
Now I perceive why Siluia did refuse
To marry with Alexis, having made
A worthier choice; which oh had I had grace
To have foreseen, perhaps this dismal chance
Never had been, and now they both had had
Joy of their loves, and we the like of them.
But ah my greedy eye, viewing the large
And spacious sheep-walkes joining unto mine,
Whereof Alexis was possessed, made me,
As worldlings do, desire to marry grounds,
And not affections, which have other bounds.
How often have I with threats, with promises,
With all persuasions, sought to win her mind
To fancy him, yet all would not prevail?
How often has she again upon her knees
With tears besought me; Oh dear father mine
Do not enforce me to accept a man
I cannot fancy: rather take from me,
The life you gave me, then afflict it so.
Yet all this would not alter mine intent,
This was the man she must affect or none.
But ah what sin was this to torture so
A heart forevow'd unto a better choice,
Where goodness met in one the self same point,
And virtues answered in an equal joint?
Sure, sure, Charinus, for this sin of mine
The gods bereast me of my child, and would
Not have her be, to be without her heart,
Nor me take joy where I did none impart.

Cha. Medorus, thus we see man's wretchedness
That learnes his errors but by their success,
And when there is no remedy; and now
We can but wish it had been otherwise.

Med. And in that wish Charinus we are rackt;
But I remember now I often have
Had shadowesin my sleep that figures bare
Of some such liking twixt your child and mine.
And this last night a pleasing dream I had
(Though dreams of joy makes wakers minds more sad)
Me thought my daughter Siluia was returned
In most strange fashion, and upon her knees
Craves my good will for Thirsis, otherwise
She would be gone again and seen no more.
I at the sight of my dear child, was rapt
With that excess of joy, as gave no time
Either for me to answer her request,
Or leave for sleep to figure out the rest.

Cha. Alas Medorus, dreams are vapors, which
Engendered with day thoughts, fall in the night
And vanish with the morning; are but made
Afflictions unto man, to the end he might
Not rest in rest, but toil both day and night.
But see here comes my solitary son:
Let us stand close Medorus out of sight,
And note how he behaues hlmselfe in this
Affliction, and distressed case of his.

SCEN. III.
Thirsis solus. THis is the day, the day, the lamentable day
Of my destruction, which the Sun has twice
Returned unto my grief, which keep one course
Continually with it in motion like.
But that they never set: this day does claim
Th'especiall tribute of my sighs and tears,
Though every day I duly pay my tears
Unto that soul which this day left the world.
And yet I know not why? me thoughts the Sun
Arose this day with far more cheerful rays
With brighter beams, then usually it did
As if it would bring something of release
Unto my cares, or else my spirit has had
Some manner of intelligence with hope
Wherewith my heart is unacquainted yet:
And that might cause mine eye with quicker sense,
To note th'appearing of the eye of heaven;
But something sure I feel which does bear up
The weight of sorrow easier then before.
SCEN. IV.
Palaemon. Thirsis. What Thirsis still in passion? still one man?
For shame show not your self so weakly set,
So feebly ioynted that you cannot bear
The fortunes of the world like other men.
Believe me Thirsis you much wrong your worth:
This is to be no man, to have no powers.
Passions are women's parts, actions ours.
I was in hopet'haue found you otherwise.
Their. How? otherwise Palaemon? do not you
Hold it to be a most heroicke thing
To act one man, and do that part exact?
Can there be in the world more worthiness change?
Then to be constant? is there any thing
Shows more a man? What, would you have me
That were to have me base, that were indeed
To show a feeble heart, and weakly set.
No no Palaemon, I should think my self
The most unworthy man of men, should I
But let a thought into this heart of mine
That might disturb or shake my constancy.
And think Palaemon I have combats too,
To be the man I am, being built of flesh,
And having round about me traitors too
That seek to undermine my powers, and steal
Into my weaknesses, but that I keep
Continual watch and ward upon my self,
Least I should be surpised at unawares
And taken from my vows with other snares.
And even now at this instant I confess,
Palaemon, I do feel a certain touch
Of comfort, which I fear to entertain,
Least it should be some spy, sent as a train
To make discovery of what strength I am.

Pal. Ah worthy Thirsis, entertain that spirit
What ever else thou do: set all the doors
Of thine affections open thereunto.

Their. Palaemon no. Comfort and I have been
So long time strangers, as that now I fear
To let it in. I know not how t'acquaint
My self therewith, being used to converse
With other humors, that affect me best.
Nor do I love to have mixed company
VVhereto I must of force my self apply.

Pal. But Thirsis think that this must have an end,
And more it would approve your worth to make
The same your work, then time should make it his.

Their. End sure it must Palaeman, but with me:
For so I by the Oracle was told
That very day wherein I lost the day
And light of comfort that can never rise
Again to me: when I the faddest man
That ever breathed before those Altars fell,
And there besought to know what was become
Of my dear Siluta, whether dead, or how
Reast from the world: but that I could not learn.
Yet thus much did that voice divine return:
Go youth, reserve thy self, the day will come
Thou shall be happy, and return again.
But when shall be that day demanded I,
The day thou dyest, replide the Oracle.
So that you see, it will not be in these
But in th'Elizian fields, where I shall joy,
The day of death must bring me happiness.

Pal. You may mistake the meaning of those words
Which is not known before it be fulfilled.
Yield you to what the gods command, if not
Unto your friends desires: reserve your self
For better days, and think the Oracle
Is not untrue, although not understood.
But howsoever, let it not be said
That Thirsis being a man of so rare parts,
So understanding and discreet, should pine in love
And languish for a silly woman thus:
To be the fable of the vulgar, made
Ascorne, and laughed at, by inferior wits.

Their. In love Palaemon? know you what you say?
Do you esteem it light to be in love?
How have I been mistaken in the choice
Of such a friend, as I held you to be,
That seems not, or else does not understand
The noblest portion of humanity,
The worthiest piece of nature set in man?
Ah know that when you mention love, you name
A sacred mystery, a Deity,
Not understood of creatures built of mudde,
But of the purest and refined clay
Whereto the eternal fires their spirits convey.
And for a woman, which you prize so low,
Like men that do forget whence they are men;
Know her to be th'especiall creature, made
By the Creator of the complement
Of this great Architect the world; to hold
The same together, which would otherwise
Fall all asunder: and is natures chief
Vicegerent upon earth, supplies her state.
And do you hold it weakness then to love?
And love so excellent a miracle
As is a worthy woman, ah then let me
Still be so weak, still let me love and pine
In contemplation of that clean, clear soul,
That made mine see that nothing in the world
Is so supreamely beautiful as it.
Think not it was those colors white and red
Laid but on flesh, that could affect me so.
But something else, which thought holds under lock
And has no key of words to open it.
They are the smallest pieces of the mind
That pass this narrow organ of the voice.
The great remain behind in that vast orb
Ofth apprehension, and are never borne.
And therefore if your judge cannot reach
Unto the understanding of my Case,
You do not well to put your self into
My Jury, to condemn me as you do.
Let th'ignorant out of their dullness laugh
At these my sufferings, I will pity them
To have been so ill borne, so miscompos'd
As not to know what thing it is to love.
And I to great Apollo here appeal
The sovereign of the Muses, and of all
Well tuned affections, and to Cinthia bright,
And glorious Lady of clear faithfulness;
Who from above look down with blisfull beams
Upon our humble groves, and joy the hearts
Of all the world, to see their mutual loves;
They can judge what worthiness there is
In worthy love. Therefore Palaemon peace,
Unless you did know better what it were.
And this be sure, when as that fire goes out
In man, he is the miserablest thing
On earth, his daylight sets, and is all dark
And dull within; no motions of delight,
But all oppressed, lies struggling with the weight
Of worldly cares: and this old Damon says,
Who well had felt what love was in his days.

Pal. Well Thirsis, well, how ever you do guilde
Your passions, to indeere them to your self,
You never shall induce me to believe,
That sicknesses can be of such effect.
And so farewell, until you shall be well.

SCEN. V
Medorus. Charinus. O Gods, Charinus, what a man is this?
Who ever heard of such a constancy?
Had I but known him in enjoying him,
As now I do, too late, in losing him,
How blessed had been mine age? but ah I was
Unworthy of so great a blessedness.
Cha. You see, Medorus, how no counsel can
Prevail to turn the current of his will,
To make it run in any other course
Then what it does; so that I see I must
Esteem him irreuocably lost.
But hark, the shepherds festiuals begin,
Let us from hence, where sadness were a sin.

Here was presented a rural marriage, conducted with this Song.

From the Temple to the Board,
From the Board unto the Bed,
We conduct your maidenhead:
Wishing Hymen to afford
All the pleasures that he can,
Twixt a woman and a man.
ACT. IIII. SCEN. I.
Thirsis solus I Thought these simple woods, these gentle trees
Would, in regard I am their daily guest,
And harbor underneath their shadie roofes,
Not have consented to delude my griefs;
And mock my miseries with false reports:
But now I see they will afflict me too.
For as I came by yonder spreading Beech
Which often has the Secretary been
To my sad thoughts, while I have rested me
(if love had ever rest) under his gentle shade,
I found incaru'd, and fair incaru'd, these words:
Thy Siluia, Thirsis, lives; and is returned.
Ah me, that any hand would thus add scorn
Unto affliction; and a hand so fair
As this may seem to be; which were more fit,
Me thinks, for good, then to do injury;
For sure no virtue should be ill imployd.
And which is more; the name of Siluia was
Carved in the self same kind of character
Which she alive did use, and where with all
Subscribed her vows to me, who knows it best;
Which shows the fraud the more, and more the wrong.
Therefore you stars of that high court of heaven,
Which do reveal deceits, and punish them,
Let not this crime, to feit a hand
To couzin my desires, escape your doom.
Nor let these riots of intrusion, made
Upon my louenesse, by strange company
Afflict me thus, but let me have some rest.
Come then, refresher of all living things,
Soft sleep, come gently, and take truce with these
Oppressors, but come simple and alone,
Without these images of fantasy,
Which hurt me more then thou can do me good:
Let me not sleep, unless I could sleep all.
SCEN. II.
Palaemon. Thirsis. ALas, he here has laid him down to rest,
It were now sin his quiet to molest;
And God forbid I should; I will retire
And leave him, for I know his griefs require
This poor releeuement of a little sleep.
Thy. What spirit here haunts me? what no time free?
Ah, is it you Palaemon? would to God
You would forbear me but a little while:
You show your care of me too much in this:
Unseasonable love, skarce kindness is.

Pal. Good Thirsis, I am sorry I should give
The least occasion of disease to you;
I will be gone and leave you to your rest.

Thy. Do good Palaemon, go your way, farewell;
And yet Palaemon stay, perhaps you may
By charms you have, cause sleep to close mine eyes;
For you were wont, I do remember well,
To sing me Sonnets, which in passion I
Composed in my happier days, when as
Her beams inflamed my spirits, which now are set.
And if you can remember it, I pray
Sing me the song, which thus begins: Eyes hide my love,
Which I did write upon the earnest charge
She gave unto me, to conceal our love.

The Song.
Eyes hide my love, and do not show
To any but to her my notes,
Who only does that cipher know,
Wherewith we pass our secret thoughts:
Belie your looks in others sight;
And wrong your selves to do her right.
Pal. So now he sleeps, or else does seem to sleep;
But howsoever, I will not trouble him.

SCEN. III.
Clarindo. Thirsis SEe where he lies, whom I so long to see;
Ah my dear Thirsis, take thy quiet rest,
I know thou needst it, sleep thy fill, sweet love
Let nothing trouble thee: be calm oh winds,
Be still you herds, chirp not so loud sweet birds,
Lest you should wake my love: thou gentle bank
That thus art blessed to bear so dear a weight,
Be soft unto those dainty lymmes of his,
Plie tender grass, and render sweet refresh
Unto his weary senses, whilst he rests.
Oh could I now but put off this disguise,
With those respects that fetter my des^^^^:
How closely could I neighbor that sweet side?
But stay, he stirs; I fear my heart has brought
My feet too near, and I have wakened him.
Thy. It will not be, sleep is no friend of mine,
Or such a friend, as leaves a man, when most
He needs him. See a new assault: who now?
Ah it is the boy that was with me erewhiles,
That gentle boy; I am content to speak
With him, he speaks so pretily, so sweet,
And with so good respective modesty:
And much resembles one I knew once well:
Come hither gentle boy, what have thou there?

Cla. A token sent you from the nymph I serve.

Thy. Keep it my boy, and wear it on thy head.

Cla. The gods forbid, rhat I, a servant, should
Wear on my head, that which my mistress has
Prepared for yours: Sir, I beseech you urge
No more a thing so ill becoming me.

Thy. Nay sure I think, it better will become
Thy head then mine; and therefore boy, thou must
Needs put it on.

Cla. I trust you lo^enesse has not so
Vnciuil'd you, to force a messenger
To do against good manners, and his will.

Thy. No, good my boy, but I entreat thee now
Let me but put it on, hold still thy head,
It shall not be thy act, but only mine:
Let it alone good boy, for if thou saw
How well it did become thee, sure thou would.
Now, can thou sing my boy some gentle song?

Cla. I cannot sing, but I could weep.

Thy. Weep, why?

Cla. Because I am not as I wish to be.

Thy. Why so are none; be not dipleas'd for this;
And if you cannot sing, tell me some tale
To pass the time.

Cla. That can I do, did I but know what kind
Of tale you liked.

Thy. No merry tale my boy, nor yet too sad,
But mixed, like the tragic Comedies.

Cla. Then such a tale I have, and a true tale,
Believe me Sir, although not written yet
In any book, but sure it will, I know
Some gentle shepherd, moved with passion, must
Record it to the world, and well it will
Become the world to understand the same.
And this it is: There was sometimes a nymph,
Isulia named, and an Arcadian borne;
Fair can I not avouch she was, but chaste,
And honest sure, as the event will prove;
Whose mother dying, left her very young
Unto her fathers charge, who carefully
Did breed her up, until she came to years
Of womanhood, and then prouides a match
Both rich, and young, and fit enough for her.
But she, who to another shepherd had
Called Sirthis, vowed her love, as unto one
Her heart esteemed more worthy of her love,
Could not by all her fathers means be wrought
To leave her choice; and to forgo her vow.

Thy. No more could my dear Siluia be from me.

Cla. Which caused much affliction to the both,

Thy. And so the self same cause did unto us.

Cla. This nymph one day, surcharged with love and grief,
Which commonly (the more the pity) dwell
As Inmates both together, walking forth
With other maids, to fish upon the shore;
Estrayes apart, and leaves her company,
To entertain her self with her own thoughts:
And wanders on so far, and out of sight,
As she at length was sudainely surpised
By Pirates, who lay lurking underneath
Those hollow rocks, expecting there some prize.
And notwithstanding all her pittious cries,
Entreaty, tears, and prays, those feirce men
Rent hair, and veil, and carried her by force
Into their ship, which in a little Creek
Hard by, at Anckor lay, and presently hoys'd sail,
And so away. Thy. Rent hair and veil? and so
Both hair and veil of Siluia, I found rent,
Which here I keep with me. But now alas
What did she? what became of her my boy?

Cla. When she was thus in shipped, and woefully
Had cast her eyes about to view that hell
Ofhorrour, whereinto she was so sudainely
Implung'd, she spies a women sitting with a child
Sucking her breast, which was the captains wife.
To her she creepes, down at her feet she lies;
O woman, if that name of woman may
Move you to pity, pity a poor maid,
The most distressed soul that ever breathed.
And save me from the hands of these feirce men,
Let me not be defiled, and made unclean,
Dear woman now: and I will be to you
The faithfull'st slave that ever mistres served;
Never poor soul shall be more dutiful,
To do what ever you command, then I.
No toil will I refuse; so that I may
Keep this poor body clean and vndeflowr'd,
Which is all I will ever seek. For know
It is not fear of death lays me thus low,
But of that stain will make my death to blu sh.

Thy. What, would not all this move the woman's heart?

Cla. All this would nothing move the woman's heart,
Whom yet she would not leave, but still besought;
Oh woman, by that infant at your breast,
And by the pains it cost you in the birth,
Save me, as ever you desire to have
Your babe to joy and prosper in the world.
Which will the better prosper sure, if you
Shall mercy show, which is with mercy paid.
Then kisses she her feet, then kisses too
The infants feet, and oh sweet babe (said she)
Could thou but to thy mother speak for me,
And crave her to have pity on my case;
Thou might perhaps prevail with her so much
Although I cannot; child, ah could thou speak.
The infant, whether by her touching it
Or by instinct of nature, seeing her weep,
Looks earnestly upon her, and then looks
Upon the mother, then on her again,
And then it cries, and then on either looks:
Which she perceauing, blessed child, said she,
Although thou can not speak, yet do thou cry
Unto thy mother for me. Hear thy child
Dear mother, it is for me it cries,
It Is all the speech it has: accept those cries,
Save me at his request from being defilde;
Let pity move thee, that thus mooues thy child.
The woman, though by birth and custom rude.
Yet having veins of nature, could not be
But peircible, did feel at length the point
Of pity, enter so, as out gusht tears
(Not usual to stern eyes) and she besought
Her husband, to bestow on her that prize.
With safeguard of her body, at her will.
The captain seeing his wife, the child, the nymph,
All crying to him in this pittious sort;
Felt his rough nature shaken too, and grants
His wives request, and seals his grant with tears;
And so they wept all four for company,
And some beholders stood not with dry eyes;
Such passion wrought the passion of their prize.

Thy. In troth my boy, and even thy telling it
Moves me likewise, thou do so feelingly
Report the same, as if thou had been by.
But I imagine now how this poor nymph
When she received that doom, was comforted?

Cla. Sir, never was there pardon, that did take
Condemned from the block, more joyful then
This grant to her. For all her misery
Seemed nothing to the comfort she received.
By being thus saved from impurity:
And from the woman's feet she would not part,
Nor trust her hand to be without some hold
Of her, or of the child, so long as she remaind
Within the ship, which in few days arriues
At Alexandria, whence these pirates were;
And there this woeful maid for two years space
Did serve, and truly serve this captains wife,
Who would not lose the benefit of her
Attendance for ^ll her profit otherwise.
But daring not in such a place as that
To trust her self in woman's habit, craved
That she might be appareld like a boy,
And so she was, and as a boy she served.

Thy. And two years it is, since I my Siluia lost.

Cla. At two years end, her mistres sends her forth
Unto the Port for some commodities,
Which whilst she sought for, going up and down
She heard some merchant men of Corinth talk,
Who spoke that language the Arcadians did,
And were next neighbors of one continent.
To them all rapt with passion, down she kneeles,
Tells them she was a poor distressed boy,
Borne in Arcadia, and by Pirates took
And made a slave in Egypt, and besought
Them, as they fathers were of children, or
Did hold their native country dear, they would
Take pity on her, and relieve her youth
From that sad servitude wherein she lived:
For which she hoped that she had friends alive
Would thank them one day, and reward them too;
If not, yet that, she knew the heavens would do.
The merchants moved with pity of her case,
Being ready to depart, took her with them,
And landed her upon her country coast,
Where when she found her self, she prostrate falls,
Kisses the ground, thanks gives unto the Gods,
Thanks them who had been her deliuerers.
And on she trudges through the desert woods,
Climes over craggie rocks, and mountains steep,
VVades thorough rivers, struggles thorough bogs,
Sustained only by the force of love;
Until she came unto the native plains,
Unto the fields, where first she drew her breath.
There lifts she up her eyes, salutes the air,
Salutes the trees, the bushes, flowers, and all:
And oh dear Sirthis, here I am, said she,
Here, notwithstanding all my miseries.
I am the same I was to thee; a pure,
A chaste, and spotless maid: oh that I may
Find thee the man, thou did profess to be.

Thy. Or else no man; for boy who truly loves,
Must ever so; that dye will never out:
And who but would love truly such a soul?

Cla. But now, the better to have notice how
The state of things then stood, and not in haste
To cast her self on new encumbrances,
She kept her habit still, and put her self
To serve a nymph, of whom she had made choice
Till time were fitting to reveal her self.

Thy. This may be Siluias case; this may be she;
But it is not: let me consider well:
The teller, and the circumstance agree.

SCEN. III.
Montanus. Thirsis. Chorus. AH sirrah, have I found you? are you here
You princock boy? and with your garland on?
Does this attire become your peevish head?
Come, I must teach you better manners, boy.
He stabs Clarindo, and rashes off his garland. So Phillis, I have done my
task, and here
I bring the Trophey to confirm the same.
Thy. Ah monster man, vile wretch, what have thou done?
Alas, in what a strait am I engaged here?
If I pursue revenge, l leave to save.
Help, help, you gentle swains, if any now be near, beast
Help, help: ah hark cue^ Echo helps me cry

Cho. What means this outcrie? sure some savage
Disturbs our herds, or else some wolf has seaz'd
Upon a Lamb. Thy. A worse thing then a wolf,
More bloody then a beast, has murdered here
A gentler creature then a lamb: therefore
Good swains pursue, pursue the homicide.
That ougly wretch, Montanus, who has stabd
This sily creature here, at unawares.

Cho. Montanus? why, we met him but even now,
Decked with a garland, grumbling to himself;
We will attach that villain presently:
Come sirs, make haste, and let us after him.

SCEN. IIII.
Palaemon. Thirsis. ALas, what accident is here fallen out?
My dear friend Thirsis, how comes this to pass?

Thy. That monster man Montanus, here has stabbed
A harmless youth, in message sent to me.
Now good Palaemon help me hold him up,
And see if that we can recover him.

Pal. It may be Thirsis, more his fear then hurt:
Stay him a while, and I will haste and send
For Lamia, who with ointments, oil and herbs
If any help remain, will help him sure.

Thy. Do good Palaemon, make what haste you may
Seek out for help, and be not long away.
Alas sweet boy, that thou should ever have
So hard misfortune, coming unto me,
And end thy tale with this sad tragedy;
That tale which well resembled Siluias case,
Which thou resemblest; for such brows had she.
Such a proportioned face, and such a neck.
What have we here, the mole of Siluia too?
What and her breasts? what? and her hair? what all?
All Siluia? yes, all Siluia, and all dead.
And art thou thus returned again to me?
Art thou thy self, that strange delivered nymphe?
And did thou come to tell me thine escape
From death to die before me? had I not
Enough to do, to wayle reported harms
But thou must come to bleed within my arms?
Was not one death sufficient for my greifes
But that thou must die twice? why thou were dead
To me before. Why? must thou dye again?
Ah, better had it been still to be lost
Then thus to have been found; yet better found
Though thus, then so lost as was thought before.
For howsoever, now I have thee yet
Though in the saddest fashion that may be.
Yet Siluia now I have thee, and will I
No more for ever part with thee again:
And we this benefit shall have thereby
Though fate would not permit us both to have
Onebed, yet Siluia we shall have one grave.
And that is something, and much more then I
Expected ever could have come to pass.
And sure the gods but only sent thee thus
To fetch me; and to take me hence with thee;
And Siluia so thou shall. I ready am
T'accompany thy soul, and that with speed.
The strings I feel, are all dissolved, that hold
This woeful heart, reserved it seems for this:
And well reserved, for this so dear an end.

SCEN. V.
Chorus. Palaemon. SO, we have took the villain, and him bound
Fast to an Oak, as rugged as himself.
And there he stares and gapes in the air, and raues
Like a wild beast, that is taken in the toil:
And so he shall remain, till time we see
What will become of this his savage act.
Pa: Cheer Thirsis, Lamia will come presently
And bring the best preservatives she has.
What now? Who lies discovered here? Ay me,
A woman dead? Is this that boy transformed?
Why, this is Siluia, O good Thirsis how
Comes this to pass? Friend Thirsis, Thirsis speak.
Good Thirsis tell me. Out alas he sownes,
As well as she, and both seem gone alike.
Come gentle herds men, come and carry them
To yonder sheep-cote quickly, that we may
(If possible) recover them again.
If not perform those rites that appertain
Unto so rare a couple. Come my friends, make have.

The fourth Song of the Chorus.
Qu. Were ever chaste and honest hearts
Exposed unto so great distresses?
Ans. Yes: they that act the worthiest parts,
Most commonly have worst successes.
Great fortunes follow not the best,
It Is virtue that is most distressed.
Then fortune why do we admire
The glory of thy great excesses?
Since by thee what men acquire
Thy work and not their worths expresses.
Nor do thou raise them for their good:
But to have their illes more understood.
ACT. V. SCAEN. I.
Chorus. Palaemon. DId ever yet Arcadia hear before
Of two so worthy lovers, as we find
Thirsis and Siluia were? or ever had
Clear truth, and simple constant honesty,
So lamentable an event as this?
But here comes forth Palaemon, we shall now
Learn all of him, what has been done within.

Pal. Go Pollio, summon all the Arcadia youth
Here, round about, and will them to prepare
To celebrate with all delights they can
This joyful hour, that has restord to us
The worthiest pair of hearts that ever were,
Will them to show the height of musiques art,
And all the strains of cunning they can show:
That we may make these rocks and hills about,
Ring with the Echo of redoubled notes.
And will Charinus and Medorus too,
The aged parents of this worthy pair,
To come with speed, whose joy, good souls, will be
More then their speed; and yet their speed I know,
Will be beyond th'allowance of their years,
When they shall understand this happy news.
And summon likewise all the train of nymphs
That glorify our plains, and all that can
Give honor to this day.
Go Pollio have away, and as you go
Unbind Montanus that rude savage swain:
And though he be unworthy to be here,
Yet let him come. He has been in his days
Held a good fellow, howsoever now
His rage and love transported him in this.

Cho. Poloemon, we are glad to see you thus
Delightful, now we hope there is good news.

Pal. Good news my friends, and I will tell it you,
Siluia and Thirsis being to my cottage brought,
The skillful Lamia comes and searched the wound
Which Siluia had received of this rude swain,
And finding it not deadly she applyde
Those remedies she knew of best effect.
And binds it up, and powers into her mouth
Such cordial waters as revive the spirits:
And so much wrought, as she at length perceived
Life was not quite gone out, but lay oppressed.
With like endeavors we on Thirsis work,
And ministered like Cordials unto him:
At length we might hear Siluia fetch a groan,
And there withal Thirsis perceived to move,
Then Thirsis fet a groan, and Siluia moved
As if their lives were made both of one piece.
Whereat we ioyd, and then remoud' and set
Each before other, and held up their heads,
And chafed their temples, rubbed and stroak'd their cheeks:
Wherewith first Siluia casts up her dim eyes,
And presently did Thirsis lift up his.
And then again they both together sighed,
And each on other fixed an vnseeing eye:
For yet it was scarce the twylight of their new
Returning day, out of the night of death.
And though they saw, they did not yet perceive
Each other, and yet both turned to one point
As touched alike, and held their looks direct.
At length we might perceive, as life began
T'appeare; and make the morning in their eyes,
Their beams were cleerer, and their opener looks
Did show as if they took some little note
Of each the other: yet not so as they
Could thoroughly discern who themselves were.
And then we took and joined their hands in one,
And held them so a while, until we fealt
How even each others touch, the motion gave
Unto their feeling, and they trembling wrung
Their hands together, and so held them locked,
Looked still upon each other, but no words at all.
Then we called out to Thirsis Thirsis look,
It is thy Siluia thou here holdst, she is
Returned revived, and safe. Siluia, behold thou have
Thy Thirsis, and shall ever have him thine.
Then did we set them both upon their feet
And there they stood in act, even as before
Looking upon each other hand in hand:
At last we saw a blushing red appear
In both their cheeks, which sense sent as a Iampe
To light their understanding. And forthwith
The tears gusht forth their eyes, which hindered the^
A while from seeing each other, till they had
Cleared them again. And then as if new waked
From out a fearful dream, they stand and doubt
Whether they were awake indeed, or else
Still in a dream, distrusting their own eyes.
Their long endured miseries, would not
Let them believe their sudden happiness,
Although they saw it: till with much ado
They had confirmed their credit, and had kissed
Each other and embraced, and kissed again,
And yet still dumb: their joy now seemed to be
Too busy with their thoughts, t'allow them words.
And then they walked a little, then stood still,
Then walked again, and still held other fast
As if they feared, they should be lost again.
And when at last they spoke, it was but thus,
O Siluia, and O Thirsis, and there stopped.
We, lest our sight and presence
So many) hinder might the passage of being there
Their modest, simple, and vnpractis'd love,
Came all our way, and only Lamia left
Whose spirit, and that sufficient skill she has
Will serve no doubt, to see they shall do well.

Cho. Well may they do dear couple, who have thus
Graced our Arcadia with their faithfulness.

SCAEN. II.
Phillis. Lidia. Cloris. What shall we now do Lidia? now am I
Utterly shamed: this youth turned woman is,
Clarindo, Siluia is become; how now?
Can I for ever look on her again?
Or come in any company for shame?
Now must I needs be made a common jest
And laughing stock to every one that shall
But hear how grossly I behau'd my self.

Lid. Faith Phillis asit is fallen out, your case
Is very crazie, and to make it whole
There is no way but even to laugh it out,
And set as good a face, as you can do
Upon the matter, and say thus: How you
Knew well enough it was no man whom you
Affected so, who never could love man,
Nor ever would, and that by mere instinct
And simpathie of Sex, you fancied him.
So put ^t off, and turn it to a jest,

Phi. That shall I never do but ever blush
At her, to think what she will think of me,
Who did bewray my self so foolishly.

Lid. Are you here Cloris, you are blessed to day
For being mistres unto such a boy:
You may rejoice that ever this fell out.

Clo. Rejoice? ah Lidia, never was there nymphe
Had more occasion to be sad then I,
For I am quite undone and shamed hereby.
For I employed this my supposed boy
In message unto Thirsis, whom I loved
I must confess, more dearly then my life:
And told him all the secrets of my heart.
And therefore with what face can ever I
Look upon them that know thus much by me?
No Lidia, I will now take Thirsis course:
Hide me for ever in these desert woods,
And never come in company again;
They shall not laugh at me in their great joys.

Lid. But Cloris, I would laugh with them, were I as you,
And how soever felt my self within,
Yet would I seem be otherwise without.
Cannot you say, that you knew well enough
How it was Siluia that you intertain'd,
Although you would not seem to take such note;
And thereupon employed her in that sort
To Thirsis, knowing who it was would give
To him the greatest comfort upon earth.
And thus fair Nymphs you fitly may excuse
These simple slips, and know that they shall still
Have crosses with their piles, who thus do play
Their fortunes with their loves, as you two did:
But you must frame your countenance thereto
And look with other faces then their own.
As many else do here, who in their parts
Set shining looks upon their clowdy hearts,
And let us mix us with this company
That here appears with mirth and iollitie.

The Song of the fifth Chorus.
Who ever saw so fair a sight,
Love and virtue met aright:
And that wonder Constancy,
Like a Comet to the eye
Seldom ever seen so bright?
Sound out aloud so rare a thing,
That all the Hills and Vales may ring.
Look, Lovers look, with passion see,
If that any such there be:
As there cannot but be such
Who do feel that noble touch
In this glorious company,
Sound out aloud, etc.
FINIS.
Page 51. line 24 and page 54. line 28. for louenesse, read lonenesse. Ib. p.
54. l. 6. for desci^e r. de^^^e p. 59. l. 23 put out, all. p. 62. l 7. at the
verses end, add, help. p. 63. l. 6. r. oils.


