SEVEN SERMONS ON, the WONDERFVLL Combat (for Gods Glory, and Man's Salvation)
between Christ and Satan.

DELIVERED By the Reverend Father in GOD, Doct. ANDREWS, Bishop of Winchester,
lately deceased.

James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endures Temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised them
that love him. London printed for I. Iaggard, and Michael Spark, 1627.

SEVEN SERMONS UPON The Temptation of CHRIST in the Wilderness.
1. SERMON.
Matthew Chap. 4. verse 1. Then was Jesus led aside of the Spirit into the
wilderness, to be tempted of the devil.
OUR Savior Christ by his Nativity, Galath. 4.^
took upon him the shape of man; by his Circumcision, Philip. 2.5.
he took upon him, and submitted himself to the degree of a servant. By the
first, he made himself in case and able to perform the work of our
redemption: By the second, he entered bound for the performing of it. All was to
this end, that he might restore the work of God to his original perfection.
In the bringing of which to pass, it was decreed by God in the beginning (as a
thing necessary) that the head of the Serpent (by whose means it was violated
and defaced) should be bruised. And For this cause (says John) 1 John. 3. 8.
appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the works of the Devil: whereof
this was the first. For in Genesis 3 we read, that his first work after his fall,
was enuiously to tempt our first parents, and thereby to overthrow all
mankind. And here, straight after our Savior was baptized, he with like
envy sets on him. Christ therefore first begins with the ouercomming of
that: and for that purpose he is here led forth to be tempted, that so being
tempted he might overcome.

Our Savior makes this question, Math. 11. 7. upon their going out to see John
Baptist; what went ye out to see? As if he should have said, They would have
never gone out into the wilderness, except it had been to see some great and
worthy matter: and behold a greater and a worthier matter here. If there be
any thing in the wilderness worthy the going out to behold, this is a matter
much worthy of it. Or if there be any matter worthy the hearing, it is worthy
our attention to hear; not Michael the Archangell disputing about the body of
Moses with the devil, Jude 9. but our own matter, argued by two such cunning
adversaries; to see the combat betwixt our grand enemy, who goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking to devour us, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
and our Archduke: for so he is called, Heb. 12. 2. to see our King of old,
Psalm. 74. 12. the pawn of our inheritance, and our Prince of new, or Prince
by usurpation, the Prince of this world, John 3. 14.
John 4. 30. enter the lists together; to see the wisdom of the new Serpent,
match the craftiness and subtilty of the old serpent, Reave. 12. 9. to see the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Apo. 5. 5.
combating with the roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. If any thing be worthy the
sight, it is this.

Though there should come no profit to us by the victory, yet were it worth the
sight, in this respect, only to behold how these Champions behave themselves;
that so we may be warned before hand, by seeing the strength of our Adversary:
and that also seeing the manner of his fight, and of our Saviors defense, we
may be instructed how to arm our selves, and how to ward accordingly. For let
us be sure, that since the Devil spared not to tempt our Savior, he will be
much more bold with us: If he have done this to the green tree, what will
become of the dry? Luke 23. 31. If he have sought our overthrow in Christ, how
much more will he do it in our selves? If our days here be but as the days
of an hireling, Job 7. 1. and our whole life be but as a continual warfare, 2 Timothy 2. 4. then is it behoouefull for us, to have some intelligence of our
enemi^s forces and drifts. It is said, his darts are fiery, Ephesians. 6 16. Here we
may see the manner of his casting them, that so Satan should not circumuen us,
2 Cor. 2. 11. Let us mark how our Savior wardeth and defends himself, that
so we may be armed with the same mind, 1 Pet. 4. 1. Let us therefore go out
into the wilderness to see it.

[ Then Jesus.] This is the description of the entry into the temptation, and
it contains (as a weighty history) many circumstances importing great
matters, which may be reduced to 7. branches or heads. First, the two
Champions, 1. Christ, and 2. Satan: 3. the leader of Jesus into the lists, who
is said to be the holy Ghost: 4. the end, which was the conflict it self,
that is, to be tempted: 5. the day of the battle, expressed under the word
Then: 6. the lists themselves, that is, the wilderness: 7. Christ his
preparation to it, that is, his fasting.

1.
First; for the party defendant, Christ; who (as God) gives food to every
living creature, Psalm. 136. 25. and (as God and man) with five loaves and two
fishes fed 5000. besides women and children, Math. 14. 11. He that is said to
be the very meat it self, whereby we live eternally, John 6. is here said to
be hungry. He, before whom thousand thousands are said to minister, and ten
thousand thousands are said to stand before him, Dan. 7. 10. has here for his
companions the wild beasts: for so says Mark Chap. 1. 13. He to whom the
Angels minister, verse 11. is here assailed with devils, which offer unto him
matter of great indignity; and the indignity which he suffered: leads us to
the consideration of the greeuousnesse of our sins, and of the greatness of
his love, both which are measured by the greatness of those things he suffered
for us; as that he was cast out from among the company of Angels (for so Mark
chap. 1. verse 12. has it) into the Desert, to be a companion of beasts, and
so led forth to be tempted; where he suffered in his body hunger, in his soul
temptation: what is it else, but a proclayming of his great love toward us? As
if he should (exulting) say, What is it that shall separate me from the love of
men? Shall temptation? shall solitariness? shall hunger? shall wearisome
labor and travel? shall watching? shall anguish of mind, and bloody sweat?
shall mockes? shall whippes? shall nails? shall spears? shall principalities?
That we also might use the same challenge which Paul does in the 8. Chapter of
his Epistle to the Romans the 35. verse, What shall separate us from the love
of Christ? shall tribulation? shall anguish? or persecution? These two
profitable points grow out of the consideration of the person of the defendant.

II.
Secondly, the party assay lant is the Devil, who is so called, by reason of
his foul mouth in defaming: for so does the word Diabolus import, whereby we
have occasion to detest the sin of infamy: and it shows what name they
deserve, and how to be esteemed of, in whom that quality is found. S. Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 3. foretold, that in the latter days there should be men devils,
foule-mouthed men, evil speakers: and 1 Timothy 3. 11 he speaks of women
devils, because of their calumnious speeches. In the tongue wherein Christ
spoke these words, namely, the Syriacke, the fittest word that he could find
to signify the devils name, is a word that signifies Diuulgator: so that a
publisher of infamous reports, is good Syriacke for the devil; as when a man
lightly conceiues a reproach, either forging it himself by misconstruction, or
credulously receiving it upon the report of others, and then is not sorry for
his brothers ill, Math. 5. 22. but rather insulteth; not considering that he
himself may fall into the like temptations, Gal. 6. 1. and so becomes puffed
up, 1 Cor. 5. 2. and at last; falls a blazing his brothers imperfections, 3.
John 10. These come right to the devils quality, they take upon them the
abetting of the devils quarrel.

It is the Devils occupation to defame us first with God, as he did Job, as if
he had been an hypocrite, and had served God only for gain, Job 1. 9. and so
stands he continually accusing us, Apoc. 12. 10. and he also defameth God with
us, as if he were a God that did envy our good, Genesis 3. 1. and so he here
defameth God to Christ, as if he were careless in providing for him, in
suffering him to be hungry. And from these two defamations proceeds all evil
whatsoever, as well that which the Divines call Malum poenae, as Job 1. 12.
accusing Job, that he would curse God if he handled him roughly, and so got
power over his goods: as that which they call Malum culpae. For his defaming
God with us, was the cause of all sin: and every where still we see he
labors to persuade us, that God is an unkind God; that so we may burst
forth into those terms, This good did I get at Gods hand, 2 King. 6. 33. to
wit, hunger. To this does he tempt Christ, verse 3. And as to desperation, so
sometimes to the contrary, presumption; as verse 6. Cast thy self down, etc.
by bringing us to have a base conceit of God, defaming him as if he were a God
of clouts, not to be reckoned of, as if he were a man to wait upon us, and to
take us up as often as we list to throw our selves down, that we may say in our
hearts, as they that were frozen in their dregs did, Sophon. 1. 2. He neither
does good nor hurt, it is all one to serve him, and not to serve him. He tells
us (as verse 9.) that he will give us all this, if we will fall down and
worship him, as though he were very liberal in rewards, and as though God were
unkind or ungrateful, not once regarding us for all our service, but suffer^
us even to sterue. Which brought men to that pass, as to say, Mal. 3. 14. that
It is but in vain to serve God, what gain is in his service? If he cannot
prevail this way against us, then he will try another way: for, when (seeing
that this temptation succeeded not) the devil left Christ, he departed not for
altogether, but went to come again (as appears in Luke 4. 13. he departed
for a time.) Christ was too cunning for him in disputing; he meant therefore to
take another course: for as James notes, Chap. 1. verse 14. there be two sorts
of temptations, one by inticement, as a Serpent; another by violence, as a
Lion: if he cannot prevail as a Serpent, he will play the Lion. He had also
another hour at Christ in the Garden, the hour of darkness, Luke 22. 53.
there he bruised his heel.

III.
Thirdly, we are to consider the leader, He was led by the Spirit. In which we
are to note five things: not making any question, but that it was the good
Spirit, for so it appears in Luke 4. 1.

First, that the state of a man regenerate by Baptism, is not a standing
still, Math. 20. 6. He found others standing idle in the market place, and he
said to them, why stand ye idle all day? We must not only have a mortifying
and reviving, but a quickening and stirring spirit. 1 Cor. 15. 45. which will
move us, and cause us to proceed: we must not lie still like lumpes of flesh,
laying all upon Christ's shoulders, Phil. 3, 16. We must walk for wards, for
the kingdom of God consists not in words, but in power, 1 Cor. 4, 19.

Secondly, as there must be a stirring, so this stirring must not be such, as
when a man is left to his own voluntary or natural motion: we must go
according as we are lead. For having given our selves to God, we are no longer
to be at our own disposition or direction: whereas before our calling, we
were Gentiles, and were carried into errors, 1 Cor. 12, 2. we wandered up and
down as masterlesse or careless, or else gave heed to the doctrine of devils,
1 Timothy 1 4. or else led with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3, 6. But now being become
the children of God, we must be led by the Spirit of God: For so many as be
the sons of God, are led thereby, Romans 8, 14. We must not be led by the
Spirit whence the Revelation came, Math. 16, 22. from whence revelations of
flesh and blood do arise; but by the Spirit from whence the voice came, This is
my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. It came not by the spirit that
ministers wise counsel, but by that which came down upon them.

Thirdly, the manner of leading, is described to be such a kind of leading, as
when a Ship is losed from the shore, as Luke 8. 22. it is called launching
forth: so in the 18. of the Acts, the 31. verse, Paul is said to have failed
forth. The holy Ghost driving us, is compared to a gale of wind, John 3. 8.
which teaches us, that as when the wind blow^th, we must be ready to hoist up
sail: so must we make us ready to be led by the Spirit. Our Hop^ is compared
to an Anchor, Heb. 6, 19. which must be h^led up to us; and our Faith to the
Sail, we are to bear as great a sail as we can. We must also look to the
closeness of the vessel; which is our Conscience: for, if we have not a good
conscience, we may make shipwreck of faith, religion, and all, 1 Timothy 1, 19.
And thus are we to proceed in our journey toward our country (the spiritual
Jerusalem) as it were seafaring men. Acts 20, 22. Now behold, I go bound in
spirit to Jerusalem; to which iourny the love of Christ must constrain us, 2
Cor. 5, 14.

Fourthly, that he was led to be tempted. His temptation therefore came not
by chance; nor as Job speaks, chap. 5. v. 6. out of the dust, or out of the
earth, nor from the devil, not only over Jobs person; but not so much as over
his goods, Job 1. 12, 14. He had no power of himself, no not so much as over
the Hogs of the Gergashites, who were profane men, Mat. 8, 31. Hence gather we
this comfort, that the holy Ghost is not a stander by (as a stranger) when we
are tempted, Tanquam otiosus spectator; but he leads us by the hand, and
stands by as a faithful Assistant, Esaias 4, 13. He makes an issue out of all
our temptations, and will not suffer us to be tempted beyond our strength, 2
Cor. 10, 13. And, he turns the work of sione, and of the devil too, unto our
good, Romans 8, 28. so that all these shall make us more wary after to resist
them: and hell (by fearing it) shall be an occasion unto us, to avoid that might
bring us to it; and so they shall all be fellow-helpers to our salvation. So
that temptations, whether they be (as the Fathers call them) rods to chasten
us for sin committed, or to try and sift us, Mat. 3, 12. and so to take away
the chafe, the fan being in the holy Ghosts hand: or whither they be sent
to buffet us against the prick of the flesh, 2 Cor. 12, 17. Or whither they be
as matters serving for our experience, not only for our selves, that we may
know our own strength, Romans 5, 3. and to work patience in us: but to the
devil also, that so his mouth may be stopped, as in Job 2, 3. Have thou marked
my servant Job, how upright he is, and that in all the world there is not such
an one? Howsoever they be, the devil has not the rod or chain in his hands,
but the holy Ghost to order them, as they may best serve for his glory and our
good: and as for the devil, he binds him fast, Revel. 20, 2.

Fifthly, by the Greek word here used, is set forth the difference between the
temptations of the Saints, and Reprobates. In the Lords Prayer one petition is,
Lead us not into temptation: but there, the word imports another manner of
leading, than is here meant. We do not there pray against this manner of
leading here, which is so to lead us, as to be with us, and to bring us back
again, Heb. 13, 20. but we pray there, that he would not cast or drive us
into temptations; and when we are there, leave us, by withdrawing his grace and
holy Spirit, as he does from the reprobate and forsaken.

IIII.
The fourth point is the end, that is, the Conflict, as it concerns Christ;
insomuch, that he was led to be tempted. In which temptation, Augustine says,
Habemus and quod credentes veneremur, et quod videntes imitamur: There be two
things for faith to adore, and two things for imitation to practice.

First for faith, that the temptations of Christ, have sanctified temptations
unto us: that whereas before they were curses, like unto hanging on a tree; now
since Christ has been both tempted and hanged on a tree, they be no longer
signs and pledges of Gods wrath, but favors. A man may be the child of God
notwithstanding, and therefore he is not to receive any discouragement by any
of them.

Secondly, besides the sanctifying, it is an abatement, so that now when we are
tempted, they have not the force they had before: for now the Serpents head is
bruised, so that he is now nothing so strong (as he was) to cast his darts.
Also the head of his darts are blunted, 1 Cor. 15. 55. Death, where is thy
sting? Hell, where is thy victory? For as his death and resurrection had a
mortifying force against the old man, and a quickening force toward the new man:
so has his temptation a dulling force to the Devil, and a strengthening force
to us.

For our life and imitation, there are also two. First, Compassion: for Christ
knowing in what sort we were tempted, as having felt by experience, both how
strong the assaylant was, Psalm. 18. 13. who, thrust sore at him that he might
fall; and how feeble our nature is to make resistance, being nothing but dust,
Psalm. 103. 14. he is moved thereby to lay away severity, and to put on the
bowels of compassion. So that, Now we have not a high Priest which cannot be
tempted with our infirmities, but was tempted in like sort. Heb. 4. 15. So we,
(which were before stony Judges, and too rough for Physicians) ought in like
sort (having been tempted our selves) to look upon others defects with a more
passionate regard.

The second thing we are to imitate, Christ is our fellow-helper in all our
necessities and temptations; who, as he shows us his sleights and darts,
Ephe. 4. 14. so he teaches us how to avoid them. This is no small comfort to
us, when we consider, that he is with us, and will be, till the end of the
world, Math. 28. 20. who has overcome the world, John 16. 33. and the devil:
if any temptation happen, that he will bear us out, we may be of good cheer.
This was it that did so animate Job, Do thou but take my part, and who shall
touch me? Job 17. 3. When as both Christ and we draw together in one yoke,
Math. 11. 29. what can hurt us? Yet if we be afraid for that we see the enemy
coming; let us call for the help of our assistant, and as it is said in Psalm.
68. 1. we shall see God will arise, and his enemies shall be scattered: they
shall vanish like smoke, and melt like wax. When they are ready to attache us,
let us say, Save me O God, for the waters are entered even into my soul, Psalm.
69. 1. When we are feeble, then let us say with Ezekiel, O Lord it has
oppressed me, comfort me, Ezekiel. 38. 14. Or though they have wounded us, let us
say with David, Bring out thy spear, and stop the way against them that
persecute me. Psalm. 35. 3. Say yet to my soul, I am thy salvation. So that we
have not only an example, but a comfort too.

V.
The fifth point, is the day and time when this was done, in which we are to
note, two things. The word [Then] relates as well to the end of the Chapter
next going before, as to the present instant.

First then, when as Christ was but newly come out of the water of Baptism,
and immediately after the heavens had opened unto him, and the holy Ghost
descended upon him in the likeness of a Dove, and while he was yet full of the
holy Ghost; did the Devil set upon him. When as the voice from heaven had
pronounced, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; the devil
straight adds; In whom I am ill pleased: and so addresseth himself against
him. And it is Gods property to look for much at his hands, to whom he has
given much. When he gives a man a large measure of grace, he gives the devil
withal a large patent. Our Savior had great gifts, and the devil is like a
thief, that will venture most for the greatest booty.

Secondly, in regard of the present, we are to note, that in thirty years, the
devil did nothing to our Savior: but now when he goes about to gird himself
with our salvation, according to Psalm. 45. 3. then does the devil gird on his
sword also; that is as much to say, as the better the work is, the more
resistance it shall have. Ten repulses did the Israelites suffer, before they
could get possession of the promised Land of Canaan: and as many did David
endure, before he was invested in the promised Kingdom. Many lets came before
the Temple was re-edified, as is to be seen in Esdras and Nehemias. Yea,
(says the devil:) Has God anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows? I will see if I can annoint him with the oil of sadness above his
fellows. Has he been baptized of water and the holy Ghost? I will provide
another Baptism for him, namely, of fire. Has God sent down the holy Ghost
upon him in likeness of a Dove? I will cause tribulation, and a crown of
thorns to light upon his head. Has a voice come down from Heaven saying,
This is my beloved Son? I will provide a voice for him, that shall ascend
from the foot, that shall say, If thou be the Son of God, come down from
the Cross.

VI.
The sixth is the place, the Lystes, to wit; the Wilderness, that so he might
be alone, and that there might be no fellow-worker with him in the matter of
our salvation, that he alone might have the treading of the wine press, Esaias
63, 3. So, in the Transfiguration in the Mount, he was found alone, Luke 9, 36.
So in the garden in his great agony, he was in effect alone; for his Disciples
slept all the while, Math. 26, 40. that unto him might be ascribed all the
praise.

Secondly, we will note here, that there is no place privileged from
temptations. As there be some that think there be certain places to be
exempt from Gods presence, (as was noted in the dream of Jacob:) so the Monks
and Hermites thought, that by avoiding company, they should be free from
temptations; which is not so. For, although Christ were alone in the
wilderness, and fasting too, yet was he tempted we see. And yet it is true,
that he that will live well, must shun the company of the wicked, Genesis 19, 7.

When the Angels had brought Lot and his family out of the doors, they charged
them not to tarry, nor to stand still, nor once to look back. So after the
Cock had crowed, and put Peter in mind of his fall; he went out of the doors
and weps bitterly, Math. 26, 75. his solitariness was a cause to make his
repentance the more earnest, and helped to increase his tears: and company is
commonly a hindrance to the receiving of any good grace, and to the exercising
and confirming us in any good purpose. But as true it is, that temptations are,
and may as well be in the deserts, as in public places: not only in the
valleys, but in the mountains, verse 8 and not only in the country, but
even in the holy City, verse 5. yea, and sometimes full, and sometimes
fasting, yea, in Paradise and in Heaven it self; for thither does the devil
come and accuse us before God: we are therefore always to stand upon our
guard. For in Luke 11, 24. he is said, to walk through dry places, least
happily some might be escaped from him thither: and though we could go
whether he could not come, we should not be free: for we carry ever a Tempter
about with us. And when we pray to be delivered from temptation, it is not
only from the devil, but from our selves: we carry fire within us. Nazianzen
and Basil were of that mind once, that by change of the place a man might go
from temptation: but afterward they recanted it, affirming; That it was
impossible to avoid temptation, yea, though he went out of the world, except he
left his heart behind him also.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON.
Math. Chap. 4. verse 2. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty
nights, he was afterward hungry.
NOW come we to the seventh and last circumstance. It may seem strange, that
being about to present himself to the world, as Prince, Priest, and Prophet,
that he would make his progress into the Wilderness, and begin with a Fast:
for this was clean contrary to the course and fashion of the world, which
uses when any great matter is in hand, to make a Praeface or Praeludium with
some great solemnity. As when Solomon came first to his Crown, he went to the
chief City, and gathered a solemn Convent. So Christ, should rather first
have gone to Jerusalem the holy City, and there should have been some solemn
banquet. But Christ from his Baptism began his calling, and fasted forty
days and forty nights. This his Fast (by late Writers) is called the entrance
into his calling: by the ancient Writers, it is called the entrance into his
conflict.

The manner of the Church has always been, that at the first institution or
undertaking of any great and weighty matter, there has been extraordinary
Fasting. So Moses, Deuteronomy. 9, 9. when he entered into his calling at the
receiving of the Law, fasted forty days. So Elias, 1 Kings 19, ^8. at the
restoring of the same Law, did the like. And so when they went about the
re-edifying of the Temple, as appears Esdras 8, 49. So in the new Testament,
at the separation of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13, 3. And (as Jerome reports,)
Saint John would not undertake to write the divine work of his Gospel, until
the whole Church (by Fasting) had recommended the same unto God.

So likewise, at the entrance into a Conflict, for the obtaining of some
Victory, as Iehoshaphat did when he overcame the Amorites, 2 Chronicles. 20, 3. So
did Hester when she went about the deliverance of the Jews, as in Ester 4,
ver. 16. And Eusebius reports, that when Peter was to enter disputation with
Simon Magus, there was Fasting throughout the whole Church generally. Whether
at the entrance into a Calling, or to resist the devil, Saint Peter's rule
mentioned in his first chapter and fifth verse, ought to take place, we must
use Prayer and Fasting. And as at all times we are to use watchfulness and
carfulness: so then especially, when we look that the devil will be most
busy; and the rather, for that in some cases there is no dealing without
Fasting, as Mark 9, 29. there is a kind of devil that will not be cast out,
without Prayer and Fasting.

As for the number of days wherein he fasted, just forty; Curiosity may find
it self work enough: but it is dangerous to make Conclusions, when no
certainty appears. Some say, there is a correspondencie between these forty
days, and the forty days wherein the world was destroyed by the Deluge. But
it is better to say, As Moses fasted forty days at the institution of the
Law, and Elias forty at the restoration; so Christ here. And because he came
but in the shape of a servant, he would not take upon him above his fellow
servants. Contrary to our times, wherein a man is accounted no body, except he
can have a quirke above his fellows. But it is more material, to see how it
concerns us. It is a thing rather to be adored by admiration, than to be
followed by apish imitation.

This Fast here, was not the fast of a day, as that of Peter and of Cornelius,
Acts 10, 9, 30. but such as Luke 4, 2. describes, He did eat nothing all that
time. Saint John the Baptist though his life were very strict did eat Locusts
and wild Honey, Math. 3, 4. Ours is not properly a Fast, but a provocation of
meats; and therefore there can be no proportion between them. But as it is, what
is to be thought of it? Socrates and Irenaeus record, that at the first, the
Church did use to celebrate but one day in remembrance of Christ's Fast; till
after, the Montanists (a certain sect of heretics, who thereupon are called
Eueratitiae) raised it to fourteen days; the zeal of the Clergy after
increased it to forty, after to fifty: the Monks brought it to sixty, the
Friars to seventy; and if the Pope had not there staid it, they would have
brought it to eighty, and so have doubled Christ's fasting. When the Primitive
Church saw the Heretics (by this outward show) go about to disgrace the
Christians, by this counterfeit show of holiness; they used it also: but
(says Augustine and Chrysostom) they held it only a positive law, which was
in the Church to use or take away, and not as any exercise of godliness.

Only a doubt rests now, because of the hardness of men's hearts, whether it
were better left or kept Some would have abstinence used, and one day kept for
the Sabbath, but left to every man's liberty what time and day, and tied to no
certainty: but that were (upon the matter) to have none kept at all
Notwithstanding, the reformed Church (as that of France) have used their
liberty in removing of it, for that they saw an inclination in their people to
superstition, who would think themselves holier for such fasting; like the
Pharisees, Luke 18, 12. The Church wherein we live, uses her liberty in
retayning it, and that upon good reasons: for since God has created the fishes
of the sea for man, and given him an interest in them also, Genesis 9, 2. as well
as in the beasts. Since the death of fish was a plague wherewith God plagued
Pharaoh, and so contrariwise the increase of fish is a blessing: God will have
fish to be used, so that he may have praises as well for the sea, as for the
land. Psalm. 104, 25.

If we look into the civil reason, we shall see great cause to observe it.
See Numb. 15. 22. the abundance of flesh that was consumed in one month. The
maintenance of store then is of great importance, and therefore order must be
taken accordingly. Jerusalem had fish days, that Tyrus and such like, living
upon Navigations, might have utterance for their commodities, Nehem. 13, 16.
(for Tyrus was the maritine City, till after Alexander annexed to it another
City, and made it dry.)

The Tribe of Zabulon lived by Navigations, Genesis 49, 13. which is a thing
necessary both for wealth, 2 Chronicles. 9, 20. and made Solomon richer than any
other King, and also for munition, as Esaias 23, 4. that Tribe therefore had
need of maintenance. And therefore our Church and Commonwealth have taken
order accordingly; and the rather, for that ourtimes require it: (for the times
that forbad marriage and the abstinence of meats, 1 Timothy 4, 3. are past) we
rather live in the age of self-love, intemperancy, and filthy pleasure, 2 Timothy
3, 4. There is more fear of a pottinger full of gluttony, than a spoonefull of
superstition. This is no Fast, but a change of meat.

Verse 3. Then came to him the tempter, etc.
BEfore we come to the particular temptations, we have four general points
to be considered. First, the changing of the devils name, from devil to
Tempter: secondly, that it is said, He came unto him: thirdly, that he came
when he was fasting: fourthly, the diversity and order of the temptatious.

I.
First, in James 1, 13. it is said, that God tempts no man; and yet in Deuteronomy.
13, 3. it appears, that God does tempt some; we must then make difference
between temptations; between Gods temptations, and the devils. The devil
indeed tempts us, but God (as our English translation has it) tries us. The
latter is to commend us, Romans 3, 5. or rather that our tribulation may bring
forth patience, and patience hope, Romans 4, 3. It makes us know that to be in
our selves, which before we knew not, as we see in Job. So the Lord proved the
Israelites, to see if they loved him or no, Deuteronomy. 13, 3. The devils temptation
is to know our corruption: for knowing the innocence of Adam, he went about to
corrupt him. It is like the Israelites proving of Manna, to try conclusions.
Gods is like the trial of gold, 1 Pet. 1, 7. which the oftener it is tried, the
puter it waxes: the devils, like that of Manna, which stinketh and corrupts
by trial. Gods is like the trial of the fan, Math. 3, 12. the devils like
that of the sciue, Luke 22, 31. which lets go the flower, and keeps the bran.

II.
Secondly, the devil has two shapes; in the one, he tempts and allureth,
(and in that he came now to our Savior:) in the other, he assayleth us. that
is, by assault and violence, Ephesians. 6, 11. The first is the temptation of
hypocrites, Math. 22, 18. Shall we pay tribute to Caesar? The second, of Judas,
who in the garden assaulted our Savior, John 6, 70. So Satan sets on Christ
by violence. He came unto Christ by casting sparks of fire into him; for he
was deuoid of any wicked and vain thoughts coming forth of him.

Two ways may a man be tempted: either by doubts arising in our hearts out of
us, Luke 24, 38. or by a sop entering into us, John 13, 27. Christ could not be
tempted the first way: for he was deuoid of any wicked and vain thought,
coming forth of him. To us the devil needs bring but a pair of bellows, for
he shall find fire within us: but to Christ he was feign to bring fire too.

III.
Thirdly, he then came to him when he was fasting, which discovers the
devils desparate boldness, as also his craftiness, in that he waited his
time, to stay till he was hungry. Notwithstanding, Christ was newly come from
his Baptism, and was full of the holy Ghost, and even now in his exercise of
mortification, yet had the devil courage to set upon him. There is no place so
holy, nor exercise so good, as can repress his courage, or give a stay to the
boldness of his attempts: as we see, Mark 4, 14. The word is no sooner
sown, but Satan comes immediately, and takes it out of their hearts: which
must needs be done in the Church. For the word is out before they be out of the
Church: so that he is not afraid of hearing the word, but can abide it well
enough, yea, better than many. And though they carry the word out of the
Church, he will wait on then home, and choke the word with cares and riches,
and voluptuons li^ing, like the seed that fell among thorns, Luke 8, 14.

And no more does he care for the exercise of prayer: for even then immediately
after the repetition of forgiveness, when we have made even with all the
world, when God has forgiven us, and we others; then does the devil give us
occasion to say, Lead us not into temptation, as standing by there ready to
tempt us.

And as little cares he for the Sacraments: for presently after they had
received the Sacrament, and sang the hymn, Christ tells them, they shall all be
offended in him that night, Math. 26, 1. Thus we see his courage serves him at
all times, nothing is able to quail it.

As this ought not to discourage the children of God, having so faithful an
assistant to take their part: so it gives them this caveat, that they be at
no time secure, but always to keep a sure guard. Saint Bernard in the midst
of a Sermon was solicited to vainglory, because he thought he pleased his
auditors; and thereupon brake off his speech, and turned it to the devil,
saying; Non propter te hoc opus coeptum est; nec propter te, nec in te finitur.

And as he is courageous, so is he subtle: for notwithstanding his eager
desire, he staid the fittest time, wherein consists a chief point of
wisdom. So when he tempted Eve, he stayed till her husband was away, and till
he could show her the fruit which was so pleasing to the eye. So when David lay
with Beth sheba Vriahs wife, he tempted him in the evening and after his
sl^epe, 2 Samuel 11, 12. a very fit time for the purpose. So when they were
asleep, the enemy sowed tar^s, Math. 13.

And as he is wary in choosing his time, so is he as cunning in choosing the
means, observing the dispositions of men. For wanton and voluptuous men, he
has the daughters of Moab, a bayte fit for their humors, whereby to tempt them
to idolatry, Numb. 15, 1. For men secure and careless, he has a net that
suffices to throw over them, (2 Timothy 2, 26.) and snare them in. For others,
that have more care to seek and inquire into things, he has quils to blow
them up, as knowledge which puffes up, 1 Cor. 8, 1. Yea, even the best things
can he make serve for his purpose, and to be occasions of temptations; so that
he may find better entertainment, for the good exercises sake that come with
him. He will come sometimes shrouded in the necessity of nature, as here; for
when a man is hungry, nature requires somewhat to assuage it.

Prayer, no man doubts to be a godly exercise: yet thereby he tempted them
that loved to pray in the Synagogues, and make much babbling, and repetition,
Math. 6, 5, 7. In like sort does he abuse the name of good counsel, as in
Peter to Christ, Math. 16, 22. who (as a friend) wished him to spare himself,
and live out his time.

Thus can he put on a fair show, the sooner to beguile: and for good reason,
for if he should come unmasked in his own likeness, he would be rejected; as
if Iehoram the King of Israel had come himself without Iehoshaphat, Elisha
would not have looked on him: so by a good pretense, the temptation shrowdes
and insinuates it self: otherwise, it would not be looked on.

IIII.
Now we are to consider the diversity and order of the temptations, and then
will we handle them particularly. And first we are to note, that though there
are but these three recorded, yet he endured diverse others. His whole life was
full of temptations, as may appear by Luke 22, 28. It is said, Luke 4, 2. that
he was tempted forty days of the devil, whereas these three temptations here
set down, were not till after the end of forty days. These only are
mentioned, but there were other not written, as diverse of his miracles are
unwritten, John 20, 25. Only, so much was written as was expedient.

These three are a brief Abridgement of all his Temptations. As it is true
that Paul says, that Christ resembled Adam, and was made a quickening spirit,
as Adam was a living soul, 1 Cor. 15, 45. And the bringing of the children of
Israel out of Egypt, by being called out of Egypt, Mat. 2, 15. So may Christ
and Adam be compared in these three temptations. For they both were tempted
with concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eye, and pride of life,
1. John, 2, 16. In Adam the devil first brought him into a conceit, that God
envied his good. As we see Faulconers put hoodes over Hawks eyes, to make them
more quiet and ruely. Secondly, he lulles him on to a proud conceit of himself,
by persuading him that by eating he should be like God. Thirdly, he shows
the fruit, which was pleasant. So in Christ's temptation. First, he would have
brought him to murmr against God: secondly, to presume: and thirdly, to
commit Idolatry, all which are set down in the 1 Cor. 10, 5, 6, 7 verses. And
under these three heads come all temptations, Numb. 14 and 21. and Exodus 32.

To some of these extremes will the devil seek to drive one. First, by
distrust he will seek to drive us to use unlawful means, for the obtaining
of necessary things, as bread is when a man is hungry. Or if we be in no such
want, that that temptation cannot take place, then (through superfluity) he
will tempt us to wanton and unnecessary desires, as to throw our selves down,
that the Angels may take us up: and having prevailed so far, then he carries
us to the devil and all. All this will I give thee; there is his [All:] Fall
down and worship me, there is the devil with it: so (that in this respect)
may it well be said, that The way of a Serpent is over a stone, Prou. 30, 19.
He goes so slily, that a man sees him in, before he can tell what way, or how
he got in. First, he wraps himself in necessity, and thereby winds himself
in vnperceyued: then he brings us to make riches our God.

Now let us see his Darts. The first is, of making stones bread: This may well
be called, The hungry Temptation. The stream of the Doctors, make Adams
offense the sin of Gluttony: but Bucer thinks, that this temptation is rather
to be referred to distrust and despair. There is small likelyhoode, that one
should sin in gluttony by eating bread only. The devils desire was only,
that the stones might be turned into bread, and that after so long a Fast: and
then, if the Temptation had been to Gluttony, Christ's answer had been nothing
to the purpose; the Devil might well have replied against the insufficiency
of it. For gluttony is to be answered by a text willing sobriety: whereas this
text which Christ answers by, contains rather an assertion of Gods
providence: and therefore our Savior should have seemed very unskillful in
defending himself. The temptation therefore is to distrust.

This stands well with the devils cunning in fight: for by this he shoots
first even at the throat, and at that which is the life of a Christian, to wit,
his faith; as a man would say, Iugulum petit, even at that which ouercometh the
world, 1 John. 5, 5. He tempted him to such a distrust, as was in the
Israelites, Exodus 17, 7. when they asked if God were with them, or no? So he
made Adam think, God eared not for him: so here the devil premiseth a doubt
to shake his faith, wherein Christ made no doubt, Si filius Dei es.

Indeed you heard a voice say, you were the beloved Son of God, but are you
so indeed? or was it not rather a delusion? You see you are almost starued for
want of bread: well, would God have suffered you so to be, if you had been his
Filius dilectus? No, you are some hunger-starued child. So Luke 22, 31. Christ
prayed, that Peter's faith might not fail. It was that the devil shot at. He is
a roaring Lion seeking to devour us, whom we must resist by faith, 1 Pet. 5, 8.

It is our faith that the aims at, 1 These. 3, 5. For having overthrown that,
disobedience soon will follow. Having abolished the stablisher of the Law,
Romans 3, 31. the breach of the Law must needs follow. He has then fit time to
set us a work, about making stones into bread, that is, to get our living by
unlawful means. First, shipwreck of faith, then of obedience.

The Devil here seeing him in great want and hunger, would thereby bring in
doubt, that he was not the Son of God, which is not a good argument. For
whether we respect the natural tokens of Gods favor, we see they happen not
to the wisest and men of best and greatest knowledge, as appears in Eccles.
9, 11. or the supernatural favor of God. We shall see Abraham forced to fly
his Country into Egypt for famine, Genesis 10, 12. So did Isaac, Genesis 26, 1. and
Jacob likewise was in the same distress, Genesis 43, 1. Notwithstanding that God
was called, The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; yet were they all three like
to be hunger-starued. Yea, not only so, but for their faith, many were burned
and stoned, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11, 37. So fared it with the
Apostles, they were hungry, naked, and athirst, 1 Cor. 4, 11. But what do we
speak of the adopted sons of God, when as his own natural Son suffered
as much, nay, far more? Here we see he was hungry, also he was wearied with
travail, and feign to rest: John 4, 6. he had no house to hide his head in,
whereas Foxes have holes.

If thou be the Son of God.
THe Heathens have observed, that in Rhetoric it is a point of chiefest
cunning, when you would out face a man, or importune him to do a thing, to
press and urge him with that, which he will not or cannot for shame deny to
be in himself, As by saying; If you have any wit, then you will do thus and
thus: if you be an honest man or a good fellow, do this. So here the devil
(not being to learn any point of subtilty) comes to our Savior, saying; If
thou be the Son of God. (as it may be doubted, you being in this case:) then,
make these stones bread. No, no, it follows not: a man may be the son of
God, and not show it by any such Art. So when Pilate asked, who accused Christ?
they answered, If he had not been a malefactor, we would not have brought him
before thee, John 18. 30. They were jolly grave men, it was a flat flattery:
and in John 21. 23. there is the like. This ought to put us in mind, when we
are tempted in like manner, that we take heed we be not out-faced.

In the matter it self we are to consider these points: First, the devil
sets it down for a ground, that (follow what will) bread must needs be had.
Therefore Christ first closes with him. Admit he had bread, were he then
safe? No, We live not by berad only: so that bread is not of absolute
necessity. Well, what follows of that? Bread you must needs have, you see your
want, God has left off to provide for you. Then comes the conclusion,
Therefore shift for your self as well as you can. First he soliciteth us to a
mutinous repining within our selves, as Heb. 3, 8. Harden not your hearts, as
in the day of temptation, etc. whereby he forces us to break out into such
like conceits, as Psalm. 116, 11. I said in my distress, that all men be liars:
and Psalm. 31, 22. I said in my haste, I am cast off. Thus closely he distrusted
God, in saying, his Prophets prophecy lies, till at last, we even open our
mouths against God himself, and say, This evil comes from the Lord: shall I
attend on the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6, 33. Hunger and shame is all we shall
get at Gods hands. And so casting off God, betake themselves to some other
Patron, and then the devil is fittest for their turn. For when we are fallen
out with one, it is best serving his enemy, and to retain to the contrary
faction. Then we seek a familiar (with Saul) to answer us, 1 Samuel 28, 7.

But what did the devil than tell him? did he bring comfort with him? No: he
tells him, that to morrow he and his sons should dye. So here does the devil
bring a stone with him. What Father (says Christ) if his Son ask him bread,
would give him a stone? Math. 7, 9. yet the devil does so; Christ was hungry,
and the devil shows him stones.

Here is the Devils comfort, here be stones for thee, if thou can devise any
way to make these stones bread, thou art well; whereas we do not use to make
bread of stones, but of wheat, to work it with the sweat of our browe: sto
get it so, we learn Genesis 3, 19.

By extortion and usury we may make stones into bread, that is the devils
Alchymistrie: or happily we may make bread of nothing, when a man gets a thing
by another oversight, Genesis 43, 12. Or else, what and if we can ouer-reach our
brother in subtilty, and go beyond him with a trick of wit or cunning? Let no
man defraud or oppress his brother in any matter: for the Lord is avenged of
all such, 1 These. 4, 6. The one is called, The bread of violence and
oppression, Prou. 4, 17 The other, The bread of deceit.

They are indeed both made of stones, for they still retain their former
property, as the event will declare. For though in the beginning such bread be
pleasant, Prou. 20, 17. yet after, his mouth is but filled with gravel, Prou.
20, 17. After which will consequently follow, gnashing of teeth.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE THIRD SERMON
Matthew Chap. 4. verse 4. But he answering, said; It is written, Man shall not
live by bread only, but by euey word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.
IT was a good service that Elisha (2 Reg. 6, 9.) did, to tell the King of the
trains laid for him, when they lay in ambush against him. And even this is the
first use that we have of our Saviors Temptations.

It warnes us before hand of the devils coming, so that we may have time to
prepare our selves accordingly. For as at that time the devil came upon Christ
when hunger pinched him: so where we are in any distress, we are to look for
temptations.

This temptation has two parts. First comes (Si,) a distrust: Secondly
follows unlawful means. Having laid this foundation, that bread is necessary
to be had when one is hungry; he infers, that God helps nor, nor
supplyeth the want: therefore God is not the Father. Mat. 7, 9. and therefore
depend no longer on him, but shift for your self. This is the effect of the
devils argument.

The Fathers upon the words Ephe. 6, 16. (Take the shield of faith, to quench
all the fiery darts of the devil:) do note, that about every one of the darts
or temptations of the devil, there are (as it were) balls of wild fire. For
being to assault our obedience, and knowing hat faith is our shield: to that
end he uses the arrow-head, which is; distrust in God, about which is fire, to
wit; the using of unlawful means, to consume our obedience, which will
consume our shield of faith, and so make way for the dark to kill or wound us.
So that his drift is, to bring our adoption or Sonship to a Si.

There is no doubt, but Christ was able to have turned stones into bread: but
why would he not then follow the devils advice? The devil by saying, Say unto
these stones, seems to acknowledge, that he had the force to have done it,
even by his bare word: for even stones are said to hear the voice of God, and
obey his commandment; and not only Gods, but even Gods servants, as 1 Reg.
13, 5. when the man of God had pronounced, that the Altar should rent in
sunder, it did so. And Math. 27, 5. when Jesus cried out with a loud voice, the
veil of the Temple rent in twain, the earth did quake, and the stones were
cloven. The dead men are worse than stones, yet they in their graves heard his
voice.

And not only was he able to turn stones into bread, but into men also: as
Children to Abraham of stones, Math. 3, 9. If therefore it had pleased him, he
was as well able at this time to have turned stones into bread, as after he
turned water into wine, John 2, 10.

It was no less possible to him (no doubt) to have saved himself, when the
Jews scoffingly bad him, Math. 27, 42. as to have saved others; and to have
come down from the Cross being alive; as it was after for him, not only
being dead and buried, but a great stone being over him, to remove it, and come
out of the grave, Math. 28, 2. He had power to both, but not will alike to both.

But why would he not here use his power, for the satisfying of his hunger, and
follow the devils advice? In setting down the History of turning water into
wine, it is thus farther said, that he did it, that his Disciples might believe
in him, John 2, 11. That was the reason that moved him to the working of that
miracle: and because there was no such cause here, he did it not. For the
devil would not believe in him (he knew) though he had done it. The Devil
desired him, but to have him show what he could do, for a need only, for a
vaunt of his power: wherein we see the humor of pride, that made him at the
first to fall.

It is the same temptation that his kinsfolks used, No man does any thing
secretly, that seeks to be famous: if thou do these things, show thy self
to the world. But see how unfitly the Temptation hangs together. He should
rather have said, If you be hungry; than If you be the Son of God: and then
rather have bid him fast forty days more, than turn the stones into bread. If
it had been to have made a Son of God, Christ would have done it: but not to
have showed himself to be the Son of God.

But it may be asked, why did Christ vouchsafe to give him any answer at all;
whereas he might have commanded him to silence, and tormented him before his
time, and have punish^d him for his sauciness? When Peter tempted him, he cut
him up very sharply, saying; Come behind me Satan, Mark. 8, 33. Why did he
not answer the devil so? He might have enjoined him, and thrown him into the
bottomless pit, Luke 8, 31. or at the least bidden him, Avoid Sa\than, verse
10. Augustine answers this doubt, that Christ answered in the like time, to
teach us to answer: willing us thereby (as Abimelech did his soldiers) to do
as he had done before, Judge. 9, 48. So Christ is our example, John 13, 15. and
bids us do as he has done. Christ is our Captain, he has gone before us, and
showed us how to behave our selves in fight: when the devil assaulteth us with
distrust, then are we to ward it off with a Text of Gods providence; and so to
the rest, as he has done before us. Our Saviors shield, whereby (we see) he
bears off all the devils darts, is covered all over with Scriptum est. We
have here a brief view of the Churches Armorie, Cant. 4, 4. of the Tower of
David, built for defense. Here be the shields wherewith Salomons Temple was
hanged, and which Paul calls, The weapons of our warfare, 2 Cor. 10, 4. not
carnal, but mighty (through God) to cast down holds.

They are in number five: First, a preparation of our selves by the use of Gods
Sacraments, that we may be the more strong to sustain and bear off
temptations, and to hold out to the end without fainting. Secondly, a
withdrawing our selves into the desert, or some other solitary place, there (by
Meditation) to kindle good thoughts, Psalm. 39, 3. Thirdly, fasting. Fourthly,
watchful prayer, Math. 26, 41. Fifthly, the perfecting our selves in the
Scriptures. These be the five shields wherewith Salomons Tenple was hanged.

Now as for the Scripture, we are to note, that where God speaks of any good
that we are to receive out of it, it is commended to us as a storehouse,
whether we are to make our resort for the bread of life, and the water of
life, whereof he that tastes, shall never thirst, John 6, 35. And from thence
are we to draw the waters of comfort, out of the fountains of salvation, Esaias
12, 3. When there is any ill spoken of which we are to resist, then it is
commended to us as an Armory, whence we may fetch any kind of weapon which we
shall need, either offensive, as a sword, Heb. 4, 12. or defensive, as a
shield, Prou. 30, 5.

The Scripture is the broad plate that is to bear off the darts: our faith is
the braces or handle whereby we take hold, Ephe. 6, 16. and lift it up to defend
our selves withal. For the Scripture is a shield, Non quod dciitur, sed quod,
dicitur. Dicitur; there is the strong and broad matter, fit to bear off: and
Creditur, that is the handle or braces to it, God spoke once or twice, I have
heard it, power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62, 11. So that it suffices not that
it be spoken only by God, but we must hear it too: neither must we hear it
as the voice of a man (as Samuel at the first did; who when God called him,
thought it the voice of Eli:) but as the voice of God, that we which were dead
in our sins, he has quickened and forgiven us all our trespasses, 1 These. 2,
13. This is the perfection of our faith.

Generally of the Scriptures, this is Christ's opinion, confirmed by his own
practice; that if the devil come as a Serpent, here is a charm for him, Psalm
58, 5. Or if he come as a Lion, here is that is able to prevail against him, 1
Pet. 5, 8. And that the devil knows well enough, as appears by bis malice
that he has always borne it, before it was Scripture, when is was but only
Dictum. For so soon as God had said, Let us make man in our likeness, that
word was straight a whetstone to the devils envy. And after the fall, when the
seed was promised, that was, and is the cause of all the devils enmity, Genesis
31, 15. So when the promise was reitterated, Genesis 22. 18. that was the cause he
so turmoyled all the Patriarchs.

But when the word was to be written, and to become Scripture, then his malice
began to grow very hot, insomuch that he caused it for anger to be broken,
Exodus 32, 19 For the Fathers are of opinion, that all the devils busy
endeavor, in making the Israelites to commit idolatry with the golden Calfe,
was to the end, that he might so heat Moses in his zeal, as that in his anger
he should break the Tables of the Law, by casting them hastily out of his
hands. We are to note therefore, that there is a forceable sound in the word,
which the Devil cannot abide; and not only the sound, but the sight also.

It is written of Augustine, that lying sick on his bed, he caused the seven
poenitentiall Psalms to be painted on the wall over against him, in great
Letters; that if after he should become speechless yet he might point to every
verse when the devil came to tempt him; and so confute him. Blessed is he that
has his quiver full of such arrows, they shall not he ashamed. Blessed is he
that has the skill to choose out fit arrows for the purpose, as the Fathers
speak out of Esaias 49, 2. Christ says affirmatively of the Scriptures, that in
them is eternal life, John 5, 39. Negatiuely, that the cause of error, is the
not knowing of them, Mark 12, 24. David says, it was that that made him wiser
than his enemies, than his teachers, and than the Ancients, Psalm. 119, 98, 99,
and 110. Knowledge of the truth, is the way to amendment after a fall, 2 Timothy
2, 26. There is much calling now adays for the Word, and others find fault as
fast, that it is no better harkned unto. For as the want of obedience, and all
other abuses (which are so much cried out against) proceed not only from the
not hearing of the word, but as well from the not mingling of faith with it,
(without which mixture, it is nothing worth) it profits not, Heb. 4, 2. So
the error of the former times was, in yielding too far to the devils policy,
by sealing up the Scriptures, and locking the storehouse and Armorie of the
people. It is the policy Christ tells us of in the 11. of Lukes Gospel 22. A
strong man puts the strong armed man out of his house, and takes away his
armor from him: then he needs not fear him.

The like policy we read of, 1 Samuel 13, 19 when the Philistims had taken away
all Smithes and Armor, then they thought they were safe. So in the time of
darkness, the devil might let them do their good works, and what they list,
and yet have them still under his lure: that he might offend them at his
pleasure, that had no armor to resist him. All the Children of God, had a
right and property in the Law of God, as appears by Christ's words, John 10,
34. he answered them, that is, the common people, Is it not written in your
Law? As though he should say, the Scripture is yours. To the young man (in the
tenth Chapter of S Lukes Gospel, and 26. verse) that asked Christ what he
should do to be saved? Christ answers: What is written in the Law? how
read thou? Whereunto the answer, that we cannot read, or that the book is
sealed up, Esaias 29, 11. is as the devil would have it. Then has he a fit time
to offer us stones to make bread of. But this answer with our Savior Christ
will not he allowed of.

Now come we to the special point of Christ's answer, It is written, Man lives
not by bread only, etc. Deuteronomy 8, 3. There is no better kind of reasoning, than
that, when one grants all that has been said by his adversary, and proves
it to make on his part; and upon a new conceit, auoyds all that his adversary
said. Here our Savior might confess all that the devil objected; as that he
is the Son of God; and admit the stones were made bread, and that bread were
of absolute necessity, and that it were so to be come by (which is untrue,)
were we then in good case?

This indeed is the devils position, wherewith he would persuade all those that
have animam triticeam, (as the Fathers call it:) that those external things
are necessary to be had: and that if they have enough thereof, they are well
enough; as we see it to be the mind of the rich man, Luke 12, 19. This man
having a wheaten soul, having corn enough, bad his soul take rest, and live
merrily for many years. But Christ goes further, and says; Though the stones
be made bread, it will not avail, except it please God (by the blessing of his
word) to give virtue, and (as it were) life unto the bread, there is no
difference between it, and a stone.

It is not the plenty or quality of victuals, howsoever some dote upon such
external means, as they did, which sacrificed to their net, and burnt incense
to their yerne, Abac. 1. 16. because by them their portion was fat, and their
meats plentuous. For what says Job 31, 27. If I rejoiced because my substance
was great, this had been an iniquity. So that our life is not maintained by
bread only, descended out of the mould of the earth. The nature of bread and
stones are not much unlike, they come both out of one belly: that is to say,
the earth, Job 28, 5, 6. and of themselves, the one of them has no more power
than the other unto life: for we know that the Israelites died, even while the
flesh of Quayles was in their mouths, Numb. 11, 33. and Manna (heavenly fare)
being far better than our bread. It is the devils crafty policy, to bury a
man's life vender a loaf of bread: and (as it were) to fetter the grace of God
to the outward means; whereas they of themselves are of no efficacy, without
the operation and grace of the word, than a hammer and a saw, without a hand,
able to employ them.

David says (Psalm. 104, 28.) The eyes of all things wait on God for their
meat in due season, and thou fillest them: With what? with bread? No, but with
thy blessing and goodness. Our hearts must be stablished with grace, not with
meats. Heb. 13, 9. It is Gods prerogative, that as all things had their
beginning from him, Col. 1, 17. so he supporteth and sustaineth them, Heb. 1, 3.

This is a further point than all Philosophy teaches us. For they having laid
down the four elements, bare and simple essences, tanquam materiam, by
compounding and tempering of them, they bring forth a cercaine quintenssence or
balm full of virtue. But Divinity leads so to a quintessence, without
which, all the quintessences and balmes in the world can do us no good.

To the question that Jeremy propounds, Ier. 8, 22. Is there no balm at
Gilead? Is there no Physician there? The answer may be, Man's health is not
recovered by balm or physic only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God, if we weigh Christ's argument aright. For we may see, 2 Chronicles. 16, 12. Asa dyed for all his Physicians that were about him. So if it be
asked, Are there no horses nor chariots in Gilead? we may answer, warlike
victory consists not in warlike furniture only, but in remembering the name
of the Lord God. Psalm. 20, 7. A horse is a vain thing to save, without the
power of this word. And so when a man thriues nor, or prospers not in his
actions; it is not often for want of labor or care: Psalm. 127, 1. tells him,
Except the Lord build the house, etc. Augustine advises his Auditorie; to
believe it in time, least (by woeful experience) they find it to be true,
when 'as they shall have such a consumption, that no meat shall do them any
good; or such a dropsy, that no drink shall avail them. The power and virtue
of this word is called, The staff of bread, Leuit. 26, 26. and it is meant of
a chiose staff, such a one as is set in the midst, to bear up all the Tent.
The plainest similitude I can use, to make you understand the force thereof, is
this: When we go to Physic for any disease, we are bidden seethe such
herbs in running water, and then to drink the water, we know it is not the
water which helps, but the decoction of infusion, So it is not the bread
(considered barely in it self) that nourishes us, but the virtue and grace of
the word infused into it. We are not therefore to stick to the means, like
the Glutton, Luke 12, 19. but to pray for this blessing. And to this end, God
(in the establishing of nature) has thereout reserved four special
prerogatives to his Word.

As first, with a very little of the means, to go far in operation, 1 Reg. 17,
14. with a little oil and a little wheat, he fed Elias, the poor widow, and
her son a great while. And Math. 17. 14. Christ made five loaves and two
fishes serve five thousand persons. The heathen man thought no certain
proportion was to be set down for a family, because when a heavenly hunger
comes on men, they eat more at one time, than at another. But whatsoever the
heathen have spoken wisely, we have far more wisely uttered by the holy
Ghost, in one place or other. In Psalm. 17, 14. this is set down, where there
is mention made of a certain hidden treasure, wherewith means bellies be
filled, and Haggi. 1, 6. says, Men eat much, yet have not enough; drink much,
but are not filled. This is the first prerogative.

His second is, he takes order as well for the quality, as for the quantity;
course meats and fine are all one with him; for the Israelites
(notwithstanding their Quayles and Manna) died: and Daniel and his fellows,
that fed upon course meats, looked better than all the children that were fed
with the Kings own dyct, Dan. 1, 15.

Thirdly, without means he works sometimes. Therefore Asa had said little or
nothing to the purpose, 2 Chronicles. 14, 1 1. If he had said, God helps by many
or few (if he had not put in too) and sometimes by none. For there was light
before any Sun or Moon, Genesis 1, 3. though after ( verse 14). it pleased God
to ordain them as instruments. And so Genesis 2, 5. the earth was fertile, when
as then no rain had fallen on the earth, nor any such ordinary means. Let
Moses be on the Mount, and but hear God, and he needs no bread.

The fourth is, that he can bring his purpose to pass, even by those means
whose natures tend to contrary effects; as to preserve by stones.
Colloquintida, being rank poison, (in eating whereof is present death) was (by
the Prophet) made matter of nourishment, 2 Kings 4, 40. So Christ, by those
things which were fit to put out a seeing man's eyes, as dust; made a blind man
recover his sight, John 9, 6. And so does he make light to shine out of
darkness, 2 Cor. 4, 6. One contrary out of another. Thus we see the devil
answered. Now let us apply these things to our selves.

Christ's answer does import two words, and so two mouths, and two breaths, or
spirits: and these two be as two twins. He that will be maintained by the
one, must seek after the other. The first word is the same decree, whereby the
course of nature is established, according to Psalm. 147, 15. He sends forth
his commandment upon the earth, and his word runs very swiftly: he gives
snow like wool, etc.

Secondly, the other is that whereof James 1, 18. speaks: to wit, the word of
truth, wherewith (of his own will) he begat us. The one proceeds from the
mouth of Gods providence, creating and governing all things, Psalm. 33, 6. he
but spoke the word, and it was done. The other proceeds out of the mouth of
Gods Prophets, who are (as it were) his mouth, Ier. 15, 19. Thou stand
before me, as if thou were my mouth. From the first word, all things have
their beginning and being; as when he sent forth his spirit or breath, they
were created and had their beginning: So Psalm. 104, 29. he teaches us, that so
soon as God hides his face, they are troubled. And if he takes away their
breath, they dye, and return to dust. The other spirit, that is, the
sanctifying Spirit, ministers unto us supernatural life, Esaias 56, 21. Now
therefore to set them together, every man is thus to think with himself. If I
get my living contrary to Gods word, that is, by any unlawful means; surely
Gods other word will not accompany such gotten goods. That is, these two words
be twins: if we get not our goods by the one word, we shall want the blessing
of the other word, and then we were as good eat stones: it will be but
gravel in our mouths, or Quails. We are then to use the means, according to
the second word. Abraham (we see) went forth to sacrifice, according to Gods
appointment, Genesis 22. the Word was his direction: therefore when Isaac asked,
Where was the Sacrifice? he might boldly answer, God would provide one; as we
see even at the very pinch he did: whereupon it came to be a proverb, that
even In monte, Iehoua prouidebit. The Israelits went out of Egypt, by the
warrant and appointment of Gods Word. How then? First, they had away made them
(where never was any before) through the Red Sea, Exodus 14, 21. they had bread
downward out of the clouds, whereas it uses to rise upwards out of the earth:
their garments in forty years never waxed old, Deuteronomy. 8, 3, 4. they had water,
whence water uses not to come; by striking the Rocks, water gushed forth: So
that it is true which the Prophet David says, Psalm. 34, 9. There is no want to
them that fear God. Though (peradventure) he will not use the same means he
did for the Israelites; yet the Children of God (walking after his will) shall
have some way of relief always. And therefore Christ would not distrust the
providence of God: for he knew he was in the work and way of God. For we
read, that he was led into the wilderness by the Spirit, and therefore could
not lack; as indeed he did not, for the Angels came and minstred unto him: as
it follows in the 11. verse of this Chapter. So either the Crows shall
minister to our wants, as they did to Elias: or our enemies, as the Egyptians
did to the Israelites: or else the Angels themselves, as they did here.

But to grow to a conclusion, Let us seek the Kingdom of God, and all other
things shall be ministered unto us. And in all like temptations, we may learn a
good answer out of Dan. 3, 17. That God that we serve, is able to relieve and
deliver us, even the burning fire: But, if it should not be his will so to do,
yet we will not use unlawful means, or fall to Idolatry, or turn stones
into bread. In this answer (again) Christ would teach us here to be resolute,
howsoever Gods blessing does not concur with our gettings, as it does not
when we get them by indirect means, contrary to Gods word. To goods so
gotten, God will add sorrow: for The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he
does add no sorrows with it, Proverb. 10, 22. When God gives riches, he
gives quietness withal: but if God give them not, we were as good be without
them, whether they be gotten by oppression or violence, Prou 4, 17. or by fraud
and deceit, Prou. 20, 17. For these two be the quicksilver and brimstone of
the devils Alchymistrie. God will add sorrow to them: for though they be
pleasant at the first, Proueob. 20, 17. and money gotten by stinking means,
smells like other money (as an Emperor said:) and bread so gotten, tastes like
other bread: yet in the end a plain conclusion and experiment will make it
manifest, that it was made of stones, and had sorrow mingled or added to it.
And therefore it shall be either an occasion or matter of the disease called
the Stone: or it shall turn his meat in his bowels, and fill him with the
gall of Alps, Job 20, 14. or as Asaes oppression by delicacie became an
occasion of the dropsy or gout: or else shall the executioner catch all that
he has, and the stranger spoil him, Psalm. 109, 11. or spend them upon
Physicians, Mark 5, 26. or on Lawyers: or else, though God suffer them to
enjoy them quiet all their life time, and even to die by their flesh pots; yet
on their deathbed they shall find such a grudging and torment in their
conscience, that they will wish that they had starued for hunger, before they
had begun to use any such means. Or if God in his judgment (for their greater
torment) suffer them to die in their beds, without any remorse of conscience,
like blocks, or like an Ox dying in a ditch; at the last day they shall feel
a gnashing in their teeth, and then they will know it was made of stones.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
Math. Chap. 4. verses 5, 6. Then the devil took him up into the holy City,
and set him on a pinnacle of the Temple,

And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it
is written, That he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, least at any time thou should dash thy foot against
a stone.


THe manner is, after one has taken a foil, his courage will fail. The
Angel would have been gone, when he saw he could not prevail over Jacob,
Genesis 32, 26. But it is not so here with the devil. For when he saw that his
first temptations would not prevail, he tries another. And even so he played
with Job: for when he could do no good upon his first patent, by taking away
all that he had, he comes and sues for a new Commission, that he might touch
his flesh and bones, Job 2, 5. and thereby he gives us to learn, That it is
not one foil that can make him give over. He is one of those, whom a Father
says, to have courage above their strength; and of that nature be many in our
days, whose daring is above their skill; and have courage to undertake much
more than their ability is to perform. Not like David, who did as much as he
undertook in killing Goliath: nor like him of whom Esaias speaks in the seventh
verse of his third Chapter, that when they would have made him Prince, he had
no bread nor clothing, and therefore refused: but they will take it upon them
though they have not wherewithal, and thereby become Authors of trouble,
wanting ability to go through withal. But as Augustine says; Is it not all
one not to be able to answer, nor to be able to hold their peace? We see here
the Devil is a great undertaker.

Secondly, he is not only content to take a foil, but even out of the same
thing wherewith he was foiled makes he matter of a new Temptation, a new ball
of fire. Out of Christ's conquest, he makes a new assault; that is, since he
will needs trust, he will set him on trusting, he shall trust as much as he
will. As the fo^mer tempted him to diffidence; so this shall tempt him to
presidence. As before the devil brought him to the waters of Meribah (Exodus
17, 7.) where the Children of Israel did murmr and tempt God: so now he
brings him to the temptation of Massah, (Deuteronomy. 6, 16.) that is, to presumption,
wantonness, and delicacie: for then with bread they were not content, but they
must have flesh and other dainties, Psalm. 78, 20. As the first might be called
the hungry Temptation, so this may be called, The wanton Temptation. That which
was in the old Testament the Temptation of Meribah, is here in the new
Testament the Temptation of the Wilderness; and that which was there the
Temptation of Massah, is here the temptation of the Pinnacle.

In the first, by want of things necessary, he thought to drive them to
vexation and bitterness of spirit, and to distrust Gods power and goodness.
In the second, by unnecessary matters, he draws us on to wantonness, and to
put God to try what he can do, and to set him about base services; by the one,
he drives us unto unlawful means, by the other, he draws us from the use
of things lawful: by the one, he brings us to this conceit, that we are so
abiected of God, that if we trust in him, he will in the end fail us; by the
other, to think we are so dear in Gods eyes, and such darlings, as throw our
selves into any danger, and he will not forsake us. By the one, he puts us in
fear (as Augustine says:) Deum defuturum, eatiam si promisit; by the other,
in hope, Deum adfuturum, vbi non promised: by the one, he slandreth God unto us,
as if he were a God of straw, of base condition, and subject to our beck; by
the other, as if he were a God of iron, that would not incline, though we
requested him.

Now to the Temptation: wherein we are to consider three things. First, the
ground the Devil chose for the working of this Temptation. Secondly, the
temptation it self; to wit, the devils speech. Thirdly, Christ's answer to it.
In the place, three things are to be noted: First, the place it self:
Secondly, the devil chose it: Thirdly, that our Savior followed him thither.
For a new temptation he makes choice of a new place. Indeed for a temptation to
presumption the Wilderness was not a fit place: first it was not high enough,
and then it was not populous enough. It was a melancholy place: when a man is
under the cross in affliction, or in some anguish and sorrow for want, death
of friends, or otherwise; and generally for all solitary men: the hungry
Temptation is fitter than this of Presumption. As long as Noah was in the Arc
in the midst of the waters, he had in him no presumptuous thought: but sitting
under the Vine in his Vineyard, he was overcome therewith. And just Lot (2
Pet. 2, 8.) in Sodom, had no fit time or place to be presumptuous; but when he
dwelt in the mountain in security, then the committed incest with his
Daughters, being made drunk by them. David, so long as he was persecuted by
Saul, and tossed up and down from post to pillar, had no leisure to be
presumptuous: but in the top of his Turret, when he was at rest in his
Palace, 2 Samuel 11, 2. presumption gave him a blow. So here the Wilderness was
no fit place, but the Pinnacle is a very fit place for one to be presumptuous
on. It is as good as a stage to show himself upon, to see and to be seen.

In the Wilderness there was small warrant for one that would be presumptuous:
but from the Pinnacle he might discern far and near, both the inner Court
and outward Court, and see a whole Cloud of Witnesses, and have some warrant of
example of all estates, high or low, wise or noble. For what abuse soever be in
him, be he never so presumptuous, he shall see some as proud, stout, and
highminded as himself: be his hair never so long, or his ruffes never so
great, he shall find some as far gone therein as himself.

If we mark the four gradations that it has, we shall find it to be a very
fit place. As first, before he could come to the Pinnacle, he must go out of the
Wilderness into the City: Secondly, not any City, but the holy City:
Thirdly, into the Temple of the City: And fourthly, out of the Temple up to
the Pinnacle. First, (having got him to leave the Wilderness) he brought him
into the City, that there he might say unto him: You see such and such grave
men, how they behave themselves: why should you seek to be holier than they?
This was a good ciuell temptation: he brought him not to Cesarea or Samaria,
but even to Jerusalem the holy City: for that addition is given it, Luke 4, 9.
and Dan. 9, 24. Thirdly, he brought him into the Temple, where even the very
ground was holy. Fourthly, not to any other place of it, but the very top and
Pinnacle which was over the Sanctum Sanctorum. Who would not tread hard there?
and take upon him, being in such a place, where if a man will be carried away
with example; he may see Ananias the High Priest, renting his clothes, at the
hearing of things that sounded like blasphemy, Mark 14, 63. and yet buying his
Bishopric for money? who will not then be bold to do the like? And Herod a
Prince, such a one as heard John Baptist preach; yea, and with much delight, to
commit adultery, Mark 6, 20. who would fear to do the like? There he may see
the Pharisie, under show of great holiness, tything Mint and Cummin, and under
color of long prayers, devour widows houses, bringing in by extortion, and
sending out by excess, Math. 23, 14, 21. And so in this City, one may see
some men, both great frequenters of Sermons, and yet great usurers; Gentlewomen
misshapen in their attire. Seeing this, who will not be as bold as they, the
place being so holy? And being thus warranted by example, surely we must needs
commend the devils wit, for his choice.

Out of this, arise two notes. First, against some fantastical spirits, who
say; Can that be an holy City, where there be dumb dogs? There were so in
Jerusalem, Esaias 56, 10. Where the leaders be blind? Mat. 15, 14 They were so
where Judas ministered the Sacrament, where there is division and debate amongst
themselves, Phil. 4, 2. Can this (say they) be the holy City? And thereupon
they forsake the fellowship, Heb. 10, 25. Whereas they (not withstanding the
former abuses, and notwithstanding the eleven Tribes were Apostates) did yet
name it the holy City.

Secondly, on the other side we are to be instructed, though a man be on the
battlements of the Church, yet has he no sure sooting, or cause to be secure;
but rather to fear the more: for even there does the devil stand at his
elbow, watching his Overthrow. There is no place (we see) privileged from
temptations, no Desert so solitary, but the devil will seek it out: no
Pinnacle so high, but the devil is a Bishop over it, to visit and ouer-looke it.

To conclude, though in Jerusalem sits the abomination of desolation (whereof
David spoke;) yet it is the holy City still. And though the place be never so
holy, yet is that no cause of privilege; but even there may fit the
abomination of desolation. Both are proved out of Math. 24, 15.

The second thing that we observed in the circumstance of place, is; that the
Devil assumpted Christ: which, to those that are weak (as Gregory also
collecteth) may be offensive, in giving them to think, that the devil had
such power over Christ, as to carry him whether he listed. But when they shall
consider, that even the limbs of the devil haled and harrowed him too and
fro, from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilat from Pilat to Herod, and from
him back again to Pilat: and how spitefully and contemptuously he was used in
all these places, and at last carried to execution: what marvel will it be to
see him (as Augustine speaks:) In monte duci a capite, qui a membris in
additure, etc. These things do indeed (as all other his sufferings) set forth
the greatness of the love of God toward us. Of God the Father, that he would
give his only Son; yea, appoint him this work of out salvation, and give
the devil such a power oner him, Luke 22, 53. Of God the Son, that he would
be content to suffer such indignity, phl. 2, 7. as to be obedient to the death
of the Cross.

The reason of all these his sufferings, as also that he would be baptized of
John, a weak and sinful man; was (as himself declares it) to fulfill all
righteousness, Math. 3. 15. So here he was to suffer it, else Gods
righteousness would not have been fulfilled, nor the work of our salvation.
And as he suffered this Assumption, so afterward, Luke 9, 51. his second
Assumption was, to go to Jerusalem to suffer: and so at the last he came to his
third and last Assumption, to be received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3, 16. And by
the very same steps and degrees, must we be assumpted. And this is the
assumption of suffering, which brought him to glorifying.

The third thing is, that our Savior followed; whereby we are to mark, not so
much his courage, that he durst encounter with the Devil, in any place
wheresoever he list to carry him: and that he was not only the God of the
valleys, but a God of the mountains also, contrary to their surmise, 1 King.
20, 23. That (I say) is not so much to be marked, as that our Savior would at
all stand upon a Pinnacle. There be some that would make us believe, it is a sin
to stand upon a Pinnacle: but then if that had been so, Christ would never have
stood there. And since Christ stood there, it is no more sin for any man else
to stand there, than it is to stand in the Wilderness: for it is lawful for
us to follow his footsteps, and to tread wheresoever he has trod before us;
yet such places be not privileged. For, as it is true, that many men's table
and wealth is their snares, Psalm. 69, 22. even so the good gifts and graces of
God, beturned to a man's hurt: as knowledge may serve for a quill to puff him
up, and make him swell, 1 Con. 8, 1. Nay, even that godly sorrow, which is so
much to be wished for, has in it matter of temptation, least men be swallowed
up with too much heaviness, 2 Cor. 2, 7.

The Scriptures themselves (we see) are subject to the abuse of the devil:
whereby it should follow, that they are to be refused, if every thing be
refused which brings matter of temptation. But as Augustine says, Non est laus
stetisse in pinaculo, sed stetisse and non cecidisse. In every place to answer
the devil, is praiseworthy. Indeed it is dangerous for one that has a light
and giddy brain, for such as are drunk, Esaias 51, 22. (though not with wine)
to stand so high. Job could stand there without falling, for he had a more
settled brain, Job 31, 27. Such places are forth wisest and sagest men. Saint
Paul stood not there, but yet he could have stood there, for he had the trick
or skill of it, as himself confesses, Phil. 4, 12. I can be abased, and I can
abound, etc.

Now come we to the Temptation it self, which has three general heads.
First, the ball of wild fire; which is to consume his faith. Secondly, the
dart, Cast thy self down; which is to pierce the soul. Thirdly, he tempereth
the head of his dart with some stronger metal; which is, Scriptum est.

I.
FIrst, Si filius Dei es. This is a great mote in the devils eye, he uses the
same term in the former temptation, and here he is up with it again. And all
is to this end, that by often bringing it into question whether he be the
Son of God; he may at last make it out of question or doubt, that we are not
the sons of God: that by and from Si sis, he may bring it to Ne sis; and so
we may be like himself. For to this end is all his compassing of sea and land,
to make one Proselyte like himself, according to the endeavor of the
Pharisees, Math. 23, 15. who did in like sort; and when he is made, ye make
him (twofold more) the child of hell, then your selves. As on the other side,
Christ would have us the sons of God like him. But see what a dexterity the
devil has, in making things serve for his purpose: he makes one self same
thing serve for two several, yea, contrary purposes. What a goodly grace he
has in the first Temptation? He uses it there to procure us to desparation:
he makes it here to serve for presumption. But indeed there be two manner of
Si es, or Ifs: the one is a questioning or doubting, [Si;] as, If thou be the
Son of God, show us a sign, Mark 8, 12. Lord if thou will, thou can make
me whole, Mat. 8, 2, The other is a plain affirmation, as Phil. 3, 11. If by
any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead: where we are sure
he made no doubt thereof. So here the devil says, If thou be the Son of
God, as I now grant indeed. I was in some doubt, but now I confess thou art: I
am of those voices mind, that pronounced thee so at thy Baptism.

The devil (in the former temptation) came out like a malecontent, or a
murmurer: here he comes like a flattering parasite, he will pinguare caput eius
oleo, make his head even swim in the oil of ostentation. But though it be not
the same temptation, yet it is the same devil in both places. For both by the
one and the other, he seeks the downfall and destruction of man: and though
his two Ifs be contrary in themselves, yet are they both also contrary to the
will and word of God: for he would not in any case we should distrust him,
neith^r would he that at any time we should cast our selves down. And
therefore has be caused battlements to be made on every house top, that none
might be slain with falling down, Deuteronomy, 22, 8. Now he would have him show
himself (thereby) to be the Son of God, for he is now in the sight of all
Jerusalem.

It is said, that Christ comes now to put too a spark of fire, that is of
faith, and that his will was, it might burn and be maintained. The devil on
the other side, labors by all means possible to quench and put it out: and
seeing water would not do it in the former temptation; he goes now about to
see, if he can make the very oil it self to put it out, even that very thing
whereby it was to be maintained: as indeed it will, if we power out too great a
quantity. Or if he cannot quench it, either with water or oil, he will see if
he can blow it up with gunpowder. As, seeing the water of distrust will not
extinguish his faith, but that he would trust in God: he endeavors now by
Scriptures (that magnify the providence of God, and the confidence we are to
put in him) to set him as far gone in the other extreme, by presuming or
trusting too much, that so the fire, which before he would have quenched, may
now so flame out, as not to keep it self within the chimney, but to set the
whole house on fire. This is the ball of wilde-fire of this second Temptation:
and so both we seetend to the consuming and nullifying of our faith.

II.
THe dart it self is, [Cast thy self down:] which consists of two points.
First, the casting down. Secondly, that he himself was to cast down himself.
For the first, it is general, the neglect of ordinary means, as here.
Whereas the ordinary way was down the stairs, he would have him leap, or
throw himself over the Battlements. And here a man may see to what end the
devils halting comes: he brings a man up by little and little to some high
place, that so he may send him at once with his head downward. All the
preferments that he bestows on a man, is not to any other intent, but that he
may do as the devil himself did, (who being on high, did cast himself down)
and so be like him, John 8, 23. that is, from beneath, not from above: who fell
from heaven like lightning, Luke 10, 18. So that howsoever in outward show he
may seem to befriend us, yet this is his inward intention and scope. As the
Edomites in time of the prosperity of the Israelites, pretended great good
will to them: but in the day of their great calamity, they were they that
cried, Down with them, dawne weth them, Psalm. 137, 7. Gods manner is, when he
means to exalt a man, he will first humble him, and make him low, Math. 23,
12. The devils manner is (we see) clean contrary, Esaias 14, 14. to lift them up
to the clouds, that he may bring them down to the grave, yea to the lowest
grave, Psalm. 86, 13. He carries them the higher, to throw them down with the
greater violence. He lifeth up Adam with a conceit, to be like God, to the very
top of perfection, to the intent he might be like the beast that perishes,
Psalm. 49, 20.

The second has some matter of comfort: the devil is here a suitor to him, to
do it himself. Why does not the devil cast him down? First, it was not in
his power; or if he had, yet would not that have served his turn: then there
had been no sin of presumption in it. There must be two persons that must
concur in our downfall: well may the devil induce and move us to it; but
unless we our selves be consenting, and cast our selves down, there can be no
downfall to hurt us. For as Chrysostom says, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso:
so, Nullum precipitium nisi voluntarium. The devil did not cram Eve with the
forbidden fruit: but when she saw it, she took it, and eat it, Genesis 3, 6. So
the devil, when he enters into the soul of a man (which he counts his
palace) he does not break open the door; no, nor so much as draw the latch;
but when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished, Luke 11, 25. and so
goes in. There must therefore be a reaching out of the hand, and an opening of
the door by our selves, and so a casting down of the self, or else, though
the devil thrust sore at thee that thou may fall, the Lord will help thee,
Psalm. 118, 13. In Deuteronomy. 22, 8. God has caused battlements to be made on every
house top, by which we may stay our selves. The devil tells God, that he had
made a hedge about Job, Chap. 1, 10. so that unless Job step over it, or
break it down, he is safe.

III.
THe devils dart is, Cast thy self down: but he bestows some great cost on
this. With the selfsame armor that Christ bare off the other dart, does the
devil sharpen and harden this: he does not so in any other of the temptations,
therefore we are to look for some great matter: he brings Scripture, that
he may be the better credited. He speaks not now after the manner of men, 1
Cor. 9, 8. so that it is not he now that speaks, but Scripture, as Paul
reasons there, You see (says he) I counsel you to nothing, but that the
Psalms will bear you out in. The devil knew well by his own fall, how
dangerous the sin of presumption is, it cost him dearly: and so did it David
likewise, and therefore of all other, he prays God to keep him from
presumptuous sins: Psalm. 19, 13. He knew also what it was to abuse the
goodness, patience, and long suffering of God, Romans 2, 4. Therefore he
avouches it by Scripture: he tells him, it will be too long to go down the
stayres, and withal teaches him a nearer way, but to iumpe, or to cast
himself down, and to fear no hurt, for the Angels have charge of him. And
even so he persuades men now adays; that they need not go down fair and
softly, in fear and trembling, but to defer all till their dying hour, and
then commend themselves to God, and throw themselves upon Gods mercy, and that
fiery Chariot that took up Elias, shall come and fetch up them; or else, an
Angel shall carry them up, let them be sure they shall have no harm, for they
be Gods darlings, and God does so dote on them, that he will not suffer them
in any case to receive the least hurt that may be.

If ever the devil came in his likeness, it was here. In the first of Sam.
28, 18. he came but in the guise of a Prophet: so that in stead of saying, Is
Saul among the Prophets? it might have been said; What, is the devil among the
Prophets? But here he has used himself so cunningly, that if ever he was
transformed into an Angel of light, here it is verified, 1 Cor. 11, 14. For he
comes here like a white devil, or like a Divine; he comes with a Psalter in
his hand, and turns to the place, and shows our Savior the 91. Psalm, verse
11, 12. Wherein first we are to note, that the devil reads Psalms, as well
as we, and has the words of Scripture in his mouth. And 1 Samuel 28. he
counterfeited Samuel so right, and used the very words that he had used, that
they could not know him from Samuel: so here he counterfeited the voice of
David, Acts 19, 15. This will make us shake off security, considering that God
does (for our trial) sometime deliver the adversary the okey of our Armorie,
whereby he is able to hold argument with an Archangell, Jude 9. yea, with
Christ himself, as we see here. How careful therefore had we need to be, to
find out a fit answer for him? For only to assault us does he read the
Scriptures: yea, but not to any good end, but even thereby to deceive the
simplicity of men; as here to make them put their souls in adventure to the
last hour. He has indeed a grace with some vain youths of the Court, and
ungodly Atheists, to set them a scoffing at the the Scripture, as Esaias 28, 22.
But with others, that have the Scriptures in more high reverence, he goes
another way to work, making it to them the savor of death, Romans 7, 10.

The words which he uses in the name of Samuel, he uses to make Saul
despair: and here he uses David's words to cause presumption, and to make
them our bane. And not every Scripture: but if there be any Scripture more
full of heavenly comfort than another, that of all other will the devil abuse;
as indeed the Psalms are; and of all the Psalms, this 91. especially: and in
that part, if any one sentence be sweeter than another, that of all other will
the devil abuse. Mark the second verse here cited: He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. These last words the devil
leaves out, because they make not for his purpose. They shall bear thee in
their hands, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone. And we shall see
nothing can be spoken more comfortable: as first, in that it is said, that the
Angels have charge over us in all our ways, Exodus 23, 20. Behold I send my
Angel before thee, to guide thee in the way; and to comfort, and confirm us.
As when Jacob was in fear of his brother Esau, the Angel met him, Genesis 32, 1.
and to defend us in all dangers, and succor us in all necessities, spreading
their wings over us, and pitching their tents about us. Psalm. 34, 7. Secondly,
this charge not only concerns our head and principal members, but also our
feet: yea, Gods providence reaches even to the hairs of our head, for they
are numbered, Math, 10, 30. Thirdly, this charge of theirs is not only to
admonish us when danger comes, but they are actually to help us, as it were
putting their hands between the ground and us. Mat. 13, 14. They shall take
the rubs and offenses out of our way. Fourthly, this do they not of courtesy,
as being creatures given by nature to love mankind, but by special mandate
and charge they are bound to it, and have a praecipe for it, yea, the very
beasts and stones shall be in league with us.

This Psalm, and these verses containing such comfort, has the Devil culled
to persuade men, that being such sweet children of God, they may venture
whether and upon what they will; for the Angels attend them at an inch. He bids
them put the matter in adventure, and then but whistle for an Angel, and they
will come at first: he carries them up to the top of the Pinnacle, and shows
them their own case in Annas and Herod; and tells them God will require no more
of them, than he did at their hands: and all the way as they go up, he sings
them a Psalm of the mercies of God: he carries them up with a song, that Gods
mercy is above all his works, Psalm. 145, 9. And with Psalm. 103, 8. How
gracious and long-suffering God is, who rewards us not according to our
deserts. And Psalm. 136. That his mercy endures for ever: God therefore being
so full of mercy, will take all things in good part. But this mercy the devil
tells them of, diffeteth from the mercy David meant. For the mercy David
speaks of, is coupled with judgment, Psalm. 101, 1. 1 will sing mercy and
judgment to thee O Lord: and Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy and truth are met together,
Justice and peace have kissed each other. Thus I say they shall have music
all the way, and if any at the height think it a great way down: no (says
the devil) you need but a iumpe from your baptism into heaven, you shall
need no stairs at all.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
Matthew Chap. 4. verse 7. Jesus said unto him; It is written again. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God.
COnsidering that Saint James says Chap. 4, 5. The Scripture speaks nothing
in vain: and that as our Savior Christ says, John 10, 35. No Scripture can
be disappointed; it may seem strange that the devil coming armed with The
sword of the Spirit, (for so is the word of God termed, Ephesians. 6, 17.) Christ
gives not place, but opposes himself to answer. We see that a message
coming in the name of the Lord, this very name abashed Nehemias, (Neh. 6, 10.)
at the first hearing, till he perceived it was contrary to the law of God, and
so came not from him: which here we see to be the cause, why Christ does not
yield by and by, upon the hearing of the Word, but sets himself to make
answer: for so much as the word is not of, Quia dicitur only, but Quia ireditur,
as Augustine notes. If there be not the mixture of faith with it, (whereof
Paul speaks, Heb- 4, 2.) it is nothing worth. And therefore the bad spirit
was nothing abashed or daunted at the hearing of the bare names of Jesus and
Paul, Act. 19, 15. but answered, I know them, but who are ye? They did not
believe, and therefore could do them no good, but were wounded themselves:
glorious names would not serve the turn. So was it here used without faith.
When the Scripture is here urged against one, a man would think it were not to
be answered by citing another place of Scripture, but by some tradition of the
Elders, Mark. 7, 1. or some gloss, or other shift; but we see our Savior
answers here no other way but by Scripture. Because, the Woolfe comes
sometimes disguised in a sheeps skin, it is no reason that therefore the very
sheep should lay away their fleeces: so here, because the devil uses the
Word, as the slaying letter, 2 Cor. 3, 6. or as the sword to kill men with; it
is no reason why Christ may not therefore use it in his own defense. Why then
(will some say) one of these two inconveniences will follow; that hereby we
shall think the Scripture is of the devils side, as well as of Christ side, and
so divided; as in like sort they make a division of Christ, when one holds with
Paul, another with Apollos, 1 Cor 1, 13. No, it is not so, Christ alleges not
this Scripture in that sort, as one nail to drive out another: but by way of
harmony and exposition, that the one may make plain the meaning of the other.
For, albeit the devil shows himself to be the devil, in citing that Text
so, as might best serve for his purpose: in that, whereas the Psalm whereout
he takes it, has it thus; That he might keep him in all his ways; which
words he leaves out. For if he had cited that, he could not thereby have
enforced any casting down. For the Angels have no charge over a man, but in his
ways; and from the top of the Pinnacle there was no way, but down the stairs
on his feet. He was not (relying on the Angels) to cast himself down with
his head forward. But the devil has a wrest to make the string sound hye or
low, as he list; or if that will not serve, he has a rack to stretch them
out, as some did Saint Paul's Epistiles, 2 Pet. 3, 16. He can set them on the
tenters, to prove, that down the stairs, or over the battlements, all is one,
the Angels shall safe-gard him. Though this (I say) be the devils corruption,
which the late writers have well spyed: yet Christ (we see) is not willing to
take advantage of that, but uses a wiser course; for so are we to think, that
he went the best way to work, that is, the conference of Scripture with
Scripture, which Christ here practices, and commends unto us.

In every Art, all propositions are not of a like certainty, but some be
grounds and principles so certain, as that no exception is to be taken
against them. From them are others derived, by a consequence called Deduction,
not so certain as the other: from these again others, to the twentieth hand.
So is it in Divinity. Christ here reduces the devils argument and place, to a
place most plain to be confessed. For the Jews valewing of the meaning, had
to consider, that God fed them with Manna, which they knew not, to teach them,
that Man lives not by bread only, Deuteronomy. 8, 3. contemning the same: and in
Deuteronomy. 6, 16. bad them, They should not tempt their Lord their God, as in
Messah, when they cried for bread. The Lord curses him, that makes flesh his
arm, and with-draweth his heart from God, Ier. 17, 5. They sacrificed unto
their yarne, because their portion was plentiful, Abac. 1, 16. Job condemns
the making gold our hope, or the wedge of gold our confidence, Chap. 31, 24. As
then we must not defy the means, attributing all sufficiency to them: so we
may not nullify them, and think too basely of them, but use them that we
tempt not God, according to his word.

Out of these two grounds, may every question be resolved: for every
proposition must be proved out of the ground. So that, as we way not think
the arm of God to be so shortened, that he cannot help without means: so are
we not to think basely of God for ordaining means. Secondly, we heard, that
the devils allegation was taken out of the Psalm, and one of the most
comfortable places of the Psalm. Christ by not standing in Disputation about
the words and meaning of the Text, commends to us the safest and wisest way
to make answer in such like cases. Our Savior would warn us, that the 91.
Psalm. is not fit matter for us to study on, when we are on the top of the
Pinnacle: he therefore chooses a place of a contrary kind, to counterpoise
himself, standing in that fickle place. The Law (we know) is a great cooler to
Presumption. If one tamper much with the Psalms, being in case of confidence,
he may make the fire too big. Faith is the fire which Christ came to put on
the earth, and it is seated between two extremes, Distrust, and Presumption.
Distrust is as water to it, which if it be powered on in abundance, it will make
it to be smoking flax, or utterly quench it. Presumption (on the other side)
is a Gunpowder to it, which being thrown into it, it will blow it up, and make
it fly all about the house. Christ was to take heed of ouer-heating his
faith. Luther upon the Galathians says, the 91. Psalm is no meet study for
many men's humors in our days: they had more need of a corrosiue, to eat out
the soar from the root and bottom.

Now to the answer, which consists of six points. First, what it is to tempt
God: Secondly, wherein: Thirdly, the manner how: Fourthly, this proposition,
Thou shall not tempt: Fifthly, the reason why we may not: Sixthly, though he be
our God, and we on the Pinnacle, these be no arguments for us to presume.

I.
FIrst, whosoever will not use such ordinary means as God has appointed,
tempts God: If he use extraordinary, (as here the devil would have Christ
do) when no body went about to thrust him down, wilfully to have cast himself
down, were great madness: or when a man has a fair pair of stairs to go
down by, to call for a Cherub to carry him, or for the wind to fly down,
Psalm 18, 10. were a^ great wantonness.

There is an humor in man, that we are all given unto by nature; to be
marvelous desirous to try conclusions in matters that are rare and unknown
unto them; contemning things common, and to be fond after strange novelties. It
was told them as plain as could be, that they should not reserve of the Manna
till morning, and they needed not to have reserved it; they had fresh every
day: and yet forsooth, they would needs keep it, if it were but for an
experiment sake, to try whither it would stink or no, Exodus 10, 20. And though
they were forbidden togather on the Sabbath day, and on the Eeuen had enough
for two days, and it was told them they should find none; yet they must needs
try. When a thing cannot be had without great difficulty, it is our manner to
have a vehement longing after it: as when David was in a Hold, and the
Garrisons of the Philistims were in Bethelem, then being thirsty, no water
would serve his turn, but that in Bethelem, 2 Samuel 23, 15. But when three
mighty men had broken into the host of the Philistims, and had brought him of
it, he cared not for it.

II.
FOr the second, we are to know, that where need is (as the Heathen speaks)
there a man may commit himself to the providence of God, and rely upon him.
For we have heard, that where the means fail us, God has yet in store his
four prerogatives: therefore when it comes to a dead lift (as we say) then to
have a strong confidence in God, is thank worthy: and it is the practice and
property of faith, to say boldly with Abraham when he saw nothing present,
that even on the hill God will provide, Genesis 22, 14. When our enemies are
behind us, and the red Sea before us, then to look for a way through the Sea,
and to expect Manna out of heaven, and water out of the Rock, is much worth.
So our Sauoiur, when he and his company were in the desert, where no meat was
to be had, fed them miraculously: but being near to the Town where they might
have it, he dismissed them. When Elias was in distress, and all meats failed
him, then the Angel brought him meat, 1 Kings 19, 6. When Hagar and Ismael
were in the wilderness, and the water in the bottle spent, and she in great
heaviness, then God comforted her from heaven, Genesis 22, 17. When the
Israelites were in the deserts, then they had an Angel to lead them, Exodus 22,
20. When Sydrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were cast bound into the fiery
Furnace, then God sent them an Angel to be their deliverer, Dan. 3, 25. And so
when Daniel was thrown into the Lions den, (not when he put himself in) God
sent his Angel to stop the Lions mouth, Dan. 6, 22. When we are deserti in
deserto, and all means fail, it is time to trust in God, as Job did. Our
conversation therefore must be without covetousness, and we must be content
with those things that we have: for he has said, He will not fail us, nor
forsake us, Heb. 13, 5. This is out of the compass of tempting God, and this
is as much as the Psalm could warrant him to look for. Look upon it, and you
shall see, that it expresses such dangers, as could not be prevented by man's
care and industry. As, from the snare of the hunter, ver. 3. who uses to lay
it so as we cannot see it to avoid it. Verse. 5. Thou shall not fear the
arrow that flies by day. An arrow (we know) will reach a man far off before he
be aware. And so throughout the Psalm, they are things out of our defense,
therefore they had need Angels help: but when we have means to help our
selves, Gods omnipotency is for the time discharged. Eutychus that fell out of
a window by heaviness of sleep, was restored to life by Paul, Act. 20, 9.
This then is Christ's answer. If their were no stayres, and he must needs go
down, it were a good Scripture to meditate on.

III.
THirdly, as it is a point of Gods power to help without means: so has he
in his wisdom appointed means: there be degrees, whereby we ascend to the
effect: they are as a pair of stayres. Where these are, we must use them; but
when he offers as a strange sign, it is scrupulous and foolish niceness to
refuse it. As when God bad Ahaz ask a sign, Esaias 7, 21. and he would not for
tempting God, he was too precise, he was but an Hypocrite. Moses asked a sign
and had it, and God was well pleased with it. And so did Gedeon also, to assure
him self of delivering Israel by him, Judge. 6. 36. In great, weighty, and
extraordinary callings, it was allowable to request a sign: but, when there is
no need, or when there be otherwise sufficient, as Mat. 16. 1. where many
miracles were daily done before their eyes, and where (though they had never so
many more) yet they would not have believed on him. Such were the Scribes and
Pharisees, that for every trifling occasion, they must have a sign from
heaven. Thus to grate upon Gods omnipotent providence, is saucie malepertnesse.
For ordinary matters, there be ordinary means to serve our turns: and for
extraordinary, there be extraordinary ways and means reserved, that we need
not let fall our trust in matters corporal. We all confess there be means,
as they which will not work, may not eat, 2 These. 3, 10. In warfare there is
no victory to be hoped for, without fight, building of rampires, and making of
darts and shields, 2 Chronicles. 23, 5. only in spiritual matters we think to do
well enough, though we never put too our endeavor; we lay all upon God, and
trouble not our selves.

There is but one degree or step in all Christianity; it is no more but out of
the Font to leap straight into Heaven; from Predestination, we leap straight
to Glorification: it is no matter for Mortification, there be no such mean
degrees. But S. Paul tells us, it is so high, that we had need of a ladder, in
which be many steps: insomuch, as he puts a [How shall] to every step, Romans 10,
14. How shall they call on God on whom they have not believed? etc. There must
be calling on God, believing on him, hearing his word. There must be ordinary
means; and there is a ladder of practice, as well as of speculation or
contemplation, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6 Join virtue with your faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and so patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness, and love. If these things be in you, you shall not be
idle and fruitless in the knowledge of Christ: for he that has not these
things, is blind: he goes blindfold to the wood, and may chance hap beside
heaven, or step besides the ladder. A great many say as Balaam did, O let my
soul dye the death of the Righteous: but they care not for living the life of
the Righteous. He went but blindfold, he knew not the Angel that stood with a
sword drawn in the way, but would have gone upon it, if his Ass had been so
foolish. A great many think, that presumption in being secure of their
salvation, is good Divinity. Balaam thought he went well, when he went on the
point of a naked sword. So, one entised by the flattery of a harlot, thinks he
goes to a place of great pleasure: but he goes as one that goes to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, Prou. 7, 22. Those whom it pleases
God to have partakers of his kingdom, he puts them in mind to remember their
Creator in the days of their youth, before the evil days come: he gives
them the grace of timely repentance, and suffers them not to defer it till
the last cast, and then to think, that with the turning of a pin (as it were)
they shall with a trice be in heaven, with Elias in a whirlewinde. Augustine
says, We may in some cases advise men to have great hope that they shall be
saved: but in no case give them warrant of security. So, in Ephesians. 5, 6. This
we know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritance in the
king dome of heaven. Let no man deceive you through vain words, he that does
righteousness is righteous, and he that does unrighteousness, is of the
devil. John 3, 7.

Now therefore, to neglect the hearing of the word, or when he comes to hear
it, to clap down in his place without desire or mind to bear it away, thereby
to be bettered in his life; and without purpose after by meditating on it, to
chew it, and so to kindle a fire within himself, whereby it may be digested,
and turned into the substance of the mind: this is to tempt God. So also, to
bear a greater countenance, and make more show of holiness, than indeed is in
one, is to lay a greater yoke on himself than he need, as Acts 15, 10. is a
tempting of God. Again, he that sins, must look for evil to follow.
Psalm. 91, 10. He therefore that sins, and yet thinks to escape punishment,
tempts God. They that by often experience have found, that such and such
things have been to them occasions of sinning, and yet will presume to use the
same again, tempts God. And those which set up their Idols in their heart, and
put the stumbling block of iniquity before their face, Ezech. 14, 3. and
think not they sin. such tempt God. He that comes to ask forgiveness of God,
and will not perform the condition of the Lords prayer, that is, Forgive
others, tempts God. Generally, he that seeks for good of God, and will not
preforme that which he is to do; or does evil, thinking to escape scot-free,
without endeavoring to avoid or resist it, both these tempt God: and to these
two, may all other be referred.

IIII.
THe fourth is, we must not at all tempt God at no hand: we must not think
but God is able to bring water even out of a rock, Numb. 20, 11. when there is
nothing but rocks and stones: but when we may hope to find it, we must dig
for it. So when the soil will bear corn, we must till it. When Elisha was in
a little village, not able to defend him from the Assyrians, he had chariots
and horses of fire to defend him, 2 King. 6, 17. but when he was in Samaria, (a
strong walled City) then when the King of Israel sent to fetch his head, he
said to those which were with him, Shut the door, verse 32. Christ in the
Wilderness miraculously fed many: in the City he sent his Disciples to buy
meat, as John 4, 8. In the beginning, when the Gospdll was published, there
wanted sufficient men for the purpose: the Apostles had the power, as appears
Acts 8, 29. that on whomsoever they laid hands, he received the holy Ghost, and
was straight able and meet to preach the Gospel: but after, every man to his
study, 1 Timothy 4, 5. These things exercise, etc. We see, that notwithstanding
Paul was told by an Angel that there should be no loss of any man's life in the
ship, yet he caused the Mariners to cut the ropes, and to cast Anchor, Acts 27.
23, 24, 29, 30, 31, 32. Nay, when some would have gone out by boat, he would
not let them: so here Christ answers, that howsoever Angels attend on him, he
may not tempt God.

V.
NOw follow the reasons why we may not tempt God. There be two sorts of
tempting: the one, by ignorance; the other by unbelief. It is the manner of
Surgeons, when they are to dress a wound, and know not how far, nor which
way it goes, to tent it: In the same manner is God (after the manner of men)
said to tempt us, sometimes to prove what is in our hearts, and whither we
will keep his commandments, Deuteronomy. 6, 2. as he did the Israelites forty
years. To this end he both made them hungry, and fed them with Maenna. We
sometimes tempt God, as if the arm of his power had received a wound, or his
eye a hurt; as if he could not help or discern our wants as well as before,
because he brings us not water out of the rock, Number. 20, 10. but such miracles
now are not agreeing with his will, which content us. He will have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, Romans 9, 19. And we must not despise the riches of his
bounteousnesse, and patience, and long suffering, which leads to repentance,
Romans 2, 4. The Lords hand is not shortened, that he cannot save; nor his ear
heavy, that it cannot hear: because he does not reprove us, we think him
like us, Psalm. 50, 19. When God holds his peace, we think his tongue is cut:
but I will not always hold my peace, says God, Ma^vlt But how shall I know
this, say men now adays? as Zacharias knew his wife was with child, Luke 1,
18. who (when he would not believe the Angel that told him so, but would needs
have a sign, was stricken dumb. Behold thou shall be dumb till the day. Here is
a sign for incredulity: he had been as good have believed without a sign.

The second kind of tempting, proceeds of overmuch familiarity, when as we
think we may be hold with God, and that he will take it in good part, and
therefore we will put him to it, (as we say:) we will try both him and his
Angels, what mettle is in them, and what they can do. We are to think upon the
name of God, as of a heavy and weighty thing, that is not upon every small
occasion to be taken up and removed. We are not to account it as a feather,
that we may lightly toss up and down at our pleasure: and even so are we to
esteem of the mercy of God. It is not to be aduocated upon every vain trifle,
for that were to use God as we are wont to use our luglers. Come on, let us see
what you can do, show us a miracle, say they, Exodus 7, 11. So Herod desired to
see Christ, that he might see some miracle of him, as in Luke 13, 8. It is a
heavy case when men stand thus affected toward God: when afterward, in Luke
22, 64. they blindfolded him, and bad him read who struck him. We our selves
would not be so used, we could not endure to see our friends used so: how much
less ought we to use God in that manner? especially, that attribute, quality,
or property of God, which of all others, he would have to be most magnified,
that is, his mercy? He must needs take it very hainously to see that abused,
since (of all the rest) he makes most account of it. Howsoever he could be
content to serve, yet would he not be a servant to our sins in any case,
Esaias 43, 24. especially not to be made a pack-horse (if I may so say) for our
sins, to lay load on, even till his back ache. He says, Amos 2, 13. that he
is pressed under us, as a cart is pressed that is under sheaues. Let us not make a
dung-cart of Gods mercy, let us forbear him that service of all other.

VI.
THe sixth is, that none of these Dominum Deum tuum, neither Lord, nor God, nor
that he is thine, are fit arguments to prove, that we may presume upon him. The
devil belike had perceived, that there was some acquaintance between Christ
and God, and peradventure had said unto him; You may be bold with him, and
with his Angels. What? he is your Father, and (as Caesar's daughter answered)
that though he forget himself to be Caesar, yet do not you forget to be his
son. No says Christ, these be no good arguments to make one presume. As for
Dominus we will all grant (I am sure) there is small matter of presumption in
that. In Deus there may be some more color: but yet very little. It is no good
dealing with one that is mightier than our selves, least he happen not to take
it in good part, but fall to earnest, and so we feel the smart. We were not
best to make sport with Sampson, least he pull the house about our ears, and
so make us pay dearly for our pastime. Paul says, Do we provoke the Lord to
anger? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10, 22. If we will needs tempt, we were
b^st tempt with our matches. There is no dealing with fire, for it will burn
all that touches it, Heb. 1, 7. his Angels and Ministers are a flame of fire:
but Heb. 12, 29. it is said, Our God is even a consuming fire. Indeed, if he
were like Dagon, the Philistims god, he might be set up and taken down, and
we might break his neck and hands at our pleasure: but being the strong and
mighty God of hoasts, we were best take heed how we deal with him.

Tuum, what say we to that? Anvngracious child might make that an argument of
presumption: but whosoever is of any good nature, will make it an argument of
the contrary. Isaac was Jacobs father, but was Jacob more bold to abuse him for
that? No, but rather more timorous, Genesis 27. My father (says he) may chance
feel me; and so I shall seem to him a mocker, and so bring a curse on me, and
not a blessing. Is God merciful? yea truly, Mercy is with thee, but that thou
may be feared, Psalm. 130, 4. We may not abuse his mercy, as to sin, that
grace may abound, Romans 6. 1. Is he bountiful and long suffering? We must
therefore the more fear to displease him. When the Pharisees tempted him, and
would adventure their souls in seeking a sign, it is said, Math. 8, 11.
Christ sighed: and why did he sigh? Because God swear in his wrath, that they
should never enter into his rest, whose fathers tempted him in the wilderness.
Psalm. 95. What rest? He does not mean the rest in the Land of Canaan only,
but that which shall be in the kingdom of God. Heb. 3, 10. These two
temptations of the devil, may fitly be compared to those two rocks, between
which Jonathan was to pass, which are said, 1 Samuel 14, 4. to be sharp. One is
called Borez, which signifies dirt; the other Seneh, which signifies a
bramble, or some sharp prick; between which, he and his Armor-bearer were
feign to clamber up, ver. 13. Between two such rocks lies our way, that is,
Presumption, and Desperation: therefore blessed is he that so loves God, that
he can be content to creep on hands and feet to him.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
Math. Chap. 4. verses 8, 9. Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding
high Mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory
of them.

And says unto him: All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me.


AT the first overthrow, we had the first Again: and when Christ ouerthrewe
him then also, yet would not the devil leave then neither, but he comes with
his second Again: he comes Again, and Again. The first Again, was an
argument of his courage and stomach: this second, is an argument of his
importunity. The first repulse could not drive him away, nor the second
neither; no, nor this third for altogether: for Luke says, He departed for a
season, Luke 4, 13. So that as Christ says, John 16, 16. After awhile ye shall
see me, and after awhile you shall not see me: so says the devil also, After
awhile you shall not see me, and again after awhile you shall see me. Which
teaches us this lesson; that it is not enough to have prevailed against his
temptations twice or thrice, and so become secure; but we are always to stand
upon our guard, knowing how the devil will successively, every turning of a
hand, be with us; and that while we live, we shall never be at rest with him:
or if he tempt us not, we shall be in as bad or worse case. For so long as the
Lord left other Nations among the Isrielites to prove them by, and to be
pricks to their sides, it went well enough with them, Judge. 3, 1. but when
they began to live in some security (having for the most part subdued them)
then grew they to mutual dissension. It is the greatest temptation, to be
without temptation. Therefore Paul had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2
Cor. 12, 7 for then follows the pressing of God by prayers. But whether we
join hands with Satan, or resist him, we shall be sure he will set upon us,
and try by fair means what he can do; or if we say nay, yet in the end he
will weary us, as Dalila did Sampson, Judge. 16, 16. who because she was
importunate, his soul was pained to the death, and then he told her: or if we
will be obstinate in relecting his temptations, giving him at the first a
peremptory refusal; then he will go another way to work, as to imagine some
devise against us, and smite us with the tongue, Ier. 18. 18. he will be rough
with us. If none of these will prevail, he will persuade us, we must be like
other men, and that is as profitable or pleasant to us, and then say Samuel
what he can, we will have a King, I Sam. 8, 19. And when we have yielded once,
then goes he to fetch company, and takes unto him seven whose spirits than
himself, Luke 11, 26. So the last state of that man is worse than the first.
Give but an inch, and he will take an Ell: if he can get in but an arm, he
will make shift to shoue in his whole body. As we see, if the point of a nail
have once made entry, the rest will soon in. We see an example of his
encroaching even in David, 2 Samuel 11, 4. after he had once made him commit
adultery by some mean degrees with Bethsheba, see how he draws him on from
one wickedness to another. She was with child, her husband being in the
service of God and the King, was by the King murdered to hide her shame, and
satisfy his lust. So did he draw on Peter; first, he made him follow aloof
off; secondly, flatly to deny Christ; thirdly, to forswear him; and fourthly,
to curse himself if he knew him.

The Hebrew Writers note, that the Devils name Beelzebub, signifies a great
flesh Fly, or a master Fly; flap him away never so often, he will still fly
thither again. So the devil will never cease molesting us, till the smoking
flax be quite quenched, and the bruised reed clean^ broken, Esaias 42, 3. First,
he twists certain small threads together, and so makes a little cord of vanity,
to draw us unto him: afterward with a cart-rope or cable of iniquity, he seeks
to bind us fast unto him for starting; either by the v^ce of lust, or of envy,
or at least covetousness. But if all should fail, pride is sure to hold; Oh
Lord, I thank thee, I am not like such and such, nor like this Publicane (a
degree further,) nor like this Pharisie, Luke 18, 11. This may be a good caveat
unto us, that we stand always upon our guard, and that we be sure that we make
strong resistance in the beginning, and break it (if we can) while it is but a
whip-cord. And to use the like policy in a good matter, that the King of Egypt
did in a bad; who took order that every male child should be killed, to keep
the Israelites down betimes: and against the succession of temptation, to
entertain the succession of prayer.

Now to the matter. The Devil deals as with a City. In the first, he tells
him he must be famished, except he can turn stones into bread. Secondly, he
comes to make a train of Scripture to entrap him. Now he comes to the ordinary
means of dealing, that is; when men strive about any thing, and both parties
are loa^h to yield, there will be some parley of composition and sharing
between them. So here, the devil seeing that he cannot ouer-throw his faith,
offers him to compound: and (on his part) he is content to give Christ all
the Kingdoms of the world, if our Savior (for his part) will but fall down,
and worship him. The devil before came disguised in the shape of a
malcontent, as that Christ should be in such hunger. Next, he came in the
habit of a Divine, and that very demurely, with his Psalter in his hand. Now he
comes in all his Royalty, like the Prince of this world, as he is so called,
John 4, 30. He does not stand pedling with Christ, but goes roundly and
frankely to work: he offers all that he has, (and that is no small matter)
to bring Christ but to one sin, that so he might ouer-throw all mankind. He
comes no more now with Si filius Dei es: for that we see is here left, he would
not have him think on it: he would have him now, filius seculi. This is called
by S. Paul, the bewitching temptation, whereby men become so foolish, as that
after they have begun in the spirit, they will end in the flesh, Gal. 3, 3.
Where the devil cannot prevail, either by our own concupiscence, or by his
enticings. he will see what he can do with his Dragons tail, and by that
means (say the Fathers) he did more hurt, than by the other. Secondly, his
tail is said to draw down the third part of the stars of heaven, and to
cast them to the earth, Apoc. 12, 4.

We are here to consider: First, the preparation that the devil makes, by
taking him up to an high hill, to make the offer, verse. 8. Secondly, the
Temptation it self, verse. 9. Thirdly, our Saviors answer, and the shield he
opposes to it, verse. 10. Fourthly, the issue of the conflict, the victory,
verse. 11. In the first we are to consider: first, the devils method: secondly,
the place and ground: thirdly, his policy, in not only telling what he would
give; but in showing thereof: fourthly, the things themselves which he offers,
which are two; the kingdom of the earth, and the glory thereof.

I.
FIrst, of his method. Ephesians 4, 14. we are warned not to be wavering, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit and craftiness of
men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Craftiness and deceit then, be the
instruments which the devil uses; he brings Christ from the Wilderness to
the Temple, and from the Temple to the Mountain, to destroy the Temple, which
Mountain is prosperity. So in adversity we vow to God, that we will serve
him; but after help, we break it.

II.
SEcondly, the lysts where this temptation was used, was the Mountain. The
reason why he chose this place rather than any other, is the fitness of it,
in regard of the prospect. The wilderness (we know) was a melancholy place,
and in no wise fit for this temptation, so, neither was the Pinnacle: for
besides that it might have hindered the working of this temptation, being the
Pinnacle of the Temple; the prospect was not good enough. For though it were
high, yet there were diverse hills about Jerusalem, which would have hindered the
sight of many things. And though Sion were a Mountain, yet in respect of Mount
Hermon, and Lybanus, it is said to be a little one, Psalm. 42, 6. And Psalm. 68,
16. Basan is said to be the great Hill. Therefore as good choose a convenient
hill, both for height and neerenesse, where he might behold the whole Land of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. 32, 49. So here the devil chose an exceeding high Mountain,
where a high mind might best take view and contemplate: such, where his
horizon might be as spacious as was possible, and where his sight might not be
hindered by any mean object.

III.
THirdly, be sets before his eyes, all the kingdoms of the earth. There is
nothing so soon entised and led away, as the eye: it is the Broker between
the heart, and all wicked lusts that be in the world. And therefore it was
great folly in Hezeehias, to show his robes and treasure, Esaias 39, 2. as he
was told by the Prophet: it stirred up such coals of desire in them that saw
them, as could not be quenched, till they had fetched away all that he had, and
all that his Ancestors had laid up even till that day. It is the wisdom that
is used now adays, when men would have one thing for another, to show the
thing they would so exchange: as the buyer shows his money, and the seller
his wares in the best manner that he can, each to entice the other (by the eye)
to the define of the heart. It is the devils ancient slight, he would not go
about to persuade the matter in words, till he might withal present the thing
to the eye. So he dealt with Eve, Genesis 3, 6. First, he showed her how pleasant
the fruit was, and the woman saw it. So the cause of the deluge was, Genesis 6,
2. that the sons of God saw the beauty of the daughters of men. Achabs
seeing of Naboths vineyard, 1 King. 21, 2. for that it lay near his house, was
the cause of all the mischief that followed. This same foolish vanity of
apparel, (whereof I have given so often warning out of this place,) comes from
hence: I saw a fine Babilonish garment, and desiring it, I took it says
Achan, Joshua. 7, 11. So the seeing of the bribe, blinds the eyes of the
Judge, Deuteronomy. 16, 19. So still the sight of the eye, allureth the heart to
desire. The Heathen man therefore wished, that virtue and honesty might as well
be seen with bodily eyes: for then he thinks, that Admirabiles amores
excitarent suo. So if we could as well see that which God has for us, as that
the devil here offers us: we would not regard the devils largess. Moses and
the other Patriarchs saw him which is invisible, which had provided a better
thing for them: therefore he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, Heb. 11, 27. and to enjoy the pleasure of sin. But you are not so
to take it, as though it were a thing simply ill to behold such things, or to
look on a cup-boord of plate, or to stand on a Pinnacle, it is dangerous, but
no sin; especially, it is unfit for an unstayed and an ungoverned eye.
Therefore Lot and his wife were forbidden to look back at the destruction of
Sodom, Genesis 19, 17. To Abraham it was l^ft at large, without any restraint;
for that he was a man of better ruled affections. For as there must be one
without, to take view and to entice; so must therebe one within, to hearken to
it, and to condescend. Be sure of that within, that it be upright; and then
thou may the better look with that which is without. But ever be wary, for
the tinder of thy nature will soon take fire. Job said Chap. 31, 1. He made a
covenant with his eyes: why then should he think on a maid? and that he had
not been deceived by a woman, verse 9. and that his heart had not walked after
his eye, verse. 7. Paul knew how to use want, and how to use abundance or
plenty, how poverty: both to be full, and to be hungry: he had stayed
affections, Phil. 4, 12.

IIII.
Omnia Regna. This was no small offer, but even all the wealth and honor that
may be: two such things as are most vehemently desired of all men. So that as
Terome says, Prae auri sacra fama nihil sacrum. The desire thereof also is so
insatiable, that it is like the dropsy; which, the more liquor is ministered to
it, the more it thirsts; it is perpetual and unnatural. The lessetime a man
has to live, and so needs thelesse; the more he couets to abound. These two do
never wax old; of all vices, gray hairs do never grow on these. This is the
bait the devil laid for Christ, and lays for youth, and minds lasciuiously
given, he lays a bait on live flesh; to choleric natures, he ministers
matters that may increase their wrath; for melancholy, he lays baits of
envy: and so for every one, according to their natural inclinations and
humors, such baits as may entice them soonest. Which if he can get them once
to swallow his hook that is within, it will hold them sure enough, and by his
line he will draw them to him when he list; so that he cares not to let them
play with the line: then though he go to twenty Sermons, it is no matter:
with an Apple he caught Adam and Eve, and all their posterity. Well, we must
be as children, weaned from this world, though it bring weeping with it. Psalm.
131, 2. Genesis 27, 38. When Eve was Lady and Mistress of all the world; yet,
because there was a Godship, a higher degree than hers, she was not content.
Princes, because they can go no higher by any earthly dignity, aspire to be
Gods, and so would be accounted; as was said to Herod, that it was the voice
of God, and not of man. But, as they that are above, can abide to have no
equals, but will be alone by themselves; so they that be below can abide no
superior. As when Saul was chosen by lot from amongst the Israelites, to be
King over them, some wicked men said, There is a goodly wise King: nay, I would
I were King, I would they might come to me for Justice, 1 Samuel 10, 27. 2 Samuel
15, 4. Every one has this conceit of himself, that he is worthier to bear
rule, than they which are in authority: not so much as the silly Fur-bush, but
it thought it self a fit person to make a King, Judge. 9, 15. and the Thistle
would have the Cedars daughter married to his son, 1 King. 14, 9. The Spider,
a silly poysonfull thing, will yet be in the top of the Kings Palaces. Prou.
30, 28. The Gourd starts up in one night, and was gone in the next, Ion. 4, 6.
Goodly Zebedeus wife could find no less thing to ask of Christ, for her two
sons, that came the last day from the cart; but that the one might sit at
Christ's right hand, and the other at the left in his kingdom, Math. 20, 20.
Balaam could never think his Ass went half fast enough, when he rode toward
preferment, Number. 22, 17. The Disciples also longed for the kingdom of Israel
to be restored.

The devil did not show all his kingdom to Saul, when he was coming from
keeping his fathers sheep, 1 Samuel 9, 24. and Samuel feasted him: nor after
Saul was chosen King, 11, 5. and he followed his cattle: Neither did he show
them to the King, bidden to Absolons sheep-shearing, 2 Samuel 13, 24. nor at such
times as Princes withdraw themselves to be private, Dan. 6, 18. But he shows
them at such times as they are in their greatest glory and ruff, when
kingdoms were grown to the top of iollitie and Majesty, as the kingdom of
Israel was in Salomons time: and chooses such a time, as when they were in
most triumph and pomp, as they were wont to be at the day of the Kings birth
or inauguration, Hosea 7, 5. Cant. 3, 11. or at a Coronation, or at the
receiving of Ambassadors; or at the entertaining of foreign States, as when
the Qu^^^e of Saba was in Salomons Court, 1 King. 10. To conclude, he shows
them not when they are in base estate, but when they are in greatest pomp,
Acts 25, 23.

NOw come we to the second point: to wit, the Temptation it self: En haec
omnia tibi dabo, verse 9. Having prepared Christ's mind (as he thought) by
showing him that he would give him: now he comes in with a short and pithie
Oration; [All this will I give thee] Here thou see all thou can wish for;
without thee sha'l no man lift up his hand or his foot in all Egypt, as Pharaoh
said to Joseph, Genesis 41, 44. so as he might make all Captains, and give to
every one fields and vineyards, 1 Samuel 22, 7. that he might say to every one
what he list; Speak thou to me? see thou not that I have power to crucify
thee, or to let thee go? John 19, 10. that his favor might raise a man so
high, as Haman was exalted above all the Princes, Hest. 3, 1. and his
disfavor, or the least word of his mouth quite overthrow him, as Haman was,
verse 7, 8. by picking some small quarrel against him. But this is not all
neither: for the same garish apparel, wherein many do delight, is contained
under this Haec omnia: Not only embroydered with gold, but even gold it self,
and smells of the finest scent, Psalm. 45. 8. and 9. And as for the delights of
the flesh, if he can see any that delight him better than other: it is no more
than with David, 2. Sam. 11, 4. to send for her, and have her, she was straight
at his command. Neither must any say, it was unlawful: no, not John Baptist,
if he love his head, Mark. 6, 17. He may command what he list; if any gainesay
it, he may dispatch him out of the way: for he may kill and wound whom he
list, Dan. 5, 19. He may command all men's tongues, 2 Samuel 14, 10. that they
dare not once open their mouth to speak against him. Nay, he shall have all
men's tongues and pens ready to extol all that he does, and say; The King is
like an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 19. or that it is the voice of God, and not of
man, Act. 12, 22. Why, then to have all men's hands, feet, bodies, faces,
tongues, and pens: this may be well said All, to have not only one kingdom,
but all: to have all the power and glory of those kingdoms: here is even all
the kingdom, the power, and the glory. He comes not after a pelting manner, he
shows himself a frank chapman: he says not, that Godliness is great gain,
and a mind content with his lot, 1 Timothy 6, 6. and wills him to be content with
food and raiment, ver. 8. He comes not with Illae, which we shall not once
behold, till another world come; and whether there be any such or no, many
doubt. He shows him a mount that may be touched, Heb. 12, 18. he comes with
haec, that is, with ready money in his hand: he not only offers, but stakes
down: And whereas God faith, that in the Sweat of our forehead we shall eat
our bread, Genesis 3. 19. the Devil requires no such thing. This is a donatiue,
Haec omnia dabo. What say ye now? Shall Christ take it, or no?

The Heathen man says, If a man be to violate his faith for any thing, it is
for a kingdom. Christ has here offered him all kingdoms, a very enticing
bayt: but is there never a hook hidden under it? The woman was fine and brave,
and had a cup of gold in her hand, but it was full of abomination, Apoc 17,
14. So here, for all these fair shows, if you will gain any thing by the
devil, you must worship him; that is the condition annexed to the grant, it is
no absolute gift, the devil is not so kind, as to part from all that for
nothing. It is such a gift as the Lawyers call Excambium, that is, Exchange: I
will give you this, if you will give me that. But yet one would think it a
very large offer, to give so great a lieu for so small a service; it is but a
little external reverence, the bowing of the knee; you may (notwithstanding)
in heart think what ye list. Well, we may think there was some what in it,
that the devil offered so much for so little, and yet Christ refused it.
Indeed Christ had great reason to refuse it: for he should have been a looser
by the bargain. I will stand to it, he had been better to have yielded to
either of the two former temptations, than to this: he should full dearly
have bought all his kingdoms, he had been better to have cast himself down
from the Pinnacle. For that which the devil here demands in lieu, is as much
worth, as both the glory of God, and the redemption of man. Of his glory, God
says, That he will not give it to another, Esaias 42, 8. If to no other, then
not to the devil of all other. And therefore the Angel would not have a burnt
offering offered to him, but to God, Judge. 13, 16. The Angel would not let
John fall down and worship him, but bad him worship God, Revel. 19, 10. For
he knew that God was very jealous of his honor, and stood precisely upon that
point. If he would not impart this honor with the Angels, much less would he
with the devil: for there are degrees in idolatry, Romans 1, 23. It is not so
ill to turn the glory of God into the image of a man, as into birds and beasts.

Secondly, if we look into the desire that he had to satisfy his ancient
envy, by the destruction of mankind: we must needs commend the devils wit, in
making such a bargain. It had been the best penyworth that ever was bought.
For if we mark how Christ rateth one only soul, we may see, how he that to
gain all the kingdoms of the world, shall loose his own soul, Math. 16, 26.
makes but a foolish bargain. Then what rate shall be made of all men's souls,
if one be worth kingdoms; all which had been lost, if Christ had consented
to that which the devil here requires: for then he could not have said, I
restored that which I took not, Psalm. 69, 4. By his death he paid the price
for the sins of the whole World; he should then have had a score of his own
to have paid, and his death could have been sufficient but for himself only.
If he had fallen down, and worshipped him: he could no have said, That the
Prince of this world had nothing to say against him, John 14, 3.

Now let us apply this to our selves.
But we will peradventure say, the devil never made us any such offer; and
therefore what needs any dmonishment in this behalf? But I answer, though the
devil come not in person to us, as he did to Christ, yet he comes by his
instruments. When Balaac sent to Balaam, to come and curse the Israelites, and
promised him great rewards, Numb. 22, 17. it was not Balaacks messengers that
spoke, but the devil used them as instruments to speak. So when Simon Magus
would have bought the holy Ghost with money; the Devil there in tempted the
Apostles with Symonie, Simon was but the trunk, through which the devil
spoke, Acts 8.

Again, there be some that will say, they were never tempted with Kingdoms:
it may well be, for it needs not, when less will serve. It was Christ only,
that was thus tempted: in him lay a heroical mind, that could not be allured
with small matters. But with us it is nothing so, we esteem far more basely
of our selves: we set our wares at a very easy price, he may buy us even
dagger cheap, as we say: he need never carry us so high as the Mount, the
Pinnacle is high enough, yea the lowest steeple in all the Town would serve the
turn. Or let him but carry us to the Leads or gutters of our own houses, nay,
us but stand in our window, or in our doors; if he will give us but so much as
we can there see, he will tempt us thoroughly, we will accept it, and thank
him too. He shall not need to come to us with kingdoms, one kingdom is too
much, what say ye to half a one? Mark 6, 23. No, will the devil say, I will
give ye half of one? If he would come to us but with thirty pence, Math 26,
15. I am afraid many of us would play Judas. Nay, less than so would buy a
great sort, even handfuls of barley, and peeccs of bread, Ezec. 13, 19. and
Prou. 28, 21. Yea, some will not stick to buy and sell the poor for a pair
of shoes, as Amos speaks, Chap. 8, 6.

When he comes then to tempt us, he may abate a great deal of this that he
offers Christ; he may strike out Omnia, and Haec too, and in stead thereof put
in Hoc, and say; Hold, ye shall have this to worship me, I will give ye no
more; I fear me we will make short work, and take it, Hoc aliquid, a matter
of half a crown or ten groates, a pair of shoes, or some such trifle, will
bring us on our knees to the devil. Is there a pretty commodity to be h^d? It
makes no matter for breaking faith and promise. This is that that makes the
devil so good a husband and thriftie, and to go near hand: what need he give
more, when so little will serve? Whereas, if we will stand hucking with him,
we might get a great deal more.

In this temptation (as in the former) there is both fire to consume our faith,
and a dart to wound our consciences. The fire is the motion of discontent, that
God is either a poor God, not able sufficiently to reward those that serve
him: or else an unkind God, that will not reward the duties that are performed
by those that serve him. By this we come to say: Who is the Almighty, that we
should serve him? Job 21, 15. The wicked are they that prosper and increase in
riches. I have cleansed my heart in vain, for daily have I been punished,
Psalm. 73, 12. Then this dart makes us weary of well doing; and then follows,
that we will serve the devil Being discontent with Gods service, we undertake
the service of his enemy: he requires nothing but a little falling down, and
then if Simon shall come, and require any unlawful thing at our hands, we are
ready (with Judas) to meet with him, and say; What will ye give me, and I will
do it? Math. 26, 15. though it be to the betraying of Christ. The Devil here
opens his meaning in this Temptation plainly, (that he would have him fall
down and worship him) with a bare and bold face: before, he came disguised,
and spoke in Parables. His meaning is not when he says Dabo, to give them; but
to barter or exchange one thing for another. It is no gift, but a flat
bargain: men use not to account it a gift, except it be without rendering back
either money or service. I he render here service back, he may well think I
have sold my soul for Hoc aliquid, Math. 16, 76. He may think, as Esau sold
his birthright for a mess of pottage, Heb. 12, 16. so has he sold his
soul, his birthright, and freedom: for we were all bought with a price, 1
Cor. 7, 23. the same great high Priest redeemed us all with his blood. No
sins are so carefully to be taken heed of, as these, that have annexed to
adoration, donation: he has Malum with a ioynter. If he should have cast
himself down from the Pinnacle, here is all he should have had: they would
have talked of it, and have wondered a while at it.

Well, we must be thus persuaded, that God is as well able and willing to
reward us for any service, as the Devil, and better too. It is he indeed
that reigns over the kingdoms of men, Dan. 5, 21. and places in them w^om
pleases him: but when he gives or disposes, he gives indeed freely,
exacting nothing back again, unless it be such things, as he were to have
without any such gift: such things as are due of mere right, with out any
stipulation or hyre. Iam. 1, 5. The Devils Dabo, is, as Offices and Parsonages
are given amongst us; that is, as usually sold as horses in Smithfield. But if
we could be content to give indeed, let that heroical mind that was in
Abraham be in us, Genesis 14, 23. that as he would not take any thing of
Melchisedech, so we will not be a shoo-lachet the richer by the devil. If he
offer to make us wealthy, let us answer him; Pecunia tua tecum pereat.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
THE SEVENTH SERMON.
Math. Chap. 4. verses 10, 11. Then Jesus says unto him; Get the hence behind
me Satan: for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

Then the devil leaves him, and behold the Angels came, and ministered unto
him.


THe answering of this Temptation, if some had had the answering of it, would
hauc been facto, by the doing of the thing that the devil required: and not
in words, standing upon terms in disputation. Insomuch, as they would never
hauc cared for a cushion to kneel on; but have fallen down straight on their
very faces, and have thanked him too. If Balaak should say unto one of them, I
will promote thee to great honor, Numb. 22, 17. an Angel standing in the way,
should not hinder them from going. The manner of flesh and blood is in cases of
preferment to respect nothing that may bring them out of their conceived hope
or desire thereof: and therefore whatsoever it is that stands in their way, be
it never so holy, down it shall for have, to make the way nearest. In regard
of this, one brother respects not another. When Joseph had had a dream of his
brethren, and told it them, all brotherly affection was laid aside, Genesis 37, 5.
The son and subject Absolon, forgets his duty as to his father, and
allegiance as to his Prince, seeking his life, 2 Samuel 16, 11. The mother of
Ahaziah, Athalia, when she saw her son dead, makes no more ado, but
destroys all the Kings seed, 2 King. 11, 1. Iehu makes no bones, nor is abashed
at the sight of heaps of dead men's heads, of Kings sons that he had caused
to be slain, but adds more murders to them, 2 King. 10, 8. What Is a basket
full of heads to a Kingdom? And Herod stacke not to kill all the male-borne
children in Bethlehom, Math. 2, 16. So that Gregory might well say, Ambitio est
vita, cui etiam innocents nocent, such is the vehement desire of a kingdom.
So that a great many would have made no scruple at the matter, neither would
they have counted it a temptatin, but good counsel: Neither would so have cut
up Peter as Christ did, to bid him go behind him, and turn their backs on
him; but they would rather have turned their backs to God, and their faces
after Satan, Ier. 2, 27. 1 Timothy 5, 15. And indeed it must needs be, that
either our Savior was unwise in refusing so good an offer, or else the World
(in these days) is in a wrong byas.

Our Savior (we see) does not only refuse the thing, but also gives him hard
words, for making the offer and motion. For he does not only confute him
here, by saying, Scriptum est: but he adds words of bitter reprehension,
saying; Avoid Satan. He might have given fair words, as he did before: but
here he seems to have left his patience. The reason why he was more hot in
this, than in the former, lis: for that this touches the glory of God, and the
redemption of mankind: the former Temptations touched but himself in
particular, as the turning of stones into bread, but for miracle: and the
casting himself down, was but to try God, what care he had of him. But this
so much touches the glory of God, as he can hold no longer. Also, his longing
to redeem man, caused the same. Neither did he only answer the devil so; but
when his blessed Apostle, who meant friendly to him, moved him to the like
matter, he rebuked him sharply.

Two causes there are, wherein Christ is very earnest; one in counsel
ministered to him, tending to the impairing of Gods glory; the other in
practices, tending to the impairing of Gods Church, John 2, 15. there he was
not only vehement in words; but made a whippe to scourge them out. And so in
the old Testament, it is said of Moses, Numb. 12, 3. That he was a meek man,
above all the men of the earth: yet when he came to a case of Idolatry, Exodus
32, 19. it is said. He threw the Tables out of his hands, and brake them. And
so far did he loose his natural affection to his people and Country men,
that he caused a great number of them to be slain And so in a case of the
Church, when Corah rebelled, Numb. 16, 15. then Moses waxed very angry: for
Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth, is the Angels song and joy, and
the devils grief: as on the other side, the dishonor of God, and dissension
of the Church, is the devils joy, and grief of the Angels.

Now, besides that he does in words rebuke him sharply, he does no less in
gesture also; as by turning his back upon him, (as it is most like he did, in
saying, Anoyd Satan:) which is such a despightful disgrace, as if that one
should offer us the like, we would take it in very great disdain. Which is to
us an instruction, that as there is a time, when we are to keep the decill
before us, and to have our eye still upon him, and his weapon or temptation,
for fear least unawares he might do us some hurt: so is there a place, a time,
and a sin, that we are to turn our backs on, and not once to look at his
temptation. In affliction, patience is to be tried; there resist the Devil,
stand to him, and he will fly from ye, Iam. 4, 7. Here we are to set the
Devil before us. But in a case of lust, or filthy desire, then do ye fly from
him, 1 Cor. 6, 18. So in 2 Timothy, 2, 22. we are exhorted to fly from the lusts
of youth, and to follow justice: there is no standing to gaze back on the
devil, and his temptations.

Now to the answer: Scriptum est.
THe disputing or deciding of the Devils Title: that is, whether the Kingdoms
of the earth were his to give or no, Christ stands not upon; nor upon this,
whether the devil were a man of his word or no. Indeed, it might well have
been doubted, whether the devil be as good as his word: his promises are not
Yea and Amen, as the promises of God are. We may take example by Eve, to whom
he promised, that if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, that they should be
like Gods; but were they so indeed, after they had eaten? No, but like the
beasts that perish. And as true it is, that the Kingdoms are his. If the
Kingdom of Israel had beerie at his disposition, we may be sure David should
never have been King; as well appears by the troubles he raised against
him. No, nor Hezechi as neither, of all other he would never choose such. We
may see his good will in Job Chap. 2, 7. he could not only be content to
spoil him of all that he had, but also he must afflict his body: and so upon
the Gergashites hogs, Math. 8, 30.

The Kingdoms are none of his, but they are committed to him in some sort to
dispose, as himself faith, Luke 4, 6. He has (as it were) an Aduowson of
them, to present unto them; but yet, not as he there says, to give to whom he
list, but to whom he is permitted. God must first put all that Job has in his
hands, or else he can do nothing. Abimelech, Judge. 9. and Herod, Mat. 2. came
to their Kingdoms by the devils Patent, they be the devils Officers. So we see
daily in our days, that he bestows Offices, and presents to Churches. So that
as Brentius says, Many have Panem quotidianum, that cannot come by Danobis:
they come not to it by Gods gift: yet all the interest that the devil has, is
but to present Pro haec vita tantuns. As therefore it may be true, that in
some. fort they may be given him: so yet, not to dispose as he will. It is God
only that can say so; for his only they are absolutely. The earth is the
Lords, and all the fullness thereof, the round world, and all that dwell
therein, Psalm. 24, 1. It is he (the most high God) that divided to the Nations
their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32, 8. By him Kings reign, and Princes have dominion,
Prou. 8, 15. He brought Nebuchaednezzer to know, That the most high God bare
rule over the Kingdoms of men, Dan. 5, 21. He indeed may well say, Cui
voluero, doea: and to whomsoever God gives, he gives liberally, and
reproacheth no man. Iam. 1, 5. The devil (we see) exacteth more than the thing
is worth, and straineth the benefit of his grant with unjust covenants. But
Christ goes not about to answer the devil that way: but by flying to the
Scriptures, as to his surest hold. Therefore David prayers, that his mind may
be inclined to Gods Law, and not to Covetousness, Psalm. 119, 36. For there is
a medicine for every disease, and power as well against this Temptation of
Covetousness, as against the former: the Law of God can as well keep a man
from Covetousness, as from Desperation: Heaven and earth shall pass, but no
one jot of this, Let therefore Haec omnia give place to Scriptum est: marry
Omnia illa, which both we now enjoy, and which are laid up for us here after,
are come to by Scriptum est. So that Omnia haec is not all we must care for;
there be things to come (besides these things which we lay hands on) far
more precious. Though here be all the Kingdoms of the earth: yet they are
said, to be showed in the twinkling of an eye, so cannot the other Kingdom of
exceeding glory. All the power of all the Princes on the earth, have not power
over one silly soul to destroy it, Math, 10, 28. All the glory of them, is
called but a great big fannes, or pomp, Acts 25, 23. Solomon was the most
glorious Prince that ever was, yet he was not clothed like a Lilly, Mat. 6,
29. Nor all the Lillies in the field, nor Stars in heaven, nor the Sun and
Moon it self, are comparable to one soul.

The Scripture whereby Christ answers the devil, is in Deuteronomy. 16, 13. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him. If any fantastical spirit oppose
it self against Moses, let it be accursed. There is in this answer two things
set down; worship, and Service: both which are due to God only. Covetousness
ends in Idolatry, and fitly is so termed: if Christ had been couetously
minded, then he must needs have fallen down and worshipped the Devil, for
Covetousness and Idolatry being joined together, we would not have parted
from so great a benefit. Christ has here changed a word, which the
Septuaginta Translator has; which signifies, a service with an open
testimony. So that, wiil ye know if a man do b^leeue? He believes unto
righteousness with the heart, that with the mouth confesses to salvation,
Romans 10, 10. Such as glorify God as well in their members, as in their spirit,
1 Cor. 6, 20. As S. James faith of Faith, Show me thy faith by thy works: so
may in be said of fear. You say you have fear, can you show me your fear? If
it be not a dead fear, it is to be seen: as Dan. 3, 5. it must be showed by
falling down, and worshipping. The servant that feared, fell down and
besought his master, Math. 18, 26. Do you fear? then where is the outward
reverence? The inward affection must appear by the outward action: Religion is
outward, as well as inward, I Kings 19, 18.

There be two ways whereby we may have traffic with the devil, either of
both will serve his turn. first, homage: secondly, service of the body; and
both these does God require, even when we are in the dark, or in our chamber,
Ezech. 8, 12. Indeed might the devil say, this Mountain is very open; but
how say ye? will ye be content closly in a corner to worship me? If ye will not
wear my cognizance on your forehead, yet ye may take my mark in your hand;
then shutting your hand, no body can perceive it. If ye will not take the
mark, yet take the number of the Beasts name, that is, six hundred threescore
and six, Apoc. 13, 17, 18. Will ye do none of these? What then? Will ye serve
me? Romans 16, 18. Thus ye see what glorious terms he uses: but if one should
seem to do one of these on courtesy, he will not be content till he do it of
duty.

NOw let us see first what it is to Worship. It is that which Cornelius did to
Peter, he met him, fell down at his feet, and worshipped him, Acts 10, 25. And
that which John did to the Angel; that is, he fell down before his feet to
worship him, Apoc. 19, 10. It is, when one on the knees does a bodily worship.
I will show it you in David's, words: for I cannot tell it ye better. When
Michol scoffed at David, for being bare-headed before the Arc, he says; I
will be more vile than thus, and will be low in mine own sight, 2 Samuel 6, 22.
A man can never be too reverent to God: we think it a great disgrace and
debasing of our selves, if we use any bodily worship to God. It may be said to
them, as it was to him, that feared to do too much reverence to Caesar, Hic
homo times timere Caesarem. Our religion and Cultus must be uncovered, and a
barefaced religion: were would not use to come before a mean Prince, as we do
before the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, even the God of heaven and earth.
The four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on the Throne, and
worshipped him that lives for ever, and cast their crowns before his Throne.
The wandering eye mustlearne to be fastened on him, Luke 4, 20. and the work
of justice and peace, Esaias 32, 17. the worship of the Knees to how, Ephesians. 3,
14. and kneel before the Lord their Maker, Psalm. 95, 6. Our feet are to come
before his face: For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods,
Psalm. 95, 2, 3. Jacob, though he were not able to stand, or kneel: yet
(because he would use some corporal service) leaned upon his staff, and
worshipped God, as appears, Genesis 49, 33. and Heb. 11, 21. This must be done
as duty due unto God, and in regard of those that be strangers.

SEcondly, what it is to Serve. This is to bow the soul, as the other is to
bow the body. For the King to serve and speak kindly to the people, that they
may serve him for ever after, 1 King. 12, 7. is not the service he means, nor
to do all that the King commands, 2 Samuel 15, 15. For God must be above all: and
of whomsoever a man is overcome, to him he is in bondage, 2 Pet 2, 19. We must
serve God with our sacrifices, but not with our sins, nor weary him with our
iniquities, Esaias 43, 23. We may not make a dung cart of him, to load him with
our sin and filth, Amos 2, 13. and when he comes again, to have as much more
for him.

[ Only.] The Devil himself would grant, that God is to be served, his
meaning was, that a man might serve God, and him too: but Christ says, God
only. But it may be said, this word [ Onely] is not in the Scripture whence
Christ cites this sentence, and so Christ has added to the word of God:
Indeed, in Deuteronomy. 6, 13. Alone is not, but in the next verse it is said, Do not
follow after other gods, which is in effect, God only.

The Papists ask, where we find Only in siustification by faith? Indeed we
do not find it, but we do find, that by faith and nothing else we are
justified, Romans 3, 28. and so we may well collect it, by faith only. By grace
we are saved through faith: and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2, 7. And on this warrant have many of the Ancient Fathers been bold, to
add the word Only: as Origin upon Romans 3, 28. Hilarie upon Math. 8. and
diverse others say, Faith only instifieth.

God is only to be worshipped and served, and none besides him. Zephaniah
prophecieth against them that serve the host of heaven upon the house top, and
swear by Malcham, Zeph, 1, 5. But Jacob swear by the fear of his father
Isaae: and it is said, They feared the Lord, and served their Idols also, Genesis
32, 53. 2 Kings 17, 41. It is the property of Arons rod, that being turned into
a Serpent, if the Magicians turn theirs also into Serpents, Arons will devour
the rest, Exodus 7, 15. Bring the Arc into the Temple of Dagon, Dagon will fall
down and break his face, and though it were lifted up again, yet it fell
down again, 1 Samuel 5, 3. The stories bear witness, that the god; of the
Hebrews would not come into Pantho. Samuel bad the people, if thuy were come
again to the Lord with all their hearts, to put away their strange gods from
amongst them, 1 samuel 7, 4. If there were any other (beside him) that were able
to help up, we might have some reason to serueother: but since it is her that
must help us in all necessities, we must worship him alone: otherwise, when we
pray to him, he may send us to the gods which we have chosen to serve for our
help, Judge. 10, 14. If we could find an equal, or a better then God, we had
some reason to make him a partner in his worship: but if none be worthy once to
be named with him, (so far is all beneath him,) we shall offer him too much
disgrace and injury in so doing. It is an embasing of gold to have any other
metal joined with it: yea, though it be silver; the son (says Malachi,
Chap. 1, 6.) honors his father, and the servant his Lord: if I be your
father, where is your reverence? Whether we account of God, as of our Lord and
master; or whether we take him for a father, a man can have but one father,
except he be a bastard, Esaias 2, 14. and so be Filius Populi: if for a husband,
not two husbands, for he is a jealous God, and cannot abide that. No man can
serve two master; but he must love the one, and despise the other; no man can
love God and Mammon.

Verse 11. Then the Devil lest him.
BLessed is the man (says James, Chap. 1, 12.) that endures temptation: for
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life. Christ has endured the
temptation, now follows the blessing. Jacob would not let the Angel depart
(with whom he strove,) before he had blessed him, Genesis 32, 26. Job (after his
afflictions) received his two fold blessing, Job 42. the woman of Canaan first
hears her self accounted a dog: but at last she heard, Fiat tibi. Paul was
first buffeted by the prick of the flesh: and after heard, My grace is
sufficient for thee. So here at last, when the Devil saw it was bootlesse to
stay any longer, there was no good by him to be done, he leaves our Savior:
But yet he went not away willingly of himself, but was sent away with an
Auant. Which is a comfort to us, to think we stand not at the devils courtesy,
and that he shall not attempt us so long as he list, for God has the devil in
a chain, Apoc. 20, 2. and will not suffer him to tempt us above our strength,
1 Cor. 10, 13. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the
righteous, least the righteous put forth their hand to wickedness, Psalm. 125,
3. To have the devil not to come to us is a great favor; but to have him
come, and go away conquered, is exceeding mercy. For tribulation brings
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, Romans 5, 4. As God said of Job, 2, 3. Have thou marked my servant Job,
who keeps still his integrity?

And behold, the Angels came, and ministered unto him.
ANd as Luke says, Chap. 15, 10. There is joy with the Angels in heaven, upon
the conversion of every sinner. For we are made a spectacle unto men and
Angels, 1 Cor. 4, 9. Before God are said to stand, ten thousand Angels, Dan. 7,
10. and to minister before him. He has a greater pre-eminence, but we are also
herein partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1, 4. either because we are fed
by Angels, as Elias Was, 1 King. 19, 5. or defended by them, or watched of
them. But says Esaias, Chap. 18, 18. He that believes, makes not have. Christ
was not hasty, but stayed Gods good time: he would not make his own bread, but
stayed till the Angels ministered unto him. Then there appeared an Angel to
comfort him, Luke, 22, 43. This wisdom must we learn by holding our tongue,
Job 33, 33. otherwise one of these two extremes shall we come to: either,
Extremum luctus gaudium occupat: or Extrema gandij luctus occupat, says
Bernard, Luke 16, 25.

The world is like Iael, who meets Sisera, Judge. 4, 19. and entertaines him at
first very friendly, she allures him to her and gives him drink, and lays
him down: but so soon as he was asleep, she smites a nail into his temple:
The world begins with milk, and ends with a hammer. But our Saviors meaning
is clean contrary. The world first utters good wine; and when men have wsll
drunk, then that which is worst, John 2, 10. But Christ has kept bocke the
good wine till now, Chap. 2, 9. Matthew says, Chap. 13. v. 14. The Son of man
shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom, all
things that offend, and them which do iniquity: and shall cast the into a
furnace of fire, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Then shall the
just shine as the Sun, in the kingdom of their Father. Our Saviors method
is, to give bitter first, and sweet afterward. Wherefore we are to wish, that
here we may suffer affliction, that we may after be Crowned by him.

FINIS.

