THE CIVIL WARES between the Howses of Lancaster and York corrected and
continued by Samuel Daniel one of the Grooms of her Majesty's most honorable
Privy Chamber.

Aetas prima canat veneres postrema tumultus.

PRINTED AT LONDON by Simon Watersonne 1609:



TO THE RIGHT NOBLE Lady, the Lady Marie, Countess Dowager of Pembrooke.
MADAME:
THis Poem of our last Civil Wars of England, (whereof the many Editions
show what kind of intertainement it has had with the world) I have now
again sent-forth, with the addition of two books: the one, (...) the course
of the History; the other, making-vp (...) part, which (for haste) was left
unfurnished in the former (...). And, having nothing else to do with my (...),
but to work whilst I have it; I held it my part, to (...) (the best I could)
this Province, Nature has (...) to my Charge: and which I desire to leave,
after my death, in the best form I may; seeing I can erect no other pillars to
sustain my memory, but my lines nor (...) pay my debts and the recknings of
my gratitude to their honor who have done me good, and furthered (...) Work.

And, whereas this Argument was long since undertaken (in a time which was not
so well secured of the future, as God be blessed now it is) with a purpose, to
show the deformities of (...) Dissension, and the miserable events of
Rebellions, Conspiracies, and bloody Reuengements, which followed (as in a
circle) upon that breach of the due course of Succession, by the Usurpation of
Hen. 4; and thereby to make the blessings of Peace, and the happiness of an
established Government (in a direct Line) the better to appear: I trust I
shall do a grateful work to my Country, to continue the same, unto the
glorious (...) of Hen. 7: from whence is descended our present Happiness.

In which Work, I have carefully followed that truth which is (...) in the
History; without adding to, or subtracting from, the general received opinion
of things as we find them in our common Annalles: holding it an impiety, to
violate that public Testimony we have, without more evident proof; or to
introduce fictions of (...) own imagination, in things of this nature. Famae
rerum standum est. Though I know, in these public actions, there are ever
popular bruites, and opinions, which run according to the time and the biass of
men's affections: and it is the part of an Historian, to recite them, not to
rule the^; especially, otherwise then the circumstances may induce: according
to that modest saying; Nec affirmare sustineo de quibus dubito, nec subducere
quae accepi.

I have only used that poetical license, of framing speeches to the persons
of men according to their occasions; as C. Salustius, and T. Liuius (though
Writers in Prose, yet in that kind Poets) have, with diverse other ancient and
modern Writers, done before me. Wherein, though they (...) (...) upon (...)
(...) (...), (...) (...) a (...) that was not properly theirs: yet, seeing they
(...) so (...) a proportion, with the nature of men, and the course of
affairs; they pass as the parts of the Actor (not the Writer) and are
(...)'d with great approbation.

And although many of these Images are drawn with the pencil of mine
conceiving: yet I know, they are according to the portraiture of Nature; and
carry a resemblance to the life of Action, and their complexions whom they
represent. For, I see, Ambition, Faction, and Affections, speak ever one
Language, we are like colors (though in several fashions) feed, and are fed
with the same nutriments; and only vary but in time.

Man is a creature of the same dimension he was: and how great and eminent
(...) he be, his measure and height is easy to be taken. And all these great
actions are openly presented on the Stage of the World: where, there are ever
Spectators, who will judge and censare how men personate those parts, which
they are set to perform; and so enter them in the Records of Memory.

And if I have erred somewhat in the draught of the young Q. Isabel (wife to
Ric. 2.) in not suting her passions to her years: I must crave favor of my
credulous Readers; and hope, the young Ladies of England (who peradventure will
think themselves of age sufficient, at 14 years, to have a feeling of their
own estates) will excuse me in that point. For the rest, setting-aside those
ornaments, proper to this kind of Writing; I have faithfully observed the
History. Wherein, such as love this Harmony of words, may find, that a
Subject, of the greatest gravity, will be aptly expressed: howsoever others
(seeing in (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...)) (...) (...) but as a
language (...) Lightness and (...).

For (...) own part, I am not so far in (...) with this form of Writing (nor
have I sworn Fealty only to Ryme) but that I (...) serve in any other state
of Invention, with what weapon of (...) I will: and, so it may make good my
(...), I care not. For, I see, Judgment and Discretion (with what soever is
worthy) carry their own Ornaments, and are graced with their own beauties; be
they (...) in what fashion they will. And because I find the common tongue of
the world is Prose; I purpose in that kind to write the History of England,
from the Conquest: being encouraged thereunto, by many noble and worthy
Spirits. Although (...), I must not neglect to prosecute the other part of this
Work (...) being thus revived by your Goodness: to whom; and to whose Noble
Family, I hold my self ever bound; and will labor to (...) you all she honor,
and service I can.

SAM. DANYEL.

TO THE HIGH and most Illustrious Prince CHARLES His Excellence.
SIR:
PResents to gods were offered by the hands of graces; and why not those of
great Princes, by those of the Muses? To you therefore Great Prince of Honor,
and Honor of Princes; J jointly present Poesy and Music, in the one the
service of my defunct Brother, in the other, the duty of my self living, in
both the douotion of two Brothers, your Highness humble servants. Your
Excellence then who is of such recommendable fame, with all Nations for the
curiosity of your rare Spirit to understand, and ability of Knowledge to judge
of all things: I humbly inuit leaving the Songs of his Muse, who living so
sweetly chanted the glory of your High Name: Sacred is the fame of Poets,
Sacred the name of Princes; To which

Humbly bows, and vows Himself, ever your Highness Servant, John Daniel.

THE FIRST BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
What times fore-goe Richard the seconds Reign,
The fatal causes of this civil War,
His Uncles pride, his greedy Minions gain,
Glosters revolt, and death, delivered are.
Herford, accused, exiled, call'd-back again,
Pretendes to amend what others Rule did mar.
The King from Ireland hastes, but did no good;
Whilst strange prodigious signs fore-token blood.
1
I Sing the civil Wars, tumultuous Broils,
And bloody factions of a mighty Land:
Whose people hautie, proud with foreign spoils,
Upon themselves turn-backe their conquering hand;
Whilst Kin their Kin, Brother the Brother foyles;
Like Ensigns all against like Ensigns band;
Bows against Bows, the Crown against the Crown;
Whilst all pretending right, all right's thrown down.
2
What fury, o what madness held thee so,
Dear England (too too prodigal of blood)
To waste so much, and war without a foe,
Whilst France, to see thy spoils, at pleasure stood!
How much might thou have purchased with less woe,
To Have done thee honor and thy people good?
Thine might have been what-euer lies between
The Alps (...) us, the Pyrenei and Rhene.
3
Yet now what reason have we to complain?
Since hereby came the calm we did enjoy;
The bliss of thee Eliza; happy gain
For all our loss: when as no other way
The Heavens could find, but to unite again
The (...) sev'red Families, that they
Might bring forth thee: that in thy peace might grow
That glory, which few Times could ever show.
4
Come sacred Virtue: I no Muse, but thee,
(...), in this great labor I intend.
Do thou inspire my thoughts, infuse in me
A power to bring the same to happy end.
Raise up a work, for later times to see,
That may thy glory, and my pains commend.
Make me these tumults rightly to rehearse:
And give peace to my life, life to my verse.
5
And thou Charles (...) (who did once afford
Rest for my fortunes, on thy quiet shore;
And cheer'dst me on, these measures to record
In grauer tones, then I had used before)
Behold: my gratitude makes good my word
Engaged to thee (although thou be no more)
That I, who (...) have lived by thee,
Do give thee now a room to live with me.
6
And MEMORY, preserv'resse of things done,
Come thou, unfold the wounds, the wrack, the waste:
Reveal to me now all the strife be gunne
Twixt Lancaster and York, in ages past:
How causes, counsels, and events did run,
So long as these unhappy times did last,
(...) with fictions, fantasies.
I versifie the troth; not Poetize.
7
And to the end we may with better ease
Discern the true discourse; vouchsafe to show,
What were the times foregoing, near to these,
That these we may with better profit know:
Tell, how the world sell into this disease,
And how so great distemperature did grow.
So shall we see, by what degrees it came,
" How things, at full, do soon wex out of frame.
8
Ten Kings had, from the Norman Conqueror, reigned, Which (...) in the space of
260 (...).

With intermixed and variable fate,
When England to her greatest height attained
Of power, dominion, glory, wealth, and State;
After it had, with much a do, sustained
The violence of Princes, with debate
For titles, and the often mutinies
Of Nobles, for their ancient liberties.
9
For, first, the Norman, conquering all by might, 1067. (...) 1. surnamed the
Conqueror, (...) (...) son to Robert the sixth Duke of Normand (...), reigned
20. years and 8. months, and lest the Crown of England to William his third
son; contrary to the (...) of (...).

By might was forced to keep what he had got;
Mixing our Customs and the form of Right
With foraine Constitutions he had brought:
Maistering the mighty, humbling the poorer wight
By all seuerest means that could be wrought:
And, making the succession doubtful, rent
This new-got State, and left it turbulent.
10 (...). (...). (...) wars with (...) (...) (...) Robert D. of (...): with
(...) (...) (...) (...), (...) many of the (...) of (...) (...) (...). He was
(...) (...) (...) the new forest by Sir Walter (...) shooting at a (...), when
he had (...) 13. years.

William his son, tracing his fathers ways
(The great men spent in peace, or (...) (...) fight)
Upon depressed weakness (...) preyes,
And makes his force maintain his doubtful right:
His elder brothers claim, vexing his days,
His actions and (...) still incite:
And giving Beasts, what did to Men pertain
(Took for a Beast) himself in the end was slain.
11
His brother Henry next commands the State: 1100. Hen. 1. the youngest son
of (...) (...) 35. years, and 4 (...), whose son (...). and Ric. (...) (...)
on the (...), he (...) the (...) to Maude (...) married to the (...), (...). 4
and after to Geffrey (...) (...). of (...).

Who, Roberts title better to reject,
Seeks to repacifie the peoples hate;
And with fair shows, rather then in effect,
Allayes those grieuances that heavy sat:
Reformes the laws, which soon he did neglect;
And reft of (...), for whom he did prepare,
Leaves crown and strife, to Maude his daughters care.
12
Whom Stephen his nephew (falsifying his Oath) 1135. Stephen son to the (...).
of Bloys and Adela daughter to (...) 1. (...) (...) the (...) (...) with Maude
the Empress for the succession, and (...) (...) 18. years and 10. (...).

Preuents, assay les the Realm, obtaines the Crown;
Such tumults ray sing as torment them both,
Whilst both held nothing certainly their own:
The Afflicted State (divided in their troth
And partial faith) most miserable grown,
Endures the while, till peace, and Stephens death,
Gave some calm leisure to recover breath.
13 1154. Hen 2. son of Gef (...) (...) E. of (...) and (...) the Empress
(...) ated his son Hen. in the Crown and government; (...) (...) to hu gre t
(...), and set (...) sons, Henry, Richard, Geffry, and John against him.
(...) 34. (...) and 7. (...).

When Henry, son to Maude the Empress, reigns,
And England into form and greatness brought,
Adds Ireland to this Scepter, and obtaines
Large Provinces in France; much treasure got,
And from exactions here at home abstaynes:
And had not his (...) children sought
(...) his age with tumults, he had been
The (...) (...) that this State had seen.
14 1189. Richard went to the (...) wars, was (...) of Jerusalem (...) his
brother (...) by the help of the King of France (...) the crown of England. He
was detained prisoner in Austria, redeemed, and reigned nine years. 9. months.

Him, Richard follows in the government;
Who much the glory of our Arms increast;
And all his fathers mighty (...) spent,
In that deuoutfull (...) of the East:
Whereto, whiles he (...) forces wholly bent,
(...) and (...) his (...) oppressed;
A (...) (...), and a fatal King,
Cut Off his (...) (...) glory, in the spring.
15
Which wicked brother, contrary to course,
False John usurps his Nephew Arthurs right;
Gets to the Crown by craft, by wrong, by force;
Rules it with lust, oppression, rigor might; 1199. K. John vsurps the right
of Arthur, son to Geffery his elder brother; and reigns 17 years. He had
wars with his Barons; who elected Lewis, Son to the K. of France.

Murders the lawful heir without remorse:
Wherefore procuring all the worlds despite,
A Tyrant loathed, a homicide conuented,
Poisoned he dies, disgraced and unlamented.
16
Henry his son is (...) (...), though young,
And Jews of France (elected first) beguiled;
After the mighty had debated long,
Doubtful to choose a stranger or a child:
With him, the (...) (in the (...) grown strong)
War for (...) (...) (...) so long exiled. 1216. Hen. 3 at 9. years of age,
was Crowned King: and reigned 56 years.

He graunts the (...) that pretended ease;
Yet kept his own, and did his State appease.
17
Edward, his (...) a Martial (...), succeedes;
Just, prudent, grave, religious, (...):
Whose happy ordered Reign most fertile breeds, 1272. Ed. 1. had the dominion
over this whole Island of (...): and (...) gloriously 34. years. 7. Months.

Plenty of mighty spirits to strength his State:
And worthy minds, to manage worthy deeds,
The Experience of those times ingenerate:
For, ever great employment, for the great,
Quickens the blood, and honor does beget.
18 (...) 307. Edward 2. abused by his Minions and debaushed by his own
weakness, was deposed from his government, when he had reig ned 19. years 6.
months; and was murdered in prison.

And had (...) his misled lascivious Son,
Edward the second, intermitted so
The course of glory happily begun
(Which brought him and his favorites to woe)
That happy current without stop had run
Unto the full of his son Edwards flow:
But, who has often seen, in such a State,
Father and Son like good, like fortunate?
19
But now, this great Succeeder, all repaires, 13. 26. Edw. 3

And reinduc't that discontinued good:
He builds up strength and greatness, for his heirs,
Out of the virtues that adornd his blood:
He makes his Subjects Lords of more then theirs;
And sets their bounds far wider then they stood.
His power, and fortune, had (...) wrought,
Could but the State have kept what he had got.
20
And had his heir surviu'd him in due course, Edward the black prince who died
before his father.

What limits England had thou found? what bar?
What world could have resisted so great force?
O more then men! (two thunderbolts of war)
Why did not Time your joined worth divorce,
To Have made your several glories greater far?
Too prodigal was Nature, thus to do;
To spend in one Age, what should serve for two.
21
But now the Scepter, in this glorious State, Richard. 2. being but 11. years
of age, was crowned K. of England. 1377

Supported with strong power and victory,
Was left unto a Child, ordained by fate
To stay the course of what might grow too hie:
Here was a stop, that Greatness did abate,
When power upon so weak a base did lie.
For, least great fortune should presume too far,
Such oppositions interposed are.
22
Never this Island better peopled stood;
Never more men of might, and minds addressed:
Never more Princes of the royal blood,
(If not too many for the public Rest)
Nor ever was more treasure wealth and good;
Then when this Richard, first, the Crown possessed;
The second of that name, in two accursed:
And well we might have mist all, but the first.
23
In this man's Reign, began this fatal strife
(The bloody argument where of we treat)
That dearly cost so many'a Prince his life;
And spoyld the weak, and even consumed the great:
That, wherein all confusion was so rife,
As Memory even grieves her to repeat,
And would that time might now this knowledge lose;
But that it is good to learn by others woes.
24
Edward the third, being dead, had left this child, Richard the 2. son to the
black prince.

(Son of his worthy son deceast of late)
The Crown and Scepter of this Realm to wield:
Appointing the protectors of his State
Two of his sons, to be his better shield;
Supposing, Uncles, free from guile or hate,
Would order all things for his better good,
In the respect and honor of their blood.
25
Of these, John, Duke of Lancaster, was one, The D. of Lancaster entitled K. of
Castile in the right of his wife Constance eldest daughter to K. Peter.

(Too great a Subject grown, for such a State.
The title of a King, and glory won
In great exploits his mind did eleuate
Above proportion kingdoms stand upon:
Which made him push at what his issue gate) Edmond Langly Earl of Cambridge;
after created D. of York.

The other, Langley: whose mild temperatness
Did tend unto a calmer quietness.
26
With these, did Woodstock interpose his part;
A man, for action violently bent, Thomas of Wood (...) after made D. of
Gloucester.

And of a spirit averse, and ouer-thwart;
Which could not suit a peace-full government:
Whose euer-swelling, and tumultuous heart
Wrought his own ill and others discontent.
And these had all the manage of affairs,
During the time the King was under years.
27
And in the first years of his government,
Things past, as first; the wars in France proceed,
Though not with that same fortune and event,
Being now not followed with such careful heed;
Our people here at home, grown discontent,
Through great exactions, insurrections breed:
Private respects hindered the Commonweal:
And idle ease does on the mighty steal.
28
Too many Kings breed factions in the Court:
The head too weak, the members grown too great.
Which evermore does happen in this sort,
When Children (...) the plague which God does threat
Unto those Kingdoms which he will transport
To other Lines, or utterly defeat:
" For, the ambitious, once inured to (...),
" Canneuer brook a private state again.
29
" And Kingdoms ever suffer this distress,
" Where one, or many, guide the infant King:
" Which one or many (tasting this excess
" Of greatness and command) can never bring
" Their thoughts again t'obay, or to be less.
" From hence, these insolences ever spring;
" Contempt of others, whom they seek to foil:
" Then follow leagues, destruction, (...), spoil.
30
And whether they, which underwent this charge,
Permit the King to take a youthful vain,
That they their private better might enlarge:
Or whether he himself would farther strain
(Thinking his years sufficient to discharge
The government) and so assumed the rain:
Or howsoever, now his ear he lends
To youthful counsel, and his lusts attends.
31
And Courts were never barren yet of those
Which could with subtle train, and apt advice,
Work on the Princes weakness, and dispose
Of feeble frailty, easy to entice.
And such, no doubt, about this King arose,
Whose flattery (the dangerous nurse of vice)
Got hand upon his youth, to pleasures bent:
Which, led by them, did others discontent.
32
For, now his Uncles grew much to mislike
These ill proceedings; were it that they saw
That others, favored, did aspiring seek
Their Nephew from their counsels to withdraw,
(Seeing him of nature flexible, and weak)
Because they only would keep all in awe;
Or that (...) they found the King and State
Abused by such as now in office sat.
33
Or rather else, they all were in the fault;
The Ambitious Uncles, th'indiscreete young King,
The greedy Council, and the Minions naught;
And altogether did this tempest bring:
Besides, the times, with all injustice fraught,
Concurred, with such confused misgouerning,
That we may truly say, This spoyld the State,
" Youthful Counsel, private Gain, partial Hate.
34
And then the King, besides his iealousies
Which nourisht were, had reason to be led
To doubt his Uncles for their loyalties;
Since John (...) Gaunt (as was discovered)
Had practiced his death in secret wise;
And Gloucester openly becomes the head
Unto a league, who all in arms were bent
To Oppose against the present government; Robert Veere Duke of Ireland.

35
Pretending to remove such men as were
Accounted to abuse the king, and State. Ann. Reg. 11. the D. of Gloucester with
the E E. of Darby, Aru^del, Nottingham, Warwick and other L L. having forced
the K. to put from him all his officers of Court, at this Parliament, caused
most of the^ to be executed: as, (...) Beauchamp L. (...) of his (...), Sir
Simon Burley, L. Chamberlain, with manyother. Also the L. chief Justice was
here executed, and all the Judges condemned to death, for (...) the kings (...)
against these L L. and the (...) of the last Parliament, m Ann. 10

Of whom, the chief they did accuse, was Veere,
Made Duke of Ireland, with great grace of late;
And diverse else, who for the place they bear
Obnoxious are, and subject unto hate.
And these must be sequestered with all speed:
Or else they vowed, their swords should do the deed.
36
The King was forced in that next Parliament,
To grant them what he durst not well refuse.
For, thither armed they came, and fully bent
To suffer no repulse, nor no excuse:
And here they did accomplish their intent;
Where Justice did her sword, not Balance, use.
For, even that (...) place they violate,
Arresting all the Judges as they sat.
37
And here had many worthy men their end,
Without all form, or any course of Right.
" For, still these broils, that public good pretend,
" Work most injustice, being done through spite.
" For, those aggrieued evermore do bend
" Against such as they see of greatest might:
" Who, though they cannot help what will go ill;
" Yet, since they may do wrong, are thought they will.
38
And yet herein I mean not to excuse
The Justices, and Minions of the King
(Who might their office and their grace abuse)
But blame the course held in the managing.
" For, great-men, ouer-grac't, much rigor use.
" Presuming fauorits coffeehouse bring.
" And disproportions harmony do break.
" Minions, too great, argue a king too weak.
39
Now, that so much was granted, as was sought;
A reconcilement made, although not meant,
Appeased them all in show, but not in thought,
Whilst every one seemed outwardly content:
Though hereby king, nor peers, nor people got
More love, more strength, or easier government;
But every day, things still succeeded worse.
" For good from Kings is seldom drawn by force.
40
And thus it lo continued, till by chance
The Queen (which was the Emperors daughter) di'de: Ann. Reg. 18.

When As the King, to establish peace with France,
And (...) for home-quiet to provide,
Sought by contracting marriage to advance
His own affairs, against his Uncles pride;
Took the young daughter of King Charles to wife: Ann. 20. (...), daughter to
Charles, 6.

Which after, in the end, raised greater strife.
41
For, now his uncle Gloucester much repined,
Against this French alliance and this peace:
As either out of a tumultuous mind;
(Which never was content the wars should cease:)
Or that he did dishonorable find
Those articles which did our State decrease;
And therefore stormed because the Crown had wrong:
Or that he feared, the King would grow too strong.
42
But whatsoever moved him; this is sure,
Hereby he wrought his ruin in the end;
And was a fatal cause, that did procure
The swift approaching mischiefs that attend.
For lo, the King no longer could endure
Thus to be crossed in what he did intend;
And therefore watched but some occasion fit
T'attache the Duke, when he thought least of it.
43
And Fortune, to set forward this intent,
The Cont S. Paul, from France, does hither bring:
Whom Charles the sixth employed in complement, Valeran E. of S. Paul who had
married the kings half sister.

To see the Queen, and to salute the King.
To whom he shows his Uncles discontent,
And of his secret dangerous practicing,
How he his Subjects sought to sulleuate,
And break the league with France concluded late.
44
" To whom the Cont, most cunningly replies;
" Great Prince, it is within your power, with ease
" To remedy such fears, such iealousies,
" And rid you of such mutiners as these;
" By cutting off that, which might greater rise:
" And now at first, preventing this disease,
" And that before he shall your wrath disclose.
" For, who threats first, means of revenge does lose.
45
" First take his head; then tell the reason why:
" Stand not to find him guilty by your laws.
" You easier shall with him your quarrel try
" Dead then alive, who has the better cause.
" For, in the murmuring vulgar, usually
" This public course of yours compassion draws;
" Especially in cases of the great:
" Which work much pity, in the vndiscreat.
46
" And this is sure, though his offense be such:
" Yet does calamity attract commorse:
" And men repine at Princes bloodshed much,
" (How iust-soeuer) judging it is by force.
" I know not how, their death gives such a tuch,
" In those that reach not to a true discourse;
" As so shall you, observing formal right,
" Be held still as unjust, and win more spite.
47
" And, often, the cause may come prevented so:
" And therefore when it is done, let it be heard.
" For, thereby shall you escape your private woe,
" And satisfy the world too, afterward.
" What need you weigh the rumors that shall go?
" What is that breath, being with your life compared?
" And therefore, if you will be ruled by me,
" In secret sort, let him dispatched be.
48
And then arraigne the chief of those you find
Were of his faction secretly compact:
Who may so well be handled in their kind;
As their confessions, which you shall exact,
May both appease the aggrieued peoples mind,
And make their death to aggrauate their fact.
So shall you rid your self of dangers quite;
And show the world, that you have done but right.
49
This counsel, vttred unto such an ear
As willing listens to the safest ways,
Works on the yielding matter of his fear;
Which easily to any course obayes.
For, every Prince, seeing his danger near,
By any means his quiet peace assaies.
" And still the greatest wrongs, that ever were,
" Have then been wrought, when Kings were put in fear.
50
Called in with public pardon, and release, At the parliament, in Anno 11.
the I. L. of the league with Gloucester, being pardoned for their opposing against
the kings proceedings, were quiet till Anno 21; when upon report of a new
conspiracy, they were surprised.

The Duke of Gloucester, with his accomplices;
All tumults, all contentions seem to cease,
The land rich, people pleased, all in happiness;
When suddenly Gloucester came caught, with peace;
Warwick, with proffered love and promises:
And Arundell was in, with cunning brought:
Who else abroad, his safety might have wrought.
51
Long was it not, ere Gloucester was conuayd
To Calice, and there strangled secretly:
Warwick and Arundell close prisoners laid,
Th'especiall men of his confederacy: Mowbray E. Marshal, after made Duke of
Norfolk, (...) the charge of dispatching the D. of Gloucester, at Calice.

Yet VVarwickes tears and base confessions staide
The doom of death; and came confined thereby,
And so prolongs this not long base-begg'd breath:
But Arundell was put to public death.
52
Which public death (received with such a cheer,
As not (...) sigh, a look, a shrink bewrayes
The least felt touch of a degenerous fear)
Gave life to Envy, to his courage praise;
And made his stout-defended cause appear The K. had by (...) before pardoned
the D. and those two Earls: yet was the pardon (...).

With such a face of Right, as that it lays
The side of wrong toward him, who had long since
By Parliament forgiven this offense:
53
And in the vnconceiuing vulgar sort,
Such an impression of his goodness gave
As Sainted him, and raised a strange report
Of miracles effected on his Grave:
Although the Wise (whom zeal did not transport)
" Knew, how each great example still must have
" Something of wrong, a taste of violence;
" Wherewith, the public quiet does dispense.
54
The King foorth-with prouides him of a Guard;
A thousand Archers daily to attend:
Which now upon the act he had prepared,
As th'argument his actions to defend:
But yet the world hereof conceived so hard,
That all this naught auaild him in the end.
" In vain, with terror is he fortified,
" That is not guarded with firm love beside.
55
Now storm his grieved Uncles, though in vain;
Not able better courses to (...).
They might their grieuance inwardly complain;
But outwardly they needs must temporise.
The King was great; and they should nothing gain
T'attempt revenge, or offer once to rise:
This league with France had made him now so strong,
That they must needs as yet endure this wrong.
56
For, like a Lion that escapes his bounds,
Having been long restrained his use to stray,
Ranges the restless woods, stays on no ground,
Riots with bloodshed, wantons on his pray;
Seeks not for need, but in his pride to wound,
Glorying to see his strength and what he may:
So this unbridled King (freed of his fears)
In liberty, himself thus wildely bears.
57
For, standing now alone, he sees his might
Out of the compass of respective awe;
And now begins to violate all right,
While no restraining fear at hand he saw.
Now he exacts of all, (...) in delight,
Riots in pleasure, and neglects the law:
He thinks his Crown is licenst to do ill.
" That less should list, that may do what it will.
58
Thus b'ing transported in this sensual course;
No friend to warn no counsel to withstand,
He (...) proceeds on from bad to worse,
Soothed in all actions that he took in hand, -- (...) quo l credere de se non
possit, cum laudatur, (...) aequa (...).

By such as all impiety did nurse,
Commending ever what he did command.
" Unhappy Kings! that never may be taught
" To know themselves, or to discern their fault.
59
And whilst this course did much the kingdom daunt,
The Duke of Herford being of courage bold, Hen. Bollingbroke of Heresord.

As son and heir to mighty John (...) Gaunt,
Vtters the passion which he could not hold
Concerning these oppressions, and the want
Of government: which he to Norfolk told; Tho. Mowbray D. of Norfolk.

To the end, he (being great about the king)
Might do some good, by better counselling.
60
Hereof does Norfolk presently take hold,
And to the king the whole discourse relate:
Who, not conceipting it, as it was told,
But judging it proceeded out of hate;
Disdeigning deeply to be so controwl'd,
That others should his Rule preiudicate,
Charged Herford therewithal: who re-accus'd
Norfolk, for words of treason he had used.
61
Norfolk denies them peremptorily.
Herford recharg'd, and supplicates the king,
To have the combat of his enemy;
That by his sword he might approve the thing.
Norfolk desires the same, as earnestly:
And both with equal courage menacing
Revenge of wrong; that none knew which was free:
For, times of faction, times of slander be.
62
The combat granted, and the day assigned,
They both in order of the field appear,
Most richly furnished in all Martial kind,
And at the point of intercombate were;
When (lo) the king changed suddenly his mind,
Casts down his warder to arrest them there;
As being advised a better way to take,
Which might for his more certain safety make.
63
For, now considering (as it likely might)
The victory should hap on Herfords side
(A man most valiant and of noble sprite,
Beloved of all, and ever worthy tried)
How much he might be graced in public sight,
By suchan act, as might advance his pride,
And so become more popular by this;
Which he fears, too much he already is.
64
And therefore he resolves to banish both, Mowbray was banished the very day
(by the course of the year) whereon he murdered the D. of Gloucester.

Though the one in chiefest favor with him stood,
A man he dearly loved; and might be loath
To leave him, that had done him so much good:
Yet having cause to do as now he does,
To mitigate the envy of his blood,
Thought best to lose a friend, to rid a foe;
And such a one, as now he doubted so.
65
And therefore to perpetual exile he
Mowbray condemns; Herford but for ten years:
Thinking (for that the wrong of this decree,
Compared with greater rigor, (...) appears)
It might of all the better liked be:
But yet such murmuring of the fact he hears,
That he is feign four of the ten for give,
And judged him six years in exile to live.
66
At whose departure hence out of the Land,
How did the open multitude reveal
The wondrous love they bare him underhand!
Which now, in this hot passion of their zeal,
They plainly showed; that all might understand
How dear he was unto the common weal.
They feared not to exclaim against the King;
As one, that sought all good men's ruining.
67
Unto the shore, with tears, with sighs, with moan,
They him conduct; cursing the bounds that stay
Their willing feet, that would have further gone,
Had not the fearful Ocean stopped their way:
" Why Neptune; Have thou made us stand alone
" Divided from the world, for this, say they?
" Hemd-in, to be a spoil to tyranny,
" Leaving affliction hence no way to fly?
68
" Are we locked up, poor souls, here to abide
" Within the waterie prison of thy waves,
" As in a fold, where subject to the pride
" And lust of Rulers we remain (...) as slaves?
" Here in the reach of might, where none can hide
" From the eye of wrath, but only in their Graves?
" Happy confiners you of other lands,
" That shift your soil, and often escape tyrants hands.
69
" And must we leave him here, whom here were fit
" We should retain, the pillar of our State?
" Whose virtues well deserve to govern it,
" And not this wanton young effeminate.
" Why should not he in Regal honor sit,
" That best knows how a Realm to ordinate?
" But, one day yet, we hope thou shall bring back
" (Dear Bullingbrooke) the Justice that we lack.
70
" Thus muttred, lo, the malecontented sort;
" That love Kings best, before they have them, still;
" And never can the present State comport,
" But would as often change, as they change will.
" For, this good Duke had won them in this sort
" By succ'ring them, and pitying of their ill,
" That they supposed straight it was one thing,
" To be both a good Man, and a good King.
71
When As the grauer fort that saw the course,
And knew that Princes may not be controld,
Liked well to suffer this, for fear of worse;
" Since, many great, one Kingdom cannot hold.
For, now they saw, intestine strife, of force,
The apt-diuided State entangle would,
If he should stay whom they would make their head,
By whom the vulgar body might be led.
72
" They saw likewise, that Princes often are feign
" To buy their quiet, with the price of wrong:
" And better 'twere that now a few complain,
" Then all should mourn, as well the weak as strong:
" Seeing still how little, Realms by change do gain;
" And therefore learned by observing long,
" T'admire times past, follow the present will,
" Wish for good Princes, but t'indure the ill.
73
For, when it naught auailes, what folly then
To strive against the current of the time?
Who will throw down himself, for other men,
That make a ladder by his fall to clime?
Or who would seek t'imbroyle his Country, when
He might have rest; suffering but others crime?
" Since wise men ever have preferred far
" Th'vniustest peace, before the iustest war.
74
Thus they considered, that in quiet sat,
Rich or content, or else unfit to strive:
Peace-louer wealth, hating a troublous State,
Does willing reasons for their rest contriue:
But, if that all were thus considerate,
How should in Court, the great, the favored thrive?
Factions must be, and these varieties:
And some must fall, that other-some may rise.
75
But, long the Duke remained not in exile,
Before that John of Gaunt, his father, dies.
Upon whose state the king seized now, this while,
Disposing of it, as his enemies.
This open wrong no longer could beguile
The world, that saw these great indignities.
Which so exasperates the minds of all,
That they resolved, him home again to call.
76
For, now they saw, to was malice in the King
(Transported in his ill-conceiued thought)
That made him so to prosecute the thing
Against all law, and in a course so naught.
And this advantage to the Duke did bring
More fit occasions; whereupon he wrought.
" For, to a man so strong, and of such might,
" He gives him more, that takes away his right.
77
The King in this mean time (I know not how) An. Reg. 22.

Was drawn into some actions, forth the Land,
To Appease the Irish, that revolted now:
And, there attending what he had in hand,
Neglects those parts from whence worse dangers grow;
As ignorant, how his affairs did stands
Whether the plot was wrought it should be so,
Or that his fate did draw him on to go.
78
Most sure it is, that he committed here
An ignorant and idle oversight;
Not looking to the Dukes proceedings there,
Being in the Court of France, where best he (...);
Where both the King and all (...) were
TO have stopped his course, being within their right:
But now he was exiled, he thought him sure;
And, free from farther doubting, lived secure.
79
So blindes the sharpest counsels of the wise
This ouershadowing Providence on hie;
And dazleth all their clearest sighted eyes,
That they see not how nakedly they lie.
There where they little think, the storm does rise,
And ouercasts their clear security:
When man has stopped all ways save only that,
Which (as least doubted) Ruin enters at.
80
And now was all disorder in the excess,
And whatsoever does a change portend;
As, idle luxury, and wantonness,
Proteus-like varying Pride, vain without end:
Wrong-worker Riot (motive to oppress)
Endless Exactions, which the idle spend,
Consuming Usury, and credits cracked,
Call'd-on this purging War, that many lackt.
81
Then Ill-perswading want, in Martial minds,
And wronged patience (long oppressed with might)
Loosenes in all (which no religion binds)
Commanding force (the measure made of Right)
Gave fuel to this fire, that easy finds
The way, t'inflame the whole indangerd quite:
These were the public breeders of this War;
By which, still greatest States confo unded (...).
82
For, now this peace with France had shut in here
The ouergrowing humors Wars do spend.
For, where t'euacuate no employments were,
Wider th'vnwieldy burden does distend.
Men, wholly used to war, peace could not bear;
As knowing no other course, whereto to bend:
For, brought up in the broils of these two Reames,
They thought best fishing still, in troubled streams.
83
Like to a River, that is stopped his course,
Does violate his banks, breaks his own bed,
Destroys his bounds, and ouer-runs, by force,
The neighbour-fieldes, irregularly spread:
Even so this sudden stop of War does nurse
Home broils, within it self, from others led:
So dangerous the change hereof is tried
Ere minds 'come soft, or otherwise imploid.
84
But, all this makes for thee, o Bulling brook,
To work a way unto thy Soueraintie.
This care, the Heavens, Fate, and Fortune took,
To bring thee to thy (...) easily.
Upon thee falls that hap, which him forsook,
Who, crowned a King, a King yet must not die.
Thou were ordaind, by Providence, to raise
A quarrel, lasting longer then thy days.
85
For, now this absent Lord, out of his Land
(Where though he showed great sprite and valor then;
Being attended with a worthy band
Of valiant Peers, and most courageous men)
Gave time to them at home, that had in hand
Th'vngodly work, and knew the season when:
Who fail not to advise the Duke with speed;
Soliciting to what he soon agreed.
86
Who presently, upon so good report, The D. being bavished in (...), landed in
the beginning of Iulie, after, (...) Rauenspurre, in Yorkshire, some say but
with 60. men, other with 3000 and 8 ships set forth and furnished by the Duke
of Britain Ann. Reg. 22.

Relying on his friends fidelity,
Conueyes himself out of the French Kings Court,
Under pretense to go to Britannie:
And, with his followers, that to him resort,
Landed in England: Welcomed joyfully
Of th'altring vulgar, apt for changes still;
As headlong carried with a present will.
87
And com'n to quiet shore, but not to rest;
The first night of his joyful landing here,
A fearful vision does his thoughts molest:
Seeming to see in reverent form appear
A fair and goodly woman all distressed; The Genius of England appears to
Bullingbrooke.

Which, with full-weeping eyes and rented hair,
Wringing her hands (as one that grieved and prayed)
With sighs commixt with words, unto him said;
88
" O whither do thou tend, my unkind Son?
" What mischief do thou go-about to bring
" To her, whose Genius thou here lookst upon,
" Thy Mother-countrey, whence thy self did spring?
" Whither thus do thou, in ambition, run,
" To change due course, by foul disordering?
" What bloodshed, what turmoyles do thou commence,
" To last for many woeful ages hence?
89
" Stay here thy foot, thy yet unguilty foot,
" That can not stay when thou art farther in.
" Retire thee yet unstained, whilst it does boot:
" The end, is spoil, of what thou do begin:
" Injustice never yet took lasting root,
" Nor held that long, Impiety did win.
" The babes, unborn, shall (o) be borne to bleed
" In this thy quarrel, if thou do proceed.
90
This said, she ceast: when he in troubled thought
Grieved at this tale and sigh't, and thus replies;
" Dear Country, o I have not hither brought
" These Arms to spoil, but for thy liberties:
" The sin be on their head, that this have wrought;
" Who wronged me first, and thee do tyrannise.
" I am thy Champion, and I seek my right:
" Prouok't I am to this, by others spite.
91
" This, this pretense, says she, the ambitious find
" To smooth injustice, and to flatter wrong.
" Thou do not know what then will be thy mind,
" When thou shall see thy self advanced and strong.
" When thou have shook off that, which others bind;
" Thou soon forgettest what thou learned long.
" Men do not know what then themselves will be,
" When As, more then themselves, themselves they see.
92
And here with all, turning about he wakes,
Laboring in spirit, troubled with this strange sight:
And mused a while, waking aduisement takes
Of what had past in sleep and silent night:
Yet hereof no important reckoning makes,
But as a dream that vanished with the light:
The day designs, and what he had in hand
Left it to his diuerted thoughts vnscand.
93
Doubtful at first, he wary does proceed;
Seems not: affect that, which he did effect:
(...) else perhaps seems, as he meant indeed,
Sought but his own, and did no more expect.
Then, Fortune, thou art guilty of his deed:
That did his state above his hopes erect:
And thou must bear some blame of his great sin;
That (...) him worse, then when he did begin.
94
Thou did conspire with Pride, and with the Time,
To make so easy an ascent to wrong,
That he who had no thought so hie to clime
(With sauouring comfort still allured along)
Was with occasion thrust into the crime;
Seeing others weakness and his part so strong.
" And who is there, in such a case that will
" Do good, and fear, that may live free with ill?
95
We will not say nor think, O Lancaster,
But that thou then did mean as thou did swear
Upon th'Euangelists at Doncaster,
In the eye of heaven, and that assembly theare,
That thou but as an upright orderer,
Sought'st to reform the abused Kingdom here,
And get thy right, and what was thine before;
And this was all; thou would attempt no more:
96
Though we might say, and think, that this pretense
Was but a shadow to the intended act;
Because the event does argue the offense,
And plainly seems to manifest the fact:
For that hereby thou might win confidence
With those, whom else thy course might hap distract,
And all suspicion of thy drift remove;
" Since easily men credit whom they love.
97
But, God forbid we should so nearly pry
Into the lowe-deepe-buried sins long past,
T'examine and confer iniquity,
Whereof faith would no memory should last:
That our times might not have t'exemplifie
With aged stains; but, with our own shame cast,
Might think our blot the first, not done before;
That new-made sins might make us blush the more.
98
And let un wresting Charity believe
That then thy oath with thy intent agreed;
And others faith, thy faith did first deceive,
Thy after-fortune forced thee to this deed.
And let no man (...) idle censure give,
Because the event proves so, 'twas so decreed.
" For, ost our counsels sort to other end,
" Then that which frailty did at first intend.
99
Whilst those that are but outward lookers on
(Who sildome sound these mysteries of State)
Deem things were so contrived as they are done,
And hold that policy, which was but fate;
Imagining, all former acts did run
Unto that course they seeth' effects relate;
Whilst still too short they come, or cast too far,
" And make these great men wiser then they are.
100 The D. put to death VVillia^ Scroope E. of (...), Treasurer of Eng. with
Sir Hen. Green, and Sir John Bushy, for misgouerning the king and the Realm.

But, by degrees he ventures now on blood;
And sacrifiz'd, unto the peoples love,
The death of those that chief in envy stood:
As, the Officers (who first these dangers prove)
The Treasurer, and those whom they thought good,
Bushy and Green, by death he must remove:
These were the men, the people thought, did cause
Those great exactions, and abused the laws.
101
This done, his cause was preached with learned skill,
By Arundel, the Archbishop: who there showed
A Pardon sent from Rome, to all that will
Take part with him, and quit the faith they owed Th. Arundel Archbish. of
Canterbury.

To Richard; as a Prince unfit and ill:
On whom the Crown was fatally bestowed.
And easie-yeelding zeal was quickly caught,
With what the mouth of gravity had taught.
102
O that this power, from everlasting given Bis peccat, qui pretextu Religionis
peccat.

(The great alliance made twixt God and us;
The intelligence that earth does hold with heaven)
Sacred Religion; o that thou must thus
Be made to smooth our ways unjust, uneven;
Brought from above, earth-quarrels to discuss!
Must men beguile our souls, to win our wills,
And make our Zeal the furtherer of ils?
103
But, the ambitious, to (...) their might,
Dispense with heaven, and what Religion would.
" The armed will find right, or else make right;
If this (...) wrought not, yet an other should.
And this and other now do all incite
To strength the faction that the Duke does hold:
Who easily obtained what he sought;
His virtues and his love so greatly wrought.
104
The King, still busied in this Irish war
(Which by his valor there did well succeed)
Had news, how here his Lords revolted are,
And how the Duke of Herford does proceed:
In these affairs he fears are grown too far;
Hastes his return from thence with greatest speed:
But was by tempests, winds, and seas debarred;
As if they likewise had against him warred.
105
But, at the length (though late) in Wales he lands: Edward D. of Aumerle Son
to the D. of York.

Where, thoroughly informed of Henry's force,
And well aduertis'd how his own case stands
(Which to his grief he sees tends to the worse)
He leauest' Aumarle, at Milford, all those bands
He brought from Ireland: taking thence his course
To Conway (all disguised) with fourteen more, Conway Castle in Wales.

To The Earl of Salisburie, thither sent before:
106
Thinking, the Earl had raised some Army there;
Whom there he finds for saken all alone: Montague E. of (...).

The forces, in those parts which levied were,
Were closely shrunk away, dispersed and gone.
The king had stayed too long; and they, in fear,
Resolved every man to shift for one.
At this amas'd, such fortune he laments;
Foresees his fall, whereto each thing consents.
107
In this disturbed tumultuous broken State,
Whilst yet the event stood doubtful what should be;
Whilst naught but headlong running to debate,
And glittering troops and arm or men might see:
Fury, and fear, compassion, wrath, and hate,
Confused through all the land, no corner free:
The strong, all mad, to strife, to ruin bent;
The weaker waild: the aged they lament,
108
And blame their many years that live so long,
To see the horror of these miseries.
Why had not we (said they) di'd with the strong,
In foreign fields, in honorable wise,
In just exployts, and noble without wrong,
And by the valiant hand of enemies?
And not thus now reserved, in our age,
To home-confusion, and disordered rage.
109
Unto the Temples flock the weak, devout,
Sad wayling Women; there to vow and pray
For husbands, brothers, or their sons gone out
To bloodshed: whom nor tears, nor love could stay.
Here, grave religious Fathers (which much doubt
The sad events these broils procure them may)
As Prophets warn, exclaim, dissuade these crimes,
By the examples fresh of other times.
110
And (o!) what, do you now prepare, said they,
Another Conquest, by these fatal ways?
What, must your own hands make your selves a pray
To desolation, which these tumults raise?
What Dane, what Norman, shall prepare his way
To triumph on the spoil of your decays?
That, which nor France, nor all the world, could do
In union, shall your discord bring you to?
111
Conspire against us, neighbor nations all,
That envy at the height whereto we are grown:
Conjure the barbarous North, and let them call
Strange fury from far distant shores unknown;
And let them altogether on us fall,
So to divert the ruin of our own:
That we, forgetting what does so incense,
May turn the hand of malice, to defense.
112
Calm these tempestuous spirits, O mighty Lord;
This threatening storm that ouer-hangs the Land.
Make them consider, ere they 'vnsheath the sword,
How vain is the earth, this point whereon they stand;
And with what sad calamities is stored
The best of that, for which the Ambitious band:
" Labor the end of labor, strife of strife;
" Terror in death, and horror after life.
113
Thus they in zeal, whose humbled thoughts were good,
Whilst in this wide-spread volume of the skies,
The book of Providence disclosed stood,
Warnings of wrath, foregoing miseries
In lines of fire and characters of blood,
There fear full forms in dreadful flames arise,
Amazing Comets, threatening Monarchs might,
And new-seene Stars, unknown unto the night,
114
Red (...) Dragons in the air do fly,
And burning Meteors, pointed-streaming lights:
Bright Stars in midst of day appear in sky,
Prodigious monsters, ghastly fearful sights:
Strange Ghostes, and apparitions terrify:
The woeful mother her own birth affrightes;
Seeing a wrong deformed infant borne,
Grieves in her pains, deceived in shame does mourn.
115
The earth, as if afeard of blood and wounds,
Trembles in terror of these falling (...):
The hollow concaues give out groaning sounds,
And sighing murmures, to lament our woes:
The Ocean, all at discord with his bounds,
Reiterates his strange untimely flows:
Nature all out of course, to check our course,
Neglects her work, to work in us remorse.
116
So great a wrack unto it self does, lo,
Disordered proud mortality prepare,
That this whole frame does even labor so
Her ruin unto frailty to declare:
And travails to fore-signifie the woe
That weak improuidence could not beware.
" For heaven and earth, and air and seas and all,
" Taught men to see, but not to shun their fall.
117
Is man so dear unto the heavens, that they
Respect the ways of earth, the works of sin?
Does this great All, this Vniuer sall, weigh
The vain designs that weakness does begin?
Or does our fear, father of zeal, give way
Unto this error ignorance lives in?
And deem our faults the cause that move these powers,
That have their cause from other cause then ours?
118
But, these beginnings had this impious War,
Th'vngodly bloodshed that did so defile
The beauty of thy fields, and even did mar
The flower of thy chief pride, thou fairest I Will:
These were the causes that incenst so far
The civil wounding hand enraged with spoil;
That now the living, with afflicted eye,
Look back with grief on such calamity.
The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
King Richard mones his wrong, and wails his reign:
And here betrayed, to London he is led,
Basely attyr'd, attending Herfords train:
Whereth' one is scornd, the other VVelcomed.
His Wife, mistaking him, does much complain;
And both together greatly sorrowed:
In hope to save his life and ease his thrall,
He yields up state, and Rule, and Crown, and all.
1
IN dearth of faith, and scarcity of friends,
The late great mighty Monarch, on the shore
In the utmost corner of his Land, attendes
To call back false obedience, fled before;
Toils, and in vain, histoyle and labor spendes;
More hearts he sought to gain, he lost the more:
All turned their faces to the rising sun,
And leave his setting-fortune, night begun.
2
Tercy, how soon, by thy example led,
The household train for sooke their wretched Lord! This Percie was Earl of
Worster, brother to the Earl of Northumberland, and steward of the Kings house.

When, with thy staff of charge dishonored,
Thou brak'st thy faith, not steward of thy word,
And tookst his part that after took thy head;
When thine own hand had strengthened first his sword.
" For, such great merits do vpbraid, and call
" For great reward, or think the great too small.
3
And Kings love not to be beholding ought:
Which makes their chiefest friends often speed the worst.
For, those, by whom their fortunes have bin wrought,
Put them in mind of what they were at (...).
Whose doubtful faith if once in question brought,
It Is thought they will offend because they durst:
And taken in a fault are never spared;
" Being easier to revenge, then to reward.
4
And thus these mighty actors, sons of change,
These partizanes of factions, often tried;
That, in the smoke of Innouations strange,
Build huge uncertain plots of unsure pride:
And, on the hazard of a bad exchange,
Have ventured all the stock of life beside;
" Whilst Princes, raised, disdain to have bin raised
" By those whose helps deserve not to be praised.
5
But thus is Richard left, and all alone
Save with th'vnarmed title of his right;
And those brave troops, his fortune-followers gone,
And all that pomp (the complements of might)
Th'amuzing shadows that are cast upon
The state of Princes, to beguile the sight,
All vanished clean, and only frailty left;
Himself, of all, besides himself, bereft:
6
Like when some great Colossus, whose strong base
Or mighty props are shrunk or sunk away,
Fore-shewing ruin, threatening all the place
That in the danger of his fall does stay,
All straight to better safety flock apace;
Nonerest to help the ruin, while they may.
" The (...) great, and doubtful the redress,
" Men are content to leave Right in distress.
7
And look, how Thames, inricht with many a Flood,
And goodly Rivers (that have made their Graves,
And buried both their names and all their good
Within his greatness, to augment his (...))
Glides on, with pomp of Waters, un withstood,
Unto the Ocean (which his tribute craves)
And lays up all his wealth, within that power,
Which in it self all greatness does deuowre:
8
So flock the mighty, with their following train, (...) D. of York, left
Governor of the 'Realm in the (...) of the king, having levied a (...) Army,
as if to have opposed against Bulling brook, brought most of the (...) of the
kingdom to take his (...)

Unto the all-receiuing Bulling brook:
Who wonders at himself, how he should gain
So many hearts as now his party took;
And with what ease, and with how slender pain,
His fortune gives him more then he could look:
What he imagind never could be wrought
Is powrd upon him, (...) beyond his thought.
9
So, often, things which seem at first in show,
Without the (...) of accomplishment,
Once ventred on, to that success do grow,
That even the Authors do admire the event;
So many means which they did never know
Do second their designs, and do present
Strange unexpected helps, and chiefly then
When the Actors are reputed worthy men.
10
And Richard, who looked Fortune in the back,
Sees headlong-lightness running from the right,
Amazed stands to note how great a wrack
Of faith, his riots caused, what mortal spite
They bear him, who did law and justice lack;
Sees how concealed hate breaks out in sight,
And fear-(...) envy (pent before)
When fit occasion thus unlocked the door.
11
Like when some mastive whelpe, disposed to play,
A whole confused heard of beasts does chase,
Which with one vile consent run all away;
If any hardier then the rest in place
But offer head, that idle fear to stay,
Back straight the daunted chaser turns his face,
And all the rest (with bold example led)
As fast run on him, as before they fled:
12
So, with this bold opposer, rushes-on
This many-headed monster, Multitude:
And he, who late was feared, is set upon,
And by his own ( Actaeon-like) pursued;
His own, that had all love and a we forgone:
Whom breath and shadows only did delude,
And newer hopes, which promises persuade;
Though rarely men keep (...) so made.
13
Which when he saw; thus to himself complains:
" O why do you, fond, false-deceined, so
" Run headlong to that change that nothing gains,
" But gain of sorrow, only change of woe?
" Which is all one, if he be like who reigns:
" Why will you buy, with blood, what you forgo?
" It Is naught, but shows, that Ignorance esteems:
" The thing possessed is not the thing it seems.
14
" And when the sins of Bullingbrooke shall be
" As great as mine, and you unanswered
" In these your hopes; then may you wish for me
" Your lawful Sov'raigne, from whose faith you sled;
" And, grieved in your souls, the error see
" That shining promises had shadowed:
" As th'humorous sick, removing, find no ease,
" When changed Chambers change not the disease.
15
" Then shall you find this name of Liberty
" (The watchword of Rebellion ever used;
" The idle echo of Uncertainty,
" That evermore the simple has abused)
" But new-turnd Servitude and Misery;
" And even the same and worse, before refused.
" Th'aspirer once attaind unto the top,
" Cuts off those means by which himself got up.
16
" And with a harder hand, and streighter rain,
" Does curb that loosenes he did find before;
" Doubting the occasion like might serve again:
" His own example makes him fear the more.
" Then, o injurious Land, what do (...) gain
" To aggrauate thine own afflictions store?
" Since thou must needs obey Kings government;
" And no rule, ever yet, could all content.
17
" What if my youth has offered up to lust
" Licentious fruits of indiscreet desires,
" When idle heat of vainer years did thrust
" That fury on: yet now when it retires
" To calmer state, why should you so distrust
" To reap that good whereto mine age aspires?
" The youth of Princes have no bounds for sin,
" Unless themselves do make them bounds within.
18
" Who sees not, that sees ought (woe worth the while)
" The easy way, that Greatness has to fall?
" Enuirond with deceit, hemm'd-in with guile,
" Soothed up in flattery, fawned on of all:
" Within his own, living as in exile;
" Hears but with others ears, or not at all:
" And even is made a prey unto a few,
" Who lock up grace that would to other show:
19
" And who (as let in lease) do farm the Crown,
" And joy the vfe of Majesty and might;
" Whilst we hold but the shadow of our own,
" Pleased with vain shows, and dallied with delight:
" They, as huge vnproportion'd mountains, grown
" Between our land and us, shadowing our light,
" Bereave the rest of joy, and us of love,
" And keep down all, to keep themselves above.
20
" Which wounds, with grief, poor unrespected zeal,
" When grace holds no proportion in the parts;
" When distribution, in the Commonweal,
" Of charge and honor due to good deserts
" Is stopped; when others greedy hands must deal
" The benefit that Majesty imparts:
" What good we meant, comes gleaned home but light,
" Whilst we are robbed of praise, they of their right.
21
Thus he complained; when, lo, from Lancaster The E. of (...) sent to the king
from Hen. Bulling brook now D. of Lancaster.

(The new intit'led Duke with order sent
Arrived Northumberland, as to confer
And make relation of the Dukes intent:
And offered there, if that he would refer
The controversy unto Parliament,
And punish those that had abused the State,
As causers of this universal hate;
22
And also see that Justice might be had
On those the Duke of Glosters death procured,
and such removed from Council as were bad;
His cousin Henry would, he there assured,
On humble knees before his Grace be glad
To ask him pardon, to be well secured,
and have his right and grace resto'rd again:
The which was all he labored to obtain.
23
And therefore does an enterparle exhort,
Persuades him leave that unbeseeming place,
and with a princely hardiness resort
Unto his people, that attend his Grace:
They meant his public good, and not his hurt;
and would most joyful be to see his face:
He lays his soul to pledge, and takes his Oath,
The ost of Christ, an ostage for his troth.
24
This proffer, with such protestations, made
Unto a King that so near danger stood,
Was a sufficient motive to persuade,
When no way else could show a face so good:
Th'vnhonourable means of safety, bade
Danger accept, what Majesty withstood.
" When better choyses are not to be had,
" We needs must take the seeming bost of bad.
25
Yet stands he'in doubt, a while, what way to take;
Conferring with that small remaining troop
Fortune had left; which never would forsake
Their poor distressed Lord, nor never stoop The Bishop of Carlisle. Montague
Earl of Salisbury.

To any hopes the stronger part could make.
Good Carlisle, Ferby; and Sir Stephen Scroope,
With that most worthy Montague, were all
That were content with Majesty to fall.
26
Time, spare, and make not sacrilegious theft
Upon so memorable constancy:
Let not succeeding Ages be bereft
Of such examples of integrity:
Nor thou magnanimous Leigh must not be left This was sir ^eter Leighs
^^uncitor of ^ime in Che^^ire that ^ow is.

in darkness, for thy rare fidelity;
To save thy faith, content to lose thy head;
That (...) head, of good men honored.
27
Nor will my Conscience I should injury
Thy memory most trusty Ienico,
For b'ing not ours; though wish that (...) nico d' Ar^is a Gas^oin.

Claym'd not, for hers, the faith we reverence so;
That England might have this small company
Only to her alone, having no more:
But le'ts divide this good betwixt us both,
Take she thy birth, and we will have thy troth.
28
" Grave Montague, whom long experience taught
" In either fortune, thus advised his King: The Earl of ^alsbury his ^peech
to K. Richard.

" Dear Sovereign know, the matter that is sought,
" Is only now your Majesty to bring
" (From out of this poor safety you have got)
" Into their hands, that else hold every thing:
" For, now, but only you they want, of all;
" and wanting you, they nothing theirs can call.
29
" Here have you craggie Rocks to take your part;
" That never will betray their faith to you:
" These trusty Mountains here will never start,
" But stand t'vpbraid their shame that are untrue:
" Here may you fence your safety with small art,
" against the pride of that confused Crew:
" If men will not, these very Cliffes will fight,
" and be sufficient to defend your right.
30
" Then keep you here, and here shall you behold,
" Within short space, the slyding faith of those
" That cannot long their resolution hold,
" Repent the course their idle rashness chose:
" For, that same mercenarie faith (they sold)
" With least occasions discontented grows,
" And insolent those voluntary bands;
" Presuming how, by them, he chiefly stands.
31
" And how can he those mighty troops sustain
" Long time, where now he is, or any where?
" Besides, what discipline can he retain
" Whereas he dares not keep them under fear,
" For fear to have them to revolt again?
" So that it self when Greatness cannot bear,
" With her own weight, must needs confusedly fall,
" Without the help of other force at all.
32
" And hither to approach he will not dare;
" Where deserts, rocks, and hills, no succors give;
" Where desolation, and no comforts are;
" Where few can do no good, many not live.
" Besides, we have the Ocean to prepare
" Someother place, if this should not relieve:
" So shall you tire his force, consume his strength,
" And weary all his followers, out, at length.
33
" Do but refer to time, and to small time;
" And infinite occasions you shall find
" To quail the Rebel, even in the prime
" Of all his hopes, beyond all thought of mind:
" For, many (with the conscience of the crime)
" In colder blood will curse what they designed;
" And bad success, vpbrayding their ill fact,
" Draws them, whom others draw, from such an act.
34
" For, if the least imagined ouerture
" But of conceived revolt men once (...);
" Straight shrink the weak, the great will not endure,
" The Impatient run, the discontented fly:
" The friend his friends example does procure,
" And all to gither haste them presently
" Some to their home, some hide; others, that stay,
" To reconcile themselves, the rest betray.
35
" What hope have you, that ever Bullingbrooke
" Will live a Subject, that has tried his fate?
" Or what good reconcilement can you look,
" Where he must always fear, and you must hate?
" And never think that he this quarrel took
" To reobtaine thereby his private state.
" It Was greater hopes, that hereto did him call:
" And he will thrust for all, or else lose all.
36
" Nor trust this subtle Agent, nor his oath.
" You know his faith: you tried it before hand.
" His fault is death: and now to lose his troth,
" To save his life, he will not greatly stand.
" Nor trust your kinsmans proffer; since you, both,
" Show, blood in Princes is no steadfast band.
" What though he has no title? he has might:
" That makes a title, where there is no right.
37
Thus he: when that good Bishop thus replies, The Bishop of Carlisle.

Out of a mind that quiet did affect:
" My Lord, I must confess, as your caselies,
" You have great cause your Subjects to suspect,
" And counterplot against their subtelties,
" Who all good care and honesty neglect;
" And fear the worst what insolence may do,
" Or armed fury may incense them to.
38
" But yet, my Lord, fear may as well transport
" Your care, beyond the truth of what is meant;
" As otherwise neglect may fall too short;
" In not examining of their intent:
" But, let us weigh the thing which they exhort,
" It Is Peace, Submission, and a Parliament:
" Which, how expedient it is for either part,
" T were good we judged with an impartial heart,
39
" And first, for you my Lord, in grief we see
" The miserable case wherein you stand;
" Void here of succor, help, or majesty,
" On this poor promontorie of your Land:
" And where how long a time your Grace may be
" (Expecting what may fall into your hand)
" We know not; since the event of things do lie
" Closed up in darkness, far from mortal eye.
40
" And how unfit it were, you should protract
" Long time, in this so dangerous disgrace?
" As though that you good spirit and courage lackt
" To issue out of this opprobrious place:
" When even the face of Kings do often exact
" Fear and (...) in faulty subjects base;
" And longer stay a great presumption draws
" That you were guilty, or did doubt your cause.
41
" What Subjects ever so enraged would dare
" To violate a Prince, to offend the blood
" Of that renowned race, by which they are
" Exalted to the height of all their good?
" What if some things by chance misguided were,
" Which they have now rebelliously withstood?
" They never will proceed with that despite
" To wrack the State, and to confound the right.
43
" Nor do I think that Bulling brook can be
" So blind-ambitious, to affect the Crown;
" Having himself no title, and does see
" Others, if you should fail, must keep him down.
" Besides, the Realm, though mad, will never gree
" To have a right succession overthrown,
" To raise confusion upon them and theirs,
" By preiudicing true and lawful heirs.
43
" And now it may be, fearing the success
" Of his attemptes, or with (...) of mind,
" Or else distrusting secret practices,
" He would be glad his quarrel were resigned;
" So that there were some orderly redress
" In those disorders which the Realm did find:
" And this, I think, he now sees were his best;
" Since farther actions further but unrest.
44
" And, forth'impossibilitie of peace
" And reconcilement, which my Lord objects;
" I think, when doying injury shall cease
" (The cause pretended) then surcease the effects:
" Time and some other Actions may increase
" As may divert the thought of these respects;
" Others law of forgetting injuries Lex Amnestiae.

" May serve our turn in like calamities.
45
" And for his oath, in conscience, and in sense,
" True honor would not so be found untrue,
" Nor spot his blood with such a foul offense
" Against his soul, against his God, and you.
" Our Lord forbid, that ever with the expense
" Of heaven and heavenly joys, that shall ensue,
" Mortality should buy this little breath,
" Tindure the horror of eternal death.
46
" And therefore, as I think, you safely may
" Accept this proffer; that determine shall
" All doubtful courses by a quiet way,
" Needful for you, fit for them, good for all.
" And here, my Sov'raigne, to make longer stay
" To Attend for what you are unsure will fall,
" May (...) the occasion, and incense their will:
" For, Fear, that is wiser then the truth, does ill.
47
Thus he persuades, out of a zealous mind;
Supposing, men had spoken as they meant:
And, unto this, the King likewise inclined;
As wholly unto peace, and quiet bent:
And yeeldes himself to The Earl, goes, leaues-behind
His safety, Scepter, Honor, Government:
For, gone, all is gone: he is no more his own;
And they rid quite of fear, he of the Crown.
48
A place there is, where proudly raised therestands
A huge aspiring Rock, neighboring the Skies;
Whose surly brow imperiously commands
The Sea his bounds, that at his proud feet lies:
And spurns the waves, that in rebellious bands
Assault his Empire, and against him rise:
Under whose craggy government, there was
A niggard narrow way for men to pasle.
49
And here, in hidden cliffes, concealed lay
A troop of armed men, to intercept
The vnsuspecting King, that had no way
To free his foot, that into danger stepped.
The dreadful Ocean, on the one side, lay:
The hard-incroching Mountain the other kept.
Before him, he beheld his hateful foes:
Behind him, tray terous enemies enclose.
50
Enuiron'd thus, the Earl begins to cheer
His al-amased Lord, by him betrayde;
Bids him take courage, there is no cause of fear,
These troops, but there to guard him safe, were laid.
To whom the King; What need so many here?
This is against your oath, my Lord, he said.
But, now he sees in what distress he stood:
To strive, was vain; t'intreat, would do no good.
51
And therefore on with careful heart he goes;
Complains (but, to himself) sighs, grieves, and freats;
At Rutland dines, though feeds but on his woes:
The grief of mind hindered the mind of meats.
For, sorrow, shame, and fear, scorn of his foes,
The thought of what he was, and what now threats,
Then what he should, and now what he has done,
Masters confused passions all in one.
52
To Flint, from thence, unto a restless bed,
That miserable night, he comes conuayd;
Poorly provided, poorly followed,
Vncourted, unrespected, vnobayd:
Where, if uncertain sleep but hoouered
Over the drooping cares that heavy weighed;
Millions of figures, fantasy presents
Unto that sorrow, wakened grief augments.
53
His new misfortune makes deluding sleep
Say 'twas not so (False dreams the truth deny).
Wherewith he starts; feels waking cares do creep
Upon his soul, and gives his dream the lie;
Then sleeps again: and then again, as deep
Deceites of darkness mock his misery.
So hard believed was sorrow in her youth:
That he thinks truth was dreams, and dreams were truth.
54
The morning light presents unto his view
(Walking upon a turret of the place)
The truth of what he sees is proved too true;
A hundred thousand men, before his face,
Camemarching on the shore, which thither drew:
And, more to aggrauate his great disgrace,
Those he had wronged, or done to them despite,
(As if they him upbraid) came first in sight.
55
There might he see that false forsworn vile crew,
Those shameless agents of unlawful lust,
His Pandars, Parasites (people untrue
To God and man, unworthy any trust)
Preacing unto that fortune that was new,
And with vnblushing faces foremost thrust;
As those that still with prosperous fortune sort,
And are as borne for Corte, or made in Cort.
56
There he beheld, how humbly diligent
New Adulation was to be at hand;
How ready Falsehood (...); how nimbly went
Base pick-thank Flattery, and preuents Command:
He saw the great obey, the grave consent,
And all with this new-rays'd Aspirer stand;
But, which was worst, his own partacted there,
Not by himself; his power, not his, appear.
57
Which whilst he viewed, the Duke he might perceive
Make toward the Castle, to an interview.
Wherefore he did his contemplation leave,
And down into some fitter place withdrew;
Where now he must admit, without his leave,
Him, who before with all submission due
Would have been glad, to attend, and to prepare
The grace of audience, with respective care.
58
Who now being come in presence of his king
(Whether the sight of Majesty did breed
Remorse of what he was in compassing,
Or whether but to formalize his deed)
He kneeles him down with some astonishing,
Rose; kneeles again (for, craft will still exceed)
When As the king approch't, put off his Hood,
And welcomd him, though wished him little good.
59
" To whom, the Duke began: My Lord, I know
" That both vncall'd, and unexpected too,
" I have presumed in this sort to show
" And seek the right which I am borne unto:
" Yet pardon I beseech you, and allow
" Of that constraint, which drives me thus to do.
" For, since I could not by a fairer course
" Attain mine own, I must use this of force.
60
" Well: so it seems, dear Cousin, said the King;
" Though you might have procured it otherwise:
" And I am here content, in every thing,
" To right you, as your self shall best devise:
" And God voutsafe, the force that here you bring
" Beget not England greater injuries.
" And so they part: the Duke made haste from thence:
" It was no place to end this difference.
61
Straight toward London, in this heat of pride,
They forward set; as they had fore-decreed:
With whom, the (...) King constraind mustride,
Most meanly mounted on a simple Steed:
Degraded of all grace and ease beside,
Thereby neglect of all respect to breed.
For, th'ouer-spreading pomp of prouder might
Must darken weakness, and debase his sight.
62
Approaching near the City, he was met
With all the sumptuous shows joy could devise:
Where new-desire to please did not forget
To pasle the usual pomp of former guise.
Striving applause, as out of prison let,
Runnes-on, beyond all bounds, to novelties:
And voice, and hands, and knees, and all do now
A strange deformed form of welcome show.
63
And manifold confusion running greetes,
Shoutes, cries, claps hands, thrusts, strives and presses near:
Houses impov'risht were, t'inrich the streets,
And streets left naked, that (unhappy) were
Placed from the sight where joy with wonder meets;
Where all, of all degrees, strive to appear;
Where diuers-speaking zeal one murmr finds,
In vndistinguisht voice to tell their minds.
64
He that in glory of his fortune sat,
Admiring what he thought could never be,
Did feel his blood within salute his state,
And lift up his rejoicing soul, to see
So many hands and hearts congratulate
Th'aduancement of his long-desir'd degree;
When, prodigal of thanks, in passing by,
He resalutes them all, with cheerful eye.
65
Behind him, all aloof, came pensive on
The unregarded King; that drooping went
Alone, and (but for spite) scarce looked upon:
Judge, if he did more envy, or lament.
See what a wondrous work this day is done;
Which thimage of both fortunes does present:
In the one, to show the best of glories face;
In the other, worse then worst of all disgrace.
67
Now Isabell, the young afflicted Queen
(Whose years had never showed her but delights,
Nor lovely eyes before had ever seen
Other then smiling joys, and joyful sights;
(...) great, matched great, lived great, and ever been
(...) of the worlds best benefits)
(...) placed her self, hearing her Lord should pass
(...) way, where she unseen in secret was;
68
Sick of delay, and longing to behold
Her long-(...) Love in fearful ieoperdies:
To whom, although it had, in sort, been told
Of their proceeding, and of his surprise;
Yet thinking they would never be so bold
To lead their Lord in any shameful wise,
But rather would conduct him as their King;
As seeking but the States reordering.
69
And forth she looks, and notes the foremost train;
And (...) to view some there she wished nor there:
Seeing the chief not come, stays, looks again;
And yet she sees not him that should appear:
Then back she stands, and then desires as feign
Again to look, to see if he were near:
At length a glittering troop far off she spies,
Perceiues the throng, and hears the shouts and (...).
70
Lo, yonder now at length he comes, says she:
Look, my good women, where he is in sight:
Do you not see him? yonder; that is he,
Mounted on that white Courser, all in white,
There where the thronging troops of people be;
I know him by his seat, he sits s upright:
Lo, now he bows: dear Lord, with what sweet grace!
How long, have I longd to behold that face!
71
O what delight my heart takes by mine eye!
I doubt me, when he comes but something near,
I shall set wide the window: what care I
Who does see me, so him I may see clear.
Thus does false joy delude her wrongfully
(Sweet Lady) in the thing she held so dear.
For, nearer come, she finds she had mistook;
And him she marked, was Henry Bullingbrooke.
72
Then Envy takes the place in her sweet eyes,
Where Sorrow had prepared her self a seat:
And words of wrath, from whence complaints should rise,
Proceed from egre looks, and brows that threat:
Traitor, says she; is it thou, that, in this wise
To brave thy Lord and King, art made so great?
And have mine eyes done unto me: this wrong,
To look on thee? for this, staid I so long?
73
Ah, have they graced a perjured Rebel so?
Well; for their error I will weep them out,
And hate the tongue defiled, that praysde my foe,
And loath the mind, that gave me not to doubt:
What? have I added shame, unto my woe?
I Will look no more: Ladies, look you about,
And tell me if my Lord be in this train;
Least my betraying eyes should err again.
74
And in this passion turns (...) self away:
The rest look all, and careful note each wight;
Whilst she, impatient of the least delay,
Demaundes again; And what, not yet in sight?
Where is my Lord? What, gone some other way?
I muse at this. O God, grant all go right:
Then to the window goes again at last,
And sees the chiefest train of all was past;
75
And sees not him her soul desired to see:
And yet hope, spent, makes her not leave to look.
At last, her loue-quicke eyes, which ready be,
Fastens on one; whom though she never took
Could be her Lord; yet that sad cheer which he
Then showed, his habit and his woeful look,
The grace he does in base attire retain,
Caused her she could not from his sight refrain.
76
What might he be, she said, that thus alone
Rides pensive in this universal joy?
Some I perceive, as well as we, do moan:
All are not pleased with every thing this day.
It may be, he laments the wrong is done
Unto my Lord, and grieves; as well he may.
Then he is some of ours: and we, of right.
Must pity him, that pitties our said plight.
77
But stay: (...) not my Lord himself I see?
In truth, if 't were not for his base array,
I verily should think that it were he;
And yet his baseness does a grace bewray:
Yet God forbid; let me deceived be,
And be it not my Lord, although it may:
Let my desire make vows against desire;
And let my sight approve my sight a lier.
78
Let me not see him, but himself; a King:
For so he left me; so he did remove.
This is not he: this feels some other thing;
A passion of dislike, or else of love.
O yes; it is he: that princely face does bring
The evidence of Majesty to prove:
That face, I have conferred, which now I see,
With that within my heart, and they agree.
79
Thus as she stood assured, and yet in doubt;
Wishing to see, what seen she grieved to see;
Having belief, yet feign would be without;
Knowing, yet striving not to know 'twas he:
Her heart relenting, yet her heart so stout
As would not yield to think what was, could be:
Till, quite condemned by open proof of sight,
She must confess; or else deny the light.
80
For, whither love in him did sympathize,
Or chance so wrought, to manifest her doubt;
Even just before, where she thus secret pries,
He stays, and with clear face looks all about;
When she: It Is, o, too true; I know his eyes:
Alas, it is my own dear Lord cries out:
And, with that cry, sinks down upon the flore.
Abundant grief lackt words to utter more.
81
Sorrow keeps full possession in her heart,
Locks it within, stops up the way of breath,
Shuts senses out of door from every part;
And so long holds there, as it hazardeth
Oppressed Nature, and is forced to part,
Or else must be constrained to stay with death:
So, by a sigh, it lets in sense again;
And sense, at length, gives words leave to complain.
82
Then, like a torrent had been stopped before,
Tears, sighs, and words, doubled together flow;
Confusedly striving whether should do more,
The true intelligence of grief to show.
Sighs hindered words: words perished in their store:
Both, intermixed in one, together grow.
One would do all: the other, more then is part;
Being both sent equal Agents, from the heart.
83
At length, when past the first of sorrows worst,
When calmed confusion better form affordes;
Her heart commands, her words should pass out first,
And then her sighs should interpoint her words;
The whiles her eyes out into tears should burst:
This order with her sorrow she accordes;
Which, orderless, all form of order brake:
So, then began her words, and thus she spoke;
84
What? do thou thus return again to me?
Are these the triumphs, for thy victories?
Is this the glory thou do bring with thee,
From that unhappy Irish enterprise?
And have I made so many vows to see
Thy safe return, and see thee in this wise?
Is this the lookt-for comfort thou do bring?
To come a Captive, that wentst out a King?
85
And yet, dear Lord, though thy ungrateful Land
Has left thee thus; yet I will take thy part:
I do remain the same, under thy hand;
Thou still do rule the kingdom of my heart:
If all be lost, that government does stand;
And that shall never from thy rule depart:
And so thou be, I care not how thou be:
Let Greatness go; so it go without thee.
86
And welcome come, how-so unfortunate;
I will applaud what others do despise:
I love thee for thy self; not for thy State:
More then thy self, is what without thee lies:
Let that more go, if it be in thy fate:
And having but thy self, it will suffize:
I married was not to thy Crown, but thee;
And thou, without a Crown, all one to me.
87
But what do I, here lurking idly, moan
And wayle apart, and in a single part
Make several grief? which should be both in one;
The touch being equal of each others heart.
Ah, no: sweet Lord, thou must not moan alone.
For, without me, thou art not all thou art;
Nor my tears, without thine, are fully tears:
For thus vnioyn'd, sorrow but half appears.
88
Join then our plaints, and make our grief full grief:
Our state being one, let us not part our care.
Sorrow has only this poor bare relief,
To be bemon'd of such as woeful are.
And should I rob thy grief, and be the thief
To steal a private part, and several share,
Defrawding sorrow of her perfect due?
No, no, my Lord; I come to help thee rue.
89
Then forth she goes, a close concealed way
(As grieuing to be seen not as she was);
Laborst' attain his presence all she may:
Which, with most hard a-do, was brought to pass.
For, that night, understanding where he lay,
With earnest treating she procured her Pass
To come to him. Rigor could not deny
Those tears, so poor a suite, or put her by.
90
Entering the chamber, where he was alone
(As one whose former fortune was his shame)
Loathing th'vpbrayding eye of any one
That knew him once, and knows him not the same:
When having given express command that none
Should press to him; yet hearing some that came,
Turns angerly about his grieved eyes:
When, lo, his sweet afflicted Queen he spies.
91
Straight cleares his brow; and with a borrowed smile,
What, my dear Queen? welcome, my dear, he says:
And (striving his own passion to beguile,
And (...) the sorrow which his eye betrays)
Could speak no more; but wrings her hands, the while:
And then, Sweet Lady; and again he stays:
The Excess of joy and sorrow both affordes
Affliction none, or but poor niggard words.
92
She that was come with a resolved heart,
And with a mouth full stored, with words well chose;
Thinking, This comfort will I first impart
Unto my Lord, and thus my speech dispose:
Then thus I Will say, thus look, and with this art
Hide mine own sorrow to relieve his woes:
When being come, all this proved naught but wind;
Tears, looks, and sighs, do only tell her mind.
93
Thus both stood silent and confused so,
Their eyes relating how their hearts did morn:
Both big with sorrow, and both great with woe
In labor with what was not to be borne:
This mighty burden, where withal they go,
Dies vndeliuered, perishes unborn;
Sorrow makes silence her best Orator,
Where words may make it less, not show it more.
94
But he, whom longer time had learned the art
T'indure affliction, as a usual touch,
Strains forth his words, and throws dismay apart,
To raise up her; whose passions now were such
As quite oppressed her ouercharged heart
(Too small a vessel to contain so much)
And cheeres and mones, and fained hopes does frame,
As if himself believed, or hoped the same.
95
And now, the while these Princes sorrowed,
Forward ambition (come so near her end)
Sleeps not, nor slippes the occasion offered,
T'accomplish what it did before intend:
A Parliament is forth with summoned
In Richards name; whereby they might pretend
A form, to grace disorder, and a show
Of holy right, the right to overthrow.
96
Order, how much predominant art thou!
That if but only thou pretended art;
How soon, deceived mortality does bow
To follow thine, as still the better part!
It Is thought, that reverent form will not allow
Iniquity, or sacred right peruart.
Within our souls, since then thou dwell'st so strong;
How ill do they, that use thee, to do wrong!
97
So ill did they, that in this formal course
Sought to establish a deformed right:
Who might as well effected it by force;
But that men hold it wrong, what is wrought by might.
Offenses urged in public are made worse:
The show of justice aggrauates despite.
" The multitude, that look not to the cause,
" Rest satisfied, so it seem done by laws.
98
And now they diverse articles object
Of rigor, malice, private fauourings,
Exaction, riot, falsehood, and neglect;
Crimes done, but sildome answered by Kings:
Which Subjects doelament, but not correct.
And all these faults, which Lancaster now brings
Against a King, must be his own, when he,
By urging others sins, a King shall be.
99
For, all that was most odious was devised,
And published in these articles abroad.
All th'errours of his youth were here comprised,
Calamity with obloquie to lode:
And more to make him publicly despised,
Libels, inuectiues, railing rimes, were sowed
Among the vulgar, to prepare his fall
With more applause and good consent of all.
100
Look how the day-hater, Mineruas bird,
Whilst priuiledg'd with darkness and the night, The Owl is said to be
Mineruas bird.

Does live securet' himself, of others feared;
If but by chance discovered in the light,
How does each little Foul (with envy stirred)
Call him to justice, urge him with despite;
Summon the feathered flocks of all the wood,
To come to scorn the tyrant of their blood:
101
So fares this King, laid open to disgrace,
Whilst every mouth full of reproach inuayes;
And every base detractor, in this case,
Upon the advantage of misfortune plays:
Downe-falling Greatness, urged on apace,
Was followed-hard, by all disgraceful ways;
Now in the point t'accelerate an end,
Whilst misery had no means to defend.
102
Upon those articles in Parliament
So heinous made, enforced, and urged so hard,
He was adiudg'd unfit for government,
And of all regal power and rule debarred:
For, who durst contradict the Dukes intent?
Or, if they durst, should patiently be heard?
Desire of change, old wrongs, new hopes, fresh fear,
Being far the mayor part, the cause must bear.
103
Yet must we think, that some which saw the course
(The better few, whom passion made not (...))
Stood careful lookers-on, with sad commorse,
Amazed to see what headlong rage designed:
And, in a more considerate discourse
Of tragical euentes, thereof diuin'd;
And would excuse and pity those defects,
Which, with such hate, the adverse parts objects:
104
" Say'ing, better years might work a better care,
" And time might well have cured what was amiss;
" Since all these faults fatal to Greatness are,
" And worse deserts have not been punished thus:
" But yet in this, the heavens, we fear, prepare
" Confusion for our sins, as well as his;
" And his calamity begins our:
" For, he his own, and we abused his power.
105
Thus murmured they; when to the king were sent
Certain who might persuade him to for sake
And leave his Crown, and with his free consent
A voluntary Resignation make;
Since that he could no other way prevent
These dangers which he else must needs partake:
For, not to yield, to what fear would constrain,
Would bar the hope of life, that did remain.
106
And yet this scarce could work him to consent
To yield up that so soon, men hold so dear.
Why, let him take (said he) the government,
And letme yet the name, the title bear:
Leave me that show, and I will be content;
And let them rule and govern without fear.
What, can they not my shadow now endure,
When they of all the rest do stand secure?
107
Let me hold that, I ask no other good:
Nay, that I will hold; Henry do thy worst.
For, ere I yield my Crown, I Will lose my blood;
That blood, that shall make thee and thine accursed.
Thus resolute a while he firmly stood,
Till love of life, and fear of being forced,
Vanquished th'innated valor of his mind;
And hope, and friends, so wrought, that he resigned.
108
Then to the Tower (where he remained) went
The Duke, with all the Peers in company,
To take his offer with his free consent,
And this his Resignation testify;
And thereof to inform the Parliament,
That all things might be done more formally,
And men thereby rest better satisfide;
As of an act not forced, or falsifide.
109
And forth h'is brought unto the accomplishment,
Decked with the Crown in princely robes that day;
Like as the dead, in other Lands, are sent
Unto their Graves, in all their best array:
And even like good, did him this ornament.
For, what he brought, he must not bear away;
But buries there his glory and his name,
Entombed both in his own and others blame.
110
And there unto the assembly of these States,
His sorrow for their long endured wrong
Through his abused authority relates,
Excuses with confessions mixed among:
And glad he says, to finish all debates,
He was to leave the Rule they sought-for long;
(...), if it might be for their good,
He would as gladly sacrifice his blood.
111
There, he his Subjects all (in general)
Assoyles and quites of oath and fealty,
Renounces interest, (...), right and all
That appertained to kingly (...);
Subscribes thereto, and does to witness call
Both heaven and earth, and God, and Saints on hie,
To testify his act, and does profess
To do the same with most free willingness.
112
This said, with his own hands he gave the Crown
To Lancaster, and wished to God he might
Have better joy thereof then he had known,
And that his power might make it his by right:
And furthermore he craved, of all his own,
But life, to live apart a private wight;
The vanity of Greatness he had tried,
And how vnsurely stands the foot of pride.
113
This brought to pass, the Lords return with speed,
The Parliament hereof to (...);
Where, they at large published the Kings own deed,
And form of his resignement verbally:
And thereupon does Lancaster proceed
To make his claim unto the Monarchy;
And shows the right he has, both by descent,
And by recovery, to the government.
114 The Archbishop of Cant. takes his text out of the first book of the
Kings, cap. 9. Vir dominabitur in populo.

Which being granted, Canterbury rose
And animates them, by the sacred word,
" In this their course: and by his Text, he shows
" How well they made their choice of such a Lord;
" Who, as a man was able to dispose
" And guide the State: and how the royal sword
" Ought to be at a man's commandment;
" Not at a childs, or one as impotent.
115
" Since, when the greatness of his charge exceedes
" The smallness of his powers, he must collate
" The same on others: whence, says he, proceeds
" This (...) expilation of the State;
" Whence no man any more the public heedes,
" Then so much as imports his private state.
" Our Health is from our head: if that be ill,
" Distemp'red, faint, and weak, all the rest will.
116
" Then to the present, all his speech he draws,
" And shows what admirable parts abound
" In this brave Prince; being fit to give them laws,
" Fit for his valor, fit for judgment sound.
" And, Lancaster, indeed I would thy cause
" Had had as lawful and as sure a ground,
" As had thy virtues, and thy noble heart,
" Ordaind, and borne for an Imperial part.
117
Then had not that confused succeeding Age
Our fields ingrayn'd with blood, our rivers died
With purple-streaming wounds of our own rage,
Nor seen our Princes slaughtred, Peers destroyed.
Then (...) not thou, dear Country, com'n to wage
War with thy self, nor those afflictions tried
Of all consuming discord here so long;
Too mighty now, against thy self too strong.
The end of the second Book.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD BOOK.
Henry, the fourth, the Crown established.
The Lords, that did to Glosters death consent,
Degraded, do rebel, are vanquished.
King Richard, unto Pomfret Castle sent,
Is by a cruel Knight there murdered,
After the Lords had had their punishment.
His Corpse, from thence, to London is conuayd;
And there, for all to view, is open laid.
1
NOw risen is that Head, by which did spring
The birth of two strong Heads, two Crowns, two rights;
That monstrous shape, that afterward did bring
Deformed confusion to distracted wights.
Now is attained that dearly purchased thing
That filled the world with lamentable sights:
And now, attained, all care is how to frame
Means to establish, and to hold the same.
2
First, he attends to build a strong conceit
Of his usurped power, in peoples minds;
And arms his cause with furniture of weight:
Which easily the sword, and Greatness finds.
Succession, Conquest, and election straight
Suggested are, and proved in all their kinds.
More then enough they find, who find their might
Has force to make all, that they will have, Right.
3
Though one of these might very well suffice
His present approbation to procure.
" But who his own cause makes, does still devise
" To make too much, to have it more then sure.
" Fear casts too deep, and ever is too wise:
" No usual plots, the doubtful can secure.
And all these disagreeing Claymes he had,
With hope to make one good of many bad.
4
Like unto him that fears, and feign would stop
Aninundation working-on apace,
Runs to the Breach, heaps mighty matter up,
Throws indigested burdens on the place,
Lodes with huge weights, the outside, and the top,
But leaves the inner parts in feeble case;
Whilst th'vnder-searching water, working-on,
Bears (proudly) down, all that was idly don:
5
So fares it with our indirect desseignes,
And wrong contrived labors, at the last;
Whilst working Time, and justice undermines
The feeble frame, held to be wrought so fast:
Then when out-breaking vengeance vncombines
The ill-ioyn'd plots so fayrely ouer-cast;
Turns up those huge pretended heaps of shows,
And all these weak illusions ouer-throwes.
6
But, after, having made his title plain,
Unto his Coronation he proceeds:
Which, in most sumptuous sort (to intertaine
The gazing vulgar, whom this splendour feeds)
Is stately furnished, with a glorious train:
Wherein, the former Kings he far exceedes;
And all t'amuse the world, and turn the thought
Of what and how 'twas done, to whatis wrought.
7
And that he might on many props repose,
He strengths his own, and who his part did take:
New Officers, new Counselors he chose:
His eldest son, the Prince of Wales does make;
His second, Lord high Steward: and, to those
Had hazarded their fortunes for his sake,
He gives them charge, as merits their deseart;
And rayses them, by crushing th'aduerse part.
8
So that hereby, the universal face
Of Court, with all the Offices of State
Are wholly changed, by death, or by disgrace,
Upon the advantage of the peoples hate;
" Who, ever envying those of chiefest place
" (Whom neither worth nor virtue, but their fate
" Exalted has) do, when their Kings do naught
" (Because it is in their power) judge it their fault.
9
And in their steed, such as were popular,
And wel-deseruing, were advanced by grace.
Grave Shirley, he ordaines Lord Chancellor;
Both worthy for his virtues, and his race:
And Norburie he appoints for Treasurer;
A man, though mean, yet fit to use that place:
And others, the other rooms; whom people hold
So much more loved, how much they loath the old.
10
And it behoues him now to do his best
T'approue his vow, and oath made to the State:
And many great disorders he redrest;
Which always Usurpation makes the gate
To let it self into the peoples breast,
And seeks the public best t'accommodate:
Wherein, Injustice better does then Right:
" For, who reproues the lame, must go upright.
11
Though it be easy to accuse a State,
Of imperfection and misgouernment:
And easy to beget in people hate
Of present Rule, which cannot all content;
And few attempt it, that effect it not:
Yet, t'introduce a better government
In steed thereof, if we t'example look,
The vnder-takers have been ouer-tooke.
12
Then, against those he strictly does proceed, The Nobility accused (...) the
death (...) Thomas of Woodstocke D. of Gloucester.

Who chief of Glosters death were guilty thought;
Not so much for the hatred of that deed:
But, under this pretext the means he sought
To ruin such whose might did much exceed
His power to wrong, nor else could well be wrought.
Law, Justice, blood, the zeal unto the dead,
Were on (...) side, and his drift colored. The Dukes of Surry Excester, and
Aumarle, The Earls of (...) and (...), the Bishop of Carlisle, Sir Thomas
Blunt, and other, were the parties accused, for the death of the D. of Gloucester.

13
Here, many of the greatest of the Land
Accused were of the act, strong proofs brought out;
Which strongly were (...): the Lords all stand,
To clear their Cause, (...) resolutely stout:
The King, (...) what he took in hand
Was not with safety to be brought-about,
Desists to urge their death, in any wise;
Respecting number, strength, friends, and allies.
14
Nor was it time now, in his tender reign,
And infant-young-beginning government,
To strive, with blood; when lenity must gain
The mighty men, and please the discontent.
" New Kings do fear; when old Courts farther strain:
Established States to all things will consent.
He must dispense with his will, and their crime,
And seek t'oppresse and wear them out with time.
15
Yet not to seem, but to have some thing done,
In what he could, not as he would effect;
To (...) the people (that (...),
(...) (...) (...) (...) to expect)
He (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), one,
(...) (...) (...) this (...) was elect;
A (...) (...) (...), few, or none would miss:
Who first did serve their turn; and now serves his.
16
And, to abase the too high state of those
That were accused, and lesten their degrees,
Aumarle, Surry, Exceter, must lose
The names of Dukes, their titles, dignities,
And whatsoever profits thereby rise;
The Earls, their titles and their Signories:
And all they got in the end of Richards reign,
Since Glosters death, they must restore again;
17
By this, as if by Ostracisme, t'abate
That great presumptiue wealth, whereon they stand.
For, first, hereby impov'rishing their state,
He killes the means they might have to withstand:
Then equals them with other whom they hate,
Who (by their spoils) are raised to hie command;
That weak, and envied, if they should conspire,
They wrack themselves, and he has his desire.
18
Yet, by this grace (which must be held a grace;
As both they, and the world, are made believe)
He thinks to have dealt benignly in this case,
And left them state enough, to let them live;
And that the taking, from the^, means and place,
Was nothing, in respect what he did give:
But they, that know how their own reckning (...),
Account not what they have, but what they lose.
19
The Parliament, which now is held, decreed
What-euer pleased the King but to propound;
Confirmed the Crown, to him, and to his seed,
And by their oath their due obedience bound:
Which was the power that stood him best in steed,
And made what-euer broken courses sound.
For, what he got by fortune, favor, might,
It was the State that now must make his right.
20
Here was agreed, to make all more secure,
That Richard should remain, for evermore,
Close-prisoner; least the Realm might chance endure
Some new revolt, or any fresh vp-rore:
And, that if any should such broyle procure,
By him, or for him, he should die therefore.
So that a talk of tumult, and a breath,
Would serve him as his passing bell to death.
21
Yet, reverent Carlisle, thou did there oppose
Thy holy voice, to save thy Princes blood;
And freely checktst this judgment, and his foes:
When all were bad, yet thou dar'dst to be good.
Be it inrold (that time may never lose
The memory) how firm thy courage stood;
When power, disgrace, nor death, could ought divert
Thy glorious tongue, thus, to reveal thy heart.
22
" Grave, reverent Lords, since that this sacred place
" Our Auentine-Retire, our holy hill
" (This place, soul of our State, the Realms best grace)
" Does privilege me speak what reason will:
" Let me but say my conscience in this case;
" Least sin of silence show my heart was ill:
" And let these walls witness, if you will not,
" I do discharge my soul, of this foul blot.
23
" Never shall this poor breath of mine consent,
" That he that two and twenty years has raignd
" As lawful Lord, and King by just descent,
" Should here be judged, unheard, and vnarraignd;
" By Subjects too (Judges incompetent
" To judge their King unlawfully detaind)
" And vnbrought-foorth to plead his guiltless Cause;
" Barringth' Anointed, liberty of laws.
24
" Have you not done enough, with what is done?
" Must needs disorder grow, from bad, to worse?
" Can never mischief end as it begun,
" But being once out, must farther out, of force?
" Think you, that any means, under the Sun,
" Can aslecure so indirect a course?
" Or any broken cunning build so strong,
" As can hold out the hand of vengeance long?
25
Stopped, there, was his too vehement speech with speed,
And he sent close to ward, from where he stood;
His zeal untimely, deemed too much t'exceed
The measure of his wit, and did no good.
They resolute, for all this, do proceed
Unto that judgment could not be withstood:
The King had all he craved, or could compel:
And all was done; let others judge, how well.
26
Now Muse relate a woeful accident,
And tell the bloodshed of these mighty Peers,
Who (lately reconciled) rest discontent,
Grieved with disgrace, remaining in their fears:
How-euer seeming outwardly content;
Yet the inward touch, that wounded honor bears,
Rests closely rankling, and can find no ease,
Till death of one side cure this great disease.
27
Means how to feel, and learn each others heart,
By the Abbots skill of Westminster is found:
Who, secretly disliking Henry's part,
Inuites these Lords, and those he meant to sound;
Feasts them with cost, and draws them on with art;
And dark, and doubtful questions does propound:
Then playner speaks; and yet uncertain speaks:
Then wishes well; then off abruptly breaks.
28
My Lords, says he, I fear we shall not find
This long-desired King, such as was thought:
But yet, he may do well: God turn his mind:
It Is yet new days: but, Ill bodes new and naught:
Some yet speed well: though all men of my kind
Have cause to doubt; his speech is not forgot,
That Princes had too little, we too much.
God give him grace: but, it is ill trusting such.
29
This open-close, apparent-darke discourse
Drew-on much speech: and every man replies:
And every man adds heat: and words enforce
And urge out words. For, when one man espies
Another mind like his, then ill breeds worse;
And out breaks all in the end what closest lies.
For, when men well have fed, th'blood being warm,
Then are they most improuident of harm.
30
Bewray they did their inward boiling spite;
Each stirring other to revenge their cause.
One says he never should endure the sight
Of that forsworn, that wrongs both Land and laws,
Another vows the same; of his mind, right.
A third t'a point more near the matter draws;
Swears, if they would, he would attempt the thing,
To chase the usurper, and replace their King.
31
Thus one by one, kindling each others fire,
Till all inflamed, they all in one agree:
All resolute to prosecute their ire,
Seeking their own, and Countries cause to free;
And have his first, that their blood did conspire.
For, no way else, they said, but this, could be
Their wrong-detained honor to redeem:
Which, true-bred blood should, more then life, esteem.
32
And let not this our new-made faithless Lord, Thom. late Duke of Surry.

Says Surry, think, that we are left so bare
(Though bare enough) but we will find a sword
To kill him with, when he shall not beware.
For, he that is with life and will instor'd,
Has, for revenge, enough, and needs not care:
For, time brings means to furnish him withal:
Let him but way te occasions as they fall.
33
Then, of the manner how to effect the thing,
Consulted was: and in the end agreed,
That at a Mask, and common Reuelling,
Which was ordained, they should perform the deed;
For, that would be least doubted of the King,
And fittest for their safety to proceed:
The night, their number, and the soddaine act,
Would dash all order, and protect their fact.
34
Besides, they might under the fair pretense
Of Tilts and Turnements, which they intend,
Provide them horse, and armor for defense,
And all things else convenient for their end:
Besides, they might hold sure intelligence
Among themselves, without suspect to offend:
The King would think, they sought but grace in Court,
With all their great preparing in this sort.
35
A solemn oath religiously they take,
By intermutuall vows protesting there,
This never to reveal; nor to forsake
So good a Cause, for danger, hope, or fear:
The Sacrament, the pledge of faith, they take:
And every man upon his sword does swear,
By Knighthood, honor, or what else should bind;
To assecure, the more, each others mind.
36
And when all this was done, and thought well done,
And every one assures him good success,
And easy seems the thing to every one
That naught could cross their plot, or them suppress:
Yet one among the rest (whose mind not won
With th'ouer-weening thought of hot excess,
Nor headlong carried with the stream of will,
Nor by his own election led to ill)
37
Judicious Blunt (whose learning, valor, wit, Sir Thom. Blunt.

Had taught true knowledge in the course of things;
Knew dangers as they were, and th'humerous fit
Ofware-lessediscontent, what end it brings)
Counsels their heat, with calm grave words, and fit
(Words wellfore-thought, that from experience springs)
And warnes a warier carriage in the thing;
Least blind presumption work their ruining.
38
" My Lords, says he, I know your wisdoms such,
" As that of mine advice you have no need:
" I know, you know how much the thing does touch
" The maine of all your states, your blood, your seed:
" Yet, since the same concerns my life, as much
" As his whose hand is chiefest in this deed,
" And that my foot must go as far, as his;
" I think, my tongue may speak what needful is,
39
" The thing we enterprise, I know, does bear
" Great possibility of good effect;
" For-that so many men of might there are
" That venture here this action to direct:
" Which meaner wightes, of trust and credit bare,
" Not so respected, could not look to effect.
" For, none, without great hopes, will follow such
" Whose power, and honor does not promise much.
40
" Besides, this new, and doubtful government,
" The wavering faith of people vain, and light,
" The secret hopes of many discontent,
" The natural affection to the right,
" Our lawful Sov'raignes life, in prison pent,
" Whom men begin to pity now, not spite,
" Our well laid plot, and all, I must confess,
" With our just cause, does promise good success.
41
" But this is yet the outward fairest side
" Of our desseigne: within, rests more of fear,
" More dread of sad event yet vndescri'd,
" Then (my most worthy Lords) I would there were:
" But yet, I speak not this as to divide
" Your thoughts from the act, or to dismay your cheer;
" Only to add, unto your forward will,
" A moderate fear, to cast the worst of ill.
42
" Danger, before, and in, and after the act,
" You needs must grant, is great, and to be waigh'd.
" Before; least, while we do the deed protract,
" It be by any of our selves bewraid:
" For, many being privy to the fact,
" How hard it is to keep it vnbetraid?
" When the betrayer shall have life and grace,
" And rid himself of danger and disgrace.
43
" For, though some few continue resolute,
" Yet many shrink, which at the first would dare,
" And be the foremost men to execute,
" If the act, and motion at one instant were:
" But, intermission suffers men dispute
" What dangers are, and cast with farther care:
" Cold doubt cauils with honor, scorneth fame:
" And in the end, fear waighes down faith, with shame.
44
" Then in the act, what perils shall we find,
" If either place, or time, or other course,
" Cause us to alter the order now assigned?
" Or that, then we expect, things happen worse?
" If either error, or afainting mind,
" An indiscreet amazement, or remorse,
" In any at that instant should be found;
" How much it might the act, and all confound?
45
" After the deed, the dangers are no less;
" Lest that, our forwardnes not seconded
" By our own followers, and accomplices
" (Being kept back, or slow, or hindered)
" The hasty multitude rush-on, t'oppresse
" Confused weakness, there vnsuccored;
" Or ray se another head, of that same race,
" T'auenge his death, and prosecute the case.
46
" All this (my Lords) must be considered
" (The best and worst of that which may succeed)
" That valourmixt with fear, boldness with dread,
" May march more circumspect, with better heed.
" And, To prevent these mischiefs mentioned,
" Is, by our faith, our secrecy, and speed.
" For, even already is the work begun:
" And we rest all undone, till all be done.
47
" And though I could have wished another course,
" In open field to have hazarded my blood;
" Yet some are here, whose love is of that force
" To draw my life, whom zeal has not withstood:
" But, like you not of your desseigne the worse.
" If the success be good, your course is good:
" And ending well, our honor then begins.
" No hand of strife is pure, but that which wins.
48
This said, a sad still silence held their minds,
Upon the fearful project of their woe;
But that, not long, ere forward fury finds
Encouraging persuasions on to go.
We must (said they) we will, our honor binds,
Our safety bids, our faith must have it so:
We know the worst can come, it is thought upon:
We cannot shift; being in, we must go on.
49
And on in deed they went; but (o!) not far:
A fatal stop trauerst their headlong course;
Their drift comes known, and they discovered are:
For, some of many will be false, of force.
Aumarle became the man, that all did mar,
Whether through indiscretion, chance, or worse:
He makes his peace, with offering others blood;
And shows the King, how all the matter stood.
50
Then lo, dismayde, confusion all possessed
The Afflicted troop, hearing their plot descride.
Then runs amazed distress, with sad unrest,
To this, to that, to sly, to stand, to hide:
Distracted terror knew not what was best;
On what determination to abide.
At last, (...) would yet stand to the Sword,
To try what friends would do, or fate asfoord.
51
Then this, then that man's aid, they crave, implore;
Post here for help, seek there their followers;
Conjure their friends they had, labor for more,
Solicit all reputed favorers,
Who Richards cause seemed to affect before:
And, in his name, write, pray, send messengers;
To try what faith was (...), if by this art
Any would (...) to take Afflictions part.
52
And some were found; and some again draw back:
Uncertain power could not it self retain:
Entreat they may; authority they lack:
And here, and there they march (but, all in vain)
With desperate course; like those that see their wrack
Even on the Rocks of death, and yet they strain
That death may not them idly find to attend
Their certain last, but work to meet their end.
53
And long they stand not, ere the chief, surpised,
Conclude with their dear blood their tragedy:
And all the rest, dispersed, run some disguised
To unknown coasts; some to the shores do fly;
Some to the woods, or whither fear advised:
But running from, all to destruction hie.
The breach once made upon a battered state,
Down goes distress; no shelter shroudes their fate.
54
And now what horror in their souls does grow!
What sorrows, with their friends, and near allies!
What mourning in their ruined houses now!
How many childrens plaints, and mothers cries!
How many woeful Widows left to bow
To sad disgrace! what perished families!
What heirs of hie rich hopes, their thoughts must frame
To base-downe-looking poverty and shame!
55
This slaughter and calamity fore-goes
Thy eminent destruction, woeful King.
This is the bloody Comet of thy woes,
That does foretell thy present ruyning.
Here was thy end decreed, when these men rose:
And even with theirs, this act thy death did bring;
Or hastened, at the least, upon this ground:
Yet, if not this, another had been found.
56
Kings, Lords of times and of occasions, may
Take their advantage, when, and how they list:
For, now the Realm, he thought in this dismay,
TO(...) like mischiefs, neither would resist,
Norfeele the wound at all; since, by this way,
All future disturbations would desist;
The root cut off, from whence these tumults rose,
He should have rest, the Commonwealth repose.
57
He knew this time: and yet he would not seem
Too quick to wrath, as if affecting blood;
But yet complains so far, that men might deem
He would 'twere done, and that he thought it good:
And wished that some would so his (...) esteem,
Asridde him of these fears wherein he stood: This Knight was Sir Pierce of
The Exton.

And therewith eyes a Knight, that then was by;
Who soon could learn his lesson, by his eye.
58
The man, he knew, was one that willingly
For one good look would hazard soul and all;
An instrument for any villainy,
That needed no commission more at all:
A great ease to the King, that should, hereby,
Not need in this a course of justice call,
Nor seem to will the act (...) for, though what is wrought
Were his own deed, he (...) should so be thought.
59
" So foul a thing ((...)) thou Injustice art,
" That tort'rest both the dooer and distressed.
" For, when a man has done a wicked part,
" How does he (...) t'excuse to make the best,
" To shift the fault, (...) then his charged heart,
" And glad to find the least surmise of rest!
" And if he could make his, seem others sin;
" What great repose, what case he finds therein!
60
This Knight; but yet, why should I call him Knight,
To give impiety this reverent style?
Title of honor, worth, and virtues right,
Should not be given to a wretch so vile:
But pardon me, if I do not aright:
It is because I will not here defile
My unstained verse, with his opprobrious name,
And grace him so, to place him in the same.
61
This caitife goes, and with him takes eight more
As desperate as himself, impiously bold
(Such villains, as he knew would not abhor
To execute what wicked act he would)
And hastes him down to Pomfret; where, before,
The restless King, conuaide, was laid in hold:
There would he do the deed, he thought should bring
To him great grace and favor, with his King.
62
Whether the soul receives intelligence,
By her near Genius, of the bodies end,
And so impartes a sadness to the sense
Foregoing ruin, whereto it does tend:
Or whether Nature else has conference
With profound sleep, and so does warning send
By prophetizing dreams, what hurt is near,
And gives the heavy careful heart to fear:
63
How-euer, so it is, the now sad King
(Tossed here and there, his quiet to confound)
Feels a strange weight of sorrows, gathering
Upon his trembling heart, and sees no ground;
Feels sudden terror bring cold shiuering;
Listes not to eat, still muses, sleeps unsound,
His senses droope, his steady eyes vnquicke,
And much he ails; and yet he is not sick.
64
The morning of that day, which was his last,
After a weary rest rising to pain,
Out at a little grate his eyes he cast
Upon those bordering hills, and open Plain,
And viewes the town, and sees how people past:
Where others liberty, makes him complain
The more his own, and grieves his soul the more;
Conferring captiue-Crownes, with freedom poor.
65
" O happy man, says he, that lo I see
" Grazing his cattle in those pleasant fields!
" If he but knew his good (how blessed he,
" That feels not (...) affliction Greatness yeeldes!)
" Other then what he is, he would not be,
" Nor change his state with him that Scepters wieldes:
" Thine, thine is that true life; That is to live,
" To rest secure, and not rise up to grieve.
66
" Thou sitst, at home, safe, by thy quiet fire,
" And hear'st of others harms; but feel none:
" And there thou telst of Kings, and who aspire,
" Who fall, who rise, who triumphs, who do moan:
" Perhaps thou talkst of me, and do inquire
" Of my restraint, why here I live alone,
" And pittiest this my miserable fall:
" For, pity must have part; envy, not all.
67
" Thrice happy you that look, as from the shore,
" And have no venture in the wrack you see;
" No interest, no occasion to deplore
" Other men's travails, while your selves sit free.
" How much does your sweet rest make us the more
" To see our misery, and what we be!
" Whose blinded Greatness, ever in turmoyle,
" Still seeking happy life, makes life a toil.
68
" Great Dioclesian (and more great therefore Primus imperium communicauit, and
posuit Dioclesianus: and in eo ponendo, dixisse fertur; Recipe Jupiter
imperium, quod mihi commodasti.

" For yeelding-vp that whereto pride aspires)
" Reckning thy Gardens in Illiria more
" Then all the Empire, all what the earth admires;
" Thou well did teach, that he is never poor
" That little has, but he that much desires;
" Finding more true delight in that small ground,
" Then, in possessing all the earth, was found.
69
" Are Kings that freedom give, themselves not free,
" As meaner men, to take what they may give?
" What, are they of so fatal a degree,
" That they cannot descend from that, and live?
" Unless they still be Kings can they not be,
" Nor may they their authority survive?
" Will not my yielded Crown redeem my breath?
" Still am I feared? is there no way, but death?
70
Scarce this word, Death, from sorrow did proceed,
When in rusht one, and tells him, such a knight
Is new arrived, and comes from Court in speed.
What news said he, with him, that traytrous wight?
What, more removing yet? alas! what need?
Are we not far enough sent out of sight?
Or is this place, here, not sufficient strong
To guard us in? or must we have more wrong?
71
By this, the bloody troop were at the door;
When As a sudden and a strange dismay
(...) them strain, who should go in before:
One offers, and in offering makes a stay:
An other forward sets, and does no more:
A third the like, and none durst make the way:
So much the horror of so vile a deed,
In vilest minds, deterres them to proceed.
72
At length, as to some great aduentrous fight,
This Brauo cheeres these dastards, all he can;
And valiantly their courage does incite,
And all against one weak unarmed man:
A great exployte, and fit for such a knight;
Wherein, so much renown his valor wan.
But see, how men that very Presence fear,
Which once, they knew, Authority did bear,
73
Then, on thrusts one, and he would foremost be
To shead another blood; but lost his own:
For, entering in, as soon as he did see
The face of Majesty, to him well known;
Like Marius Soldier at Minternum, he
Stood still amazed, his courage ouer-throwne.
The King, seeing this, starting from where he sat,
Out from his trembling hand his weapon gate.
74
Thus, even his foes, who came to bring him death,
Bring him a weapon, that before had none;
That yet he might not idly lose his breath,
But die revenged, in action, not alone.
And this good chance, that thus much favors,
He slackes not: for, he presently speedes one:
And, Lion-like, upon the rest he flies:
And here falls one; and there another lies.
75
And up and down he trauerses his ground;
Now wards a felling blow, now strikes again,
Then nimbly shifts a thrust, then lends a wound,
Now back he gives, then rushes-on amain.
His quick and ready hand does so confound
These shameful beasts, that four of them lie slain:
And all had perished happily and well,
But for one act, that (o!) I grieve to tell.
76
This coward Knight, seeing with shame and fear
His men thus slain, and doubting his own end,
Leapes up into a chair that (lo) was there,
The-whiles the King did all his courage bend
Against those four, which now before him were,
Doubting not who behind him does attend;
And plyes his hands undaunted, vnaffeard,
And with good heart, and life for life he stird.
77
And whiles he this, and that, and each man's blow
Does eye, defend, and shift, being layd-to (...),
Backward he bears for more advantage now,
Thinking the wall would safeguard him the more;
When, lo, with impious hand, o wicked thou,
That shameful durst not come to strike before,
Behind him gav'st that lamentable wound,
Which laid that wretched Prince flat on the ground.
78
Now, proditorious wretch, what have thou done,
To make this barbarous base assassinate
Upon the person of a Prince, and one
Fore-spent with sorrow, and all desolate?
What great advancement have thou hereby won,
By being the instrument to perpetrate
So foul a deed? where is thy grace in Corte,
For such a service, acted in this sort?
79
First, he for whom thou do this villainy
(Though pleased there with) will not avouch thy fact,
But let the weight of thine own infamy
Fall on thee, vnsupported, and vnbackt:
Then, all men else will loath thy treachery,
And thou thy self abhor thy proper act:
" So the Wolf, in hope the Lions grace to win
" Betraying other beasts, lost his own (...).
80
But now, as this sweet Prince distended lay,
And him nor Life, nor Death, their own could call,
(For, Life, removing, (...) not all away;
And Death, though entering, had not seized on all)
That short-tym'd motion had a little stay
(The mouer ceasing) though it were but small:
(As the Organ-sound, a time, suruiues the stop,
Before it does the dying note give up)
81
When, lo, there streams a spring of blood so fast,
From those deep wounds, as all imbrued the face
Of that accursed caytiue, as he past
(After the deed effected) through the place:
And therewithal those dying eyes did cast
Such an vpbrayding look on his disgrace
(Seeming to check so cowardly a part)
As left the impression even in his heart.
82
And this one King, most near in blood allied,
Is made th'oblation for the others peace. The Corpse was (...) from (...) to
London: (...) (...) withopen (...) in Paul's, 3 days; and after a solemn
obseque, was had to Langley and there (...) (...).

Which peace yet was not hereby ratified
So, as it could all future fears release.
For, though the other did forth with provide
To have the rumor run of his decease,
By drawing the corpse to London, where it was
Laid (three days to be seen) with open face:
83
Yet, so great was this execrable deed,
As men would searce therein believe their eyes;
Much less their ears: and many sought to feed K. Ric. bruted to be (...)
after he was (...) murdered: which (...) a conCon, (...); for the which, Sir
(...) Clarindon, supposed to be the base son of the (...) (...) was executed,
with diverse (...).

The easy creditours of novelties,
By voycing him alive; how he was freed
By strange escape out of his miseries:
And many did conspire now to relieve
Him dead, who had forsaken him alive.
84
And many suffered: for his Cause, when now
He had (...): many (...) for him again,
When they perceived the exchange did not allow
Their hopes so much as they did look to gain,
By traffiquing of kings; and all saw how
Their full (...) were in the wane.
They had a King was more then him before;
But yet a king, where they were naught the more.
85
And sure, this murthred Prince, though weak he was,
He was not ill; not yet so weak, (...) that
He showed much Martial (...) in his place,
Aduentring of this person for the State:
And might amongst our better Princes pass;
Had not the flattery, rapine, and debate
Of factious Lords and greedy Officers
(...) his actions, and abused his years.
86
Nor is it so much Princes weaknesses,
As the corruption of their Ministers,
Whereby the Commonwealth receives distress.
For, they, attending their particulars,
Make imperfections their advantages
To be themselves both Kings and Counselors.
And, sure, this Commonwealth can never take
Hurt by weak kings, but such as we do make.
87
Besides, he was (which people much respect
In Princes, and which pleases vulgarly)
Of goodly personage, and of sweet aspect,
Of mild access, and liberality; He (...) in his Court 1000. (...) in
ordinary allowance of (...), 300. (...) in his Kitchen, above 300. Ladies
(...), and Landerers: (...) apparel was sumptuous; (...) so was it generally,
in his time: be had one Cote of gold and stone, valued as 30000. (...). One
(...) with the Fr. King at (...), when (...) (...) Isabel was delivered unto
him, cost 300000. marks.

And feasts, and shows, and triumphs did affect,
As the delights of youth and iollitie:
But, here, the great profusion and expense
Of his revenues, bred him much offense:
88
And gave advantage unto enmity,
This grievous accusation to prefer;
" That he consumed the common Treasury:
" Whereof he being the simple vsager
" But for the State (not in propriety)
" Did alien at his pleasure, and transfer
" The same this minions, and to whom he list;
" By which, the Commonwealth was to subsist.
89
" Whereby, said they, the poor concussed State Hen. 4. (...) al letters
patents of (...) granted by K. (...). and K. Ric. Ann. reg. 6.

" Shall ever be exacted for supplies.
" Which accusation was the occasion, that
" His succeslour by order (...)
" Many his Patents, and did reuocate When he was first surprised in Wales, the
D. of (...) had in (...) Castle 100000. (...) in coin, and 200000, marks in
(...): and at his Resignation (...) the (...), 300000 (...), beside: plate and
Jewels.

" And reaslume his liberalities:
" And yet, for all these wastes, these gifts and feasts,
" He was not found a Bankrupt in his chests.
90
But they, who took to Syndicque in this sort
The Actions of a Monarch, knew those things
Wherein the accoumpts were likely to fall short
Between the State of Kingdoms, and their Kings:
Which president, of pestilent import
(Had not the heavens blessed thy indeuourings)
Against thee Henry, had been likewise brought,
The Example made of thy example wrought.
91
For, though this bounty, and this liberalness, A Prince, (...) (...), (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

A glorious virtue be; it better fits
Great men, then kings: who, giving in excess,
Give not their own, but others benefits:
Which calles-vp manies hopes, but pleasures less;
(...) (...) (...) more love, then it begets.
For, Justice is their Virtue: that alone
Makes them sit sure, and glorifies the Throne.
The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
King Henry, his excuses publishes
For Richards death; and truce does intertaine
With France The Scots, (...) for wrongs, address
Themselves to war; and are appeased again.
The Welsh rebel. The Percies practices
(To part the State) are stopped, in battle slain.
Continual troubles still afflict this King;
Till Death an end does to his travails bring.
1
THe bounds once ouer-gone, that hold men in,
They never stay; but on, from bad to worse.
" Wrongs do not leave off there, where they begin;
" But, still beget new mischiefs in their course.
Now, Henry, thou (...) added to thy (...)
Of usurpation, and intruding force,
A greater crime; which makes that gone before
T'appeare more then it did, and noted more.
2
For, now thou artinforc't to apologize (...) (...) sent to foreign Princes,
(...) (...) and (...) the Kings proceedings.

With foreign States, for two enormious things,
Wherein, thou do appear to scandalize
The public Right, and common Cause of Kings:
Which, though (with all the skill thou can devise)
Thou ouerlay'st with fairest colorings;
Yet the vnder-worke, transparent, shows too plain.
" Where open acts accuse, the excuse is vain.
3
And these defenses, are but complements,
To dally with confining Potentates;
Who, busied in their proper governments,
Do seldom tend the affairs of other States:
Their wisdom, which to present power consents,
Liue-dogges before dead Lions, estimates:
" And no man more respects these public wrongs,
" Then so much as to his private state belongs.
4
Yet, most it seemed the French King to import;
As sharer in his daughters injury:
" Though blood, in Princes, links not in such sort,
" As that it is of any power to tie,
Where their estates may seem t'aduenture hurt;
Or where there is not a necessity,
That does combine them with a stronger chain,
Then all these great Alliances contain.
5
For, though this King might have resentiment,
And will, t'auenge him of this injury: In this time of Charles 6. (...) the
(...) wars (...) (...), between the Dukes of (...), and (...).

Yet, at that time, his State being turbulent,
Factious, and full of partiality,
And of tentimes he him self impotent,
By means of his Phreneticque malady;
It was not likely, any good could rise
By undertaking such an enterprise.
6
And therefore both sides, upon intercourse The Truce made with R'c. 2. renewd
for 30, years: but broken the next year after, upon their part; sending (...)
de Burbon, with forces into (...), to the aid of (...).

(As fitted best their present terms) agreed,
The former truce continue should in force,
According as it had been fore-decreed
Upon the match with Richard; and a course
For Isabel (with all convenient speed)
Provided, with an honorable Train
Suting her state, to be sent home again.
7
Whom willingly they would have still retained, The (...) labors to have (...)
(...) to his son Henry, Prince of Wales.

And matched unto the Prince: but she (though young;
Yet sensible of that which appertained
To honor, and renown) scornd any tongue
That offered such a motion; and disdaynd
To have it thought, she would but hear that wrong
Moved to her, of her Lord, and husband dead,
To have his murderers race enjoy his bed.
8
Besides; the French (doubting the Government,
Thus gotten, would be subject still to strife)
Not willing were to urge her to consent (...) Isabel was married to Charles,
son to (...) D. of (...).

T'accept a troublous, and uncertain life:
And, being returned, she grew in the end content
To be (at home) a Duke of Orleance wife;
Escaped from such storms of power, holding it best
To be below her self, to be at rest.
9
And so has Henry assecur'd that side, Thom. (...) (...) of (...) was sent
into Gascony with 200. men at Arms and 400. Archers, to (...) Sir Robert (...)
Lieutenant there: where he (...) that Country, being (...) by the (...) to
(...) upon their (...) for the death of King Ric. whom they especially (...)
for (...) (...) at Burdeux.

And there with all his State of Gasconie:
Which, on th'intelligence was notifi'd
Of Richards death, were wrought to mutiny;
And hardly came to be repacifi'd,
And kept to hold in their fidelity:
So much, to him were they affectioned,
For having been amongst them borne and bred.
10
These toils abroad, these tumults with his own
(As if the frame of all disioynted were,
With this disordred shifting of the Crown)
Fell, in the revolution of one year.
Beside; the Scotte (in coffeehouse grown,
For the detayning, and supporting here, George (...), E. of March, (...) out
of Scotland, was (...) (...) (...) (...) England, and (...) against his Country.

The scourge of all that kingdom, George Dunbar)
With fire and sword, proclaymes an open war;
11
Taking their time, in these disturbances
And (...) of a wavering Government,
TO avenge them of their former grieuances,
And by our spoils their fortunes to augment.
Against whose forces, Henry furnishes
A powrefull Army, and in person went;
But wars with a retyring enemy,
With much more travail then with victory.
12
And, being (by sharp, deformed Winters force) Owen Glendour, an (...) in
NorthWales, (...) with the L. Gray of (...), for (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
by (...); and being not (...) (...) (...) (...) own (...) to recover them,
(...) force and made (...) (...) the L. Gray; and (...) (...) for the (...) of
that (...).

Caused to retire, he finds new storms at home,
From other Coasts ary sing; that proved worse
Then those, which now he was returned from.
In Wales, a Cause of Law, by violent course,
Was (from a variance) now a war become;
And Owen Glendour, who with Gray of late
Contests for private lands, now seeks a State.
13
Whom to represle, he early in the Spring,
With all provisions fit, does forward set;
When straight his enemies (not purposing Ann. Reg. 2.

To hazard battle) to the mountains get.
Where, after long and weary trauayling,
Without performing any great defeat,
He only their provisions wastes, and burns,
And with some prey of Cattle home returns.
14
Wherewith, the Rebel rather was the more
Encouraged, then addaunted: and begun
T'aduenture farther then he did before;
Seeing such a Monarch had so little done,
Being comn in person, with so great a power,
And suddenly again retired and gone.
" For, in this case, they help, who hurt so small;
" And he has nothing done, that does not all.
15
But now (behold) other new heads appear,
New Hidra's of rebellion, that procure Ann Reg. 3.

More work to do, and give more cause of (...);
And showed, that nothing in his State stood sure.
And these, even of his chiefest followers were,
Of whom he might presume him most secure;
Who had the especial ingins been, to rear
His fortunes up, unto the State they were.
16
The Percies were the men; men of great might,
Strong in alliance, and in courage strong:
Who now conspire; under pretense to right
Such wrongs, as to the Common wealth belong:
Urged, either through their conscience, or despite,
Or finding now the part they took was wrong:
Or else Ambition hereto did them call, In this battle of Homeldon, the L:
Hen. (...), surnamed Hot-spur, accompanied with George (...) (...). of March,
overthrew the Scottish forces: where were slain 23 Knights and 10000 of the
(...): the (...) (...) of Fife, Murry, Angus, with 500. other of meaner degree,
token prisoners.

Or others enuy'd grace; or, rather, all.
17
And such they were, who might presume to have done
Much for the king, and honor of the State;
Having the chiefest actions vnder-gone,
Both foreign and domestical of late:
Beside that famous day of Homeldon;
Where Hotspur gave that wonderful defeat
Unto the Scotts, as shook that kingdom more
Then many Monarchs armies had before.
18
Which might perhaps advance their minds, so far
Above the level of subjection, as
T'assume to them the glory of that war;
Where all things, by their power, were brought to pass:
They, being so mighty, and so popular,
And their command so spacious as it was,
Might (in their State) forget, how all these things
That subjects do effect, must be their Kings.
19
And so fell after into discontent,
For-that the king required to have, as his,
Those Lords were taken prisoners; whom they meant
To hold still as their proper purchases:
Then, that he would not, at their suit, consent
To work their Cousin Mortimers release,
Out of the Rebel Owen Glendour's hands;
Who held him prisoner, in disgraceful bands.
20
But be, what will, the cause; strong was their plot,
Their parties great, means good, the season fit,
Their practice close, their faith suspected not,
Their states far off, and they of wary wit:
Who, with large promises, so woo the Scot
To aid their Cause, (...) he consents to it;
And glad was to disturne that furious stream
Of war, on us, that else had swallowed them.
21
Then join they with the Welsh; who, now well trained,
In Arms and action daily grew more great. In the 9. (...) of the (...) of
King Richard 2. (...) (...) by (...) ordained (...) E. of March (...) apparent
to the Crown.

Their Leader, by his wiles, had much attaynd,
And done much mischief on the English State:
Beside, his prisoner (...) he gained,
From being a foe, to (...) his confederate;
A man the King much feared: and well he might; (...) Roger was the (...) of
Edmond Mortimer, who married (...) the only daughter of Leonel D. of (...), the
third son of King Ed. 3. (...) by her had (...) (...) Roger and Elizabeth:
(...) had (...) 4. children, all (...), (...) only Anne, (...) without (...);
(...) (...) (...) (...) to (...). (...) of (...), second (...) (...) Edmo d D.
of York. This Rich. (...) at (...), (...) issue (...) (...), (...), surnamed
(...), after Duke of York.

Least he should look whether his Crown stood right.
22
For, Richard (for the quiet of the State)
Before he took those Irish wars in (...),
About Succession does deliberate:
And, finding how the certain Right did stand,
With full consent this man did ordinate
The heir apparent to the Crown and Land;
Whose competencie was of tender touch:
Although his might was small, his right was much.
23
With these, the Percies them confederat,
And (as three heads) conioyne in one intent:
And instituting a Triumuirate)
Do part the Land, in triple government;
Dividing thus, among themselves, the State:
The Percies should rule all the North, from Trent;
And Glendour, Wales; the Earl of March should be
Lord of the South, from Trent: and so they'gree.
24
Then, those fair bayts these Trouble-States still use
(Pretense of common good, the Kings ill Course)
Must be cast forth, the people to abuse,
And give their Cause, and them, the (...) force.
The king, for tyranny, they do accuse,
By whom the State was grown from bad to worse;
A perjured man, who held all faith in scorn:
Whose trusted Oaths had others (...) forsworn.
25
And, there withal, the execrable act, The (...) (...) against (...). (...).
Ann. (...). 4.

On their late murdered King, they aggrauate:
How he employed the dooers of the fact,
Whom afterward he did remunerate:
And daily such taxations did exact,
As were against the Order of the State;
Presuming, those great sums he did impose,
About his private uses to dispose:
26
And how he was environed with such
As had possessed him; and in slanderous sort
Accused them so, as they durst not approach
To clear themselves of such unjust report:
And, thereupon, they (...) disauouch
To yield him more obedience, or support:
And, as t'a (...) Duke of Lancaster,
Their Cartell of Defiance they prefer;
27
Protesting, these objections to make good,
With sword in hand, and to confirm and seal
Their undertaking, with their dearest blood,
As Procurators for the Commonweal:
And that upon their Consciences it stood,
And did import their duty and their zeal
Unto the State, as Peers to seeredrest
Those miseries wherewith it was oppressed.
28
Great seemed their Cause: and greatly, too, did add
The peoples love thereto, these crimes imposed;
That many gathered to the troops they had,
And many sent them aid though vndisclos'd:
So that, the King, with all maine speed, was glad
Both by his remonstrances well composed,
And with his sword (his best defense) provide
To right himself, and to correct their pride:
29
Divulging, first, a fair Apology
Of his clear heart, touching the foul report
Of that assassinate: which utterly
He does (...) protesting, in no sort
Tagree thereto, in will or priuitie:
And, how he had been used to extort,
The State could witness best; by whose consent
Was granted what he had, in Parliament.
30
Which never was, but only one supply,
Infoure years troublous and expensiue Reign:
And (...), upon extreme necessity,
The safety of the public to maintain:
And that the Percies best could testify,
How most that money issued was, again;
To whom the same was rendered, to the end
To war the Scot, and Borders to defend:
31
And that the rest was, to the same effect
For which it was obtaynd, in like (...).
And where-as they did slanderously object,
How that they durst not hazard to present
In person their defenses, in respect
He was incenst by some maleuolent;
It was most false: for, he knew no defense
They were to make, till now they made offense.
32
And how far, he had been, from cruelty,
Both Wales, and Scotland could him witness bear;
Where, those effects of his great clemency,
Insparing blood, do to his cost appear:
Much more, his subjects find his lenity;
Whose love he seeks to have, and not their fear.
" But thus, said he, they ever do pretend
" To have received a wrong, who wrong intend.
33
Not to give time unto th'increasing rage,
And gathering fury, forth he marched with speed;
Least more delay, or giving longer age
To the evil grown, it might the cure exceed.
All his bestmen at Arms, and Leaders sage,
All he prepared he could; and all did need.
For, to a mighty work thou go, o King,
That equal spirits, and equal powers shall bring.
34
There shall young Hotspur, with a fury led,
Ingrapple with thy son, as fierce as he:
There Martial VVorster, long experienced
In foreign arms, shall come t'incounter thee.
There Douglas, to thy Stafford, shall make head:
There Vernon, for thy valiant Blunt, shall be.
There, shall thou find a doubtful bloody day;
Though sickness keep Northumberland away.
35
Who yet reserved (though, after, quit for this)
Another tempest on thy head to raise;
As if, still, wrong-reuenging Nemesis
Meant to afflict all thy continuing (...)
And here this field he happily does miss,
For thy great good; and therefore well he stays. The K. (...) forward by
George Dunbar, was in sight of his enemies lying in Camp (...) to (...),
sooner then (...) was exspected: for the (...) supposed he would have stayde
longer then (...) did, at (...) (...) Trent, for the (...) of his (...) cell
with other (...) (...) werethere to (...) him. (...) they (...) to (...) the
Town of (...); and Prepared to encounter the kings (...). Ann. (...). 4.

What might his force have done, being brought thereto,
When that already, gave so much to do?
36
The swift approach, and unexpected speed,
The King had made upon this new-rays'd force,
In the vnconfirmed troops, much fear did breed,
Untimely hind'ring their intended course:
Theioyning with the Welsh (they had decreed)
Was hereby dashed; which made their Cause the worse:
Northumberland, with forces from the North,
Expected to be there, was not set forth.
37
And yet, undaunted Hotspur, seeing the King
So near arrived; leaving the work in hand,
With forward speed his forces marshalling,
Sets forth, his farther coming to withstand:
And, with a cheerful voice encouraging
His well experienced and aduentrous Band,
Brings on his Army, eger unto fight;
And placed the same, before the King in sight.
38
" This day (says he) my valiant trusty friends,
" What-euer it does give, shall glory give;
" This day, with honor, frees our State, or ends
" Our misery with fame, that still shall live:
" And do but think, how well the same he spends,
" Who spends his blood, his Country to relieve.
" What? have we hands, and shall we servile be?
" Why were swords made? but, to preserve men free.
39
Besides, th'assured hope of victory,
Which we may even fore-promise on our side,
Against this weak constrained company;
Whom force and fear, not will and love does guide:
Against a Prince, whose foulimpiety
The heavens do hate, the earth cannot abide:
Our number being no less, our courage more,
No doubt we have it, if we work therefore.
40
This said, and thus resolved, even bent to charge
Upon the King; who well their order viewed,
And wary noted all the course at large
Of their proceeding, and their multitude: The Abbot of Shrew bury and one of
the Cleark of the (...) seal were (...) from the K to the (...) to offer them
parden if they would come to any reasonable agreement.

And deeming better, if he could discharge
The day with safety, and some peace conclude,
Great proffers sendes of pardon and of grace
If they would yield, and quietness embrace.
41
Which though his fears might drive him to propose, Whereupon the E. of
Worcester (...) to the K. (...) many kind (...) and (...) sing to move (...)
Nephew (...), (...) at (...) return, (...) said, conceal them, (...) hastened
on the battle; which was (...) (...) (...). An. Reg. 4.

To time his businesle, for some other end;
Yet, sure, he could not mean to have peace with those,
Who did in that supreme degree offend:
Nor were they such, as would be won with shows;
Or breath of oaths, or vows could apprehend:
So that in honor, th'offers, he does make,
Were not for him to (...), nor them to take.
42
And yet this much his courses do approve,
He was not bloody, in his Natural;
And yield he did to more, then might behoue
His dignity, to have dispenst withal:
And, unto VVorster, he himself did move
A reconcilement to be made of all:
But VVorster, know'ing it could not be secured,
His Nephews onset (yet for all) procured.
43
Which seeing, the King (with greater wrathin censt)
Rage, against fury, does with speed prepare.
And though, said he, I could have well dispenst
With this days blood, which I have sought to spare;
That greater glory might have recompenst
The forward worth of these, that so much dare;
That we might good have had by th'ouerthrowne,
And th'wounds we make, might not have been our own:
44
Yet, since that other men's iniquity
Calles-on the sword of wrath, against my will;
And that themselves exact this cruelty,
And I constrained am this blood to spill;
Then on, brave followers, on courageously,
True-harted subjects, against traitors ill:
And spare not them, who seek to spoil us all;
Whose foul confused end, soon see you shall.
45
Forthwith, began these fury-mouing sounds,
The notes of wrath, the music brought from Hell,
The (...) Drums (which trumpets voice confounds)
The cries, th'incouragements, the shouting shrill;
That, all about, the beaten air rebounds
Confused thundring-murmurs horrible;
To rob all sense, except the sense to fight.
Well hands may work: the mind has lost his sight,
46
O war! begot in pride and luxury,
The child of malice, and reuengeful hate;
Thou impious good, and good impiety,
That art the foul refiner of a State;
Vniust-iust scourge of men's iniquity,
Sharpe-easer of corruptions desperate;
Is there no means, but that a sin-sicke Land
Must be let blood with such a boy sterous hand?
47
How well might thou have, here, been spared this day,
Had not wrong-counsaild Percy been perverse?
Whose forward hand, inured to wounds, makes way
Upon the sharpest fronts of the most fierce:
Where now an equal fury thrusts, to stay
And backe-repell that force, and his disperse:
Then these aslaile, then those re-chase again,
Till stayed with new-made hills of bodies slain.
48
There, lo that new-appearing glorious star,
Wonder of Arms, the terror of the field, Prince (...), (...) this Battle, was
not 17 years of (...)

Young Henry, laboring where the stoutest are,
And even the stoutest (...) back to yield;
There is that hand boldned to blood and war,
That must the sword, in wondtous actions, wield:
Though better, he had learnd with others blood;
A lesle expense to us, to him more good.
49
Yet here had he not speedy succor lent
To his endangered father, near oppressed,
That day had seen the full accomplishment
Of all his travails, and his final rest:
For, Mars-like Douglas all his forces bent
T'incounter, and to grapple with the best;
As if disdayning any other thing
To do, that day, but to subdue a King.
50
And three, with fiery courage, he assailes;
Three, all as kings adornd in royal wise:
And each successiue after other quails;
Still wondering, whence so many Kings should rise.
And, doubting lest his hand or eyesight fayles,
In these confounded, on a fourth he flies,
And him vnhorses too: whom had he sped,
He then all Kings, in him, had vanquished.
51
For Henry had divided, as it were,
The person of himself, into four parts;
To be (...) known, and yet known every where,
The more to animate his peoples hearts:
Who, cheered by his presence, would not spare
To execute their best and worthyest parts.
By which, two special things effected are;
His safety, and his subjects better care.
52
And never worthy Prince a day did quit
With greater hazard, and with more renown,
Then thou did, mighty Henry, in this fight;
Which only made thee owner of thine own:
Thou never proov'dst the Tenure of thy right
(How thou did hold thy easie-gotten Crown)
Till now: and, now, thou show thy self Chief Lord,
By that especial right of kings; the Sword.
53
And dear it cost, and much good blood is shed
To (...) thee, a (...) victory:
Great Stafford thy high Constable lies dead, (...), E of Staf (...), (...) of
(...).

With Shorly, (...), Gawsell, Caluerly,
And many more; whose brave deaths witnessed
Their noble valor and fidelity:
And many more had left their dearest blood
Behind, that day, had Hot spur longer stood.
54
But he, as Douglas, with his fury led,
Rushing into the thickest woods of spears,
And brakes of swords, still laying at the Head
(The life of the Army) whiles he nothing (...),
Or spares his own, comes all environed
With multitude of power, that ouer-beares
His manly worth: who yeeldes not, in his fall;
But fighting dies, and dying kills withal.
55
What Arc, what trophey, what magnifence
Of glory, Hot-spurre, had thou purchas't here;
Could but thy Cause, as fair as thy pretense,
Be made unto thy Country to appear!
Had it (...) her protection and defense
(Not thy (...)) made thee sell so dear
Thy self this day; she must have here made good
An everlasting Statue for thy blood.
56
Which thus misspent, thy Army presently,
(As if they could not stand, when thou were down)
Dispersed in rout, betook them all to fly:
And Douglas, faint with wounds, and ouer-throwne,
Was taken; who yet won the enemy
Which took him (by his noble valor shown,
In that days mighty work) and was preserved
With all the grace, and honor he deserved.
57
VVorc'ster (who had escaped unhappily
His death in battle) on a Scaffold dies, Tho. (...) (...). of Worcester, with
Sir Richard Vernon and the Baron of Kinderton, were taken in the (...) and
(...).

The next day after, in the company
Of other chiefest of that enterprise.
And, so, the tempest of this mutiny
Became allayed; and those greatieoperdies
Blowne-ouer in this sort, the Coasts well cleared,
But for one threatening cloud, that yet appeared.
58
Northumber land (recovered) still out-stands,
The principal of this great family
And faction; having Berwike in his hands,
With other holds; strong by confed'racie
With Scotland; mighty by his own command:
And, likely now, his utmost power to try,
T'auenge him on the ruin of his Blood,
And join with Wales; which yet undaunted stood.
59
Which moved the king (who had too much endured
In this days work, to hazard new again)
By all the aptest means could be procured
To lay to draw him in, by any train.
And write he did, and vowed, and him assured
(Upon his princely word) to intertaine
With former grace, if he would but submit,
And come to yield the obedience that was fit.
60
The Earl, be'ing now by this defeat dismayed
(And fearing his confederates would fail
With Fortune, and betray, rather then aid,
Those who are down; being for their own avail)
Relying on his Sov'raignes oath obay'd;
Which, with his tender griefs, did much (...):
And in he came, and had no detryment,
But (for a show) some short imprisonment.
61
The Parliament, that afterward insu'd,
Restored him t'all his dignities and lands.
And now none, but the Welsh, seemed to seclude
The king, from having wholly in his hands
All peace within: and them he had pursued
Whiles this brave army, with these ready bands,
Were yet on foot; could he but have got pay
To hold them, and his charge of war defray.
62
But, that he could not gain, though all the ways
That might be wrought, he labors to procure
Means to effect the same. But, those delays,
And long protraction, which he must endure
By way of Parliament, so much betrays
The opportunity, that might secure
His undertaking; as, the occasion, lost,
Drove both the State, and him, to greater cost.
63 The Fr. K. (...) (...) to Owen (...) with 140. (...), which landed at (...)
(...). An. Reg. 6.

For, now the Rebel, thus forborne, grows strong
Both in his reputation and success:
For, (...) with his power held out so long,
Many adventure (with more (...))
To yield him aid, and to support his wrong:
And foreign Princes (in his business
Whom he sollicites) now will lend their hand
To hold him up; seeing, himself can stand.
64 An. Reg. 6. with much adoo the Laity (...) 2 (...), upon condition that
the L. Furniuall should receive all the money, and see it to be spent in the
(...).

And thus he prospers; whiles, the King here spent
Much time to levy treasure, to maintain
His charge abroad: which, with that discontent,
That murmr, those denyals, he does gain,
As that he finds it even as turbulent
To war for it, as with it, all his Reign; The D. of Orleans with an Army of
6000. men entered into (...), and besieged (...), the space of (...), months,
and returned without obtaining (...).

Though he had those inforcements of expense,
Both for (...), retaynements, and defense.
65
For, here beside these troubles in the Land,
His large Dominions, held abroad, require An. Reg. (...). The Conte Cleremont,
Son to the D. of (...), (...) Mon. de la Bret, won (...) Casties in (...).
The same time the Conte Sa. Paul (...) the (...) of Wight, with 1600. men.

A plentiful and a prepared hand
To guard them; where so mighty men aspire
T'assaile, distract (...) trouble his Command,
With hopes, with promises, with sword and fire:
And (...) as deep importes, his (...) to clear;
Which, by his neighbors, much infested were
66
The Flomings, Britains, with the French and all, (...). Reg. 6. The Cont
(...) Paul (...) (...) Castle of Mark (...) 3. (...) of (...). The (...)
under the conduct of the L. of (...) spoiled and (...) the Town of (...).

Attemptincursions, and work much despite:
Orleance, for Guien: and here the Conte, Saint Paul,
For Calais labors, and the I Will of Wight.
Wherein, though neither had success at all;
Yet (...) overcame, and won by fight
Important Holds, in Gasconie the-while,
And did the English much distress and spoil,
67
All which require provisions to withstand: (...) K. sends 4000 (...) to (...)
and 3000 to the S (...), (...) the (...) (...) his second son (...) of (...)
after D. of (...).

And all are succord with great providence:
A Navy, to secure the Seas, is manned,
And forces sent to Calais; for defense.
And wherein other parts defective stand,
(...) are supplied, with careful diligence:
So that his subjects could not, but well know,
That what they (...), he did sure bestow.
68
Nor did he spare himself, nor his; but (bent
All-wholly (...) active Worthynesse)
The Prince of Wales unto his Province sent;
Where, he was sure he should not take his ease:
His second soune is, with the Earl of Kent,
Imployd (as (...)) to keep the Seas. (...), after D. of Bedford, sent with
Ralph Neusle E. of Westmerland, (...) the North.

A third (though very young) likewise sent forth
With Westmerland, attends unto the North.
69
Thus were they bred, who after were to be
Men amongst men: here, with these grave Adioynts
(These learned Masters) they were taught to see
Themselves, to read the world, and keep their points.
Thus were they entered in the first degree
(And Accedence) of action; which acquaints
Them, with the Rules of Worth and Nobleness:
Which, in true Concord, they learned well to express.
70
And, whiles h'attends the State thus carefully,
The Earl of Marches children are conuay'd
Out of the Tower of Windsor, secretly;
Being prisoners there, not for their merit, laid;
But, for their Blood; and to the end whereby
This Chain of Nature might be interlay'd
Between the Father and his high intents,
To hold him back, to save these innocents.
71
For which attempt (though it were frustrated
By their recovery, who were got again) The (...) (...), (...) to Edward D.
(...) York, late wife to (...). L. Spencer (executed at (...), An. Reg. 1.)
(...) her brother to be the (...) author of conuaying away the E. of Marches
(...) out of the (...) of (...).

Aumarle (now Duke of York) is challenged,
By his own sister, to have laid that train;
Who (late) her Lord, with others ruined,
In secretly betraying them, t'obtaine
His grace and peace: which yet contents him not.
For, Who has grace and peace by treason got?
72
So much did love, t'her executed Lord,
Predominate in this fair Ladies heart,
As in that region, it would not afford
Nature a place, to rest in any part
Of her affections; but that she abhord
Her proper blood, and left to do the part
Of (...), to do that of a wife;
T'auenge a Husbands death, by Brothers life.
73
Upon which accusation, presently
The Duke committed is, without much stir
Or vulgar noise; for that it tenderly
Did touch the secretst wounds of Lancaster:
When straight, another new conspiracy (...). (...) E. of North. again (...)
against the K with Rich. (...) (...) of

(As if it were a certain (...)
Allied to this) engendered in the North,
Is by th'Archbishop Scroope with power brought forth:
74
And with fair zeal, and piety, approved
To be forth universal benefit York. (...). (...) E Marshal, Tho. L,
Bardolph, and others. They (...) the Citizens of York with the Country adioy
(...) to take their part for the commodity of the (...).

And succor of the people, who (soon moved
By such perswaders, as are held upright;
And for their zeal, and charity beloved)
Use not t'examine if the Cause be right,
But leap into the toil, and are undone
By following them that they relied upon.
75
Here, new aspersions, with new obloquies,
Are laid on old deserts; and future ill They (...) (...) Articles (...) the
King.

On present sufferings, bruted to arise,
That farther grieuancesing ender will.
And then concussion, rapine, pilleries,
Their Catalogue of accusations fill.
Which to redress, they do presume to make
Religion to auow the part they take.
76
And even as Canterbury did produce
A Pardon to advance him to the (...); The (...). of York offers pardon to all
(...) (...) their part (...) the King.

The like now York (...), to (...)
His faction for the pulling of him down:
Whilst th'ignorant, deceived by this abuse,
Makes others ends to be as if their own.
But, what would these have don against the crimes,
Oppressions, ryots, wastes of other times?
77
Since now they had a Monarch, and a man,
Raised by his worth, and by their own consent,
To govern them, and works the best he can
T'aduance the Crown, and give the State content; (...) E. of (...). land,
with (...) D. of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) against the (...) (...)
power being too great for the^, the E. made somblance to toyne with the Archb.
for redress of (...) greuances as he (...); (...) (...) (...) and (...) him of
(...) forces. An. Reg. 6.

Commits not all to others care, nor ran
Anidle course, or on his (...) spent.
" But, thus the Horse at first bites at the Bit;
" That after is content to play with it.
78
Grown to a mighty power (attending now
Northumberland, with his prepared aid)
The Bishop (by a parle) is, with a show
Of combination, cunningly be trayde
By Westmerland: whose wit did overthrow,
Without a sword, all these great feats, and stayed
The mightiest danger, that did ever yet
Thy Crown and State, disturbed Henry, threat.
79
For which, this reverent Priest with Mowbray dies: The Archb. was brother to
scroope E. of Willshire, Treasurer of Eng and before beheaded..

Who both, drawn on, with passion of despite,
To undertake this fatal enterpise
(The one his brothers bloodshed to requite;
The other for his fathers injuries) Though Monbray ^. Marshall, son to the
Duke of Norfolk, banished about the quarrel with H. Bullingbrooke.

Did wrong themselves, and did not others right.
For, who through the eyes of their affections look,
And not of judgment, thus are ouer-tooke.
80
Where of when news came to Northumberland
(Who seldom other then of misery
Seems borne to hear^^ being ever behind hand
With Fortune, and his opportunity) The E. of North. returning out of Wales
Slain in the Battle, An. Reg. 9

To Scotland flies: where, given to understand
Of some intrapment by conspiracy,
Gets into Wales: whence, he adventured
T'attempt another day; and lost his head.
81
Whereby, once more those Parts are quieted,
When As the King (who never had his brow
Seen free from sweat nor heart from trouble rid) The K. grows jealous of his
son, Hen. Prince of Wales: who with a better mind then fashion, came to his
Father and cleared himself. An. Reg. 13

Was, with suspicion that his son grew now
Too popular, and forward, so much fed
By wicked instruments (who well knew how
To gain by Princes fears) as he thereby
Fell, in his grief, to great extreamitie.
82
Which when that virtuous Prince (who borne to be
The module of a glorious Monarch) heard,
With humble protestations did so free
His fathers fears, and his own honor cleared,
As that he plainly made the world to see
How base, Detraction, and Deceit appeard;
And that a heart, so nobly built, could not
Contain (within) a thought, that wore a blot.
83
Wherewith, the king betakes him to some peace;
Yet to a peace, much like a sicke-mans sleep
(Whose unrelenting pains do never cease;
But always watch upon his weakness keep)
That never any Sabbath of release
Could free his travails, and afflictions deep:
But still his cares held working, all his life,
Till Death concludes a final end with strife.
84
Whose Herald, Sickness, being imployd, before,
With full commission to denounce his end;
And pain and grief, enforcing more and more,
Besieged the Hold, that could not long defend;
Consuming, so, all that resisting store
Of those provisions Nature daign'd to lend,
As that the walls, (...) thin, permit the Mind
To look out through, and his frailty find.
85
For, now (as if those vapors vanished were,
Which heat of boiling blood, and health, did breed,
To clowd the judgment) things do plain appear
In their own colors, as they are indeed;
When As th'illightned soul discouers clear
Th'abusing shows of Sense, and notes with heed
How poor a thing is pride; when all, as slaves,
" Differ but in their fetters, not their Graves.
86
And, lying on his last afflicted bed,
Pale Death and Conscience both before him stand;
The One holding out a Book, wherein he read
In bloody lines the deeds of his own hand:
The other shows a glass, which figured
Anougly form of foul corrupted Sand;
Both bringing horror in the hiest degree,
With what he was, and what he soon should be.
87
Which seeing; all trembling, and confused with fear,
He lay a while, amazed, with this affright:
Atlast, commands some, that attending were,
To fetch the Crown, and set it in his sight.
On which, with fixed eye, and heavy cheer,
Casting a look; O God, says he, what right
I had to thee, I now in grief conceive:
Thee, which with blood I held, with horror leave.
88
And, herewithall, the soul (rapt with the thought
Of mischiefs past) did so attentive wey
These present terrors, whilst (as if forgot)
The dull oppressed body senseless lay;
That he, as breathless quite, quite dead is thought;
When, lo, the son comes in, and takes-away
This fatal Crown from thence, and out he goes;
As if impatient, longer time to lose.
89
To whom (called back for this presumptuous deed)
The King (returned from out his ecstasy)
" Began: O son, what needst thou make such speed
" To be beforehand with thy misery?
" Thou shall have time enough, if thou succeed,
" To feel the storms that beat on Dignity.
" And, if thou (...) but be (be any thing)
" In (...), then never be a King.
90
" Nay, Father; since your Fortune did attain
" So high a Stand, I mean not to descend,
" Replies the Prince: as if what you did gain,
" I were of spirit unable to defend.
" Time will appease (...) well, who now complain,
" And ratify our interest in the end.
" What wrong has not continuance quite out-worne?
" Years make that right, which never was so borne.
91
" If so; God work his pleasure, said the King:
" Yet thou must needs contend, with all thy might,
" Such evidence of virtuous deeds to bring,
" That well may prove our wrong to be our right:
" And let the goodness of the managing
" Raze out the blot of foul attaining, quite;
" That Discontent may all advantage miss,
" To wish it otherwise, then now it is.
92
" And since my death my purpose does prevent,
" Touching this Holy war I took in hand
" (An action wherewithal my soul had meant
" To Appease my God, and reconcile my Land)
" To thee is left to finish my intent;
" Who, to be safe, must neueridly stand:
" But some great actions entertain thou still,
" To hold their minds, who else will practice ill.
93
" Thou have not that advantage by my Reign,
" To ryotit, as they whom long descent
" Has purchas'tloue, by custom; but, with pain
" Thou must contend to buy the worlds content.
" What their birth gave them, thou have yet to gain,
" By thine own virtues, and good government:
" So that unless thy worth confirm the thing,
" Thou never shall be father to a King.
94
" Nor art thou borne in those calm days, where Rest
" Has brought asleep sluggish Security:
" But, in tumultuous times; where minds, addressed
" To factions, are invr'd to mutiny;
" A mischief, not by force, to be suppressed,
" Where rigor still begets more enmity:
" Hatred must be beguiled with some new course,
" Where States are stiff, and Princes doubt their force.
95
This, and much more, Affliction would have said,
Out of the experience of a troublous Reign Ann. dom. 14. 12. the K. died in
the 46. year of his age, when he had (...) 13 years 6 (...); and left 4
(...); (...). after him K. The D. of Clarence, John D. of Bedford, and (...) D.
of (...).

(For which, his high desires had dearly paid
The interest of an euer-toyling pain)
But that this all-subduing Power here stayed
His fault'ring tongue, and pain (r'inforc't again)
Barred up the oppressed passages of breath,
To bring him quite under the state of Death.
96
In whose possession I must leave him now;
And now, into the Ocean of new toils,
Into the stormy Maine (where tempests grow
Of greater ruins, and of greater spoils)
Setfoorth my course (to hasten-on my vow)
Ov'rall the troublous Deep of these turmoyles.
And, if I may but live t'attaine the shore
Of my desired end, I wish no more.
The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Henry the fifth cuts off his enemy,
The Earl of Cambridge, that conspired his death.
Henry the sixth (married unluckily)
His, and his Countries glory ruineth.
Suffolk, that made the match, preferred too hie,
Going to exile, a Pirat murthereth.
What means the Duke of York observed to gain
The worlds good will, seeking the Crown t'attaine.
1
CLose smothered lay the low depressed fire,
Whose after-issuing flames confounded all, Henry (...). began (...) (...) the
20 of March. (...). 1412

The whilst victorious Henry did conspire
The wrack of France, that at his feet did fall:
Whilst joys of gotten spoils, and new desire
Of greater gain, to greater deeds did call
His conquering troops; that could no thoughts retain,
Save thoughts of glory, all that active Reign.
2
Whom here, me thinks (as if he did appear,
Out of the clowdy darkness of the night)
I do behold approach with Martial cheer,
And with a dreadful (and yet lovely) sight:
Whose eye gives courage, and whose brow has fear;
Both representing terror, and delight;
And stays my course, and off my purpose breaks,
And in up brayding words thus fiercely speaks:
3
" Ungrateful times, that impiously neglect
" That worth, that never times again shall show;
" What? merits all our toil no more respect?
" Or else stands Idleness ashamed to know
" Those wondrous Actions, that do so object
" Blame to the wanton, sin unto the slow?
" Can England see the best, that she can boast,
" Lie thus vngrac't, vndeckt and almost lost?
4
" Why do you seek for fained Palladines
" (Out of the smoke of idle vanity)
" Who may give glory to the true designs,
" Of (...) chier, Talbot, Neuile, Willoughby?
" Why should not you strive to fill up your lines,
" With wonders of your own, with verity?
" T'inflame their offspring with the love of good,
" And glorious true examples of their Blood.
5
" What everlasting matter here is found,
" Whence new immortal Iliads might proceed!
" That those, whose happy graces do abound
" In blessed accents, here may have to feed
" Good thoughts, on no imaginary ground
" Of hungry shadows, which no profit breed;
" Whence, musicke-like, instant delight may grow;
" Yet, when men all do know, they nothing know.
6
" And why do thou, in lamentable verse,
" Nothing but bloodshed, treasons, sin and shame,
" The worst of times, the extreme of ills, rehearse;
" To raise old staynes, and to renew dead blame?
" As if the minds of the evil, and (...),
" Were not far sooner trained from the same,
" By good example of fair virtuous acts,
" Then by the show of foul ungodly facts.
7
" Would God, our times had had some sacred wight,
" Whose words as happy as our swords had bin,
" To have prepared for us Tropheis aright,
" Of vnde caying frames to have rested in;
" Triumphant Arks, of perdurable might,
" O holy lines! that such advantage win
" Upon the Sieth of Time, in spite of years.
" How blessed they, who gain what never wears!
8
" For, what is it to do, if what we do
" Shall perish near as soon as it is done?
" What is that glory we attain unto
" With all our toil, if lost as soon as won?
" A small requital, for so great adoo,
" Is this poor present breath, a smoke soon gone;
" Or these dumb stones, erected for our sake:
" Which, formless heaps few stormy changes make.
9
" Tell great ELIZA (since her days are graced,
" With those bright ornaments, to us denied)
" That sherepaire what darkness has defaced,
" And get our ruyn'd deeds, reedifi'd:
" She in whose all-directing eye is placed
" A power, the highest powers of wit to guide;
" She may command the work, and ouer-see
" The holy frame, that might eternal be.
10
For, would She be content, that Time should make
A (...) prey, upon her glorious Reign;
That Darkness, and the Night, should overtake
So clear a Brightness, shining without stain?
Ah! no: She fosters some (no doubt) that wake
For her eternity, with pleasing pain.
And if she, for her self, prepare this good;
Let her not so neglect those of her Blood.
11
This, that great Monarch, Henry, seemed to crave;
When (weighing what a holy motive here
Virtue proposed, and fit for him to have,
Whom all times ought of duty hold most dear)
I sigh't, and wished that some would take t'ingraue,
With curious hand, so proud a work to rear
(To grace the present, and to bless times past)
That might, for ever, to our glory last.
12
So should our well-taught times have learned alike,
How fair shined Virtue, and how foul Vice stood;
When now my self am driven to mislike
Those deeds of worth, I dare not vow for good:
I cannot moan who lose, nor praise who seek
By mighty Actions here t'aduance their Blood.
I must say, Who wrought most, least honor had:
How ever good the Cause, the deeds were bad.
13
And only tell the worst of every Reign;
And not the intermedled good report.
I leave, what glory Virtue did attain
At th'euer-memorable Agincort:
I leave to tell, what wit, what power did gain
Th'assieged Roan, Caen, Dreux; or in what sort:
How Majesty, with terror, did advance
Her conquering foot, on all subdued France.
14
All this I pass, and that magnanimous King,
Mirror of virtue, miracle of worth;
Whose mighty Actions, with wise managing,
Forced prouder boasting Climes to serve the North.
The best of all the best, the earth can bring,
Scarce equals him, in what his Reign brought forth;
Being of a mind, as forward to aspire,
As fit to govern what he did desire.
15
His comely body was a goodly seat,
Where Virtue dwelt most fair; as lodged most pure:
A body strong; where use of strength did get
A stronger state to do, and to endure:
His life he makes the example, to beget
Like spirit in those, he did to good inure;
And gave, to (...), such life, and liuelihood,
As if he Greatness sought, but to do good.
16
He as the Chief, and all-directing head,
Did with his subjects, as his members, live;
And them to goodness forced not but led;
Winning, not much to have, but much to give
(Deeming, the power of his, his power did spread)
As borne to bless the world, and not to grieve;
Adorned with others spoils, not subjects store:
No King, exacting less; none, winning more.
17
He, after that corrupted faith had bred
An ill inured obedience for Command;
And languishing luxutiousnes had spread
Weyward unaptness over all the Land;
Those long vnordred (...) so marshalled,
Under such formal discipline to stand,
That even his soul seemed only to direct
So great a body, such exployts to effect.
18
He brings abroad distracted Discontent,
Dispersed ill humors into actions hie;
And, to unite them all in one consent,
Placed the fair mark of glory in their eye;
That, Malice had no leisure to dissent,
Nor Envy time to practice treachery:
The present actions do divert the thought
Of madness past, while minds were so well wrought.
19
Here now were Pride, Oppression, Usury
(The canker-eating mischiefs of the State)
Called forth to prey upon the enemy;
Whilst the home-burth'ned, better lightened sat:
Exactors did not, with a greedy eye,
Examine states, or private riches rate:
The silent Courts warred not, with busy words; The Courts of Justice.

Nor wrested law gave the contentious, swords.
20
Now, nothing (...) th'attentiue (...),
But stratagems, (...), surprises, fightes;
How to give laws to them that conquered were,
How to articulate with yielding wightes:
The weak with mercy, and the proud with fear,
How to retain; to give deserts their rights,
Were now the Arts: and nothing else was thought,
But how to win, and maintain what was got.
21
Nor here were any privately possessed
Or held alone imprisoned Majesty,
Proudly debarring entrance (...) the rest;
As if the prey were theirs, by victory.
Here, no detractor wounds who merits best;
Nor shameless brow cheeres-on impiety.
Virtue, who all her toil with zeal had spent,
Not here, all unrewarded, sighing went.
22
But, here, the equally-respecting eye
Of Power, looking alike on like deserts,
Blessing the good, made others good thereby;
More mighty, by the multitude of hearts.
The field of glory, unto all does lie
Open alike; honor, to all imparts.
So that the only fashion in request,
Was, to be good, or good-like, as the rest.
23
So much, o thou Example, do effect
(Being far a better Master, then Command) -- (...) tolerare labores; Non
(...).

That, how to do, by doing do direct,
And teach others action, by thy hand.
" Who follows not the course, that kings elect?
" When Princes work, who then will idle stand?
" And, when that doing good is only thought
" Worthy reward; who will be bad for naught?
24
And had not The Earl of Cambridge, with vain speed, Richard E. of Cambridge
the second son to Edmond (...), Duke of York, married (...) the (...) of
Roger (...) Earl of March, descended from Lionell D. of (...), the third son
to K Ed. (...). by whose right 'Richard D. of York son to this E. of
Cambridge, afterward aimed the Crown.

Untimely practiced for an others right,
With hope to advance those of his proper seed
(On whom the Rule seemed destined to light)
The Land had seen none of her own to bleed,
During this Reign, nor no aggreeued sight;
None the least blackness inter clouded had
So fair a day, nor any eye looked sad.
25
But now, when France perceived (from afar)
The gathering tempest, growing-on from hence,
Ready to fall, threatening their State to mar,
They labor all means to provide defense:
And, practicing how to prevent this war,
And shut-out such calamities from thence,
Do foster, here, some discord lately grown;
To hold Ambition busied, with her own.
26
Finding those humors which they saw were fit
Soon to be wrought, and easy to befed,
Swollen full with envy, that the Crown should sit
There where it did (as if established)
And whom it touched in Blood, to grieve at it;
They with such hopes and helps solicited,
That this great Earl was drawn t'attempt the thing,
And practices how to depose the King.
27
For, being of mighty means to do the deed;
And yet of mightier hopes, then means to do:
And yet of spirit, that did his hopes exceed;
And then of Blood as great, to add thereto:
All these, with what the gold of France could breed
(Being powers enough a clyming mind to woo) The E of Ca^bridge (...) the (...)
of the King, was with Hen. Scroope Lord Treasurer, and Sir Thomas Gray (...) at
Southhampton. Ann. 3. Reg.

He so employed, that many he had won,
Even of the chief the King reli'd upon.
28
The well-knowne right of the Earl of March allured
A leaning love: whose Cause he did pretend.
Whereby, he knew that so himself procured
The Crown for his own children, in the end.
For, the Earl being (as he was assured)
Unapt for issue, it must needs descend
On those of his, being next of Clarence race;
As who, by course of right, should hold the place.
29
It was the time, when as the forward Prince (...) (...).

Had all prepared for his great enterprise;
And ready stand his troops to part from hence,
And all in stately form and order lies,
When open Fame gives out intelligence
Of these bad complots of his enemies:
Or else, this time (of purpose) chosen is:
Though known before; yet let run-on, till this.
30
That this might yield the more (...) aggrauate
Upon so foul a deed untimely sought,
Now at this point, t'attempt to ruinate
So glorious a design so forward brought,
Whilst careful Virtue seeks t'aduance the State,
And for her everlasting honor sought:
That though the Cause seemed right, and title strong;
The time (...) doing it, yet makes it wrong.
31
But, straight, an unlamented death he had:
And straight were joyfully the Anchors weighd:
And all flock fast aboard, with visage glad;
As if the sacrifice had now been paid,
For their good speed; that made (...) stay so sad,
Loathing the least occasion that delayed.
And, now new thoughts, great hopes, calm seas, fair winds,
With present action intertaine their minds.
32
No other cross, o Henry, saw thy days Richard, Duke of York, son to the
E. of Cambridge, by Anne daughter to the Earl of March, made his claim, in
(...). (...) of Hon. 6.

But this, that touched thy now possessed hold;
Nor after, long, till this man's son assayes
To get, of thine, the right that he controlled:
For which, contending long, his life he pays.
So that, it fatal seemed the father should
Thy winning seek to stay, and then his son
Should be the cause to lose, when thou had won.
33
Yet now in this so happy a meane-while,
And interlightning times, thy (...) wrought,
That Discord had (...) leisure to defile
So fair attempts with a tumultuous thought:
And even thy self, thy self did so beguile
With such attention upon what was sought,
That time (...) not now with fear or hate
Others to seek, thee to secure thy State.
34
Or else, how easy had it been, for thee,
All the pretendant race to have laid full low?
If thou proceeded had with cruelty,
Not suffering any fatal branch to grow:
But, vnsuspicious Magnanimity
Shames such effects of fear, and force, to show;
Busied in free, and open Actions still
Being great: for, being good, hates to be ill.
35
And yet, such wrongs are held meet to be done,
And often for the State thought requisite:
As, when the public good depends thereon,
When great injustice is esteemed great right:
But yet, what good with doing ill is won?
Who has of blood made such a benefit,
As has not feared, more after then before,
And made his peace the (...), his plague the more?
36
Far otherwise dealt this undaunted King,
That cherished the offspring of his foes;
And his Competitors to grace did bring:
And them, his friends for Arms, and honors, chose;
As if plain courses were the safest thing,
Where upright goodness, sure, and steadfast goes,
Free from that subtle maskt impiety,
Which this depraved world calls policy.
37
Yet, how has Fate disposed of all this good?
What have these Virtues after (...) auail'd?
In what stead has hy-raised Valor stood,
When this continuing cause of Greatness failed?
Then, when proud-growne, the irritated blood,
Enduring not it self, it self (...);
As though that Prowess had but learnd to spill
Much blood abroad, to cut her throat with skill
38
How does The Eternal, in the course of things,
Immix the causes both of Good and Ill?
That thus the one, effects of the other brings:
As what seems made to bliss, is borne to spill?
What? from the best of Virtues glory, springs
That, which the world with misery does fill?
Is the end of happiness, but wretchedness?
Has Sin his plague, and Virtue no success?
39
Either that is not good, the world holds good:
Or else is so confused with ill; that we
(Abused with th'appearing likelihood)
Run to offend, whilst we think good to be:
Or else the heavens made man (in furious blood)
To torture man; Allotting no course free
From mischief long: Sending fair days that breed
But storms; to make, more foul, times that succeed.
40
Who would have thought, that so great victories,
Such conquests, riches, Land, and Kingdom gained,
Could not but have established in such wise
This powrefull state, in state to have remained?
Who would have thought, that Mischief could devise
A way, so soon to lose what was attained?
As if power were but showed to grieve, not grace;
And to reduce us into far worse case.
41
With what contagion, France, did thou infect
This Land, by thee made proud, to disagree?
T'inrage them so, their own swords to direct
Upon themselves, that were made sharp in thee?
Why did thou teach them, here at homet'erect
Trophies of their blood, which of thine should be?
Or was the date of thine affliction out,
And so (by course) was ours to come about?
42
But, that untimely death of this great King, (...). 5. (...) 9. years and
(...) (...), and died in the 36 year of (...).

Whose nine years Reign so mighty wonders wrought,
To thee thy hopes; to us despair did bring;
Not long to keep, and govern, what was got:
For, those that had th'affayres in managing,
Although their Countries good they greatly sought;
Yet, so ill accidents vofitly fell,
That their dessignes could hardly prosper well.
43
An infant King does in the State succeed, Hen. 6. (...) one year old when
(...) (...) (...) (...), was committed to the charge of the two good Dukes,
(...) and (...) his (...).

(...) one year old, left unto others guide:
Whose (...) trust, though such as showed indeed,
They weighed their charge more then the world beside,
And did with duty, zeal, and love proceed;
Yet (for all what their travail could provide)
Could not woo Fortune, to remain with us,
When this her Minion was departed thus:
44
But, by degrees first this, then that, regained,
The turning tide bears back, with flowing chance
Unto the Dolphin, all we had attained,
And filles the late lowe-running hopes of France;
When Bedford (who our only hold maintained)
Death takes from us, their fortune to advance:
And then home-strife (that on it self did fall)
Neglecting foreign care, did soon lose all.
45
Near three score years are past since Bulling brook
Did first attain (God knows how just) the Crown:
And now his race, (...) right possessors took,
Were held of all, to hold naught but their own:
When Richard, Duke of York, begins to look
Into their right, and makes his (...) known;
Wakening-vp sleeping Right (that lay as dead)
To (...), how his race was (...).
46
His fathers end, in him, no fear could move
T'attempt the like, against the like of might;
Where long possession now of fear, and love,
Seemed to prescribe even an innated Right.
So that, To prove his state, was to disprove
Time, law, consent, oath, and allegiance quight:
And no way, but the way of blood there was,
Through which, with all confusion he must pass.
47
And how much better for him, had it been,
T'indure a wrong with peace, then with such toil
" T'obtaine a bloody Right? since Right is sin,
" That is ill sought, and purchased with spoil.
But, this so wretched state are Kingdoms in,
Where one man's Cause, shall all the rest imbroyle:
And often, t'aduance a Tyran to a Crown,
Men runt' undo the State, that is their own.
48
And yet that opportunity, which led
Him to attempt, seem (...) him t'excuse:
A seeble spirited King that governed,
(Who ill could guide the Scepter he did use)
His enemies (that his worth maliced;
Who, both the Land, and him, did much abuse)
The peoples love, and his apparent Right,
May seem sufficient motives to incite.
49
Besides; the now ripe wrath (deferd till now)
Of that sure and vnsayling Iusticer,
That neuers suffers wrong so long to grow,
And to incorporate with right so far,
As it might come to seem the same in show
(T'incourage those that (...) minded are
By such success) but that at last he will
Confound the branch, whose root was planted ill.
50
Else, might the impious say (with grudging spite)
Does God permit the Great to riot free,
And bless the mighty though they do unright,
As if he did unto their wrongs agree?
And only plague the weak and wretched wight,
For smallest faults, even in the highest degree?
When he, but using them for others scourge,
Likewise of them at length the world does purge.
51
But could not yet, for bloodshed, satisfy
The now well-ruling of th'ill-gotten Crown?
Must even the good receive the penalty
Of former sins, that never were their own?
And must a just Kings blood, with misery
Pay for a bad, unjustly overthrown?
Well; then we see, Right in his course must go:
And men, t'escape from blood, must keep it so.
52
And, sure, this King, that now the Crown possessed
( Henry the sixth) was one, whose life was free
From that command of vice, whereto the rest
Of most these mighty Sovereigns subjects be;
And numbered might have been, among the best
Of other men, if not of that degree:
A right good man, but yet an evil King;
Unfit for what he had in managing.
53
Of humble spirit, of nature continent:
No thought to increase he had; scarce keep his own:
For pard'ning apter, then for punishment,
He chokes his power, to have his bounty known.
Far from revenge, soon won, soon made content;
As fitter for a Cloister then a Crown:
Whose holy mind so much addicted is
On the world to-come, that he neglects this.
54
With such a weake-good, feeble-godly King,
Has Richard, Duke of York, his Cause to try:
Who, by the experience of long managing
The wars of France, with supreme dignity;
And by his own great worth, with furthering
The common good against the enemy,
Had wrought, that zeal and love attend his might,
And made his spirit equal unto his Right.
55
For, now the Duke of Bedford being dead, The (...) York made (...) France,
(...) the death of the D. of (...).

He is ordained the Regent to succeed
In France for five years: where, he trauayled
With ready hand, and with as careful heed,
To seek to turn back Fortune (that now fled)
And hold up falling power, in time of need:
And got and lost, and reattaines (again)
That which again was lost, for all his pain.
56
His time expired, he should for five years more
Have had his charge prolongd: but Sommerset Edmond, Duke of (...), a great
enemy of the Duke of York.

(That still had enui'd his command before)
That place, and honor, for himself did get:
Which ads that matter to th'already store
Of kindled hate, which such a fire does set
Unto the touch of a confounding flame,
As both their bloods could never quench the same.
57
And now the weakness of that feeble Head
(That does neglect all care, but his souls care)
So easy means of practice ministered,
Unto the ambitious members, to prepare
Their own desires, to what their humors led;
That all good actions coldly followed are,
And sev'rall-tending hopes do wholly bend
To other now, then to the public end.
58
And, to draw-on more speedy misery,
The King unto a fatal match is led
With Rayners daughter, King of Sicilie; This Ravner was Duke of (...), and
only inioyed the title of the K. of (...).

Whom, with unlucky stars, he married:
For, by the means of this affimtie,
Was lost all that his father conquered;
Even as if France had some Erynnis sent
T'auenge their wrongs, done by the insolent.
59
This marriage was the Earl of Suffolkes deed, William dels (...) E. of
Suffolk, after created D. of Suff. the (...) (...) in this marriage: which was
(...), An. Reg. 23. (...) the King and the Lady (...), daughter to Rayner D. of
(...); to whom was delivered up the Duchy of Aniou, and the Conty of Maine,
(...) the conclusion of this match.

With great rewards won to effect the same:
Which made him that he took so little heed
Unto his Countries good, or his own shame;
It being a match could stand us in no steed
For strength, for wealth, for reputation, fame:
But cunningly contrived for others gain;
And cost us more, then Aniou, Mauns, and Maine.
60
And yet (as if he had accomplished
Some mighty benefit unto the Land)
He got his travails to be registered
In Parliament, for evermore to stand
A witness to approve all what he did:
To the end, that, if hereafter it were scand,
Authority might yet be on his side;
As doing naught but what was ratified:
61
Imagining, th'allowance of that Place
Would make that good, the which he knew was naught;
And so would his negotiation grace,
As none might think it was his private fault.
Wherein, though wit dealt wary in this case;
Yet, in the end, it self it ouer-raught.
Striving to hide, he opened it the more;
His after-care, showed craft had gone before.
62
Dear did thou buy, o King, so fair a Wife,
So rare a spirit, so high a mind, the-while:
Whose (...) was destruction; dowry, strise:
Whose bed was sorrow; whose embracing, spoil:
Whose maintenance cost thee and thine, their life;
And whose best comfort, never was but toil.
What Paris brought this booty of desire,
To set our mighty Ilium here on fire?
63
I grieve, I should be forced to say thus much,
To blame her, whom I yet must wonder at;
Whose so sweet beauty, wit, and worth, were such,
As (though she Fortune lost) she glory gat:
Yet does my Countries zeal so nearly touch,
That here my Muse it does exasperate;
Although unwilling, that my pen should give
Stain to that sex, by whom her fame does live.
64
For, sure, those virtues well deserved a Crown.
And, had it not been ours, no doubt she might
Have been among the Worthies of renown,
And now sat fair with fame, with glory bright:
But, coming in the way where sin was grown
So foul and thick, it was her chance to light
Amidst the gross infection of those times;
And so came stained with black disgrace-full crimes.
65
For, some the world must have, on whom to lay
The heavy burden of reproach and blame;
Against whose deeds, the afflicted may inuay,
As the only Authors, whence destruction came:
When yet, perhaps, 'twas not in them to stay
The current of that stream, nor help the same;
But, living in the eye of Action so,
Not hindering it, are thought to draw-on woe.
66
So much unhappy do the Mighty stand,
Who stand on other then their own defense,
When As destruction is so near at hand,
That if by weakness, folly, negligence,
They do not coming misery withstand,
They shall be deemed the authors of the offense,
And to call in, that which they kept not out;
And cursed, as they who brought those plagues about.
67
And so remain for ever rigistred
In that eternal book of Infamy;
When yet how many other causes led
As well to that, as their iniquity?
The worst complots often lie close smothered:
And well-meant deeds fall out unluckily;
Whilst the aggrieu'd stand not to weigh the intent;
But ever judge according to the event.
68
I say not this t'excuse thy Sin, o Queen, The pride and hautinesse of this
Queen Margaret gave the first origi nall to the (...) that so lowed by the
death of Humsrey Duke of Gloucester (...).

Nor clear their faults who mighty Actors are:
I cannot but affirm, thy pride has been
A special means this Commonwealth to mar:
And that thy weyward will was plainly seen,
In vain ambition, to presume too far;
And that, by thee, the only way was wrought
The Duke of Gloucester to his death was brought:
69
A man, though seeming in thy thought to sit
Between the light of thy desires and thee;
Yet did his taking thence plainly permit
Others to look to that they could not see
During his life, nor would adventure it:
When his Remove quite made that passage free;
That, by his fall, thinking to stand alone,
Thou scarce could stand at all, when he was gone.
70
For, this Duke (as Protector) many years,
Had ruled the Land, during the Kings young age;
And now the self same charge and title bears,
As if he still were in his pupillage:
Which, such disgrace unto the Queen appears,
That (all incenst, with an ambitious rage)
She does conspire to have him made-away;
As one, that stayed the Current of her sway:
71
Thrust thereinto, not only with her pride;
But, by her fathers counsel and consent:
Who grieved likewise, that any one beside,
Should have the honor of the government:
And, therefore, he such deep advice applied,
As foreign craft and cunning could invent,
To circumuent an vnsuspecting wight,
Before he should discern of their despite.
72
And many ready hands she straight does find,
To aid her deed, of such as could not brook
The length of one man's office, in that kind;
Who, all th'especiall Charges undertook,
Ruled all, himself: and never had the mind
T'impart a part with others; who would look
To have likewise some honor in their hands,
And grieved at such engrossing of Commands.
73
For, had he not had such a greedy love (...), quam breuem (...) esse qua magna
sit.

To intertaine his Offices too long,
Envy had been unable to reprove
His acted life, unless she did him wrong:
But, having lived, so many years, above,
He grieves now to descend, to belesse strong,
And kills that fame that virtue did beget;
Chose to be held less good, then seen less great.
74
" For, could the mighty but give bounds to pride,
" And weigh back Fortune, ere she pull Them down;
" Contented with enough, with honors satisfied,
" Not striving how to make so much their own,
" As to leave nothing for the rest beside,
" Who seem by their high-spreading ouer-growne
" (Whilst they themselves remain in all men's sight,
" The odious mark of hatred and despite)
75
" Then never should so many tragedies
" Burden our knowledge, with their bloody end:
" Nor their disgraced confounded families,
" From so high pride, to solowe shame descend;
" But, planted on that ground where safety lies,
" Their branches should to eternity extend:
" But ever, they, who ouer-looke so much,
" Will ouer-see themselves; their state is such.
76
Severe he was, and strictly did observe The Virtues of Humsrey D. (...).

Due form of Justice toward every wight;
Immovable, and never won to swerue
For any cause, in what he thought was right:
Wherein, although he did so well deserve;
In the licentious, yet, it bred despite:
" So that even Virtue seems an Actor too,
" To ruin those, Fortune prepares t'vndoo.
77
Now, such, being forward, who (the Queen well knew)
Hated his might, and glad to innouate;
Unto so great, and strong a party grew,
As it was easy to subvert his State:
And only hope of alteration drew
Many to yield, that had no cause to hate.
" For, even with goodness men grow discontent,
" Where States are ripe to fall, and virtue spent.
78
And, taking all the Rule into her hand
(Under the shadow of that feeble King)
The Duke sh'excludes from Office and Command,
And in the reach of enmity does bring,
From that respected height where he did stand
(When malice scarce durst mutter any thing):
And now the worst of him comes all revealed,
Which former fear, or rigor kept concealed.
79
Now is he taxed, that he rather sought
His private profit, then the public good;
And many things presumptuously had wrought;
Other, then with our laws, and customs stood:
As one, that would into the Land have brought
The Civil form, in cases touching blood;
And such poor Crimes: that showed, their spite was sound;
But yet be wrayde, their matter wanted ground.
80
Yet served they well the turn, and did effect
That which is easy wrought in such a case:
Where, what suborned Justice shall object,
Is to the purpose, and must pass with grace;
And what the wretched bring, of no effect:
Whose heinous faults his matter must deface.
" For, where Power has decreed to find the offense,
" The Cause is better still, then the defense.
81
A Parliament, at Berry summoned, The D. of (...) coming to this Parliament from
his Castle of the Viez (...) (...). (...) (...) by (...) L. (...) high (...),
the Dukes of Buckingham and Somerset, with others; (...) he appointed certain
of the Kings (...) to attend upon him: but he died (...) he was brought to his
an swear, some say of sorrow, others of a (...), or an (...), An. (...), 25.
The D. of Suffalke was a principal instrument in this businisse.

Dispatched the deed, more speedily then well.
For, thither came the Duke without all dread,
Or oughtimagining of what befell:
Where, now the matter is so followed,
That he conuented is, (...) he could tell
He was in danger, or had done offense;
And presently to prison sent, from thence.
82
Which quick, and so daine action gave not time
For men to weigh the justice of the deed;
Whilst looking only on the urged crime,
Unto the farther drist they take no heed.
For, these occasions taken in the prime
Of courses new, that old dislikes succeed,
Leave not behind that feeling touch of wrong.
Satietie makes passions still less strong.
83
And yet they seemed some mutiny to doubt,
For thus proceeding with a man of might;
Consid'ring he was popular and stout,
And resolute would stand upon his Right:
And therefore did they cast this way about,
To have him closely murdered out of sight;
That so, his trouble, and his death hereby,
Might come together, and together die:
84
Reckning it better, since his end is meant,
And must be wrought, at once to rid it clear,
And put it to the fortune of the event;
Then by long doing, to be long in fear:
When, in such courses of high punishment,
The deed, and the attempt, like danger bear:
And often, things done (perhaps) do less annoy,
Then may the doing, handled with delay.
85
And, so, they had it straight accomplished.
For, next day after his commitment, he
Is dead brought forth; being found so in his bed:
Which was by sudden sickness said to be,
That had upon his sorrows newly bred;
As by apparent tokens men might see.
And thus o Sickness, thou art often beli'd;
When death has many ways to come, beside.
86
Are these the deeds, high foreign wits invent?
Is this that Wisdom whereof they so boast?
Well; then I would it never had been spent
Here, amongst us, nor brought from out their coast:
Let their vile cunning, in their limits pent,
Remain amongst themselves, that like it most:
And let the North (they count of colder blood)
Be held more grosle, so it remain more good.
87
Let them have fairer cities, goodlier soyles,
And sweeter fields, for beauty to the eye,
So long as they have these un godly wyles,
Such detestable vile impiety:
And let us want their Vines, their Fruits the-whyles,
So that we want not faith and honesty:
We care not for those pleasures; so we may
Have better hearts, and stronger hands then they.
88
Neptune, keepe-out, from thy embraced I Will,
This foul contagion of iniquity:
Drown all corruptions, coming to defile
Our fair proceedings ordered formally:
Keep us mere English: let not craft be guile
Honor and Justice, with strange subtilties
Let us not think, how that our good can frame,
Which ruined has the Authors of the same.
89
But, by this impious means, that worthy man
Is brought unto this lamentable end.
And, now, that Current with maine fury ran
(The stop removed, that did the course defend)
Unto the full of mischief, that began
T'a universal ruin to extend;
That Isthmus failing, which the Land did keep,
From the entire possession of the Deep.
90
And now the King, alone, all open lay;
No under prop of Blood, to stay him by.
None, but h mselfe stands weakly in the way
Twixt York, and the affected sov'(...):
Gone is that bar, that would have been the stay
To Have kept him back, from mounting up so hie.
" But see (ah!) see: What state stand these men in,
" That cannot (...) without, nor with their kin?
91
The Queen has yet, by this, her full desire;
And now she with her Minion, Suffolk, raigns: (...) Pole (...) (...) of
(...), (...). Reg. 26 and is (...), and (...), the next year: after.

Now she has has all authority entire;
And all (...) unto her self retains:
And only Suffolk is a luaunced (...),
He is the man rewarded, for his pains;
He, that did her in stead most chiefly stand;
And more advanced her, then he did the Land.
92
Which when they saw, who better did expect,
Then they began their error to (...);
And well perceive, that only the defect
Was in their judgments, passion-drawne awry;
Found, formal rigor fitter to direct,
Then pride and insolent inconstancy.
" Better severity, that is right and just,
" Then impotent affections, led with lust.
93
And thereupon, in sorrow thus complain;
" What wondrous inconvenience do they feel,
" Where as such imbecillitie does reign,
" As so neglects the care of Commonweal?
" Where, ever one or other does obtain
" So high a grace thus absolute to deal;
" The-whilst th'aggreeued subject suffers, still,
" The pride of some predominating will?
94
" And ever, one removed, a worse succeedes:
" So that the best, that we can hope, is War,
" Tumults, and stirs, that this (...) breeds:
" The sword must (...), what Insolence does (...).
" For, what rebellions, and what bloody deeds,
" Have ever followed, where such courses are?
" What oft-remoues? what death of Counsailers?
" What murder? what exile of Officers?
95
" Witness the Spencers, Gauestone, and Uere,
" The mighty Minions of our feeblest Kings;
" Who ever Subjects to their subjects were,
" And only the procurers of these things:
" When worthy Monarchs, that hold honor dear,
" Master themselves, and theirs; which ever brings
" That universal reverence, and respect.
" For, who waighes him, that does himself neglect?
96
" And yet our case is like to be far worse;
" Having a King, though not so bent to ill,
" Yet so neglecting good, that giving force
" By giving leave, does all good order kill;
" Suffering a violent Woman take her course,
" To manage all, according to her will:
" Which, how she does begin, her deeds express;
" And, what will be the end, our selves may guess.
97
Which after followed, even as they did dread, The Duchy of Normandy was lost,
in the (...) 1449. (...) it had been held 30 (...) conquered by (...). (...).
Ann. Reg. 27. (...) objected (...) de la (...), Duke of (...).

When now the shameful loss of France, much grieves:
Which unto Suffolk is attributed;
As who in all men's sight most hateful lives:
And is accused, that he (with lucre led).
Betraies the State, and secret knowledge gives
Of our designs; and, all that we did hold,
By his corruption, is or lost, or sold.
98
And, as he deals abroad, so likewise here,
He robs at home, the Treasury no less;
Here, where he all authorities does bear,
And makes a Monopoly of Offices:
He is inricht, His raised, and placed near; At the Parliament at Leicester,
the lower House besought the K. that such persons as assented to the rendering
of (...) and Maine, might be duly pumshed: of which fact, they accused as
principals, the D. of Sufsolke, the L. Say, Treasurer of Eng. with others.
Where upon, the K. to appease the Commons, sequestered them from their offices
and rooms; and aster, banished the D. for 5 years.

And only he, gives counsel to oppress:
Thus men object, whilst many, up in Arms,
Offer to be revenged of these harms.
99
The Queen, perceiving in what case she stood
To lose her Minion, or engage her State;
(After with long contention in her blood,
Love and Ambition, did the Cause debate)
She yields to Pride: and rather thought it good,
To sacrifice her Love unto their hate;
Then to adventure else the loss of all:
Which (by maintaining him) was like to fall.
100
Yet, seeking at the first to temporize,
She tries if that some short Imprisonment
Would calm their heat: when that would not suffize,
Then to exile him she must needs consent;
Hoping, that time would salve it in such wise,
As yet at length they might become content,
And she again, might have him home at last,
When this first fury of their rage was past.
101
But, as he to his judged exile went,
Hard on the shore he comes incountered As the D. was (...) into France, he
was (...) with (...) of War, (...) to (...) (...) of (...): (...) took (...)
(...) him back to (...): where his head was (...) off, and his body left on the
sands. Ann. reg. 27.

By some, that so far off his Honor sent,
As put his backe-returne quite out of dread:
For, there he had his rightful punishment,
Though wrongly done; and there he lost his head:
Part of his blood has Neptune, part the Sand;
As who had mischief wrought by sea and land.
102
Whose death, when swift-wingd Fame at full conuaid
To this disturbed Queen, misdoubting naught;
Despite, and Sorrow such affliction laid
Upon her soul, as wondrous passions wrought.
" And art thou Suffolk, thus, said she, betrayed?
" And have my favors thy destruction brought?
" Is this their gain, whom Highness favors,
" Who chief preferred, stand as preferred to death?
103
" O fatal grace! without which, men complain,
" And with it perish; what preuailes that we
" Must wear the Crown, and other men must reign,
" And cannot stand to be, that which we be?
" Must our own Subjects limit and constrain
" Our favors, wher-as they themselves decree?
" Must we, our love, at their appointment, place?
" Do we command, and they direct our grace (...)
104
" Must they our power, thus from our will, divide?
" And have we might, but must not use our might?
" Poor Majesty, which other men must guide;
" Whose discontent can never look aright:
" For, euer-more we see those who abide
" Graciousin ours, are odious in their sight,
" Who would all-maistring Majesty defeat
" Of her best grace; that is, to make men Great.
105
" But, well; We see, although the King be Head,
" The State will be the Heart. This Sovereignty
" Is but in place, not power; and governed
" By th'equall Scepter of Necessity.
" And we have seen more Princes ruined,
" By (...) imoderat favoring privately,
" Then by severity in general.
" For, best h'is liked, that is alike to all.
106
Thus storms this Lady, all disquieted; The Commons of Kent assembled the^
selves in great number: and had to their Captains lack Cade, who named himself
Mortimer, Cosen to the Duke of (...): (...) purpose to redress the aluses of
the government.

When As far greater tumults now burst out:
Which close and cunningly were practiced,
By such, as sought great hopes to bring about.
For, up in Arms in Kent were gathered
A mighty insolent rebellious rout,
Under a dangerous Head; who, to deterr
The State the more, himself named Mortimer.
107
The Duke of York, that did not idle stand
(But seeks to work on all advantages)
Had like wise in this course a secret hand,
And hartned on their chiefest accomplices;
To try how here the people of the Land
Would (if occasion served) b'in readiness
To aid that Line, if one should come in deed
To move his Right, and in due course proceed;
108
Knowing himself to be the only one,
That must attempt the thing, if any should:
And therefore, lets the Rebel now run-on
With that false Name, to effect the best he could;
To make a way for him to work upon,
Who but on certain ground adventure would.
For, if the Traitor sped, the gain were his;
If not, yet he stands safe, and blameless is.
109
T'attempt' with others dangers, not his own,
He counts it wisdom, if it could be wrought:
And to have the humor of the people known,
Was now that, which was chiefly to be sought.
For, with the best, he knew himself was grown
In such account, as made him take no thought;
Having observed, in those he meant to prove,
Their wit, their wealth, their carriage, and their love.
110
With whom, and with his own alliances,
He first begins to open (in some wise)
The Right he had; yet, with such doubtfulnes,
As rather sorrow, then his drift descries:
Complaining of his Countries wretchedness,
In what a miserable case it lies;
And how much it imports them to provide
For their defense, against this woman's pride.
111
Then, with the discontented he does deal,
In sounding theirs, not uttering his intent;
As be'ing advised, not so much to reveal,
Whereby they might be made again content:
But, when they grieved for the Commonweal,
He does persuade them to be patient,
And to endure; there was no other course:
Yet, so persuades, as makes their malice worse.
112
And then, with such as with the time did run,
In most upright opinion he does stand;
As one, that never crossed what they begun,
But seemed to like that which they took in hand:
Seeking all causes of offense to shun,
Praises the Rule, and blames th'vnruly Land;
Works so with gifts, and kindly offices,
That, even of them, he serves his turn no less.
113
Then, as for those, who were his followers
(Being all choice men for virtues, or desearts)
He so with grace, and benefits prefers,
That he becomes the Monarch of their hearts.
He gets the learned, for his Counsaylers;
And cherishes all men of rarest parts:
" To whom, good done, does an impressio^ strike
" Of joy and love, in all that are alike.
114
And now, by means of th'intermitted war,
Many most valiant men, impov'rished,
Only by him fed and relieved are;
Only respected, graced, and honored.
Which let him in, unto their hearts so far,
As they by him were wholly to be led.
" He only treads the sure and perfect path
" To Greatness, who love and opinion has.
115
And, to have one some certain Province his,
As the maine body that must work the feate,
Yorkshire he chose, the place wherein he is
By title, livings, and possessions great.
No Country he preferres, so much as this:
Here, has his Bounty, her abiding seat:
Here, is his Justice, and relieuing hand,
Ready to all, that in distress do stand.
116
What with his tenants, (...), followers, friends,
And their alliances, and amities,
All that Shire universally attends
His hand, held up to any enterprise.
And thus far, Virtue with her power extends:
The rest, touching the event, in Fortune lies.
With which accomplements, so mighty grown,
Forward he tends, with hope t'attaine a Crown.
The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The bad success of Cades rebellion:
Yorkes open practice and conspiracy:
His coming in, and his submission:
The effect of Printing and Artillery.
Burdeux reuolts; craves our protection:
Talbot, defending ours, dies gloriously.
The French wars end: and York begins again;
And, at S. Albones, Sommerset is slain.
1
THE furious train of that tumultuous rout, The Commons of Kent with their
Leader lack Cade (...) their many (...): amongst which, (...) the King was
driven to (...) only on his Commons; and other men to (...) the Re (...) of
the (...); (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Maiestic, and the great payments of
(...) people, now late (...) to the King (...) Parliament. Also they desire,
that the King would (...) all the false (...) and (...) of the late D. of (...)
which be (...) (...), and them to punish, and to take about (...) person the
(...) Lords of (...) royal blood; to wit, the mighty Prince the D. of York,
late exiled by the traytrous motion of the false D (...) Suffolk, and (...)
(...), etc.

Whom close sub-ayding power, and good success,
Had made unwisely proud, and fondly stout,
Thrust headlong on, oppression to (...);
And now, to fullness grown, boldly give out,
That they the public wrongs meant to redress:
" Formelesse themselves, reforming doc pretend;
" As if Confusion could Disorder mend.
2
And on they march, with their false-named Head,
Of base and vulgar birth, though noble fayn'd:
Who, (...) with vain desires, to London led
His rash abused troops, with shadows trained:
When As the King, thereof ascertained,
Supposing some small power would have restrained
Disordred rage, sends with a simple crew
Sir Humfrey Stafford; whom they ouer-threw.
3
Which so increast the opinion of their might,
That much it gave to do, and much it wrought,
Confirmed their rage, drew on the vulgar wight,
Called forth the timorous, fresh partakers brought:
For, many, though most glad their wrongs to right,
Yet durst not venture their estates for naught:
But, see'ing the Cause had such advantage got,
Occasion makes them stir; that else would not. Also they (...) that they who
contrived the death of the high and mighty Prince, Humfrey 'D of Gloucester,
might have punishment.

4
So much he erres, that scorns, or else neglects
The small beginnings of arysing broils;
And censures others, not his own defects,
And with a selfe-conceite himself beguiles;
Thinking small force will compass great effects,
And spares at first to buy more costly toils:
" When true-obseruing providence, in war,
" Still makes her foes, farte stronger then they are.
5
Yet this good fortune, all their fortune mard;
" Which, fools by helping ever does suppress.
For, wareless insolence (whilst vndebard
Of bounding awe) runs on to such excess,
That following lust, and spoil, and blood, so hard,
Sees not how they procure their own distress:
The better, lothing courses so impure,
Rather will like their wounds, then such a cure.
6
For, whilst this wild vnrained multitude
(Led with an vnfore-seeing greedy mind
Of an imagined good, that did delude
Their ignorance, in their desires made blind)
Ransacke the City, and (with hands imbrued)
Run to all outrage in the extremest kind,
Heaping-vp wrath and horror, more and more,
They add fresh guilt, to mischiefs done before.
7
And yet, se'ing all this sorting to no end,
But to their own; no promised aid t'appeare;
No such partakers as they did attend;
Nor such succesles as imagined were;
Good men resolved, the present to defend;
Justice, against them with a brow seuete:
Themselves, feared of themselves, tired with excess,
" Found, mischief was no fit way to redress.
8
And as they stand in desperate comberment,
Enuirond round with horror, blood, and shame:
Crossed of their course, despayring of the event
A pardon (that smooth bait for baseness) came:
Which (as a snare, to catch the impotent)
Being once pronounced, they straight embrace the same:
And, as huge snowy Mountains melt with heat;
So they dissolved with hope, and home they get:
9
Leaving their Captain to discharge, alone,
The shot of blood, consumed in their heat: Anno

Too small a sacrifice, for mischiefs done, Reg. 29.

Was one man's breath, which thousands did defeat.
Unrighteous Death, why art thou but all one
Unto the small offender and the great?
Why art thou not more then thou art, to those
That thousands spoil, and thousands lives do lose?
10
This fury, passing with so quick an end, The D. os York, who at this time was
in Ireland (sent thither to appease a Rebellion: which he effected in such
sort, as got him and his lineage exceeding love and (...) with that people ever
after) returning home, and pretending great injuries to be offered him, (...)
whiles he was in the K. service, and likewise upon his landing in North Wales,
combines himself (...) Ric. Neuile E. of Salis. second son to Ralph, E. of
Westmerland (whose daughter he had married) and with Ri. Neuile the son, E. of
Warw. with other his especial friends; with who^ he consults, for the
reformation of the government, after he had complained of the great disorders
therein: Laying the blame, for the loss of Normandy upon the D. of Summers.
whom, (...) his returning thence, he caused to be arrested and committed.

Disclosed not those that on the advantage lay:
Who, seeing the course to such disorder tend,
Withdrew their foot, ashamed to take that way;
Or else prevented, whilst they did attend
Some mightier force, or for occasion stay:
But, what they meant, ill-fortune must not tell;
Mischief be'ing often made good, by speeding well.
11
Put-by from this, the Duke of York dessignes
Another course to bring his hopes about:
And, with those friends affinity combines
In surest bonds, his thoughts he poureth-out:
And closely feels, and closely undermines
The faith of whom he had both hope and doubt;
Meaning, in more apparent open course,
To try his right, his fortune, and his force.
12
Love, and alliance, had most firmly joined
Unto his part, that mighty Family,
The fair distended stock of Neuiles kind;
Great by their many issued progeny:
But greater by their worth (that clearly shined,
And gave fair light to their nobility)
So that each corner of the Land became
Enricht with some great Worthy, of that name.
13
But greatest in renown does Warwick sit;
That brave King-maker Warwick; so far grown,
In grace with Fortune, that he gouerns it,
And Monarchs makes; and, made, again puts down.
What reuolutions, his first-mouing wit
Here brought about, are more then too well known;
The fatal kindle-fire of those hot days:
Whose worth I may, whose work I cannot praise.
14
With him, with Richard, Earl of Salisbury,
Courtny and Brook, and other his dear friends;
He intimates his mind; and openly
The present bad proceedings discommends;
Laments the State, the peoples misery,
And (that which such a pitier seldom mends)
Oppression, that sharp two-edged sword,
That others wounds, and wounds likewise his Lord.
15
" My Lord; (says he) how things are carried here,
" In this corrupted State, you plainly see;
" What burden our abused shoulders bear,
" Charged with the weight of imbecillitie:
" And in what base account all we appear,
" That stand without their grace that all must be;
" And who they be, and how their course succeedes,
" Our shame reports, and time bewraies their deeds.
16
" Aniou and Maine (the maime that foul appears;
" The Eternal scarre of our dismembered Land)
" Guien, all lost; that did, three hundred years,
" Remain subjected under our Command.
" From whence, me thinks, there sounds unto our ears
" The voice of those dear ghosts, whose living hand
" Got it with sweat, and kept it with their blood,
" To do us (thankless us) their offspring good:
17
" And seem to cry; What? can you thus behold
" Their hateful feet upon our Graves should tread?
" Your Fathers Graves; who gloriously did hold
" That, which your shame has left recovered?
" Redeem our Tumbs, O spirits too too cold:
" Pull-backe these Towers, our Arms have honored.
" These Towers are yours: these Forts we built for you:
" These walls do bear our names; and are your due.
18
" Thus, well they may vpbraid our retchlesnes;
" Whilst we, as if at league with infamy,
" Riot away, for naught, whole Provinces;
" Giue-vp, as nothing worth, all Normandy;
" Traffic important Holds, sell Fortresses
" So long, that naught is left but misery,
" Poor Calais, and these water-walles about,
" That basely pownd us in, from breaking out.
19
" And (which is worse) I fear, we shall in the end
" (Thrown from the glory of inuading War)
" Before't our proper limits to defend;
" Where, ever, men are not the same they are:
" The hope of conquest, does their spirits extend
" Beyond the usual powers of valor, far.
" For, more is he that ventureth for more,
" Then who fights, but for what he had before.
20
" Put-to your hands, therefore, to reskew now
" Th'indangered State (dear Lords) from this disgrace:
" And let us in our honor, labor how
" To bring this scorned Land in better case.
" No doubt, but God our action will allow,
" That knows my right, and how they rule the place,
" Whose weakeness calls-vp our unwillingness;
" As opening even the door to our redresle.
21
" Though I protest, it is not for a Crown
" My soul is moov'd (yet, if it be my right,
" I have no reason to refuse mine own)
" But only these indignities to (...).
" And what if God (whose judgments are unknown)
" Has me ordained the man, that by my might
" (...) Country shall be blessed? If so it be;
" By helping me, you raise your selves with me.
22
Those, in whom, zeal and amity had bred The D. of York (...) an Army in the
marches of Wales, under pretext to remove diverse (...) sellers about the King,
and to revenge the manifest injuries don to the Commonwealth: and withal, (...)
publishes a declaration of his loyalty, and the wrongs done him by his
adversaries; offering to take his oath upon the blessed Sacrament, to have been
ever true liege-man to the K. and so ever to continue. Which declaration, was
written from his Castle of Ludlow, the 9 of (...). An. reg. 30.

A fore-impression of the right he had,
These stirring words so much encouraged,
That (with desire of innovation mad)
They seemed to runne-afore, not to be led;
And to his fire do quicker fuel add:
For, where such humors are prepared before;
The opening them, makes them abound the more.
23
Then counsel take they, fitting their desire:
(For, naught that fits not their desire is waigh'd)
The Duke is straight advised to retire
Into the bounds of Wales, to leauie aid:
Which under smooth pretense he does require;
T'amoue such persons as the State betrayed,
And to (...) th'oppression of the Land;
The charm, which Weakness seldom does with stand.
24
Ten thousand, straight caught with this bait of breath,
Are toward greater lookt-for forces led:
Whose power, the King, by all means, trauaileth
In their arising to have ruined:
But, their preventing Head so compasses,
That all ambushments (...) are fled;
Refusing ought to hazard by the way, The 16 of Febru. the K. with the D. of
So^merset, and other LL set forward toward the Marches: but the D. of York,
took other ways, and made up toward (...).

Keeping his Greatness for a greater day.
25
And to the Citte straight directs his course;
The City, seat of Kings, and Kings chief grace:
Where, having found his entertainment worse
By far, then he expected in that place;
Much disappointed, draws from thence his force,
And toward better trust, marches apace;
And down in Kent (fatal for discontents)
Near to thy banks, fair Thames, does pitch his tents.
26
And there, intrencht, plants his Artillery;
Artillery, the infernal instrument, The use of Guns, and great Ordinance,
began about this time, or not long before.

New-brought from hell, to scourge mortality
With hideous roaring, and astonishment:
Engine of horror, framed to (...)
And tear the Earth, and strongest Towers to rent:
Torment of Thunder, made to mock the skies;
As more of power, in our calamities.
27
If that first fire (subtle Prometheus brought)
Stolen out of heaven, did so afflict mankind,
That ever since, plagued with a curious thought
Of stirring search, could never quiet find;
What has he done, who now by stealth has got
Lightning and thunder both, in wondrous kind?
What plague deserves so proud an enterprise?
Tell Muse, and how it came, and in what wise.
28
It was the time, when fair Europa sat This principal part of Europe, which
contained the (...) (...) (...) of Christendom, was at this time in the hands
of many several (...), and Commonwealths, which (...) (...) the (...): for,
being so many, and none ouer-great, they were (...) attemptiue to disturb
(...), and more (...) to keep their own, with a mutual corresponde^ce of
amity. As Italy had the^ many more principalities and Commonwealths then it
has: (...) was divided into many kingdoms, France consisted of diverse free
Princes: Both the (...) of many more Governments.

With many goodly Diadems addressed;
And all her parts in flourishing estate
Lay beautiful, in order, at their rest:
No swelling member, vnproportionate,
Grown out of form, sought to disturb the rest:
The less, subsisting by the greaters might;
The greater, by the lesser kept upright.
29
No noise of tumult ever wak't them all:
Only, perhaps, some private jar within,
For titles, or for confines, might befall;
Which, ended soon, made better love begin:
But no eruption did, in general,
Break down their rest, with universal sin:
No public shock disioynted this fair frame,
Till Nemesis from out the Orient came;
30
Fierce Nemesis, mother of fate and change,
Sword Bearer of the eternal Providence
(That had so long, with such afflictions strange,
Confounded Asias proud magnificence,
And brought foul impious Barbarism to range
On all the glory of her excellence)
Turns her (...) look at last unto the West;
As grieved to see on earth such happy rest.
31
And for Pandora calls presently
( Pandora, Jove's fair gift, that first deceived
Poor (...) imbecillitie,
That thought he had a wondrous boon received;
By means whereof, curious Mortality
Was of all former quiet quite bereaved):
To whom, being come, decked with all qualities,
The wrathful Goddess breaks out in this wise;
32
Do thou not see in what secure estate
Those flourishing fair Western parts remain?
As if they had made covenant with Fate,
To be exempted free from others pain;
At-one with their desires, friends with Debate,
In peace with Pride, content with their own gain,
Their bounds contain their minds, their minds applied
To have their bounds with plenty beautified.
33
Devotion (mother of Obedience)
Bears such a hand on their credulity,
That it abates the spirit of eminence,
And busies them with humble piety.
For, see what works, what infinite expense,
What monuments of zeal they edify;
As if they would, so that no stop were found,
Fill all with Temples, make all holy ground.
34
But we must cool this all-(...) zeal,
That has enjoyed so fair a turn so long;
And other reuolutions must reveal,
Other desires, other designs among:
(...) of this, first by degrees shall steal
Upon the souls of men, persuaded wrong: The Church.

And that abused Power, which thus has wrought,
Shall give herself the sword to cut her throat.
35
Go therefore thou, with all thy stirring train
Of swelling Sciences, the gifts of grief:
Go loose the links of that soule-binding chain;
Enlarge this vninquisitiue Belief:
Call-vp men's spirits, that simplenes retain:
Enter their hearts, and Knowledge make the thief
To open all the doors, to let in light;
That all may all things see, but what is right.
36
Opinion Arm against Opinion grown:
Make newborn Contradiction still to rise;
As if Thebes-founder, Cadmus, tongues had sown,
Instead of teeth, for greater mutinies.
Bring new-defended Faith, against Faith known:
Weary the Soul with contrarieties;
Till all Religion become retrograde,
And that fair tire, the mask of sin be made.
37
And, better to effect a speedy end,
Let there be found two fatal Instruments,
The one to publish, the other to defend
Impious Contention, and proud Discontents:
Make, that instamped Characters may send
Abroad, to thousands, thousand men's intent;
And in a moment may dispatch much more,
Then could a world of Pens perform before.
38
Whereby, all quarrels, titles, secrecies,
May unto all be presently made known;
Factions prepared, parties allured to rise,
Sedition under fair pretentions sown:
Whereby, the vulgar may become so wise,
That (with a self-presumption ouer-growne)
They may of deepest mysteries debate,
Control their betters, censure acts of State.
39
And then, when this dispersed mischief shall
Have brought confusion in each mystery,
Call'd-vp contempt of states in general,
Ripened the humor of impiety;
Then have they the other Engine, where-with-all
They may torment their selfe-wrought misery,
And scourge each other, in so strange a wise,
As time or Tyrants never could devise.
40
For, by this stratagem, they shall confound
All th'antient form and discipline of War:
Alter their Camps, alter their fights, their ground,
Daunt mighty spirits, prowess and manhood mar:
For, basest cowardes from a far shall wound
The most courageous, forced to fight afar;
Valor, wrapped up in smoke (as in the night)
Shall perish without witness, without sight.
41
But first, before this general disease
Break forth into so great extreamitie,
Prepare it by degrees; first kill this ease, The many States of Christendom
reduced to a few.

Spoil this proportion, mar this harmony:
Make greater States upon the lesser seize:
Join many kingdoms to one sovereignty:
Raise a few Great, that may (with greater power)
Slaughter each other, and mankind devour.
42
And first begin, with factions to divide
The fairest Land; that from her thrusts the rest,
As if she cared not for the world beside;
A world within her self, with wonders blessed:
Raise such a strife as time shall not decide,
Till the dear blood of most of all her best
Be poured forth; and all her people tossed
With unkind tumults, and almost all lost.
43
Let her be made the sable Stage, whereon
Shall first be acted bloody Tragedies;
That all the neighbor States, gazing thereon,
May make their profit, by her miseries:
And those, whom she before had marched upon,
(Having, by this, both time and mean to rise)
Made martial by her Arms, shall grow so great,
As (save their own) no force shall them defeat:
44
That when their power, unable to sustain
And bear it self, upon it self shall fall,
She may (recovered of her wounds again)
Sit and behold their Parts as tragical:
For, there must come a time, that shall obtain
Truce for (...); when make-peace Hymen shall
Bring the conjoined adverse powers to bed,
And set the Crown (made one) upon one head.
45
Out of which blessed union, shall arise
A sacred branch (with grace and glory blessed)
Whose Virtue shall her Land so patronize,
As all our power shall not her days molest:
For, snee ((...) she) the Minion of the skies,
Shall purchase (of the high st) to hers such rest
((...) between the wrath of heaven and them)
As no (...) shall touch her Diadem:
46
And, from the Rocks of Safety, shall descrie
The wondrous wracks, that Wrath lays ruined;
All round about her, blood and misery,
Powers betrayed, Princes slain, Kings massacred,
States all-confus'd, brought to calamity,
And all the face of Kingdoms altered:
Yet, she the same inviolable stands,
Dear to her own, wonder to other Lands.
47
But, let not her defense discourage thee.
For, never one, but she, shall have this grace,
From all disturbs to be so long kept free,
And with such glory to discharge that place.
And therefore, (...) by such a Power thou be
Stopped of thy course, reckon it no disgrace;
Since she alone (being priuiledg'd from hie)
Has this large Patent of her dignity.
48
This charge the Goddesle gave: when, ready straight
The subtle messenger, accompayned
With all hercrew of Arts that on her wait,
Hastes to effect what she was counseled:
And out she pours, of her immense conceit,
Upon such searching spirits as trauayled
In penetrating hidden secrecies;
Who soon these means of misery devise.
49
And boldly breaking with rebellious mind
Into their mothers close-lockt Treasury,
They Mineralls combustible do find,
Which in (...) concaues placed cunningly
They fire: and fire, imprisoned against kind,
Tears out a way, thrusts out his enemy;
Barking with such a horror, as if wroth
With man, that wrongs himself, and Nature both.
50
And this beginning had this cursed frame, The D. of York being not admitted
into the (...), passed (...) King (...) Bridge, and so into (...), an en Brent
heath (...) (...). (...) (...) (...). The K. makes after, and (...) upon Black
heath: from whence be (...) the 'B. B. of (...) and Ely (...) the E E. of (...)
and Warwike to mediat a peace.

Which York now planted has against his King;
Presuming, by his power, and by the same,
His purpose unto good effect to bring;
When diverse of the grauest Council came,
Sent from the King, to understand what thing
Had thrust him into these proceedings bad,
And what he sought, and what intent he had.
51
Who, with words mildly-sharpe, gently-seuere,
Wrought on those wounds that must be touched with heed;
Applying rather salues of hope, then fear,
Least corrasiues should desperate mischiefs breed.
And, what my Lord (said they) should move you here,
In this unseemly manner to proceed?
Whose worth being such, as all the Land admires,
Has fairer ways then these, to your desires.
52
Will you, whose means, whose many friends, whose grace,
Can work the world in peace unto your will,
Take such a course, as shall your Blood deface,
And make (by handling bad) a good Cause, ill?
How many hearts hazard you in this case,
That in all quiet plots would aid you still?
Having in Court a Party far more strong,
Then you conceive, pressed to redress your wrong.
53
Phy, phy! forsake this hateful course, my Lord:
Down with these Arms; that will but wound your Cause.
What Peace may do, hazard not with the Sword:
Lay down the force that from your force with-drawes;
And yield: and we will mediate such accord
As shall dispense with rigor and the laws;
And interpose this solemn faith of our
Betwixt your fault, and the offended Power.
54
Which ingins of protests, and proffers kind, And (...) the (...) (...) not to
(...) (...) expectation, (...) the kings (...) (...) (...) then his, he (...)
(...) to conditions of (...). (...) D. (...) (...) of the (...) of (...) (...)
from John of Gante, (...) the (...) man (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) qua.
(...).

Urged out of seeming grief and shows of love,
So shook the whole foundation of his Mind,
As they did all his resolution move:
And present seemed unto their course inclined,
So that the King would Sommerset remove;
The man, (...) most intolerable pride
Trod down his worth, and all good men's beside.
55
Which, they there vowed, should presently be done:
For, what will not peace-louers willing grant,
Where dangerous events depend thereon,
And men unfurnished, and the State in want?
And if with words the conquest will be won,
The (...) (...) small: and who holds breath so scant
As then to spare, though with indignity?
" Better descend, then end, in Majesty.
56
And here-upon the Duke (...) his force,
Submits him to the King, on public vow:
The rather too, presuming on this course,
For that his son, the Earl of March, was now
With mightier powers abroad: which would enforce
His peace; which else the King would not allow.
For, seeing not all of him, in him, he has,
His death would but give life to greater wrath.
57
Yet, coming to the King, in former place
(His (...)) the Duke of Sommerset he finds:
Whom openly, reproching to his face,
He charged with treason in the highest kinds.
The Duke returns like speeches of disgrace;
And fiery words bewrayed their flaming minds:
But yet the trial was for them deferd,
Till (...) time allowed it to be heard.
58
At Westminster, a Counsel, sommoned,
Deliberates what course the Cause should end
Of th'apprehended Duke of York; whose head
Does now on others doubtful breath depend.
Law fiercely urged his act, and found him dead:
Friends fayl'd to speak, where they could not defend:
Only the King himself for mercy stood;
As, prodigal of life, niggard of blood.
59
" And, as if angry with the Laws of death,
" Ah! why should you, said he, urge things so far?
" You, that inured with mercenarie breath,
" And hired tongue, so peremptory are;
" Brauing on him whom sorrow prostrateth:
" As if you did with poor Affliction war,
" And prey on frayltie, folly has betrayed;
" Bringing the laws to wound, (...) to aid.
60
" Dispense sometime with stern severity:
" Make not the Laws still traps to apprehend:
" Win grace upon the bad, with clemency.
" Mercy may mend; whom malice made offend.
" Death gives no thanks; but checkes authority:
" And life does only Majesty commend.
" Revenge dies not; Rigor begets new wrath:
" And blood has never glory; Mercy has.
61
" And for my part (and my part should be chief)
" I am most willing to restore his state:
" And rather had I win him with relief,
" Then lose him with despite, and get more hate.
" Pity draws love: bloodshed is natures grief;
" Compassion follows the unfortunate:
" And, losing him, in him I lose my power.
" We rule who live: the dead are none of our.
62
" And should our rigor lessen then the same,
" Which we with greater glory should retain?
" No; let him live: his life must give us fame;
" The child of mercy newly borne again.
" As often burials are Physicians shame;
" So, many deaths argue a Kings hard Reign.
" Why should we say, The Law must have her vigor?
" The Law kills him; but quits not us of rigor.
63
" You, to get more preferment by your wit,
" Others to gain the spoils of misery,
" Labor with all your power to follow it;
" Showing us fears, to draw-on cruelty.
" You urge the offense, not tell us what is fit;
" Abusing wrong-informed Majesty:
" As if our power, were only but to slay;
" And that to save, were a most dangerous way.
64
Thus, out of Pity, spoke that holy King:
Whom mild affections led to hope the best;
When Sommerset began to urge the thing
With words of hotter temper, thus expressed:
" Dear sovereign Lord, the Cause in managing
" Is more then yours; t'imports the public rest:
" We all have part; it touches all our good:
" And life's ill spared, that is spared to cost more blood.
65
" Compassion, here, is cruelty my Lord;
" Pity will cut our throats, for saving so.
" What benefit enjoy we by the sword,
" If mischief shall escape to draw-on mo?
" Why should we give, what Law cannot afford,
" To be accessaries to our proper woe?
" Wisdom must judge, 'twixt men apt to amend,
" And minds incurable, borne to offend.
66
" It is no private Cause (I do protest)
" That moves me thus to prosecute his deed.
" Would God his blood, and mine, had well releast
" The dangers, that his pride is like to breed.
" Although, at me, he seems to have addressed
" His spite; it is not the end he has decreed.
" I am not he alone, he does pursue:
" But, through me, he means to shoot at you.
67
" For, thus, these great Reformers of a State
" (Aspiring to attain the Government)
" Still take advantage of the peoples hate,
" Who ever hate such as are eminent.
" (For, who can great affairs negotiat,
" And all a way ward multitude content?)
" And then these people-minions, they must fall
" To worke-out us, to work themselves int'all.
68
" But note, my Lord, first, who is in your hand;
" Then, how he has offended, what is his end:
" It is the man, whose Race would seem to stand
" Before your Right, and does a Right pretend:
" Who (Traitor-like) has raised a mighty Band,
" With color, your proceedings to amend.
" Which if it should have happened to succeed,
" You had not now sat to adiudge his deed.
69
" If oftentimes the person, not the offense,
" Have been sufficient cause of death to some,
" Where public safety puts in evidence
" Of mischief, likely by their life to come;
" Shall he, whose fortune, and his insolence,
" Have both deserved to die, escape that doom;
" When you shall save your Land, your Crown thereby;
" And since You cannot live, unless He die?
70
Thus spaketh' aggrieued Duke, that gravely saw
Th'incompatible powers of Princes minds;
And what affliction his escape might draw
Unto the State, and people of all kinds:
And yet the humble yielding, and the aw,
Which York there showed, so good opinion finds,
That (with the rumor of his Sons great strength, The D. was suffered to go to
his Castle at Wigmore.

And French affairs) he there came quit at length.
71
For, even the fear t'exasperat the heat
Of The Earl of March, whose forward youth and might
Well followed, seemed a proud revenge to threat,
If any shame should on his Father light:
And then desire in Gascoyne to reget
The glory lost, which home-broyles hinder might,
Aduantaged the Duke, and saved his head;
Which, questionless, had else been hazarded.
72
For, now had Burdeux offered (upon aid) The City of Burdeux send their
Ambassadors ossring to reuols from the French part if aid might be sent unto
them: whereupon, John L. (...) (...). of (...) was employed with a power of
3000 men, and surprised the (...) of (...).

Present revolt, if we would send with speed.
Which fair advantage to have then delayed,
Upon such hopes, had been a shameful deed.
And therefore this, all other courses stayed,
And out wardly these in ward hates agreed;
Giving an interpause to pride and spite:
Which breathed, but to breake-out with greater might.
73
Whilst dreadful Talbot, terror late of France,
(Against the Genius of our Fortune) strove,
The downe-throwne glory of our State t'aduance;
Where, France far more then France he now does prove:
For, friends, opinion, and succeeding chance
(Which wrought the weak to yield, the strong to love)
Were not the same, that he had found before
In happier times; when, less would have done more.
74
For, both the Britain, and Burgonian now, The Dukes of (...) and (...) (...)
great means (...) (...) for the conquering of France.

Came altered with our luck, and won with theirs
(Those bridges, and the gates, that did allow
So easy passage unto our affairs)
Judging it safer to endeavor how
To link with strength, then lean unto despaires.
" And, who wants friends, to back what he begins,
" In Lands far off, gets not, although he wins.
75
Which too well proved this fatal enterprise,
The last, that lost us all we had to lose,
Where, though aduantag'd by some mutinies,
And petty Lords, that in our Cause arose:
Yet those great fayl'd; whose ready quick supplies,
Ever at hand, cheered us, and quail'd our foes.
Succors, from far, come seldom to our mind.
" For, who holds league with Neptune, and the wind?
76
Yet, worthy Talbot, thou did so employ The (...). of Shrews. (...)
accompayned (...) (...) (...) Sir (...) I albot, L. (...) by the right of (...)
(...), with the L L. Mohn, (...), and Cameis, Sir (...) (...) Sir John (...)
and (...), recovered (...) towns in Gaseony: amongst other, the town, and
Castle of Chastillon in (...) which the French love after besieged.

The broken remnants of disscattered power,
That they might see it was our destiny,
Not want of spirit, that lost us what was our:
Thy dying hand sold them the victory
With so dear wounds, as made the conquest sour:
So much it cost to spoil who were undone;
And such ado to win, when they had won.
77
For, as a fierce courageous Mastiue fares;
That, having once sure fast'ned on his foe,
Lies tugging on that hold, never forbeares,
What force soever force him to for go:
The more he feels his wounds, the more he dares;
As if his death were sweet, in dying so:
So held his hold this Lord, whilst he held breath;
And scarce, but with much blood, lets go in death.
78
For, though he saw prepared, against his side,
Both unlike fortune, and unequal force,
Borne with the swelling current of their pride
Down the maine stream of a most happy course:
Yet stands he stiff, vndasht, vnterrifi'd;
His mind the same, although his fortune worse:
Virtue in greatest dangers being best shown;
And though oppressed, yet never ouer-throwne.
79
For, rescuing of besieged Chatillion
(Where having first constraind the French to fly,
And following hard on their confusion)
Comes (lo) incountred with a strong supply
Of fresh-arriuing powers, that back thrust-on
Those flying troops, another chance to try:
Who, double armed, with shame, and fury, strain
To wreake their foil, and win their fame again.
80
Which seeing, th'vndaunted Talbot (with more might
Of spirit to will, then hands of power to do)
Preparing t'entertaine a glorious fight,
Cheeres-vp his wearied Soldiers thereunto.
" Courage, says he: those brauing troops, in sight,
" Are but the same, that now you did undo.
" And what if there be come some more then they?
" They come to bring more glory to the day.
81
" Which day, must either thrust us out of all;
" Or all, with greater glory, back restore.
" This day, your valiant worth adventure shall,
" For what our Land shall never fight for, more.
" If now we fail, with us is like to fall
" All that renown which we have got before.
" This is the last: if we discharge the same,
" The same shall last to our eternal fame.
82
" Never had worthy men, for any fact,
" A more fair glorious Theater, then we;
" Whereon true Magnanimicie might act
" Brave deeds, which better witnessed could be.
" For, lo, from (...) Turrets, yet vnsackt,
" Your valiant fellows stand, your worth to see,
" T'auouch your valor, if you live to gain;
" And if we die, that we (...) not in vain.
83
" And even our foes (whose proud and powreful might
" Would seem to swallow up our dignity)
" Shall not keep-backe the glory of our right;
" Which their confounded blood shall testify:
" For, in their wounds, our goarie swords shall write
" The monumentes of our eternity:
" For, vile is honor, and a title vain,
" The which, true worth and danger do not gain.
84
" For, they shall see, when we (in careless sort)
" Shall throw our selves on their despised spears.
" It Is not despair, that does us so transport:
" But even true Fortitude, that nothing fears;
" Since we may well retire us, in some sort:
" But, shame on him that such a foul thought bears.
" For, be they more, let Fortune take their part,
" We Will tugge her too, and scratch her, ere we part.
85
This said; a fresh infused desire of fame
Enters their warmed blood, with such a will,
That they deemed long, they were not at the game;
And, though they (...) apace, thought they stood still,
And that their lingering foes too slowely came
To join with them, spending much time but ill:
Such force had words, fierce humors up to call,
Sent from the mouth of such a General.
86
Who yet, his forces weighing (with their fire) The Lord Lisle was advised by
his father to retire him (...) of the (...).

Turns him about, in private, to his Son
(A worthy Son, and worthy such a Sire)
And tells him, what ground he stood upon,
Aduising him in secret to retire;
Considering how his youth, but now begun,
Would make it unto him, at all, no stain:
His death small fame, his flight no shame could gain.
87
To whom, th'aggrieued Son (as if disgraced)
" Ah Father, have you then selected me
" To be the man, whom you would have displac't
" Out of the roll of Immortality?
" What have I done this day, that has defaced
" My worth, that my hands work despised should be?
" God shield, I should bear home a Cowards name.
" He long enough has lived, who dies with fame.
88
At which, the Father, touched with sorrowing-ioy,
Turned him about (shaking his head) and says;
" O my dear Son, worthy a better day,
" To enter thy first youth, in hard assayes.
And now had Wrath, impatient (...) delay,
Begun the fight, and farther speeches stays:
Fury thrustes on; striving, whose sword should be
First warmed, in the wounds of the enemy.
89
Hotly these small, but mightie-minded, Bands.
(As if ambitious now of death) do strain
Against innumerable armed hands,
And gloriously a wondrous fight maintain;
Rushing on all what-euer strength withstands,
Whetting their wrath on blood, and on disdain;
And so far thrust, that hard 'twere to descry
Whether they more desire to kill, or dye.
90
Frank of their own, greedy of others blood,
No stroke they give, but wounds; no wound, but kills:
Near to their hate, close to their work they stood,
Hit where they would, their hand obeyes their wills;
Scorning the blow from far, that does no good,
Loathing the crack, unless some blood it spils:
No wounds could let-out life that wrath held in,
Till others wounds, revenged, did first begin.
91
So much, true resolution wrought in those
Who had made covenant with death before,
That their small number (scorning so great foes)
Made France most happy, that there were no more;
And Fortune doubt to whom she might dispose
That weary day; or unto whom restore
The glory of a Conquest dearly bought,
Which scarce the Conqueror could think well got.
92
For, as with equal rage, and equal might,
Two adverse winds combat, with billows proud,
And neither yield; Seas, skies maintain like fight,
Wave against wave opposed, and clowd to clowd:
So war both sides, with obstinate despite,
With like revenge, and neither party bowed;
Fronting each other with confounding blows,
No wound, one sword, unto the other owes:
93
Whilst Talbot (whose fresh ardor having got
A marvelous advantage of his years)
Carries his unfelt age, as if forgot,
Whirling about, where any need appears:
His hand, his eye, his wits all present, wrought
The function of the glorious Part he bears:
Now urging here, now cheering there, he flies,
Vnlockes the thickest troops, where most force lies.
94
In midst of wrath, of wounds, of blood, and death,
There is he most, where as he may do best:
And there the closest ranks he seuereth,
Driues-back the stoutest powers, that forward pressed:
There makes his sword his way: there laboreth
Th'infatigable hand that never ceast;
Scorning, unto his mortal wounds to yield;
Till Death became best master of the Field.
95
Then like a sturdy Oak, that having long, The death of John L. Talbot E. of
Shrewesburie; who had served in the (...) of (...) most (...) for the space of
30. years.

Against the wars of fiercest winds, made head,
When (withsome forced tempestuous rage, more strong)
His down-borne top comes ouer-maistered,
All the near bordering Trees (he stood among)
Crushed with his weighty fall, lie ruined:
So lay his spoils, all round about him slain,
T'adorne his death, that could not die in vain.
96
On the other part, his most all-daring (...) The death of the (...) (...),
Son to (...) worthy (...) Shrewesburie.

(Although the inexperience of his years
Made him less skild in what was to be done;
And yet did carry him beyond all fears)
Into the maine Battalion, thrusting on
Near to the King, amidst the chiefest Peers,
With thousand wounds, became at length oppressed;
As if he scorned to die, but with the best.
97
Who thus both, having gaind a glorious end,
Soon ended that great day; that set so red,
As all the purple Plains, that wide extend,
A sad tempestuous season witnessed.
So much ado had toyling France to rend,
From us, the right so long inherited:
And so hard went we from what we posseft,
As with it went the blood we loved best.
98
Which blood, not lost, but fast laid up with heed
In everlasting fame, is there held dear, 1453. (...). 32. (...) was the (...)
of Aquitaine lost; which (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the Crow of England, by
the space almost of 300 years. The (...) whereof came (...) the (...) of K
Hen. 2. with (...), daughter to (...) D. of (...).

To seal the memory of this days deed;
The Eternal evidence of what we were:
To which, our Fathers, we, and who succeed,
Do owe a sigh, for that it touched us near:
Nor must we sin so much, as to neglect
The holy thought of such a dear respect.
99
Yet happy-hapless day, blessed ill-lost breath,
Both for our better fortune, and your ownel In this (...), are 4. (...), 24.
(...), 50. (...), 202. Baronies, and above a 1000. (...), and (...).

For, what foul wounds, what spoil, what shameful death,
Had by this forward resolution grown,
If at S. Albons, Wakefield, (...)-heath,
It should unto your infamy been shown?
Blessed you, that did not teach how great a fault
Even Virtue is, in actions that are naught.
100
Yet, would this sad days loss had now been all,
That this day lost: then should we not much plain,
If hereby we had com'n but there to fall;
And that day, ended, ended had our pain:
Then small the loss of France, of Guien small;
Nothing the shame to be turned home again,
Compard with other shames. But now, France, lost,
Sheds us more blood, then all her winning cost.
101
For, losing war abroad, at home lost peace;
Be'ing with our vnsupporting selves close pent;
And no dessignes for pride (that did increase)
But our own throats; and our own punishment;
The working spirit ceast not, though work did cease,
Having fit time to practice discontent,
And stir up such as could not long lie still:
" Who, not employed to good, must needs do ill.
102
And now this grief of our received shame,
Gave fit occasion, for ambitious care,
To draw the chief reproach of all the same
On such as obuious unto hatred are,
Th'especiall men of State: who, all the blame
Of whatsoever Fortune does, must bear.
For, still, in vulgar ears delight it breeds, York procures the hatred of
the people, against the Duke of (...): and so wrought (in a time of the Kings
sickness) that he caused him to be arrested in the Qu. great Chamber, and sent
to the Tower of Lo^ don; accusing him to have been the occasion of the loss of
France: but the K. being recovered, he was again (...) at liberty, Ann. reg.
32. The D. of York, (...) his accusations not to (...) against the D. of Some.
resolves to (...) his purpose by open war: and so being in Wales, accompanied
(...) his special (...), assembled an Army, and marched toward London.

To have the hated, authors of misdeeds.
103
And therefore, easily, great Sommerset
(Whom envy long had singled out before)
With all the vollie of disgraces met,
As the only mark that Fortune placed therefore:
On whose ill-wrought opinion, Spite did whet
The edge of wrath, to make it pearce the more:
And grief was glad to have gotten now on whom
To lay the fault of what must light on some.
104
Whereon, th'againe out-breaking York begins
To build new modules of his old desire.
And se'ing the booty Fortune for him winnes,
Upon the ground of this in kind ledire,
He takes th'aduantages of others sins
To ay de his own, and help him to aspire.
For, doubting, peace should better scanne deeds past,
He thinks not safe, to have his sword out, last:
105
Especially, since every man (now pressed
To innovation) do with rancor swell:
A stirring humor gen'rally possessed
Those peace-spilt times, weary of being well:
The weak with wrongs, the happy tired with rest,
And many mad; for what, they could not tell:
The World, even great with Change, thought it went wrong
To stay beyond the bearing-time, so long.
106
And therefore now these Lords confedered
(Being much increast in number and in spite)
So shaped their course, that gathering to a head,
They grew to be of formidable might:
The Abused world, so hastily is led
(Some for revenge, some for wealth, some for delight)
That York, from small-beginning troops, soon draws
A world of men, to venture in his Cause.
107
Like as proud Seuerne, from a private head,
With humble streams at first, does gently glide,
Till other Rivers have contributed
The springing riches of their store beside;
Wherewith at length high-swelling, she does spread,
Her broad-distended waters laid so wide, K. Hen. sets forward (...) London
with 20000 me^ of war, to encounter with the D. of York; attended with Hums.
D. of Buckingh. and Humfry his son, E. (...), Edm. D. of So^mers. Hen. (...),
E. of North. Ia. Butler. E. of (...). and Ormond, Jasper, E. of Pembrooke, the
son of Owen Tewder, half brother to the K. Tho. Courtney, E. of Deuonsh.
Ioh. L. Clifford, the L L. Sudley, Barnes, Ross, and others.

That coming to the Sea, she seems, from far,
Not to have tribute brought, but rather war:
108
Even so is York now grown, and now is bent
T'incounter with the best, and for the best.
Whose near approach the King hastes to prevent,
With hope, far off to have his power suppressed;
Fearing the City, least some insolent,
And mutinous, should harten on the rest
To take his part. But he so forward set,
That at S. Albones both the Armies met.
109
Where-to, their haste far fewer hands did bring,
Then else their better leisure would have done:
And yet too many for so foul a thing;
Since who did best, has but dishonor won:
For, whilst some offer peace, sent from the King,
Warwicks too forward hand has War begone;
A war, that does the face of War deforme:
Which still is foul; but foulest, wanting form.
110 The D. of York, with the L L. pitched their bat (...) without the town,
in a place called Keyfield: and the K. power (to their great disadvantage)
took up the town: where being (...) and wanting room to use their power,
were (...) overthrown and slaughtered. On the K. side, were (...) Edm. D. of
Summers. who (...) behind him 3 sons, Hen. ry, Edm. and Ioh. Here was also
slain, the E. of (...), the E. Stafford, the L. Clifford, Sir Rob. Vere, with
diverse others to the number of 5000: and on the L L. part, but 600. And this
was the first battle at S. Albones, the 23 of May, Ann. reg. 33. The D. of
York, with other L L. came to the K. where he was, and (...) grace and (...)
nesse on their knees, of that that they had done in his presence, intending
nothing but for the good of him and his kingdom: with who^ they removed to
London; concluding there to hold a Parliament, the 9 of July following.

And, never valiant Leaders (so well known
For brave performed actions done before)
Did blemish their discretion and renown
In any weak effected service more;
Bringing such powers into so straight a Town,
As to some Citty-tumult or vp-rore:
Which, slaughter, and no battle, might be thought;
Since that side used their swords, and this their throat.
111
But this, on th'error of the King, is laid,
And upon Sommersets desire t'obtaine
The day with peace: for which they longer staid
Then wisdom would, aduent'ring for the Maine:
Whose force, in narrow streets once ouer-laid,
Never recouerd head: but even there slain
The Duke and all the greatest Leaders are;
The King himself being taken prisoner.
112
Yet not a prisoner to the outward eye,
For-that he must seem graced with his lost day;
All things being done for his commodity,
Against such men as did the State betray:
For, with such apt deceiving (...)
And seeming order, York did so allay
That touch of wrong, as made him make great stealth
In weaker minds, with show of Commonwealth.
113
Long-lookt-for power thus got into his hand,
The former face of Court does new appear:
Ric. E. of (...). made L. (...). (...) the E. of Warwick. Governor of (...).
And all th'especiall Charges of Command,
To his partakers distributed were:
Himself is made Protector of the Land.
A title found, which covertly did bear
All-working power under another style;
And yet the sovereign Part does act the while.
114
The King held only but an empty name,
Left, with his life: whereof the proof was such,
As sharpest pride could not transpearce the same,
Nor all-desiring greediness durst touch:
Impiety had not enlarged their shame
As yet so wide, as to attempt so much:
Mischief was not full ripe, for such foul deeds;
Left, for th'vnbounded malice that succeedes.
The end of the Sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The King's repriz'd: York, and his side retires;
And making head again, is put to flight:
Returns into the Land, his right requires:
Having regained the King, confirms his right:
And, whilst his rash improuidence aspires,
Is (...) at Wakefield, by Q. Marg'rets might:
Who, at S. Albones, back her Lord regaines;
Is forced from thence: and March the Crown attaines.
1 The D. of York, in respect that K. Hen. for his (...) of life, and
clemency, was highly esteemed of the Commons, durst not attempt any violent
course against his person: but only labors to strengthen his own party:
which he could not do, but by the oppression and displacing of many worthy
men; with committing other violencies, whereunto (...) enforced him, for the
preserment of his friends. which raisd a greater party against him, then that
he made.

DIsordinate Authority, thus gaind,
Knew not at first, or durst not to proceed
With an out-breaking course; but stood restraind
Within the compass of respective heed:
Distrust of friends, and power of foes, detaind
That mounting will, from making too much speed:
For, though he held the power he longd to win,
Yet had not all the keys to let him in.
2
The Queen abroad, with a revenging hand
(Armed with her own disgrace, and others spite,
Gathering the oppressed party of the Land)
Held over him the threatening sword of might;
That forced him, in the terms of awe, to stand
(Who else had burst-vp Right, to come to his right)
And kept him so confused, that he knew not
To make use of the means, which he had got.
3
For, either by his fearing to restrain
The person of the King; or by neglect
Of guarding him with a sufficient train,
The watchful Queen, with cunning, does effect
A practice that recouers him again
(As one that with best care could him protect:)
And h'is conuaid to Couentry, to those
Who well knew how of Majesty dispose.
4
Though this weak King had blunted thus before
The edge of power, with so dull clemency,
And left him nothing else was gracious, more
Then even the title of his Sov'raigntie;
Yet is that title ofso precious store,
As it makes, golden, leaden Majesty:
And where, or how-soeuer it does sit,
Is sure to have the world attend on it.
5
Whether it be, that Form, and Eminence,
Adorned with Pomp and State, begets this awe:
Or, whether an inbred obedience
To Right and Power, does our affections draw:
Or, whether sacred Kings work reverence,
And make that Nature now, which was first Law,
We know not: but, the Head will draw the Parts;
And good Kings, with our bodies, have our hearts.
6
For, lo, no sooner was his person joined The Queen with her Party, having
recovered the K. and withdrawing him far from Lon. (where they found the D. of
York was too much favored by the Citizens) grew to be very strong, by means
that so many Ll. and much people, oppressed and discontented with these
proceedings of their enemies, resorted daily unto the^. Whereupon, the K.
so^moned the D. and his adherents, to appear before him at Couentry: but they,
finding their present strength, not sufficient to make good their answer,
retired the^ selves into several parts. The D. of York withdrawes him to
Wigmore, in Wales: the E. of Salisb. into the North, the E. of Warw. to Calais.

With this distracted body of his friends;
But, straight the Duke, and all that faction find,
They lost the only Engine for their ends:
Authority, with Majesty combined,
Stands bent upon them now, and powrefull sends
Them summons to appear, who lately held
That power themselves, and could not be compeld.
7
Wherewith confused, as either not prepared
For all events; or se'ing the times not fit;
Or men's affections, failing in regard;
Or their own forces, not of power as yet:
They all retire them home; and neither dared
T'appeare, or to stand-out to answer it.
This vnfore-thought-on accident, confounds
All their dessignes, and frustrates all their grounds:
8
As usually it fares, with those that plot
These machines of Ambition, and high pride;
Who (in their chiefest counsels ouer-shot)
For all things save what serve the turn, provide;
Whilst that, which most imports, rests most forgot,
Or waigh'd not, or contemned, or vndescri'd;
That something may be ever ouer-gone,
Where courses shall be crossed, and men undone.
9
York into Wales, Warwick to Calais hies,
Someto the North, others to other parts;
As if they ran both from their dignities,
And also from themselves, and their own hearts:
" (The mind decayed, in public ieopardies,
" To the will at hand, only it self conuerts)
That none would think, Yorkes hopes, being so near dry,
Could ever flow again, and swell so hie.
10
And yet, for all this ebbing Chance, remains
The spring that feeds that hope (which leaves men last):
Whom no'affliction so entire restraines,
But that it may remount, as in times past:
Though he had lost his place, his power, his pains;
Yet held his love, his friends, his title fast:
The whole frame of that fortune could not fail;
As that, which hung by more then by one nail.
11
Else might we think, what error had it bin,
These parts thus sev'red, not to have quite destroyed;
But that they saw it not the way to win.
Some more dependances there were beside:
Which, Age, and Fate, keeps us from looking in,
That their true Counsels come not right descri'd;
Which, our presumptuous wits must not condem:
They be'ing not ignorant; but we, of them.
12
For, here, we look upon another Crown,
An other image of Nobility
(Which civil Discord had not yet brought down
Unto a lower range of dignity);
Upon a Power as yet not ouer-flowne
With The Ocean of all-drowning Sov'raintie.
These Lords, who thus against their Kings draw swords,
Taught Kings to come, how to be more then Lords.
13
Which well this Queen observed; and therefore sought Diverse grave persons
were sent to the (...) York to mediat a (...): and a great Council was called
at London, Ann. reg. 36, to agree all disserences: Whither came the E. of Salis.
with 500. men, the D. os York with 400. and was lodged at his house, at
Bainards Castle.

To draw them in, and ruin them with Peace;
Whom Force (she saw) more dangerous had wrought,
And did their power and malice but increase:
And therefore, to the City having got,
A Counsel was convok't, all iarres to cease:
Where come these Lords at length; but yet so strong,
As if to do, rather then suffer wrong.
14
Here Scottish border broils, and fears of France,
Urged with the present times necessity,
Brought forth a suttle-shadowed countenance
Of quiet peace, resembling Amity;
Wrapped in a strong and curious ordinance,
Of many Articles, bound solemnly:
As if those Gordian knots could be so (...), The Dukes of Excester, and
Somerset, with 800. men, lodged without Temple Bar. The E. of Northu^. the I. L
Egremo^t and Clif ford with 1500, and lodged without the City: The E. of
Warwick from Calais with 600. men al in his livery. The L. Mayor kept
continual watch with 2000. men in armor during the treaty. Where in by the
great travail and exbortation of the (...) of Canterbury, with other grave
Prelates, a reconciliation was (...), and celebrated with a solemn procession.

As no impatient sword could them divide:
15
Especially, whereas the self same ends
Concur not in a point of like respect;
But that each party covertly intends
Thereby their own designments to effect:
Which Peace, with more indangering wounds, offends,
Then War can do; that stands upon suspect,
And never can be tied with other chain,
Then intermutuall benefit and gain.
16
As well by this concluded Act is seen:
Which had no power to holde-in minds, out-bent;
But quickly was dissolved and canceld cleene,
Either by Warwicks fortune or intent.
How ever urged, the Servants of the Queen
Assaulted his, as he from Counsel went:
Where, his own person, egerly (...),
Hardly (by Boat) (...) the multitude.
17
Which deed, most heinous made, and urged as his,
The Queen (who soon the advantage apprehends)
Thought forthwith (...) committed him on this:
But, he preuents, (...) (...) (...) friends,
Shows them his danger, and (...) (...) there is The E. os War. wicke is set
upon by the Queens servants.

In her, that all their overthrows (...);
" And that these (...) the effects of this Peace are:
" Which gives more deadly wounding blows, then war.
18
Struck with his heat, began the others fire
(Kindled with danger, and disdain) t'inflame:
Which having well prepared, to his desire,
He leaves the farther growing of the same,
And unto Calais (to his strong retire)
With speed betakes him, to prevent the same
Of his imposed offense; least, in disgrace,
He might be dispossessed of that place.
19
York straight advised the Earl of Salsbury,
T'addresse him to the King: and there upon,
With other grieuances, to signify
Th'iniurious act committed on his Son;
And there, to urge the breach of th'Amitie,
By these sinister plots to be begun:
But, he so strongly goes, as men might guess,
He purposed not to crave, but make redress.
20
Whom, the Lord Audly, hasting to restrain, (...) Tuichet L. Audly slain at
Blore heath and his army discomfited by the E. of Salisb. with the loss of
2400. men. An. reg. 38.

(Sent, with tenthousand men, well furnished)
Encountered on Blore-heath; where he is slain,
And all his power and force discomfited:
Which chance, so opened and let-out again
The hopes of York (whom Peace had fettered)
That he resolves, what-euer should befall,
To set vp's Rest, to venture now for all.
21
Fury, vnti'd, and broken out of bands,
Runs desperate presently to either head:
Faction and War (that never wanted hands
For Blood and Mischief) soon were furnished:
Affection finds a side: and out it stands;
Not by the Cause, but by her interest led:
And many, urging War, most forward are;
" Not that't is just, but only that it is War.
22
Whereby, the Duke is grownet'a mighty head
In Shropshire, with his Welsh and Northren aid:
To whom came Warwick, having ordered
His charge at Calais; and with him conuay'd
Many brave Leaders, that adventured Sir Andrew Trollop, afterward fled to the
King. John Blu^e remainde (...) the Lords.

Their fortunes on the side that he had laid:
Whereof as chief, Trollop and Blunt excelled:
But, Trollop fayld his friends; Blunt faithful held.
23
The King (prouok't these mischiefs to prevent,
Followed with Sommerset and Excester)
Strongly appointed, all his forces bent,
Their malice to correct or to deter:
And, drawing near, a reverent Prelate sent The King, being at Worcester,
sends the B. of (...) (...) to the L L. to induce (...) them to peace, and to
offer pardon.

To proffer pardon, if they would refer
Their Cause to Peace; as being a cleaner course
Unto their ends, then this foul barbarous force.
24
" For, what a war, said he, is here begun,
" Where even the victory is held accursed?
" And who-so winnes, it will be so ill won,
" That though he have the best, he speeds the worst.
" For, here your making, is, to be undone;
" Seeking t'obtaine the State, you lose it first:
" Both sides being one, the blood consumed all one;
" To make it yours, you work to have it none.
25
" Leave then with this, though this be yet a stain
" T'attempt this sin, to be so near a fall.
" The doubtful Dye of war, cast at the Maine,
" Is such, as one bad chance may lose you all.
" A certain sin, seeks an uncertain gain:
" Which, got, your selves even wayle and pity shall.
" No way, but Peace, leads out from blood and fears;
" To free your selves, the Land, and us, from tears.
26
Whereto the discontented part replies;
" That they, hereto by others wrongs enforced,
" Had no way else but these extremities,
" And worst meants of redress, t'auoide the worst.
" For, since that peace did but their spoils devise,
" And held them out from grace (as men diuorc't
" From th'honors, that their fortunes did afford)
" Better die with the sword, then by the sword.
27
" For, if pacts, vows, or oaths, could have done ought,
" There had enough been done: but, to no end
" Save to their ruin, who had ever sought
" To'auoide these broyls, as grieuing to contend;
" Smothring disgraces, drawing to parts remote,
" As exiled men: where now they were, to attend
" His Grace with all respect, and reverence;
" Not with the sword of malice, but defense.
28
Whereby, they showed, that words were not to win: The Bishop of Salisbury
offered pardon, to all such as would submit themselves

But yet the Pardon works so feelingly,
That to the King, that very night, came-in
Sir Andrew Trollop, with some company,
Contented to redeem his sin with sin;
Disloyalty, with infidelity:
And, by this means, became discovered quite
All th'orders of th'intended next days fight.
29
Which so much wrought upon their weakened fears, The D. of York, with his
youngest son the E of Rutland, w^ithdrew him into Ireland where he was
exceedingly beloved.

That presently their Camp brake up, ere day;
And every man with all his speed prepares,
According to their course, to shift their way.
York, with his youngest Son, tow'ards Ireland bears;
Warwick to Calais, where his safety lay;
To that sure harbor of conspiracy,
Enuies Retreit, Rebellions nursery.
30
Which fatal place, seems that with either hand
Is made to offend. For, France sh'afflicts with the one: The (...) of Calais at
that time.

And with the other, did infest this Land;
As if ordained to do good to none:
But, as a Gate to both our ills did stand,
To let-out plagues on us, and int'her own:
A part without us, that small good has bin;
But to keep, less entire, the whole within.
31
And there, as in their all and best support,
Is Warwick got, with March and Salsbury;
When all the Gates of England, every Port
And Shore close-shut, debarres their (...);
Locked out from all; and all left in that sort,
As no means seems can ay de their misery.
This wound, given without blow, weakens them more,
Then all their loss of blood had done before.
32
For, now again upon them frowningly
(...) Power with Fortune, trampling on their Sates;
And brands them with the marks of Infamy;
Rebellions, Treasons, and Assassinats;
Attaints their Blood, in all Posterity;
Ransacks their Lands, spoils their Confederats;
And lays so hideous colors on their crimes,
As would have terrified more timorous times;
33
But, here could do no good: for why? this Age,
Being in a course of motion, could not rest,
Until the revolution of their rage
Came to that point, whereto it was addressed.
Misfortune, crosses, ruin, could not swage
That heat of hope, or of revenge, at least.
" The World, once set a-worke, cannot soon cease;
" Nor ever is the same, it is in peace.
34
For, other motions, other interests here,
The acting spirits up and awake do keep:
" Faith, friendship, honor is more sure, more dear,
" And more it self, then when it is asleep:
Worth will stand-out, and does no shadows fear:
(...) make impressions far more deep;
When Ease, (...) it will stir, or break her rest,
Lies still, bears all, content to be oppressed.
35
York, and his side, could not, while life remained,
Though thus dispersed, but work and interdeale:
Nor any sword, at home, could keep restrained
Th'out-breaking powers of this innated zeal.
This humor had so large a passage gained,
On the inward body of the Commonweal;
That 'twas impossible to stop, by force,
This current of affections violent course.
36 Hen. the young D. of Summers. was, in An. reg. 37, made Captain of (...)
and a (...) seal sent to the E. os (...), to discharge him os that place: who,
in respect he was made Captain there by (...) (...), would not obey the (...)
(...).

Yet they at home (disorder to keep forth)
Did all what power could do, or wit invent;
Placed, in th'auoided rooms, men of great worth;
Young Sommerset, with strength to Calais sent;
Northumberland and (...) to the North;
(Whereof They only had the government)
Defend all landings, bar all (...),
Strive to redress the public grieuances:
37
And, to this end, summon a Parliament:
Wherein, when as the godly King would not,
Unto th'attainder of the Lords, consent;
The Queen in grief (and in her passions hot) The Parliament at Couentry.

Breaks out in speech, lovingly violent:
" And what (says she) my Lord, have vou forgot
" To rule and be a King? Why will you thus
" Bemilde to them, and cruel unto us?
38
" What good have you procured by clemency,
" But given to wild presumption much more head?
" And now what cure, what other remedy
" Can to our desp'rat wounds be ministered?
" Men are not good, but for necessity;
" Nor orderly are ever borne, but bred.
" Sad want, and poverty, makes men industrious:
" But, Law must make them good, and fear obsequious.
39
" My Lord; He gouerns well, that is well obayd:
" And temp'rat Rigor ever safely sits.
" For, as to him, who Cotis did vpbraid,
" And called his rigor, madness, raging fits; Cotis, a Tyrant of Thrace.

" Content thee, thou unskillful man, he said,
" My madness keeps my Subjects in their wits:
" So, to like course my Lord, you are forced to fall;
" Or else you must, in the end, undo us all.
40
" Look but, I pray, on this dear part of you;
" This branch (sprung from your blood) your own aspect:
" Look on this Child, and think what shall ensue
" To this fair hope of ours, by (...) neglect.
" Though you respect not us, wrong not his due,
" That must his right, left you, from you expect;
" The right of the renowned Lancasters,
" His fathers fathers, and great grandfathers.
41
" Then turns t'her son: O son! do thou not see?
" He is not moved, nor touched, nor weighes our tears.
" What shall I do? What hope is left for me,
" When he wants will to help, and thou wantst years?
" Could yet these hands of thine but partners be
" In these my labors, to keep-out our fears,
" How well were I? that now alone must toil,
" And turn, and toss; and yet undone the while.
42
" I know, if thou could help, thy mother thus
" Should not beyond her strength endure so much;
" Nor these proud Rebels, that would ruin us,
" Escape with their heinous treasons, without touch:
" I know, thou would conceive how dangerous
" Mercy were unto those, whose hopes are such;
" And not preserve whom Law has ouer-throwne,
" Saving their liuely-hood, to lose our own.
43
" But, since thou can not, nor I able am,
" Thou must no more expect of me, dear Son;
" Nor yet, in time to come, thy Mother blame,
" If thou, by others weakness be undone.
" The world, with me, must testify the same,
" That I have done my best, what could be done;
" And have not failed, with hazard of my life,
" The duty of a mother and a wife.
44
" But well; I see which way the world will go:
" And let it go: and so turns her about,
" Full, with stout grief, and with disdainefull woe;
" Which, now, her words shut-vp, her looks let-out.
" The cast of her side-bended eye, did show
" Both sorrow and reproof; se'ing so great doubt,
" And no power to redress, but stand and vex,
" Imprisoned in the setters of her sex.
45
Yet, so much wrought these moving arguments At this Parliament at Couentry, in
the year 1459, in the 38 of Hen. 6. (...) (...). D. os York, with his son
Edw. and all his posterity, and partakers, attainted, to the ninth degree,
their goods and (...) escheated, (...) tenants spoiled of their goods, the
Town of (...) (...) to the D. of York (...), and the Duchess of York
sporled of her goods. (...) D. (...) Sommerset with the L L. Audly, and Rosy
attempted the town (...) (...), (...) were repulst; (...) (...) (...) (...) to
the E. of War and himself hardly escaped.

(Drawn from that blood, where Nature urged her Right)
As his all-vpward tending zeal relents;
And, downward to his State, (...) his sight:
And so, to their Attainders he consents;
Provided, He, on their submission, might
Out of his Princely power, in his own name,
Without a Parliament, revoke the same.
46
Whilst Sommerset with maine endeavor lay
To get his given (but vngot) government,
The stout Calisians (bent another way)
Fiercely repel him, frustrate his intent:
Yet takes he Guines, landing at Whit sandbay:
Where-as the swords, he brought, would not consent
To wound his foes: the fight no rancor has:
Malice was friends: and War was without wrath.
47
Though he their hands, yet Warwick had their hearts:
To whom both men and shipping they betrayed;
Whilst Englands (though debarred) shore imparts,
To him, herother-where intended ay de:
For, the Lord Rivers, passing to those parts, The (...). (...), and his son
Sir (...) (...), were taken by John (...), at Sandwich; whether they were sent
to guard the town, and supply the D. of (...).

To Have fresh supplies unto the Duke conuay'd;
At Sandwich, with his Son accompayned,
Staying for wind, was taken in his bed.
48
Whose shipping, and provisions, Warwick takes
For Ireland, with his Chieftaine to confer:
And within thirty days this voyage makes, The E. of Warwick sailed into
Ireland to conserre with the D. of York.

And backe-returnes, ere known to have been there:
So that the heavens, the sea, the wind partakes
With him; as if they of his faction were;
Or that his spirit and valor were combined,
With destiny, to effect what he designed.
49
Which working, though without, and on the shore,
Reached yet unto the center of the Land;
Searched all those humors that were bred before;
Shakes the whole frame, whereon the State did stand;
" Affection, pity, fortune, fear being more
" Far off and absent, then they are at hand.
" Pity becomes a traitor with the oppressed:
" And many have been raised, by being suppressed.
49
For, they had left, although themselves were gone,
Opinion and their memory behind.
Which so preuayles, that naught could here be done,
But straight was known as soon as once designed:
Court, Councell-chamber, Closet, all were won,
To be reuealers of the Princes mind:
So false is Faction, and so smooth a liar,
As that it never had a side entire.
50
Whereby, th'exil'd had leisure to prevent, (...) L. Faulconbridge, sent to
Sandwich, took the Town and Sir Simon Monfort Governor thereof.

And circumuent, what-euer was deuiz'd:
Which made, that Faulconbridge, to Sandwich bent,
That Fortress and the Governor surpised;
Who, presently from thence to Calais sent,
Had his vnguiltie blood there sacrifiz'd:
And Faulconbridge, returning back, relates
The Affection here, and zeal of all estates.
51
Drawn with which news, and with a spirit that dared
T'attempt on any likelihood of support;
They take the advantage of so great regard;
Their landing here secured them in such sort,
By Faulconbridge; the fatal bridge prepared
To be the way of blood, and to transport
Returning fury to make greater wounds
Then ever England saw within her bounds.
52
And but with fifteen hundred men do land,
Upon a Land, with many millions stored:
So much, did high-presuming Courage stand
On th'ayde, home-disobedience would afford.
Nor were their hopes deceived: for, such a hand
Had Innovation ready for the sword,
As ere they near unto the City drew,
Their power beyond all former greatness grew.
53
Muse, what may we imagine was the Cause
That Fury works thus universally?
What humor, what affection, is it, draws
Sides, of such power, to this Nobility?
Was it their Conscience, to redress the Laws;
Or malice, to a wrong-plac't Sov'raintie,
That caused them (more then wealth, or life) desire
Destruction, ruin, bloodshed, sword and fire?
54
Or was the Power of Lords (thus inter-plac't
Betwixt the height of Princes, and the State)
The Occasion that the people so embraced
Their actions, and attend on this Debate?
Or had their Greatness, with their Worth, imbas't
The Touch of Royalty to so low rate,
As their opinion could such tumults move?
Then Power, and Virtue, you contagious prove.
55
And Perianders leuell'd Ears of Corn
Show what is fittest for the public Rest;
And that the highest Minions which adorn
A Commonweal (and do become it best)
Are Zeal and Justice, Law, and Customs, borne
Of hye descent; that never do infest
The Land with false suggestions, claymes, affrights,
To make men lose their own, for others rights.
56
But now, against this disproportion, bends The King, from Couentry (...) the
L. (...), the L. Louel, the E. of Kendal, to London, with others, (...) keep
the (...) (...).

The feeble King all his best industry:
And, from abroad, Skales, Louell, Kendall, sends,
To hold the City in fidelity;
The City, which before (for others ends)
Was wrought to leave the part of Royalty:
Where, though the Kings command was of no power;
Yet work these Lords so, that they took the Tower:
57
And, from thence, labor to bring-in again The E E. of March, (...), and
(...), landing at (...), were met by the Archb. of Cant. who with his Cross
borne before him accompayned them to London. An. reg. 38.

The outlet will of disobediencie;
Send terror, threats, entreaties; but in vain:
Warwick, and March, are with all iollitie
And grace received. The Cities love did gain
The best part of a Crown: for whose defense,
And intertaining still, stays Salsburie,
Whilst March, and Warwick other fortunes try; The affection which the City
of London bare to the D. of York was an especial mean for the raising of
that line, to the Crown. The E. of Salisbury left to keep the City.

58
Conducting their fresh troops against their King
(Who leaves a woman to supply his steed):
And near Northhampton, both imbattailing,
Made, now, the very heart of England bleed:
Where, what strange resolutions both sides bring,
And with what deadly rancour they proceed, The Batte'l of Northhampton.

Witness the blood there shed, and fowlly shed;
That cannot, but with sighs, be registered.
59
There, Buckingham, Talbot, and Egremont, The D. of Bucking. the E. of (...):
the L. Bgremont, John Vicont (...), Sir William Lucy (...).

Bewmont, and Lucy; parts of Lancaster
(Parts most important, and of chief account)
In this unhappy day, extinguished are.
There, the Lord Gray, (whose faith did not amount The L. Edmond Gray of (...)
who led the (...) of K. (...) withdrew himself and took part with the L L.

Unto the trust committed to his care)
Betrays his King, borne to be strangely tossed;
And, late again attained, again is lost.
60
Again is lost this outside of a King
Ordained for others uses, not his own: The King in (...) to London, the Tower
yielded up to the Lords, and the L. Skales who kept it, is (...).

Who, to the part that had him, could but bring
A feeble body only, and a Crown;
But yet was held to be the dearest thing
Both sides did labor-for, so much; to crown
Their Cause with the apparency of might:
From whom, and by whom, they must make their Right;
61
When he himself (as if he naught esteemed
The highest Crown on earth) continues one;
Weak to the world: which, his Religion deemed
Like to the breath of man; vain, and soon gone:
(...) the stout Queen, by speedy flight redeemed
The safety of her self, and of her Son:
And, with her, Sommerset to Durham fled; The D. of Sommerset.

Her powers, suppressed, her heart unvanquished.
62
So much for absent York, is acted here,
Attending English hopes, on the Irish coast.
Which when, unlooked for, they related were,
Ambition (still on horseback) comes in poast,
And seems with greater glory to appear;
As made the more, by be'ing so long time lost:
And to the Parliament with state is led,
Which his associates had fore-summoned.
63
And, com'n into the Chamber of the Peers,
He sets himself down, in the chair of State:
Where, such an unexpected face appears
Of an amazed Court, that gazing sat
With a dumb silence (seeming, that it fears
The thing it went about t'effectuate)
As if the Place, the Cause, the Conscience, give
Bars to the words, their forced courso should have.
64
It Is strange, those times, which brought such hands for blood,
Had not bred tongues to make good any side;
And that no prostituted conscience stood,
Any injustice to have iustifid
(As men of the forelone hope, only good
In desperatest acts to be employed)
And that none, in the assembly there, was found,
That would t'ambitious descant give a ground:
65
That even himself (forced of necessity)
Must be the Orator of his own Cause.
For, having viewd them all, and could epsy
None proff'ring once to speak (all, in a pause)
On this friend looks with an inuiting eye,
And then on that (as if he wooed applause)
Holding the cloth of State still in his hand;
The sign, which he would have them understand.
66
But se'ing none move; with an imperial port,
Gathering his spirits, he ryses from his seat;
Does, with such power of words, his Cause support,
As seems all others Causes to defeat.
" And, sure, who works his Greatness in that sort,
" Must have more powers, then those that are borne great:
" Such Reuolutions are not wrought, but when
" Those spirits do work, which must be more then men.
67
He argues first his Right, so long withheld
By th'vsurpation of the Lancasters;
" The Right of a direct Line, always held
" The sacred course of Blood; our Ancestors,
" Our Laws, our reverent Customs have vp-held
" With holy hands. Whence, when disorder crres,
" What horrors, what confusion, do we see,
" Until it be reduced where it should be?
68
" And how it prospers with this wretched Land,
" Witness the universal misery,
" Wherein (as if accursed) the Realm does stand;
" Deprived of State, wealth, honor, dignity;
" The Church, and Commons, underneath the hand
" Of violence, extortion, robbery;
" No face of order, no respect of Laws:
" And thus complaynes of what himself is cause;
69
" Accusing others insolence, that they
" Exhausted the Revenues of the Crown:
" So that the King was forced only to prey
" Upon his Subjects, poor and wretched grown)
" And that they now sought Ireland to betray,
" And Calais to the French; which he had known,
" By the intercepted notes of their own hand,
" Who were the only Traitors of the Land:
70
" And yet procured th'Attaynders most unjust,
" Of others guiltless and unspotted blood;
" Who evermore had labored, in their trust
" And faithful service for their Countries good:
" And who with extreme violence were thrust
" Quite out of all, spoiled of their liuelihood,
" Exposed to all the miseries of life:
" Which they endured, to put-off blood and strife.
71
" But since (says he) their malice has no end,
" But t'end us all, and to undo the Land:
" (For which, the hateful French gladly attend,
" And at this instant have their swords in hand)
" And that the God of heaven does seem to bend
" Unto our Cause, whereto the best men stand;
" And that this blood of mine, so long time sought,
" Reserved seems, for something to be wrought;
72
" It rests within your judgments, to vp-right,
" Or else to ruin utterly the Land.
" For, this be sure, I must pursue my Right
" Whilst I have breath, or I and mine can stand.
" Think, whether this poor State, being in this plight,
" Stands not in need of some vp-raysing hand:
" Or whether it is not time we should have rest,
" And this confusion, and our wounds redrest.
73
This said, he turns aside, and out he goes;
Leaves them to counsel what was to be done.
Where, though the most part gathered, were of those
Who with no opposition sure would run;
Yet some, more temperate, offered to propose
That which was fit to be considered on:
Who, though they knew his claim was fair, in sight;
Yet thought, it now lackt the right face of Right;
74
Since, for the space of three score years, the Crown
Had been in act possessed, in three descents;
Confirmed by all the Nobles of renown, Non confirmatur tractu (...), quod de
(...) ab (...) non (...).

The peoples suffrages, Oaths, Parlements;
So many Acts of State, both of our own,
And of all other foraine Governments:
" That Wrong, by order, may grow Right by this;
" Since Right, th'obseruer but of Order is.
75
" And then considring, first, how Bullingbrooke,
" Landing in Yorkshire but with three score men,
" By the consent of all the Kingdom, took
" The Crown upon him, held for lawful then;
" His Uncle York and all the Peers betook
" Themselves to him, as to their Sovereign; when
" King Richards wrongs, and his propinquitie,
" Did seem to make no distance in their (...):
76
" Nor was without example, in those days:
" Wherein (as in all Ages) States do take
" The side of public Peace, to counterpayse
" The weight of wrong; which, time may rightful make.
" No elderhood, Rufus and (...) stays, W. Rufus and Hen. 1. (...) before
their elder brother.

" The imperial Crown of England t'vndertake:
" And John, before his nephew Arthur, (...);
" Whom, though deprived, Henry his son succeedes.
77
Edward the third, made Sov'raigne of the State,
Upon his fathers deprivation, was:
All which, though seeming wrongs, yet fairly sat
In their succeeders, and for right did pass.
And if they could so work, t'accommodate,
And calm the Peers, and please the Populasse;
They wished, the Crown might, where it stood, remain,
Succeeding inconvenience to restrain.
78
Thus th'auncient Fathers of the Law advise;
Grave Baron Thorpe and learned Fortescue:
Who, though they could not fashion, otherwise,
Those strong-bent humors, which auersiue grew;
Yet seemed to qualify th'extreamities,
And some respect more to their Sov'raine drew;
That, during life, it was by all agreed,
He should be King, and York should him succeed:
79
Which, presently enacted, was (beside)
Proclaym'd through-out with all solemnities;
And inter mutually there ratified
With protestations, vows and oaths, likewise;
Built-vp, with all the strength of form, to abide
What-euer oppositions could arise;
And might have seemed sure and authentical,
Had all this body of the State been all.
80
But Trent, thou keptst a part; Thames had not all:
The North divided honor, with the South:
And like power held like Greatness several:
Where other Right, spoke with another mouth;
Another Heir, another Prince they call,
Whom natural succession follow does;
The branch of Kings, the true son of the Crown:
To whom, no father can but leave his own.
81
The King, as husband to the Crown, does by
The wives infe offement hold; and only here
Inioyes the same for life, by Courtesy;
Without power to dispose it other-where
(After his death) but as the authority,
Order, and custom of Succession bear:
And therefore Henry's Act cannot undo
The right of him, whom it belongs unto.
82
And this unnatural intrusion, here,
Of that attainted Blood, out of all course,
Effected with confusion and with fear,
Must be reduced to other terms, of force,
These insolences Justice cannot bear:
The sword (whereto they only had recourse)
Must cut this knot, so intricately tied;
Whose vain contrived ends are plain descried.
83
Thus they giue-out; and out the sword in hand
Is drawn for blood, to justify the same:
And by a side, with many a Worthy, mand;
Great Sommerset, Excester, Buckingham,
With Clifford Courtney, and Northumberland
(Lords of as mighty courage as of name)
Which all, against Yorkes forced courses, bend;
Who, having done, yet had not made an end:
84
But, to another work, is forced to go;
The last turmoyle laboring Ambition had:
Where Pride and Ouer-weening led him so
(For fortunes past) as made the (...) sad:
For, whether safer counsel would or no,
His yet unfurnished troops he desp'rat led
From Sandall Castle, unto Wakefield Green,
Against far mightier forces of the Queen.
85
Where, round enclosed by Ambushments fore-lay'd, The Battle of Wakefield,
where the D. of York is slain: the E. of Salsburie taken and beheaded at
York: Edmond E. of Rutland, youngest son to the D. of York murdered after
the Battle, by the L. Clifford.

Hard-working for his life (but all in vain)
With number and confusion ouer-lay'd,
Himself and valiant Salsbury are slain:
With whom, the most and dearest blood decayed
Of his courageous and aduenturous train:
So short a life had those long hopes of his;
Borne not to wear the Crown, he wrought for thus;
86
But, in the rise of his out-springing lust,
Now in the last of hope, received this fall;
Now, that his working powers so far had thrust,
That his desires had but this step to all:
When, so near home, he seemed past all distrust,
This unexpected wrack does him befall:
This successor th'inheritor fore-goes;
The play-game made of Fortune, and his foes.
87
Whose young son, Rutland (made the sacrifice
For others sins, ere he knew how to sin)
Brought only but to see this exercise
Of blood and wounds, ends ere he did begin:
Whose tears, whose moan, whose lamentable cries,
Could neither mercy nor compassion win:
The branch of such a tree, though tender now,
Was not thought fit should any longer grow.
88
Which turning Chance, t'a long vngraced side,
Brings back their almost quayled hopes again;
And thrust them on, to use the present Tide
And Flow of this occasion, to regaine
Th'inthralled Monarch, and to vndecide
The late concluded Act they held for vain;
And mooues their Armies, new refresht with spoil,
For more confusion, and for more turmoyle:
89
Victoriously proceeding vnwithstood,
Till at S. Albones Warwick forced a stand: The 2. (...) S. (...).

Where-as (to make his own undoing good)
The King is brought against himself to band:
His Power (...) Crown is set against his Blood;
Forced on the side, not of himself, to stand.
Divided King, in what a case thou art!
To have thy hand, thus bent against thy heart.
90
And here this famous fatal place, again,
Is made the stage of blood; again these streets,
(...) with slaughter, cov'red with the slain,
Witness what desp'rat wrath with rancor meets.
But, Fortune now is in an other vain;
Another side her turning favor greets:
The King, here lately lost, is now here won; The King is again (...) by the
(...).

Still sure t'vndoe the side that he was on.
91
Warwick, with other Genius then his own, The (...) of Warwick (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...), put to (...), and Sir John (...) (...) on the Kings (...).

Had here to do: which made him see the face
Of sad misfortune, in the self same Town,
Where prosperous winning lately gave him grace:
And Marg'ret here, this Martial Amazon,
Was, with the spirit of herself, in place:
Whose labors, Fortune, even to pity, stir;
And, being a woman, could but give it her.
92
The reputation and encouragement
Of (...) glory, wakened them to this.
And this seems now the full accomplishment
Of all their travel, all their combrances.
For, what can more disturb this Government,
When York extinct, and Warwick conquered, is?
Directing Salsburie, left without a head,
What rests there now, that all is not finished?
93
Thus, for the sick, preserving Nature strives
Against corruption, and the loathsome Grave;
When, out of Deaths cold hands, she back repriues
Th'almost confounded spirits, she feign would save:
And them cheeres up, illightens, and reuiues;
Making faint Sickness, words of health to have,
With looks of life, as if the worst were past;
When strait comes dissolution, and his last.
94
So fares it with this late revived Queen:
Whose Victories, thus fortunately won,
Have but as only lightning motions been,
Before the ruin that ensued thereon.
For, now another springing power is seen;
Whereto, as to the new arysing Sun,
All turn their faces, leaving those low rays
Of setting Fortune, which no Climer waighes.
95
Now is young March, more than a Duke of York.
For, youth, love, grace and courage make him more.
All which, for Fortunes favor, now do work,
Who graceth freshest Actors evermore;
Making the first attempt, the chiefest work
Of any man's designs, that strives therefore.
" The after-seasons are not so well blessed.
" For, those first spirits make their first actions best.
96
Now as the Libyan Lion, when with pain
The weary Hunter has pursued his prey
From Rocks, to Brakes, from Thickets to the Plain,
And at the point, thereon his hands to lay,
Hard-by his hopes, his eye upon his gain,
Out-rushing from his den rapts all away:
So comes young March, their ends to disappoint,
Who now were grown so near unto the point.
97
The love of these important southern parts,
Of Essex, Surry, Middlesex, and Kent,
The Queen had wholly lost; as they whose hearts
Grew ill affected to her government,
Upon th'vnciuile and presumptuous parts,
Played by the Northern troops, grown insolent:
Whom, though she could not govern otherwise,
Yet the will that is wrought for her, upon her lies.
98
So wretched is this execrable War,
" This civil Sword: wherein, though all we see
" Be foul, and all things miferable are;
" Yet most distresse-full is the (...):
" Which is, not only th'extream ruiner
" Of others; but, her own calamity:
" Where, who obtains, what he would cannot do:
" Their power has part, who help him thereunto.
99
The City, whose good will they most desire, The Queen, after the battle of
S. (...), sent to the Mayor of London for certain provisions: who (...) to
(...) (...) therewith all, the Commons of the City stayed the same, and would
not permit the carts to (...). Whereupon, the L. Mayor sent to excuse (...),
and to appease the displeasure of the Queen.

(Yet thereunto durst not commit their state)
Sends them not those provisions they require;
Which seemed restrained by the peoples hate:
Yet Marches help far off, and near this fire
(To win them time) (...) them to mediate
A reconcilement: which, well entertained,
Was fairly now growen-on, and nearly gained:
100
When, with a thousand tongs, swift-wing'd Fame coms,
And tells of Marches gallant Victories:
Who, what withstands, subdues; all ouercomes;
Making his way through fiercest enemies;
As having now to cast, in greater Sums,
The Reckning of his hopes, that mainly rise.
His fathers death, gives more life unto wrath:
And vexed valor, greater courage has.
101
And now, as for his last, his laboring worth
Works on the coast which on fair Seuerne lies:
Whereto his Father (passing to the North)
Sent him, to levy other fresh supplies:
But, hearing now what Wakefield had brought forth;
Imploring aid against these injuries,
Obtains from Gloucester, Worster, Shrewsburie,
Important powers, to work his remedy.
102
Which he, against Pembrooke and Ormond, bends; Jasper E. of Pe^brok, and James
Butler E. of Ormond and (...).

Whom Margaret (now upon her victory)
With all speed possible from Wakefield sends;
With hope to have surprised him suddenly.
Wherein, though she all means, all wit extends,
To the utmost reach of wary policy;
Yet nothing her avayles: no plots succeed,
T'avert those mischiefs which the heavens decreed.
103 The battle of Mortimers cross where Owen Teuther, father to the E. of
Pembrooke, who had married K Hen. mother was taken and (...).

For, near the Cross allied unto his name,
He (...) those mighty forces of his foes;
And with a spirit, or day'nd for deeds of fame,
Their eager-fighting Army ouer-throwes:
Making all clear behind, from whence he came;
Bearing-downe, wholly, what before him rose;
Like to an all-confounding Torrent seems:
And was made more, by VVarwicks mighty streams. The E. of (...). after his
overthrow at S. Alb. retires with all the forces he could make, and ioines
with the young D. of York: who coming to (...), and received with all joy, a
great Council was (...) called of the L L. spiritu (...) all and temporal:
where King (...) was (...) (...) (...): for the (...) of the (...), and to be
(...) (...) all (...) author (...); and the D os (...) elected (...) K and
(...) (...) by the name of Edward the 4. the 4 of March, 1460. at the age of 18.

104
With th'inundation of which Greatness, he
(Having no bounds of power to keep him back)
Marched to the City: at whose entrance free,
No signs of joy, nor no applaudings lack.
Whose near approach, when this sad Queen did see,
(T'auoyde these rocks of her near threatening wrack)
With her grieved troops Northward she hence departs;
And leaves, to Youth and Fortune, these South-parts.
105
Glory, with admiration, entering now,
Opened that easy door to his intent,
As that there needs not long time to allow
The Right he had unto the Government;
Nor Henry's injuries to disauow,
Against his oath, and The Act of Parliament.
" For, here the speediest way he takes t'accord
Difference in law, that pleades it with the Sword.
106
Gathered to see his mustred Companies,
Stood all the flocking troops of London streets;
When Faulconbridge, with gentle feeling, tries
How strong the pulse of their affection beats; And so Hen. 6. after he had
reigned 38. years 8. (...), was deposed.

And (reckning up the grievous miseries,
And desolation, which the Country threats)
Asked them, whom they would have to be their King,
To lead those troops; and State in form to bring.
107
Whereto, with such an universal showt,
The Earl of March, the multitude replies,
As the rebounding Echo straight through-out
(From Tower to Tower reuerberated) flies
To the ears of those great Lords, who sat about
The consultation for this enterprise.
Whose care is saved, which most they stood upon:
For, what they counsel how too do, is done.
108
And nothing now, but to confirm him king,
Remains (which must not long remain) to do.
The present heat does strait dispatch the thing,
With all those solemn rites that long thereto:
So that, what York, with all his trauay ling,
Force and intrusion, could not get unto,
Is now thus freely laid upon his son;
Who must make fair, what (...) was begun.
109
Whose end, attayn'd, had it here made an end
Of foul destruction, and had stayed the blood
Which Towton, Exham, Tewksbury did spend
With desperate hands, and deeper wounds with stood;
And that none other Crown, brought to contend
With that of his, had made his seem less good;
How had this long-afflicted Land been blessed!
Our sighs had ended, and my Muse had rest.
110
Which now (but little past half her long way)
Stands trembling at the horrors that succeed;
Weary with these embroylements, feign would stay
Her (...) course, unwilling to proceed:
And, feign to see that glorious holy day
Of Union, which this discord reagreed;
Knows not as yet, what to resolve upon;
Whether to leaue-off here, or else go-on.
The end of the seventh Book.
THE EIGHTTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
King Edward, Power against King Henry led;
And has at Towton-field the victory.
From whence, King Henry into Scotland fled:
Where he attempts his States recovery;
Steals into England; is discovered;
Brought Prisoner to the Tower disgracefully.
And Edward, whiles great Warwick does assay
A Match in France, marries the Lady Gray.
1
ON yet, sad Verse: though those bright (...), from whence
Thou had thy light, are set for evermore;
And that these times do not like grace dispense
To our endeavors, as those did before:
Yet on; since She, whose beams do reincense
This sacred fire, seems as reserved in store
To raise this Work, and here to have my last;
Who had the first of all my labors past.
2
On (with her blessed favor) and relate, Edward being proclaimed, and
acknowledged for King, presently (...) (...) toward the North, to encounter
with K. Hen. 6. who in York shire had assembled a puissant army, of near
60000. men, and at a place called Towton, about 4. miles from York, both their
powers met: where was soght the greatest battle our stories mention, in all
these civil wars. Where both the Armies consisted of above a 100000. men, and
all of our own nation.

With what new bloodshed, this new chosen Lord
Made his first entry to the afflicted State,
Past his first Act of public, with the sword,
Ingor'd his new-worne Crown, and how he gat
Possession of affliction, and restored
His Right unto a Royal misery;
Maintained with as bloody dignity.
3
Show, how our great Pharsalian Field was fought
At Towton in the North; the greatest day
Of ruin, that (...) ever brought
Unto this Kingdom: where, two Crowns did sway
The work of slaughter; two Kings Causes wrought
Destruction to our People, by the way
Of their affections, and their loyalties;
As if one, for these ills, could not suffice.
4
Where Lancaster and that courageous side
(That noble constant Part) came furnished
With such a Power, as might have terrified
And ouer-run the earth; had they been led
The way of glory, where they might have tried
For The Empire of all Europe, as those did
The Macedonian led into the East;
Their number being double, at the least.
5
And where brave York comes as completely mand,
With courage, valor, and with equal might;
Prepared to try with a resolved hand,
The metal of his Crown, and of his Right:
Attended with his fatal fier-brand
Of War, Warwick; that blazing star of fight,
The Comet of destruction, that portends
Confusion, and distress, what way he tends.
6
What rage, what madness, England, do we see?
That this brave people, in such multitude
Run to confound themselves, and all to be
Thus mad for Lords, and for mere Servitude.
What might have been, if (Roman-like, and free)
These gallant Spirits had nobler ends pursued,
And strayn'd to points of glory and renown,
For good of the Republique and their own?
7
But, here no Cato with a Senate stood
For Commonwealth: nor here were any sought
T'emancipate the State, for public good;
But only, headlong, for their faction wrought.
Here, every man runs-on to spend his blood,
To get but what he had already got.
For, whether Pompey, or a Caesar won,
Their state was ever sure to be all one.
8
And, first, before these fatal Armies met,
Had forward Warwick laid the passage free,
At Ferry Brigges: where the Lord Clifford (set The L. Clifford slain at Ferry
(...).

With an aduentrous gallant company
To guard that straight, Yorkes farther march to let)
Began the Scene to this great Tragedy;
Made the first entrance on the Stage of blood:
Which now, set wide for wounds, all open stood.
9
When, Edward to exhort his men began,
With words, where to both spirit and Majesty
His pers'nage gave; for-that he was a man
(Besides a King) whose Crown sat gracefully.
Com'n is the day, said he, wherein who can
Obtain the best, is Best: this day must try
Who has the wrong, and whence our ills have been:
And it is our swords must make us honest men.
10
For though our Cause, by God and men allowed,
Has in it honor, right, and honesty:
Yet all, as nothing, is to be avowed,
Unless withal, we have the victory.
For, Justice is (we see) a virtue proud,
And leanes to power, and leaves weak misery.
And therefore, seeing the case we now stand in,
We must resolve either to die or win.
11
So that if any here does find his heart
To fail him, for this noble work, or stands
Irresolute this day; let him depart,
And leave his Arms behind, for worthier hands.
I know, e now will stay to do their part,
Here to redeem themselves, (...), children, lands,
And have the glory that thereby shall rise,
To free their Country from these miseries.
12
But here, what needed words to blow the fire
In flame already, and inkindled so
As when it was proclaym'd, they might retire
Who found unwillingness to undergo
That ventrous work; they all did so conspire
To stand out Fortune, that not one would go,
To bear away a hand from blood; not one
Defraud the Field of the evil might be done.
13
Where Warwick too (producing, in their sight,
An argument, whereby he did conclude The E. (...) War; (...), (...) the (...)
(...) began, with (...) own hands (...) (...) (...).

There was no hope of (...), but by fight)
Does sacrifize his horse, to Fortitude:
And thereby did the least conceit of flight,
Or any succor, by escape, exclude;
" Se'ing, in the straight of a necessity,
" The means to win, is to have no means to fly.
14
It was upon the twilight of that day
(That peaceful day) when the Religious bear
The Oliue-branches as they go to pray,
(And we, in lieu, the blooming Palms use here)
When both the Armies, ready in array
Forth' early sacrifize of blood, appear
Prepared formischiefe, ere they had full light
To see to do it, and to do it right.
15
The Advantage of the time, and of the wind
(Which, both, with York seem as retayn'd in pay)
Brave Faulconbridge takes hold-on, and assigned William (...). L.
Faulconbridge, (...). (...) created E. of (...).

The Archers their flight-shafes to shoot away:
Which, th'aduerse side (with sleet and dimnesse, blind,
Mistaken in the distance of the way)
Answer with their sheafe-arrowes; that came short
Of their intended aim, and did no hurt.
16
But, gathered by th'on-marching Enemy,
Returned were, like clouds of steel; which power
Destruction down, and did new-night the sky;
As if the Day had fayl'd to keep his hour.
Whereat, the ranged horse breake-out, deny
Obedience to the Riders, scorn their power,
Disrank the troops, set all in disarray,
To maketh' Assay lant owner of the day.
17
Thus, thou peculiar Ingine of our Land
(Weapon of Conquest, Master of the Field)
Renowned Boaw (that made this Crown command
The towers of France, and all their powers to yield)
Art made at home to have th'especiall hand
In our dissensions, by thy work vp-held:
Thou first did conquer us; then raised our skill
To vanquish others; here our selves to spill.
18
And now how come thou to be out of date,
And all neglected leave us, and art gone?
And with thee, the ancient strength, the manly state
Of valor, and of worth, that glory won?
Or else stay'st thou, till new-priz'd shot abate?
(That never shall affect what thou have don)
And oneiy but attend'st some blessed Reign,
When thou and Virtue shall be graced again.
19
But, this sharp tempest drove Northumberland,
(Who led the vant-guard of king Henry's side)
With eger heatioine battle, out of hand;
And this disorder, with their swords to hide. In this battle of Towton on K.
Hen. side, were (...) Hen (...) E. of North. the EE. of Shrewsbury and
Devonshire. John I. (...), the I. L. Bewmond, Neuile, Willouhby, Wells, Roos,
Gray, Dacres, Fitz-bugh, Molineux, Beckingham: Knights, the 2. base sons of
Hen. Holland D. of Excester, Richard Percie, (...) Cliston, Andrew Trollop. etc.

Where, twice sieve hours, these furious armies stand;
And Fortunes Balance weighed on neither side;
Nor either did but equal bloodshed gain,
Till Henry's chiefest leaders all were slain.
20
Then, lo, those spirits, which from these heads derive
Their motions, gave off working; and, in haste,
Turn all their backs to Death, and mainely strive
Who from themselves shall runaway most fast.
The after-slyers on the former drive:
And they again, by the pursuers chac't,
Make bridges of their fellows backs, to pass
The Brooks and Rivers, where-as danger was.
21
Witness O cleare-stream'd Cock: within whose banks,
So many thousand, crawling, helpless lay,
With wounds and wearinesle; who, in their ranks,
Had valiantly behaved themselves that day:
And might have had more honor, and more thanks The whole number (...) were
accounted, by som', 33000. by others, 35091.

By standing to their work, and by their stay.
" But men, at once, life seem to love and loath;
" Running to lose it, and to save it both.
22
Unhappy Henry, from a little Hill,
Placed not (...) off (whence he might view the fight)
Had all th'intire full prospect of (...) ill,
With all the scattered slaughter, in his sight:
Saw how the victorrag'd, and spoiled at will,
And left not off when all was in his might:
Saw, with how great adoo himself was won;
And with what store of blood Kings are undone.
23
We are not worth so much, nor I, nor he,
As has been spent for us, by you this day,
Dear people, said he: therefore, O, agree,
And leave off mischief, and your malice stay.
Stay, Edward, stay. They must a People be,
When we shall not be Kings: and it is they,
Who make us with their miseries. Spare them,
For whom thou thus do seek a Diadem.
24
For me, I could be pleased to have naught to do
With Fortune; and content, my self were ill,
So England might be well; and that t'vndoe
Me, might suffice the sword, without more ill.
And yet perhaps, these men, that cleave unto
The parts of Princes, with such eger will,
Have likewise their own ends, of gain or hate,
In these our strifes, and nourish this debate.
25
Thus stood he (drawing lines of his discourse)
In contemplation; when, more needfully, Queen Margaret with her son were in
the City of York, expecting the event of this Battle.

It did import him to devise a course,
How he might shift for his recovery:
And had been taken had not some by force,
Rescued, and drawn him off, more speedily;
And brought him unto York, in all maine post:
Where he first told his Queen, the day was lost.
25
Who, as composed of that firm temp'rature
Which could not bend to base complaynts, nor wayle
As weakness does (fore-knowing howt'indure)
Fayl'd not hersolfe, though Fortune did her fail;
But, rather casts-about how to procure
Means to reserve her part, and to prevail
Of that poor time, left her to save her own;
As one though overcome, not ouer-throwne:
26
Now, when she had of fatal Lancaster
Seen all the pillars crushed and ruined,
That vnder-set it; all that followed her
Of those heroicke personages, dead,
Save only Sommerset, and Excester
(Who from this last destruction hardly fled)
And saw all lost, and nothing in her might,
But only that which must be saved by flight:
27
Now, when there was no North left, of their own,
To draw unto; no side, to gather head;
No people to be raised, t'an empty Crown;
Nor yet the ground their own, whereon they tread.
When yet your faith (worthy of all renown)
Constant Northumbrians, firm continued:
And, though you could not render succors fit
Unto your Sov'raigne, you would save him yet;
28
And be (as few men, in this world, are) true
Unto affliction, and to misery:
And would not basely purchase and renew
Your peace, and safety, by (...):
But wrought, that though the Victor did pursue,
With greedy care and egre industry,
To have surpised him; yet was all in (...).
Till he recovered Berwicke, with his (...).
29
Where now, he was at some more vacancie
To understand, and see himself undone:
Which, in this sodaine-comming misery,
He had no leisure to consider-on.
And now (...) he that poor company,
Attending on himself, his wife, and son;
Sees how that all the State, which served his Crown,
Was shut within the walls of one small town:
30
(...) there, what a poor distressed thing,
A King without a people was; and whence
The glory of that Mightiness does spring,
That ouer-spreds (with such a reverence)
This vnder-world: whence comes this furnishing
And all this splendour of Magnificence:
He sees, what chair so-euer Monarch sat
Upon, on Earth, the People was the State.
31
And yet, although he did contain no more
Then what he saw; yet saw a piece so small
Could not contain him. What he was before,
Made him incapable of any wall,
To yield him succor now: he must have more,
Then only this small Hold, or none at all.
And therefore, this (se'ing it auayl'd him not,
Nor could he keep) he renders to the Scot;
32
As th'Earnest, to confirm and ratify Hen. 6 delivers the town of Berwicke
to the K. of Scots.

The league between them two, newly begun.
Whereof to make more sure and faster tie,
He promised, too, th'alliance of his son:
And all that might secure their amity,
With willingness, on either side was done.
And here they practice, all they can devise,
To turn revenge upon their Enemies.
33
Thus, England, did thou see the mightiest King
Thou ever had (in Power and Majesty
Of State, and of Dominions; governing
A most magnificent Nobility;
With an aduent'rous people, flourishing
In all the glories of felicity)
Chac't from his kingdom, forced to seek redress
In parts remote, distressed and succourlesse.
34
Now Bullingbrook, these miseries, here shown,
Do much unload thy sin; make thy ill, good.
For, if thou did did by wrong, attain the Crown,
It Was without cries; it cost but little blood:
But, York, by his attempt has ouer-throwne
All the best glory wherein England stood;
And did his state by her undoing win:
And was, though white without, yet red within.
35
And thus he has it: and is now to deal
For the intertaining and continuance
Of men's affections; and to seek to heal
Those foul corruptions, which the maintenance
Of so long wars bred in the Commonweal.
He must remunerate, prefer, advance,
His chiefest friends; and prosecute, with might,
The adverse part; do wrong, to do men right:
36
Whilst Martial Margaret, with her hopeful Son,
Is travailing in France to purchase aid;
And plots, and toiles, and nothing leaves undone;
Though allin vain. For, being thus ouer-layd
By Fortune and the Time, all that is done
Is out out of season. For she must have stayed
Till that first heat of men's affections (which
They bear new Kings) were laid, and not so much.
37
When they should find, that (...) had gayn'd no more,
Then th'Asle, (...) changing of his Masters, did;
(Who still must labor as he used before)
And those expectancies came frustrated,
Which they had set upon th'imag in'd score,
Of their accounts; and had considered,
How that it did but little benefit
The Doves; To change the Falcon, for the Kite.
38 Queen Margaret, furnished with a great power of Scots and French, to the
number of 20000, with her (...) entered into Northumberland, took the Castle of
Bambrough and after came forward to the Bishopric of Durham. Where Hen. (...)
D. of Somerset who had lately (...) reconciled to K. Ed. 4 joined with them,
and also brought (...) with him Sir Ralph Percie, (...) man of great courage
and worth: who were taken in the battle of Exham, and executed in An. 3. Ed.
4. 1464.

And yet brave Queen, for three years of his Reign,
Thou gave him little breathing time of rest;
But still his miseries did entertain
With new attempts, and new aslauts addressed:
And, at thy now-returne from France again,
(Supplied with forces) once more gatheredst
An Army for the Field, and brought, to war,
The scattered parts of broken Lancaster.
39
And once again, at Exham, ledst them on
With Scots, and French t'another bloody day;
And there beheldst thy self again undone,
With all that Rest, whereon thy fortunes lay.
Where, Somerset (late to King Edward gone,
And got his pardon) having escaped away,
With noble Percie, came to bring their blood
Unto thy side, whereto they first had stood.
40
Where, the Lords, Molines, Rosse, and Hungerford,
With many else of noble Families,
Extinguished were; and many that days sword
Cut Off their names, in their posterities.
Where fled, again, their lucklesse followed Lord;
And is so near pursued by the enemies,
As th'Ensigne of his Crown was seized upon,
For him who had before his Kingdom won;
41
And shortly after, too, his person gat.
For, he, now wearied with his long exile,
And miseries abroad, grew passionate,
With longing to return to his native soil.
And se'ing he could not do the fame, in State;
He seeks, disguised in fashion, to beguile
The world a time, and steal the liberty
And sight of his dear Country, privately:
42
As if there were, for a pursued King, King Hen. was (...) in (...), and (...)
to London, with his legs bound to the (...), (...), in (...) company, (...)
Doctor Manning, Deane of Windzor, with another Divine: who were taken with him
and committed to the Tower.

A covert left on earth, wherein to hide;
When Power and Jealousy are travailing,
And lay to catch affliction, on each side.
Misfortune serves, we see, for every thing.
And soon he comes, God knows, to be descried:
And Edward has the booty he desired:
For whose establishment, all things conspired.
43
Yet, long it was not, ere a fire began
To take, in th'inwardst Closet, where he laid
The treasure of his chiefest trust; and ran
From thence, through al his State, before it staid.
For, be'ing a King, who his whole fortunes wan
With others hands, must many leave vnpay'd:
And could not fill up that vast greediness
Of Expectation, which is bottomless:
44
Though he did all the best that in him lay K. Ed. 4. sat on the Kings Bench,
in open Court, 3 (...) together, in Michaelmas Term An. 2. of his reign, to
understand how his laws were executed.

(As a most active Prince) to satisfy
The interest of their trauayles, and (...)
The bands contracted twixt his sovereignty
And the Republic: seeking to allay
All greeuances; reorder equity;
Reform the Bars, that Justice did abuse;
Lay easy on the State, as new Kings use.
45
As he, who, having found great Treasury,
The first year offers, with most grateful cheer,
A sheep of gold, (...) Iunoes deity;
And next, of silver, for the second year;
The third, of brass; and then, neglectiuely,
Nothing at all: So those respects, which were
Borne of a present feeling, moved him most;
But soon were with their times and motives lost.
46
And, what his bounty could not recompense,
He pays with honors, and with dignities.
And (more to angle the benevolence,
And catch the love of men, with courtesies)
He often would make his dignity dispense
With his too low familiarities;
Descending, from his Sphere of Majesty.
Beneath himself, very submissiuely.
47 The Earl of Warwick was sent into France to treat of a marriage between
King Edward and the Lady Bona, daughter to Loyse D. of Sauoy and sister to the
La. Carlote Queen of France: which was there agreed upon; and Monsieur Damp
Martin with others appointed to be sent into Eng. for the full accomplishing
thereof.

And when he had disposed, in some good train,
His home affairs; he counsels how t'aduance
His foreign correspondence, with the chain
Ofsome alliance that might countenance
His Greatness, and his quiet intertaine.
Which was thought fittest with some match, of France;
To hold that Kingdom, from subayding such
Who else could not subsist, nor hope so much.
48
Nor was it now a time to have contrast
With any foreign mighty Potentate;
But keep the outer doors of each side fast,
Having so much to do within his State.
And, thereupon, was Warwick (by whose cast
All must be wrought) employed to mediate
A present Marriage, to be had between
Him, and the sister of the young French Queen.
49
Which was not long, nor hard to bring to pass But in the mean (...), (the
first of (...)) the K. married the La. Elizabeth Gray, daughter to the Duchess
of Redford, late wife to Sir John Gray (...) at S. (...) on King Henry's part.

Where like respects met in a point alike.
So that the same as even concluded was,
And all as done; Lady and friends all like:
When (...), the Lord of Kings (by whom must pass
This Act of our Affections) took dislike
That he was not made (...) thereunto;
And therefore, in his wrath, would all undo.
50
For, whiles this youthful Prince, at his disport
In Grafton woods, retired from public care,
Attending how his suit in France did sort
(Whereon his cogitations only were)
He comes, at home, surprised in other sort;
A nearer fire inflamed his passions here;
An English Beauty, with more worth indu'd
Then France could yield, his royal heart subdued.
51
A woeful widow, whom his quarrel had
(As it had many more) made desolate,
Came to his Court, in mournful habit clad,
To sue for Justice, to relieve her state.
And entering as a suppliant all sad;
With graceful sorrow, and a comely gate
She past the Presence: where, all eyes were cast
On her more stately presence, as she past.
52
Her looks, not let-abrode (but carefully
Kept in, restraind) held their (...):
Observing none but her own dignity,
And his, to whom she did her self address.
And, drawing near his royal Majesty,
A blush of reverence, not bashfulnesse,
Lightened her lovely cheeks, and down she kneeles;
Gives her Petition, for the wrongs she feels.
53
And, in deliv'ring it, lifts up her eyes
(The mouingst Mediators she could bring)
And strait withdrawes them, in submissiue wise;
Not fixing them directly on the King:
Who, moved with her sweet fashion, bade her rise,
With gentle language full of comforting;
Read her request: but thought not what he read.
The lines, he viewed, her eyes had figured.
54
Then paused a while, and mused; as if he weighed
The substance of her suit. The which, God wot,
Was not the thing he mused. And, having stayed,
Seemed to read on again; but yet reads not:
And still a stealing (...)-cast look conuai'd
On her sweet face; as if he had forgot
To be elsewhere, then where he did behold:
And thought not what he did; but what he would.
55
But, least his sudden passion might have, there,
More (...) then he would wish to have;
He took up his desires, which posting were
Beyond their stages; and this answer gave:
Madam, we will our self take time to hear
Your Cause at large: wherein we will you have
No other reference, but repair to us:
Who will accommodate this business.
56
She, that expected present remedy
(Hearing this dilatory answer) thought,
The King found scruple in the equity
Of her request; and thereupon he sought
To put her to delays of Court, whereby
She might be tired, and in the end get naught.
And that, which her opinion made more strong,
Was that he studied, and was mute, so long.
57
Which forced from her these words: My Lord,
Let not my being a Lancastrian bred
Without mine own election, disafford
Me right, or make my Cause disfigured;
Since I am now the subject of your sword:
Which God has (with your Right) established,
To do us right: and let not what we were,
Be now the cause to hurt us as we are.
58
Lady, mistake me not: never did I
Make war with women, nor used women's war,
Revenge; but prosecuted honestly
My Right, not Men. My quarrels ended are,
With my obtaining of the victory.
And (Lady) know, your Cause moves me thus far,
As you shall find, said he, I do desire
To do you greater right then you require.
59
With this, they part; both, with their thoughts full charged:
She, of her suit in hand; and he of her:
Wherein, he spends that night, and quite discharged
All other cogitations; to confer,
First, how he might have her estate enlarged:
Then, in what sort her service to prefer
Unto his new exspected Wife and Queen:
Then, how to mask his love, from being seen.
60
For, yet, Lust was not grown to that degree
To have no limits; but that shame kept-in
The greatest Greatness, from this being free
To hold their Wantonness to be no sin.
For, though Kings cannot ouer-maistred be,
They will be ouer-lookt, and seen within:
And, though they could their (...) make sure;
Yet crimes, though safe, can never be secure.
61
Sometimes, he thinks it better to provide
A place retired, and have her from the Court:
And then, with what pretentions he might hide
His private coming, and his often resort:
Then, by his Queen, if it should be espid,
How he might clear with her, and stop report.
And thus consumes the night: and if he slept,
He slept those thoughts that with these (...) kept.
62
The morning being com'n (and glad he was
That it was com'n) after so long a night
He thought would have no morning (time did pass
So (...), and his desires ran-on so light)
A (...) with speed dispatched was,
Of special trust, this Lady to inuit
To come to his presence; though before the time
That Ladies rise: who rarely rise betime.
63
Yet soon she hastes: and yet that soon seemed long,
To him whose longing went so swift a pase:
And frets, that such attyring should belong
To that which yields it self sufficient grace;
Consid'ring how these ornaments may wrong
The set of beauty: which, we see, does grace
Th'attire it wears, and is not graced thereby;
As be'ing that only, which does take the eye.
64
But now, be'ing com'n, that quarrel of delay
Straight ended was: her presence satisfies
All, what Expectance had laid out for stay:
And he be held more sweetness in her eyes,
And saw her more then she was yesterday:
A cheerliness did with her hopes arise,
That lamped (...) then it did before,
And made her spirit, and his affections, more.
65
When, those who were about him, presently
Voyded the room, and left him to confer
Alone with his fair Suter privately
(As they who to his courses conscious were)
And he began: Madame, the remedy
Which you (in your Petition) sue-for here,
Shall be allowed to the utmost that you crave,
With th'expedition you would wish to have.
66
And here I have another suit to you:
Which if you please to grant, we both shall now
Rest equally content. Wherewith, there grew
That sudden alteration in her brow,
As all were ouer-cast; and so withdrew
That freedom from her looks (least they should 'low
More then her heart might mean) as they reflect
A narrower and a carefuller aspect.
67
That when he saw this barrier of dislike
Thus inter-set, to keep his forwardnes
Back from presumptiue pressing; it did strike
That reverence, as it staide him to express
His farther will. And she replies: It Is like,
When Kings to subjects sue, they mean no less
Then to command; nor must they be withstood;
For-that good Kings will seek but what is good.
68
And, in that fair respect, your Majesty,
According to your will, both must and may
Command my service; who most reverently
Your royal pleasure ever shall obey.
With which word, pleasure (though it doubtfully
In that hard (...) of condition lay,
Under the lock of goodness) he was cast
In hope, he might obtain the same at last.
69
And thus (...) My pleasure only shall
Be, Madame, for your good; please it but you
To make it so. And, here to tell you all,
I love you; and therein I tell you true.
What honor may by Kings (...) fall,
Must light upon your fortunes, as your due.
And though France shall a Wife, for fashion, bring:
You must be the only mistress of the King.
70
Straight might you see, how Scorn, and Fear, and Shame
All intermixed in one aspect) return
The message of her thoughts, before words came.
And first, within her brow, in state sat Scorn;
Shame in her Cheeks; where also Fear became
An In-mate too; and both appear, by turn:
Blushes did paleness, paleness blushes chase;
As scorning, fearing, shaming such disgrace.
71
She scorns to be addeem'd so worthlesse-base
As to be moved to such an infamy.
She shames to think, that ought, within her face,
Should breed the opinion of immodestie.
She fears the (...) danger of the place,
Her'loneness, and the power of Majesty:
And so (confused) in fear, in shame, in scorn,
This Answer to his Motion does return:
72
My sov'raigne Lord, it grieves me that you deem,
Because I in this sort for Justice sue,
I would the same with mine own wrong redeem,
And by dishonor reobtaine my due:
No: I would hate that right, which should but seem
To be beholding to a wanton view
Or motive of my person, not my Cause;
That craves but right, from Justice, and your laws.
73
And know, great Monarch, that I more do weigh
My Distaffe with mine honor, then I do
The mightiest Scepter, King did ever sway
Upon the earth, or Nations bowed unto.
I owe (...); which I humbly pay,
With all the out ward service I can do:
But, Sov'raigne, in the region of my heart
I reign sole (...); no King can force a part.
74
Here, (...) a little interposed a touch,
To warn her violence to temporize
With Power, and State: and she concludes her speech,
With craving pardon in more humble wise;
Yet, in proud humble wise: which showed, how much
She did her honor above Greatness prise.
And so, being full of what she did conceive,
Desires to be dismissed, and takes her leave.
75
Here, Mary Pembrooke (by whose generous brow,
And noble graces, I (...)
These shapes of others virtues) could I show
In what a desperate and confused estate
She left this disappointed King; and how
Love and Ambition in their glory sat,
And tyrannized on his divided heart,
Warring each other with a powrefull part.
76
How first, Love underneath his Colors brought
The strength of all her graceful worthiness;
And sets them in the advantage of his thought,
Upon the side of Youth and Wantonness:
Then how Ambition, that for glory wrought,
Comes with his State, his Crown, and Powrfulnes,
And plants her on the side of providence,
To beat unfit Affections off from thence.
77
But, I must ouer-goe these passages;
And hasten-on my way, to ouer-take
Mine ends, in sad and grauer businesses;
Whereof I shall to you relation make:
And yet my zeal here forced me thus to express
Elizabeth, forour Elizaes sake;
Who graced the Muses (which her Times became):
For, they who give them comfort, must have fame.
78
And I must tell you now, when this great fight
Of counter-passions had been thoroughly tried,
How in the end the victory did light
Upon Loves forces, as the stronger side;
And beat down those respects of benefit,
Of honor, greatness, strength, and all beside;
And never granted rest unto his strife,
Till marriage rites had her confirmed his wife.
79
Which, that place, where he saw her first, saw done,
Ere he removed his foot: for, Love is still
In haste, and (as a Lord, that rules alone)
Admittes no Counselor, in good norill.
For, He and Kings gladly give ear to none,
But such as smooth their ways, and sooth their will.
And who will not desire to give his voice
(Be what it will) to praise a Princes choice?
80
Which was (indeed) in virtue, beauty, grace,
And all but fortune, worthy of his bed:
And in that too, had he but lived the space
Thaue seen her plentious issue fully bred;
That they might have collated strength and grace
On her weak side: which ((...) and maliced)
Lay-open vndefenc't, apt to b'vndon
By proud usurping Power, when he was gone.
81
But now, when fame of this home-chosen Match
Arrived in France (for there it did arrive,
Ere they could here attend to make dispatch
T'impart the same to Warwick, or contriue
Some color that in any sort might fetch
Him fayrely off, and no dishonor give)
It so much stird the humors in those parts,
As marred the whole complexion of their hearts.
82
The French King scorns such an indignity.
Warwick disdaines employment in this case.
The Queen (enraged) with extreme vehemence,
Storms at her sisters and her own disgrace.
The Lady Bona takes most tenderly
To be so mocked, with hope of such a Place:
And all blame Warwick, and his fraud condem;
Whilst he himself, deceived, suffers with them:
83
And could not (by all means might be deuiz'd)
Vntaste them of this violent disgust;
But that they still held, something lay disguised
Under this treaty. So that now he must
Bring-home his reputation cauteris'd
With th'idle mark of serving others lust
In frivolous employments, or be sent
Out of the way to color some intent.
84
" Which, to himself, made him, with grief inueigh
" Against distemp'red kings: who often are
" Ill warrants for their own affairs; and weigh
" Their lusts, more then their dignity, by far:
" And what a misery they have that sway
" Their great designs; what danger, and what care;
" And often must be forced, be'ing at their becks,
" To crack their reputation, or their necks.
85
" How their high favors like as fig trees are,
" That grow upon the sides of rocks; where they
" Who reach their fruit, adventure must so far
" As to hazard their deep downfall and decay.
" Their grace, not fixed; but, as a blazing star
" Burns out the present matter, and away:
" And how the world could too well witness (...),
" That both their loves and hates like dangerous were.
86
Thus he complaynes, and makes his home-retire;
All disappointed of his purposes.
For, hoping, by this Match, to hold entire
That Lady, with her great alliances;
And have the King more (...) to his desire,
By managing of both their bus'nesses;
He, by this Match (thus made without his mean)
Comes barred from al those tying interests clean.
87
For, well he knew, that all his service past
Was past; and would not be a future tie
To hold him in, unless that he could cast
To introduce some neerenecessity
Of his employment, that were like to last,
And shut-out all other concurrency.
Without which, nor his Greatness, nor his Wits,
Could ward him from the Kings unconstant fits.
88
Which more perplexed him, and in nearer sort,
Then what France might by his embassage guess,
Or England deem, But, being arrived at Cort,
He draws a Trauerse 'twixt his greeuances;
Looks like the time: his eye made not report
Of what he felt within: nor was he less
Then usually he was, in every part;
Wore a clear face, upon a clowdy heart:
89
Congratulates the Queen; commends the King
For his rare choice; protesting her to be
Far beyond all, the world beside could bring
To fit his liking; and that he did see
The Lady Bona was a peevish thing,
Sullayne, and proud; and would in no degree
Have pleased his humor, or in any sort
Have satisfied the Ladies of this Cort.
90
And, after having finished all the rite
Of complement and interuisiting;
He humbly craves (...) that he might
Retire a while, to attend the managing
And setting of his country-bus'nesse right;
Whereby the better to attend the King:
From whom he parts; and never seemed more dear,
More (...), nor yet himself offre'er cheer.
91
First, VVarwick-Castle (that had seldom known
The Master there) he visits; and from thence
Goest' other goodly Mannours of his own.
Where seen with joy, with love, with reverence;
(King of him self,) he finds that there is show'n
The use of life, the true magnificence,
(...) his Greatness: which, at Corte, in vain
Mentoyle-for, and yet never do attain.
92
Which, his religious Confessor (who best
Could cast, with what a violent access,
This sever of Ambition did molest
His still-sick mind) takes hold-on; to address
(Upon the advantage of this little rest)
Some lenitiues, t'allay the firynesse
Of this disease; which (as a malady,
Seized in the Spirits) has seldom remedy.
93
" And thus sets on him: See, my Lord, how here
" The Eternal Providence of God has brought
" You to the Shore of safety (out of fear)
" From all the waves of misery, that wrought
" To ouer-whelm you; and has set you clear,
" Where you would be; with having (which you sought
" Through all these hazards of distress) a King
" Of your own making and establishing.
94
" And now, my Lord, I trust you will sit down,
" And rest you, after all this passed thrall,
" And be your self (a Prince within your own)
" Without aduent'ring any more at all
" Your state in others Bottomes; having known
" The dangers that on mighty Actors fall;
" Since, in the foot of your accounts, your gaynes
" Come-short to make even reckoning with your pains.
95
" Enjoy now what you wrought-for, in this sort
" (If great-mens Ends be to enjoy their Ends)
" And know, the happiest power, the greatest port,
" Is only that which on it self depends.
" Here have you State enough to be a Cort
" Unto your self; here, where the world attends
" On you, not you on it, observed sole:
" You, elsewhere but a part, are here the whole.
96
" Th'aduantages of Princes, are (we see)
" But things conceived imaginarily.
" For, every state of fortune, in degree,
" Some image has of principality:
" Which they enjoy more natural and free,
" Then can great Powers, chained with observancie,
" And with the fetters of respect still tied;
" Being easier far to follow then to guide.
97
" And what are Corts, but Camps of misery?
" That do besiege men's states, and still are pressed
" T'assaile, prevent, complot, and fortify;
" In hope t'attaine, in fear to be suppressed:
" Where, all with shows, and with apparancie,
" Men seem, as if for stratagems addressed:
" Where, Fortune, as the Woolfe, does still prefer
" The fowlest of the train that follows her.
98
" And where, fair hopes are laid (as ambushments)
" To intercept your life, and to betray
" Your liberty to such intanglements,
" As you shall neuer-more get clear away:
" Where, both th'ingagement of your own intents,
" And others recknings, and accounts, shall lay
" Such waights upon you, as you shall not part,
" Unless you break your credit, or your heart.
99
" Besides: as exiles, ever from your homes
" You live perpetual in disturbancy;
" Contending, thrusting, shuffling for your rooms
" Of ease or honor, with impatiency:
" Building your fortunes, upon others tombs,
" For other then your own posterity.
" You see, Corts few advance; many undo:
" And those they do advance, they ruin too.
100
" And therefore now, my Lord, since you are here,
" Where you may have your rest with dignity;
" Work that you may continue so: and clear
" Your self, from out these streights of misery.
" Hold your estate and life, as things more dear
" Then to be thrown at an uncertainty.
" It Is time, that you and England have a calm;
" And time, the Olive stood above the Palm.
101
Thus the good Father, with an humble thought
(Bred in a Cellularie low retire)
According to his quiet humor, sought
T'auert him from his turbulent desire;
" When the great Earl began: Father, I note
" What you with zeal advise, with love require:
" And I must thank you, for this care you have,
" And for those good aduertisements you gave.
102
" And truly, Father, could I but get free
" (Without being rent) and hold my dignity;
" That Sheep-cot, which in yonder vale you see
" (Beset with Groves, and those sweet Springs hard-by)
" I rather would my Palace wish to be,
" Then any roof, of proudest Majesty:
" But, that I cannot do; I have my part:
" And I must live, in one house, with my heart.
103
" I know, that I am fixed unto a Sphere
" That is ordayn'd to move. It is the place
" My fate appoints me; and the region where
" I must, what-euer happens, there, embrace,
" Disturbance, travail, labor, hope and fear,
" Are of that Clime, engendered in that place.
" And action best, I see, becomes the Best.
" The Stars, that have most glory, have no rest.
104
" Besides: it were a Cowards part, to fly
" Now from my Hold, that have held out so well;
" It being the Station of my life, where I
" Am set to serve, and stand as Sentinel:
" And must, of force, make good the place, or die,
" When Fate and Fortune (those great States) compel.
" And then, we Lords in such case (...) are,
" As peace can cut our throats as well as war.
105
" And has her griefs, and (...) (...):
" And does with idle rest, deforme us more
" Then any (...) can, or sorceresse,
" With basely wasting all the Martial store
" Of heat and spirit (which graceth Manliness)
" And makes us still false images adore:
" Besides profusion of our faculties,
" In gross dull glutt'ny, vap'rous gourmandise.
106
" And therefore since I am the man I am,
" I must not give a foot, least I give all.
" Nor is this Bird within my breast so tame,
" As to be fed at hand, and mocked with-all.
" I rather would my state were out of frame,
" Then my renown should come to get a fall.
" No, no: th'vngratefull boy shall never think,
" That I, who him enlarged to power, will shrink.
107
" What is our life, without our dignity?
" Which often, we see, comes less by living long.
" Who ever was there worth the memory,
" And eminent indeed, but still died young?
" As if worth had agreed with destiny,
" That time, which rightes them, should not do the^ wrong.
" Besides; Old Age does give, by too long space,
" Our souls as many wrinkles as our face.
108
" And as for my inheritance and state
" (What ever happen) I will so provide
" That Law shall, with what strength it has, collate
" The same on mine, and those to mine allied:
" Although I know, she serves a present State,
" And can undo again what she has tied.
" But, that we leave to him, who poynts-out heirs:
" And howsoever, yet the world is theirs.
109
" Where, they must work it out; as borne to run
" Those Fortunes, which as mighty Families
" (As ever they could be) before have done.
" Nor shall they gain, by mine indignities,
" Who may without my courses be undone.
" And who-so makes his State, and life, his ties
" To do unworthily, is borne a slave:
" And let him with that brand go to his Grave.
110
Here, would the reverent Father have replied,
That it were far more Magnanimity,
T'indure, then to resist: that we are tied
As well to bear the inconueniencie
And straynes of Kings and States; as to abide
Untimely raynes, tempests, sterilitie,
And other ills of Nature that befall:
Which we, of force, must be content withal:
111
But that a speedy messenger was sent
To show, the D. of Clarence was hard-by.
And, thereupon, Warwick breakes-off, and went
(With all his train attending formally)
To intertaine him, with fit complement;
As, glad of such an opportunity
To work upon, for those high purposes
He had conceived in discontentednes.
The end of the eightth Book.
Faults escaped.
Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 40. 24. all call 61. 9. This It Is 204. 14. our
one.


