A faithful Report of proceedings anent the Assembly of Ministers at Abirdeen
upon Twesday 2. July 1605.

Proverb. 18. verse. 17. He that is first in his own cause is just, then comes
his neighbor and makes inquiry of him.

21. Februar. 1606.

A faithful Report of proceedings anent the Assembly of Ministers at Abirdeen
upon Twesday the second of Iulij 1605.
ALthough I have been in England many years, yet I cannot but be moved with
the grievous traducing of faithful Ministers in Scotland, which I hear every
day as I have occasion to meet with men either addicted (more or less) to
Papistrie, or utterly ignorant of Scottis-affairs. Traducing, I say, sic
Ministers as if they were indeed guilty of high treason. A lively member of
the Kirk cannot but be sensible of the troubles thereof, in what part of the
world so ever he be: How then can I be unmoved to hear sic things of the
principal members of the Kirk in Scotland, so near and dear not only to
Scottis-me^, but to Englishmen too, if they be truly religious? For does not
every wise-hearted Christian evidently perceive, that (among other Stratagemes
of this declining age) Satan would blemish the gospel and vnderminde the Kirk,
through the sides of those faithful Ministers.

I have thought it therefore very necessary to collect and set donn this
faithful Report, hoping that th'indifferent Reader will suspend his judgment,
till Truth (Times daughter) be fit to show her self in publict. I confute no
objections, because I would not offend: and besides Rectum est index sui and
obliqui. Lastly I call this Report faithful, because I have faithfully
collected the same out of faithful intelligences sent out of Scotland from
faithful Brethren; and not because I can ovow (though I believe) every part
thereof to be undoubtedly true. And therefore pray with protestation that this
Report be not prejudicial to a more evident truth, which hereafter may be
published by authority; or by the Ministry.

In the General Assembly at Halyrudehous, in November 1602. the Brethren
consented to his Ma: that the next Assembly sold be at Abirdeen the last
Twesday of July 1604. and not before (Notwithstanding it was then and there
ordained with his Ma. consent, that the diets of Assemblies be appointed, and
kept precisely every year according to an act of Parliament 1592) Respecting
his Ma. pleasure so much, as that they did not duly consider how prejudicial
it might prove to the liberty of the ^^rk, to transgress the said Acts of
Parliament, and General Assembly, in not holding with all constancy the
General Assembly Once (at least) every year.

That their exceeding regard of his Ma: pleasure may it more appear, it is not
to be forgotten, that the Presbyteries yielded to a Letter dated at Perth 4.
July 1604. and subscribed be the Lord of Lowreston the Kings Commissioner,
Master Patrik Galloway, Moderator of the said Assembly at Holyrudehous and
Master Richard Thomeson, Clerk to the Commissioners, in name of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly: Whereby they were certified that it was
his Majesty's pleasure that the Assembly sold be continued to the First
Twesday of July 1605. if advertisement came not sooner. And this they did,
notwithstanding an Act of the Assembly at Holyrudehous, whereby all power was
taken from the Commissioners of the General Assembly, to make any alteration,
drift or delay of the diet of the General Assembly: Which act was made with
his Majesty's consent, to remove a just conceived grief of the Kirk.

The General Assembly being so mani-yeeres deferred, open scandalls so
multiplied, and the rather because inferior Iudicatories were contemned by the
chiefest malefactors, who did elude, and escape their censures by appellation
to a General Assembly, which they never expected; and Papists grew so
insolent, Jesuits and Seminary Priests travayling securely within the
kingdom, That of necessity many Synodes and Presbyteries used many means and
Mediators, yea many Commissioners from many Provinces, convening at Saint
Iohnstone in October 1604. made (with consent of his Majesty's Commissioner) a
Supplication to his Majesty, for hasting the General Assembly; But all to no
great purpose.

For not long before the uttermost day of Assembly were letters dated at
Edingburgh, subscribed as those from Perth, and directed to the Presbyteries,
advising them not to keep the fifth day of Iulij: Which error of naming the
fifth day for the First Twesday, which was the second day of Iuli directly
appointed in the said letters from Perth, whether it were of purpose or no, it
is not certain. But so it was that the Commissioners of some Presbyteries by
reason thereof came not to Abirdeen till the 4. and 5. days of Iuli, and some
not at all.

The causes mooving the Presbyteries to send their Commissioners (these letters
notwithstanding) were these. 1. They came too late. 2. They were not with
command, but by way of advice. 3. By the said Act at Halyrudehous, the power of
altering or delaying the Diet of Assemblies was taken from the Commissioners of
the General Assembly. 4 No other day and place were appointed. 5. The danger
of the forfalting the liberty of the Kirk, and 6. The necessity of an
Assembly.

The Ministers who convened at Abirdeen the second of July were these, May.
John Forbes, Ma. John Munro, Ma. Andro Duncan, Ma. Alexander Stranchen, Ma.
William Forbes, Ma. Robert oungson, Ma. James Irving, Ma. Charles Ferme, Ma.
John Sharp, Ma. Robert Durie. Ma. Archibald Blackburne, Ma. James Rosse, Ma.
David Rail, Ma. Alexander Strogie, M. James Mill, Ma. David Robertson, Ma.
William Dauidson, Ma. Robert Reed, and John Rough, in all 19.

After the sermon made by Ma. James Rosse Minister at Abirdeen, the Brethren
convened in the Kirk with the Lord of Lowreston, and by mutual consent
continued their donn sitting till the after noone in expectation of mo Brethren
hindered in their journey, as was supposed, by injury of weather. At two
hours in the after noone they met in the Session-house, within the Kirk of
Abirdeen, and after incalling on the name of God by May. David Rout Moderator
of the Synod of Abirdeen, in place of M. Pal. Galloway, they sent for the
ordinary Clerk of the Assembly, who went to them; At which time the Lord of
Lowreston sitting don amongst them, affirmed: That though he might charge them,
yet he would rather make use of a missive Letter from the Lords of the secret
Council, directed to the Ministry in their Assembly at Abirdeen, which he
desired them to read and answer. But until a Moderator was chosen, that could
not be. He named Master John Forbes to be the mouth for the rest; But
perceiving that the Assembly would proceed orderly in their election, he
remooved him self of his own free will, That (as he openly declared) he
might eschew to be quarelled and found fault with, for seeming to approove the
said Election by his presence, if it sold fall out that he and they sold not
agree. After his remooving, they desired Ma. Thomas Nicholsone (ordinary
Clerk to the Assembly) to remain with them, and to do his office, He refused
til he sold see how the issue of their doings sold content the Lord of
Lowreston, and so (but first desiring and obtaining dispensation for his
absence) he likewise remooved himself.

The Assembly proceeds, and having put in lytes Master Robert Durie, Ma. John
Munro, and Ma. John Forbes, who were in ele^^^on, with general consent choose
May. Io^^ Forbes Moderator, and the rather, because they were willing to
respect the Lord of Lowstones nominatio^; and after prayer made by the new
Moderator, they did choose M. John Sharp Clerk for that time.

After this election the Letter missiue was read, and the judgment of the
Assembly craved. The letter consisted of two points; first that the Assembly
sold be presently dissolved; and secondly, that no new diet sold be appointed
till his Majesty were acquainted therewith. And yet it was agreed between the
Lord Chancellor and May. John Forbes in Edinburgh before the Ministers met in
their Assembly at Abirdeen, that the Ministers sold meet, and (upon request of
the Council) having fenced their Assembly, continue the entreating of all
things to a new day. The Assembly yielded to the former, But for reasons before
mentioned, thought it needful to appoint a new diet, if the Lord of Lowreston
would not, but if he would they agreed to consent thereto, were the day
appointed long or short. They sent and desired his presence. The Moderator
declared to him the judgment of the Assembly, and he approved the former part
of their conclusion, but refused to design any time long or short, Albeit the
Assembly assured him that upon the reverent respect they had to satisfy his
Ma. desire, they would be als ready afterward to continue to a certain day, if
his Ma. sold require the same. After long reasoning was brought to consider
the necessity of continuing the Assembly to a certain time: and the rather,
because (as he him self did there openly report) it was thought they sold
never have Assembly again: but yet would not agree thereunto, because (as he
affirmed) he had no warrant so to do. He therefore again did voluntarily
remove him self, though he was desired to stay, giving the second time the
same cause of sic remooving him self, which he gave before.

Presently after, The entreating of the affairs of the Assembly were continued
to the (...) Twesday of September then next following a Abirdeen; and
intimation ordained to be made in all Presbyteries according to the order and
custom observed in sic cases. Which being done, and the Assembly ready to
dissolve, the Lord of Lawreston returned of him self (for the doors were
never shut) and protested that he did not acknowledge their meeting for a
lawful Assembly from the beginning; Because of the absence of M. Patrik
Galloway, Moderator of the former general Assembly; and of the ordinary clerk:
(Here it is to be noted that the number of Ministers assembled, was not the^
excepted against.) To the protestation the Moderator (in name of the rest)
answered that the reasons thereof notwithstanding, it behoved the Assembly to
be lawful: Because of the warrant. 1. of Gods word. 2. Laws of the Realm. 3.
continual practice of the Kirk, since the year of our Lord 1560. But most
clearly set donn in the book of discipline established in this Land, at his
Ma. own desire publicly made to the General Assembly holde^ at Glasgo, 1581.
where n the 7. ca. art. 3. and 4. it is thus written: All ecclesiastical
Assemblies have power to convene together for treating of things concerning the
church p rtaining to their charges. They have power to appoint times and places
to that effect, and one Assembly to appoint diet, time and place of another. 4.
The subscription and oath of the King and all his subjects. 5. The said letter
of the Commissioners from Perth and. 6. Presidents in the Register of the
Assembly of choosing a new Moderator in absence of the old, and a clerk for
the time in place of th'ordinarie.

In mean time the Lord of Lowreston caused John Wisheart messinger to charge
the Assembly with letters of Horning to suffer the same to desert, and gave a
subscribed copy to the Moderator in name of the Assembly? The reasons whereof
were these. 1. That his Ma. had signified that he could not be resolved anent a
general Assembly till the Parliament was past. 2. That this Assembly was
without his knowledge and consent. Thereunto Obedience was given instantly, the
Moderator craving a certificat of the same under the hand of the messinger, who
was also a public Notarie: but he refusing, The Ministers after the dissolving
of the Assembly with prayer by the Moderator, went presently to the common
Clerks chamber of Abirdeen, and took instruments of their obedience to the
said charge: Which was t'honly charge that ever they heard of first or last by
public or private intimation or knowledge whatsoever, as they protested upon
their salvation in their Apology send afterward to his Majesty.

Of this charge no mention was made to the Lords of the secret Counsel, but
another was alleged to have been given by virtue of the same letters on Monday
the first of July by open proclamation at the market cross of Abirdeen.
Whereas (in truth) there was no sic thing don. For then the Lord of Lowreston
would have intimated the same, when he delivered the said letter missiue, and
not have said that he might have charged them, if he would. Again, it can be
proved that from the first coming of the Lord of Lowreston and his servants
into Abirdeen to eight hours in the night, there were continually about the
market cross, walking sundry honest men, who heard of no sic matter.
Moreover, if the indorsement of the said supposed charge were true, to wit,
that it was executed before. 2. witnesses, both servantes to the Lord of
Lowreston, between 7. and 8. hours at night, yet it was to no purpose.
Because it was not executed in the morning between eight and 12. hour at
noone, before famous witnesses according to an act of Parleament 1587.

Upon Thursday and Friday following (...) reason of the error of the
Commissioners Letter aforesaid, came to Abirdeen May. John Welsh, May.
Nathaniel Inglis, Ma. James Greig, Ma. John oung, Ma. Thomas Abirnethie, Ma.
Archibald Symson, Ma. Nathaniel Harlaw, M. Abraham Henderson, and John Rosse:
who finding the Assembly dissolved, and having received a subscribed copy of
the proceedings thereof, went to the place where the Assembly was holden, and
for the discharge of their Commission, took instruments under the hands of
two Notaries, that they were come to have kept the said Assembly and that they
did ratify all the proceedings thereof, in their own names, and in the names
of the Presbyteries who sent them.

After which proceedings, the 24. of Iuli, May. John Forbes being in Edinburgh
of purpose to satisfy the Lords of Council anent the alleged disobedience
to his Majesty's charge, was send for by the Counsel to speak with them who
were convened, consisting of 6. Lords and 7. or 8. of the late Bishops, and
Commissioners of the General Assembly (a noveltie not heard of before in
Scotland) and was commanded to ward in the Castle of Edinburgh, because he
would not condemn the Assembly at Abirdeen by his private judgment, albeit he
submitted him self and proceedings thereat to the General Assembly.

Master John Welsh being also in Edinburgh, was charged by a Messinger to
compeir before the Council the next day following; who compeiring and refusing
to give his oath, as he took it super inquirendis, albeit he offered it upon
the knowledge of the particular interrogatories, was likewise warded in the
Tolbnith till eleaven hours, at which time both he and May. John Forbes were
transported to Blacknes.

The second of August Ma. Robert Durie, Ma. Andro Duncan, Ma. Alexander
Stranchen, and Ma. John Sharp, being summoned, compeired before the Council,
and with them M. John Welsh, who was brought from Blacknes upon his offer to
give his Oath upon the points of his summonds, and were all committed to
prison in Blacknes, for the same cause for which Ma. John Forbes was imprisoned.

The third of October other 14. of those, who had been either the 2. or 5. day
of July in Abirdeen, being cited before the Council 7. of them, because they
doubted of the lawfulnes of the Assembly, til it were discussed in a free
General Assembly, were remitted home; and other 7. were warded for the same
cause, for which the rest were imprisoned before. To wit, May. Charles Ferme,
and Ma. John Munro were warded in the Castle of Dorone, M. Nathaniel Inglis,
and M. James Greig, in the castle of Dumbertome, M. James Irving, Ma. William
Forbes and John Rosse in the castle of Stirling. The rest who were at Abirdeen
the 2. and 5. of July were not summoned, and so spared by the providence of God.

After sundry Supplications, the said 13. imprisoned Ministers wrote reasons
to prove the Summonds from the secret Council, and proceedings before them to
be prejudicial to the authorized discipline of the Kirk, and contrary to the
laudable order observed in the Realm. And most humbly besought their Lo: in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, to
remit their cause and trial thereof to the General Assembly as only judge
competent thereto: as also to dimit them in peace that they might attend on
their callings. Which Supplications not regarded, they gave to the Lords a
Declinator subscribed by them all the said 24. of October. Whereby they did
appeal, as it were, from the King and the Council, to the K. and General
Assembly: yet so that they did always acknowledge themselves bound to submit
to the Councels judgment, in any matter wherein any other subject was bound to
submit. And howsoever they referred the answering of theticall Interrogatories
to the General Assembly, yet to clear themselves of crimes objected, they
answered particular accusations and hypotheticall interrogations in their
Resuming of the said Summonds and Apology to his Ma.

Their Reasons of declining the Councels judgment contained in their last
supplication, and pleaded when they gave their Declinator, be these.

1. They alleged and read an act of Parliament in anno 1592. whereby a former
act of Parliament anno 1584. making it treasonable to decline the King and
Councels judgment was interpreted, (for it passed when the principal members
both of Kirk and Commonwealth were forced to forsake the land, and it was never
put in execution) not to derogate any thing to the privilege that God has
given to the spiritual office-bearers in the Kirk concerning any essential
censure having warrant of Gods word. But to judge of the lawfulnes or
unlawfulness of Synodes (whereof the General Assembly is the sinew and life) is
an essential censure, having warrant of Gods word.

2. By the practice of the Kirk since the act of Parliament 1584. recorded in
the Register of the Assembly, one Assembly has ever discerned and judged
another, and the proceedings thereof, as is evident in the General Assembly
holde^ at Dundie anno 1597. which allowed the Assembly at Perth, and the
proceedings thereof; at both which Assemblies his Ma: was present: and (which
is more) he required the question made of the former to be decided by the later
Assembly, as properly pertaining to that Iudicatorie. And in his Ma:
Proclamation given to Hampton Court 26. of September 1605. His Ma: not
forgetting the practice of this Kirk, expects separation of the supposed
disorders of the Assembly (for which we are called in question) at the Assembly
to be holden at Dundie the last Twesday of July next.

3. If the Council sold take upon them to judge and censure the lawfulnes or
unlawfulness, the validity or invaliditie of an Assembly: What were this, but
to confound Ecclesiastical, and Civil Iudicatories, which hitherto have been
by law and practice happily distinguished? and which his Ma: in the Declaration
of the said Act of Parliament, anno 1584. professes to be far from his
meaning. His intention being (as he there affirms) not in sort to take away
the lawful and ordinary judgment in the Kirk, whereby Discipline and good
order might decay; But that as temporal Magistrates do judge in temporal
matters, so Spiritual Jurisdiction sold have the ordinary trial in matters
belonging to the Ministry and their estate.

Moreover, It may be affirmed, that it is no new thing to decline the Council.
For 1. there is a Declinator yet extant, subscribed by the hands of those same
men of the Ministry, who are now most against us, and mo then 300. Pastors:
and 2. It is also, and has been an ordinary custom in civil and criminal
matters even of Civil persons to decline the Council, and to take them to the
judgment of the Lords of Session, or to the Justice, upon the different
quality of the civil fact.

At this time Ma. Robert ounson, one of those who had been remitted from Perth,
because he doubted of the lawfulnes of the Assembly, being moved in
conscience, returned; and the same day and hour when these 13. were standing
before the Council in that cause did compeir, and desiring to be heard did
acknowledge his oversight at Perth, and confesses his trouble in conscience.
And therefore that albeit not summoned by their Lo: yet charged by the living
God, was compelled to come thither that day to justify that Assembly, and
whole proceedings thereof, to the great astonishment of the Lords, and comfort
of his brethren; who also subscribed the Declinator with them. Who all
thereafter were send back to their several prisons, and Ma. Robert oungson
to the Castle of Stirling, with the other three that were warded there, and so
as yet all continue in ward.

In their Resuming of Summondes and Apology before mentioned, the Ministers
clear themselves of crimes objected, by narration of their proceedings
already reported, and reasons therein comprised; and et further by these
Apologeticall answers.

First, the true cause of the lawfulnes of ecclesiastical Synodes, and actions
is the ordinance of Jesus Christ, who as King of his Kirk, has prescribed and
commanded the same in his word, as is affirmed in the said book of
Discipline, cap. 1. art. 10. So that the act of Parliament in anno 1592. is not
the only warrant of sic Synods and actions, being but the civil approbation of
our christian Sovereign moved of christian duty, in testification of his
subjection to Christ, and willingness to have all his subjects brought under
humble obedience to the scepter of Christ, as may appear by these words of
the said Act: And declares the said Assemblies Presbyteries, and Sessions,
Jurisdiction and Discipline thereof, to have been in all times bigane, and to
be in all times coming, most good, just and godly in the self. Therefore, and
the rather because of our subscription and oath to maintain the discipline of
our Kirk contained in the Confession of our faith, we had highly sinned, if we
had not forced the General Assembly, being not forbidden to meet by the
Council, nor by the Kings Commissioner, no not by the Commissioners of the
General Assembly. For they only advised us not to keep the 5. day, and it
was not kept. And seeing we had endangered the liberty of the Kirk, if we had
not continued the Assembly to a certain day. For authority designed none,
whereunto we might have consented, and therefore, that day being expired,
another could not be appointed by the Kirk, according to the ordinance, and
ordinary custom of the same.

Secondly, we did not transgress the said act of Parliament anno 1592. in any
thing. 1. Because it is no instituting law, but a simple approbation of
Assemblies as they are appointed by the Kirk. 2. Because the said Approbation
declares that it salbe lawful to the Kircke and Ministers every eere once, and
ofter, as occasion sall require, to hold General Assemblies. 3. Because in the
same statute it is provided that the King, or his Co^missioner (if either be in
the Town where the general Assembly is held) be present, not to allow or
disallow the convening or holding of the said Assemblies, but only to nominate
the time and place of the next Assembly. And therefore it is provided that the
King or his Commissioner be present at Ilk General Assembly before the
dissolvinge thereof: Neither does the proviso give authority to the King or
his Commissioner to nominate the time and place of the next Assembly
absolutely, or by him self, but coniunctly and with the Assembly. But if
neither the King nor his Commissioner be present in the place of the Assembly,
then the proviso says expressly, that it salbe lesum to the Assembly by them
selves to nominate time and place of the next Assembly. But true it is, that
his Ma: could not, and his Co^missioner would not be present, but (as said is)
voluntarily removed him self, while the Assembly was continued to a certain
time and place.

Thirdly, let it be supposed that it was an offense to hold, and to continue
the said Assembly, et it was not to be imputed unto us, because we were but
commissioners of sundry Presbyteries, whereunto, and not unto us in particular
the said letters from the Commissioners at Edinburgh were directed, which
notwithstanding, the Presbyteries send us unto the Assembly, and approved our
proceedings after the Assembly. So that the Presbyteries (if any) and not we
are subject to censure.

All which allegations notwithstanding, Ma. John Forbes, Ma. John Welsh, Ma.
Robert Durie, Ma. Andrew Duncan, Ma. John Sharp, and Ma. Alexander Stranchen
were brought by the guard from Blackenes to Linlitgow, there to be arraigned
upon Friday 10. January last, before the secret Council of Treason, because
they declined the judgment of the said Council, contrary to the said Act of
Parleament anno 1584.

The Council first dealt with them instantly, to depart from their Declinator
for his Ma: satisfaction. They were willing, so that all proceedings might be
holden pro deleto. Then the Council willed them to take advise of their
brethren, who were many then and there met together from many parts of
Scotland. They did so, and at first found great difference of opinion. For some
thought it lawful, and (in respect of inco^veniences likely to follow) very
expedient to depart from the said Declinator. In the end (with consent) some of
the Ministers were send to the Counsel, for eschewing the present peril of
their Brethren, to crave leave for the prisoners to go, and co^ferre with the
Presbyteries (which send them in commission) anent that motion, without whose
advice they could do nothing in the said matter. This denied, it was thought by
the whole number of the Ministers, that the Prisoners could not pass from
their Declinator without great prejudice to the Kirk and Kingdom of Christ.
Wherevpo^ they were carried to the place of arraignment, and named for their
Prolocutors Ma. Thomas Craig, M. William Oliphant, M. Thomas Hope, and M.
Thomas Gray, who had all promised to speak for them; but the two former being
absent were send for and refused to come. The other two by evident reasons made
the lawfulnes of the prisoners their proceedings, manifest to the consciences
of all. But the prisoners them selves so cleared themselves and their cause,
that their enemies were astonished, their doubtful Brethren resolved, and
every one that heard, satisfied. So that the Kings advocat was put to his
shift, namely to charge the Assise only to find, whether the prisoners had
declined the Councils judgment or no, to which purpose only he gave them
proofs. And the Assise was so troubled that they would have been rid of the
matter. But that denied, and they enclosed; at the first they all would have
cleansed the prisoners, which being signified to the Counsel they willed the
Justice clerk, and Henry Steward Chancellor of the Assise (in England called
the Forema^ of the Jury) to deal with the prisoners, to see, if et they might
be made to depart from their Declinator; which being refused, they were send
back to the Assise to convict the prisoners in respect it was his Ma. will, and
it behooved so to be, for preparing way to their peace. Whereupon it being voted
6. cleansed, and the rest filed the Prisoners, to the unspeakable grief and
miscontent of all men, except, etc. But judgment was suspended till his Ma.
mind be known.

Whose mind (I hope) will be to reexamine matters, or to release the
prisoners, lest otherwise he be guilty of Innocent blood; ea the blood of the
Lords holy ones (for such are faithful Ministers in a special sense) which is
right precious in his sight. And therefore he says, Touch not mine anointed,
and do my Prophets no harm. And the rather, because it is inacted 11. Jacob.
6. ca. 91. That all Assizes (or Iuries) be enclosed alone, and no person to be
suffered to be with them, nor to repair to them under any pretense whatsoever,
and that they be not suffered to come out for whatsoever cause, till they
being agreed, return their answer to the judge. Otherwise, or in case any
point of the said act be transgressed, the parties accused to be holden, and
pronounced clear and innocent of the crimes and treasons then laid to their
charge. Nay though there were no such statute, yet (I hope) his Ma: will take
heed of such innocent blood, because I have experience of his natural gracious
disposition. For howsoever incensed by sic as sought themselves, he made
grievous laws against the Kirk in anno 1584. ea so, that he put down the
Presbyteries and set up Bishops: et upon better information and consideration,
he put down Papal Bishops, and set up the Presbytery as the ordinance of
God. Again, his Ma. being very wise, can not but ^^rceyue how the titular
Bishops which he has made, grieving that they have a title without
Jurisdiction: And the late Commissioners of the General Assembly, aspiring to
that transcendent authority, which they see Commissioners Ecclesiastical
exercise in England, under pretense of his Ma: prerogative, use all the
devises, friends, and means they can, to incense his Ma: against all
Presbyteriall government, especially the General Assembly, which holds all
in aw.

Beseeching God to sanctify and bless his Majesty, and his Royal Issue to
justify wisdom, and comfort his people. I commend this Report to the Reader,
and him to the grace of God. From my chamber the 21. of February 1606.


