A Continuation of the History of France, from the death of Charles the eight
where Comines ends, till the death of Henry the second.

Collected By Thomas Danett Gentleman.

LONDON Printed by Thomas ^^st for Thomas Charde. 1600.

To the Right honorable my very good Lord the Lord Buckhurst, Lord high
Treasorer of England and knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
AFter I had Right Honorable about three years sithence presented to the late
LORD TREASORER of worthy memory your Lordships predecessor the Commentaries
of Comines, translated into our English tongue, I was earnestly pressed by some
of my friends to continue the History of France, from Charles the eight where
he ends till this our present age, which a long time I utterly refused to
do, knowing that to annex my poor collections to the works of so excellent a
writer as Comines is, should be as arrogant a part and as much to my discredit
as if a Painter should have attempted to finish the Image of Venus beegunne but
not ended by Apelles, which was a work of so rare excellency that no Paynter
after him durst adventure to perfect it. Notwithstanding when I called to mind
that others before me had attempted this that they required at my hands, and
withal not being able to withstand the importunity of my friends I began
though somewhat timorously to take pen in hand. And whereas there are in all
learnings two kinds of methodes, the one proceeding from the causes to the
effects, and the other judging of the causes by the effects which is called
Iudicium a posteriori: my self not being able to perform the former as
Comines does, who was privy to the hidden mysteries, of Princes deseignes, and
of Counsel with their secret cogitations: determined only to follow the
second course, namely to set down the effects and the naked truth forbearing
either to give grave aduertisments as well to Princes themselves as to their
servant as he does, or to enter into deep discourses of high points of
policy and government (as a matter far above my capacity) wherewith his
works are singularly beautified. In the which course having waded in the
History of France till the death of Henry the second and purposing to
continue it further, both my heart and hand fainted, and my pen fell forth of
my fingers of it own accord.

For the actions of the civil wars of France are so blouddie, cruel, and
barbarous and so far I will not say srom all Christianity, but from all
humanity and military discipline used in former times, that for my own part
I judge them worthy to be buried in the dongeon of eternal oblivion.
Agreeable to the which actions were also the effects whereof my self have been
an eye witness. For passing out of Spain through France in the year 77, in
company of a Gentleman of good service not long since gone to God, whom her
Majesty employed at that time to the King of Spain for her affairs: we found
such a wilderness in all the country between Bayonne and Bourdeaux, that whole
forests and woods were turned up and consumed, the towns utterly desolated,
the people despearsed, the churches quite subverted, and the children (a
lamentable thing to be recorded) remaining unchristened by the space of ten
years, which bred in me such a commiseration, to see so noble a member of
Christendom so miserablye torn in pieces with her own teeth, that it did not
only visiblie as it were set before mine eyes the destruction of Sodoma and
Gomorha, and the rude Chaos wherein the world lay buried and hidden, before God
placed all things in this goodly order which we now see them in: but also made
me call to mind the example of Africanus Minor, who wept bitterly with a
certain Sinpathie of sorrow, when he saw Carthage all on flaming fire, calling
to mind that the like might happen to his own country Rome in time to come.
The vices that ouerflowed France at the beeginning of their civil wars are
noted to be these three, Magia, Atheismus, Libido, which I pray God England
be free from at this day. But I will no longer dwell upon this argument, least
my Epistle become to your honorable Lordship odious, and my book beecome in
it self monstrous by having to great a head to so small a body, wherefore to
return to my principal purpose, having reduced the History of France, so
far as for the reasons above aledged I determined to proceed in it, I was
soon resolved to whom to dedicate these my simple labors, for having
presented Comines to your Lordships predecessor, to whom could I fitlier
consecrate this my continuance of his History then to your Lordship, being
his successor in office, in honor, in government, in Wisdom, and in all
other virtues beelonging to a most worthy counselor so that GOD has raised
you up under her most excellent Majesty, to be no less famous in matters of
Council then others are in matters of war, which Cicero as your Lordship
knowerh preserreth far before warly actions, because Council preserves
the commonwealth without wars, but war cannot desend it without counsel.
The handeling of the work is mean I confess, and too* unworthy of so noble
a patron: yet notwithstanding it contains the principal matters of state
that passed in th^se parts by the space of three score years. Wherefore if
your Lordship shall vouchsafe to accept it as our Savior in the Scripture did
the poor Widows Mite: I shall think my self a happy man in having
obtained the fruit of my desire, and shall daily pray to Almighty GOD long to
preserve your Lordship in all honor and felicity, as well for the advancement
of her Majesty's service, as for the benefit of the whole common wealth.

Your Lordships Thomas Dannett.

In the Epistle in the first line last page for those read these. Page. 29.
line. 18. for Nauara read Nouara. Page 34. line 6* for in battle, read in a
battle. Page 46. line 12. for estate, read estates. Page 69. line 12. for
charge, read great charge. Page 81. line 7. for predecessors, read predecessor.
Page 87. line. 8. for us, read up. Page. 94. line 23. for Rossam, read
Rosseim. Page 102. line 15. for Aughien, read Anghien. Page 121 line. 2. for
duchy, read duchess. Page 139. line. 21. for 20000. read 10000. For Aluiana
read in all places Aluiane.
A Continuation of the History of France, from the death of Charles the eight
where Comines ends till the death of Henry the second, namely till the year
1559.
LEWIS the twelfth of that name King of FRANCE.
Cap. 1. Lewis the twelfth comes to the crown, he is deuorced from his
wife, and marries the Lady Anne, King Charles his widow and heir of Bretaine,
A brief discourse of the evils that ensewed that marriage.
AFter the death of King Charles 1498.
the eight, Lewis Duke of Orleans as next male of the blood royal succeeded to
the crown of France by the name of Lewis the twelfth, a Prince as well
before as after his coming to the crown subject to great variety of
fortune. The first thing he attempted after he had settled his estate, was to
be deuorced from his wife the Lady Jane daughter to King Lewis the eleventh,
pretending that he had married her by constraint, and never had any carnal
knowledge of her. But because he doubted how his Realm would digest, so great
an injury offered to this Lady, being a Kings daughter and sister and a most
virtuous Princess, who had also been his wife a great number of years, and
had by excessive suit and many tears begged his life of king Charles her
brother, after the wars of Bretaine ended, wherein the said Duke of Orleans
(as before you have heard) was taken prisoner: he sought to the Pope for
relief, hoping under color of religion to cloak his ungodly purpose, and to
justify by authority of the Church his ambitious desire, to join himself in
marriage with Anne widow of the late King Charles and heir of Bretaine,
thereby to hold still the said Duchy of Bretaine united to the crown of
France, which otherwise must have been severed from it, if this Lady had
been bestowed else where. Alexander the seventh so often mentioned in the wars
of Charles the eight, a spaniard borne of the house of Borgia continewed still
Pope at this time, a man apt to embrace any wicked motion that might tend
either to the filling of his cofers, or to the advancement of his house. This
Pope had a son named Valentinus Borgia, (a sink of all fillthinesse) the
self same that had been hostage with king charles in his Italian wars being
at that time a Church man and named Cardinal of Valence: and had escaped from
him as in the said wars of Italy mention is already made. This Borgia having
lately renounced his Cardinals hatt, had betaken himself to the wars, and
was entered into the Kings pay. And his father exchaunging spiritual graces for
temporal possessions, was contented to grant the king a Bull of deuorce from
the said Lady Jane his wise with these conditions, that his said son Borgia
might be made Duke of Valence a City in Daulphine, have the charge of a
company of men of arms under the king, marry with Charlotte daughter of
Monsieur d'Alebret a great Prince in Guyenne, and receive a yearly pension of
20000. crowns and as much reuenew of inheritance, all the which conditions
were yielded unto, and by that means the Bull of deuorce obtained, and the King
married the said Queen Anne heir of Bretaine. I 1499.
know not well who is most to be cried out of in this case, either the Pope for
granting so wicked a Bull, or the king for his extreme ambition and
ingratitude toward his wife, or his people for soothing him up and encouraging
him to so detestable a fact, or the Queen Dowager her self in accepting so
ungodly a marriage, especially considering that she having been married before
to a king of France whom she could not enjoy but by dismission of his former
wife to give her place: and being punished therefore as well by the sudden
death of the said king her husband, as by the loss of all her children
begotten in that unlawful marriage: durst now notwithstanding adventure upon a
second husband after the same sort. But sure it well appeared that God was much
offended with this match, for if we consider first the Popes end and his
sons, the one of the which poisoned himself with a flaggon of wine, which
his said son and he had prepared for the poisoning of certain Cardinals
their enemies, and the other after al his great conquests in Italy, and his
favors in France, was suddenly spoiled of all that he held in both those
Countries, sent prisoner into Spain, and lastly slain being a miserable
vagabond in the Realm of Nauarra: Secondarely if we behold the miseries that
fell upon the king, and the great dishonors and losses he received even till
the time of his death, being tossed and chased like a tennis ball, first clean
out of Italy by a prince in power much inferior to himself, and afterward
almost clean out of his own Realm by a confederacy of most of the Princes
and states of Christendom against him in the last periode of his age: Thirdly
if we way with our selves the continual troubles the realm of France has
endured ever since this wicked marriage, under the government of this Ladies
offspring even till this very day. Lastly if we observe how in this our age
her descent is utterly dispossessed of her Duchy of Bretayne (which was the
only occasion of this ungodly match) and the said Duchy fallen to the hands
of a king a mere stranger to her and none of her line: we must of necessity
confess that God is a just judge, and punishes sharply such offenses,
howsoever flatterers that are about Princes sooth them up and encourage them to
such wicked acts clean forgetting God and his commandments, if the breach
thereof may further their affairs or enlarge their dominions. Examples heerof
are plentiful both in sacred and profane Histories, so that it were but lost
labor to spend much breath in this discourse.

Cap. 2. The king conquereth the Duchy of Milan, Lodouic Sforce recouereth
it, and presently after loses it again, and both he and his brother
Cardinal Ascanius are carried prisoners into France.
THis matter of deuorce having succeeded according to the Kings desire, he
made peace with all his neighbors round about him, namely with Ferdinande King
of Aragon, Maximilian King of Romans and Archduc Philip his son, and with
Henry King of England, which being done he presently levied men, and made
friends on all sides, purposing to invade the Duchy of Milan, held still as
yet by Lodouic Sforce surnamed the Moore, the self same that called King
Charles the eight into Italy as before you have heard: which also the King
soon conquered, for you shall understand that the said Lodouic was hated of
his own people, as well because of his great tirannie, as also for poisoning
his Nephew right heir of Milan, at the least heir before him. Farther he was
fallen out with his best friends ye Venetians about Pisa, who also partly for
extreme hatred that they bare against him: and partly for greediness of
Cremona and the country of Guyradadda, which the king promised them for their
part of the victory: did not only encourage the king to pass into Italy and
invade Milan, but entered also into league with him, so that the said Lodouic
was destitute of all help, the Pope and the Venetians being in league with the
King, and the poor King of Naples Frederic unable to defend his own, much
less to give Lodouic any aid. So that after the French army had taken La
Roccad'Arazza, Anon, Valentia, Basignane, voghera, Chasteauneuf, Pontcorona,
and Tortona: and that Galeas of Saint Seuerin to his great reproach, had through
cowardice abandoned Alexandria and Dertona, and that Pauia had of their own
accord received the French, the Venetians also inuading the said Duchy of
Milan on the other side: the said Lodouic astonished with the loss of so many
towns, mistrusting his own people, and being abandoned of all his friends
and principal servants: fled with his children and a great mass of money to
the Emperor Maximilian into Germany, presently after whose departure the
City of Milan yielded to the French, the Castle being also delivered unto them
by the treason of Bernardin de Corte Captain thereof. Soon after the whole
state of Genoua submitted it self likewise to the King, and Cremona with the
Country of Guyradadda were delivered to the Venetians according to the Kings
promise. In eight days Lodouic lost this rich and noble Duchy, so small
assurance is in worldly honors. The king having settled the state of Milan, and
abated ye excessive exactions yt they paid in Lodouics time, to ye great
though not to the full contentment of the people, for they looked to have had
all paiments clean abolished and taken away, and having given forces to the
Duke of Valentinoys for the recovery of those towns in Romania that
appertained to the Church: returned to Lions, where he was welcomed with new
joys because of the birth of his Daughter Claude. But 1500
this his good success was soon altered, for the Milanois being by nature
variable and inconstant, and also misliking the rough government of Master
James of Treuoul, whom the king had left behind him for his Lieutenant, who
being of the Guelph faction, used to rudely those of the faction Guibeline:
and farther the people not being able to endure the insolences of the French
soldiers: secretly solicited Lodouic to return, who not omitting this
opportunity, but leuying with speed 12000 Swyssers, by the favor of the
Emperor Maximilian but with his own money, and 8000. Italians, entered into
the Duchy of Milan with all diligence, and as suddenly recovered the whole
country as before he had lost it, all save the Castle of Milan with some
other few places, and the state of Genoua which held still for the king, such
mutabilitie is not only in the people of this estate, but in all the vulgar
sort throughout Italy. Beesides all this d'Aubigny and Treuoul Governors of
the French in the said Duchy were at great variance, which utterly subverted
the kings afflicted affairs, in such sort that he was forced to remove them
both and to commit the government of the army to Trimouille, who by his
wisdom having reconciled them together, joined them in equal authority with
himself, so that the army for two governors had three. But the king being
exceedingly moved with this sudden loss of the Duchy of Milan leuyed 600
Lances and a great army of Swyssers and sent them with all diligence to
Milan, which Lodouic understanding retired to Nouara, where the French army
beesieged him. And notwithstanding that he were in state to fight with his
enemies and meant also so to do: yet the Swyssers that served him being
corrupted with French crowns by means of the Swyssers Captains that were in
the French Camp, refused to fight against their country men and kinsmen,
wherewith Lodouic being in utter despair, and doubting to be delivered by
them into his enemies hands, with great difficulty obtained of them that he
might march among them as a common Swysser soldier till he should be
conveyed to some place of saftie. But the matter being discovered to
Trimouille, whose money made every thing known unto him: he was apprehended as
he marched like a common soldier among them, and presently sent into France,
where he remained prisoner in the tower of Loches till his death, not once
being admitted to ye kings presence nor speech. And so this Prince whose
ambitious desires caused him, first to poison his Nephew, and then to set all
Italy on fire by calling in the French, and likewise to depart from his league
with the Venetians (being his only saftie) for greedines of having the town
of Pisa, which he sought to draw out of their subjection to his obedience, and
lastly who never held faith nor promise with any man longer then it served for
his own profit, was now abandoned of all men, and betrayed by those whom he
had brought into Italy for his principal succor and defense, and ended his
days in a miserable dongeon, where all his extrauagant thoughts were cloased
up within the compass of a narrow rome, his brother the Cardinal Ascanius,
found means to conueigh his brothers children safe into Germany, but was
himself soon after his brother taken prisoner by the Venetians, and sent
likewise by the Kings commandment (though not without great dishonor to the
Venetian estate) into France, where he was used with much more favor and
liberty than his brother was (for he had the whole Realm of France for his
prison) and in the end by the means or rather through the simplicity of the
Cardinal of Amboyse returned again into Italy, where he was restored to his
former estate and dignity. And thus the King soon recovered the Duchy of
Milan.

Cap. 3. By a confederacy between the kings of France and Spain, Frederick
King of Naples loses his realm. The two Kings*part it beetweene them, the
King of Spain in the end obtains the whole, Pope Alexauder dies Julius the
second succedeth.
BUT this Ptinces mind not being satisfied with one good 1501.
success, but the more he conquered the more his ambition being inflamed, he
determined to attempt the conquest of the Realm of NAPLES not long before
revolted from his predecessor, as in KING CHARLES his wars of Italy ample
mention is already made.

And to the end he might obtain the victory without any resistaunce, he
determined to make the KING of SPAIN partaker with him of the booty, least
he being a neighbor in the I Will of SICILE to the Realm of NAPLES and a
kinseman to the King thereof, and having also forces already entered into the
Country for the said Kings defense: should hinder his conquest of the said
Realm.

This offer was soon embraced by the KING of SPAIN, who being received into
the strong places of the said Realm of NAPLES, under color of defending them
for KING FREDERIC, detayned them for him self and utterly ruinated the said
FREDERIC, notwithstanding both the trust that he had reposed in the KING of
SPAIN, and the near kindred that was beetweene them.

Thus FREDERIC being at one instant invaded by the FRENCH and beetrayed by the
SPANIARD, yielded his Realm in despite of the said KING of SPAIN into the
hands of KING LEWIS, and went with him into FRANCE, where he lived in very
honorable estate till his death.

But his son Ferdinand Duke of Calabria, whom Consalue the king of Spaines
general in the said Realm of Naples, had given his oath to set at liberty,
so soon as he should be delivered into his hands: was notwithstanding the
said oath sent into Spain to the king of ARAGON, where (after many years
imprisonment) he married in the year 1522. with the LADY GERMANE of FOIX,
widow of the said KING of ARAGON, a rich LADY but barrayne, which marriage
was made by the EMPEROVR CHARLES, who greatly favored the said Duke of
Calabria, because he had refused to be taken out of La Rocca Sciatiua, which
was the prison wherein he lay, and to be made head of a rebellion that happened
in Spain called La Santa giunta whereof hereafter mention shall be made.
This Ferdinand Duke of Calabria was the last of the race of the first Alfonse
King of Naples, for two of his brethren died before him, one in Italy the
other in France. But to return to the History, the treason of the King of
Spain toward King Frederic was no greater in this action, than the error of
the king of France, as the sequel well delared. For whereas the said
Frederic offered King Lewis to hold the Realm of Naples of him, and to pay him
for it yearly a great tribute, by means whereof no man should have commanded
in the said Realm but his tributarie king (who always must have depended
upon him) and himself: he now called in a neighbor PRINCE, though not so
mighty yet much more subtle than himself, and divided the kingdom with him
being obtained by his own money and his own subjects blood, and soon after
lost the whole to his own great dishonor and damage.

For you shall understand that the very next year after the partition made of
the said Realm beetweene 1502.
these two Princes, they fell at varience about the bounds of their
territories, and because the French were at that instant the stronger, they
took many places in the Country called the Capitanat (which was the province
in controversy beetweene them) from the Spaniards. But the next year after
the Spaniards haueing renforced their companies not only recovered all their
losses, but also wanne diverse places from the French, and namely 1503.
RVBOS a town not far from BARLETTA, where also they took prisoner Monsieur
de la Palisse. And notwithstanding that by the entermise of Archduc Philip
son in law to the king of Spain (who this year came into France) a peace
was concluded between the kings of France and Spain, upon the security
whereof king Lewis wholly reposing himself, forbear to send new supplies to
NAPLES: yet the king of Spain very cunningly delayed the confirmation of the
said peace because he saw his affairs to prosper well in Italy through the
French kings ouergreat credulity and negligence, and in the end flatly
disauowed al his son in laws actions. And Consalue his General in the said
Realm of NAPLES notwithstanding the Archducs commandments often sent unto
him to surcease all Hostility in those parts: not only refused so to do
because he received noe such commandment from his Master, but also proceeded
still in his conquests, and wanne from the French diverse towns, defeated the
Duke of ATRY who led certain French bands and took him prisoner, and
afterward also overthrew Monsieur d'Aubigny and took him prisoner, and lastly
at the battle of Cirignolles vanquished the whole power of france, and slew
in the field with diverse noble men the brave Duke of NEMOVRS general of the
French forces.

Farther the said Consalue using the benefit of this victory marched
presently before Naples, and without resistance entered into the town and
reduced it to the obedience of the King of Spain, and soon after took also
the Castles, and conquered almost the whole Realm. In the mean time dyed Pope
ALEXANDER the sixth, and PIUS the third was chosen Pope, who dying also at the
end of six and twenty days, the Cardinal Petri ad Vincula (so often
mentioned in the wars of Charles the eight) succeeded by the name of JULIUS
the second.

The King in the mean time made great preparation to recover his Realm of
NAPLES so shamefully and dishonorably lost, and entered as far as the River
GARILLIANO called LIRIS in ancient times, where diverse attempts were made by
the French to pass the said River, which all were overthrown and brought to
naught by the wisdom and industry of Consalue.

In the end, what through want of victuals and lack of money which the kings
officers most shamefullie detayned from them, by means also whereof the
companies that the King paid were not half complete: what through foul
weather and what through the industry and diligence of Consalue who took
advantage of all these their disorders: the French were forced to abandon
their fortes upon the said River, and to retire to CAIETTA which they yet
held, whether not only the said inconveniences accompanied them, but also
Consalue with all speed pursued them and there beesieged them.

But they not being able to defend the town 1504
yielded it by composition and returned into France, and thus Consalue
obtained the Realm of NAPLES without bloodshed, and had ever after the Title
of great Captain, because of his noble exployts given unto him.

Cap. 4. Frederic King of Naples and Elizabeth Queen of Spain both dye, by a
marriage beetweene the King of Aragon and the Lady Germany Foix, peace is made
beetweene France and Spain. Archduc Philip dies. Bolonia is restored to the
pope, Genoua rebelleth and is soon reduced to the Kings obedience.
IN this year dyed FREDERIC king of Naples, and likewise ELIZABETH 1504.
Queen of Castile wife to king Ferdinand, whose death caused the said king
Ferdinand the rather to desire peace with France, because he doubted that the
government of Castile (notwithstanding his wives testament whereby he was
appointed Governor thereof during his life) should be taken from him, and
delivered to Archduc Philip his son in law, whose wife was heir thereof.

The year 1505 was a year subject to great Famine and Pestilence, and in this
year a secret 1505.
consederacie beetweene the greatest Princes in Christendom against the
Venetians beegan covertly to be treated of, which afterward also took
effect. And the better to bring that matter to pass, by practice of the Pope
who was a deadly enemy to the Venetians, as was also the King of France,
because for want of their help he lost the Realm of Naples as he said: peace
was concluded between France and Spain, the French king enclining thereunto,
to the end he might have his revenge of the said venetians, and the spaniard
by that means to have a rampar against his son in law the Archduc Philip,
wherefore in consideration of a marriage between the said King of Spain and
the Lady German of Foix sisters daughter to the king of France, the said
King yielded up to the king of Spain all his title and interest to the Realm
of Naples, by the which means these two Princes that so long had continued in
deadly wars, concluded peace and became friends and allies* And the king of
Spain hereby also fortified himself mightily against his son in law the
Archduc Philip who in the beginning of the year 1506 sailed into Spain 1506.
with a purpose to take the government of Castile in to his own hands. But by
the entermise of the NObles of the realm, an accord was made between his
father in law and him, and the king of Aragon departed into his realm of
Naples with very honorable conditions. But not long after died the Archduc, and
because his wife daughter of the said King Ferdinand was distracted of her
wits, both her self (being mad in all points but in this) and likewise her
whole realm of Castile reuoqued king Ferdinand out of Italy and reestablished
him in the government of Castile, till such time as Charles the said Archducs
son and nephew of the said Ferdinand being very young should be of age to
govern the Realm him self. About this time also the Pope by aid of the
French king, recovered Bolonia from the Bentiuoli though little to the kings
honor who had received the said city of Bolonia, and the Bentiuoli into his
protection in the year 1500, and yet now betrayed the^ to the Pope, more
regarding the Popes pleasure, the^ his own honor and faith, for the which
fact ye Pope well requited him as hereafter you shall hear. But to return to
the french affairs. The Genuoys 1507.
seeing ye Kings greatness so mightily to decline in Italy by loss of the
realm of Naples, and being also desirous to recover their liberty; determined
to rebel, and to withdraw their obedience from him, which also they did, and
began first to chase away his officers, and afterward to spoil the noble men's
houses in the town. But the king being advertised thereof, passed in person
with a mighty army into Italy, and soon reduced them to their former
obedience, which being done he presently dismissed his army and returned into
France, thereby delivering all the states of Italy from the jealousy they had
conceived of him, that he meant to make some farther attempt.

Cap. 5. A confederacy is made at Cambray against the venetians, the french
overthrow them at the battle of Guyradadda.
Soon after this, the practice above mentioned 1508.
against the Venetians, which had been long treated off under hand, and had
long ere this ben concluded, but that so many strings could not so soon be
tuned (for ye Pope and the kings of Romans, France and Aragon were concurring
in the accion): brake openly forth. For you shall understand that Pope Julius
hating the Venetians extremly, because they detained from him certain towns in
Romania belonging to the Church, and received into their protection the church
rebels, namely, the Bentiuoli and others: labored to make peace among these
Princes, and to convert their arms not against the Infidels but against the
said Venetians, which also he effected in the end, the rather because every one
of these Princes had private quarells to them.

The Popes quarrel you have already heard, and the cause of the french kings
displeasure toward them I have in part touched also before, and said it was
for that they refused to aid him in his wars of Naples according to their
league, which was ye only loss of the said realm as he said. But in very
deed his principal hatred against the^, was because they held Cremona and the
country of Guiradadda members of ye Duchy of Milan which notwithstanding yt
they were delivered to the^ by his own agreement, at such time as they aided him
to chase Lodouic Sforce out of the said duchy: yet now considering their
ingratitude toward him, and withal how necessary those countries were for the
strength and defense of ye said Duchy of Milan: he determined to recover the^
again into his own hands. Maximilian and the Archduc Charles his Nephew had
an ancient quarrel to the^, first for Verona, Padoua, vinc^nse and diverse
other towns with held from the Empire, and secondarelie for the countries of
Friull and Treuisa, which they with hold from the house of Austria.

Besides that Maximillians quarrel was lately greatly increased, for even in
this very year 1508, they had not only denied him passage through their
countries for his soldiers, whose passage he pretended to be only because he
meant to go to take the crown imperial at Rome, though they knew well the
contrary: but had also defeated his companies being entered into their
dominions by force. And notwithstanding that they had reason so to do knowing
his purpose to be no thing less then that which he pretended, and that he came
with a resolution to surprise those places which he claimed to be his: yet this
defeat of his men exasperated him not a little against them, for few Princes
can endure the contrarying of their wills be it never so justly done.

The king of Spain likewise hated them because they held in the realm of
Naples certain towns engaged to them by Ferdinand King of Naples in the wars
of Charles the eight, which by no means they would restore.

Thus all these princes being animated against them, a generalleague was
concluded among them against the said Venetians at Cambray. The Pope 1509.
began first with spiritual arms, and sent forth a terrible bull against
them, from the which they appealed to the next general Counsel.

But of all the other Princes the king of France was first in a readiness and
with an army of 24000 men invaded their dominions. And they encountered him
with noe less forces, and under the conduct of Aluiane and the Earl of
Petillian gave him battle, in the which they were overthrown, Petillian
said through Aluianas temeritie and ouergreat heat, and Aluiana said through
Petillians cowardice or malice, who would not aid him with his troops because
the battle was fought against his advice.

But howsoever it were, certain it is that the Venetians lost in this battle
10000 men, and Aluiana himself was taken prisoner therein. This battle is
called the battle of Guiradadda or de la Veil. After this victory almost all
the towns that the Venetians held in Italy, yielded to the king, who restored
to the king of Romans those that he pretended Title to, and to the Pope those
that he quareled, which being done he returned to Milan. This year dyed Henry
king of England the two and twenteth of April to whom succeeded Henry his
son, a young Prince eighteen years of age, of whom hereafter ample mention
shall be made, and this year also the seventeenth of October dyed Philip de
Commines Lord of Argenton, a worthy counseler and no less worthy writer.

Cap. 6. The Venetians are reconciled to the Pope and the King of Aragon, all
they three toyne together against the King. The Swyssers also beecome the Kings
enemies, the quarrel beetweene the Pope and the Duke of Ferrare, the Pope
loses Bolonia. The King withdraws himself from the Popes obedience. The
Pope excommunicateth the whole Realm of France. The battle of Rauenna
wherein the Pope and his confederats are overthrown.
THE Venetians being thus low brought and seeing so many princes against them,
determined to take some course to dissolve this co^federacie, wherefore they
humbled themselves first unto the Pope, and found means to be reconciled unto
him, for you shall understand that after this victory above mentioned, partly
commiseration of the venetians moved him to favor them, but especially the
kings greatness in Italy beecame very odious and terrible unto him, in such
sort that he also secretly withdrew the king of Aragon from the kings
friendship, and joined him in league with the Venetians: they restoring unto
him the ports in Pouille above mentioned which they held: and the Pope himself
putting him into a continual jealousy that if the french affairs prospered in
Italy, he should be constrained again to fight for the realm of Naples,
notwithstanding his marriage with the kings niece. But in very truth the thing
that most troubled the Pope, and most caused him to envy the kings good
success, was jealousy of his own estate, because many cardinals hated him,
and objected many crimes against him, all the which had intelligence with the
king, wherefore the said Pope to the end he might omit no thing that tended
to the overthrow of the kings proceedings and these Cardinals practices,
hiered the Swyssers 1510.
to invade the Duchy of Milan and to abandon their league with the french,
which being begun by Lewis the xi. expired at this very instant, and could not
be renewed, because the Swyssers demanded proudly greater pe^sions the^ they
had before, which the king partly through disdain and partly through
covetousness would not condescend unto, whereupon they entered into league
with ye Pope against the king, and invaded ye duchy of Milan, but for want of
victuals and money they were forced at this time to return home, without any
exploit done. Farther the said Pope now showing himself openly to be the
kings enemy, together with ye Venetians prepared a navy to surprise Genoua,
and so this Pope that was the first kindler of this war against the
Venetians, and the principal author of the league of Cambray: was also
himself the first that brake it, notwithstanding all the kindness that he
had received at the kings hands.

But the navy above mentioned appointed to invade Genoua was overthrown and
dispersed by the French navy, and so all the Popes enterprises against the
king failed and came to naught, farther you shall understand that the Pope had
a quarrel to the Duke of Ferrara, as well for certain towns which he
withheld from the Church: as also for selling of salt at Comache without the
Popes permission, which thing being his vassal he might not do as the Pope
said, for the which cause he invaded his countries, but the king to requite
the Popes disloyalty and ingratitude toward him, received the Duke into his
protection and defended him against the Pope, which not a little increased their
evil will.

The king also to cry quittance with the Pope, 1511.
took Bolonia from him, which not long before he had delivered to him, and
restored it to the Bentiuoli, whom also he received into his protection, by
means whereof extreme hatred grew beetweene the Pope and the King, so far
forth that the King withdrew his Realm from his obedience, and celebrated a
council at Pisa against him, which was afterward transported to Milan. And the
Pope on the otherside excomunicated the whole Realm of France, and celebrated
a counsel at Lateran against the king. But not only spiritual but also
temporal arms were exercised between them, for the Pope hiered the Swyssers
to invade the Duchy of Milan the second time, but they being corrupted with
French crowns, soon returned bome and deluded the Popes hope, which he
perceauing waged a great army of Spaniards and Italians against the king and
against the Counsel (or as he termed it the Conuenticle) of Pisa, and the
king on the other side in the name of the said counsel of Pisa sent a mighty
army against the pope, as a Simoniac, a trobler of Christendom, a drunkard;
and a periure. And after diverse skirmishes beetweene the two armies, and
surprises of towns, and such like feats of war achieued, ensewed the great
battle of Rauenna, which was fought upon Easter day. It is written by diverse
that Pope Julius seeing his forces issew out of Rome, 1512.
took Peter's keys and threw them into the River, and withal girt himself
with a sword, adding these words, that since Peter's keys could do him no
more service, he would see if Paul's sword could stand him in any better
steed, which accion of his the learned Melanthon has properly expressed by
these verses following.

In Gallum vt fama est bellum gesturus a*cerbum,
armatam educit Julius vrbe manum,
accinctus gladio claues in Tibridis amnem
proijcit, and saeuus talia verba facit:
Cum Petri nihil efficiant ad prelia claues
auxilio Pauli for sitan ensis erit:
Which may be thus Englished.

When Julius against the force of France
sent forth his troops armed with pike and lance
this fury fell inflamde with ire and mood
the sacred keys into the famous flud
of Tyber flange, and tho with might and maine
wayuing his glaiue thus spoke in great disdain,
since Peter's keys avail naught in this case
the sword of Paul shall now supply their place.
But to return to the History. In the battle of Rauenna above mentioned,
the Pope with his confederats namely the king of Aragon and the Venetians were
overthrown. But Monsieur de Foix the kings nephew and general of his forces,
through his own to great hardiness or rather rashness, pursuing his enemies
with a small troop was entrapped and slain, whose death the king took so
grievously that he wished he had redeemed his life with ye loss of all that he
held in Italy. The said de Foix his death so astonished the French army
though victorious, that for want of a general sufficient to supply his place,
they pursewed not the victory as they ought to hauedone, but gave their
enemies liberty to breath and repair their forces, which if they had not
done, the king might not only have recovered the realm of NAPLES, but also
have disposed of all the rest of Italy as it had pleased himself. Rauenna was
sacked in revenge of Monsieur de Foix his death.

Cap. 7. The king celebrateth the counsel of Pisa against the Pope, and the
Pope the counsel of Later an against him. The Pope stirs up Maximilian the
Emperor, the kings of England and Spain, the venetians, and the swissers
against the king. The king loses Milan and Genoua. The king of Spain
conquereth Nauarra.
Aeter this victory the king returned to celebrate the counsel of Pisa, and
by authority thereof to deposse the Pope, having the Emperor Maximilian in
appearance concurring with him, and as some report affecting the Papacy for
himself, and meaning to resign ye empire to his nephew Charles though as yet
but a child. Notwithstanding soon after secretly he reconciled himself to
the Pope, and utterly abandoned the French. But the Pope by the overthrow which
he had received at Rauenna, and the great charges he had sustained in these
wars the burden whereof had lain upon his shoulders, being brought to great
poverty, and doubting also what would be the isheu of the schism in the
Church: sought for peace with the king, only craving at his hands that he
would relinquish the protection of the duke of Ferrara, which the king utterly
refusing, the Pope fell farther out of patience with him then ever he was
before.

And so happily it came to pass at that very instant for the Popes affairs,
that the king of Aragon sent him a secret message to persuade him to continue
the wars against the French, assuring him of his aid which thing the king of
Aragon did, thereby to distract the kings forces, while he invaded the Realm
of Nauarra, which he was fully resolved to attempt. And farther Monsieur de la
Palisse general of the Kings forces after Monsieur de Foix his death, was
constrained to depart out of Romania with his victorious army to the defense
of the Duchy of Milan fearing that the Swyssers would invade it as indeed
they did, wherefore the Pope by these occasions having recovered his spirits,
and being now more animated against the king then ever, first continued his
spiritual arms by celebrating the counsel of Lateran against him, and
afterward stirred up not only the Venetians, but also Maximilian the
Emperor, the King of England and Spain, and the Swyssers to be his enemies.

These Swyssers as before you have heard had abandoned the kings service
because through covetousness he would not augment their wages, and were
entered into the Popes pay, which his error the king would willingly have
reformed afterward, and have recovered them to his service again, but never
could till his dying day.

The king seeing all the Princes his neighbors in arms against him by the
Popes practices, was constrained to withdraw his forces out of Italy for the
defense of his own Realm by means whereof the Pope and the Venetians
prevailed so mightily in Italy, that they recovered all the towns that were
held by the French namely Bolonia, Cremona, and diverse other, Parma also and
Placentia yielded themselves to the Pope, yea and the King lost his Duchy of
Milan, which was delivered to Maximilian Sforce (son of Lodouic that died
prisoner in France) under the protection and defense of the Swyssers.

The state of Genoua likewise revolted from the king, by means of Ianus
Fregose who was made duke thereof, and the Duke of Ferrara was forced to make
his submission to ye Pope and to abandon the French, so that the king held
nothing at all in Italy save a few castles namely that of Milan and the castle
of Cremona, which continued French still till the next year after the battle
of Nouara, when for want of victuals they were forced to yield themselves into
the Duke of Milans hands, but all the rest the King lost almost in a moment and
withal all his friends, a strange conversion of Fortune that the King being
conqueror lost all, and the Pope and the Venetians being conquered wanne all.

But in truth they sailed not with their own wind but with other men's, for
the Realm of France had at that time to many enemies by the Popes practices
and to few friends.

Now to leave a while the affairs of Italy and to come to the wars in
France, you shall understand that the kings of England and Spain determined
to invade Guyenne. But the king of Spain pretending the Realm of Nauarra to
be of great importance for the defense of the said Country of Guyenne:
persuaded the english men first to assault that, and from thence to enter into
Guyenne, according whereunto they did, and soon took it being void of dese^ce
and not expecting any war, which conquest being achieued, and the said Realm
of Nauarra delivered into the king of Spaines hands, the said king with faier
words dismissed ye English men, giving his son in law the king of England leave
to invade Guyenne with his own forces if he would, For he had alredie obtained
his pray, by means whereof the English men being disappointed of his aid, were
forced to return home. And notwithstanding that the king of France after the
English men's departure, attempted to recover ye said realm of Nauarra: yet
could he not do it because of his great affairs else where.

Cap. 8.
Pope Julius dies, Leo the tenth succedeth, the King makes truce with the
King of Spain, and being confederated with the Venecians recouereth Milan and
Genoua, which notwithstanding presently after the battle of Nouarahee loses
again. The Venetians are overthrown nere to Vincense.

ABout this time died Pope Julius, to whom succeeded Leo the tenth of the house
of Medices, 1513.
which fell out well for the kings affairs, for Pope Julius while he lived, so
animated all the Princes of Christendom against the King, that none of them
would incline to make peace or truce with him, but after his death the Kings
affairs began to have a better course, for notwithstanding that Pope Leo were
not friend to the French, but had just cause to hate them, first because of the
schism in the Church maintained by them, secondarily because by them Peter of
Medices his brother and their whole house was overthrown and chaced out of
Florence, as in the wars of Charles the eight mention is already made, and
lastly because him self was taken prisoner by them at the battle of Rauenna
being than Pope Julius Legate: yet proved he not so deadly an enemy to them,
nor such an annimater of Christian Princes against them as his predecessor had
been, all the which proceeded of the Popes own disposition, who was a Prince by
nature more inclined to pleasures than to wars, by means whereof the King,
burning with a desire to recover his Duchy of Milan (the rather because the
Castles of Milan and Cremona held yet for him as before you have heard) sought
first to make truce with the King of Spain, which the said King easelie
inclined to, to the end that in the mean time without any impediment of
France he might setle his late conquest of the Realm of Nauarra.

Farther the king entered also into league with the Venetians who promised to
aid him with 800 men of arms, 1500 light horse, and 10000 foot men, for the
recovery of Ast, Genoua, and the Duchy of Milan, and he promised to aid
them till they had recovered all that they held in Lombardie, and in the Marca
Treuisana before ye league of Cambray. Thus the king being joined with the
Venetians, and in truce with the king of Aragon, invaded the Duchy of Milan
with a mighty army, and first recovered Genoua, and then all the Duchy of
Milan save Nouara and Coma, which held yet for Maximilian Sforce, Farther the
French army under the leading of Trimouille went and beesieged Nouara, but
this their good success in the beginning was overthrown in the twinkeling of
an eye, for you shall understand that the Swyssers who had bound themselves to
the defense of the said Duchy of Milan as before you have heard, came to
leauie the siege of Nouara, and had the french in so great contempt that they
assaulted them upon a sudden, and defeated them in their own camp, which was
one of the noblest victories that ever any nation obtained.

This battle is called the battle of Nouara. After this victory all the
Duchy of Milan revolted in a moment, chaced away the French, and returned to
the obedience of Maximilian Sforce, and the king by this overthrow, lost his
honor, his treasure, and all that he held in Italy as well Genoua as the whole
Duchy of Milan, yea and the Castles of Milan and Cremona which in all these
troubles had still continued French seeing themselves now in utter despair of
succors and being in extreme distress of victuals were yielded into the
Duke of Milans hands, and the Kings army in great fear and distress returned
into Piemont.

The Venetian forces under the leading of Aluiana were coming to join with
the French, but hearing of the overthrow they retired to Padoua, whether the
Viceroy of NAPLES and PROSPERO COVLONNE being in pay with the Pope and the
duke of Milan went to besiege them, but not being able to take the town, they
leuyed their siege, and then ALVIANA issewing out of the town pursewed them
and charged them, which charge they valyauntly received, and through the virtue
of the Spanish footmen and cowardice of the Italian footmen the Venetian army
was overthrown, and lost all their artilery and cariagde, and ALVIANA retired
to Treuisa.

This battle was fought nere to Vincense and the Venetians lost in it 400.
men of arms, and 4000. sootemen.

Cap. 9. The king of England ouuerthroweth the french, wins Therouenne and
Tournay. The Swyssers invade Burgundy, Queen Anne dies, The Pope makes peace
beetweene all these Princes. The king marieth the King of Englands sister and
dies.
THE same year also Henry King of England with a mighty army which the
Italians report to have been to the number of 80000 men invaded the Realm of
France, and overthrew the French in a battle called la iournee des esperons,
wherein the Duke of Longueuille with diverse noble men of France were taken
prisoners, the Emperor Maximilian being at that time in person in the king of
Englands camp, and being allowed daily by the said king 100 crowns for his diet.

The English men after this battle took Therouanne the two and twentieth of
August, and from thence by the Emperor Maximilians persuasion went before
Tournay which was yielded to them the nine and twentieth of September, and having
defcated in an other battle in England the Scots, the ninth of September, and
slain their King in the feeld, who by the persuasion of the French had invaded
the Realm of England during the Kings absence in France: the said king of
England triumphantly returned home.

Farther the Swyssers being secretly hiered with the Popes money, who loved not
the French for the reasons above reherced, invaded France also on the other
side, and besieged Dijon in Burgundy, into the which Monsieur de la Trimouille
had put him self, who doubting the utter ruin of the Realm of France so
many enemies inuading it on all sides, without any commission from the king
made a composition with the said Swyssers, more necessary than honorable for
the Realm, which was this, that the King should renounce all his right to the
Duchy of Milan, and pay them at a day agreed upon six hundredth thousand
Crowns, for the which also he delivered them Hostages, and they bound them
selves only to return home into their Country for that time.

The Pope was not a little offended with this their return, but they excused
the matter because they received not out of England the money that was promised
them, but in truth their greediness of the six hundredth thousand Crowns above
mentioned was the principal cause of their return, whereof notwithstanding
their hope was frustrate, for the King would not ratify this disshonorable
treaty made by Trimouille notwithstanding that it were the saftie of his
Realm, but sought to content those Swyssers with other conditions, which they
would not accept, but threatened if the treaty were not accomplished by a
certain day to strike of the hostages heads.

About the beginning of the year 1514. dyed 1514.
Queen Anne of France: Farther you shall understand that the Pope being by
nature an enemy to the wars and wholly given to delights and pleasures,
namely to Music, to hearing of Plays, and to beeholding of Maskes, bouffons,
and ieasters, yea somewhat more then was semely for his estate: Labored
earnestly to reconcile these Princes and to end the wars. But the Swyssers
would in no wise be reconciled to the king. Notwithstanding the truce between
him and the King of Spain was continewed, in the which also the Emperor
Maximilian contrary to his promise to the king of England was included, and
ratefied the said truce, which unprincely dealing of the said Maximilian
caused also the king of England to incline to peace, which soon after namely
the seventh of August by means of the Duke of Longueuille being prisoner in
England was concluded between king Lewis and him, and afterward in October
following more strongly confirmed by the marriage of the Lady Marie the King of
Englands sister with the said King.

Thus the king having made peace with all his neighbors, and being assured of
quietness on this side the mountains, turned his thoughts to the recovery of
that which he had lost in Italy, namely the Duchy of Milan and the estate
of Genoua. But being in the midst of his preparation, and incited thereunto by
the Pope (though not sincerly as some thought:) sudden death which cutteth of
all worldly cogitations seized upon him, for while he took to extreme
pleasure in the excelent beutie of his young wife, without regard either of his
age or the weakness of his complexion, he was assaulted by a fever, whereunto
a flux being joined, he departed almost suddenly out of this present life
the first day of January in the year 1515. after the Ducche and Italian
computation who begin the year at newyerstide, but 1514. according to the
French, who begin it not till Easter. This king lived 55. years, and reigned
17.

Cha. 10. A discourse of certain virtues and vices of King Lewis the twelfth.
Between this King Lewis and Pope Julius the 2. above mentioned was deadly
hatred, as by the History above written easily you may perceive, so far
forth that they pursewed one an other not only with arms but also with gybes
and scoffs. The Pope accused the king of sacrilege whereunto the king
answered that it was most absurd for him to accuse an other of sacrilige that
miantained his estate only by sale of holy things, for the Pope made money of
al ecclesiastical livings and dignities, again when the king heard that the
Pope had extremely cursed him he answered that this was a Pope made to curse
but not to pray, sarther the Pope called the french Micturi vinos, that is to
say wine pissers, noting thereby their immoderate drincking of wine, which (as
he said) issued as it entered, but this gibe evil besemed the Pope being
himself more given to drink then any man in his time. But the French partly
to requite this scoff, and partly to content the king, made these verses of
the Pope.

Patria cui Genua est, genitricem Graecia, partum
Pontus and vnda dedit, qui bonus esse potest?
sunt vani Ligures, mendax est Graecia, ponto
nulla fides, malus est haec tria quis quis hahet.
Which you may thus English.

Whose country is liguria, whose damme of Greekish blood
whose cradle is the sourging seas, can ought in him be good?
Ligurians are counted vain, Greeks liars so I find,
the sea inconstant, all these three has Julius by kind.
But these verses are answered thus on the Popes beehalfe.

Est venus orta mari, Graium sapientia, solers
ingenium est ligurum, qui malus esse potest?
cui genus vt veneri, a Graijs sapientia, solers
ingenium a Genua est? Mome proter^e tace.
Which you may thus English.

Out of the sea dame Venus sprang, with learning greece is clad
Ligurians are full of wit, how can he then be bad?
whose birth is like a Godesses, whose learning is of Greece,
whose wit is of Liguria, jack gyber hold thy peace.
But to return to king Lewis, he was a prince subject to great variety of
Fortune through the whole course of his life, both before he was King and
after, but especially toward his later end she most frouned upon him, as in
this brief discourse of his actions is plainly to be seen, his vices were,
in his youth love of women, and in his age covetousness, which caused him to
loose many opportunities, besides yt he was a prince wholly governed by others,
but his good fortune was to fall into ye hands of honorable personages, and
such as governed his Realm well. Farther he was also charged with ingratitude,
both toward his wife who had saved his life, and also toward some with whom
he had lived familiarlie before his coming to the crown, namely the
Marshall Gye, whom also he banished the court, notwithstanding the great
service that he had done the Realm.

But herein he is partly to be excused, for the said Marshalls banishment
proceeded principally from the Queen who hated him extremely, because the
said marshall had oncc stayed her carriage upon the River of Loyre, wherein she
had packed up all the kings principal Iuells, Plate, and other things of great
price, and the which she was conueighing down the said River to Nantes, the
King being at that time very sick and in great danger of death. This king was
also given to suspicions, but that is a fault all princes are subject to,
especially all those that be wise, on the other side this king was beautified
with many goodly virtues, first he was so loving and careful of his people,
that in all his foreign wars he could never be induced to increase his
impositions upon his subjects, true it is that when he was invaded in his own
Realm, he was forced to leauie of them somewhat more then ordinary, for the
which his mild government he was called Pater patriae, so iusta Prince he was
(where the necessity of his affairs enforced him not to the contrary) that
the Archduc Philip committed to him at his death the government of his son
Charles, omitting both his own father and his father in law, being both
Graundfathers to the said Child, which charge king Lewis most princely
performed as well in the education of the said Charles afterward Emperor, as
also in the preservation of all his estate.

Farther he was a prince void of all pride, affable, and courteous to all men,
and living in great quietness and mildness, with those that were familiar
with him, and the soonest forgetting all injuries past, so that I cannot better
compare him to any prince then to the Emperor ADRIAN, whose pleasant answers
and Apophthegmes being void of all scurrilitie he was also much addicted
unto, some of the which because they be worthy of memory I will be bold to
rehearse. He had in king Charles his time been evil used by diverse, of whom
he was advised to take revenge at his coming to the crown, whereunto he
answered that it became not a king of France to revenge the injuries done to
a Duke of Orleans.

Likewise looking upon the roll of King Charles his servant, he found two
that had been his deadly enemies in King Charles his time, upon each of whose
names he made a cross, wherewith they being in a wonderful perplexity,
supposed ye galowes to be prepared for them, which their fear being discovered
to the king: he sent them word to be of good cheer, for he had crossed all
their evil deeds out of his remembrance, he used to say that the condition
of horses was much worse then Asses, for Horses were killed up in running
post to Rome to fetch living for Asses, meaning unlearned prelates, when the
Queen his wife by importunity thought to bring to pass a marriage between her
daughter Claude and Archduc Charles afterward Emperor, the king told her that
she sought to make a marriage between Cats and Mice. Again when a certain
courtier complained grievously of his wives unchasteness, the king hearing
thereof bad him be of good cheer, for he that respected his wives
incontinencie or the Popes curse should never sleep quiet night. Diverse other
such like sayings of his I could rehearce which for brevity I ouerpasse.

FRANCIS THE FIRST OF that name King of France.
Cap. 1. King Francis comes to the crown, surpriseth Prospero Colonna,
vanquisheth the Swyssers, recouereth Milan. The Pope and he meet at Bolonia.
TO Lewis the twelfth succeeded King Francis ye first, being both his son
1515.
in law and the next of his blood, a Prince of young years, but of goodly
personage and great magnanimity, who finding a mighty army in a redines, that
his predecessor had levied to invade the Duchy of Milan, and burning with no
less desire to recover ye said duchy the^ his predecessor had done,
determined to lose no time but having renewed ye league made by ye late king
with Henry king of England and with the self same conditions, and likewise
with the Venetians, and received homage at Paris by the Earl of Nassau of the
Archduc Charles afterward Eemperor for Flaunders, and having also made peace
with him with promise of marriage beetwene the said Charles and ye Lady Renee
daughter to king Lewis and sister to the Queen, and withal Genoua being
reduced to his obedience by the means of Octauian Fregose Duke thereof, who
stood in continual fear of the Duke of Milan and the Swyssers: he presently
marched with his army toward the mountains. Maximilian duke of Milan seeing
the tempest that hunge over his head, sent to the Swyssers and to Pope Leo for
aid. The Pope sent to his aid Prospero Coulonna with 1500. horse, whom the
french upon a sudden (as they passed the Alps by a secret way never passed
before by horsemen) surprised and took prisoner at villa francha, and defeated
al his troops. From thence the king marched and beesieged Nouara which yielded
unto him, as did also Alexandria, Tortona and Pauia with diverse other towns:
Farther to make his conquest ye easier, he practiced to pacify with money the
Swiffers who were bound to the defense of the duchy of Milan as before you
have heard, and to cause the^ to return home, whereunto they agreed, and
rceaued some small part of the kings money in such sort that the king accounted
his conquest to be at an end. But the Cardinal of Syon so preached unto them
their league made with the Duke of Milan, that they altered their minds.

And when the king thought they had been telling their money, they came in a
great fury and invaded his army, which valiantly received their charge. And
what with force of canon shot, and valor of the Gendarmerie of France (who
made a 1515.
mends this day for their cowardice at the battle of Nouara) but especially
through the great magnanimity of the king himself, they were repulsed, and so
hewed in pieces two days together (for so long the battle endured) that in
the end they were put to flight, and slain at the least 16000. of them, and
their courages so daunted, yt after this they reigned not over princes as
before times they had done.

This battle is called the battle of Marignian, which was fought the
thirteenth of September in the year 1515. and was so bloody on both sides,
that Master James of Treuoul who had been in nineteen battayles, reported
this to have been a battle of Gyaunts, and all the other eighteen that he
had been in, in comparison of this to have been but battles of boys.

These Swyssers purpose was if they had overthrown the king, to have disposed
at their pleasure of the Duchy of Milan which wholly depended upon them. But
their hope was frustrate, and being thus vanquished they returned home,
whereupon Maximilian Sforce Duke of Milan, and the whole Country yielded to the
king. The said Maximilian was sent into France, where he was so honorably
entertained of the King, that notwithstanding that he might afterward have
returned home, yet would he never so do, alledgeing that he was delivered from
the servitude of the Swyssers, the evil usage of the Emperor, and the
treachery of the Spaniards, wherefore he chose rather to remain in France,
where he continued till his death, which happened in the year 1530. After this
victory the Pope and all the Princes of Italy sought the kings amity, so far
forth yt the Pope met with him at Bolonia, and yielded unto him Parma and
Placencia as members of the Duchy of Milan, which Julius his predecessor had
taken before as the possessions of the Church. About the end of this year
dyed the valiant Captain Aluiane, having done great service at the battle
of Marignian above mentioned, and was very honorably buried at Venis in the
Church of Saint Stephan.

Cha. 2. The King returns into France, recouereth the Swissers to his
service, Ferdinande King of Spain dies. Maximilian the Emperor inuadeth the
Duchy of Milan. The Venetians recover Bressa and Verona, a treaty between the
king and Charles king of Castile at Noyon. The wars of Vrbine, Luther preaches
against the Pope.
THE King at his return into France lest the 1516.
Duke of Burbon governor of Milan, and so soon as he was come into his
Realm practiced to recover the Swyssers to his service, and to make a new
league with them, which also was brought to pass, and they promised from time
to time to aid him in his wars against all men, the Pope and the Empire
only excepted. But five of their Cantons would not agree to this accord at
this time. Notwithstanding about ye end of this year these five also were
contented to enter into league with him, but not so far forth as the other
eight, for they entered into a league offensive with the King, but these five
only for the defense of his own estates.

In this year dyed Ferdinande king of Aragon, and Consalue otherwise surnamed
the great Captain, about a month before him. The Duke of Borbon governor of
Milan for the King, according to the kings league with the Venetians, sent unto
them under the leading of Monsieur de Lautrech 3000. footmen and 1000. horse
to recover Bressa and Verona. But because the Emperor Maximilian envying the
kings great success (as did also the king of England) leauied men of the five
Swysser Cantons that were as yet not in league with the king, and having
received 50000. angels of the king of England, and being confederated with
Francis Sforce brother to Maximilian above mentioned: invaded the Duchy of
Milan with a mighty army of Swyssers, Lanceknights, and Spaniards: the said
Lautrech was constrained to return again with his forces to Milan.

The said Maximilian came before Milan with this mighty army, but being by
nature very inconstant, and having received out of England a new supply of
money, he suddenly gave forth that he was advertised of the king of Hungaries
death, which occasion revoked him of necessity into Allemayne, whereupon
presently he dismissed his army without doing any matter of moment and
departed home having filled his baggs with ye king of Englands angels. After
his departure Lautrech returned again to aid the Venetians, who recovered
Bressa and Verona. Farther Charles Duke of Austrich, and by his grandfathers
death king of Castile, seeing ye kings great success, and doubting that he
would invade the realm of Naples which easily at that time he might have done
and was also purposed to have done, if the Emperor Maximilians descent into
Italy had not stayed him, concluded peace with the king at Noyon, where were
great demonstrations of amity between these two princes, and promise of
marriage between the said king of Castile and Louyse the kings daughter, and
diverse other articles agreed upon which never were performed, for the said king
of Castile meant only by this dissimulation to preserve his realm of Naples,
which if the king would have invaded he was not at yt time in case to defend,
by reason he was not as yet settled in his kingdom of Spain, the people whereof
seemed better affected to Ferdinand his brother (because he had been bred up
among the^) then to him.

You have heard before how the King and the Pope met at Bolonia after the
battle of Marignian, 1517.
where also the Pope restored to the king Parma and Placentia, but with this
condition that ye king should aid him to chase Francis Maria de la Rouere
Nephew to Pope Julius out of the Duchy of Vrbin, which also the king did in
the year 1516. And the Pope gave the said Duchy of Vrbin to Laurens of
Medices his nephew, to whom also ye king ye more to content the Pope gave in
marriage the lady Magdelaine heir of the Earldom of Bouloyne in France, of
the which marriage issued Catherin of Medices queen of france. Notwithstanding
in ye year 1517. the said Francis Maria recovered his Duchy again out of
the Popes hands, and notwithstanding that afterward by aid of the French ye
Pope drove the said Francis Maria to a hard co^positio^ whereby he left the
said duchy to the Pope, and was constrained to take a Pension in regard
thereof: yet continued he not long in this estate, for so soon as pope Adrian
was chosen Pope he restored Francis Maria to his Duchy of Vrbin again, who
quietly enjoyed it to his dying day which happened in the year 1538. Thus much
I thought good to write in this place of the success of this war of Vrbin,
because hereafter I mean not to make farther mention thereof.

This year also Martin Luther beegan openly to preach against the Popes
pardons in Germany.

Cap. 3. Maximilian the Emperor dies, Charles king of Castile succeeds him.
The King confederateth himself with the King of England, who restores Tournay
to him. The two Kings meet beetweene Ardres and Calais. The King of England
and the Emperor mete also together at Calais and Grauelin, a rebellion in Spain.
THE King perceauing by diverse apparent 1518.
reasons that the King of Castile meant to perform nothing of that which was
promised at Noyon, and farther understanding that the Emperor Maximilian
labored the electors of the Empire to choose king of Romans the said king
of Castile his Nephew, a thing greatly displeasing ye king, because the Empire
being joined to his Patrimoniall seniories, the said king of Castile should be
so mighty, that no Prince in Christendom should be able to withstand his
power: did both with his money and by his ministers dissuade the electors from
that election, and stayed it during Maximilians life.

Notwithstanding after the said Maximilians death which happened the twelfth
of January 1519 after the Duch and Italian account, who begin the year at
Newyerstide, but 1518. after the French who begin it not till Easter, the said
Charles king of Castile was elected Emperor, notwithstanding all the
impediments of the king, and the great suit both he and his friends had made to
obtain the Empire for himself, but god had otherwise disposed of it.
Wherefore ye king having failed of his hope for the obtaining of the Empire,
and seeing the power of the Emperor elect so greatly to increase: determined
to enter into a straight confederacy and alliance with the king of England, to
whom he sent Ambassadors to treat of a marriage between 1519.
their children, which was concluded and as well performed as the other
treatise of marriage with the king of Castile had been. Farther the king
labored the king of England to restore Tournay unto him because it was a town
that served the English men to small purpose, being far from their dominions,
and the defense thereof being yearly to the King of England a great charge,
but stood very commodiously for the king to offend at his pleasure the
Emperor in his low countries, which matter was so earnestly pursued that for
the sum of 400000. crowns the town was delivered into the kings hands, and
a straight league concluded between the king of England and him, and it was
agreed that the next year an enteruiew should be of the two kings between
Calais and Ardres, which also was accomplished accordingly, with so great 1520.
triumph and bravery on both sides, that the French called the place of the
enteruiew Le Camp de drap d'or: and with so great demonstrations of love
between the two Princes, that the like was not seen in many hundred years
before. For besides the royal and sumptuous entertainment that they gave each
to other, such brotherly love and assurance was between them, that in one day
the two kings went and dined each with others Queen, and farther one morning
very early the king of France came with a small train to Guysnes before the
king of England was stirring, and told him that he was come to yield him self
his prisoner in his Castle of Guysnes, whereunto the King of England answered
that he was come to take his heart his prisoner which was a very ready and an
apt answer. To conclude such signs of perfect love and amity passed between
these two princes by ye space of 15. or 16. days (for so long they were
together) that all men thought their friendship to be indissoluble, and that
war could never arise between the^, but it happened otherwise afterward,
whereby it appears that he spoke truth that said Princes amity to be no
inheritance. Not long after this enteruiew above mentioned, the new Emperor
elect arrived in England, where contrary to the king of France his
expectation, he was most honorably received, in such sort that the King of
England accompanied him to Calais and afterward to Grauelin, where they were
together a certain space in great friendship and fraternity, and where diverse
things were concluded between them no whit to the contentation of the King of
France. Among other articles this was one, that what controversy soever
happened beetweene the Emperor and the King, the King of England should be
the judge thereof; which article because the king would not agree unto, the
king of England took occasion to become his enemy thereupon.

Notwithstanding the wars brake not out between them this year, as well
because they had no apparent quarrel on either side, as also because they had
not as yet made their provisions for the wars, beesides that Spain was
troubled with a great rebellion which the Spaniards called La Santa giunta
which could not be appeased till the next year, that fear of the foreign
enemy namely the French inuading Spain, caused the Spaniards to forget all the
domestical dissentions, and to attend to the defense of their country.

Cha. 4. Wars between the king and the Emperor. The French conquer Navarre
and presently lose it again. The Imperials win many places from the French
in the Duchy of Milan. The French win Fontarabia. Nassau inuadeth Picardie.
The Emperor recouereth Tournay.
But to proceed, the long dissembled evil will 1521.
between these two mighty Princes could no longer be hidden, but like a fire
that had long been smothered brake suddenly forth into a great flame, partly
by the solicitation of the King of England and Francis Sforce, and partly by a
quarrel that happened between Robert de la March and Monsieur d'Emeriez about
a Castle called Hiergie.

This la March being in league with the King and in his protection, invaded
his enemy with certain french forces, and destroyed certain villages within
the Emperors dominions, wherewith the Emperor being much grieved, took upon
him the defense of de' Emeriez his subject, and upon this occasion began the
wars in those parts the flames whereof in a moment spread over all these
princes dominions, for the king perceauing the Emperors and the king of
Englands evil disposition toward him, determined while the Emperor was
troubled with ye above mentioned rebellion in Spain which as yet was
vnpacefed, to invade the realm of Nauarra, and to restore it to Henry the true
king thereof, from whose father, Ferdinande king of Spain had wrongfully taken
it as before you have heard.

The French army at the first had good success, and recovered in effect the
whole Realm. But the French Captains puffed up with pride because of this
conquest, and moved also with covetousness, hoping to obtain some goodly
booty in Spain, because of the great division the country was in, entered
into the Realm as far as the Groyne, which their invasion united the
Spainards together that before were in division, in such sort that they set
upon the French, and not only chaced them out of Spain, but also pursewing
them farther entered into Nauarra, from whence the Kings army being in
destresse both of victuals and money was forced to retire, and lost all the
places which before they had taken in ye said realm as easily as they had
won them: Farther the Emperors forces incited by this victory passed
farther into France, and spoiled many places in the country, and then in
saftie returned home. In Italy also the Emperor and his confederats, took
diverse places in the Duchy of Milan, and made sharp wars upon the king
there, wherewith the king being greatly irritated, and purposing to draw the
Emperor from the wars in Italy, to look nearer home, namely into Spain,
sent an army into Biscay, and took Fontarabia, and fortified it and held it
till the year 1523. when the Spaniards recovered it again as hereafter you
shall hear. And on an other side also the said Emperors sorces under the
leading of the Earl of Nassau invaded Picardie, rased Musancourt, took Moson,
and besieged Meziers which Captain Bayarde valiantly defended against him.
Then the King with a mighty army came down in person into Picardie,
purposing to fight with the said Earl of Nassau, but when he saw that he
would by no means be drawn to the battle, the King departed leaving his
army under the charge of the Duke of Bourbon* who took Hesdin and diverse
other towns.

But the king himself after his departure out of Picardie entered into
Burgundy, where he took and spoiled diverse towns, while the Emperor on the
other side recovered Tournay which had continued French till this time, ever
since it was restored to them by the king of England who took it in the time of
King LEWIS the twelfth as before you have heard, and thus proceeded the wars
in these parts.

Cap. 5. Pope Leo falls from the King to the Emperor. The Imperials win
Milan and soon after also Genoua. Pope Leo dies, Adrian the sixth succedeth.
The Swyssers furiously inuading the Imperials camp are vanquished. The King of
England defieth the King by the Emperors procurement. The Turk wins the
I Will of Rhodes.
NOw to return to the wars of Italy, Pope Leo seeing the Emperors great
success, began to strange his mind from the king, and secretly entered into
league with the said Emperor, pretending diverse injuries done unto him by the
kings Ministers in the Duchy of Milan, but indede burning with a desire to
recover Parma and Placentia, which himself as you have heard had after the
battle of Marignian yielded to the king.

So the Pope, the Emperor, and Francis Sforce joined together against the
king, and took Milan (which Monsieur de Lautrech defended against the^ as long
as he could) and afterward also Come, Cremona, Alexandria, and Pauia.
Notwithstanding Cremona the said Lautrech recovered soon after again and the
Castle of Milan held still for the king.

While these wars in the Duchy of Milan endured dyed Pope Leo, and in favor
of the Emperor, Adrian the sixth a Holander and the said Emperors
scholemaster, notwithstanding that he were at that time absent in Spain was
chosen Pope. The French being renforced with new 1522.
supplies namely with 10000. Swyssers entered again into the Duchy of Milan,
and came before Milan and Pauia, which were so defended against the^ by
Prospero Colonna, that they were forced to depart and abandon their siege.
Whereupon the Swyssers that served in the kings army, being weary of the
wars came to Monsieur de Lautrech and told him that except he would fight
with the enemy the next day they would depart home, which the said Lautrech at
the first refused to do, alleging the great disadvantage they should fight
with, because they must of force assault ye enemies in their camp, where
Prospero Colonna and the Marquis of Pescara were so strongly fortefied yt he
could not but utterly despair of the victory. But notwithstanding all these
reasons fight he must with all these disaduauntages, the Swyssers hoping of as
good success here as they had against the French, when they assaulted them in
their camp at Nouara. But the issue fell out clean contrary, for
notwithstanding that these Swyssers furiously assaulted the enemies camp, yet
were they repulsed and a great number of them slain, the French in very good
order retiring themselves.

This battle is called the battle of Bicocque. The Swissers after the
battle returned home not once taking their leave of Lautrech, who also having
lost the whole Duchy of Milan through this mutinous rashness of the Swyssers
returned into France to the king, leaving at his departure Monsieur de Lescun
his brother governor in Italy of those Pieces that held yet for the king, but
for want both of men and money, service he could do none, so that the
Imperials took Cremona and soon after also Genoua, and lastly the Castle of
Milan was also yielded to them. The Emperor whose affairs fell out according
to his desire passed into Spain, and by the way landed in England and so
prevailed with king Henry that he declared himself Imperial, and sent a
Herrault to defy the king.

Farther they both sent Ambassadors to Venis to dissuade them from the kings
friendship and to persuade them to enter into league with them, which also they
obtained in the end. But you shall understand that while these Christian
Princes warred thus one upon an other, the Turk to the reproach of them all
wan the I Will of Rhodes being as it were the bulwark of all Christendom. And
notwithstanding that the great master of the Rhodes sent to all these Princes
for aid: yet were they so inflamed one against another, yt they preferred
their own private quarells before the public defense.

Cha. 6. The Venetians forsake the King, The Duke of Bourbon falls also from
him, The Emperor inuadeth Biscay, recouereth Fontarabia, The King of England
inuadeth Picardie. Bourbon inuadeth Burgundy. Boniuet inuadeth Milan for the
king but with evil success. Pope Adrian dies, Clement the seventh succedeth.
The Emperor inuadeth France but with evil success.
THE treaty above mentioned with the Venetians was so earnestly pursued 1523.
that in the end they forsook the king, and entered into league with the
Emperor, with the Archduc Ferdinande his brother, and with Francis Sforce
invested by the Emperor Duke of Milan, so that it was thought the king would
now attempt no thing in Italy, having so many enemies, and his especial
friends namely the Venetians being become his foes, but it fell otherwise out
as hereafter you shall hear.

In the mean time Pope Adrian being come out of Spain into Italy compounded
the controversy between the Duke of Ferrare and the Church, and endeavored to
reconcile all those Princes together and to convert their Arms against the
Turk, but all in vain.

About this time also Charles Duke of Bourbon Constable of France and the
greatest prince in the Realm revolted from the king to the Emperor. Diverse
causes are alleged by diverse men of his revolt. But I think ambition to have
been the only cause thereof, For he being a Prince of great courage, and
greatly beloved in the Realm, was persuaded that he could have drawn the
greatest part of the Realm after him, and was promised in marriage Elenor the
Emperors sister widow of Emanuell king of Portugale, and to have the earldom
of Province conquered by the arms of the Emperor and the King of England, and
erected into a Kingdom delivered to him. And he for his part promised if the
Emperor would give him the leading of twelve thousand Lancknights to conquer
all Burgundy from the king, and to restore it to the said Emperor who
claimed it as heir to Charles the last Duke of Burgundy slain by the
Swyssers at the battle of Naucy in the year 1476.

Thus oftentime are the noblest wits so drowned with an ouergreat opinion of
themselves, that they hold those enterprises for easy which are indeed
impossible to be achieved.

Notwithstanding the Emperor used his help in the wars, and he showed
extreme hatred against the king and his country all the time of his life, for
the which most men blame him and few commend him. The Emperor having stirred
up almost all the Princes of Christendom against the king, meant to assault him
on all sides, and so to destract his forces that he should have enough to do
to defend his own, and by that means not be able to offend him in Italy.
Wherefore first he sent an army to invade Biscay which besieged Bayonne but
could not take it, but Fontarabia they recovered from the French, God so
disposing of this matter that each party should hold their own and no more:
on the other side the king of England sent the Duke of Suffolk with a mighty
army to invade Picardie. But God having commiseration as it is to be thought
of the poor Realm of France, caused the said English army for want of
victualles and money to return home without any matter of moment done.

The Duke of Bourbon likewise inuading Burgundy had no better success, for
being entered with his twelve thousand Lansknights into the country, both his
money and his intelligences failed him, and his soldiers wanting pay left
him, and the most part of them went to serve the king.

Thus God fought for the king as long as he stood upon the defense of his
own Realm, but out of his own Realm his success was far otherwise. God
as it is to be thought punishing his ambition in moving unnecessary wars
abroad to trouble the state of Italy, and not being contented with his large,
rich, and flourishing Realm at home. For you shall understand that at this
time he was him self passing with a mighty army into Italy to recover the
Duchy of Milan, as though without Milan the king of France were not worthy
the name of king. And notwithstanding that Bourbons revolt and the invasions
above mentioned stayed his own person in France: yet his army consisting of
34000. men, he sent into Italy under the leading of the Admiral Boniuet, to
recover the said Duchy of Milan.

Prospero Colonna being governor of Milan for the Emperor and Francis Sforce
met with this French army at the River of Th^sin with purpose to stop their
passage, but that notwithstanding they passed the river and Prospero was forced
to retire to Milan, whether if Boniuet had presently solowed him and given him
no leisure to fortefie the town, it is thought he might have taken it without
any resistance. But the actions of great soldiers are not to be censured by
the judgment of the vulgar sort many reasons and great dangers might move
him to forbear to give Prospero the chase and attempt to take the town by
force, which he being general concealed to himself, and delivered not to the
notice of men. About this time dyed Pope Adrian and to him succeeded Julius
Cardinal of M^dices by the name of Clement the seventh. The French army above
mentioned under the leading of Boniuet besieged Milan during the which siege
Prospero Coulonne dyed in his bed, and to the relief of the town came the
Marquis of Pescara with new supplies, and likewise the Duke of Bourbon (having
failed of his enterprise in Burgundy) with 7000. Landsknights levied in
Allmaigne by Ferdinand the Emperors brother, by means whereof (the Venetians
also joining with the Imperials, and the Swyssers that came to the succor of
the French, traitorously refusing to pass the river of Seuze and to join with
the Admirals army) the French were forced not only to abandon ye siege, but
also with great loss of men, and especially of the noble captain Bayarde to
retire into France, Bourbon and the Imperials continually charging them on the
back as they marched. This success had the king in Italy, and no better had
the Emperor in France, who about the end of this year invaded in person
with a mighty army the Realm of France from the frontiers of Spain,
supposing the small exploict done before Bayonne to have proceeded from the
negligence of his Captains, and Sauueterre he took a place of small
importance, which being done, his courage being greater the^ his ability to
entertain so mighty an army and lacking both money and victuals which could
hardly follow him in those straight passages, beesides that the hard weather
coming on which is very terrible in that rockie, and mountain country: he
was forced to dismiss his army and return home, and to abando^ this
enterprise, which he had attempted against the advice of all his best
soldiers and Captains.

Cap. 7. Queen Claude of France dies, Bourbon inuadeth Province, but is soon
forced to retire, The king inuadeth Milan, and is taken prisoner at the
battle of Pauia.
IN Iulie in the year 1524. dyed Queen Claude 1524.
at Bloys greatly to the kings grief, for she was a most wise and virtuous
Lady. The Imperials having chaced the French army clean out of the Duchy of
Milan as before you have heard, but knowing the kings magnanimity to be such
that he would not fail to attempt the recovery thereof, determined to invade
him first in his own Country, thereby to cause him to attend to the defense
of his own Realm, and to stay him from trobling the Emperor on the other
side of the mountains. Wherefore the Duke of Bourbon with a mighty army
entered into Province promising the Emperor to work wonders there for his
service, and besieged Marseilles.

But the king in person with a great army came to succor the town, whereupon
Bourbon for all his great bragges and the Imperials, were forced to leuic their
siege, and in great have retired to Milan, whether the king with his whole
army followed them, and soon recovered Milan and in a manner the whole
country, except Pauia, before the which he went and laid his siege. Whereupon
the Pope entered into league with him, and the Swyssers who the last year had
traitorously refused to join with the Admiral Boniuets army and had
abandoned the French as before you have heard, returned to the kings service
again.

But while the king lay before the siege of Pauia and had brought it to
extreme necessity. Bourbon went into Germany, and brought with him 6000.
footmen and 2000. horse: Farther 6000. Rhetians being corrupted by the
Imperials abandoned the kings camp and returned home, leading also certain
bands of Swyssers away with them.

The king also by the Popes persuasion had sent the Duke of Albanie from the
siege of Pauia with 10000. footmen and 600. horse to invade the Realm of
Naples, supposing to draw the Imperialls thither for the defense of that
Realm, which notwithstanding wisely they forbear to do, knowing the Realm of
Naples to be in sufficient saftie if they overthrew the king.

Thus the kings camp being by the departure of those above mentioned greatly
weakened, and the forces that remained with him, through the corruption of his
officers not being the one half of the number that he paid, which was a
wonderful thing that such an abuse should be offered to a Prince being with
his army in person himself: the Imperialls being ignorant of none of these
disorders, determined to invade him in his own Camp, where through the defect
of courage in the Swyssers he was taken prisoner, him self fighting more
valiauntly then any man in his army: many of the nobility were slain and
many taken, and the Swyssers were in manner all cut in pieces by the
Landsknights, in revenge of the ancient hatred between the said Swyssers and
them.

This battle is called the battle of Pauia, and was fought upon Saint
Mathias day, being the day of the Emperors Nativity in the year 1525.
according to the Italians but 1524. according to the French, which variance
arises as before I have mentioned because the one begin the year upon the
first of Januarie and the other not before Easter.

The Duke of Albanie after the kings captivity by the Popes means passed by
sea with his army safly into France. Thus was this noble King through the
disorders principally proceeding from his own officers and Captains taken
prisoner as you have heard, who not being dismayed with this sudden blow of
fortune, behaved himself with such princely magnanimity, yt he was honored and
had in admiration even of his enemies in such sort that his captivity
blemished not, but rather caused his noble virtues the more to shine, as by
this one example which I will rehearse shall well appear. So soon as he was
brought to his lodging he sent for the leaders of the Imperial army, and
told them that he had a suit unto them which he trusted they would not deny
him.

Whereunto when they seemed doubtful what answer to make, supposing it to be
some great matter of difficulty that they might not adventure to grant
without the Emperors priuitie, he perceauing their immagination, told them it
was no such important suit that required any such doubt, only his desire was
that the young French boys taken in ye battle might not remain with the
Italians, but in exchange of other prisoners be delivered to the Spaniards,
which was presently granted and executed accordingly, though not without great
admiration of ye Imperialls, who wondered that the king forgetting his own
misfortune being of a Prince made a prisoner in one day, could remember to be
so careful of the chastity of these young boys.

Cha. 8. The King of England confederateth himself with the estate of France,
and the Princes and states of Italy themselves against the Emperor. The
Imperialls seize upon the Duchy of Milan. The King sayleth into Spain. The
treaty of Madrid. The king is delivered, The Children of France go in
hostage into Spain.
T The Emperor having received the 1525.
news of the kings captivity, seemed to take it very modestly, forbidding all
signs of joy to be used, and alleging that we ought to rejoice at the
overthrow of Turks and infidels but not of any Christian Prince, which his
modest behavior put the world in great hope that he would deliver the king
with such honorable conditions as might establish a quiet peace in
Christendom and perpetual amity between them twain. But his rigor to the
king afterward declared his spirit to be far from any such moderation as his
external beehauiour made show of.

Farther you shall understand that the king of England upon ye receipt of these
news, levied amighty army purposing in person to invade France, but he
continued not long in that mind upon these occasions following.

First certain difficulties arose between the Emperor and him, the king
demanding, bearing but equal charges with the Emperor, an unequal part of
the conquest of France, and the Emperor hoping to obtain better conditions
of the King of France by making peace, then he should do if he joined with
the king of England by making war.

Secondarely the Cardinal of YORK being altogether French, and enemy to the
Emperor diswaded the king of England from farther joining with the Emperor,
who was alredie so mighty, that his greatness was become terrible to all his
neighbors round about him.

Thirdly after the battle of Pauia the Emperor seemed not to make so great
account of the king of England as before he had done, for first he refused to
marie the Lady Mary the king of Englands daughter being very young, and married
the sister of Ihon king of Portugale, as hereafter you shall hear, with whom
he received a great mass of money whereof he stood in great need.

Farther whereas before the battle of Pauia, he never wroat letter to the
king of England but with his own hand and with this subscrption Your son and
Cousin Charles, after ye battle he never wroat letter with his own hand nor
with other subscription then his simple name Charles, all the which reasons
caused the king of England by little and little to strange himself from the
Emperors friendship. But the thing that most wrought the alteration of his
mind was that the Lady Regent of France the kings mother sent unto him a
gentleman with letters very humbly wrtiten, wherein she signified unto him, yt
it was not honorable for so noble a Prince as he was, to invade a king being
Captive, and a Christian Realm afflicted with the captivity of their Prince,
which submission pierced so depely into the breast of this courageous king,
that presently he not only dismissed his army which he had leuyed to his
charge, not demanding one penie in regard thereof: but also from that day
forward became the greatest friend that the Realm of France had, and entered
into league with the Regent for the delivery of the king her son, for the
accomplishment also whereof, the said king of England so earenestly trauayled
with all the states of Christendom, that in the end he effected it, in such
sort that so soon as king Francis had set foot in France, the first thing he
did was, that presently he wroat a letter of thanckes to king Henry
aduertising him of his liberty, for the which he acknowledged himself more
beehoulding to him then to all the Princes of Christendom besides.

Such true nobility reigned in Princes being in hostility, at those days,
whereas now this age is so far degenerated from the magnanimity of their
fathers, that one Prince seeks to take away an others life by treason,
murder, poison and such like vilanous attempts, which the heathen themselves
detested and abhorred. But to return to our History. The kings captivity
astonished not only France but also all Italy, because all the Princes and
states thereof seemed now wholly to depend upon the Emperors clemency, none of
the^ being able to stand upon his own strength. The Pope especially was not a
little grieved with this accident, who notwithstanding that for his present
saftie he made an accord with the Imperials as did also the Venetians: yet
their heart was far from it, as the sequel well declared: for secretly and
under hand they practiced to make a league between the state of France, the
Pope, the Venetians, and the duke of Milan, against the Emperor, which
confederacy the Imperialls having discovered, presently seized all the Duchy
of Milan to the Emperors use, save the Castle of Milan into the which the
Duke put himself and endured the siege, and the Castle of Cremona, both the
which notwithstanding the Imperialls enuyroned with trenches on all sides.

But this seazing of the said Duchy caused the league to discover it self
sooner then otherwise it would. The king to the end he might the sooner
recover his liberty went into Spain, hoping by present conference with the
Emperor, the sooner to compound all their controversies.

But the Emperors rigor was such in rude handeling him, never once vouchsafing
to come to see him, and propounding such unreasonable conditions as the king
without the ruin of his Realm could not accept: that the King fell into a
most dangerous and almost desperate disease for very grief of mind.

Wherefore the Emperor doubting to lose the fruits of his victory by the
kings death, came and visited him, and so in the end peace was concluded
between the^ at Madrid, the 14 of February 1525. after the French, but after
the Italians 1526. being just a year lacking but 10. days since ye kings
captiutie. But you shall understand yt the conditions of this treaty were so
unreasonable that (as it is reported) the King protested he would not observe
them, when he should be returned into his Realm, especially the articles for
the restitution of Burgundy to the Emperor, and the releasing of his
soueraintie over Flaunders

Notwithstanding for the performance of this treaty Francis and Henry the
kings Children were delivered in hostage to the Emperor, and for farther
continuance of amity beetweene these two Princes it was agreed that the king
should marie Elenor the Emperors sister, promised as before you have heard to
the Duke of Bourbon, but never with any meaning to perform it.

And thus was the King delivered, with promise that if he would not perform
the treaty, he should return prisoner into Spain.

Cap. 9. The Emperor marieth, France refuses the treaty of Madrid. The
kings confederates in Italy, beesiege Milan twice, but in vain. The Pope is
twice taken prisoner by the Imperialls, Rome is sacked. Bourbon is slain at
the asault. The King of England and France defy the Emperor. The Pope is
restored to liberty. Genoua returns to the Kings obedience. The King
inuadeth Milan and the Realm of Naples, but by reason of the reuoult of Andre
D'oria to the Emperor, and the plague that entered into the French camp, his
enterprise was overthrown.
ABout the beginning of this year 1526. the Emperor having refused 1526.
the king of Englands daughter as before you have heard, married Isabella
Daughter of Emanuel and sister to Ihon King of Portugale. The king being
returned into his Realm complained greatly of the Emperors great inhumanitie
toward him, and his unprincely usage of him, being far different from the
entertainment that Edward the third king of England gave to king Ihon of
France taken prisoner by the Prince of Wales at the battle of Poicters.
Farther he assembled the estates of his Realm, who according to the Kings
mind utterly condemned the treaty of Madrid, as forced upon a prisoner by
violence and not being in the kings power to perform, and thus was the treaty
broken and the Emperor deluded, and so his own council told him he should
be, before the Kings delivery, unless he altered some points of the treaty.
Notwithstanding the King offered him two millions of crowns for the delivery
of his children, and diverse other honorable conditions in consideration of the
articles for the restitution of Burgundy, and the release of the Soueraintie
of Flaunders, which the Emperor utterly rejected, charging the king with
perjury, because not performing the treaty, he returned not prisoner again
according to his promise. But the Pope voluntarely without entreaty had
assoyled him of that oath.

The king perceuing the Emperors obstinacy, renewed his league with the king
of England, and farther co^federated himself in Italy with ye Pope, the
Venetians, the Duke of Milan and diverse other states against the Emperor, who
all jointly sent unto him for the delivery of the kings children, offering him
very honorable conditions in consideration thereof if he would accept of them,
but finding him to stand stiffly upon the treaty of Madrid, and that he
would admit no other conditions they jointly began war upon him and invaded his
dominions in Italic, and came with their army before Milan hoping to take it
and to deliver the duke of Milan who held the Castle as yet, but they failed of
their purpose, and were constrained with dishonor to levy their siege
notwithstanding yt their army came twice to the relief of the said castle of
Milan, which the duke considering, despairing of succors, and being almost
starued in the castle for victuals, he made a compositio^ with the duke of
Bourbon governor of Milan for the Emperor, whereby he yielded the castle into
his hands, and it was agreed that Coma being held by the Imperials should be
delivered to the duke of Milan, and that there he should reside till the
Emperor had heard his justification. The Emperor sent against the confederats
a mighty army under the leading of the said duke of Bourbon, and sought also
to stir up a rebellion against the Pope in Rome itself by means of the
Coulonnois, who by cunning took him prisoner in the vatican, and made him yield
to such conditions of peace as pleased them, and constrained him to abandon his
league with the confederats and to enter into league with the Imperials, and
with these conditions he was delivered by the^. But that notwithstanding, the
duke 1527.
of Bourbon whose army wanting pay desired no thing more then to be enriched
with the spoil of Rome, marched directly against the city, took it, and
sacked it though with ye loss of his own life. The Pope with many of his
Cardinals was emprisoned in the castle of Saint Angelo, and put to their
ransom, and constrained to yield to such conditions of peace as it pleased the
Imperials to propound unto the^. The Emperor hearing these news, seemed in
outward show to sorrow greatly for ye Popes emprisonment, and the sacking of
Rome, but the truth is he was glad of it at his very heart, which also well
appeared, because that notwithstanding, he ceased not the pastimes and triumphs
that he had appointed for ye birth of his son. But the king of France and
England sent their Ambassadors to ye Emperor demanding the Popes delivery.
And being entered into a straight league together by means of the Cardinal of
York, who came this year with wonderful pomp to Amiens to the king, they both
sent their Heraults to defy the Emperor, and farther the king gave the
Emperor the lie, and sent unto him a cartell of defiance, wherein he challenged
the combat of him. But the Emperor seeing so many Princes and states against
him, restored the Pope to his liberty, and about this time Genoua by means of
Andre D'oria being then in service with the King returned to the Kings
obedience. Whereupon forth with 1528.
the king leuying a mighty army, sent it under the leading of Monsieur de
Lautrech into Italy, which recovered diverse towns in the Duchy of Milan, and
besieged and took Pauia, and sacked it in revenge of the kings captivity, and
had so good success there that it is thought the French might have recovered
not only Milan, but also the whole country.

But the Pope being set at liberty, either to be revenged of the Emperor, or
in hope to have the Realm of Naples for himself, according to the agreement in
his confederacy with the King, persuaded the king to withdraw his army out of
the Duchy of Milan where his affairs prospered well, and to send Lautrech to
invade the said Realm of Naples, which the king to gratefie the Pope was
contented to do. Lautrech recovered all the said Realm save Naples it self,
which he also besieged. But during that siege Anare D'oria who with the French
navy held the town enclosed by sea, suddenly left the king, and went to the
Emperors service, by means whereof the Imperialls were masters of the Sea
which before the French commanded.

Farther the said D'oria revolted Genoua also from the king, and did much
mischief to the French by sea. But their greatest misfortune, and the very
ruin of this enterprise was the plague which entered into the French camp,
whereof Lautrech himself dyed, and whereby his army was so extenuated that
the siege was abandoned, and the French forced to return home having lost all
that they had before taken as well in the said Realm as in the Duchy of
Milan.

Cap. 10. Peace is concluded at Cambray. The Children of France are delivered,
the King marieth the Emperors sister. The Emperor is crowned, Florence is be
sieged and yielded to the Pope, Ferdinand is chosen king of Romans.
BUT in the end peace was concluded 1529.
between these princes at Cambray, for all parts were weary of the wars, and
the kings children were restored unto him for the sum of two millions of
crowns, which were presently to be paid in this sort. First the king was
presently to pay to the king of England for the Emperor 400000. crowns of
debt which the Emperor heretofore had borrowed of the said King. Farther he was
likewise to pay to the said king of England for the Emperor 500000. crowns
forfaited by the Emperor to the said king, for refusing to marie the La die
Marie the king of Englands daughter, and marying the princess of Portugale,
upon payment of the which sums the king was to redeem all the Emperors
obligations out of the king of Englands hands, and to deliver them to the
Emperor. Thirdly he was to redeem out of the said king of Englands hands a
Jewel engaged to ye said kings father by the Archduc Philip father to the
Emperor for 50000 crowns, being a flower deluce set with stones, which
because it had been a Iuell of Philip surnamed Le bon duke of Burgundy the
Emperor made no small account of, the rest of the two millions was presently
to be paid to the Emperor himself, and these conditions being performed the
Children of France to be delivered otherwise not.

T The Emperors purpose in turning the king of Englands debt upon the king was
this. First he hoped that the king, his Realm being empouerished and consumed
with the long wars that it had endured, should not be able to make present
payment of so huge a mass of money as was to be paid, first to the Emperor
himself, and secondarely to the king of England, for the redeeming of the
Emperors bonds and iuells out of his hands, without present payment whereof,
he assured himself that the king of England would not deliver the foresaid
bonds and iuells, and by that means the children of France should remain
his prisoners still.

Neither was he out of hope that happily some variance would arise beetweene
these two kings about payment of the money, and so their friendship be
dissolved, which was the principal mark he shot at, and as also partly it
fell out in the end as hereafter you shall hear.

But the king of England perceauing the Emperors cunning, and not being
ignorant of the poor estate the Realm of France was fallen into, having
sustained such a continual tempest of wars against so many mighty enemies,
ever since the beeginning of the reign of king LEWIS the twelfth till this
very time as by the course of this History above written you may easily
perceive of a noble and heroical mind, sent Sir Francis Brian, with all the
Emperors obligations and the said Iuell to king Francis, willing him on his
part to signify unto ye king, first for the 400000. crowns of debt dew unto
the said king of England by the Emperor, the king his master would give the
King liberty to pay them in five years. The 500000. crowns forfayted to him
by the Emperor for not marrying the Lady Mary the said king of Englands
Daughter he would frankely give him, and the flower de luce he would
likewise give to his Godsonne Henry Duke of ORLEANS the kings second son, and
thus was the said flower de luce and all the Emperors oblygations by the king
of Englands commandment delivered contrary to the Emperors expectation into
the kings hands, and the said Emperor satisfied in all his demands, and
thereupon the kings children set at liberty, the article for the restitution
of Burgundy released, and the amity between the two kings continewed.

And the next year 1530. the king married Elenor 1530.
the Emperors sister, and the said Emperor received the crown Imperial of
the Pope at Bolonia upon Saint Mathias day being his birth day where the peace
between the king and him was sworn anew.

All the states of Italy were reconciled to the Emperor, Francis Sforce was
restored to his duchy of Milan, and the Emperor was invested by the Pope of
the Realm of Naples, who also at the Popes request sent an army to besiege
Florence, because the Florentines during the time of the Popes emprisonment in
the hands of the Imperials, had chaced all the house of Medices out of Florence
and spoiled all their goods.

In this siege the Prince of Orange general of the Emperors army was slain.
But the said City was so distressed that in the end it yielded, and was
delivered into the Popes hands, who punished them with great severity,
suppressed their liberties and clean altered their state.

This year also Ferdinand the Emperors brother was chosen King of Romans,
and the Realm of France for certain years remained in peace.

Cap. II. The Practices of the kings of France and England against the
Emperor. The Turk inuadeth Hungary. The Pope and the Emperor meet at
Bolonia, and the Pope and the king at Marseilles. Henry the kings son
marries the Popes niece. The King of England falls from the Pope, Pope
Clement dies, Paulus the third succedeth. The Duke of VVirtemberg recouereth
his Duchy.
NOtwithstanding both the KINGS 1531.
mind and likewise the king of Englands were exulcerated against the Emperor,
the one because he saw himself dispossed of the Duchy of Milan, the conquest
whereof had been so chargeable both to his predecessor and to him, and the
other because the Emperor defended against him, the cause of his Aunt, wife to
the said king of England, and dissuaded the Pope from granting any Bull of
deuorce between him and the said Lady, whom the king was desirous to put away
because she had been first his brothers wife, and by the laws of God could
not be lawful wife to him.

But the king of France was so impourished, and wearied with long wars, that
he thought it not time to attempt aught against the Emperor as yet.

Notwithstanding he labored to draw the Pope to his party, by offering a
marriage beetweene the second son of France and Catherin niece to the said
Pope, which afterward also took effect. And not content therewith, he sought
also to stir up the Turk against the Emperor, and farther both he and the
king of England practiced a consederacie with such of the Princes of Germany
as they knew to be evil affected to him. In this year also the kings mother
dyed, and the duchy of Britain was incorporated to the crown of France.

In the year 1532. the Turk by the kings persuasion as the Emperor said
invaded Hungary, and having 1532.
spoiled and robbed all the Country returned suddenly to Constantinople,
contrary to the expectation of the king of England and France, both the which
hating the Emperor most deadly, met together about this time at Bouloyne, and
after went both together to Calais, where they were agreed to have proclaimed
war against the Emperor during the Turks invasion of Hungary.

But the Turks sudden departure out of the said Realm, and his return to
Constantinople caused them to alter their minds, and to defer the war till
a more convenient time.

Notwithstanding wisely they gave forth, that their meeting was to confer
together how to make resistance against the Turck, and the better to color
their pretense, they sent Ambassadors to diverse Princes of Germany, and other
potentates of christendom, to persuade the^ to enter into league with them
against the said Turck. But the Emperor 1533.
on ye otherside not being ignorant of these their practices came into Italy,
and the Pope and he met together at Bolonia, where in outward demonstrations
were great signs of love and amity. But it well appeared that their hearts
were far asunder, for the Emperor obtained no thing of that he desired.

For first he persuaded the Pope to bestow his niece Catherine of Medices upon
Francis Sforce Duke of Milan, and secondarelie that he would assemble a
general council both the which were denied him, only the Pope at the
Emperors earnest solicitation, and because he would not altogether discontent
him, agreed to enter into league with the Emperor, with the king of Romans
his brother, and the other potentates of Italy (all save the Venetians who
refused to be comprehended in the said league) for the defense of their estates
in Italy, and each man was rated what charges he should bear in those wars.

But with what mind this league was made soon after well appeared, for the
Emperor was no sooner departed into Spain, but the Pope and the king met at
Marseilles, where the marriage between the second son of France and the Popes
niece was accomplished, and farther the king moved the Pope for the Bull of
deuorce between the king of Engand and his wife the Emperors Aunt, which had
before been granted in the year 1529. and sent into England to Cardinal
Campegius, in whose hands it remained till the Pope for fear of the Emperor
commanded it to be burned, and at this time also notwithstanding the kings
solicitation for the same reason it could not be obtained. Wherefore the king
of England withdrew him self and 1534.
his Realm from the Popes obedience, and proclaimed him self supreme head of
the Church within his own dominions.

Soon after this meeting the Pope dyed, and Alexander Farnese succeeded him by
ye name of Paul, the third. Farther the Duke of Wirtemberg joining unto him
the Lantzgraue of Hesse, by ye kings solicitation and with his money invaded
the Duchy of Wirtemberg, whereof the said Duke had before been dispossessed by
the king of Romans, and recovered it little to the said king of Romans
contentment, who notwithstanding fearing farther troubles in the absence of his
brother the Emperor in Spain, was forced to wink thereat.

This year also Solomon the great Turck was overthrown and put to flight in
Persia by the Sophy.

Cha. 12. The Emperor wins Tunis and Gouletta in Afric. The king
establishes legions of footmen in France. VVarres beetweene the Emperor and
the King about Sauoy. The Emperor inuadeth Province with evil success.
Nassau beesiegeth Perona in vain. The King inuadeth Picardie and Artoys. The
wars of Picmont and Salusses, truce for three months.
THE Emperor being in peace with the king made a journey into Africa 1535.
and conquered Thunis and Gouletta, and so victoriously returned into Italy.
The king in the mean time established diverse laws for the good government of
his Realm, and withal made also great provision for the wars, for he leuyed
in his Realm an army of 50000. footmen which were in continual pay, and were
divided into Legions after the ancient Roman discipline, and these were
always in a readiness to offend or defend as occasion required. In the mean
time dyed the Duke of Milan, and the whole country was yielded to the Emperor,
who seeing the king in a readiness with so mighty an army, and doubting that
he would upon a sudden invade the said Duchy of Milan, being utterly
unfurnished at that time of all things necessary for defense: thought good to
temporise with the king, and to entertain him with communication of marriage
beetweene the Daulphin and the princess of Portugale daughter to Queen
Elenor, and likewise between Monsieur de' Angoulesme the kings third son and
the Princess of Spain the Emperors daughter, but notwithstanding all this
temporising, the hatred these two princes bare the one to the other could noe
longer be smothered, but brake out into a bluddie war upon this occasion
which I will now rehearse.

The king claymed the duchy of Sauoy as appertayning to him in the right of
his mother, 1536.
for the which cause he invaded it with his army and conquered the whole
country. The duke was entered into league with the Emperor and prayed aid of
him, who sent Anthony Leua to his relief. But the Kings army being first in
a readiness chased the Sauoyan clean out of his Country before the Emperors
aid could come unto him.

The Emperor came to Rome where in the consistory, he made a most bitter
inuectiue against the king, whereunto the King answered by writing at large.
Farther the said Emperor seeing his confederate the Duke of Sauoy thus 1537.
spoiled of his country, in a great fury entered with a mighty army into
Province, persuading himself soon to be Lord of all France.

But after he had remained in Province a while, and saw the preparation that
the king made against him, his army also being in great penury and distress,
because the king had so stopped all the passages that no victuals could come to
his camp, he soon returned into stalie without doing any thing worthy of
remembrance, finding the Realm of France a morsel not so easy to be
swalowed v^, as he imagined, on the other side the Earl of Nassau at the same
time invaded Picardie and besieged Perone, but after he had lain two months
before the town, he was forced to leauie his siege and depart, the self same
day that the Emperor retired out of Province.

Then the King on the other side invaded the Emperors dominions in Picardie
and Artoys, where he spoiled many towns and villages, and took Hesdin both
town and castle, and likewise Saint Pol which he strongly fortefied.
Notwithstanding the army Imperial under the leading of the Earl of Buren,
soon after recovered Saint Pol, and entered into France, and took Montreuil
and spoiled many other towns, and there truce was concluded beetweene these
two Princes dominions only in those parts, for ten months.

But the wars in Piemont endured still, for you shall understand that about
this time Francis Marquis of Salusses most traitorously and without any
occasion left the King and went to the Emperors service, for the which cause
the kings army in Piemont entered into the said Marquisate and before any
aid could come to the Marquis from the Imperials, seized all the country into
the kings hands.

Notwithstanding soon after the army Imperial 1538.
under the leading of the Marquis du Guast recovered in manner the whole
country again, and restored it to the said Marquis, all save the castles of
Verculo and Carmagnolla, the later also whereof they went and besieged, and
there the said Marquis os Salusses was slain with a musket shot.

But notwithstanding that accident, the Marquis of Guast took the said Castle
of Carmagnolla, and entered into Piemont where he recovered many places, which
the King seeing, sent a mighty army into Piemont under the leading of Henry
the Daulphin his son, who presented battle to the said Marquis of Guast,
which he being far inseriour in forces refused.

The Daulphin recovered in a manner all the places that the said Marquis had
before taken. The king also himself passed in person into Piemont. Whereupon
by the mediation of the Queen of Hungary the Emperors sister a general
truce was concluded for three months as well for these parts as before it had
been for Picardie.

Cap. 13. The Pope, the Emperor, and the king, mete at Nice in Province, a
truce is there concluded for ten years. The Emperor and the King meet at
Aiguesmortes. The Empress dies. Gaunt rebelleth. The Emperor passes through
France and represseth the rebellion of Gaunt. The Kings Ambassadors are
slain. The Emperors unfortunate voyage to Argier. The Turk iuuadeth Hungary.
BUT the Pope seeing the miserable state Christendom was brought into, through
the continual wars of these two great Princes, trauayled all yt he could to
establish a firm peace between them, wherefore he entreated them both to meet
him at Nice in Province.

Whereunto they both condescended, and accordingly in June they all three met
at the said place of Nice, where the Pope endeavored to make a final peace
between them, but when he perceived that could by no means be brought to
pass, he concluded a truce for ten years, which being done they all
departed, the Pope to go to Rome, the Emperor into Spain, and the king by
Auignion to return into France. But so soon as the king was arrived at
Auignion, he received news that the Emperor being at Villa Francha, would
gladly again speak with him, and that if it pleased him to come to
Aiguesmortes he would there meet him. The king sent the Queen to Villa
Francha to visit her brother the Emperor, and himself followed after to
Aiguesmortes, where the Emperor came on land, and dyned with the King, and
lodged with him all night in great demonstration of love and fraternity.
Afterward also the king went with the Emperor into his galey, where they were
together a long time, and so in great amity departed the Emperor into Spain
and the king home.

In the year 1539. dyed the Empress, and the town of Gaunt rebelled against
the Emperor, and sent 1539.
to submit themselves to the king, who not only refused them, but also
advertised the Emperor thereof, who meaning in person to suppress their
rebellion, and knowing the journey by sea to be long, and dangerous, because
tempest might cast him upon the coast of England, (the king whereof was his
enemy) as it had done his father in times past: sent to the king, desiring him
that he might pass the next way through France, promising him the restitution
of Milan for one of his sons, but he besought him not to demand any
assurance thereof in writing, till he should be come into the low countries,
least he should seem to yield the said duchy not of his own accord, but by
constraint to obtain his passage through France.

The king agreed to all his demands, and received him into his realm, and
conueighed him through it into his own dominions with all the honor that
possibly might be imagined. But after he was passed out of ye realm of
France, first he began to temporise about the restitution of the said Duchy of
Milan till he had spoken with his brother the king of Romans, and afterward
flatly denied that he had made any such promise at all, and thus was the king
deluded, agreeable whereunto certain words much used by the Emperor in his
passage through France, were better understood after his said passage by the
sequel that followed, than when they were uttered, for you shall understand yt
Monsieur de Sanssac was appointed to attend upon him with all sorts of Hawks,
wherein the said Emperor seemed to take great delight, especially with flying
at the Kight, which the French call Voler le Milan, in so much that he used
often to ask the said Sanssac whether they should Voler le Milan.

Which after his departure out of France and his deluding of the king for the
restitution of the Duchy of Milan, was interpreted not to be meant of flying at
the Kight, but as a jest the Emperor in his own conceit made at the Kings
simplicity, in beeleeuing that for his passage through France he would
restore the said Duchy.

The said Emperor under color and promise of pardoning the Gantoys all their
offenses entered 1540.
with his army into Gaunt, where he made a bluddy and cruel execution of all
the offenders, took away their weapons, seized all their privileges, and
built a Castle of the Abbey of Saint Bauon to command the town and hold it in
awe in the nature of a citadelle. This dissimulation of the Emperors above
mentioned touching the restitutio^ of Milan so faithfully promised, gave the
king just cause to be ielous of all his actions, and to fortefie himself
against him with as many friends as he could make, wherefore he sent Caesar
Fregose and Ricon his Ambassadors the one to the Venetians, ye other to
negotiate 1541.
with the Turk, who passing peacably through the dominions of the Emperor as
the kings good brother, friend and confederate, were both slain upon the River
of Poe by the Marquis of Guast, and that by the Emperors commandment as the
King said, whose meaning was to have found their instructions about them, and
so to have discovered all the kings secrets. But the said Ambassadors for the
better assurance, had sent their packets an other way to Venis, and so the said
Marquis failed of his purpose. The king demanded justice at the Emperors
hands for this wicked fact, naming unto him the men yt had committed this
vilanous murder, and directly proving the said Marquis to have been author
thereof. But because the Emperor refused to do justice heerin, as reason was
he should have done, it is manifest that the fact was not committed but by his
commandment. In this year also the Emperor made his journey by sea into
Africa purposing to besiege Argier but his navy was so tossed with tempest,
that with great danger of his person, and infinite loss both of treasure,
munition, ships, and men, he was forced to return home. But it had been much
more honorable for him to have gone to aid his brother, whom ye Turk spoiled
at this very time of the greatest part of Hungary, then to have attempted this
voyage into Africa, which ye king charged the Emperor to proceed of couardise,
alleging that because he durst not go against the Turk who was in person in
Hungary, he chose the other enterprise as easier and of less danger: But to
proceed.

Cap. 14. Wars renewed between the Emperor and the king. The king inuadeth
the Emperor with four armies. The Emperor inuadeth the Duke of Cleues. The
king wins Landersey, inuadeth Luxembourg the second time. The Emperor joined
with the king of England, be sieged Landersey, but in vain. The causes why the
king of England left the kings friendship.
THe king seeing the Emperor returned from his voyage in Africa, (during the
which like a Christian Prince he forbear to attempt any war against him)
solicited him earnestly to do justice for the murder of his two Ambassadors,
and farther sent to Marie Queen of Hungary the Emperors sister and regent of
ye low countries to have the town of S. Pol delivered to him according to the
Articles of the late truce concluded between the Emperor and him. But
receiving upon both these points an answer that liked him not, he determined
to recover by war that which he could not obtain by reason. Wherefore he
invaded the Emperors 1542.
dominions with four several armies. First he sent one army under the
leading of the Daulphin his son to besiege Perpignian in the cou^tie of
Roussilion in Spain, supposing the town to be worse provided for defense than
in deed it was, and this army did him no service, but was forced to return
home and relinquish the enterprise. The second army under the leading of the
Duke of Orlea^s the kings second son, invaded the Duchy of Luxembourg, and
took almost all the strong places thereof, even Luxembourg it self.

Farther during the abode of the Kings army before Luxembourg, certain bands
were delivered to the Duke of Longueuille and Martin van Rossam, who met with
the prince of Orange coming to relieve the said town of Luxembourg and
overthrew him, and pursued him even to Andwerpe gates, the suburbs also
whereof they took and spoiled and burned them, but the town they could ^ot
take, wherefore they returned to the Duke of (...) lying still at the siege of
Luxembourg, and joined themselves with him.

But Luxembourg being taken the king reuoqued home his son, whose back was no
sooner turned, but the Imperialls presently recovered all the said Duchy from
the French.

The third army under the leading of the Duke of Vendosme invaded Artoys and
spoiled all the country, and took diverse small places, and that being done,
the said Duke lodged his army all the winter in the garrison towns. The
fourth army was sent into Piemont with a purpose to have entered into the
Duchy of Milan. But the Emperor had provided well for the defense thereof,
besides that to stay the French from attempting aught against the said Duchy
of Milan, the Marquis of Guast was sent into Piemont to make head against the
French, where between him and Monsieur de Langey general of the French forces,
who dyed during these wars, and afterward between him and the Marshalled
Annebault many feats of arms but no great exploit was done, and thus these
four armies stood the king in an excessive charge and turned him neither to
honor nor profit. Notwithstanding the army that was in Picardie under the
leading of the Duke of Vendosme, winter being past, put it self again into
the field and took diverse places in Artoys, and namely Lilliers a little 1543.
but a strong town and likewise Bapaulme, and burned the^ both, finding almost
no resista^ce in the cou^rey, because ye Emperor had withdrawn all his forces
out of the strong places, and sent for them to aid him against the Duke of
Cleues, upon whom he made war, and whose country he conquered and
subdewed at this present.

But the King in the mean time to withdraw the Emperor from inuading the
said Duke of Cleues being the kings confederate, entered with a mighty army
into the Emperors dominions and took Landersey and fortefied it, and
afterward also sent the Duke of Orleans again to invade the Duchy of
Luxembourg, who wan diverse towns in that Country and namely recovered
Luxembourg it self, which was now the second time taken by the French.

The Emperor on the other side being aided by the king of England besieged
Landersey fortefied by the French as you have heard, whether the King came in
person with a mighty army to relieve the town, in such sort that the two
armies joined so nere together that the battle was assuredly looked for.

But the king having sufficiently victualed and relieved the town which was
the only cause of his coming, retired safly with his army into France, and
the Emperor soon after, for want of victuals, and because of the continual
rain that fell, and the winter that approached, about ye seventh or eighth of
November leuyed his siege. A man may maruayle here how it shoule come to pass
that the King of England, between whom and the King had been so straight a
league, and from whom so many courtesies had proceeded toward the king and his
Realm in their most troubles and greatest adversities, should now become his
foe and join with the Emperor (whom he had so deadly hated) in the invasion
of the kings dominions.

But you shall understand that this proceeded partly of the king of Englands own
disposition, partly through the kings fault, and partly through the Emperors
cunning. First as touching the King of England, true it is that as himself was
a Prince of a noble and a franck mind and one that would endeavor to pleasure
his friend to his uttermost power: so if himself likewise were not satisfied
in all his demands at his friends hands, he was by nature apt to strange
himself from his friend, not always so depely considering as was requisite his
friends ability to accomplish that which he desired.

And because he had showed himself a firm, yea almost an only friend to the
realm of France during the time of the kings captivity, and afterward at the
delivery of the Children of France as before mention is made, he took it very
unkindly at the kings hand. First that he paid not his money dew unto him,
for the which he had given the king five years day of payment, and the payment
whereof the Emperor had turned over upon the king of purpose to set these two
Princes at variance as before you have heard.

Secondarely he was grieved that the king obtained not for him the Bull of
deuorce at the Popes hands, which he was persuaded the king by his authority
might have procured, if he had dealt so earnestly in that business as
friendship required yt he should. Now as touching the king he failed toward
the king of England in ye first point that is the payment of his money, through
want of ability, for the Emperor held him in such continual wars, that he was
forced to leauie extremely of his subjects, and never could be in case to pay
debts, and as touching the second point namely ye Bull of deuorce, true it is
that the king after ye restitution of his children travailed not so earnestly
in ye business as before he had done, either because he held somewhat of the
disposition of his country men, who are said to remember good turns no
longer the^ they be in doing, or because he was loath to offend ye Emperor,
with whom he had concluded peace and whose sister he had married, or because he
found ye Pope obstinate, or a feared to grant the Bull in respect of the
Emperors greatness in Italy, or lastly because he held the case desperate,
especially after the king of Englands revolt from the Pope. Whether any of
these reasons, or all of them, or some other unknown to us caused him to deal
cowldly in the king of Englands business we can but divine, but certain it is
that the kings remissness in this cause mightily grieved the King of England,
and diminished a great part of his love toward the king.

Lastly as touching the Emperor, he used exceeding cunning to sever these two
Princes, whose amity he saw to be the countermine of all his practices and
procedings.

For first he turned over his own debt to the king of England, upon the king
of France, of purpose to cast a boane between them to set them at variance as
before you have heard: Farther so soon as he perceued the king of Englands
mind to be a little alienated from the king, he failed not to do his
endeavor to aggrauate every small unkindness, and to make a mountain of
every moulehill.

Beesides this he wroate passing kind letters to the king of England,
desiring him to remember the oulde friendship that had ever been between the
house of Burgundy and the Realm of England, and likewise not to forget the
ancient enmity and the many quarells that were yet depending beetweene
England and France, adding that if any unkindness had passed between them
two in regard of his Aunts cause, it was now clean forgotten on his part by
his Aunts death, intimating farther unto him, that if he the said Emperor
would embrace the king of France his friendship: the king offered to enter into
league with him, and to abandon his league with the said king of England, or
any other prince in Christendom that the said Emperor should mislike of.

And at such times as the Emperor had these purposes in his head, he would in
appearance make so much of the king of France, and have such conference with
him and his Ambassadors, and seem so wholly in all matters to depend upon his
direction and advise, that he made not only the king of England, but all the
kings other confederats in Christendom to doubt that he meant to do as the
Emperors letters reported, namely to enter into league with him, and to
forsake all his other friends, and thus underhand the Emperor made the king
himself the instrument to cut his own throat, and to sever from him all his
friends.

Whereunto I also add that to draw the king of England to his party and to
join arms with him, he offered him of the conquest of France what portion he
would desire himself, and by these means was the King of England won from
the Kings friendship, and sent a Herrault to defy the King, and presently
passed over his forces to join with the Emperor before Landercy as already
you have heard. But to return to the matter.

Cap. 15. The Turk joined with the kings forces, take Nice in Province, the
Emperor enters into Cambray. Furstembergs success in the duchy of
Luxembourg. The English spoil the Country of Bouloynoys. The wars in
Piemont, and the battle of Serizoles. The Emperor recouereth Luxembourg, he
and the King of England invade France. The King of England wins Boloyn,
peace between all these Princes. The death of the Kings of England and France.
THe King seeing him self thus invaded by the Emperor and the King of
England, was forced to pray in aid of the Turk, who sent his navy to join
with the Kings in the siege of Nice in Province, and the town they took and
therein executed great cruelty, but the Castle they could not take, wherefore
they retired themselves.

The Emperor on the other side by cunning entered into the town of Cambray,
and in appearance left them in their ancient liberty, but indeed so brideled
them, by a citadelle which he caused the Citizens the^ selves at their own
charge to build, and into the which he put a garrison of his own soldiers,
that he brought them to plain slavery and bondage. Farther the said Emperor
sent also William Eatle of Furstemberg with an army to recover Luxembourg, who
recovered diverse places in the country, and went and laid his siege before
Luxembourg it self, but hearing of the prince of Melphes coming to succor
the town, he leuyed his siege and retired into Allemayne, and the French
recovered all the places that before they had lost. But the English on the
other side spoiled and forraged all the country of Boulonoys. The king having
succored Luxembourg, sent an army into Pie mont under the leading of the Earl
of Anghien a most valiant young prince, who wan diverse towns there and in the
Marquisat of Salusses from the Marquis of Guast general of the Emperors
forces, and went and besieged Carignan, whether the said Marquis 1544.
with ye army Imperial came to levy the siege, but the French at a place
called Serizoles, gave him battle and overthrew him, and slew 7000. of his
army and took 2000 prisoners. After the which battle the said Monsieur
d'Anghien took Carignan and diverse other towns in Piemont and in the Marquisat
of Montferrat. But on the other side the Emperor with a huge army invaded the
Duchy of Luxembourg, and recovered Luxembourg the chief City thereof, and
diverse other towns, and namely S. Disier, which last was taken with great
difficulty, and long defended it self against the Imperial army. This year
also the Emperor and the king of England being co^federated together, invaded
France with so great forces, yt it is reported above 80000. me^ to have been in
both their armies. Their purpose was to have sacked Paris, as undoubtedly they
had done, if the king of England had marched forward according to his promis to
the Emperor, and had not stayed at the siege of Bouloyne, by means whereof
the Emperor seeing his army to be in distress of victuals, and that the
English army marched not forward to his succor according to their agreement,
concluded peace with the king and retired his forces out of France. In the
mean time the king of England wan Boloyne which was yielded to him by Monsieur
de Veruins the fourth of September, which being done the king of England
returned home and landed at Dover the first of October.

Notwithstanding the next year after many skirmishes and feats of arms done
between the french 1545.
and English as well by sea as land, peace was treated off between these two
Kings, and in the end after many difficulties concluded, but not proclaimed
before Whitsonday being the thirtenth of June 1546. and thus God miraculously
preserved the Realm of France, which undoubtedly had stood in great danger,
if God had not put into the king of Englands head to stay at the siege of
Boulonie and not to march forward to join with the Emperor as he ought to
have done, which his error in all appearance was the preservation of the Realm
of France.

The Emperor having made peace with the king entered into war against the
Protestants of 1546.
Germany, and both he and they sent to king Frances for aid, but he refused
to give aid to either of them, promising to be an indifferent friend to both.

The eight and twenteth of January following died Henry king of England, which
news the king took grievously when he heard it, as well because of the great
good will that had been between the^, as also because the king was in hope to
have made a firm league with him, and lastly because they two having been
almost of one years and of one complexion, he foresaw his own end to draw
near. Notwithstanding after the said king of Englands death, he renewed the
league lately made between them twain, with king Edward king Henryes son, and
not long after dyed also himself at Rambollet the last day of March in the
year 1546. after the French account, who begin not ye year till Easter,
having lived 53. years and reigned two and thirty and three months, and six
days.

This was a Prince endued with many excellent parts, especially magnanimity,
courtesy and liberality, and farther so great a patron, lover, and aduauncer
of learning, that he may justly be called the father and sounder of good
letters. What his fortune was in this world may easily be gathered out of his
History, wherein it does appear that she was more froward then favorable unto
him, but one great grace of God he had, that no adversity was able to diminish
the magnanimity of his mind, besides that he was of an excellent memory and
exceeding eloquent in his own tongue.

HENRY THE SEcond of that name King of France.
Cap. 1. King Henry comes to the Crown, The Emperors wars in Germany.
The English invade Scotland. The rebellion of Guyenne.
TO King Francis the first succeeded his only son Henry the second being
eight and twenty years of age, in the very beginning of whose reign the
Emperor (as before you have heard in the end of king Francis his reign) was
entered into a war in Germany against the Protestants 1547.
namely the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantzgraue of Hessen, and diverse other
Princes and towns confederated with them against him, persuading the Pope (who
sent him aid in these wars) that his quarrel was Religion, but to ye princes
Protestants of Germany, many of ye which were in his Camp and aided him, he
pretended that he made war upon them for their rebellion, although in truth
neither of both these were the cause motife of this war, but his own
ambition, for his purpose was by using the Germanies help against the
Germans, so to weaken both parts, and in the mean time so to plant garrisons
of Spaniards in the strong places of the country, that in the end he might
make the easier conquest of the whole. And such success he had at the
beginning of these wars, that he took the Duke of Saxony prisoner, and made
the Lantzgraue come and yield him self to his mercy, but with this condition
that he should not be detained in prison, which article the Emperor so gloased
with a Spanish exposition, that, that notwithstanding he emprisoned him,
alleging that the article mentioned only perpetual emprisonment. The
Palfzgraue also and the Duke of Wirtemberg and diverse other Princes and free
Towns submitted them selves to him and with their money bought their peace.

You have heard before how Henry the eight king of England dyed a little before
king Francis, and left behind him Prince Edward his son, a child about
ten years of age, the said King Henry before his death had practiced a
marriage in Scotland between the said prince his son afterward called Edward
the vj* and the heir of Scotland being about four years of age, and so far
this matter was proceeded in, that the greatest part of the states of Scotland
had given their consent thereunto, but after king Henrys death, by the
persuasion of the Queen mother being of the house of Guyse, and by the
practice of the French faction (who could not endure this uniting of these two
Realms by ye said marriage) the treaty made with king Henry was disauowed, and
a practice set on foot to bestow this young Princes upon the Daulphin of
France, for the which cause, the English men entered into Scotland with a
mighty army, and spoiled all the country, whom the Scotts encountering with
all their forces at a place called Muscleborow, were overthrown and a great
number of them slain, in September this year 1547. after the which victory
the English men took many Castles and strong places, and entered as far as
Edemborough the chief City of the Country, and fortified Hedington a strong
Town, where what happened and what issue these wars had, hereafter you shall
hear.

The Emperor having ended his wars above mentioned in Germany, and
established the 1548.
Interim which was a form of Religion to be observed till the assembly of a
general counsel came down into the low countries, leading the Duke of
Saxony and the Lantzgraue with him as it were in triumph, to the no small
grief of diverse Princes of the Empire, especially of Duke MAVRICH son in law
to the said Lantzgraue, as the sequel shall well declare. About this time
also the Prince of Spain the Emperors son came out of Spain into Italy,
and from thence to Bruxelles to his father being honorably received in all
places through which he passed.

But the Realm of France being delivered from forrayne wars, beeganne to
be vexed with domestical seditions, for a great rebellion was raised at
BOVRDEAVX and through all GVIENNE and XAINTOIGNE, for a new imposition
increased upon Sault, for the appeasing whereof the Constable and Monsieur
d'Aumalle were sent into those parts, who punished very sharply them of
BOVRDEAVX because they had slain the kings officers and committed many
disorders, and took from them all their privileges, and condemned both them
and other towns that had offended in great sums of money, and so appeased
the tumult.

Cap. 2. The King aydeth the Scots against the English, he inuadeth the
Country of Boulonoys. The Queen of Scots is carried into France. Paul the
third dies. Julius the third succedeth, peace between England and France.
YOu have heard how the last year the English men were entered into Scotland,
as far as Edingbourg and had overthrown the Scots at Muscleborow, for the
which cause the Scots sent into France for aid, and the King knowing how
prejudicial it should be for him and his Realm to suffer the English men to
nestle in Scotland, sent thither an army of 6000. men under the leading of
Monsieur d'Esse, Strozzi, the Rhingraue, and others, who made head against the
English men and much endamaged them, and wanne Hedington which they had
fortefied from them, while in the mean time their navy conueighed the young
Queen into France, notwithstanding the English navy that lay upon the Sea to
stop their passage, purposly to have surprised the said young Queen and to
have brought her into England, but the French navy escaped them and arrived
safly in France.

After the conueighing away of the young Queen the king reuoqued d'Esse, and
sent de Thermes a valiant soldier and a wise man to take the charge of his
army in Scotland, willing him to busy the English men on that side, while the
French forces entered into the Country of Boulonoys, for notwithstanding that
peace had been concluded (as before you have heard) between king Francis and
king Henry before their death, and afterward confirmed also between the two
Realms: yet that notwithstanding the French perceauing the Realm of England
to be vexed with seditions because of the alteration of Religion: used that
opportunity, and besieged Bouloyne but could not take it, notwithstanding
diverse other small pieces held by the English in the country of Boulonoys
namely Boulonberg, Hambletow, and Montlambert, and diverse other they took. This
year also the tenth of November died Pope Paul the third, to whom after three
months dissencion in the Consistory succeeded Julius the third, and this year
also in December died Margaret Queen of Nauarra sister to king Francis, a Lady
of an excelent spirit.

But after these wars above mentioned had thus passed as you have hard since ye
beginning of this kings 1550.
reign between ye French and English nations as well in Scotland as in
Boulonoys: both parts disposed themselves to peace. England was afflicted not
only with sorraine wars, but also with domestical seditions of the commons,
and dissentions among the nobles, and the French king was entered into practice
against the Emperor, both in Italy with Octauio Prince of Parma, and in
Germany with duke Maurice and diverse other Princes, who hated the Emperor
deadly for his extreme tiranie used against the liberties of their country.
Wherefore the King meaning to attempt somewhat against the Emperor was the
more inclined to make peace with England, thereby to have all clear on that
side of France. Both the Realms therefore being thus disposed to concord,
their commissioners met and concluded peace with these conditions. Boloyne was
restored to the French, for the which they paid to the king of England 400000.
crowns. The king of England promised to marie Elizabeth the eldest daughter of
France, afterward wife to Philip king of Spain. Both English and French
departed Scotland which was ordained to be governed by one of their own
nation, and both the Kings were made knights each of others order.

Cha. 3. The wars of Parma and Mirandula. The kings navy spoyleth diverse
Holandish ships. The Turk wins Tripoli.
THe king having thus established peace on that side of his realm began to
attend to his foreign practices against the Emperor as well in Italy as in
Germany.

The first attempt that he made against the Emperor was the war of Parma in
Italy, which began 1551.
upon this occasion: Petrus Aloisius Franesius son to Pope Paul the third
had given him by his father with the consent of the consistory of Cardinals
Parma and Placencia in exchange of other lands, and was created Duke thereof.

This Peter the tenth of September in the year 1547. was slain in his own
house not without the consent of Ferdinando Gonzaga governor of Milan for the
Emperor as it was thought. For presently upon his death the said Ferdinando
came to Placencia, and entered into it, and placed a garrison in it to the
Emperors use, and farther allowed Giouanni Aguzzolo who killed the said Peter,
with his own hands, twenty soldiers for his guard. Octauius Peter's son
and son in law to the Emperor (for he had married the Emperors base
daughter widow of Alexander Medices duke of Florence) demanded of the Emperor
against Gonzaga justice of his fathers death, and that Placentia might be
restored to him again, but receiving from him no thing but delatorie answers,
and fearing to be spoiled of Parma as already he was of Placentia: he sought
for succor at the hands of Julius tertius newly chosen Pope, who misliking the
Emperors greatness in Italy, persuaded Octauius to put himself under the
protection of France, not so much regarding Octauius good thereby as hoping by
this means to set these two Princes at variaunce, which he accounted the
only preservation of his own estate. But the Emperor on the other side
being exceedingly offended with this revolt of Octauio to the French,
practiced with the Pope to claim Parma as ye right of the Church, and to
excomunicate Octauio as the Church rebel, promising him if he would so do,
that he would enter into these wars and besiege Parma, and restore it to the
Church if it were recovered.

Whereupon the Pope respecting his own profit more the^ his credit or the
goodness of the cause: utterly abandoned Octauio and joined with the Emperor
in this war. But the king having received Octauio into his protection and
that by the Popes own persuasion, promised to defend him both against the
Emperors ambition and violence, and likewise against the Popes treacherous
inconstancy, who as you have heard being revolted from Octauio, joined with
the Emperor in this war in hope to recover Parma for the Church, wherefore
the king fortefied Parma and manned it, and likewise Mirandula, the Earl
whereof fearing continually to be surprised by Gonzague, joined with the
French, and received into the town certain French bands sent thither out of
Piemont by the marshal Brissac. Gonzague on the other side by the Emperors
commandment went and besieged Parma but all in the Popes name, for neither
would the Emperor seem to attempt any thing against the King, but only to
aid the Pope in a just cause, neither would the King seem to attempt any
thing against the Emperor, but only to aid Octauio being under his
protection in his just cause.

But this dissimulation between these two Princes held not long, for as
Monsieur d'Andelot passed through the Emperors dominions in Lombardie with
certain bands of men, to put himself into Parma by the Kings commandment,
notwithstanding that they passed quietly without harm doing as in their
friends country, yet was the said d'Andelot stayed prisoner by the Imperialls
and iustefied for a good przse, whereupon the King charged the Emperor with
breach of the truce and beegan to make war upon him on all sides.

A man may think the King was not well advised to enter into this war for
Octauios cause, in whom being the Emperors son in law he could repose no
assured trust, and who he might assure himself upon the restitution of
Placentia would always be ready to give him the slip, and so in deed he did
being restored thereunto in the year 1556. But you must know that the king
used this matter but as a color to provoke an open war beetweene the
Emperor and him, as he was sure it would in the end, and the which thing he
principally desired, both because he was young and naturally inclined to
martial affairs, and also because he hoped while the Emperor was busied
with the Princes of Allemaine, with whom the king had good intelligence, to
recover the duchy of Milan, in the which as also in diverse other parts of
Italy he had many good friends. But the wars of Germany had a speedier end
then he expected, after the which the Emperor held him play in so many
places, that he had no leisure to look over the mountains in a good many
years after this, and sped but evil when he took that enterprise in hand as
hereafter you shall here. And so it appears that whatsoever man purposes
God disposes afterward thereof as it pleases him. Gonzague as you have heard
besiged Parma, and the Pope on the other side, to distract the kings forces
besieged Mirandula.

But the King auowing the truce to be broken, because of Monsieur d'Andelots
imprisonment above mentioned, sent to Brissac new supplies into Piemont,
commanding him not only to succor Parma and Mirandula, but also to endamage
the Emperors dominions in those parts by all the means he might.

Whereupon the said Brissac wanne diverse towns in Piemont and in the
Marquisate of Montferrate from the Imperialls, and put the whole Duchy of
Milan into so great fear that Gonzague was forced for the defense thereof to
abandon the siege of Parma and retire thither. The Pope also prevailed no
better before Mirandula, but lost many of his men before the town, and among
the rest his Nephew Giouanni Battista de Monte.

Wherefore seeing his hope frustrate for ye recovery of Parma and Mirandula, and
being consumed with the charges of the wars, and farther perceauing a new
tempest ready to arise against the Emperor from Duke Maurice, and other
princes of Germany, with whom while the Emperor was busied, himself by the
French might be utterly ruinated: Whereunto I also add that the king had
already forbidden any cause whatsoever to be removed out of his realm to
Rome, which was no small blow to the Popes purse, and farther had utterly
refused to send any of the Clergy of his Realm to the counsel of Trent or to
accept that as a general counsel, and had also persuaded the Swyssers to do
the like, greatly to the derogation of his authority pontifical: for these
reasons I say the Pope ended the wars of Parma and Mirandula, and not only
forsook the Emperor, but also delivered into the hands of the Earl of
Mirandula all those fortes that during the siege thereof had hene built at the
Emperors charge, so that by the Popes treason the French held Mirandula made
impregnable by the Emperors purse. The kings navy also upon the sea took
diverse Flemish and Holandish ships of great price, and the Turk likewise
about this time wanne Tripoly in Africa from the Emperor, which the said
Emperor took very grievously and attributed the loss thereof to the king by
whose persuasion the Turk converted his forces thither as the Emperor said.

Cap. 4. VVarres between the Emperor and the Princes of Germany. Tbe king
enters into Germany, he carries away the duke of Lorraine, inuadeth
Luxembourg, Haynault and Picardie,
YOu have heard before how the Princes of Germany were evil affected toward
the Emperor for tirannizing over their Country, and especially Duke MAVRICE
because the Lantzgraue his father in law was still held prisoner by the
Emperor, for whose delivery duke MAVRICE had laid his honor to pawn,
wherefore seeing they could have no reason at the Emperors hands, they purposed
to obtain it by ye sword, and having made a firm league with the king they
leuyed a mighty army, and assaulted the Emperor upon such a sudden, 1552.
that he was forced for fear of his life to fly from Iusburg through the
mountains in the night by torchlight with a small company, where in his
passage he had almost broaken his neck. A strange change of Fortune, that so
mighty and glorious an Emperor, the like of whom Christendom had not seen
in many hundred years before, should be thus pursewed and that by his own
subject, yea and such a subject as himself not long before had highly
advanced. Notwithstanding soon after by the mediatio^ of the king of Romans
the Emperors brother, peace was concluded between the Emperor and his
Princes, and the Lantzgraue and the Duke of Saxony were restored to their
liberty, notwithstanding that the later of them would not depart from the
Emperor, but followed him in all these troblesome broils, because he would
not receive his liberty by Duke Maurice his means.

The King on the other side during these troubles between the Emperor and
these Allemaine Princes, accordingly as was agreed between him and the said
Princes, entered into Germany, with the title of Protector of the liberty
thereof, and took Metz in Lorraine an Imperial town, and likewise Thoul,
Verdun, and Nancy, and carried away the young Duke of Lorraine with him,
farther he marched as far as Strausbourg and Hagenau near to Spire, where the
Ambassadors of the Princes of the Empire came to him and gave him thanks for
his ready succor in the defense of the liberty of Germany, and signified
also unto him that they being now reconciled to the Emperor should have no
occasion farther to crave his aid. Whereupon the king withdrew his forces out
of Germany, the rather because he was given to understand that Martin van
Rossem had entered and spoiled some part of Campaine, and that the queen of
Hungary had taken Astenay a small town upon the Meuze belonging to the Duke
of Lorraine. Wherefore the king entered into the Duchy of Luxembourg, and
wanne diverse towns there, he took prisoner also there the Earl of Mansfelde
and restored Bouillon to the house of La March.

The Constable likewise by the kings commandment entered into Haynault and
Picardie and made great spoil there, which being done, the king because of
the foul wether dismissed his army and in great triumph returned to Paris.

Cap. 5. The Emperor besieges Metz. The Prince of Salerna reuolteth from the
Emperor, and likewise the town of Syena. The army Imperial inuadeth
Picardie, Brissac in Piemont wins Alba. Therouenna is razed by the Imperials.
THe Emperor having pacefied the Princes of Germany, leuyed a mighty army,
purposing at one instant both to recover Metz, and to invade France. But the
king sent to the defense of the town Francis duke of Guyse accompanied with so
many noble men, and valiant soldiers, that the Emperor with great loss
both of honor, men, munitio^ and money was forced in the end to abandon ye
siege, which he began in October a very unseasonable time of the year, upon
his own obstinate will, and contrary to the advice of all the Captains that
were in his camp.

When the Emperor made his approaches to the town, two skirmishes worthy of
remembrance happened, one made by the French issewing out of the town upon
the Duke of Alua, in the which the said Duke lost 150. men with loss only of
5. on the French part.

But to requite this overthrow you shall understand that Albert Marquis of
Brandembourg, who had been against the Emperor in the wars of Germany
above mentioned, being then in pay with the king, and had ever since those
wars ended, run with his troops all over Germany, spoiling, robbing, and
raunsoming all those that he became master of, especially, Abbeys, Nunries,
Bushoprikes, and all whosoever of the ecclesiastical state? now seeing the
wars open between the Emperor and the king, and meaning to recover the
Emperors favor: came with his army being to the number of 12000 toward the
siege of Metz, and so houered up and down beetweene the Emperors camp and
the places held by the French that he put the King in hope that he came to
his service.

But the Duke d'Aumale discovering his practices with the Emperor, set upon
him with certain troops of horsemen being under his leading, but to his own
cost, for the Marquis overthrew him and took him prisoner and received 50000.
crowns for his ransom, which the duche^ of Valentinoys the kings Minion and
mother in law to the said Duke caused the king to pay.

After this the said Marquis overthrew also a great conuoy of victuals
coming to the relief of the town of Met^ and that being done retired
himself with all his Troops into the Emperors camp.

Farther you shall understand that during this siege of Metz, the Prince of
Salerne in the Realm of Naples, because of the extreme tirannie and cruelty
that Don Piedro de Toledo uncle to the Duke of Alua used in the Country
whereof the said Prince could have no redress at the Emperors hands turned
French, as did also the town of Siena having first razed the citadelle built
by the Emperor to oppress their liberty, and chaced all the Spaniards out of
their town.

An other army of the Emperors under the leading of Monsieur de Reux entered
into Picardie, and burned many towns and vilages, and namely the Castle of
Foulenbray a place wherein the king took great delight, they wanne also Hesdin
both town and Castle and many other places, notwithstanding the nineteenth of
December in this very year Monsieur de Vendosme recovered Hesdin and afterward
all the other towns, and on the other side the Marshall of Brissac in Piemom
w^n from the Emperor the town of Alba.

But to return to the siege of Metz. Notwithstanding that the Emperor used
all warlike attempts, for the taking of the town, and so continually beat it
with artilerie, that it is reported by some his battery to have been heard as
far as Strausbourg, and by othersome above 22. Duch miles from the town: yet
was the industry of those within the town, and the misery of his soldiers
without the town such, his camp being most grievously afflicted with the
plague, famine, bluddie flux, and cold, the siege continewing in the midst of
an extreme winter as before you have heard: that he was forced to levy his
siege and return into Flaunders, the second day of January 1553. after the
Duch and Italian account who begin the year the first of January, but 1552.
after the French who begin it not till Easter. At his departure to the end he
might return with the more speed, he cast into the River a great part of his
artilerie, and munition for the wars, farther he lost in this siege 40000.
men, and ye ignominy thereof so much afflicted him, that he forbear all
communication with men, and soon after resigned the Empire to his brother and
his orher states to his son, and put himself into an Abbie in Spain where
he ended his days.

Such misfortunes Princes often fall into, when they are wedded to their own
wills and reject all good advise or rather when GOD is purposed to punish them,
and to change their good fortune into bad.

It is reported that the Emperors army sustained so extreme misery in this
siege, that one day as he road through his Camp, a poor soldier being
miserably afflicted with the bluddye flux cried out thus to him as he passed
by, Thou son of a mad woman how much misery do I and many a thousand more
endure here through thy ambition and wilful obstinancie. If thou were not
tainted with thy mothers humor, thou would never have brought us to this
siege, at this time of the year, which words the Emperor hearing gave no
evil answer thereunto, but only said good words soldier this matter shall
be remedied ere long be, and with that gave the poor soul money wherewith to
comfort himself, and soon after raised his siege, leaving a great number
behind him sick, whom the enemies of very pity succored and relieved. But
notwithstanding the Emperors evil fortune here before Metz, his army in
Picardie under the leading of Monsieur de Reux besieged Therouenne, in the
which siege the said de Reux dyed, after whose death Monsieur de Lalain
continued ye siege, and with a mine overthrew the fortifications, whereupon
Montmorency the Constables son Governor of the town, yielded the place, and
withal himself and diverse other noble men of France prisoners.

Cap. 6. The Imperialls raze Hesdin. The Duke of Arscot is taken prisoner. The
death of Edward the sixth King of England, and of Duke Maurice. The king
inuadeth the Emperor with three armies, the battle of Renty.
THe Emperor because of the variance that was among his Captains, made the
Duke of Sauoye general of his army, who in Iulie recovered also Hesdin from
the French, in the which the duke of Bouillon was taken prisoner, and razed the
Castle, as the Imperials before had done the Castle of Therouenne, and buylt a
new Hesdin in a more convenient place upon the River of Cauche, which they
called Hesdinfiert.

From thence the Duke of Sauoy marched toward Dourlans and Amiens, where the
Constable with part of the Kings army, met with certain of his troops upon
the fifteenth of August, and having laid diverse ambushes to entrap them,
charged them and overthrew them and took prisoner the Duke of Arscot, who was
led to Boys de Vincennes near to Paris, whence he escaped in the year 1556,
whereupon the Emperor ieasted of him saying, that he was taken like a beggar
and escaped away like a thief.

Farther the king in person with a mighty army entered into Artoys, and came
before Cambray, where the Imperial army lay, in such sort that the battle
was looked for there, but it fell otherwise out, whereupon the king returned to
Paris, leaving the Marshall of Saint Andre to spoil the Country.

In this year the sixth of Iulie dyed Edward king of England a young Prince of
rare expectation, and to him succeeded Marie his sister Cousin german to the
Emperor, who about Saint James tide the nezt year married with the Prince of
Spain the Emperors son. And the ninth of Iulie was a cruel battle fought
in Germany between Duke MAVRICE, and Albert Marquis of Brandenbourg, in the
which the said Albert was vanquished and Duke MAVRICE lost his lise.

You have heard how the king returned to Paris leaving the Marshall of Saint
Andre behind him 1554.
to spoil the Country of Artoys. But the next summer the king levied three
armies, one under the leading of the Prince of Roche sur Yonne was sent into
Artoys where it spoiled many towns and villages. The Constable with an other
army entered into Haynault, and the Duke of Neuers, with a third into the
country of Ardennes and Liege, where he burned and spoiled all the country
before him. The Constable likewise in Haynault burnt Cymay, a town
appertaining to the Duke of Ars^ot, Trelon, and Glayon, and took Mariembourg
through the cowardice of him that defended it, with the fame of the which
victory the king being incited, came in person into his army, and took
Bouuines in Brabant and burned it, and sacked Dinand. But the Emperor levied a
mighty power to encounter him under the leading of the Duke of Sauoy.
Whereupon the King returned again into Haynault and destroyed Bins and
Mariemount the Queen of Hungaries places of pleasure, in revenge of Folenbray
in Picardie, which the Imperialls burned in the year 1552. as before you have
heard, and thus having burned and spoiled all Haynault, the King with his army
entered into Artoys and besieged Renty. But the Emperor with his whole force
came to leauie the siege in such sort that a battle was there fought between
the king and him, in the which the success on both sides was so equal that
the victory can justly be attributed to neither part, some call it but a
half battle. Notwithstanding this was the battle in the which it was first
found by experience, that the rutters with their Pistoles are not able to abide
the force of the Lance, if they be roughly and resolutely charged. The next
day as the King was returning to the siege of the town, he reccaued news that
his forces were overthrown in Italy, whereupon he retired and returned to
Montrueil and the Emperor likewise to Bruxelles.

Cap. 7. The wars of Siena. Brissacs success in Piemont. Pope Julius dies.
Paul the fourth succedeth. The French in Piemont take Vulpian. The Fight
beetweene the French and Flemish Nauies before Dover. The Emperor resigneth
the Empire and all his other estates.
THe overthrow the French received in Italy happened thus. You have heard
before how while the Emperor lay at the siege of Metz, the town of Sienne in
Italy revolted from him, and razed the Citadelle built by him, chased the
Spaniards out of the town, and put themselves into the protection of France.
Wherewith he being not a little offended, after the said siege was ended
commanded the Viceroy of Naples to spoil all the country of Sienne, which he
did accordingly purposing also to besige the town, which Mouluc, Terms, and
diverse others sent therher by the king for defense thereof, fortified against
the Imperialls. The Viceroy because of the reuoult that happened also at this
very instaunt in the realm of Naples by means of the Prince of Salerna
whereof we have spoken a word or two also in the said siege of Metz, was
forced to return into the said realm of Naples, leaving the charge of the
Imperial forces in the country of Siena to the Marquis of Marignan, who being
aided by Cosmus Duke of Florence, and the Pope wenr and besieged Siena.

But understanding that Strozzi with great forces was sent by the king into
Italy, and that he had already invaded the Duke of Florence his dominions,
taken diverse places from him, and was gone to batter Ciuitelle; the said
Marquis raised his siege from before Syena, and went with his whole power to
succor the Duke of Florence, whereupon Strozzi levied his siege held before
Ciuitelle and marched to encounter the Marquis and give him battle, in the
which the said Strozzi was overthrown and put to flight and all his forces
dispersed. The Marquis after this victory returned to the siege of Siena, and
never departed thence till he had reduced it to the Emperors obedience, by
whose commandment it was delivered to the duke of Florence.

The said siege endured till the twentieth of April in the year 1555. But in
December in the said year 1554. Brissac to repair this misfortune of Strozzi
entered into Piemont, and took diverse towns of great importance and fortefied
them against the Imperialls

This year also 1554. the 23. of March after the French account who begin not
the year till Easter, dyed Pope Julius tertius, to whom succeeded Marcellus,
who lived but a few days, and to him succeeded Cardinal Caraffa being four
score years of age by the name of Paul the fourth.

The French army above mentioned under the 1555.
leading of Brissac took Cassal, and diverse other towns in the Marquisat of
Montferrat, and went to besiege Vulpian in Piemont, which the Duke of Alua with
a mighty army came to relieve as also he did. And having put victuals and
munition sufficient into the town, he departed and besieged Saint Iac.

But the town was so notably defended by the French (for the king had sent
thither great forces to succor the place) that the Duke of Alua was forced to
abandon the siege and retire himself, presently whereupon the French with
their whole forces returned to the siege of Vulpian, and took it and razed both
town and castle, because it maintained none but soldiers that robbed and
spoiled all the country.

About this time also the French and Flemish Navy met upon the Sea, near to
Dover a haven town in England, where was a most bloddie fight between them,
in the which the French being put to the worse, fired their ships, thinking
thereby to cause the flemings to vngraple from them, but the fire was so
vehement that they had no power to do it, by means whereof both the Nauies
were fired, and many ships on both sides burnt.

Notwithstanding the French being entered into the flemish ships that remained,
and seeing the small number of Flemings that were in them, took five of their
ships, and led them away with them.

This year also upon the five and twentieth of October, the Emperor in great
solempnitie in the great hall of Bruxelles, yielded up all his estats and
dominions patrimoniall to his son king Phillip, and the Empire to the king of
Romans his brother.

Cap. 8. A truce for five years between the King of France and Spain. The
Emperor saileth into Spain, and puts himself into an Abbye where he
dies.
AFter the Emperor had resigned all his estats to his son King Phillip, 1556.
the said King by the persuasion of the Queen of England his wife, and as
some also writ by the Emperors own persuasion, inclined to make peace with
France, by means whereof both the Princes sent their commissioners to meet
and treat thereof, who not being able because of the sundry difficulties to
conclude a final peace, made notwithstanding a truce for five years, each
part holding that which they had taken in the former wars. And in this year
the Emperor with his two sisters Elenor Queen of France, and Marie Queen of
Hungary sailed into Spain, and put himself into an Abbey, where he remained
till his death, which happened the one and twentieth of September in the year
1558. One notable thing is to be remembered of this noble Emperor, whereby we
may perceive how vain a thing the glory of this world is. While the Emperor
stayed at Vlushing for wind to carry him his last journey into Spain, he
conferred on a time with Seldius his brother Ferdinands Ambassador till the
deep of the night, and when Seldius should depart, the Emperor calling for
some of his servants, and no body answering him, for those that attended upon
him were some gone to their lodgings and all the rest a sleep: the Emperor
took up the candle himself, and went before Seldius to light him down the
stairs, and so did notwithstanding all the resistance that Seldius could make.

And when he was come to the stairs foot, he said thus unto him. Seldius
remember this of Charles the Emperor when he shall be dead and gone that him
whom thou have known in thy time environed with so many mighty armies and
gardes of soldiers, thou have also seen alone, abandoned, and forsaken yea
even of his own domestical servants, and that he whom thou have served so
many years has also served thee and borne the candle down before thee, I
acknowledge this change of fortune to proceed from the mighty hand of God,
which I will by no means go about to withstand.

Cap. 9. The truce for five years is broken by the Popes practice. The Duke of
Alua inuadeth the Church Dominions. The Duke of Guyse enters into Italy, and
the King inuadeth the King of Spain in diverse other places. The Queen of
England proclaymeth war against the French.
YOu have heard how a truce for five years was concluded between the 1557.
Kings of France and Spain, but it was broken before the expiration of one
year, upon this occasion which you shall now hear. The Pope being an enemy
to the Spaniard, gave forth whether falsely or truly it is uncertain, that the
Colonnesi who always have been and yet are Imperial, made secret assemblies
against him in Rome, for the which cause some of them he emprisoned, some he
banished, and seized all their lands and goods into his own hands. The
Imperials say that this was but a quarrel picked to them by the Pope, because
he had secret intelligence with the king of France, and persuaded him to
attempt the recovery of the Realm of Naples, as well thereby to abate the
Spaniards greatness in Italy, who held Naples, Milan, and Siena, and disposed
of the stats of Genoua and Florence as of his own: as also hoping if the
French had good success in Italy, that some part of the booty would fall to
his share, which he was the more desirous of, because he was a Neapolitaine
borne himself. But howsoever it were, the Colonnesi being thus iniuried
complained to king Philip and desired his succor, who sent the Duke Alua to
their aid, yet offering the Pope any reasonable conditions of peace, which he
utterly refused, and sent to the king and the duke of Ferrara being his
confederats for succors, but before they could arrive, the duke of Alua
invaded the Church dominions, and took Ostia and Palestrina and much distressed
Rome. But the King with all speed sent the Duke of Guyse with a mighty army
into Italy, who entering into Lombardie took Valentia in the duchy of Milan
and put a garrison into it, on an other side also the French invaded Artoys and
spoiled all the Country, they besieged Douay but could not take it.
Notwithstanding Lens they took and burned it. Farther the kings forces in
Piemont took Valfiniere and Cairas, and thus the five years truce concluded
the year before held not one year, great controversy is between the French
and Spanish, which of the two Princes first brake the truce. The French say the
Spaniard first brake it by inuading the Pope, whom the king as an obedient
son to the Church was bound to defend.

But the answer hereunto is easy, for besides that the inuading of the Pope
being an indifferent friend to both the Princes could not be a breach of the
truce toward the French king: it is also most certain that the first injury
proceeded from the Pope, toward the king of Spaines friends and co^federats,
and therefore the French were not to aid him in an evil cause. But admit the
ayding of the Pope were no breach of the truce: yet the King ought not to have
proceeded farther then to send the Pope aid, but he invaded king Philip before
he took weapon in hand, in Milan, in Piemont, in Artoys, and in Flaunders,
which could not be other then a flat breach of the truce. But to return to
the wars of Italy. The Duke of Guyse by the Popes persuasion, and upon
promise of aid from him, was passing with his army toward the realm of
Naples with purpose to invade it. But seeing the Duke of Alua to make head
against him, and being also disapoynted of the aid promised him by the Pope,
he was forced to retire with his army, being in very pore estate and cursing
the Pope and all his trecheries. While these matters thus passed in Italy, the
Queen of England by her husbands persuasion entered into an unnecessary war
with France, for she should have done much better to have continued as she
began a mediater for peace th^n upon no occasion to become the French kings
enemy, but she sped accordingly.

Cha. 10. The King of Spain takes Saint Quentin. The battle of Saint
Laurens in the which the Constable is overthrown and taken prisoner. The duke
of Guyse is reuoqued out of Italy. The Pope makes peace with the king of
Spain. The French take Calais. The marriage of the Daulphin. The French take
Theonuille.
But to proceed the king of Spain, seeing him self thus invaded upon a
sudden, leuyed a mighty army of Duch Flemish and English, and went and
besieged Saint Quentin a strong town in Vermandoys, for the defense whereof
the Admiral of France Gasper Chastillon, with diverse bands of men put
himself into the town. But his brother d'Andelot issewing out of Perona with
15. enseignes of footmen, purposing to do the like, was defeated.
Notwithstanding the king tendering greatly ye saftie of the town, sent the
Constable to succor it with an army of 16000. foot, and 4000. horse, who upon
Saint Laurence day very early in the morning, by certain boats which he had
brought with him upon carts, put Mon sieur d'Andelot by the river with
certain bands of footmen into the town.

But King Phillips army as the said Constable retired, charged him, brake him,
defeated his forces, slew 2500 of his men with the loss only of 50. on their
part, and took him prisoner with two of his sons, and likewise the Dukes of
Montpensier and Longueuille, the Marshall of Saint Andre, the Rheingraue, and
diverse other great personages.

Whereupon the King presently reuoqued the Duke of Guise with his forces out
of Italy, and commanded the Duke of Neuers to leauy a new army.

In the mean time King Phillip took Saint Quentin by assault, and took
prisoners therein the Admiral, and d'Andelot his brother, but d'Andelot soon
after escaped away. The King of Spain wan also Catelet and Han and diverse
other places. The Duke of Alua on the other side in Italy took diverse places
from the Pope, who in the end seeing the Dukes forces so great that he came
without resistance even to Rome gates, and that the Duke of Guise in very
poor estate was reuoqued home into France: made peace at Caui with King
Philip (contraty to his promise made to the French King) and obtained better
conditions of him than he deserved, and among the rest of the conditions this
was one that the Duke of Guise should return home in safety, and he and his
army be well entreated wheresoever they passed through king Philips
dominions, which was all the recompense the French received at the Popes
hands, for the great losses they had received in Italy by his means, such
commonly is the end of all unnecessary wars.

The King being much grieved with these his manifold losses, and supposing his
honor to be stained if he achieved not some enterprise that might
counteruaile these his misfortunes, so soon as the Duke of Guise and Strozzi
were returned with his forces out of Italy by sea, and Monsieur d'Aumalle by
land, joined to them a great army of Swissers and Almaines who under the
leading of the said Duke of Guise were sent to besiege Calais in the very
midst of winter.

Strozzi not long before the coming of the army thither, had been brought in
disguised apparaile into the town by a French man an inhabitant thereof, and
had veiwed all the fortisications both within the town and without, and the
garrison within it for the defense thereof, which was very weak, and to say the
truth the said Strozzi was the only author of this enterprise

They began the siege the first day of January, and took the town the morrow
after twelfth day, and soon after also Hams and Guysnes, and all that the
English held on that side the sea.

In April following Frauncis the Daulphin married Marie daughter and heir of
James the fifth King of Scotland, and in June following the French besiged
Theonuille, held for an impregnable town in the Duchy of Luxembourg. Yet
notwithstanding they took it, but in that siege was Peter Strozzi slain to
the Kings great grief, for he had been a most valiant and expert Captain.

Cap. II. The French invade Flaunders and sack Dunkerke, they are overthrown
in their retrait to Calais. The English Navy takes Conquet. Peace between the
Kings of Spain and France and Elizabeth Queen of England. Bourg and other
Councillors of the law are sent to the Bastile. The Kings daughter is married
to the King of Spain. The King is slain at the iusts.
But the King supposing this revenge of his losses not to be sufficient as yet,
determined to attempt farther. Wherefore in the beginning of Iulie he sent
Monsieur de Terms to invade Flaunders, who took Dunkerke and burned it. But
the Earl of Egmont leuying an army of 12000. foot and 3000 horse, met with
the French as they retired toward Calais upon the sands between Dunkerke and
Grauelin, where he charged them, and by the help of the English Navy, which by
chance sailed at that time close by the shore, and discharged their great
shot into the midst of the French troops, they were deseated and Terms
himself taken prisoner, to the great astonishment of all France, which in
sower years space had received three great overthrows, the first in Italy,
the second at Saint Quentin, and the third this here mentioned.

And thus the King not being contented with a reasonable revenge, but seeking
to recover all his honor, lost even that which he had in part recovered
before, and put both himself and his Realm into greater dangers than ever
heretofore they had been in.

Terms had left behind him three enseignes of footmen to spoil and fire
Dunkerke, who being in the midst of their blouddie execution, were all
surprised by the Burgundians and cut in pieces. The Duke of Guise hearing of
this overthrow retired into Picardie, and held himself in places of safety.

After this victory the English Navy consisting of 100. sail of ships and
10000. men, and 20. great hulks joined with them, invaded Bretaine and took
Conquet, but partly by the force of the country that came down upon them,
and partly by tempest, they were forced to return home with speed. King
Phillip being encouraged by this his good success and many victories, levied a
mighty army, and encamped near to Dourlans in Picardie being a French town,
his whole force was 30000. foot, and 15000. horse, all his soldiers being
well paid.

The king on the other side near to Amiens, leuyed a great army, but seemed
not willing to hazerd an other battle, considering the losses he had
already received. Notwithstanding in the end both the Princes to avoid the
effusion of Christian blood inclined their minds to peace.

The two and twentieth of January Charles Duke of LORRAINE married the Lady
Claude the kings younger Daughter, and the February after, peace was treated
of at Cambresis beetweene the two Kings and ELIZABETH Queen of England lately
succeeded to the Crown of that Realm by the death of her Sister MARIE, who
dyed the seauententh of November 1558.

The Commissioners agreede reasonably well about every thing save CALAIS,
which King Philip would have in any case restored to the English again, and
the French would by noe means part with, which matter was so whotlie debated
between them, that all the treaty had assuredly broaken of, if news had not
been brought from the Queen of England, that she was contented to accept of
the peace, with these conditions, that at eight years end Calais should be
restored to her again or five hunfiftie thousand crowns in lieu thereof, for
assurance whereof she should have delivered unto her four hostages of the
nobilytie of Fraune such as she would demand.

This article being agreed upon peace was concluded beetweene these Princes
the third of April, and solemply proclaimed with great joy: 1559.
And King Philip married ELIZABETH the Kings eldest Daughter promised before to
CHARLES Prince of Spain King Philips son, and the Duke of SAVOY Philibert
married MARGARET the Kings sister.

Thus the king having concluded peace to his great comfort with all his
enemies, and beetrauthed his Daughter to the king of Spain, by means of the
which allyaunce he assured him self of an everlasting amity with that
Prince: began to embrew his hands in the blood of the LVTHERANS, and
committed BOVRG and four other Judges of the Law to MONTGOMERIE Captain of
his Guarde, who sent them prisoners to the Bastile, where they were laid in
yrons.

The only cause of their emprisonment was, for that they had delivered out of
prison certain Lutherans, and had forborne to publish the kings bloody edicts
till a general or a national council should take order in so wayghtie a
cause.

This being done, the king in great triumph departed to his Daughters marriage,
who was married to king Philip by his Deputy the Duke of Alua, who represented
the king his Masters person in this case: which being accomplished the king
gave himself to sports and pastimes, and the eight and twenteth of June
entered into the Lists to just, and continewed so long therein, and ran so
many courses three days together, that with excessive travail his whole body
was become stiff, whereupon diverse of the nobility and especially the Queen
his wife besought him to run no more, the rather because that night the
Queen had dreamed that she saw him wounded to death, and diverse other
prognosticatio^s of his death are also written which I ouerpasse. But he
refusing all persuasions, and despising his wives dream, and all the other
prognostications, entered again into the listes, and ran diverse courses
excellently well, for he was a perfect man at arms. At the last he called
forth Montgomerie, the self same that had carried BOVRG and the other four
Councillors to prison, as before you have heard. Montgomerie had run diverse
courses the day before, and had sailed in them all, for the which cause he was
loath to come forth. But being constrained by the king, in the end forth he
came being reserved by God to give one sound blow at the last, to counteruaile
all his faylings before: For as the king and he met together with great
violence a splenter of Montgomeries staff which brake all to sheuers, struck
the kings head-peece full upon the visard, which being unbuckled either through
negligence, or because the king would have it so, meaning to make this his last
course, flew up, in such sort that one of the sple^ters struck the king full in
the right eye and entered into his very brain, which put this poor Prince to
extreme pain. Upon the ninth of Iulie he caused the marriage of his sister and
the duke of Sauoy to be accomplished without any pomp, which should not have
been solempnisated till eight days after, and the next day he dyed of the
said hurt. The wound soon made an end of his own life, but his realm has
bled of that wound ever since, and the blood is hardly stenched as yet. This
king lived one and forty years, and reigned twelve years and 3. months, and
ten days.

Thus have I continued as compendiously as I could, the History of France
from Charles the eighth till the death of Henry the second, namely til the
beginning of their own civil broils and dissentio^s which because they
co^taine nothing but murders, massacers, trecheries, treasons, and no orderly
disciplined wars, are nothing pleasant for me to write, nor I think
acceptable to any man to read, and much less fit to be annexed to the
martial acts of those Princes, whom I have here before in this History
treated of. Notwithstanding if any man shall take pleasure in writing them, I
had rather he handeled such a bucherly argument then my self.

Cap. 12. The conclusion of the History.
NOw to conclude this History, can we have any more notable examples than
these here above mentioned to prove that man's cogitations are vain, and all
his thoughts wicked, for if you consider how all these Princes tossed and
turmoiled themselves with continual wars, what infinite treasures they
consumed, what slaughters they made of their subjects, what sacking and burning
of towns, defiling of young Maidens and Virgins, murdering of women and
Children, with all such like mischiefs as be appendant to the wars, and that
is worst of all, charging their own souls with many promises and oaths
which they never meant to perform when they swear them, neither performed at
all when they had sworn them.

And if we farther consider how little they have effected and brought to pass
of their own desires by all these their bloddy Martial actions, with the
which they troubled the world by the space of many years: we cannot but
confess and say with the Psalmist. He that dwells in the Heaven shall
laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. For first of all consider well the
example of Lodouic Sforce surnamed the More Duke of Milan, he poisoned his
nephew to obtain thereby the said Duchy, and set all Italy on fire by calling
in the French to establish him therein, but himself was within 5. years after
taken prisoner by the French, and put into a dongeon where he miserably ended
his life, his eldest son Maximilian being restored to the said Duchy of
Milan by means of the Swissers, the Pope, and the Venetians, was within three
years after likewise taken prisoner by the French, and in France ended his
days.

Afterward his other son Francis was established in the said Duchy by the
Emperor Charles, but with such slavish conditions that he rather deserved the
name of a noble slave than an honorable Prince, and in the end died of poison
as it was thought, and was the last of this wicked race of Sforces, and after
his death the Emperor seized all the Duchy of Milan into his own hands whose
race holds it yet, and shall do so long as it pleases God: And all these
miseries fell upon the said Lodouic and his sons within the space of 34.
years.

Now way likewise the example of Pope Alexander the sixth, and Valentinus Borgia
his son.

The said Valentine in his fathers life time obtained so many conquests in
Italy, some by arms, some by cruelty, some by treason and trecheries, some
by perjury, and by all other wicked means that may be imagined, that all
Italy stood in fear of him, and he was grown to such a pride in himself,
that he gave Aut Caesar aut nullus for his devise.

The Father poisoned himself with the same wine that he had prepared for the
poisoning of diverse cardinals his enemies, and so fell himself into the pit
which he had dug for others, and the son after his fathers death was spoiled
by Pope Julius of all that he had conquered in Italy, and the King of France
took from him all his estates that he held in France.

Wherefore he fled to Consalue under his safeconduct, and remained with him a
while at Naples in great kindness in outward appearance.

But soon after by King Ferdinands commandment, he was sent prisoner into
Spain by the said Consalue, who also took from him, the safeconduct that he
had given him.

In Spain he was emprisoned in the Rocque of Medina del Campo, from whence by
cunning he escaped, and went into Navarre, where he lived a while in very base
and miserable estate, and in the end was there slain.

The Venetians likewise for hatred they bare against Lodouic Duke of Milan
above mentioned, called Lewis the twelfth into Italy to conquer the said
Duchy, and had for their part of the booty the country of Guiradadda
delivered unto them by the King.

But soon after the same king took it from them again, and became their
deadly enemy, so that notwithstanding all their charges employed in those
wars and diverse other since: yet hold they not at this day one foot of
ground in Lombardie more then they did before those wars began, and in other
parts of Italy less.

Again four kings of France successively, namely CHARLES the eight, LEWIS
the twelfth, FRANCIS the first, and HENRY the second, by the space of three
score years and better, made continual wars in Italy, with infinite
expenses of money, toil of themselves, and the death not of so few as a
hundred thousand of their subjects, for the duchy of Milan and the realm of
Naples, and what have they gotten in recompense thereof, only this that they
hold not at this day one foot of Land in neither of both those countries.

Likewise Charles the Emperor who was so ambitious a Prince that he thought
to have swalowed up both France and Germany, was chaced out of both those
countries with great ignominy, and was never able to hold no not one pore
town in either of both those realms, and in the end through moodinesse of his
evil success, gave a deffiance to all the world, and dyed in an Abbey among a
company of Monks.

Lastly king Henry the eight who was so noble a Prince, and obtained so many
conquests in France both in his youth and in his age, what has he lest to his
posterity in that Country, for his infinite charges employed in those wars?
not one town, no nor one foot of French land. These examples I think may
suffice to teach Princes to be wise, and not to attempt ambitiouslie
unnecessary wars, seeing the sequel that enseweth thereof, but to live
peaceably at home, to entertain the good will of their neighbors by all the
good means they may, to se justice done among their subjects which is their
principal charge, and especially to ground all their actions upon God, who is
the guyder of all their enterprises, and the giver of all good success. Happy
is the Prince that thus governs his subjects and happy are the subjects that
live under such a Prince.

FINIS.

