THE VISION OF the 12. Goddesses, presented in a Mask the 8. of January, at
Hampton Court: By the Queens most excellent Majesty, and her Ladies.

LONDON

Printed by T. C. for Simon Waterson, and are to be sold at his Sop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Crown. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable the Lady Lucie, Countess of Bedford.
Madame.
IN respect of the unmannerly presumption of an indiscrect Printer, who without
warrant has divulged the late show at Court, presented the 8. of January, by
the Queens Majesty and her Ladies, and the same very disorderly set forth: I
thought it not amiss seeing it would otherwise pass abroad, to the prejudice
both of the Mask and the invention, to describe the whole form thereof in all
points as it was then performed, and as the world well knows very worthily
performed, by a most magnisice^t Queen, whose heroical spirit, and bounty
only gave it so fair, an execution as it had. Seeing also that these
ornaments and delights of peace are in their season, as fit to entertain the
world, and deserve to be made memorable as well as grauer actions, both of
them co^curring to the decking and furnishing of glory, and Majesty, as the
necessary complements requisite for State and Greatness.

And therefore first I will deliver the intent and scope of the project: Which
was only to present the figure of those blessings, with the wish of their
increase and continuance, which this mighty kingdom now enioyes by the
benefit of his most gracious Majesty, by whom we have this glory of peace,
with the accession of so great state and power. And to express the same, there
were devised 12. Goddesses, under whose Images former times have represented
the several gifts of heaven, and erected Temples, Altars, and Figures unto
them, as unto divine powers, in the shape and name of women. As unto Juno the
Goddess of Empire and regnorum praesedi, they attributed that blessing of
power. To Pallas, wisdom and defense: to Venus, love and amity: to Vesta,
Religion: to Diana, the gift of Chastity: to Proserpina riches: to Macaria,
felicity: to Concordia, the union of hearts. Astraea, Justice: Flora, the
beauties of the earth. Ceres plenty. To Tethis power by Sea.

And though these Images have oftentimes diverse significatio^s, yet it being
not our purpose to represent them, with all those curious and superfluous
observations, we took them only to serve as Hierogliphicqs for our present
intention, according to some one property that fitted our occasion, without
observing other their mystical interpretations, wherein the Authors themselves
are so irrigular and confused, as the best Mytheologers, who will make somewhat
to seem any thing, are so unfaithful to themselves, as they have left us no
certain way at all, but a tract of confusion to take our course at adventure.
And therefore owing no homage to their intricate observations, we were left at
liberty to take no other knowledge of them, then fitted our present purpose,
nor were tied by any laws of Heraldry to range the^ otherwise in their
precedencies, then they fell out to stand with the nature of the matter in
hand. And in these cases it may well seem ingenerosum sapere solum ex
commentarijs quasi maioru^inuenta industriae nostrae via^ precluserit, quasi in
nobis offaeta sit vis naturae, nihil exseparere, or that there can be nothing
done authentical, unless we observe all the strict rules of the book.

And therefore we took their aptest representations that lay best and easiest
for us. And first presented the Hieroglephicq of Empire and dominion, as the
ground and matter whereon this glory of State is built. Then those blessings,
and beauties that preserve and adorn it: As armed policy, love, Religion,
Chastity, wealth, happiness, Concord, Justice, flourishing seasons, plenty:
and lastly power by sea, as to imbound and circle this greatness of dominion by
land.

And to this purpose were these Goddesses thus presented in their proper and
several attyres, bringing in their hands the particular figures of their power
which they gave to the Temple of Peace, erected upon 4. pillars, representing
the 4. Virtues that supported a Globe of the earth.

First Juno in a skie-colour mantle imbrodered with gold, and figured with
Peacocks feathers, wearing a Crown of gold on her head, presents a Scepter.

2 Pallas (which was the person her Majesty chose to represent) was attyred in
a blew mantle, with a silver imbrodery of al weapons and engines of war, with a
helmet-dressing on her head, and presents a Lance and Target.

3 Venus, in a Mantle of Doue-colour, and silver, imbrodered with Doves,
presented (in stead of her Cestus, the girdle of Amity) a Skarffe of diverse
colors.

4 Vesta, in a white Mantle imbrodered with gold-flames, with a dressing like a
Nun, presented a burning Lamp in one hand, and a Book in the other.

5 Diana, in a green Mantle imbrodered with silver half Moons, and a
croissant of pearl on her head: presents a Bow and a Quiver.

6 Proserpina, in a black Mantle imbrodered with gold-flames, with a crown of
gold on her head: presented a Mine of gold ore.

7 Macaria, the Goddess of Felicity, in a Mantle of purple and silver,
imbrodered with the Figures of Plenty and Wisdom, (which concur to the
making of true happiness) presents a Cadaceum with the Figure of abundance.

8 Concordia, in a party colored Mantle of Crimson and White (the colors of
England and Scotland joined) imbrodered with silver, hands in hand, with a
dressing likewise of party colored Roses, a Branch whereof in a wreath or
knot she presented.

9 Astraea, in a Mantle Crimson, with a silver imbroderie, Figuring the Sword
and Balance (as the Characters of Justice) which she presented.

10 Flora, in a Mantle of diverse colors, imbrodered with all sorts of Flowers,
presents a Pot of Flowers.

11 Ceres, in Straw color and silver imbrodery, with ears of Corn, and a
dressing of the same, presents a Sickle.

12 Tethes, In a Mantle of Sea-greene, with a silver imbrodery of Waves, and a
dressing of Reeds, presents a Trident.

Now for the introducing this Show: It was devised that the Night represented
in a black vesture set with Stars, should arise from below, and come
toward the upper end of the Hall: there to waken her son Somnus, sleeping in
his Cave, as the Proem to the Vision. Which Figures when they are thus
presented in humane bodies, as all Virtues, Vices, Passions Knowledges, and
whatsoever Abstracts else in imagination are, which we would make visible, we
produce them, using humane actions, and even Sleep it selie (which might seem
improperly to exercise waking motions) has been often showed us in that
manner, with speech and gesture. As for example: Exccussit tandem sibi se;
cubitoque leuatus
Quid veniat (cognouit enim) Scitatur.
Intanto soprauenne, and gli occhi chiuse
A i Signori, and a i Sergenti il pigro Sonno.


And in another place: Il Sonno viene, and Sparso il corpo stanco
Colramo intimo nel liquor di Lethe.


So there, Sleep is brought in, as a body, using speech and motion: and it was
no more improper in this form to make him walk, and stand, or speak, then it
is to give voice or passion to dead men, Ghosts, Trees, and Stones: and
therefore in such matters of Shows, these like Caracters (in what form soever
they be drawn) serve us but to read the intention of what we would represent:
as in this project of ours, Night and Sleep were to produce a Vision, an
effect proper to their power, and fit to shadow our purpose, for that these
apparitions and shows are but as imaginations, and dreams that portend our
affections, and dreams are never in all points agreeing right with waking
actions: and therefore were they aptest to shadow whatsoever error might be
herein presented. And therefore was Sleep (as he is described by Philostratus
in Amphirai imagine) apparelled in a white thin Vesture cast over a black,
to signify both the day and the night, with wings of the same color, a
Garland of Poppy on his head, and in stead of his yuoyrie and transparent
horn, he was showed bearing a black Wand in the left hand, and a white in the
other, to effect either confused or significant dreams, according to that
invocation of Statius. -- Nec te totas infundere pennas
Luminibus compello meis, hoc turba prccatur-
Latior, extremo me tange cacumine virga.
And also agreeing to that of Sil. Ital. -- Tangens Lethea tempor a Virga.


And in this actio^ did he here use his white Wand, as to infuse significant
Visions to entertain the Spectators, and so made them seem to see there a
Temple, with a Sybilla therein attending upon the Sacrifices; which done, Iris
(the Messenger of Juno) descends from the top of a Mountain raised at the
lower end of the Hall, and marching up to to the Temple of Peace, gives notice
to the Sybilla of the coming of the Goddesses, and withal delivers her a
Prospectiue, wherein she might behold the Figures of their Deities, and thereby
describe them; to the end that at their descending, there might be no stay or
hinderance of their Motion, which was to be carried without any interruption,
to the action of other entertainments that were to depend one of another,
during the the whole Show: and that the eyes of the Spectators might not
beguile their ears, as in such cases it ever happens, whiles the pomp and
splendour of the sight takes up all the intention without regard what is spoken,
and therefore was it thought fit their descriptions should be delivered by the
Sybills.

Which as soon as she had ended, the three Graces in silver Robes with white
Torches, appeared on the top of the mountain, descending hand in hand before
the Goddesses; who likewise followed three and three, as in a number dedicated
unto Sanctity and an incorpore all nature, whereas the Dual, Hierogliphice
proimmudis accipitur. And between every rank of Goddesses, marched three
Torch-bearers in the like several colors, their heads and Robes all dect with
Stars, and in their descending, the Cornets sitting in the Concaues of the
Mountain, and seen but to their breasts, in the habit of Satyrs, sou^ded a
stately March, which continued until the Goddesses were approached inst before
the Temple, and then ceased, when the Consort Music (placed in the Cupula
thereof, out of sight) began: whereunto the 3. Graces retyring themselves
aside, sang, whiles the Goddesses one after an other with solemn pace aseended
up into the Temple, and delivering their presents to the Sybilla (as it were
but in passing by) returned down into the midst of the Hall, preparing
themselves to their dance, which (as soon as the Graces had ended their Song)
they began to the Music of the Violls and Lutes, placed on one side of the
Hal. Which da^ce being performed with great majesty and Art, consisting of
diverse strains, framed unto motions circular, square, tria^gular, with other
proportio^s exceeding rare and full of variety; the Goddesses made a pawse,
casting themselves into a circle, whilst the Graces again sang to the Music
of the Temple, and prepared to take out the Lords to dance. With who^ after
they had performed certain Measures, Galliards and Curranto's, Iris again
comes and gives notice of their pleasure to depart: whose speech ended, they
drew themselves again into another short dance, with some few pleasant
changes, still retyring the^ toward the foot of the Mountain, which they
ascended in that same manner as they came down, whilst the Cornets taking
their Notes from the ceasing of the Music below, sounded another delightful
March.

And thus Madame, have I briefly delivered, both the reason and manner of this
Mask; as well to satisfy the desire of those who could not well note the
carriage of these passages, by reason (as I said) the present pomp and splendour
entertained them otherwise (as that which is most regardfull in these Shows)
wherein (by the impartial opinion of all the beholders Strangers and others)
it was not inferior to the best that ever was presented in Christendom: as
also to give up my account hereof unto your Honor, whereby I might clear the
reckening of any imputation that might be laid upon your judgment, for
preferring such a one, to her MAJESTY in this employment, as could give no
reason for what was done.

And for the captious Censurers, I regard not what they can say, who commonly
can do little else but say; and if their deep judgments ever serve them to
produce any thing, they must stand on the same Stage of Censure with other men,
and peradventure perform no such great wonders as they would make us believe:
and I comfort my self in this, that in Court I know not any, under him, who
acts the greatest parts) that is not obnoxious to envy, and a sinister
interpretation. And whosoever strives to show most wit about these Puntillos
of Dreams and shows, are sure sick of a disease they cannot hide, and would
feign have the world to think them very deeply learned in all mysteries
whatsoever. And peradventure they think themselves so, which if they do, they
are in a far worse case then they imagine; Non potest non indoctus esse qui
se doctum credit. And let us labor to show never so much skill or Art, our
weaknesses and ignorance will be seen, whatsoever covering we cast over it.
And yet in these matters of shows (though they be that which most entertain
the world) there needs no such exact sufficiency in this kind. For, Ludit istis
animus, non proficit. And therefore, Madame, I will no longer idly hold you
therein, but refer you to the speeches, and so to your better delights, as one
who must ever acknowledge my self especially bound unto your Honor.

Sam: Daniel.

The Night represented, in a black Vesture set with stars, comes and wakens
her son Somnus, (sleeping in his Cave) with this speech. AWake dark sleep,
rouse thee from out this Cave;
Thy Mother Night that bred thee in her
And fed thee first with silence and with case, (womb
Does here thy shadowing operations crave:
And therefore wake my Son, awake, and come
Strike with thy Horny wand, the spirits of these
That here expect some pleasing novelties:
And make their slumber to beget strange sights,
Strange visions and unusual properties.
Unseen of latters Ages, ancient Rytes.
Of gifts divine, wrapped up in mysteries.
Make this to seem a Temple in their sight,
Whose main support, holy, Religion frame:
And 1 Wisdom, 2 Courage, 3 Temperance, and 4 Right,
Make seem the Pillars that sustain the same.
Shadow some sybill to attend the Rytes,
And to describe the Powers that shall resort,
With th'interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clouds, and what they do import.
Yet make them to portend the true desire
Of those that wish them waking real things:
Whilcst I will hoou'ring, here a-loofe retire
And cover all things with my sable Wings.

Somnus. Dear Mother Night, I your commandment
Obey, and Dreams t'interpret Dreams will make,
As waking curiosity is wont.
Though better dream a sleep, the^ dream awake.
And this white horny Wand shall work the deed;
Whose power does Figures of the light present:
When from this sable radius does proceed
Naught but confused shows, to no intent.
Be this a Temple; there Sybisla stand,
Preparing reverent Rytes with holy hand,
And so bright visions go, and entertain
Al round about, whilst I Will to sleep again.

Iris, the Messenger of the Goddesses discending from the Mount, where they
were assembled, (dect like the Rainbow) spoke as follows. I The daughter of
Wonder, (now made the Messenger of Power) am here descended, to signify the
coming of a Celestial presence of Goddesses, determined to visit this fair
Temple of Peace, which holy hands and devout desires, have dedicated to unity
and concord. And leaving to show themselves any more in Sames, Ida, Paphos,
their ancient delighting-places of Greece, and Asia, made now the seats of
Barbarizme and spoil, vouchsafe to recreat themselves upon this Western Mount
of mighty BRITTANNY, the Land of civil Music and of rest, and are pleased to
appear in the selfsame Figures, wherein antiquity has formerly clothed
the^, and as they have been cast in the imagination of piety, who has given
mortal shapes to the gifts and effects of an eternal power, for that those
beautiful Caracters of sense were easier to be read then their mystical
Ideas, dispersed in that wide, and imcomprehensible volume of Nature.

And well have mortal men apparelled, all the Graces, all the Blessings, all
Virtues, with that shape wherein themselves are much delighted, and which work
the best Motions, and best represent the beauty of heavenly Powers.

And therefore reverent Prophetess, that here attendest upon the devotions of
this Place, prepare thy self for those Rytes that appertain to thy function,
and the honor of such Deities, and to the end thou may have a fore-notion
what Powers, and who they are that come, take here this Prospectiue, and
therein note and tell what thou see: for well may thou there observe their
shadows, but their presence will bereave thee of all, save admiration and
amazement, for who can look upon such Powers and speak? And so I leave thee.


Sybilla, having received this Message, and the Prospectiue, uses these words.
WHAT have I seen? where am I? or do I see at all? or am I any where? was this
Iris, (the Messenger of Juno) or else but a fantasme or imagination? will the
divine Goddesses vouchsafe to visit this poor Temple? Shall I be blessed, to
entertain so great Powers? it can be but a Dream: yet so great Powers have
blessed, as humble roofes, and use, out of no other respect, then their own
gracefulnes to shine where they will. But what Prospectiue is this? or what
shall I herein see? Oh admirable Powers! what sights are these?

Juno. FIRST here Imperial Juno in her Chair,
With Septer of command for Kingdoms large:
Descends all clad in colors of the Air,
Crowned with bright Stars, to signify her charge.
Pallas. NEXT warlike Pallas, in her Helmet dressed
With Lance of winning, Target of defense:
In whom both Wit and Courage are expressed,
To get with glory, hold with Providence.
Venus. THEN lovely Venus in bright Majesty,
Appears with mild aspect, in Doue-like
With the all combyning Skarffe of Amity, (hue:
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
Vesta. NEXT Holy Vesla, with her flames of Zeal
Presents her self, clad in white Purity:
Whose book, the souls sweet comfort, does re-
By the euer-burning Lamp of Piety. (ueale
Diana. THEN chaste Diana, in her Robes of green,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests
To bless the Forests, where her power is seen,
In peace with all the world, but Savage beasts.
Proserpina. NEXT rich Proserpina, with flames of gold,
Whose state although within the earth, yet she
Comes from above, and in her hand does hold
The Mine of wealth, with cheerful Majesty.
Macaria. THEN all in purple Robes, rich Happiness
Next her appears, bearing in either hand,
Th'Ensignes both of wealth, and wits to express,
That by them both, her Majesty does stand.
Concordia. NEXT all in partie-coloured Robes appears,
In white and crimson, graceful Concord dressed
With knots of Union, and in hand she bearcs
The happy joined Roses of our rest.
Astrea. CLeare-eyed Astrea, nex, t with reverent brow
Clad in Celestial hue, (which best she likes)
Comes with her Balance, and her sword to show
That first her judgment weighs before it strikes.
Flora. THen cheerful Flora, all adorned with flowers,
Who clothes the earth with beauty and delight
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining hours
Will skarce afford a darkness to the night.
Ceres. NExt plenteous Ceres in her Harvest weed,
Crowned with the increase of what she gave to
To gratitude and faith: in whom we read, (keep:
Who sowes on Virtue shall with glory reap.
Tethis. LAstly comes Tethis, Albious fairest love,
Who^ she in faithful Arms deigne to embrace
And brings the Trydent of her Power, t'approue
The kind respect she has to do him grace.
Thus have I read their shadows, but behold!
In glory, where they come as Iris told!

The three Graces, coming to the upper part of the Hall, sang this Song, while
the Goddesses delivered their Presents. Gratia sum 1 dantium, 2 reddentiu^, 3
and promerentium. 1 DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Society;
Do here with hand in hand conclude
The blessed chain of Amity:
For we deserve, we give, we thank,
Thanks, Gifts, Deserts, thus join in rank.

2 We yield the splendant raijes of light,
Unto these blessings that descend:
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing does commend;
Whilst Gratitude, Rewards, Deserts,
Please, win, draw on, and couple hearts.

3 For worth and power and due respect,
Deserves, bestows, returns with Grace:
The meed, reward, the kind effect,
That give the world a cheerful face,
And turning in this course of right,
Make Virtue move with true delight.

The Song being ended, and the Maskers in the midst of the Hall, disposing
themselves to their Dance: Sybilla having placed there several Presents on the
Altar, vtterreth these words. OPower of powers, grant to our vows we pray,
That these fair blessings which we now erect
In Figures left us here, in substance may
Be those great props of glory and respect.
1 Let kingdoms large, 2 let armed policy, (white
3 Mild love, 4 true Zeal, 5 right shouting at the
Of brave disignes: 6 let wealth, 7 felicity,
8 Justice, 9 and concord, 10 pleasure, 11 plenty, 12 might
And power by Sea, with Grace proportionate,
Make glorious both the Sovereign and his State.

After this the Maskers danced their own Measures, which being ended, and they
ready to take ^^t the Lords, the 3. Graces sang. WHiles worth with honor make
their choice
For measured motions ordered right,
Now let us likewise give a voice,
Unto the touch of our delight.
For comforts locked up without sound,
Are th'vnborne children of the thought:
Like unto Treasures never found
That buried low are left forgot.
Where words, our glory does not show,
(There) like brave Actions without Fame;
It seems as Plants not set to grow,
Oras a Tomb without a Name.

The Maskers having ended their dancing wi^^ the Lords, Iris gives warning of
their departure. Iris. AS I was the joyful Messenger to notify the coming,
so am I now the same of the departure of these divine powers. Who having
clothed themselves with these apparances, do now return back again to the
Spheres of their own being from, whence they came. But yet, of my self, this
much I must reveal, though against the warrant of a Messenger; who I know had
better to fail in obedience then in presumption, that these Deities by the
motion of the all-directing Pallas, the glorious Patroncsse of this mighty
Monarchy, descending in the Majesty of their invisible essence, upon yonder
Mountain, found there, the best, (and most worthily the best) of LADIES,
disporting with her choysest Attendants, whose forms they presently
undertook, as delighting to be in the best-built-Temples of Beauty and
Honor. And in them vouchsafed to appear in this manner, being otherwise no
objects for mortal eyes. And no doubt, but that in respect of the persons
under whose beautiful couerings they have thus presented themselves, these
Deities will be pleased the rather at their invocation (knowing all their
desires to be such) as evermore to grace this glorious Monarchy with the Real
effects of these blessings represented.


After this, they fell to a short departing dance, and so ascend the Mountain.
FINIS.

