A Funeral Poem Upon the Death of the late noble Earl of Deuonshyre,

A Funeral Poem upon the Death of the late noble Earl of Deuon-shire.
NOw that the hand of death has laid thee there
Where all must lie, and leuel'd thee with The Earth,
Where men are all of them alike, and where
There are no seu'rall rooms for state or birth:
Now thou have nothing left thee but a name
(O noble Devonshire) and all is gone
With thee, except the memory, and same
Of what thy virtue, and thy worth has done:
Now shall my verse which thou in life did grace,
(And which was no disgrace for thee to do)
Not leave thee in the grave, that darkesome place
That few regard, or have respect unto.
Where all attendance, and observance ends,
Where all the Sunshine of our favor sets;
Where what was ill, no countenance defends,
And what was good, th'vnthankfull world forgets.
Now shall thou have the service of my pen,
(The tongue of my best thoughts) and in this case,
I cannot be supposed to flatter, when
I speak behind thy back, not to thy face.
And am untied from any other chain
Than of my love, which freeborn draws free breath;
The benefit thou gave me to sustain
My humble life, I lose it by thy death.
Nor was it such, as it could lay on me,
Any exaction of respect, so strong,
As to enforce my observance beyond thee,
Or make my conscience differ from my tongue.
Let those be vassals to such services
Who have their hopes, or whose desires are hye,
For me, I have my ends, and know it is
For Freemen to speak truth, for slaves to lie.
And if mistaken by the Paralax
And distance of my standing too far off
I heretofore might err, and men might tax
My being to free of praises, without proof.
But here it is not so, and yet the choice
Of those I made did yeald the greatest show
Of honor and of worth, and had the voice
Of present times their virtues to allow.
And if they have not made them good, it is
No fault of mine, nor ought it to be laid
To disrepute these my obseruances,
True praises do adorn, the false obrayd:
And oftentimes to greatness we are glad
To attribute those parts we wish they had.
But Devonshire I here stand clear with thee
I have a manumission to be free,
I owe thee nothing, and I may be bold
To speak the certain truth of what I know,
There is no power remains in thee, to hold
The tongues of men, that will be talking now.
And now being dead I may anatomise,
And open here all that thou were within,
Show how thy mind was built, and in what wise
All the contexture of thy heart has been:
Which was so nobly framed, so well composed,
As virtue never had a fairer seat.
Nor could be better lodged nor more reposed,
Than in that goodly frame, where all thing sweet,
And all things quiet, held a peaceful rest;
Where passion did no sudden tumults raise
That might disturb her, nor was ever breast
Contayn'd so much, and made so little noise,
That by thy silent modesty is found
The emptiest vessels make the greatest sound.
For thou so well discernd'st thy self, had read
Man and his smoke so well, as made the force
The less to speak, as being ordained to spread
Thy self in action, rather than discourse.
Though thou had made a general Suruiew
Of all the best of men's best knowledges,
And knew as much as ever learning knew,
Yet did it make thee trust thy self the less,
And less presume; and yet when being moved
In private talk to speak, thou did bewray
How fully fraught thou were within and proved
That thou did know, what ever wit could say.
Which showed thou had not books as many have
For ostentation, but for use, and that
Thy bountious memory was such, as gave
A lardge reuenu of the good, it gat.
Witness so many volumes whereto thou
Have set thy notes under thy learned hand,
And marked them with that print as will show how
The point of thy conceiving thoughts did stand.
That none would think if all thy life had been
Turned into leisure, thou could have attaind
So much of time, to have perused and seen,
So many volumes that so much containd.
Which furniture may not be deemd least rare
Amongst those ornaments that sweetly dight
Thy solitary wansteed, where thy care
Had gathered all what heart, or eyes delight.
And whereas many others have we see
All things within their Houses worth the sight,
Except themselves, that furniture of thee
And of thy presence, gave the best delight.
And thus was thy provision laid within,
Thus were thou to thy self, and now remains
What to the world thou outwardly have been,
What the demension of that side contains.
Which likewise was so goodly, and so lardge,
As showed that thou wret borne t'adorne the days
Wherein thou liud'st, and also to dischardge
Those parts which Englands, and thy fame should raise.
Although in peace thou seem'dst to be all peace,
Yet being in war, thou were all war, and there
As in thy sphere, thy spirits did never cease
To move with indefatigable care.
And nothing seemed more to arride thy heart
Nor more inlardge thee into iollitie,
Then when thou saw thy self in armor girt
Or any act of arms like to be ny.
The Belgique war first tried thy martial spirit
And what thou were, and what thou would be found,
And marked thee there according to thy merit
With honors stamp, a deep and noble wound.
And that same place that rent from mortal men
Immortal Sydney, glory of the field
And glory of the Muses, and their pen,
(Who equal bare the Caduce and the Shield)
Had likewise been thy last, had not the fate
Of England then reserved thy worthy blood,
Unto the preservation of a State
That much coucern'd her honor and her good.
And thence returned thee to enjoy the blis
Of grace and savor in Elizaes eyes,
(That miracle of women) who by this
Made thee beheld, and made thee to arise
Unto a note more hye, which thou might well
Have far more raised, had not thine enemy,
Retired priuacie, made thee to sell
Thy greatness for thy quiet, and deny
To meet fair Fortune, when she came to thee.
For never man did his preferment fly,
And had it in that eminent degree,
As thou, as if it sought thy modesty.
For that which many, whom ambition toils,
And tortures with their hopes, hardly attain
Withal their thrust, and shouldring, plots, and wiles,
Was easily made thine, without thy pain.
And without any private malicing,
Or public greeuance, every good man joyed
That virtue could come clear to any thing,
And fair deserts to be so fairly paid.
Those benefits that were bestowed on thee
Were not like Fortunes favors, they could see.
Eliza's cleere-eyed judgment is renowned
For making choice of thy ability:
But it will everlastingly redound
Unto the glory, and benignity
Of Britains mighty Monarch, that thou were
By him advanced for thy great desert,
It being the fairer work of majesty
With favor to reward, than to employ.
And as thou said that naught thy heart did grieve,
In death so much, as that time would not yield
Thee means to show thy zeal, that thou might live
To Have done but one days service in the field.
And that fair bed of honor died upon,
And with thy blood have sealed thy gratefulness
To such a royal Master. Who had done
So much for thee t'aduance thy services.
Which were indeed of that deseart, as they
Might ask their grace themselves, although we see,
That to success deseart has not a way,
But under Princes that most gracious be.
For when our kingdom stood in state to have lost
The dearest purchase that it ever made,
And what it bought with that exceeding cost
Of blood and charge, to keep and to invade:
As never nation paid a dearer prise,
For such a piece of earth, and yet well paid,
And well aduentur'd for, with great advise,
And happily to our dominions laid.
Without which outlet, England thou had been
From all the rest of the earth shut out; and pent
Unto thy self, and forced to keep within,
Inuiron'd with incroching government.
Where now by this, thy large imperial Crown,
Stands boundless in the West, and has a way,
For noble times, least to make all thine own
That lies beyond it, and force all t'obay.
And this important piece, like to have been rent
From off thy state, did then so tickle stand,
As that no ioynture of the government
But shook, no ligament, no band
Of order and obedience, but were then
Loose, and in tottering, when the charge
Thereof was laid on Montioy, and that other men,
Checked by example sought to put it off.
And he out of his native modesty,
(As being no undertaker) labors too
To have avoided that which his ability,
And Englands Genius would have him to do,
And did aleadge, it was a charge unfit,
For him to undergo, seeing such a one,
As had more power, and means t'accomplish it,
Then he could have, had there so little done.
Whose ill success (for that he knew his worth
So great, as if there could have been redress,
He had effected it) in him brought forth
Discouragement, that he should there do less.
The state replide, it was not looked he should
Restore it wholly, being so disrent,
And only now, if possibly he could
But hold it up, it was sufficient.
So that it did not fall asunder quite,
Being thus dishiuerd, in a desperate plight.
With courage on he goes, does execute
With Council, and returns with victory:
But in what noble fashion he did suit
This action, with what wit and industry:
There is no room to place it in this straight.
Time, and my present griefs, do disappoint
My willingness. Besides being of that weight,
It Is sin to place it in a narrow point,
And better now say nothing then to say
But little, there remains for this behind,
A Trophey to b'erected that will stay
To all posterityes, and keep in mind,
That glorious work, which did a kingdom save,
Kept the Crown whole and made the Peace we have.
And here I will omit to show therefore,
His management of public bus'nesses:
which often are under fortunes conduct more
Then ours, and tell his private carriages.
Which on his own discretion did rely,
Where with his spirit was furnished happily.
Mild, affable, and easy of access
He was, but with a due reseruednes:
So that the passage to his favors lay
Not common to all comers, nor yet was
So narrow, but it gave a gentle way
To such as fitly might or ought to pass.
Nor sold he smoke, nor took he up to day
Commodities of men's attendances,
And of their hopes, to pay them with delay,
And intertaine them with fair promises.
But as a man that loved no great commerce
With business, and with noise, he ever flies
That Maze of many ways, which might disperse
Him, into other men's uncertainties.
And with a quiet calm sincerity,
H'effects his undertakings really.
His tongue and heart did not turn backs, but went
One way, and kept one course with what he meant.
He used no mask at all, but ever ware
His honest inclination open faced,
The friendships that he vowed, most constant were,
And with great judgment, and discretion placed.
And Devonshire thy faith has her reward,
Thy noble friends do not forsake thee now,
After thy death, but bear a kind regard,
Unto thine honor in the Grave, and show,
That worthiness, which merits to remain,
Among the examples of integrity,
Whereby themselves no doubt shall also gain,
A like regard unto their memory.
Now muttering envy, what can thou produce,
To darken the bright luster of such parts,
Cast thy pure stone, exempt from all abuse,
Say what defects could wey down these deserts,
Summon detraction, to object the worst
That may be told, and utter all it can,
It cannot find a blemish to b'inforst,
Against him, other, then he was a man,
And built of flesh and blood, and did live here
Within the region of infirmity,
Where all perfections never did appear,
To meet in any one so really,
But that his frailty ever did bewray,
Unto the world, that he was set in clay.
But yet his virtues, and his worthiness,
Being seen so far above his weaknesses,
Must ever shine, whilst the other under ground,
With his frail part, shall never more be found.
And gratitude, and charity I know,
Will keep no note, nor memory will have
Of any fault committed, but will now
Be pleased, to bury all within his Grave.
Seeing only such lie ever base and low,
That strike the dead, or mutter underhand.
And as Dogs bark at those they do not know,
So they at such they do not understand.
The worthier sort, who know we do not live
With perfect men, will never be so unkind,
They will the right to the disceased give,
Knowing themselves must likewise leave behind,
Those that will censure them. And they know how,
The Lion being dead even Hares insult.
And will not urge a passed error now,
When as he has no party to consult.
Nor tongue, nor advocate, to show his mind:
They rather will lament the loss they find,
By such a noble member of that worth,
And know how rare the world such me^ brings forth,
For never none had heart more truly served,
Under the regiment of his own care,
And was more at command, and more observed
The coullours of that honesty he bare,
Then that of his^ who never more was known,
To use immodest act, or speech obscene,
Or any leuity that might have shown,
The touch but of a thought that was unclean.
So that what ever he has done amiss,
Was underneath a shape that was not known,
As Jupiter did no unworthiness,
But was in other forms, not in his own.
But let it now sufficient be, that I,
The last scene of his act of life bewray,
Which gives the applause to all, does glorify
The work. For it is the evening crowns the day.
This action of our death especially
Shows all a man. Here only is he found,
With what munition he did fortify
His heart, how good his furniture has been.
And this did he perform in gallant wise:
In this did he confirm his worthiness.
For on the morrow after the surprise
That sickness made on him with fierce access,
He told his faithful friend whom he held dear,
(And whose great worth was worthy so to be)
How that he knew those hot diseases were.
Of that contagious force, as he did see
That men were ouertumbled Sodeinely:
And therefore did desire to set a course
And order to his affairs as speedily,
As might be, ere his sickness should grow worse:
And as for death, said he, I do not wey
I am resolved and ready in this case,
It cannot come t'affright me any way,
Let it look never with so grime a face.
And I will meet it smiling, for I know,
How vain a thing all this worlds glory is.
And herein did he keep his word. Did show
Indeed as he had promised in this.
For sickness never heard him groan at al,
Nor with a sigh consent to show his pain,
Which howesoeuer being tiranicall,
He sweetly made it look, and did retain
A lovely countenance of being well
And so would ever make his tongue to tell.
Although the seruor of extremity
Which often does throw those defenses down,
Which in our health, wall in infirmity,
And open lay more then we would have known.
Yet did no idle word in him bewray
Any one piece of nature ill set in,
Those lightnesses that any thing will say
Could say no ill of what they knew within,
Such a sure lock of Silent modesty
Was set in life upon that noble heart
As that no anguish, nor extremity
Could open it, t'impaire that worthy part.
For having dedicated still the same
Unto devotion, and to sacred skill,
That furnish perfect held, that blessed flame
Continued to the last in feruor still.
And when his spirit and tongue, no longer could
Do any certain services beside,
Even at the point of parting, they unfold
With fervent zeal, how only he relide
Upon the merits of the precious death
Of his redeemer, and with rapt desires
H'appeales to grace. His soul delivers
Unto the hand of mercy and expires.
Thus did that worthy, who most virtuously
And mildly lind, most sweet, and mildly dye.
And thus Great Patron of my muse have I
Paid thee my vows, and fairly cleerd th'accounts
Which in my love I owe thy memory.
And let me say that herein there amounts
Something unto thy fortune, that thou have
This monument of thee, perhaps may last.
Which does not t'euery mighty man befall
For lo how many when they die, die all.
And this does argue too, thy great desearts
For Honor never brought unworthiness
Further then to the Grave, and there it parts,
And leaves men's greatness to forgetfulness.
And we do see that nettles, thistles, brakes
(The poorest works of nature) tread upon
The proudest frames that man's invention makes,
To hold his memory when he is gone.
But Devonshire thou have another Tomb
Which is erected in a safer room.
Samuel Daniell,
FINIS.

