A Sum of the Guisian Embassage to the Bishop of Rome, found lately amongst
the writings of one David an Advocate of Paris, and translated out of French
into Latin, and from Latin into English.

Jmprinted. 1579.

To the Christian Reader, the Translator sends greeting in Christ Jesus.
THis little Pamphlet, (good Reader) being first extant in French, and after
translated into Latin, came unto my hands by chance, perusing other books
which were brought from Franckford: and ouerrunning shortly the same, and
perceiving that it contained the discouerye of a very da^ngerous and mischeuous
practice of the Papists in France, especially of the Guisian faction, which
under pretense of the maintenance of the Catholic or Romish faith, (as it may
seem) being thereunto by the Pope, and his favorers induced for the upholding
of his pride and ambicion, together with their Haeriticall and erroneous
doctrine, which by the Gospel in the noble Realm of France, as in all other
places in Christendom is now laid open and plainly confuted, to their no small
loss and grief, seek I speak rather to aspire to the title of the Crown of
that mighty Kingdom, by priuye claiming unto themselves, the right thereof as
the heirs discending lineallye from Charles the great: and pleading the
Valoys, with the Borbones to be but usurpers, and intruders: who at this day
are the right apparaunt heirs thereof: I thought good to publish the same to
the view of the world, leaving the creadit thereof to the Reporter, that it
may appear both how cruel and bloodthirsty a generation these Papists are,
who can never be satisfied with the shedding of their breathernes blood, and
that from Rome that spiritual Babylon, as from a Fountain flowing into all
Christendom the continual discords, contentions, tumults, wars vprores,
treasons and rebellions wherewith the same is lamentably at this day oppressed,
and overwhelmed: as also to show how unjustly they burden and charge the
godly, and zealous nobility, and Subjects of that Realm and other places with
Treason and rebellion against their Sovereigns, and Princes, they themselves
being most giltye thereof, when they withstand with all reasonable, and lawful
means the unjust, violent, tirrannicall, and unnatural oppressions, and
invasions, practiced against them, besides all law of God and man, by the
Pope, abusinge the Scepters and aucthorite of Princes, to the establishing of
his long usurped primacie, Pride and Ambition, in the Church of Christ. For
how so ever he colloureth his purposes with fair shows: yet is it evident to
those that are not blinded with affection malice, or by the just judgments of
God cast into a reprobate sense, that he seeks his own and not those things
which appertain unto Christ, and that he discrieth him self to be very
Antichriste, in settinge up his own kingdom, with the overthrow of the kingdom
of Christ, and his Gospel, (as much as lies in him,) knowing, and feeling by
experience, to his great grief (Gods name be praised therefore) that the one
cannot stand with the other.

Therefore when it pleased God to make manifest to the world, by the glorious
light of the Gospel of his son, how trayterouslye, wickedlye, and
blasphemouslye in the midst of gross and palpable darcknesse, he has usurped
and intruded upon the kingdom of his Christ, and he begins to take again
possession thereof, and shakes, like a tottering wall, the kingdom of
Antichrist: he perceiving the ruin of his usurped tyranny to be threatened in
all Christendom, and Christ like to recover his own possession again, joined
with his confederats, and laid their heads together, sundry and diverse times,
especially in the late pretended counfell holden at Trent, and considered what
was best to be done in this so desperate a state: and when they had sought by
diverse means to bring the same to pass, as by writing of books for their
defense, by confessing sum what to have bin amiss, and to promise redress
thereof (which they never meant in truth) by often promising of a general,
lawful, and free counsel, but never performing it, by threatenings, sometime
force and wars, and vsinge the same sometime, and by diverse other subtle
devises, which nevertheless by the providence of God came to naught. Then they
determined at last in their said pretenced Counsel of Trent, that seeing by no
other way they were able to compass their intent, and to hold and proppe up
their ruynous state, (which they make more accoumpt of then the glory of God):
that there should be made (forsooth) a holy league between the holy father, and
all his obedient Children which kiss his feet, against all the professors of
the Gospel in Christendom: with a full resolution, that it should be lawful
for them by the dispensation of the holy Father, to use all Treachery, deceit,
perjury, violence and crueltye against them, as being heretics, and
condemned by the said holy Counsel of Trent. And that the execution thereof
might be done with more heed, and dylligence, some were in all Countries
appointed who should undertake the same. And herehence, has since risen the
Fire and Flame of discentions, mutynes, and tumultes in all Christendom.

This I thought good (gentle reader) to admonish thee of, that in reading of
this small discourse, thou might with more light and judgment, look into
the popish practices therein contained. The Lord God make us wise in
foreseeing their pernicious counsels, and avoiding the same in time. For as
they have in that noble Realm of France, and in other places showed their
malicious intents, so mind they to do the like, it is to be feared in England,
if God do not of his mercy let them, which he grant, for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

A Sum of the Guisian Embassage to the Bishop of Rome, found lately
amongst the writings of one David an Advocate of Paris, etc.
THat the civil wars which have been in France, The war^ Fra^ more full ^fitab^
Apo^ Sea^
have brought more hinderaunce, then furtheraunce to the Apostolic Sea,
especially for ye lyberty both to write Books, which are reproachful to the
said Sea, as otherwise to deface the honor thereof: by the which liberty, the
minds of the Heretics are encouraged and hardened, and most of the Catholyques
brought to the contempt and scorn of the said holy Sea.

That the end and event of all the victories which have been gotten in
France, Hug^ and ^steri^ curse Apo^ Sea
have fallen out unto some peace shameful, and dishonorable to the King,
whereof it may be gathered, that the stock of Hugh Capet, albeit it has
succeeded in the singular, and only government of the kingdom of Charles the
great: Yet it has not succeeded it in the enjoying of the Apostolical
blessing: which blessing, consecration, and inauguration properly, and
peculiarly was bestowed upon the lygnage and posterity of Charles the great.
And further, like as Capet by taking to him and usurping the blessing of the
kings bestowed on Charles the great, has by his rashness and presumption
violated the same: so has he provoked upon his own, and successors heads, the
continual curse and malediction of the said Apostolical Seat: from ye which
curse so great falsehood, theft, and rebellion against the holy Sea have
sprung, to the destruction and overthrow whereof, that detestable law, and
ordinance has been enacted, and put in ure, which commonly amongst the French
men, is called the freedom or liberty of the French Church: The ^tute (...)
the ly^ of ye (...) Chu^^ brydl^ Pop^
which in former times has been a refuge and aid to the Albigenses and
beggars of Lions, as they termed them, and now in our time to the Lutherans and
Caluinistes, has given occasion and matter of rebellion. In so much that it is
not to be maruailed that the victories of those kings which these.16. years
past, have undertaken war for the Catholic church, have had no happy
success, neither at any time shall, as long as the Crown shall rest in the
family of Capet.

That it may seem that God in this conclusion of the last shameful peace, The
of Ch^ the g^^ ways full t^ Aposl^ Sea.
has as it were called home the rightful and lawful heirs of the Crown
unto their right, and to have offered occasion and beginning to restore the
Crown unto the heads of the right heirs of Charles. Of whom there is not one
until this day found, which has not showed unto the holy Sea, fidelity,
obedience, and due reverence: and by that faithfulness, and dutifulnes, has
declared him self to be the true, right, and lawful heir of the Apostolical
blessing bestowed upon the crown of France.

^ock of ^pe^ ^d by and to ^herof.
That it is well known now to all men that the stock of those that descend
from Capet, is carried headlong into a reprobate sense by the just plague of
God, for that some of them are hartles, and wytles, of no wisdom, or courage:
some other reprobate, rejected, hated of God and men, Heretics, excommunicate,
and cast of from the holy fellowship of the church.

That it is a token of this malediction, first that some of them are borne of
an evil shape of body, of foul and stained blood: Further, that in the flower
of their age, they dye, leaving no heirs of their body to enjoy the kingdom,
and that there remains no hope of their stock and issue, and therefore the
inheritance of the kingdom is like to paste away to Heretics and
exco^municants, to the great hurt of the Apostolic Sea.

That where great danger now is at hand, What Cathol^ endeuo^ ought t^
all the endeavor of all the catholics ought to be employed, that the crown
of France be restored to the true and lawful heirs of Charles: especially,
seeing they are so fresh and flourishing in mind and body, that they are well
known to be most fyttest to atchieue, and enterprise the greatest matters, and
of most account.

That the late wars has advanced them to attain honors, Warre^ fitable t^
Guisian but mu^ more pe^
rules and offices: but that peace shall restore again to them the lawful
inheritance of the kingdom, with great good will and lyking of all the French
Nation. Wherefore it is not to be doubted, Sermon to be n^ and wh^
but that the covenants, and conditions of this dishonorable peace, which are
granted to ye Heretics by their new Edict of Pacification, although they may
seem profitable, and convenient to the Heretics, yet are they framed and
devised not by man's counsel, but by Gods, that the praise, honor, and glory
of the vanquishing of the Heretics may rest upon God only, and the blessing
of his holy Vicar in earth. Wherefore it is to be provided, that in all
catholic cities, wholesome Sermons may be made, meet to stir up the
citizens minds, and to let the assemblyes of the abominable sect, permitted
by the last Edict.

King ^e war^ and (...) of.
That the king is to be warned, that the new styrres which he shall hear every
where to be continually raised, do not disquiet, Duke uise to ^t in: and (...)
he ^de do.
and trouble his mind, and that he put the Duke of Guise in trust to compose,
and pacify them, who having authority from the king, with a stout and valiant
courage, shall make confederacies between the nobility, and the cities, and so
shall bynd each one with an oathe, that they be not only bound to solow his
authority, but also privately, and properly his faith, and shall swear that
they will acknowledge no other chief of the confederacy, but the Duke of
Guise himself.

These things being established, Orde^ taken Duke Guise Parri^ with t^ ^rish Pr^
the Duke of Guise shall take order, that the Parish Priests, not only in
towns, but also in villages and hamlets, do write out, and in books set
down, the names of all such as are of years to bear armor, and do send
those books unto the said Duke of Guise, who incontine^t shall appoint out
Captains into those Parishes, which shall see and take a view what kind of
armor, or weapons every one is fyt, and meet to bear. What Priest do in
cular c^sion.
The Priests also shall be wylled, that in auricular confession they instruct
every one that is enrolled, of ye just cause of this war, which is for
defense sake of their conscience, and shall exhort them that they with all
speed provide them selves of Armor and weapons.

(...) the ought
The king in the mean while shall provide that Parliamentes or assemblies of al
Estates and degrees of his Realm be called and summoned (which is a pyt made
by the Heretics for the^ selves to fall in) and thereunto shall ordain very
great preparation, pomp, and solemnity (according to the manner of his
Predecessors) and shall send unto every province of his kingdom, ^^ylers (...)
to be (...), and they do.
such councillors as are most faithful and trusty to him, which shall by
their counsel direct and govern the particular assemblies of every
jurisdiction: Every one of these shall consider what is most meet for the
kings purpose according to their wisdom, and for the faith and oath, wherewith
he is bound to God, and his holiness, and the catholyque king.

The Queen mother in the mean time, shall go to her youngest Son, What (...)
Queen mother should
who is lewd, and a chaungling, whom she shall easily persuade that he come to
his brother ye King, and go with him to the Parliaments of his kingdom, and
shall labor by all means to entice thither the king of Nauar, her son in
law, and the Prince of Condie, and she shall threaten them, that if they
present not them selves at the Parliaments, they shall be proclaimed rebels,
and obstinate.

And to the intent, What t^ King a^ the Gui^ should d^ take aw^ all suspi^on.
that all the occasion of suspicion and fear be taken away from them, the Duke
of Guise and all his Brethren, shall first depart from the Court, as if it were
for some displeasure conceived against them, and the king departing out of
Paris, shall betake him self to some such place, where shall seem to be most
free access unto him and shall receive and entertain his Brother, and all the
rest which shall come unto him, with all pretense of good will, and curtesy.

^e Cap^es of the ^rishes, at they to^ld do.
About the time of the Parliame^ts, the Captains of the Parishes, shall every
one take a muster, and view of his soldiers, and of those bands shall choose out
such a number as the chief of the holy League shall appoint, that they may be
in a readiness to do those things which shall be commanded them.

^at is to one upon ^aye of Parlia^ts.
When the day of the Parliaments shall come, before any thing is referred to the
assembly, an oath shall be exacted in order of every one, yt whatsoever shall
be agreed upon, and decreed in the Parliaments, shall be kept and observed. The
Citizens moreover shall bind their brotherhooddes to bear the charges of all
the wars.

^at is to ^ore of Pope.
Lastly, his Holiness shall be entreated, that it would please him by his
authority to allow, and ratify whatsoever shall be decreed in these Parliaments:
Prag^ call d^
and that it would please him that there may be like force of these decrees,
as has been accustomed to be of the pragmaticall decree between the holy
Sea, and this Realm, as heretofore it has been done in those things, which
have been agreed upon between the Kings and the Bishops.

Moreover, What be done co^uey^^ title o^ Crow^ the sto^ Capet^
to the intent the right of the royal inheritance may be conuayed away from
the kindred, stock, and family of Caper, and that deposing of them may
according to the manner and custom of our Forefathers be left in the power of
the Parliaments: A decree shall be made, that if any Prince of the blood
royal: if any peer, or noble man shall refuse to obey the same decree of the
Parliaments. The Prince from that day forward shall be Proclaimed unworthy the
inheritance of the kingdom. The peer or noble man shall be judged unworthy of
all his honors and tytles, their goods shall be confiscated: to the end, that
money of the sale thereof gathered together, may be employed to the use of the
war, and they them selves shall be adjudged to die. And if they be
apprehended, they shall be put to death: if not, their counterfaits, or pictures
shall be made fast upon the Gallous and gibbets, and rewards shall be proposed
publicly to such as shall slaye, or kill them.

^ath of ^tye to Pope, ^a sub^tion to ^ounsel ^tent to ^equired.
These things being establyshed, and an oath to the same exacted, and given,
the States of the Realm shall yield to the successor of Saint Peter, a new
oath of fidelity, and shall profess that they will live, and die in the form
of that faith, and Religion which has been prescribed by the Counsel of
Trent, and the States of the Realm in these Parliaments, shall iudic^ide to
the said Counsel, and shall pronounce and protest all Edicts which in this
Realm has been made against the authority of that Counsel, to be taken for
void, unlawful, and as if they had never been written: But on ye other side
all those Edicts which have been made to the rooting out, and abolishing of
heresies, to be kept and observed.

The King by the authority, The to dis^ with King made Prot^
and dispensation of the holy Sea, shall be discharged and absolved from that
oath which he has made to Heretics, and their associates, and confederates:
And to the Heretics shall a certain day be appointed before the which they
shall profess before ye Ecclesiastical Magistrates, that they are sorry for
their enterprise, to the intent they may obtain Absolution for so great an
offense, and they shall entreat ye Prince to pardon them of high treason.

And because the execution of this Article may be hindered and stayed by
certain rebellious Provinces which have taken Arms, Viceroy made, the sam ^e
the ^c of ^se.
supplication must be made to the king, that he would make some Viccar
general, or Viceroy of his kingdom, which must be a fytte Prince, and
skylfull of wars, able and lusty, for courage, age, and body, apt to give
counsel, and advise of him self, and to endure the pains of war:
especially, such a one, as has always kept him self pure, and unspotted,
from all stayne, contagion, and company of Heretics. And briefly, he shall be
requested, that he would give this honor unto the Duke of Guise: whom, it is
well known, to be furnished, and endued, with all helps of wit, and body,
and skyll of warfare, to take in hand such an office.

Then the Kings Brother must be admonished, and told, Order t^ taken w^ Duke
^^lanson.
what a great offense he has committed, in that he forsook his Brother the
King, to join him self to Heretics, yea, and to be their Captain, and to
lead an Army against his Brother the King, and in that he forced his Brother
to grant unto him, not only a part of his kingdom, and very large, and
excessive allowaunce, but also to suffer him to have a Relygion of so execrable
impiety. And forasmuch, as this is the first, and highest point of treason
against Gods Majesty, and the Kings: for that it is not in the Kings power
to pardon so grievous an offense, request shall be made to the Parliamentes,
that Judges may be appointed to the Duke of Alanson, which may hear and
determine of so great a fault, and the memory of the most holy, and godly
example of the Catholic King, shall be renewed, which did not spare his only
Son.

^at is to ^one in ^nde of Parlia^s by the ^mies of ^e Pari^.
Finally, at the day that the Parliaments shall be dissolved, from all parts of
the Realm shall the Armies of the Parishes and other bands, as well
extraordinary as ordinary discover them selves, to put in execution the
decree of the Parliaments, and they shall apprehend the Duke of Alenson, and
the rest which have taken part with him in his government, and wicked wars.

^at by Duke Guise.
By this practice the Duke of Guise having gathered a strong Army, shall set upon
such Provinces, as have rebelled, ye which he shall conquer either by force, and
Arms: either by pollycie and devices, and he shall with terror ouerrunne,
both far and wide, spoiling the Country, and surprising all strong Towns by
hunger, force, and want, by buylding and raising up Castles and Holds near
about, by making often outroades upon the inhabitants, and he shall not to
little purpose spend time in subduing by force and Gunshotte, strong Cities,
as it came to pass at the assault of Rochell.

When the Duke of Guise has gotten this famous and noble Victory, The
co^c^sion of t^^ whole pl^^forme between t^^ Guisian^ and the Pope.
and has made his entrance and way into the chiefest Cities of the Realm,
having the nobility lincked to him: he shall find means to make inquisition
of Duke Alenson the kings Brother, and other his associates: and at the last
by the license and counsel of his holiness, shall thrust the King and the
Queen into a Monastery, following the example of his great Grandfather king
Pepin: Who drove Childerick the king, entrapped by the like means into a
Monastery: and by this device, the secular inheritance of the Crown of
France, together with the Apostolical blessyng being recovered, he shall
restore without exception, and restraint unto the holy Sea, the ancient
dignitye, power and authority: and shall repeal and revoke the Privileges of
the Church of France, as they are commonly called, yielding his faith and
oath: first that he will when he shall have gotten unto him self the kingdom,
religiously, and inuiolably perform all these things.

An Addition.
LEast (good Reader) the effect of this Legacy should not be known unto thee,
I have thought good to annexe to this Report the famous, either invention, or
declaration of Pope Stephan, whereby the weak confirmation of the Guisian right
may be known: It is extant in Rhegino, a Moncke of the order of Saint Benet,
Abbot of Pruniack, in his Cronicles of the year of our Lord. 753.

STephan Bishop, A Legen^
the servant of the servants of God. etc. As no man ought to vaunt him self
of his own merits, so ought not the works of God which by him are wrought
in his Saynctes, to be passed over in silence, without his desartes: but
rather be set forth as the Angel warned Tobie.

Whereupon I for the great oppre^sio^ o^ the holy Church, by the most cruel and
unworthy to be named, King Haistolph, came into France unto the good and
faithful Lord to Saint Peter: Pipine, most christian King, where I was sick
unto death, and for a time remained at the town of Paris, in the reverent
Monastery of Saint Dionise Martyr. Of whom when the Physicians did despair, I
was as it were praying in the Church of the said blessed Martyr, under the
Belles, and I saw before the altar Saint Peter, and the teacher of the
Gentyles Saint Paul, and with all my mind I knew them by their Surplices,
and also Saint Dionise at the right hand of Saint Peter, being spare, thin and
long, and the good Shepherd Saint Peter said. This our Brother does desire
health, and Saint Paul said. He shall be whole straight ways, and coming
near, he reached his hand to the breast of S. Dionise lovingly, and he looked
to S. Peter, and S. Peter said unto Saint Dionise mearely. It lies in you to
make him whole. And by and by Saint Dionise holding in his hand a Censor, with
Frankincense, and a Palm, having a Priest and a Deacon, which stood by, came
unto me and said Peace be with thee Brother, fear not, thou shall not dye,
until thou return happily unto thy seat: Arise hole, and dedicate this
Altar to the honor of God, and the Apostles, Peter and Paul, whom thou
see, saying Mass of thankesgeuing: And out of hand I was made whole, and I
would have fulfilled that which they commanded me, and they that were there,
said that I was mad: wherefore I told them and the King, and all those that
were with him, in order all that I had seen. These things were done the year
from the incarnation of our Lord.753. the Ides of August. At what time being
strengthened by the power of Christ, at the celebration of the consecration of
the said Altar, and the offering up of the Sacrifice, I anointed as Kings of
France, King Pipine, and his two Sons, Charles a^^ Charlemaine, also
Bertrand the wife of the said King apparelled with royal attire, and with the
seauenfolde grace of the holy spirit, have ordained them: In the name of God:
and sanctifying the Nobles of France with the Apostolycall blessing, by the
authority of Saint Peter given him by Christ, bound them, and required them
that they should never from thencefoorth presume by any manner of way, to
appoint either them selves, or any of their successors after them, a King of
any other stock, saving of their Progeny.

FINIS.
A fault escaped in printing.
In the first leaf of the Epistle, the second side, and syxeteene line: for
flowing, read flows.


