A Pleasant and VVitty COMEDY: Called, A New Trick to Cheat the Devil.



Written by R. D. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by John Oaks, for Humphrey Blunden, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Corne-hill, next to the Castle Tavern. 1639.

To the Courteous Reader, and gentle peruser.
TO make too long an explanation of the worth of the Author, or to commend the
Work with Eloquent words, were but to delay the time, and dull thy
expectation: It is a Comedy which has bin often acted, and so well approved;
that I hope none will dislike of it now in the reading: But the Poem it self,
being now an Orphant, and wanting the Father which first begot it, craves a
Patronage from thy gentle acceptance: my hopes are, it will prove no less
pleasing to the Reader, than it has formerly been to the Spectators; and so I
leave it to thy charitable Censure.

Farewell.

Dramatis Persona.
The young Lord Skales. Treatwell. His Man. Master Changeable. Master
Slightall. A young Gentleman. Roger. His Men. Geffrey. His Men. Friar Bernard.
Friar John. Usurer. Scrivener. Host. Hostess. Mristris Changeable. Anne, her
Daughter. Two Maids. Constable. Two Gentlemen.
A New Trick to Cheat the Devil.
Actus primus,
Scaena prima.
Enter Slightall, and Mistress Anne. Slightall. I do protest.


An. Come, you flatter me.


Sl. May I perish then, if ever thought was
Harbored in this breast,
That did intend you harm;
Your Father has consented you shall be mine;
Your Mother still holds off: but having yours,
I care not who withstands;
I am fixed your Servant and true Lover.

An. And I thine, in spite of Father, Mother, kinsfolks,
Friends; thy Anne will never forsake thee.

Sl. Then here my dearest, do I plight a vow,
And swear by thy own virtuous grace and sweetness,
By those intrammell'd Rays, those star-like eyes
Endymion blushes on; those Ruby lips,
Where a red Sea of kisses is divided
By rocks of pearl, by these joined hands, and all things
That have tied my love to thine; I Will never forsake thee.

An. Slightall, My vow is fixed, no more, my Father. Enter Changeable.


Chan. I have overheard all,
My blessing on you both:
Slightall, I love thee, and am glad thou have sped;
How I have pleaded for thee, Minion, you know.

An. Father I do, pray you for a while
Conceal it from my Mother.

Chan. Fear not that wench, how I have labored with her
You know well, but no consent from her, it is impossible:
What I have stored for thee high Heaven does know,
But it is my love, which still continues to this wayward Girl
Who never could have pleased her Father better
Then in this mutual and conjoined assent. Ent. Mrs. Changable, and Mr.
Treatwell.
Further I would proceed, but see, my wife
Consorted with a stranger.

Wi. Sir, here is a gentleman ( Slightall so near?)
Desires your conference (no devise at all
To shift him hence?) His business craves dispatch,
And is of serious urgence; 'twould become
Your modesty to spare us some few minutes,
Since it no whit concerns you.

Chan. He shall stay, he is now ingraft ascien in our Family:
Therefore what us concerns must needs touch him,
Son, son, be constant to your place I charge you.

Wi. Son?


Chan. Remove for no man, now sir speak your mind.


Tree. What in a place so public?


Chan. Yes, even here.


Tree. A place more private would become my message,
And give it gentle hearing.

Wi. Pray with draw, it comes from a great man.


Chan. Came it from on of the Guard, from Sir John Falstaff?
Nay, Hercules himself; with bumbast limbs
It should have public audience.

Wi. Daughter, a word.


Chan. Now your big man, name him I pray.


Tree. From the young Lord Skales.


Chan. I cry you mercy, my honorable friend, I pray
What service will it please him to command us?

Wi. Listen unto't, it is all for your preferment.


Sl. Fear and doubt perplex me equally.


Tree. The Lord my Master, to whom the fame of
Your fair Daughters beauty has thronged by infinite
Tongues, has in his breast
Took such a strong impression, that he is pleased
(So your consent and his may parallel)
To make her his fair Bride.

Chan. How spoke you that?


Wi. You shall be a great Lady.


Chan. His fair Bride?


Wi. And take place of al Knights wives in the Shiere.


Tree. Sir, I have full Commission from his mouth
To treat so much; and what I undertake
He has engaged his honor to make good.

Wi. His honor? so you shall be honorable,
Be every day Caroach'd; and ride in state.

An. A Lady, and Caroach'd?


Tree. Pray sir, your answer.


Chan. I wish his Lord ship had not sent so late,
My word is passed unto this gentleman;
Which to my power I will not change, nor break
For any King or Keisar.

Wi. But you shall sir, and send his Lordship satisfaction
Even to his best desire; tell him from me
She shall attend his pleasure: you shall, Nan,
Use him with all obsequious reverence,
And gladly embrace his motion; Girl, you shall.

Chan. Without our approbation?


Wi. Forward sir, if you withstand the fortune of your Daughter
In this tract of preferment without yours.
Send him fair humble language, do my wench
Accept his noble pleasure, and return him
Courteous and loving thanks; think what it is
To be attended, honored, and advanced.
My Lady Anne you shall.

An. My Lady Anne?


Wi. How poor and slightly Mistress Slightall sounds?


An. Good troth and so it does.


Tree. But Donna Anne, Madona, Madam, Lady,
What breadth those Titles bear?

An. And so they do.


Wi. Mistress? thou shall have such to be thy servants,
And curchy to thee when thou turn'st thy head;
Bow at each nod, and make their Farthingales,
At every word thou speak, to kiss their heels.

Sl. Well pleaded Grannam Eve.


Chan. What should I say? or how in equal
Balance bear my self?

Wi. Footmen, Pages, and your gentlemen Ushers,
Walk bare before you.

An. Bare before me? well.


Chan. For all the styles of honor in the World,
I would not break my faith.

Wi, Where I was wont to call thee baggage, Nan,
And paltry Girl, I must not dare to speak to your
Honor, without a Prologue of some half an hour long,
Which must begin, an't please your Ladyship.

An. It Is passing good an't please my Ladyship.


Chan. Son Slightall, for that Title I Will still fasten
Upon thy name, advise me' what shall we do?

Tree. Me thinks the motion might be fair and even,
To make her mistress of her own free thoughts
And choose where she best likes.

Wi. We Will stand to that, let it be put to her.


Chan. Son, what say you?


Sl. In her known love I am so confident,
And of her faith so constantly assured,
So void of all distrust; that I give back
All interest, Title, claim, and Ceremony
To Attend a second Censure. Mristris Changeable,
You now are your own woman.

Wi. Madam, may it please you take a second choice?


Anne. Here Is Gentry, and here is Honor, Mrs. or Madam.
A single ambling Nag, or a Caroach
With four, four great Dutch Mares; a private Gentlewoman
Or a great Lady, my worship, or my honor;
To be a Wife to a Squire of low Degree,
Or a Lord Baron: Gentry shall give place,
And in a puffed style his Lordship I Will embrace.
Thus, Slightall, I thy Title will outstrip,
That all may say, there goes my Ladyship.

Wi. You have your answer Slightall, and good sir,
Return this to my Lord.

Chan. Sir be my witness, I have no hand in this.


Exeunt all but Slightall. Sl. All come to this? shone the Sun bright in the
morn
To be ere Noone envelopp'd in this Cloud?
To be forsook, despised, and disgraced
All for a verbal Title? shall I avenge me
On the proud Don, or this his changeable stuff?
Whose name and disposition suite so well:
Something I must, but in the interim
Never to fix a constant thought again
Upon that Moone-like sex: I Will weigh them all,
Poor, rich, old, young, and middle Age alike;
Make no distinction 'twixt the loose and chaste,
The Matron and the wanton, women kind;
For the so base inconstancy of one,
Henceforth I Will form my self alike to all:
Licentiousness shall be my Mistress now,
Voluptuous pleasure, riot and excess
My future study; I Will let loose desire
And appetite unbridled; and the more
Of that intemperate Sex I can corrupt
Count it my greatest deed of Charity:
And for thy sake, thou falsest fair; I vow
Affection and all loyal Love t'abjure,
Striving to make the clearest streams impure.

Act. 1. Scaen. 2.
Enter Usurer, and his Scrivener. Vsu. HOw goes the news o'th'Change?


Scri. Faith never worse, Merchants are wary,
Tradsmen provident, Artificers turned frugall, and I think
All the World will prove good husbands.

Vsu. Better they, with half a number of that thrifty world
Were three parts hanged; but so much for the City:
What news in Holborne, Fleet Street, and the Strand?
In th'Ordinaries among Gallants, no young Heirs
There to be snapp'd?

Scri. They Have bin so bit already
With taking up Commodities of brown paper,
Buttons past fashion, silks, and Sattins,
Babies, and Childrens Fiddles, with like trash
Took up at a dear rate, and sold for trifles
That now scarce one will bite.

Vsu. What a world's this? what will it grow to in the end?


Scri. Faith sir Heaven knows,
We Scriveners fare the worse by it.

Vsu. How smart we then?
We Money Masters, from whose bags you feed,
And without whom your Pens would cast no Ink?
Nor your Wax take impression: none in chase?

Scri. Yes, sir, I have one Spung that could you squeeze him,
Would yield good substance.

Scri. Is he well possessed?


Scri. Yes sir, he has in Acres glebe and meadow,
Upland, and Dale, in woods and arrable;
And though in name a private Gentleman,
Yet has he three fair Lordships, besides Sheepe-walkes,
Parkes, and other large Demesnes.

Vsu. And will he fell?


Scri. I have dealt closely with a man of his
To undermine him, one that soothes him up
In all his riots, quarrels with his thrifty,
Leads him to Game and guzzle in Vaulting houses,
And places of bad fame.

Vsu. An honest fellow, I Will warrant him;
Can he do ought in this?

Scri. He Is one to whom he trusts his whole Estate,
And can do all things with him: In these Lands
I promised him, if when they were in sail
That I might bring his Chapman; a round sum,
To which he seemed to listen.

Vsu. 'Twas well scented,
Nor shall thou lose by it: there is a share for thee;
Acquaint me with the further Circumstance,
In which I would be perfect. Enter Roger and Geffrey, 2. Servingmen.

Rog. I do not like this shufling.


Gef. What Roger, al amort, me thinks thou art off o'th'hookes?


Rog. Yes faith, and Henges too, I Am almost desperate,
And care not how I am.

Gef. Faith I was never on a merrier pinn,
Nor my breast lighter hearted.

Rog. More Rogue thou.


Gef. Ha?


Rog. So, and if thou be not pleased with that,
Thou must prepare for worse.

Gef. Thou will not swagger, Hodge?


Rog. Faith scarce with thee, thou art not worth my anger

Gef. Are we not of one House?


Rog. Yes, but I hope we never shall be of one heart,
My fellow no better than a Pander?

Gef. Pander?


Rog. Yes, would that were all, a Traitor to that House
Where thou had thy first Bread, and almost thy being;
Thy making I am sure, but never that poison
That swells so in thy bosom: My good old Master,
Heaven rest his soul, uprising, and down lying,
Kept twenty stout tall fellows, whom thy baseness
Has shrunk to two already; if this Riot
To which thou still perswad'st the young man hold,
We shall be none, he nothing.

Gef. I could answer thee, but that I spy two Gentlemen,
With whom I have business of my Masters.

Scri. That Is the man.


Vsu. And to me none more welcome.


Scri. Is it done?


Gef. All Is plotted, we want money, sell we must,
The rate we live at must have fresh supply;
I Will give you the whole project.

Rog. Get you together, for a true-love knot
Tied by the Devil, may his Dam unloose it,
For I shall never: a Scrivener, an Usurer, and a Pimpe,
All joined in one, to ruin a young hopeful Gentleman.
Now are they turning an old three men's Song,
We be knaves all three, mount your notes aloft;
For he that I named last will bear the burden;
A load best fitting him, you will find him one day
A fellow of excellent carriage, he will bear with you,
Because he loves you so: So now all is plotted Exeunt all three.
And there is a Lordship, or a Manor at least
Gone at one lift: but what to do with money,
Of which the least is like to come to him
That has most interest in it; some to the Pot,
Part to the Pipe, not least share to the smock:
And what remains to gaudifie the back,
Must fill the Cheaters pocket; oh my old Master,
Should thy soul see this, it would suffer for it,
As my heart bleedes to think often. Enter Slightall, and 2. Gentlemen.

Genesis 1. But did she break so with you?


Sl. Worse than a shopkeeper, that has
Run long behind hand.

Genesis 2. Slight you so?


Sl. S' foot, like a puff, a Feather* it is my Lord
Must deal in wholesale with her Lady ware,
And I am quite casheir'd.

Genesis 1. Troth I commend you, that, so loving her,
You do not take it to heart.

Sl. A heart? at heel; that poor worm, Love,
Which some do style a God;
I thus tread underfoot, stamp on his shaft,
And trample on his Quiver: I must confess
I once loved beyond thought, but when I saw
My troth so bafled, and my faith despised;
I set it at defiance, and I now
Will be for all, or any.

Genesis 1. What, so general, I pray? is it possible
One that has loved sincerely, as you say
You once did, should with such an easiness
Change his affection?

Sl. I can teach thee do it.


Genesis 2. Good, prompt us that.


Sl. I love all fashions, features, forms and faces,
Proportions, sexes, ages, and degrees,
Discretions, wits, disposures, callings, places,
Indowments, faculties, and all alike;
Since one has failed, I affect all as any, any as one.

Genesis 1. This is not possible.


Rog. I pity the young Monster.


Sl. For example, I Will teach thee how to love
The loathed'st Creature; Marry I must turn Poetical.

Genesis 1. Prompt us that.


Sl. Nay I must be in rhyme too.


Genesis 2. All is pardoned.


Sl. Then, thus I do begin;
Dissemble every fault in their Complexions.
And take no notice of their imperfections:
Andromeda was belly, sides, and back
To Perseus seen, he did not term her black;
Andromache was of too large a stature,
One loving Hector praised her gifts of nature.
To her whose skin was black as Ebone was
I have said ere now, Oh, it is a Nut-browne Less.
Or if she looked a squint (as I am true
So Venus looked) if she be bleake of hew;
Pale, for the World, like Pallas; be she grown
By Jove, Minerva up and down.
If she be tall, then for her height commend her,
If she be lean, like envy term her slender.
She that is puffed like Boreas in the cheek,
Is but full fat, and Daphne she is like.
She that is Dwarfish, name her light, and quick;
And call her well set, this is grubbed thick.

Rog. Is this your Lesson? curse upon that Tutor
That read you this damned Lesson.

Sl. This was Ovid; how approve you these his precepts?


Genesis 2. Excellent Tutor.


Rog. Or rather excellent Devil.


Sl. I could instruct you in a Thousand such*
And never trouble Memory.

Rog. To what the pox, will this your practice bring you?
In these days men do sell their Lands, their Fortunes,
And their Estates to purchase them diseases.

Sl. Rog?


Rog. Sir.


Sl. Provide me a good lusty Less to night,
I purpose to be merry.

Rog. Sir, not I.


Sl. I care not of what humor, face, or feature,
So thou can find one impudent enough;
Search all the Allies, Spittle, or Pickt-hatch,
Turnball, the Bank side, or the Minories,
White Friars, St. Peter's Street, and Mutton Lane,
So thou can find one to disgrace her sex,
She best shall please my Pallat,

Rog. He has ill taste, that loves to feed on Carrion.


Sl. Get me likewise a noise of Fiddlers, and a supper too,
Equal with that which old Vitellius made,
When Art would exceed Nature; had I been he
And had his rich Exchequor, I would have fed
On nothing but Earths choicest rarities,
Drunk naught but Pearl dissolved.

Rog. Pray sir a word:
Can this world last ever? you sell, and sell,
But when the money is spent, are you resolved
To feed on Husks, and Acornes? I am plain,
How many months did your old Fathers spend
To purchase that you in few hours consume?
Ha, does this startle you? I am trusty Roger,
And so you still shall find me: did he compass
That competent Estate he left to you
By Fiddlers whores, and Cheaters? look you big?
Nay sir, I can affront you; where be now
Those furnished Tables, whose long backs bid bend
With Chines of Beef, and Chargers, feasting both
Neighbors and strangers? are they
Ryotted on lifts and whiflers?

Genesis 1. Name you any here?


Rog. If none be galled, you have no cause to wince,
But if you be, then Figo.

Genesis 2. Here Is none such.


Rog. Then do not interrupt me: Baudes and Whores,
Panders and Pimpes, did he keep such about him?
I hope none here are touched; call him to mind, sir,
And think upon his worthy memory,
And how you loose your self.

Sl. My servants servant? slave, fetch me straight a Whore.


Rog. An Office fit for none but slaves, I am none;
You had best bid these that are acquainted with them.

Sl. These are Gentlemen, my friends, and my Companions.


Rog. If they be Gentlemen, let them show them such,
That is t'abhorre those vices you are wrapped with.

Sl. I Will have Music, and the choicest Cates the City can
Afford, and wine in abundance.

Rog. And pay all.


Sl. Yes, all and some.


Rog. But some must sure repent it, when all is gone and wasted

Sl. Pox upon you, we shall have you turn Puritan,
Leave big mouthed Oaths to swear by yea and nay:
Thou Art not for me, give me a man can roar,
Show hackes upon his Sword, bristle, look big,
Knows all the Postures of a true Duello;
Give and retort the lie in his full nature:
Can weigh and drink by measure all, or half
To a rundle, or the circuit of a hair,
Can weigh his drink as well as measure it,
And,
And without frowns or grumbling still attend Ent. Geffry
On my free humors: Geffrey, well returned, the news?

Gef. I have gone through sir.


Rog. So would my sword had thee.


Sl. We shall have money then?


Gef. A Thousand pounds brought in to night.


Sl. On what conditions, Geffrey?


Gef. Trifles sir, acknowledging a Statute, nothing else;
It Is finished in a moment.

Sl. And I Will do it; In th'interim go, bespeake us delicates
The best and choicest, the dearer they shall prove
The better they will taste; Wenches too, Geffrey,
Thou know my mind, thou see our number.

Gef. Three sir.


Sl. Unless thy self wilt make a fourth with us,
And bring (with thee for thine own appetite)
Some courser stuff to keep thee Company,
And sit at the buy Table.

Gef. It shall be done, I Will be your Mercury.


Sl. And Music Geffrey.


Gef. If any thing to whet dull appetite,
To heighten pleasure, and inflame delight
Be this night wanting, ere Sun rise to morrow
Cashiere me from your service.

Sl. Here Is a fellow, whose industry does merit double hire,
Of a free Countenance and a light appetite,
When this still frowning grim and surly sir,
Has nothing in his face but melancholy,
And in his tongue repining.

Rog. You Will one day find the difference.


Sl. Come Gentlemen, shall we to Cards,
And spend an hour at Gleeke?

Genesis 1. No better motion.


Rog. Game too, all will help to send a man a going.


Genesis 2. Six penny Gleeke?


Sl. Faith Twelve pence if you please.


Genesis 2. I am content.


Rog. And so is he too, to be gleek'd of all.


Sl. What, will you please to attend us some few hours,
In absence of your fellow?

Rog. Yes, so there be no whores in Company,
But rather then feast where they shall domineere,
And bold Rampalian like, swear and drink drunk,
I Will feed on Cheese, and Onions; and in stead
Of healthing, quench my thirst with frighted water.

Sl. Well sir, will you follow?


Rog. I will not haunt him as the Devil does,
But for once I will dog him. Exeunt all.

Actus Secundus,
Scaene. 1.
Enter Changable, his Wife, and Anne. Chan. Crossed at these years?


Wi. Unless your wit were gray as well as your hairs;
You grow in years, and so you should in wisdom.

Chan. Tax my wit? a woman too, to do it?


Wi. Did you never see a bare face teach a beard?
It is no news in this so pregnant age.

Chan. An Age indeed, when smockes must read to britches;
Go to wife, thou seek'st to make us two that should be one,
Instead of me, thou art wedded to thy will;
I fear we shall repent it.

Wi. Well, well, man.


Chan. But I say, ill, ill woman.


Wi. Why I pray?
Because I seek the advancement of our house?

Chan. I would not build so many stories high
On such a weak foundation, lest the Garret
Reared on such thin supporters sink it self into the Celler.

Wi. One of your gravity? I am ashamed, a Justice by
Your place, and can appear so partial to your own;
Whom should your providence devise to raise,
If not your own? will you be twice a Child?
And now, in this your second infancy,
Not take care for your Cradle?

Chan. Thou art a shrew.


Wi. Why then I am no sheep.


Chan. An angry woman.


Wi. It should be then your care to see me better pleased.


An. I pray, good mother, nay, sir.


Chan. Sir me no sirs, I am no Knight nor Churchman,
There is a third, make me not that by breaking of my faith.

Wi. Think what it is to have a great Lord call you
Father in Law, and so your Daughter a great Lady.

Chan. So; I had rather see her a good Gentlewoman,
Lawfully great in belly and in purse,
Than swelled with poisoned Titles; it to me
Appears no better than a Timpany,
A grief not easily cured.

Wi. His Lordship will be here, give him good face,
And courteous Language, or I Will make your board
As loud as a perpetual Gossips feast,
Or a discourse of Fish-wives; and your Bed
As if you were to lodge in Loth-bury
Where they turn brazen Candlestickes.

Chan. So, so.


Wi. So you are like to find it.


Chan. Gentle wife, have patience, and be quiet, I Will give way;
I never hear thy tongue in this high Key,
But I still think of the Tower Ordnance,
Or of the peale of Chambers, that is still fired
When my Lord Major takes Barge, I will do any thing,
Good wife please thy self, and I am contented.

Wi. Why well then: Might not this time much better
Have bin spent, to have taught your Daughter rudiments
Of State? her postures, and decorums, fine French Congees,
And quaint outlandish Garbes? one that has bin
A Courtier in his youth, and brought naught thence?
Fie, fie; I am ashamed often.

An. Look to the Gate there; me thought I heard one knock.


Wi. His Lordship sure?


An. And comes, it seems, to see my Ladyship;
I feel state come upon me; speak good Mother,
How shall I bear my self?

Wi. Why such at first, as you must be hereafter; like a Lady.
Proud, but not too perverse; Coy, not disdainefull;
Strange, but yet not too straight; like one that would,
Were she well woed, but yet not to be won,
Without some formal Court-ship; had it been
My case, my wench, when I was young like thee, Enter Lord Treatwell.
I could have borne it bravely. See, he is come,
Husband, your Duty; Girl, your modest blush,
Mixed with a kind of strange, but loving welcome;
Were I as young as once: Your Lordship Sir,
Has done my House much honor.

Lo. This the Mistress?


Tree. Your Mother sir, that must be.


Lo. I make bold,
And like a rude intruder, press upon you
Sudden, and unawares.

An. Is this your Lord?


Lo. Sir, I desire your more familiar love,
Whom I shall study hereafter to respect
According to your worth and gravity.

Chan. You crave his love whose service you Command.


An. I have seen a Thousand private Gentlemen
Both better faced and featured.

Lo. Mrs. Anne, for so your name was given me.


An. Nay kiss better,
Besides, he has the mark of an ill liver,
He has not a Nose strong enough.

Wi. You see sir, what homely entertainment,
And how course our poor House can afford you.

Lo. Were it base,
But it is much better then I yet deserve,
That face alone would make and dignify't;
Your Welcome I approve, good sir, a word:
Nay, Master Treatwell, you may witness it,
We do not trade in secrets.

Both. At your service.


An. Mother, a word I pray.


Wi. What says my Child?


An. Which is his Lord-ship?


Wi. He that kissed you last.


An. Troth I felt no more honor from his lips
Than from another man, nay scarce so much;
For Slightall kisses better.

Wi. Minion, how?


An. I tell you as I find; his Lordship? good now
Tell me, in what place of his body lies it?
If in the face or foot, the Crown or Toe,
The Body, arm, or leg, the back, or bosom,
Without him, or within? I see no more
In him than in another Gentleman.

Wi. Part of it lies in what he left behind,
Observance, state, retinue, and attendance,
Of which you must partake.

An. Lord, who'de have thought it?
Would he had sent that part of his Lordship hither,
And stayed himself behind; but where is his honor?

Wi, Do thou not see him there?


An. Him, but not it.


Wi. How cast thou fool? his Nobility lies in his blood,

An. It Is that I feign would see.


Wi. His Blood?


An. Yes, if his Lordship live in that*
Would you match me to a thing invisible?
Where I bestow my self I Will see and feel,
And choose to my own liking.

Wi. Art thou mad?


An. So you would make me; this is but a man,
And I can find a man to my own liking and never trouble him.

Wi. This foolish baggage will cross all we would compass.


Chan. I am plain sir;
I have not much to give, yet I would stretch
My utmost, to my poor ability,
To show my self a Father, what she wants
In means she has in Gentry; that my blood
Can witness for her: something too besides
Though not sufficient to ennoble her,
Yet still to make her a good Gentlewoman,
And that is all my ambition.

Lo. And that is all I can demand.


Tree. His Lordship asks no more.


Chan. Provided still, all be with her consent,
For I Will force nothing, were from a stranger,
Much less from my Child.

Lo. There Is no condition you have yet proposed
But warrants grant, they are so reasonable.

An. Till now I had thought, your Lords, and Noble men
Had bin possessed of many worthier parts,
Where meaner men are scanted; but I see
All Is one, or little difference.

Lo. Mistress Anne, it were superfluous to begin a Suite
Which has before been entered; and I know
Made known to you ere this; I come not now
For motion, but for answer: All those honors
Titles, and Dignities conferred on me
We likewise do communicate with you.

Wi. Which she is ready to accept.


An. Good mother, it is me, not you, whom this affair concerns:
You gave your own free answer to my Father,
So give me leave to do where I affect,
The good or bad is mine; not touches you
That are disposed already.

Chan. My good wench, I do commend thee for it.


Wi. Will you still prate?


Chan. No more wife, I have done.


Wi. Or I shall but begin. My Lord, proceed.


Lo. Court Ladies I have often seen and tried,
Fair Country Damsels, Virgins of choice beauty,
Bred from the City Scarlet, and among these
I might have made my choice, but all relinquished
To place affection here; what comfort* Lady?

An. Faith little in that name:
Title my Lord, is a cold Bedfellow,
And many study style that marry cares;
Can honor help in Childbirth? or Nobility
Us privilege from throws?

Lo. Why no such thing.


An. What is this honor then?


Lo. Why Ceremony;
The gift of Princes, and the pride of States,
Regard in the Weal public, and employment*
Respect, and duty.

Wi. Which from his pre-eminence
Must by mere consequence redownd to you.

An. You talk like an old woman, not like one
That should make her first choice, as I must now;
When I am grieved, can honor cure my heart?
If discontent, can my Nobility
Give ease unto my Corsives? when your Lordship
Is with your Trulls and Concubines abroad,
Where is my loving Husband then at home
To keep me warm at midnight?

Lo. I am he.


An. Sir, that is the thing I doubt.


Lo. Why, I entreat you?


An. You are a man?


Lo. I am so.


An. A Lord too?


Lo. It is confessed.


An. Could you not lend your Lordship to a friend,
And keep the man your self?

Lo. To whom I pray?


An. To a poor Gentleman, one Master Slightall,
Who, had he but that slight Addition,
I gladly would embrace.

Lo. You trifle with me.


An. Therefore to show me serious, Noble man,
I take my leave thus gently.

Wi. That Is no answer; Why Nan, why Minion, good your
Lordship, take naught in ill part; a peevish thing,
God wot, that wants a little tutering.

Lo. Slightall quoth a? if she slight all as she has slighted me,
She Will fright hence all her Suitors.

Chan. This I told you.


Wi. Still will you prate? will it please your honor, take
Such cheer as this our suddainenesse affords?
And there is no question but ere dinner's done
This Tempest will blow over.

Lo. I Will take your kindness,
He Is no good Soldier that at first repulse
Will leave the Breach; belike she is fasting now,
I Will take her in full stomach.

Wi. Please you enter?
Attendance for his Lordship. Exeunt.

Act. 2. Scaen. 2.
Enter Usurer, and Scrivener, with writings. Vsu. It Is signed, sealed, and
delivered?


Scri. As fast as wax and witness can make good.


Vsu. And to my use?


Scri. Yes, and as great an use as e're you lent out money on.


Vsu. Is there no hope he will redeeme't at all?


Scri. Redeem this did you say? tush, had he more,
More he would soon send after; why he is all expense and riot.

Vsu. I shall love expense and riot while I live;
Not in my self, I must confess, but in such prodigalls
By whom we Usurers profit.

Scri. He spends all.


Vsu. So let him, what he has;
But this I Will look to safe as my life.

Scri. He minds nor cares for nothing.


Vsu. For this he minds not, my care is took already.


Scri. Troth he is sinking, he is up to the neck already.


Vsu. May he drown for him that holds him by the Chin.


Scri. Alas poor sheep, each Bramble shares his wool.
Till he be fleeced quite.

Vsu. What makes he then amongst Briars? this be his comfort,
His flesh will show the better when he is shorn,
He Will make sale for the Shambles.

Scri. Oh these Dice, Drabbs, and Drink?


Vsu. Excellent sokers, brave pills to purge the purse:
But for my part, I will take no such Physic.

Scri. What will you do, sir?


Vsu. Marry, first home, and safely lock up these,
Then seek some other new come to his Lands,
To make like prey on him.

Scri. I am your Scrivener, and sir, I hope
You Will not forget my pains?

Vsu. Forget thee? no, not whilst thy Parchment lasts:
I do remember thee by thy shop, thy sign,
Yes, thou have Labells hanging at thy door;
Thou writ'st a good fair hand, and have in Horn,
Six several Seals with sundry strange inscripts
All joined together; thee? not remember thee?
I can call thee by thy name.

Scri. But sir, my money.


Vsu. Money from me, thy writings are all paid for,
It came from Slightalls purse.

Scri. I, but my Brokage?


Vsu. Brokage indeed has some dependence still
On Usury, and Usury on that,
They Are Relatives; one is not called a Son
That has no Father, and no Father's he
That has no Son; yet money does go hard.

Scri. Yet let me have my due.


Vsu. Yes, give the Devil that,
For he will have't at length; ha, let me see,
Come, let us once be mad, we will to the next Tavern,
And there debate the business.

Scri. At your own charge?


Vsu. Yes, for this once, not use't.


Scri. A Gallon sir, betwixt us two?


Vsu. An Usurers Gallon, that is just half a pint,
It Is none of Slightalls measure, it is too great,
And come, good Scrivener, write it in Record,
That I am now thus liberal.

Scri. Sir, I shall. Exeunt.


Act 2. Scaen. 3.
Enter Slightall, Roger, and Geffrey. Sl. You have served me long, what have
you got by me?


Gef. Good Wine, good Victuals, Liveries;
And the countenance of a good Master.

Sl. And pray what is all this?


Gef. That Is as your worship shall be pleased to call it.


Sl. Nay, name it you.


Rog. So please you sir, I shall;
That which I think you are brought to now your self,
Or within little often.

Sl. And what is that?


Rog. Nothing.


Sl. Thy plains I commend, thee and thy wit,
That can give nothing name, such is my state;
Yet out of this confused lump of naught,
That which no man of sense can say it is,
Or Title by the name of any thing,
Something I have extracted, and reserved
For you, for you my servants; take this Gold.

Gef. All this sir?


Sl. Why, all this alas is nothing.


Rog. What call you something then?


Sl. To me it is not, for now it is yours,
And may it ever after something prove
To you and your succession, as a Stock
To thrive and prosper by; I only was,
But am not now; however be you still,
And may this give you Essence.

Rog. Pray keep mine,
Your service sir is all the heritage that I expect from you.

Sl. Thou never wast one that did seek to husband my estate,
Which I have vainly wasted; just, and honest,
In all my loose designs did counsel well,
And still perswadest me to providence,
That thrift of which I was incapable,
Employ it to thy own ends; had it bin more,
Greater had bin thy stock.

Rog. I Will keep it sir, as Steward to your use, but
Always ready to furnish your least wants.

Gef. And how for mine?


Sl. Though thou wast ever Pander to my lusts,
And gav'st me Spurs to all my vanities,
Fedd'st on my riots, and my loose excess,
Encourag'st still to surfeits, prayd'st not for me
But still prey'st on me Geffery; yet, because
Thou once did claim dependence on my love,
And did me some slight service; still report
Thou had a bounteous Master; so farewell both.

Gef. If this he all, as where no more is left
What more can be expected? this's my portion,
I Will husband't for my self; he that gets this,
Or part of this, must have more share in me
Than either man or Master.

Sl. Adieu good fellows, report you have left a clean
Gentleman, without or means, or money.

Rog. It Is my sorrow.


Gef. And my neglect; so I be stored my self,
Which hand with him goes forward.

Sl. A woman; that inconstant Feminine Sex, Exit Rog. and Geffry.
That changes humors oftener than the Moon
Waynes, or supplies his Orb: that moving Creature
Has been my quick subversion:
Had she proved firm; for her I had husbanded
All that I now have lavished; but too late,
What shall I now do! travel? who shall furnish me?
What comfort can there be to beg abroad?
Or make my self a storm to foreign Nations,
After I too much have bin tossed at home?
I Will prove my kindred; kindred he has none
That has not in his purse to rank with them.
My Kindred wasted, as I spent my means,
Want makes me a mere stranger: then my friends,
There Is no such name for him whom need compells
To such extremes as I am newly fallen:
Relief from them, such as in Cakes of Ice
To him, whose Nerves and Arteries are shrunk up
By bitter winters fury: then behold,
I here expose me to the fate, and force
Of all disasters threaten me; I am ready
With a pinched stomach, and cold Arctos breath,
With a bare breast, armed with patience
Against the sharpest storm, and thin necessity;
T'encounter with the keen and piercing fangs
Of what want can inflict on my poor Carkesse.

Enter Anne An. Let Father frown, or movingly entreat,
My Mother chide, or threaten menaces,
Rail till her Tongue, that yet was never tired,
Cleave to her Roof in amidst of her exclaimes:
Let my spruce Lord cogge in his courtly terms,
And woe me with a thousand vain protests;
Not all my Fathers hate, my Mothers fury,
Nor all his Alphabet of Styles and Names,
Could they a Sheep-skin fill, shall me divert
From that which I have vowed, to seek him out
And prostrate my first love.

Sl. The Devil, he
My mind suggests when all my means else fail;
That Bug-beare will supply me.

An. Have I found thee?


Sl. I am not yet provided friend, not yet;
Thou take me on a sudden.

An. Do you not love me?


Sl. For a She-divell; but I meant not her,
My business lies with him that is Lord and Captain
Of all the Fiends and firebrarnds; haunt me not,
Thou can do me no pleasure.

An. Sure he is Mad?


Sl. There can be no more terror in his look
Than in the face of my extreme distress:
His Visage cannot be so horrible
As my despair; what should I fear then, ha?
An Usurer may wear Horns, a Scrivener too,
Should I be more affraide of his then theirs?
I know no reason for it.

An. Good sir, take comfort.


Sl. Man can no sooner think upon the Devil,
But a woman is at's Elbow; trust me not
I Have no affairs with thee.

An. Leave those vain thoughts
As Fantasies of a distracted brain;
I come with sorrow, and repentant tears;
To bring you back your own.

Sl. Not possible,
That Is all in Hucksters handling, and can thou
Bring it from thence? why the great Devil himself
Can never do it; some is distribued
Among Baudes, and Whores; here Panders have a part,
And Cheaters there a share; Tavernes, and Ordinaries:
But the prime part the Usurer has in's Chest,
I would 'twere in his Belly: and the choice
Of all I had, for which these were reserved,
Prized by me but as trivial ornaments
T'adorne one Jewel, rated above them,
Higher than gold above the basest dross,
And that the Lord has seized.

An. The Lord? what Lord?


Scri. Lord of this Soil; which I will never repurchase
After his so base sullying.

An. Oh, but sir.


Sl. What says my Donna Anne, my Lady Serpent
Armed in her golden scales? What says Madona?

An. That I prefer thy basest poverty
Before all glorious Titles; give me ear,
And I Will redeem thy former injuries
With ample satisfaction.

Sl. Hear me first;
Back to your Lord, and if you want reparations,
First fall into his hands.

An. It was my folly,
My appetite too childish novelty,
Of which I now crave pardon.

Sl. Oh woman, woman,
Thou have undone me, spent me to my Shirt,
Nay beyond that, even almost to my soul;
For I am circled in with black despair,
And know not how to free me.

An. I can do it,
And to that end I come; wants thy soul comfort?
Behold, I bring you comfort: Is your state
Decayed and wasted? see, I offer thee
A second making, all my hopes and fortunes,
I throw on thee; I am possessed of nothing
Of which thou art not Lord.

Sl. Lord? there it goes;
And get thee to him, for in rifling thee
He has robbed my brain of sense, my life of means,
My soul of solace, and my days of rest;
Henceforth I Will be a Madman, turn as Savage
As thou to me was it brutish: I Will seek out
Some fine familiar Devil, and with him
Converse, when I have left man's company;
I Will make my self companion with the Night,
And Traffic with her servants like the Owl;
I Will take my Lodging in some hollow Cave,
Till I be grown so out of name and knowledge,
That if I chance but to appear by day,
Men, Beasts, and Birds shall all stand wondering at me;
As at some progedy, and point at thee
For this my transformation.

An. Jealousy, oh what a fury art thou?


Sl. Fury, where? kept it within my bosom I would cherish it,
And hugg't as one that I accounted most:
Lay't in this hand I Would brandish't against my stars
And dare them to encounter: lodged it here,
Within my eyes, I would out-stare the Devil,
The Devil, I the Devil.

An. That foul fiend,
Why do you name so often? oh study better thoughts,
And set him at defiance.

Sl. Can not endure his name, yet come thy self
To tempt me with his Satin? oh those eyes,
That once appeared like to those glorious Tapers
That spangle Heaven, show like black funerals
The Sisters bear, that blast where ere they burn:
Farewell my ruin, my decay and fall,
And what sinister Fate so ere I have.
May thy false pride b'insculpt upon my grave. Exit.

An. Curse on that pride, that such a hopeful Gentleman
Should in his prime be lost by that and me;
But who was cause? who first traduced me to it?
My Mother, and that Lord; the sin be theirs:
Offend they, and must escape due punishment?
Then let me loose, what womankind best arms,
My use of Tongue; if but this Pipe hold clear,
I Will make both curse them taught me first to speak,
And wish I from my Cradle had bin dumb:
My hate to him shall in his charge and cost,
Redeem the love that I to this have lost. Exit.

Actus Tertius,
Scaene. 1.
Enter old Friar Bernard, and young Friar John. Ber. NOw we have passed our
more retired hours
To holy uses as our vows compel;
In zealous and Religious exercises,
In Visitation of the weak and sick,
To strengthen those that stagger with our prayers,
And ghostly counsel; now night calls us home
Unto our Cloister, there to spend the rest
Of our late hours in thoughts contemplative,
And sacred Meditations.

Io. Holy Father, I am afraid time has prevented us,
It Is now past Eight, and, but I much mistake,
I heard the warning of the Cloister Bell,
Which tells us, if we reach not instantly
We Are for this night excluded.

Ber. Mercy Heaven how swift time runs?


Io. We Are now at Islington,
What hope have we to get to Crutched Friars
Before the Gates be shut, and the Keys carried
Up to the Abbots Chamber?

Ber. Thou say true, how shall we spend the night then?


Io. We Will knock here
At the next sign, the good man I know well,
Of honest conversation, of good life,
And yet a boon companion; one that loves
Good company, and to be merry with them.
He, if he be at home, will bid us welcome:
My Hostess too, a sweet and smooth-faced wench,
Courteous and kind, and wondrous well beloved
Of all her Neighbors; liberal to the Church,
And much commended for her Charity.
Let us not bauke her house.

Ber. Knock good Friar John, and beg us a nights lodging.


Enter Woman. Woe. Who Is that abroad so late?


Io. For Charity those that would be admitted.


Woe. Charity should be in bed at Midnight.


Ber. But Devotion should always wake;
Where Is the good man your Husband?

Woe. He Is gone from home, and that is a reason too
We shut up doors thus early; say, what are you?

Io. Friar Bernard, and Friar John.


Woe. Religious men, and keep unlawful hours?


Ber. It Is no vain pleasure,
Or evil purpose that has kept us out,
But Christian zeal to visit and confirm
Them, for his sake to whom our lives are vowed;
Grant us relief and harbor.

Woe. 'Twere suspicious for me, but a lone woman, he abroad,
To entertain men of your rank and place,
Whose lusts have all bin questioned, and have drawn
Good women of best rumor and report,
Into foul scandal; therefore pardon me,
This night you get no entrance.

Ber. My good Dame,
You see me aged, and far spent in years,
Decrepit, and unfit for dalliance,
And should my youthful Novice strive to exceed
His Lawful bounds, I am near to counsel him,
But he was never guilty of such thoughts.

Io. Alas my kind Dame, not I.


Ber. Then grant us the least shelter, any place,
By or remote, to keep us from the cold;
Stable, or Barn, if you be so provided,
Or any out Room where is but hay, or straw
To wrap us in till Morning.

Woe. Good, excuse me.


Io. Can you be so hard-hearted unto men
Of our so known Devotion?

Ber. Grant us this, and you shall have the assistance of our prayers
In all our Trentalls, Masses, Dirges, Orisons,
Your soul shall be remembered; but if we
Should by your rude remorcelesse cruelty
Miscarry in our persons, in this raw
And so bleake cold; the price of our two lives
Must be of you exacted.

Woe. Curse upon them,
No night but this to trouble me in? being engaged
To better fare by appointment.

Ber. Gentle Dame, for reverence of my years and gravity,
And for my Covents Order; for my Name
And my profession, grant Friar Bernard this
Harbor from Frost and Snow.

Woe. Well Friar, you shall,
But this provided, I will lock you up
In a close Garret, and my self keep the Key
To avoid suspicion; you shall have fresh straw,
But other Bedding none, no fire nor Candle,
Beer, Ale, nor any such commodity,
Now in my Husbands absence; so, pray enter,
And this I do for Charity.

Ber. Now Heavens Benison fall on thy head, that two
Religious men art so obsequious; gentle Novice, be
Civil and much observant, it is a courtesy
We scarce can find else where.

Io. My holy Father,
I know it well; I am prescribed my limits,
Which I am willing with all zeal t'observe;
I would we knew our Lodging.

Ber. All necessities are ever to be pardoned, once, like Horses,
Let Us lodge in our own Litter; I commend
The woman's modesty, that is so curious,
Her Husband being from home, to avoid scandal,
And men's base imputations.

Io. So do I,
It Is one of our best Dames; but see, she comes
To give us entertainment Enter the Woman.

Woe. I have only a Cock-loft, please you gentle Friars,
To make best use of that and some fresh straw,
Best harbor that my Husbands absence yields
You Are welcome to.

Ber. We entertain it gladly,
And thank you my good Dame, I am for sleep,
That Is this my nights ambition.

Woe. Please you enter, but yet no further then I Will lock you in
I Will keep the Key my self.

Io. At your best pleasure. Exeunt.


Enter Constable, with a Bottle of Wine, and Manchets. Con. My Watch is set,
charge given, and all at peace,
But by the burning of the Candle blew,
Which I by chance espied through the Lantern,
And by the dropping of the Beadles Nose,
I smell a Frost; now to prevent this cold,
To which I am subject, I have made my Deputy,
Given up my staff and power into his hands;
My self intending to spend all this night
Here, at an honest Neighbors; some provision
I have sent in, and some I have brought along,
A cast of Manchets, and a Bottle to
Of the best Wine in Turnball, which, they say
All London cannot better: Silent all,
None stirring near, I Will knock but softly for fear
Of waking Neighbors.

Woe. Whose there?


Con. It Is I.


Woe. Not Master Constable?


Con. The same fair love.


Woe. Have you disposed your Watch?


Con. Yes, at you further Corner.


Woe. Not too loud, mean time I softly will sneake down
The Stairs, and softly let you in.

Con. Gramercy wench; the kindest loving Neighbor the
Town yields, the Hamlet cannot match her; a smug Less,
And one that knows it too; I would not loose her
For half my state in the Parish, while I Am in Office,
She Is safe as Mouse in Mill: Oh, are you come?

Woe. I was in fear you would have broke with me,
But now I see you are current.

Con. Sweet a kiss, and hark in thine ear. Friar John peepes out above.


Io. Friar Bernard's fast, he snores and sleeps as
Snug as any Pigge in Pease-straw; but my self
Cannot once close an eye, which makes me wonder
That I am grow so wakefull.

Con. Here Is to thy good fat Pullet that is within,
Two fine Cheat Loaves were sent me from the Court,
A Cup of Nipsitate brisk and neat;
The Drawers call it Tickle-braine, 'twill do it,
But is the Roast-meat ready?

Woe. Piping hot, I Will go fetch Salt and Trenchers.


Con. Quick, good Wench.


Io. Dream I? or is it substantial that I see?
Was this your cunning Dame, to lock us up
Like Prisoners, and afford us naught but straw
To feather our nests withal? not allow us drink,
Food, nor a Candle, least we should fire the House,
For that is her excuse; fire on you both,
Have you these tricks? yet God a mercy cranny
That I can spy all this. She brings in the Pullet.

Woe. Now let us be merry, but in any case
Speak not too loud, least we should wake the Friars.

Con. The Friars? what Friars?


Woe. Two Abbey Lubbers that are locked up fast,
Of whom I could not rid me; but I think
I have fitted them, they have neither light nor bed,
Nor any other Comfort.

Con. Tush, no matter,
What Is that to us? Come sweet, cut up the Pullet,
And after we will to Bed.

Woe. Do you't, I am no Carver.


Io. Do you strain courtesies? had I it in fingering
I Would make you both make but a Fridayes feast;
Oh how the steame perfumes my Nostrils.

Con. In faith it shall be thine.


Woe. If I begin, may I never eat more.


Io. Here Is a third would do it, knew he but how to come by it.


Con. Well, since you will force me to it,
I will make bold this once. One knocks at the door.

Woe. If that should be my Husband?


Con. Ha, what then?


Woe. You were shamed, I quite undone; he knockes again;
Upon my life it is he.

Con. What shall become of me?
Do thou not think he will spare an Officer?
But fall on the Kings Image?

Io. So soon started?


Hus. Why Nan, asleep or dead?


Woe. My Husbands voice, who is there?


Con. Where, which way?


Woe. Creep beneath the Bed.


Hus. Why do not open door?


Woe. Now to convey these victuals hence, and put out the fire,
Lord Husband is it you? who looked for you so late?
These shall into the Cupboord, if the smell
Betray's not we are safe.

Con. I, if my swell betray me not.


Hus. Why do not rise?


Wi. I have got such a cold, a cough withal,
I thought I should have dyed; stay but a little
Till I have cast my Petticoate about me,
I Will quickly let you in; the fire's quite out,
No sign of any Feast.

Hus. I Am almost starved, prithee make have.


Woe. I am coming, good lie close, and if I can get him
Once to bed, I have a trick to shift you.

Con. I do feel I had need of shift already.


Io. Here Is brave juggling?
For this night, Constable, I am your Watch;
Oh but the smoking pullet. Enter Host, and Hostess.

Woe. Lord Husband that you will venture whom so late,
So many Knaves abroad?

Hus. I fear no robbing, and for my Carcass, I still bear
About me to defend that, I Have traveled hard to day,
And am very hungry prithee wife see what thou have in the house?

Woe. What, talk of Victuals now? is this a time of night?


Io. I by my faith, for one that could come by it.


Hus. Talk not to me, something I must and will have.


Woe. Had I known
But of your coming home I had provided,
But now I pray to bed, this cold so troubles me.

Hus. Cold troubles me, lay me some Faggots on.


Woe. You see the fire's quite out.


Hus. I Will have't revived.


Wi. You're such another man?


Husb. See how she stirs?


Woe. Would house and all were fired,
So some of us were out on it.

John. I for one.


Husb. I would have had some company, I had not
Such an appetite to be merry for an hour this seven year;
That I could tell where to call up some good fellow
That I knew, we would not part these two hours.

Friar John makes a noise in the Garret. Io. That Is my Qu.


Hus. Now bless us wife, what noise is in the Garret?


Woe. No hurt man; nay, pray will you to bed?


Hus. Bed me no bedds, I Will know the reason often.


Woe. Two Friars shut from their Covents, wanting harbor,
Begged lodging with such importunity
They would not be denied; at length I pitied them,
And yet to make them sure, I locked them fast
Up in the Straw-loft, and see, here is the Key,
They Are fast enough for starting.

Hus. Do thou know them?


Woe. Friar Bernard, and Friar John.


Hus. Friar Bernard, and Friar John? the only good Ladds
That I desired to meet with; I beshrew thee
They had no better welcome; go, unlocke,
Entreat them hither, we will have one cup
To th'health of all their Covent.

Woe. Call them up? what time shall we to bed then?


Hus. Time enough, early betimes, nay, quick Nan, Friar John there?
The bonniest Lad e're wore portace in a string,
Or mumbled Mass, or Mattins; I but wished
And see, it is come to pass; the other to,
Though he be strict of life, yet will sometimes
Be merry, if he like his company;
But my kind honest bald-pate, Friar Jack, Enter woman and Friars.
I shall be glad to see him; welcome faith,
With reverence, Father, to your gravity,
Be not offended if Friar John and I
Be, not exceeding compass, a little merry,
And play with the Pot; fill some in.

Woe. To your bellies pots and all.


Ber. Excess, my Host, can purchase no excuse,
But modest mirth, transgressing not his true
And lawful bounds, is good and commendable;
Now give us leave to bid you welcome home.

Hus. Thanks good Friar Bernard,
Now as I live, would I had some good cheer,
No better then I would pay for; but she tells me
There Is nothing to be compassed.

Io. The worse luck; and yet I smell a supper.


Woe. Not so much as a cantell of Cheese, or crust of bread,
That can this night be come by (for your throats,
I Will rather see you choakt.)

Hus. But any fare that would content the stomach.


Io. Say you so? I Will try what I can do.


Woe. What a leering eye the Friar cast toward the Cupbord?


Io. Bid my Dame provide Cloth, Salt, and Trenchers.


Hus. But Friar John, how shall we come by meat?


Io. For such provision trust to my Art.


Ber. By Art, can that be done?


Io. Yes, by Art Magic.


Ber. Oh profane, and fearful!
Art Magic! did thou ever study that?
It is against our Order.

Io. But not as I will order it, fear it not.


Hus. Can Friar John Conjure?


Io. For a Supper, or so, but never durst deal further;
Will you furnish a Table fit for meat?

Hus. Nan, when I say?


Woe. We shall have now some fooling.


Ber. What does my Novice mean?


Io. Good Father peace, no hurt to you nor me.


Hus. Nor any here?


Io. That Is furnished with a stomach.
Doemones, et Cacodoemones conjuro vos, surgite et venite.
No man stir, is the Cloth laid, and all things fit for meat?

Woe. You see to please you, we can do any thing.


Io. Now let me see,
What Christian Climate yields us the best bread?
Oh, the best wheat's in Spain; what say you now
To a couple of Cheat Loves baked in Madrid,
And brought into this Chamber?

Hus. Would we might see them.


Io. All vostro comando, Ast^rothe, il pane in h^c camera presto.
Oh, now it is done; mine Host, put but your hand
Into that Corner and pull forth two Loaves.

Hus. Are you in earnest?


Io. But see what Art can do.


Woe. Pox on the Friar, have you these tricks?


Hus. Two fine and delicate Manchets.


Io. The best in Spain, or Friar John much mistakes:
Place them good mine Host, behind the Salt.

Hus. I shall.


Io. There Is more behind.


Ber. Not possible in Art.


Io. Peace Father, more will be done anon;
What Climate yields the best French Grape?
My Spirit whispers Orleance Grape's the best,
What says mine Host to a pure Cup of Orleance?

Hus. Faith I say, would I might see it.


Io. Ie vou pre Monsieur Asterothe, once more
A Cup of Divine Claret; no, a Bottle of some two quarts*
Gramercy, thou have done't, mine Host, but cast your eye
Upon that place, and you shall find it there.

Hus. Most admirable, see, here is a Bottle full.


Io. But taste mine Host, and try if it be right.


Woe. Your Devils take you; you know where is the best liquor.


Hus. Excellent stuff, I never drank better Clarret.


Ber. How comes this?


Io. No hurt to you still, Father.


Hus. Bread and Drink? how shall we come by Meat?


Io. Let me see, there is a Midnight supper now served in
At Prague in Germany, where the Emperors Court
Lies for the most part, and seldom is he absent;
Among all all other dainties, speak, what dish
Desire you from the Table?

Hus. Any thing.


Io. What say you to a Pullet piping hot,
Now standing on the Dresser?

Hus. Nothing better.


Woe. The Devil take all such smell-feasts.


Io. But once more I Will employ thee, Asterothe,
For this night no more trouble thee. Veni, assiste,
and in hac re succurre; I smell the Pullet
Smoking, and Sauce unto't.

Hus. I, but where?


Io. Somewhere about this Room, who has the Key
Of that same Cupboord?

Hus. Marry Nan, my Wife.


Io. Call for it, good mine Host,
You see I come near nothing, use fair play,
Saw neither fire nor candle to provide this,
Touched neither Lock nor Key within your house,
But was asleep i'th'straw; unlocke mine Host,
See what the Cupboord yields.

Woe. A poison on thee, would it might prove so to thee,
It was never provided for those chopps.

Io. What find you there?

Hus. A hot fat Pullet, newly dressed and sauc'd.
I never heard the like,

Ber. It Is above wonder.


Io. You see what Art can do.


Ber. Tell me, Friar John?

Io. I Will talk with you anon, in the mean time
Eat while it is hot, 't has come a pretty Journey,
And marvel it is not cold.

Hus. Good wine, good bread, good victuals, stomach good,
And all to meet together? nay fall to,
And he be thanked that sent it.

Ber. This to me appears beyond imagination,
Nay, gentle Hostess sit.

Io. Many provide good Cates that taste them not,
Now blessing on their hearts.

Woe. But curse on thine, and on thy stomach too.


Hus. I pray Friar John, what spirit do you deal with?


Io. Aestroth, did you not hear me name him?


Hus. And what is he?


Io. One of the four great Spirits, that have Dominion
Over the four quarters of the Earth: good Dame,
Me thinks you do not eat.

Woe. I could eat thee.


Hus. Could you not show your Devil for a need,
To one that feign would see him?

Io. In what shape?


Hus. Why in his own.


Io. Oh it is too terrible, it would fright us all.


Hus. Yet would I see him.


Io. What, in his terrors? he would make you mad,
Distracted and amazed, yet, good mine Host,
To give you all content, I could be willing
To show him but in some familiar shape,
Such as should not affright you.

Hus. With all my heart.


Io. Have you no Neighbor whom you best affect, whose
Shape he might assume t'appeare less terrible?

Hus. Yes, twenty I could name.


Io. Soft, let me pause;
It must be some that still wake at these hours,
We have no power over sleepers; say I bring him
In person of some Watchman?

Hus. No shape better.


Io. Or in the habit of your Constable?


Hus. Why he is my honest Gossip.


Io. Why then his.


Woe. More scurvy tricks Friar John, I may live to cry quittance with you.


Io. But mine Host, resolve me one thing; should great
Asterothe appear to you in your Gossips shape,
How would you deal with him?

Hus. Why as my friend, my Neighbor, and my Gossip.


Io. No such thing; you must imagine him what he appears,
An evil spirit, to kick him, and defy him,
As you would do the Devil, otherwise
When you are late abroad, and we gone hence,
He Will haunt your house hereafter.

Hus. Fear not that,
If kickes and spurns will drive the Devil hence,
I Will help to send him packing.

Io. I must tell you, it is merely for your own good,
Appear Asteroth, Asteroth appear from underneath the bed
In shape of Master Constable; do it when I say it, Not yet?
Excruciabo te Asteroth, in jam jam jam apparebis.
Now mine Host, either with zeal expel the Devil hence,
Or have your house still haunted.

Hus. Will kickes do it?
Let me alone to conjure him, pox on the Devil,
He has put me in a sweat.

Woe. I Will after him* and least he should bear down part
Of the house, I Will let him out of doors.

Hus. Yes, do good Nan; I think Friar John
I have bumbasted the Devil; thanks for our Supper,
French wine, and Spanish Loaves, I never tasted meat
That more contented me.

Ber. But how came this?


Io. I Will tell you by the way; no questions now:
Now good mine Host we see the night quite spent
And the bright day star rising in the East;
We Will take our leaves; make much of our good Dame,
And think no worse of your good Officer,
Your Gossip and your Neighbor, in whose form
Asteroth so late appeared.

Hus. Good night Friar John, and holy Father Bernard.


Ber. Rather good morrow.


Io. Only commend us to my Dame your wife,
And thank her for our Lodging. Exeunt

Act. 3. Scaen. 2
Enter Lord Skales, Treatwell, Roger, and Geffrey. Lo. My Rival so dejected?


Gef. It Is most true, you never saw a man so strange debauched;
He has not only run out all his fortune,
But even his senses; I had once my Lord,
Some small dependence on him, but his riot
Has almost ruined me.

Lo. And what is thy Suite?


Gef. Your Lordships Cloth and countenance.


Lo. Thou shall have't
See, Master Treatwell, that his name b'inrold
Among my other Servants; let my Steward
Receiye such notice from you.

Tree. Sir, I shall.


Rog. Preferred already? may I live to see thee
Advanced some few steps higher, to the Gallows.

Lo. What fellow's that?


Gef. One of my fellows once.


Lo. And will he serve?


Rog. Yes, one that he did never, nor I think never will,
Yet a Lord too.

Lo. Will It thou depend on me?


Rog. I thank you, no; were there no other Masters
On the Earth, I am no man for you.

Lo. Thy reason friend?


Rog. Because the last I had, I lost by you, a Man, that
Save his Title, bettered you, or any of your blood.

Gef. Brave my Lord?


Rog. Long you to have your Teeth picked? I Will find time
To talk with you hereafter.

Tree. A bold fellow; give him scope, my Lord.


Rog. He was a Gentleman descended well,
As ancient as your self, as well endowed
With all the gifts of Nature; better tuter'd,
For he could write true Scholar, which few Lords
In these days practice; not ambitious,
Nor yet base thoughted, for he kept the mean,
And aimed but at his equal; you in this
Come short of; for you, less noble breasted,
Have stooped to your inferior.

Lo. Suffer this?


Tree. Nay good my Lord have patience; hear him speak.


Rog. Think you, you could have bettered him in valor?
He was too full of fire, witness his spirit,
Most worthy of a Roman Character;
That being oppressed, and only crossed in her,
He lost himself in all things; and shall I
Serve him, by whom a graft of his fair hope
Is by his Whale-like Title swallowed up?
And feed at his Board that has famished him
That was my Master? let such Sycophants do it,
That to their Lords affections suite their service,
Not to their fames and honors: that can fawn,
Lie, cogge, and flatter, Pimpe, and Pandarise,
And so farewell, good fellow.

Lo. Is he such?


Rog. I speak sir of my fellow, he is now none
For he attends your Lordship.

Tree. This fellows bluntness
Does somewhat better than at first,
Whom will thou follow now?

Rog. Him, to his Grave, or to his better fortunes;
Bless your Lordship. Exit.

Tree. I do not think but under that rough brow
Is lodged an honest heart; they are best servants
Whom want, penurious need, and poverty
Cannot fright from their Masters. Ent. Chan. and his Wife.

Lo. Oh Master Changeable, how is it with your Daughter?


Chan. Naught, naught.


Wi. Peace you, all will be well, I hope; yet peevish, but
It will bring plyantnes: it is coming on a pace.

Chapter You hear that news of M. Slightals frenzy, and his undoing?


Wi. And yet your wisdom would have matched your
Daughter unto that spend-thrift Beggar.

Lo. This his servant, since entertained by me has told me al.


Gef. And nothing more than truth.


Chan. Use you your humors,
And jest at his distress; but when I think
What he has bin of late, what come to now,
I cannot choose but sorrow; and the more
When I Record the ground of his distress;
But my soul's clear of all. Enter Anne.

An. You are a Noble Theife.


Lord. Ha?


An. You are a gentle fool.


Chan. How?


An. I am as cold as Ice, and you a scold.


Wi. Minion. how?


An. You are a Trencher friend.


Tree. That meant by me?


An. And thou a slave and Pander.


Gef. Speak it not, I Will not believe it Mistress.


An. This I Will prove.


Chan. Why Daughter, daughter?


Wi. Sure the Girle's grown frantic.


An. Faith mother a mad wench, I thank my stars.


Wi. Star me no stars.


An. Why mother, can you scold?


Chan. Yes for a need.


Lo. But Mistress Changeable, why did you call me these?


An. Stand but in row, and as I am a woman
I Will make all this good; you here, you there,
And every one in order: First, in particular,
And next in general I will go over you.

Lo. I pray you do.


An. A noble Thief, that was your Character,
Some by the high way rob; some are Sea Thieves,
We commonly call'em Pirates; some break houses,
And others snap at stals; some cunningly
Dive into Pockets, whistlers, others lifts;
Some are Poetical Thieves, and steal by wit,
One from another plots, and projects, cheates,
And decoyes; but all these under Thieves,
And steal but petty trash: but you more great,
Under pretext of your Nobility,
And countenance in Court, have from a Husband
Stolen a contracted and a married Wife;
For Contract upon Earth, in Heaven is marriage;
And celebrate by Angels.

Chan. But why fool?


An. A gentle fool, such are your patient Husbands,
That yield their wives the Breeches.

Wi. Is he such? how now bold huswife, baggage, peevish
Thing, rude, disobedient, apish, and perverse,
Irregular, hare brained, harsh and obstinate?

An. You see, she need not put me to my proof,
Her tongue will do it it self.

Tree. But Trencher friend?


An. I pray your name? Tree. Treatwell.


An. Take but the two first letters from your name,
I take it, it is Eate-well.

Gef. But all this Mistress, makes not me a Pander.


An. No, but when thou first was it base Baud to the riots
Of thy first Master, thou made thy self such.
But now in general let me see;
The Prince is not without his flatterer,
The Noble man his Secretary,
The Lawyer his Attorney,
The Justice his Clarke,
The Physitoan his Apothecary,
The Usurer his Scrivener,
The Extortioner his Broker,
Nor the Lady cannot be without her Gentleman Usher;
Your Citizens Wife her Iourney-man,
Your Country Wench her Sweetheart,
Your Tobacco woman her Pipe-maker,
And every Whore her Pander.
Farewell Geffry; God be with you Gentle-folkes. Exit.

Chan. Oh wife, wife, wife.


Lo. Nay good sir spare your tears,
She has hit us all alike; this her ingeniousnesse
Adds to her beauty, not detracts at all;
I love her nere the worse, nor any here
Whom her discourse has touched: it is witty frenzy,
And no malicious cancor; so I take it:
Nay grieve not you good woman, whom e're long
I hope to Title Mother; doubt it not, all shall be well.

Tree. But eat well.


Lo. Let not that stick in thy stomach, never could thou
Light on a more fair and sweet Godmother,
To give thee a name; I Will have all friends, let us in,
And comfort the sad Gentleman, and after to supper.

Gef. Where I Will try how near of Kin I am to this
Gentleman, and show my self an Eate-well. Exeunt.

Actus Tertius,
Scaene. 1.
Enter Slightall Melancholy. Sl. APistoll, Poniard, Poison, or a Cord,
The least of these would do it; nay, my own want
Had I the patience but to stay,
The time would end me, for since Charity late is dead,
How can beggars live? Death is the easiest
Of any thing on Earth for man to compass;
Almost no object but does offer it:
Fire, Water, not a Stone we stumble at;
Our very meat and drink but surfeit often,
It would dispatch one quickly: I have read
Of one choked with a fly; another drinking,
Strangled with the berry of a bruised grape,
Another with an hair; what is this life then
We men do make so much of? if a Pin,
A very Hair has power to take it hence?
Cursed fall of man, in whose first disobedience
All things on Earth rebelled, and war with him:
How many thousand things has Fate ordained
To stop weak natures course? and among them,
How few which can preserve it? which apprehension
Makes me that now I more desire to live,
The more my life's opposed: If there be Divills,
As all Religion tells us, I desire
To have converse and conference with some one
The greatest fiend among them, for by him
My Genius prompts me, either I shall raise
My ruined hopes, revenge me on my foes,
Or end my wretched days in this despair.
I could turn Sorcerer, Witch, or any thing
Might I but blast her beauty, brave that Lord;
And show some power over my ungrateful friends;
The Devil, I, the Devil; what Musicke's this? Music.
Descends it from the Spheres?
Hangs it in the Air?
Or issues it from Hell? Come where it can
I will attend the Novell.
Enter an Anticke habited in Parchment Indentures, Bills, Bonds, Wax Seals,
and Pen, and Inkhornes, on his breast writ, I am a Scrivener. Dances a strain,
and stands right before him. Ha? What art thou? I am a Scrivener. The Devil
thou art.
Enter dancing another strain, one written over his breast, I am a knave.
Stands as the other.
Why point'st thou to thy breast, I am a Knave?
The Proverb were not true else, for it says, The Divell's a Knave.
Enter a third with this word, I am a Prodigal.
I am am a Prodigal? I was indeed, and thou do well to
Mock me; what fury sends Hell next?
Enter a fourth with this, I am a Beggar.
I am a Beggar? yes, I am indeed,
But how the Devil came thou by my style.
Enter a fifth with this, I am a Puritan.
I am a Puritan? one that will eat no Porke,
Does use to shut his shop on Saterdayes,
And open them on Sundays: A Familist;
And one of the Arch limbs of Beelzebub,
A Jewish Christian, and a Christian Jew;
Now fire on thy sweet soul.
Enter a sixth with this, I am a Whore.
I am a Whore? yes, and a hot one too,
And had a helping hand in my confusion:
Now the same blessing on thee.
Enter a seventh with money Bags, and this Motto, I am an Usurer.
I am an Usurer, Satan's eldest Son,
And Heir to all his torments; thou have swallowed
Young heirs, and Hell must one day swallow thee.
Enter an eighth with this, I am a Devil.
I am a Devil? good, it is the black Lad I so long wished to meet.
The Dance continued, in the conclusion whereof, etc. The Scrivener bears
away the Knave; good Morrall.
The Prodigal the Beggar; ever so;
The Familist the Strumpet, not amiss;
Oh but the Usurer still the Devil and all,
Whom I so feign would speak with; Beelzebub,
If thou have any sufferance here on Earth,
Or limited power over man, once more appear
And offer me free language. Enter the Devil like a Gentleman, with glass
eyes.

Di. Did you call?


Sl. Why, what art thou?


Di. The Devil Beelzebub, whom thou so late so loud did invocate

Sl. How came thou by this shape of Gentleman?


Di. As if all habits, fashions, and attires
Were not with me familiar? I sometimes
Into a Lawyer can transform my self
To delay Causes; then to a Divine,
To devise new Sects, Scismes, and Heresies:
To a Tailor for new fashions: to a Sempster,
I was first Father for this yellow Sterch,
Which did succeed the blew; to a Feather-maker
For Gentlewomans Fans, men's spriggs, and falls;
Sometimes I am a Page, and daily attend
Upon my Lords luxurious appetites:
Then can I play the Master, Knight, and Lord,
And then coin strange varieties of riots,
Lusts, and excesses, never heard before.
Indeed, what can I not?

Sl. Be good thou can not?


Di. It never was my study, and of all things I only except that.


Sl. Thou can not pray?


Di. Yes, both on soul and body, where I am suffered.


Sl. Thou can not Preach.


Di. How then came all those Pulpit Heresies
That have with Christians, Christians set at odds?
I read to that great Doctor Arius,
That poisoned three parts of the Christian World;
There Is not a Sectary, nor a Scismaticke,
To whom I am not Tutor.

Sl. Can I then task thee in nothing?


Di. No.


Sl. Thou can not -- stay?
Thou can not change affection, nor invert the passions of
The soul; turn hate to love, and love to hate.

Di. Tush, that with ease I can.


Sl. And revenge wrongs?

Di. At pleasure.


Sl. One thing more, and I conclude;
Thou can not raise a man of desperate hopes
To a full furnished palm; to pay his debts,
And to give freely where he please to distribute?

Di. Am I not Titled Prince of all the World?
And lies there that in this great Universe
Excepted from my large Dominion?
Am I not Mammon too, the god of gold,
Sovereign of all Exchequors, treasures, mints,
And those rich Mines that set the World at odds?
In search of which men hazard dangerous Seas,
Expose them to diseases, and strange Climates,
Above their natures: Gold? I am Father of it,
And have it in abundance.

Sl. Then from can, I come to will; will thou, great
Beelzebub, so much of thy huge surplusage make mine
As shall do all that I have here proposed?

Di. I will; but on condition.


Sl. Make thine own.


Di. That when thy wishes have attained effect,
Thou art full handled, have paid all thy debts,
And nothing ow'st to any, I may then
Most freely claim thy soul.

Sl. Come, strike me luck; it is a bargain:
We shall need no witness.

Di. Thy conscience is a Thousand, that shall serve;
Let me but have't confirmed beneath thy hand,
And my Exchequor's open.

Sl. It Is confirmed; I see the Devil yet has more honesty
Then has his Son, the Usurer; for to him
A man may pawn his soul a thousand times
Ere he can get a penny: but the Father's,
Of a far more free nature.

Di. Come, withdraw, we will
Have't confirmed within. Exeunt.

Act 4. Scaen. 2.
Enter Lord Skales, Treatwell, 2. Gentlemen, Geffery, and Mistress Changeable.
Lo. But is your house so haunted?


Woe. Wondrously.


Lo. How long has it bin so?


Woe. Ten days, no more,
Part of that time that Slightall has bin Mad,
My daughter past her senses.

Genesis 1. The whole house?


Woe. No, only one by Chamber stands remote,
And in that after Midnight there is a noise,
That troubles the whole house of howlings, shrickes,
Fire-workes and Crackers, as if the great squib-maker
Were new come from beyond Sea.

Genesis 2. Has none seen the Vision?


Woe. Only my desperate Husband, who, one night,
Would be so foolish venturous as lodge there,
But did return so frighted, told such wonders,
Still fright me to remember.

Tree. It Is most strange: sure it is some vexed spirit that has
Deceased of late from out the house: who dyed last in that Chamber?

Woe. Heaven rest her soul, my mother.


Tree. Perhaps hers; who having hid some treasure in her
Life time must, till that be discovered, walk of force,
The like I have read in Legends.

Genesis 1. It has bin common, though not in these days
Frequent, might I advise, I would seek out for some
Religious man to exorcise the Spirit, and by that means
To banish thence the vision.

Lo. Counsail'd well; there are in town 4. several sorts of Friars, white and
black Friars, Gray Friars and crutched Friars.


Genesis 2. Good, you call to my remembrance
Among them, one expert in the Art of Necromancy,
His Name Friar John, whom Islington has
Made famous through London.

Gef. Him I saw but now cross by the door.


Lo. Good Geffrey find him out, and gently entreat him hither,
But acquaint him not with the cause.

Gef. Sir I shall do it.


Tree. But has he done such strange things?


Genesis 2. Wondrous sir; he can transhape his spirits, if fame
Lie not, into what form he please, to imitate me,
Or personate you; he could produce a Devil
In shape of this good ancient Gentlewoman.

Woe. A Devil sir like me?


Genesis 2. H'hath done't in habit of a Constable,
And may do it in a Gentlewomans; for his commons
In the Friars he cares not, he can for a need
Conjure his bread from Spain, from France his wine,
His diet from the utmost of the Earth,
Thus has his fame given out.

Genesis 1. Would we might see him to make proof of his cunning.


Enter Changeable, and his daughter Anne. Chan. And as I told thee Nan, be
swayed by me,
I Will make him thine, employ my industry,
Counsel and pains, to weane him by degrees
From his wild course of desperate Melancholy:
I Will seek him out, persuade him, lay thy love
As open as the midday: hope in me
And doubt not to prevail.

An. Sir, I am yours.


Chapter Thou know he loves me; I was still his friend,
And friend with friend what cannot he perform?
Make thy self mine, I Will cross thy Mothers workings,
And fool that Lords attempts; only be you of a more
Temperate humor, and more stayed, observing but what I
Shall project for you, and doubt not my performance.

An. You in all things
Have proved your self a Father: I Will henceforth
Strive to express a Daughter.

Chapter Then enough.


Woe. Here Is now my Husband, he can speak it all.


Lo. But ere I question that, of you, fair Mistress,
Let me be first resolved; is your Brain yet
In a more settled temper?

An. Sir, it is; me thinks I am new wakened from a
Dream, in which I long have slumbering lost my self.

Woe. And now art found.


An. I am, thank Heaven, and my good
Fathers counsel and advice.

Chan. I held it wife, a deed of charity, and did it for the Lords sake.


An. Sir, henceforth I shall observe you better.


Lo. You now have wreathed me with a Crown of hopes.


Woe. Made me again thy Mother, and this work,
Your ever patient and obedient wife.

Chan. Marry Heaven continue it wife, it is but need;
In conscience thou have bin froward long enough.

Tree. These things so well succeeding, pray resolve us
In what form does this Devil haunt your house.

Chan. A woman's sure.


Tree. So I told you, sure your Mothers.


Chan. Troth she was somewhat shrewish like my wife,
But yet I think not hers.

Tree. Your reason sir?


Chan. This apparition was the full portract of a young beauteous Lady.


Genesis 1. On my life Acadna then.


Lo. Acadna? what is Acadna?


Genesis 1. A harmless Spirit fashioned from the Air,
And yet assuming substance, shape and form,
That where she loves, does all the Offices
Of a fair Lady: can supply with gold.

Genesis 2. And all things to man useful.


Chan So I have heard; but this cannot be she,
For this had with her beauty so much terror,
So much affright and horror in her looks,
Such a confused noise, with hellish sounds
Able to drive the senses retrograde;
Turn reason into madness, and invert
Capacity to fury; that, I vow
I would not to be heir of all the World
Endure like night again. Enter Geffrey and Friar John.

Genesis 2. Here comes the Friar, the man can best instruct us.


Io. Hail Gentlemen, this man that stands at Livery
And says he does belong to a great Lord.
Has partly by intreates, part by command,
Enforced me from my meditations back
To know his Lordships pleasure.

Lo. Welcome Friar, it is told us thou can exorcise a spirit,
We have employment for thee.

Io. Expect you such things from religious men,
And of our holy Order?

Genesis 2. Come, we know you are an Artist in that hidden skill,
And have commerce with mighty Asterothe,
That great Arch Devil.

Io. Now mercy Heaven who has seduced you thus?


Genesis 1. Come, come we know it,
And this withal; in what men are most expect,
In that they are most dainty, and so you;
In Dauncers and Musitions it is found true;
Of all men, where they are most excellent,
They are most curious to express their skill,
So no question, you.

Gef. Remember Islington, my Host, my Hostess, and the Constable,
Should we be silent, every Oyster-wife,
Fish-wife, and those cry Milk and Orenges
Can speak of your rare supper; fie, Friar John,
And so dainty to your friends?

Io. Either I must take upon my self, and by some trick evade it,
Or else shame that which I have done before.

Lo. Nay gentle Friar.


Woe. For reverence of your Order.


Tree. As you would purchase us your lasting friends.


Genesis 1. Or make us at our deaths,
Give Legacies unto your holy Covent.

Genesis 2. Come, we know what you can do, good Friar.


Io. What, you make me a Conjurer?


Gef. A man of Art, no more; so much we know you are.


Io. Well, what is the business?


Lo. This Gentleman, you know him.


Io. My good Master.


Lo. His house is haunted by a wicked spirit
Which we would have you by your Art remove.

Io. As how?


Lo. To lodge one night within the Chamber,
And know of it the cause of its disturbance,
Or what might be the will of the deceass'd,
Which known, and being performed, the troubled Ghost
Might rest in peace.

Io. Lodge where the foul fiend walks?
A propper jest t'expose me to such danger,
So I might come to justify the Proverb,
Where had the Devil the Friar, but where he was;
But I must face it out: Pray Gentlemen, which of you all
Has seen that Vision? in what shape walks it?

Chan. Like a woman sir, but with such horror
And astonishment, I tremble once to speake't.

Io. And I to heare't.
What a she Devil now? for all the World
I would not once affront her; bring me hither
Ten thousand male Fiends, I could charm their tongues
Before one Female fury.

Chan. Sure this Friar is wittily conceited?


Io. Had it bin great Belioth, Asteroth, or Beelzebub,
I durst affront them, and confront them too,
Oh but the Devils Dam; why against her
There is no Prayer, no Spell, no Exorcisme;
No Circle that can hold her: But appeared she
Wrinckled in Brow or fair and beautiful?

Chan. As lovely to the view as flourishing May,
Clad in the pride of Spring.

Io. So much the worse,
Well wot you that our Order is by Oath
Confined from any meeting with that Sex,
Especially at Midnight; and so late;
Scarce in the daytime durst I meet a face
Of such Temptation, but in dead of rest
'Twould scandalize my Order.

Chan. Press him not, if he be so precise.


Io. Heavens Benison and mine light on you till I meet you next;
But to lie there where a she Devil haunts,
(Less with my Hosts by at Islington)
May the Grand Devil fetch me, bless you all. Exit.

Chan. Tush, Scholars still are Cowards, let him pass,
Daughter, you still are mine?

An. Else not my own.


Chan. Enough; will any of you Gentlemen,
In that my last: nights lodging second me?

Lo. It Is too full of terror; Geffrey will thou?


Gef. Offer my self to the Divill before my time?
You might accuse my folly.

Chan. Or any here?


Genesis 1. Not I.


Genesis 2. N or I.


Chan. It shall be then my care to find out one
To conjure down this spirit, and doubt it not.

Lo. So much for that: But Mistress, what from me,
Except you to express my gratitude
For this so late a favor?

An. Only this; t'avoyd all imputation fame may cast
Upon my honor touching Slightalls fall,
In which the World may think I had chief hand:
It Is but to find him out, and on his poverty
Bestow some small relief.

Lo. Now as I live, I Will do it with a full and
Plentious hand if that be all.

Tree. I Will aid him in the search to make
That sweet conclusion.

Chapter In the mean time't shall be my providence
To have my house unhaunted; come my Lord,
Lead you the way, my wife and I will follow.
Remember Nan. Exeunt.

Act. 4. Scaen. 3.
Enter Roger. Rog. Want whilst I have, or hear my pockets chide?
While his are silent? there is no justice in it:
And if he do while my Exchequor lasts,
May I be held a Proverb made to cast
In every false Grooms teeth?

Vsu. Is this the day?


Scri. It is.


Vsu. Art sure?


Scri. Upon my --

Vsu. What? thy faith?


Scri. Upon my Ears it is true.


Vsu. I will not trust to hearsay, let thine eyes
Proclaim what is written in this Almanac,
If this be the set Day.

Scri. Quindecem Michaelis, certainly the same.


Vsu. If It be not tendered then 'twixt Sun and Sun,
The Morgage is my own.

Scri. If you have the conscience to take the forfeit.


Use. Conscience? what in that is wanting he shall find
Made good in Law.

Enter Slightall Gallant, and his Page with Mony-baggs. Sl. I see the Devil
yet is good to some,
Though it repents me of the Bargain sealed,
Yet am I glad and proud of my supply;
Which the more precious is, being infinite,
Not capable of end; for Mammons treasure,
A prodigal hand may wast, but never consume.

Rog. What sudden change is this? do my eyes mock me,
Or must I call him Master?

Sl. Roger? a hand; I know thou art in want, as one some
Weeks that has bin out of service, take that gold
And spend it freely, when thou want here is more.

Rog. And you are both in cash and sense likewise?


Sl. Why man, it is want of money makes men mad,
For that disease here is Physic: honest Hodge,
Go thou and summon all my Creditors,
Leave not a man to whom I owe, uncalled,
And pay them to the utmost they demand;
Be so far from bating of the Principal,
As pay them all arrerages; it is our will
And do thou see it performed.

Rog. From whence came this sir?


Sl. What Is that to thee? have we not here to do it?
Those Debts that reckoned were mere desperate
First see discharged, unless some certain Morgage tied to a day.

Vsu. What Schreich-owles voice was that?


Sl. Monsieur Damnation? what, are you so near?
I know you sir, a Thousand pounds and the use,
Tender the sum, there is gold, and bring me back
The Morgage of my Manor.

Vsu. I Am undone then: no have good
Master Slightall, why to morrrow,
Or the next day will serve, some fortnight hence,
Nay, were it a month, I could forbear the money.

Sl. Quindecem Michaelis, you remember that,
I prithee see this man first satisfied,
And do it without delay: if he deny
The tender often I Will have it done in Court;
With such we must not dally, quick, good Hodge:
That once dispach'd, affairs of greater consequence
Attend thy trust and care.

Rog. Come, will you walk sir?


Vsu. If needs I will, we Usurers are like women
Who conceive with great pleasure, and are delivered
With great pain; so we get our wealth with infinite joy*
And part with the least of it with infinite torment.

Sl. To any man that can but show my hand,
Or witness where I have but passed my word,
Pay ready down, about it, and return.

Rog. And have we lived to see the golden age once more?
Now Geffrey, if I meet you I dare affront you boldly.

Exeunt. Manet Slightall. Sl. How want dejects, and plenty cherishes?
What a new change perceive I in my self?
Yet not so much in habit as in heart!
The sight of gold has shook off all those dumps,
Whose Leaden weights were hung upon my soul,
To keep it down from mounting; and I now
Find in my self a free and dexterous spirit,
Uncapeable of cloudy Melancholy. Ent. Lo. Treatwell, and Geffery.

Lo. I must, as did my Mistress late enjoyne,
Pass in the search of this sad Gentleman, and to
His low dejected poverty cast some few pieces.

Tree. If his pockets lining suite but to the outside
Of his Clothes, he has small need of them.

Gef. What, grown so brave? he has sure lighted on some cheat?


Lo. 'Twas her injunction, and doubtless
I Will accost him; save you sir.

Sl. I would be so, but it is not you can do it.


Lo. I understood that you were late in want?


Sl. Not of a Wife; but for your Lord ships courtesy
I had had one too many, thank you for it.

Lo. I came to seek you.


Sl. For another? no,
Now much good do it you with the thing you have,
I have no more to part with.

Lo. Leaving that; I understand you are a Gentleman
Nobly derived; but withal, you are poor.

Sl. You will not sell your Lordship?


Lo. Who should buy't?


Sl. Why he that asks the question, I, my Lord;
If you will walk by Land I Am your first man,
I Will bid as fair as any.

Lo. He Is mad still, leave him.


Gef. A Bankerupt idle fellow brave your Lordship?
Beat him to's wits, or let me kick him for you.

Sl. Ha, what is that? who, Geffery Codpeice, John Boe Peep,
Is It you that prate so freely? my young Judas,
Have you conspired against me?

Gef. Endure this?


Lo. Stay, first we will debate in friendly terms,
Before you grow to outrage.

Sl. Done most Lordly; your tongue will grace you
Better than your Sword, it is the most Noble fashion.

Lo. I Will be brief, I understood your state was much
Decayed, which in my honor I commiserating,
My purpose was in some sort to relieve you;
And would you better understand your self,
It might appear a noble courtesy.
Because it came so free and uncompell'd

Sl. Such as one Neighbor to another does
To get his wife with Child, a courtesy, and so it fitly may
Be called because it brings him to his Knees.

Tree. Still, still misprision; might I advise you, proffer
What you purpose, and if refused, so leave him.

Lo. Counsail'd well: there is twenty pieces for you.


Sl. For a wife? Her Ladyship is yours for naught already,
And should I sell her twice?

Lo. This saucy fellow usurpes upon our patience,
Which we will punish be our strong hand.

Sl. A punisher, my Lord? what beg the Beadles Office?


Gef. Dash out's brains.


Sl. I doubt his Lord ships warrant is not current, therefore I Will not obey.


As they strive to oppress him, Ent. Rog. They 2. beat of the other 3. Rog.
Sir, all is dispatched, but by my faith I lie,
Here Is something here to do.
Why God a mercy Master, I perceive
Your spirits not all spent.

Sl. Thanks to thy Sword, or I had bin oppressed else.


Rog. But how differed you? to be assailed by such a shameful odds.


Sl. They scoffed at my supposed poverty,
And my great Lord forsooth, as I had begged,
Would have bestowed his guerdon on my want,
Which taking in foul scorn, the valiant sir
Assailed me at these base advantages:
But have thou done as I enjoined?

Rog. Most carefully; all is to the full dispatched.


Sl. If with the Devil* I could dispense as well,
I should have ease within.

Rog. Ha, sir Geffrey, I
Think you played at leap Frog?

Di. You are sad sir?


Enter the Devil, and claps Slightall on the shoulder. Sl. Do not demand thy
debt before the day;
Thy forfeit is not due yet.

Di. No such thing; the business that I come to treat with thee
Is of another nature.

Rog. Sir, what is he?


Sl. To hot for thy acquaintance, do not ask,
Attend me to my Chamber, whether anon, I will not fail to come.

Rog. Too hot, and why? he may be honest, but he has the
Countenance of an old subtle knave; well, I Will attend you. Ex.

Sl. Now what to me?


Di. Have I not kept my word?


Sl. Thou have.


Di. Stored thee with all the suppliments
Man's use can ask.

Sl. It cannot be denied.


Di. Nay, was not I assistant in this quarrel, prompting thy
Man to come to thy release, just at the instant danger:

Sl. His approach was fortunate and happy.


Di. Then speak freely,
Did ever in thy life time meet a friend,
Whose word, assured trust, and constancy
Could rank with mine in all things?

Sl. Never any; but what may this infer?


Di. Proof of thy gratitude, or to be termed unthankefull.


Sl. Speak wherein.


Di. Will thou in mere
Requital of so many, do to me one fair Office?


Sl. First propose it, and then expect an answer.


Di. There Is a house haunted with a she spirit, one of my
Servants, and Kitchen maids in Hell, employed by me
For some known causes, who has played such prankes there
No man's so bold dares lodge within the room,
This bed would I have thee to undertake.

Sl. To send me to Hell before my day? your plot is too apparent.


Di. Still amiss; have not I power over al my creatures there
To limit and command them? art not thou
One of our house by Indenture? though to them
She appeared ghastly, horrid, and deformed,
To thee she shall seem fair and beautiful,
No whit inferior to that Grecian Queen,
That launcht 1^000. Ships from Aulis Gulf,
And brought them to the fatal siege of Troy.

Sl. Make but this good, I Will do it.


Di. And so confirm thee
A Minyon to the mighty Beelzebub,
And great in our black Kingdom. Exeunt.

Actus Quintus,
Scaene. 1.
Enter Lord, Changables Wife, and Geffrey. Wi. BUt was he so perverse and
peremptory?


Lo. He braved necessity, and outfac'd want,
And took my proffered largess in such scorn,
As he had bin some great Kings Treasurer;
My bounty he defied with shaking pockets,
The noise whereof deafned and seemed to drown
The sound of my despised Charity;
Some pieces I would willingly have given.

Wi. Which would he not receive?


Lo. Merely refused,
And with a haughty and contemplative smile,
Instead of grateful thanks, proudly demanded if I would
Sell my Lordship.

Wi. Did you suffer it?


Lo. While I could limit patience I forbore,
To chastise him with an ungentle hand;
But when I found no bounds in his distaste,
But that it still exceeded Law and compass,
I thought to chastise his ingratitude;
And did it with my Sword.

Wi. 'Twas bravely done.


Gef. I think we made him fly, for I am sure some there
Gave shameful ground.

Wi. But leaving that,
How does my Daughter relish you of late?
Do you not find her coming?

Lo. Affible, as any courteous maid alive can be,
To whom I did discover these proceedings,
Which she seemed well to relish.

Wi. Doubt not then, all will be to our wishes;
One thing only, which sadds me when I think often.

Lo. Pray what is that?


Wi. To think my house should be so strangely troubled
In dead of Night.

Lo. It is prodigious sure.


Wi. And that I fear it is my Mothers Spirit,
Who for some unknown causes restless walks,
As one not sleeping in her quiet grave;
It Is this that moves me deeply.

Lo. I have sent
To one Friar Bernand, a Religious man,
And Tutor to Friar John, to learn from him the depth of
This concealment; and see, in happy time
Treatwell's returned Ent Treatwell.

Tree. Sir, I had conference with him.


Lo. Will he do it?


Tree. By no entreaty or persuasive skill,
Nay were he pressed by menace or command,
He vows to have no hand in these designs;
I could not make him think such things can be;
He counts them mere impostures, falacyes,
Or, let a man receive them at the best,
Illusions of the Devil; that Ghosts walk
He says directly it is impossible,
And in that faith he will dye; further discourse
I could by no means get him listen to, but half displeased he left me.

Wi. That Is his faith, but we are froc'd to credit
Otherwise by lamentable proof. Ent. M. Changeable.

Gef. Here comes your husband, he has perhaps some news

Chan. I have bin laboring, toyling and moyling,
To find the cause of this so strange distemperature,
Questioned Divines, and talked with cunning men,
With Fortune Tellers, skilled in Palmistry,
Not a tain'd Gipsey can escape my search, but I with such
Have Traffic.

Wi. And what comfort?


Chan. Troth small, or none yet, most in this conclude,
That pretend Judgment; that till we find some one
To lodge without companion in that Bed,
And in the dead of darkness question it,
Why, to what end, and for what cause it walks,
The Vision shall continue: this they said,
But none amongst them all so resolute as to
Attempt th'adventure.

Lo. Then it is desperate?


Chan. Not so; for coming from the Friery late,
I met a man by chance that crossed my way,
Whom rather too much spirit had possessed,
Or too much folly made mere desperate;
Would willingly attempt it, and indeed
He did entreat it of me as a Suite.

Lo. What reason moved him to it?


Chan. Because he is mad:
For who of understanding, or of sense,
Would willingly confront great Beelzebub,
Perhaps despair, distraction, discontent
Or fury has possessed him; be it what will,
What Is that to us? his is the certain danger,
Ours the assured gain.

Lo. What might he be?


Chan. One like enough, were Hurcules alive,
With him in Thesius stead to enter Hell;
A mad companion whom you all well know,
One that was once a Suter to my Daughter.

Wi. Not Slightall?


Chapter He.


Lo. My Rival?


Chapter Even the same.


Wi. Of all men living I am loath that he should lodge
Beneath my Roof; were there none such he'de play the
Devil himself.

Chan. But we have those
Within, can tame him were he twice so wild.

Lo. But he to be received? of all men living
I do not love that fellow.

Chan. See your error,
What better way, more secret, and more safe
Can we devise to be revenged, than this?
To have him peece-meale torn by Haggs and Fiends;
He has no prayer to arm him against their assault,
His Oaths will be assistant to their fury,
And further not repel it: You by this
Are from a Rival freed; my daughter Nan,
From an importunate Suter, Beggar too;
We all from a disturber, and a man
That wronged our common quiet.

Gef. He says true sir,
Let all your anger then conclude in this,
And bid the Devil take him.

Wife. A good riddance.


Tree. I know not how you could dispose him better
And empty all your wishes.

Lo. Well, I am pleased,
Employ your best discretions.

Chan. But where is Nan?


Woe. Sick in her Chamber, where she keeps her Bed,
And dares not thence remove.

Chan. The worse for her,
Yet for our purpose better, as it happes,
Because she shall not see him, nor he her;
Hark, there is one knocks, it is Slightall on my life;
Disperse I do entreat, I Will answer him. Within.

Sl. Where Is this Three-headed Dog that keeps Hell gates?
He knockes that feign would enter.

Chapter It Is the same,
I know him by his roaring. Enter Slightall.

Sl. If this, as many men give out, be Hell,
Show me the Master? he that keeps the house:
Pluto that great grim sir.

Chan. I am the Lord
Of this poor Manor; now, I cannot tell
By what hard Fate distressed.

Sl. Oh, you keep lodgings,
And as I understand, the Devil here has late took up his Inn.

Chan. My greater grief sir.


Sl. I would for one night be his Chamber-fellow,
Shall I have entertainment, good mine Host?

Chan. I would not wish you sir.


Sl. Wish me no wishes,
I am the Knight adventurer that would do it:
One thing resolve me; has the Devil your Guest
A Horse in the Stable?

Chan, None sir, I assure you.


Sl. Then make him pay for's Bed; it is the custom
Of every Inn through England.

Chan. Sir, I know you,
And ever wished you to your hearts desire,
How well you may remember; if forgot,
In you it is error, and no fault in me.

Sl. Which love I thus have studied to requite,
To conjure hence your Devil; how appears it?
In Feminine shape?

Chan. Yes, like a woman's sure.


Sl. But not like Madam Proserpine your wife?
No shape else can affright me.

Chan. I must confess
A Devil of her tongue, but no way else sir.

Sl. Show me my Chamber.


Chapter This.


Sl. My lodging.


Chapter There

Sl. Command me two fair Tapers, that may last
And burn out this nights hell.

Chan. Instantly.


Sl Those, my good sword, this Book, and my bold heart
Are Guards sufficient against a thousand shadows
Of no Corporeal essence capable.

Chan. Here be your Lights.


Sl. Some wine too, I entreat,
It Is the best armor to a fainting soul,
And then no further trouble.

Chan. It shall be done.


Sl. Whom am I to encounter? singly too?
Without a second? spirits, or Fantasmes?
Ghosts being, or imaginary dreams?
Not in the comfortable day, and view
Of judging eyes, but in the solitude
Of melancholy darkanesse? I Will not think often, before
I find the truth, or mockery. Ent. with Wine, Chan.

Chan. I have brought your Livery.


Sl. Indeed I must thank you for it? indeed I am your man; now, if you please,
Leave me to my adventure.

Chan. Rest may your Body,
And peace possess your thoughts.

Sl. What e're betide me.
Good night to you: see the doors locked and bolted,
That Is all I shall enjoyne you; till we meet
A fair and prosperous Morning: did I know
What object I should meet with, I could then
Fit me unto the plunge accordingly,
And arm me for the Grapple; but of this
I nothing can conjecture: oh but that Parchment
By which I am obliged to pay a soul,
The memory of that is horrible,
And strikes me with affright: what can I guess,
But that this is my devils Stratagem,
To have his Sergeant death arrest me here;
And bear me to that cursed Dungeon, Hell?
An Usurer would do it; any fat Sergeant
That looks as plumpe in cheeks as the other lean;
Then why not these? their gaine's but petty trash,
But these the precious riches of a soul;
Yet in these Hell Hounds have I greater trust
Than in those Dogs of The Earth, for I am sure
The Devil himself can be no Usurer,
He is so free of his purse; and hitherto
Has lent his money gratis: I Will to Bed,
And yet I will not; I Am no whit dismayed,
Nor yet at peace within; disquieted
With sudden fears, nor yet well reconciled:
I Will try if I can sleep; and yet not so,
Lest I be taken napping; yet I Will throw me
Upon the Bed and read.
Ent. Devils dancing, with Fire wokes, and Crackers. Hey, hey, the Devils
dance, sure Hell's broke loose?
And this is their Shrove Tuesday; horns upon you,
And that is the Cuckolds curse; yet this was sport,
Though somewhat fearful: had they proffered violence,
This should have thrash'd among them, but it seems
These were no quarreling spirits; yet howsoever,
I am glad they are gone: what object shall be next?
Music? yet this sounds sweeter than the first,
For that was all of discords.
Ent. two Maids with Banquet and Lights; after courtesies to him, they fetch
in Anne, and place her at the Table against him. What, in Hell are there white
Devils, Angels are
These of Light, or but light Angels? Banquet too?
And Feast? the furies in the lower World
I thought till now had fed on hot meats all;
On parboyl'd Murderers, Usurers roasted flesh,
Whores cheeks for dainties, Carbonado'd over
Red sulphurous Gridions, and a thousand such:
But what is she enters now? to whom the rest
Do such obeisance? place her in her State,
As if she were the Queen grim Pluto stole,
And great Alcides once redeemed from Hell?
Be'st thou Ghost, shadow, Fuery, Fiend, or Hag,
In Troth thou art a fair one; In Heavens name
What art thou? speak, do answer me in smiles?
Why do thou beckon me? point to those shadows,
As were the meats essential! had I a stomach,
With thee I durst not eat: do laugh at me?
Oh had thou but a substance to that presence
I Would dare on thee, were thou the infirnall Dam.
Temptation still? I Will think her what she seems,
For no affright can lodge in her fair look,
And venture somewhat near; she is left alone,
And single; I will to her, what would you have me
Sit there? I will; eat? but begin I Will do it:
Feign would I take her by the hand, but fear
Hers rather would melt mine, than melt in mine:
Why should my sense of touching thus turn Coward?
My eyes being so valiant, can you speak?
Oh such a wife through all the world I Would wish,
That would be ever Tongue-ty'd; reach your hand?
I would and gladly too; s'foot I will venture,
No danger, a white, soft, and delicate palm,
That nigh dissolves in touching: you feel well,
Sweet, can you kiss? most sweet and excellent;
Again, again; were there no worse in Hell,
And this the place, here would I wish to dwell.
Nay you that can both touch and lip it too,
Sure can do something else: be'st thou a Lamia,
Or Incubus, thou can not escape me so;
I have a spirit in me great as thine:
Thou Have boorded it, I Will see if thou ^anst Bed,
And try if thou have mettle to thy shape;
Dumb spirits cannot clamor out for help,
I Will now try Masteries. Thundering and howling, Ent. Chan. like the Devil

Chan. Think upon thy Bond.


Sl. Ha? when is it due?


Di. Now.


Sl. Hellish Fiend thou lie;
But ere thou claim'st that debt, show me that beauty
I am so much entranced with.

Di. It Is vanished into Air, whence it was formed.


Sl. Great Beelzebub, yet once more let me see it.


Di. Not possible, until you meet in Hell; so near
Thy Fate, and cannot now the terror of that place
Cool thy hot courage? see the forfeiture,
And here I do arrest thee.

Sl. Angels bale me,
Or I am ever lost.

Di. Can thou deny thy deed?


Sl. That hand I cannot, yet be not Judge and
Accuser too; I Will put my cause to censure.

Di. Who shall do it.


Sl. The next we meet.


Di I am content, it is done; how ere thy soul
I Am confident is won. Exeunt.

Act. 5. Scaen. 2.
Enter Usurer, and Scrivener. Vsu. Oh, curse on that supply that snatched from me
So rich a Morgage.

Scri. You looked not in the Almanac
For good and evil days.

Vsu. Yes, but too late:
For when 'twas past, I counsail'd with the day.

Scri. And pray what was the Motto.


Vsu. Guess I pray thee.


Scri. Alas poor man, all to no purpose, be better advised,
Or it may be, kept out of his clutches; these, if we may
Believe th'Astronomer, are omenous days.

Vsu. Tush, none of these.


Scri. What then?


Vsu. Nihil in Bag.


Scri. Nihil in Bag? a scurvy critical Emblem,
Presaging empty pockets, Why no Cutpurse
Will trade when that is in power; then why would you
Lend money in that unlucky hour?

Vsu. It shall be a warning to me: in th'meane time
Would it were razed out of the Calendar quite,
It is a day prodigious. Enter Changeable and Slightall.

Di. If I can prove that all thy debts be paid
Thou art my own, was it not, and speak thy conscience,
Our joint condition?

Sl. I confess it was.


Di. That Usurer's one of thy maine Creditors,
But when thou wast so free to pay thy debts, thou never
Dream'st of thy forfeit; propose to him thy question.

Sl And I will, I bid thee that thy money
Never shall do, save thee.

Vsu. Beshrow you sir, you made me start,
What is your will with me?

Sl. I speak to thee
As to the Drawer at the Vintners Bar:
What is all paid?

Vsu. And like the Bar-boy I
When you bring ready money, and keep touch
All Is paid sir, and you are welcome.

Di. It Is confessed.


Scri. What Is he that looks so ghastly?


Sl. It Is the Devil.


Scri. My Pen and Inkhorne bless me.


Vsu. All those crosses that I have figured on the
Princes Coin, stand still betwixt me and danger,

Exeunt Vsu. and Scri. Di. These are discharged, what refuge have thou now?
Nay bring me unto all thy Creditors;
I Will prove thy debts discharged.

Sl. I pray how many
Of our best London Gallants that hope Heaven,
Can say the like? merit I Hell for that?

Di. But I must have my bargain.


Sl. Two words to it.


Enter two Gentlemen. Di. Have thou not owed to these?


Sl. Most true, I have.


Di. Resolve me friends, as you are Gentlemen,
In what known sums did this man stand engaged to
Each of you?

Genesis 1. I know not why you ask sir,
But the time was he ought me some few pieces,
I thought them desperate once, but nobly, since
He to the full has seen me satisfied.

Genesis 2. I never met with a more generous debtor,
I only trusted him with some few sums,
And he has paid me use and principal,
A thing I never expected.

Di. That Is all Gentlemen -- morrow

Genesis 1. The like to you; I wonder what the Devil
Slightall ails, he looks so strangely on us?

Genesis 2. Sparks no doubt, of his first madness. Exeunt.


Di. Do but name the man, to whom thou can appeal.


Sl. I must confess I Am gone by th'common Law,
The Chancery too, because of thee, my conscience,
If to any, I appeal to the Church.

Di. And to whom there?


Sl. To any reverent Father. Ent. Friar. Ber. and Friar John.


Di. Then to these, to both, or either, freely take thy choice.


Sl. Holy Friar Bernard then, my parting breath
Could not desire a better confessor.

Di. Read there, and tell me what thou think of that.


Ber. Give me but leave to take my second eyes,
I will resolve you presently.

Di. In th'interim, what is the best news in the parish?


Sl. Where I live?


Di. Yes.


Sl. I Will tell thee all I know,
We are better to the Suburbs than they planted
Within the City; thereon holy days
The tavern doors are ever shut till six,
Else is the Vintner fined; but there where we
Keep rendevous may be let in at three, and never stir
The Informers.

Ber. Horrible; what tremour this begets?


Io. Is that the Devil?


Ber. So this Indenture speaks.


Io. Ten thousand Creeds, as many Pater-nosters,
Ave Mary's stand between me and harm.

Ber. In these conditions, I like a cunning Lawyer find a
Clause to cheat the Devil, and to save a soul;
Be'st thou the greatest fell with Lucifer,
Nay he himself, I now am armed for thee: what claim'st
Thou of this man?

Di. I claim a soul.


Ber. Which is not forfeit.


Di. Show me reasons why.


Ber. By help of Heaven I shall: this deed thus runs;
When all his Creditors are satisfied,
His Bonds discharged and cancelled, debts full paid,
His Morgages called in, his words redeemed,
This Bond is then in virtue; not till then.

Di. All this I grant, and call to witness none
Save his own Conscience; art thou not at freedom,
And clear from all the world?

Sl. Most true, I am,
Nor can I name that party under Heaven
To whom I owe one farthing; a brass token
Will cancel all my scores.

Io. It Is a plain case.


Ber. Yes, but against the Devil.


Di. Speak, how that?


Ber. What were the sums for which he stood engaged?


Di. Some fifteen thousand pounds, which I have paid,
And now the man owes nothing; therefore duly I
Claim both soul and body.

Ber. Both are quit,
As thou thy self shall to thy grief confess;
For I will prove him more indebted now
Than e're he was before.

Di. To whom?


Ber. To thee,
Whom till he have discharged the utmost penny,
The Bond's of no effect.

Di. And am I tripp'd?


Io. The Devil has bragged he has caught many a Friar,
Now one has caught the Devil.

Sl. Am I clear then?


Io. Yes, till thou pay'st him all his money down,
Which when thou do thou art worthy to be damned.

Sl. Insert but that condition'mongst the rest,
And I Will again subscribe; Gramercy Friar.

Di. Nay then I see vainly we Devils stand against the
Church, they have still the upper hand,
I yield me vanquished; in the meame time Friar read
And conceal. Gives him another paper to read.

Sl. What, by a quid d it freed? by a quirke in the Law? by
This I see the Divell's no good Lawyer: give me my deed,
That I may see it cancelled and undone:
I Will tear it small as Atoms, that no memory
Of the least Letter be reserved as witness
Against my soul when I shall resurvive;
Nor shall I be at patience till I see
This Parchment ashes, and this horrid Writ
Dissolved to smoke and air.

Di. Yet for my love,
For all the good thou have received by me,
For all my cost and charges, large expense,
As I acquit thee truly, so thou freely
Lend me thine ear.

Sl. Thy bounty has deserved it*
To save a soul I know no Scrivener here
That would not only lend but give an ear.

Ber. I am informed to th'full; if this be true,
Devil, the art honest, and shall have thy due:
Associate me Friar John.

Io. With all my heart,
If this be Asteroth I so late invoakt, I never shall desire
His company, but on an empty stomach. Ex. Friars.

Sl. And shall I meet her there?


Di. Presume thou shall.


Sl. The self same spirit?


Di. And enjoy her to:
Do thou but hazard as thou did before
And doubt not, she is thine own.

Sl. Substantially?


Di. As a contracted Bride and Bedfellow.


Sl. No difference in her shape and ornament?


Di. None.


Sl. Thou can do much with me, nor do I
Know beyond what bounds thy credence to extend: thou
May prove false, but thou have bin yet my friend. Exeunt all.

Act. 5. Scaen. 3.
Enter Anne in Bed, Mistress Changeable, Lord Skales, Treatwell and Geffery. Lo.
Run for the Doctor Geffery.


An. Let him stay,
Deaths Image cannot show so ghastly to me
As would the shape of Doctor, I Will have none.

Wi. Nay sweet Nan be persuaded.


An. If he come
Good faith I Will live no longer.

Lo. Sooth her up,
Or she will grow to frenzy.

Wi. How does my sweet heart?


An. Sick, oh sick at heart, and you keep such a buzzing
In my ears, that I can take no rest;
Would you would leave me.

Wi. See here is my Lord.


An. From whom, if it
Be his will, the Lord deliver me.

Tree. The maid talks idly.


Wi. What would my honey have?


An. Your absence,
Mother, and yours, and all of you; I am but dead
Unless you give me rest; oh sick, sick, sick,
Your tongues like untuned Bells, sound in my ears,
Nothing but Grave and Churchyard.

Wi. Whom wilt have
To watch with thee all night?

An. None but my Father,
All tongues are noise and discords saving his;
But his like charming Music, quietly
Summons my eyes to rest; and could I sleep once
I hope I should be better, oh.

Lo. It Is best to humor her.


An. I shall disclaim all friendship with that tongue
That speaks another syllable; this prating
It strikes quite through my head, and makes it beat
As it would fall in pieces.

Wi. Silence all.


An. Mother, you talk of silence, and yet speak; how can that be?


Wi. Mum.


An. if you were sick at heart as I, you'de
Say mum were a word, Mum sounds to me, being sick,
Loud as a Cannon; why so? I thank you all, indeed you
Do me now a wondrous kindness; I pray, pray for me, I
shall be well at midnight, well at heart;
And at head too I hope: and Mother, nay reply not,
I Am like the man that could endure no noise
In'th silent woman, answer all in signs;
Mother I hope ere morning I shall find
Some more hearts ease; remember when you see it,
I told you often before hand: I would sleep:
Hand in my bed, I Will turn to the wall, and try if I can
Sleep, so good night all. The Bed pulled in

Wi. So, softly as you can; some little rest
Will bring her to her temper, for this night
We will commit her to her Fathers charge, since she so
Much desires it.

Lo. Any thing to give her least content.


Enter old Changeable and Roger. Chan. Thou know my mind, what thou have
undertook
Manage with good discretion.

Rog. It Is as safe
Here in my breast as under bolts and locks,
The cunning'st pick-locke tongue that ever spoke
Shall turn these springs to open them; farewell sir.

Chan. Farewell good Roger, but no word to' your Master
Of what I have revealed thee kept from him.

Rog. As I would do a kindness, lay't in me,
From my old fellow Geffery. Exit.

Chan. Now my Lord; I am still laboring for the general
Good, to have my house at peace, and you content;
But Wife, how is it with Nan?

Wi. Sir, wondrous ill,
She will endure no counsel, physic, language,
All tongues are clamor to her, saving yours,
Harsh as a black Sant, or a grating Wheel;
And I much fear without some providence, she scarce
Will live till morning.

Chan. Alas poor Girl.


Lo. But she entreats in amidst of all extremes
That you would take the pains to watch with her,
No other she will endure.

Chan. And sir, I Will do it,
No other tongue this night shall trouble her, nor presence
Save my own; shall I entreat your Lordship, you good
Wife, and those you think best to associate you,
To stand in sight of all such Apparitions
As shall in this room be made visible?
My life shall for your safety be ^ngag'd, in it can be no
Danger.

Lo. What assurance can you produce for that?


Chan. The word and faith of some approved religious,
Who have promised, at my great intercession, that this
Night shall be the last of all my progidies
That thus afflict my house.

Tree. I am but one and I my self will venture.


Gef. Faith
And I.

Chan. I do not think wife but there will be visions
Worthy both sight and observation to;
What will you say if Slightall be this night
Contract to a she fury? but no words,
I Will not tell you all I know; he is past his sense
And apt for any stratagem of Hell: I am promised
Much fair hope; will you ascend and guide my Lord to a
Convenient place, where you may view this object?

Wi. In th'meane time, how will you dispose your self?


Chan. To watch with Nan,
And in her great despair to comfort her;
Naught but the dangerous sickness of my Girl
Could keep me from you, but the hour draws on,
Which Ghosts ever are tied to.

Wi. Mauger spirits, I Will
Once take spirit into me.

Lo. A woman lead? They ascend.
'Twere baseness not to follow.

Chan. My Girle's my
Charge, she has bin ever so, and therefore ought
This night; and since one Devil some
Few days since began to haunt my house
She never had peace of thought, health, nor content,
Or least essential comfort; which to compass,
All Art, wit, learning, this night I Will implore
To drive him hence, shall haunt my house no more. Exit.
Thunder. Enter above Lord, Wife, Treatwell, and Geffery.

Lord. The Larum's given;
For at that watch word still the rufling noise begins.

Gef. Would I were hence.


Lor. Now sweeter Music strikes.


Wif. There Is no affright in this.


Enter Friars, Bernard and John at several doors, as hallowing the Room.
Gef. My lord these Friars I know.


Lo. But whether
They, or but their shadows by Art Magic raised we
Cannot yet presume.

Wi. But this I Am sure.
They are exceeding like.

Friar Bernard fetches in at his door Slightall, and Roger, Friar Io. at his,
Anne and the Devil. Lo. That can be none but Slightall.


Gef. My Lord see, my
Fellow Roger's damned, for he is got in
Among the Fiends and Furies.

Wi. Were I not certain my daughter Nan were desperately
Sick, and kept both Bed and Chamber, I durst swear
That were my Girl.

Gef. Is she not dead to night, and
Now her Ghost there walks?

Lo. What might we
Think often? the Friars prepare for Marriage; but what, he
Stands for the Father, whom they beckon to, to give
Her hand to Slightall.

Gef. Now I have't;
Upon my life the Devil can be no better; she the illusive
Spirit by whom this room was haunted, contracted
Now unto yon desperate Ruffian.

Lo. But this troubles me, the Fury should assume no other
Shape but her fair Angel beauty.

Wi. Even for that, great reason too, would I could understand it.


Wi. Because he was enamoured first on her,
The more to tempt him, she assumed that shape,
Whom else could she so fitly personate?
Nay go together, you have my consent,
I Will never forbid the Banes.

Lo. Much joy unto you, good troth nor I.


Wi. The Devil give you good often.


Chan. And so the
Devil does, for your kind consent my Lord I thank you,
And gentle wife for yours.

An. And, next my Father,
I hold it my fit duty, thanks to both.

Wi. Let me leap down the next way, for the contract
I vow to break.

Rog. But Mistress, that is the next way
To break your neck, and keep the contract firm;
The Staire-case will do better.

Lo. Thus over reached?


Wi. Fooled and deluded? give me way my Lord,
For I will down among them.

Rog. Hye to shelter, for there is a storm coming.


Sl. That you are man, this woman, I am rapt
And extasy'd in brain, but cannot yet
Unwrappe my senses from this wondrous maze;
This sudden light of knowledge so much dazels,
That in my judgment I am blinded quite,
And know not how to free me.

Chan. That anon, my Daughter making known your
Deep despair, your help I studied both of purse and brain,
And fearing a lost soul, I then turned Devil,
To prove your better Angel; talk with her,
For I must arm for thunder.

Enter Lord, Wife, Treatwell, and Geffery. Wi. Was this a marriage in the
Devils name?


Chan. Yes, and his Dam in presence; she looked on.


Wi. That your she Lamia?


Chan. Yes, my sweet wench Nan.


Wi. Were you sick with a vengeance?


An. But I told you I should be well by Midnight;
So good Mother I feel my self I am well, never better

Chapter Shall I be plain, my Lord? I crave your pardon,
Wife, for your rage I am armed, yes,
If thou could encounter with
Flesh-hookes, and with Firebrarnds; for I tell thee
I am practiced in the Devil: but to you, my Lord,
I passed my faith unto this Gentleman,
Had it been done to you I never had broke it.

Lo. Sir you speak nobly;
What must be, must be: it is in the will of Heaven,
And I am well pleased with it.

Wi. And am I over-reached? well Slightall,
My blessing on thee, she is thine.

Sl. Mother, my Knee in duty bows thus low:
My Lord, your hand, I hope no
Malice harbors in your heart.

Lo. I hope you will not imagine't.


Sl. Sir I do not; and all I hope are pleased.


All. We are.


Sl. If these be so, we then are happy,
We are new wedded, you are our chief Guest,
Though once my Rival, now you are my friend:
My fortune thus all malice has defeated,
And by a new trike the Grand Devil cheated.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

