ONE OF THE SERMONS PREACHED At Westminster: The fifth of APRIL, (being the
day of the Public Fast;)

Before the Right Honorable Lords of the High Court of PARLIAMENT, and set
forth by their appointment.

By the Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Badger, and are to be sold by John Stempe at his
shop at the East end of S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street. 1628.

JEREMY 3.22. the latter part of the Verse.
Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord, our God.
SOme wonderful sight out of all question was here to be seen, or else men
never durst have been so bold, as to have called to the great God of heaven to
behold it. Some pleasing spectacle out of all doubt was to be exhibited, or
else the great God of heaven would never have vouchsafed the casting down of
his gracious eye upon it. It was so indeed. A wonder above all other wonders:
the stony and rebellious hearts of men suddenly turned, into soft and obedient
hearts. A joyful spectacle unto God above all other spectacles; runnagate
servants returning unto the service of their Sovereign Lord; rebellious
children repenting, and running as it were into the bosom of their gracious
God, and loving Father. If we will believe him who is Truth it self, this is
the principal, if not the only sight upon earth, which gives contentment, and
brings joy unto Heaven, Luke 15.7.
unto the Saints, unto the Angels, yea unto the blessed Trinity it self. I
have chosen this, as a Text fitting the present occasion, because we are now
doing the very same thing, which the Israelites then did: For tell me, I pray,
what do we intend by this solemn general Assembly, or what do we pretend by
this public Fasting, Praying, and humbling our selves under the hand of
Almighty God, but this serious protestation; Behold, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God? Bold, profane, and wretched men we are if we
deride our Maker, and call unto him, that he would out of heaven behold a Sight
here upon earth when in truth there is no such Sight to be seen. Dutiful,
holy, and happy men we are, if God looking down from heaven, behold in us,
that which we pretend, and he expects. Now that we may the better understand
what this is, let us come to a particular consideration of the Text; which is
nothing else, but a short and direct answer of Gods people, unto a Proposition
which God had made unto them in the words immediately going before. Gods
proposition was this: (O return ye back sliding children, and I will heal
your rebellions) The Israelites answer hereunto, is very punctual and direct.
(Behold, we come unto thee for thou art the Lord, our God.) In which answer, we
may observe these two general parts:

1. (Behold, we come unto thee)

2. For thou art the Lord, our God.

This protestation consists not of many words, and yet it contains many
matters of great importance; which I will speak of in order, as the words
shall offer them unto me.

1. Ecce, Behold: For howsoever the Heart be not expressly named, yet this
Ecce, calls as it were upon God, to take notice of the secret resolution of
their hearts, and to behold their obedience, in bowing and bending of them,
unto his most just, and holy commands. In all acceptable obedience unto God,
the Heart must be the ringleader: if that be wanting, the seeming good actions
of a Heartlesse Christian, are but like the walking or stirring of a liueles
body, Seneca.
which affrights many, but pleases no beholder. Omnia honesta opera voluntas
inchoat. It is the Heart or Will, which gives the beginning unto every good
action: and this is it which in the first place the Israelites presented unto
God: And surely there was good reason, and a just cause of their so doing

First, because their unfaithful and stubborn heart was it, that had lead
them out into open rebellion against God; and therefore it was necessarily
required, that a loyal and obedient heart, should also be their Leader, in
this their Submission, and coming in unto Almighty God. Again, whenever God
calls unto a Sinner to return, his meaning is, that his heart should first
answer unto the call. My Son give me thy heart; and Hebrews the 10.22. Let
us draw near unto God with a true heart. As good stay behind; as come when
God calls, and leave our hearts behind. Last of all, it is the Heart upon
which Gods eyes are principally fixed, whenever we present our humble service
unto him: and it is one of his Royal Prerogatives, to be the Discerner of
Hearts. We may therefore well suppose, that these Israelites durst never have
called God to Behold their coming, had not their hearts been their leaders.
For they could not be ignorant of that peremptory conclusion. ( If I regard
wickedness in my heart, Psalm. 66.18.
the Lord will not hear me. Now if any man ask me whence came this admirable
change, that men of brazen foreheads, and iron hearts, are so suddenly become
men of humble, soft, and religious hearts, all that I can answer is this: The
same God that had long called unto them for their hearts, had now at length
given them new hearts, and a new spirit, Chap. 36. Verse 26. Prosper.
and had taken the stony heart out of their body, as the Prophet Ezekiel
speaks. Bona voluntas est hominis propria, sed Deo inspirante concepta. A good
will, or a good heart, is a man's own when he has it: but it is the divine
inspiration from whence he has it. Let us now for a while leave the
consideration of these Israelites, and their new hearts, and come to consider
our own. We all make the same protestation this day, of our obedient and
penitent hearts which they did. We all in effect entreat GOD to look down
from heaven, and to Behold this unfeigned and sincere resolution of our Hearts.
Take heed of drawing near unto GOD with your lips, and remoouing your
hearts far from him. Be sure of that constant resolution which was in holy
David, when he made this profession: Psalm. 40.
I desire to do thy good will (O my God) yea thy law is within my heart. Pars
prima bonitatis est velle fieri bonum. The first part of goodness, is to have
the Will of being good. I cannot pierce into your hearts, and see your secret
intentions and purposes: God can, and does, and your own hearts also can and
do take notice of your inward resolutions. Has any man therefore had a
filthy, lustful, and adulterous heart; ask it whether it be now resolved to
keep it self a pure, chaste, and undefiled heart. Has any man had a covetous
or an ambitious proud heart, let him search into it, and see whether it now be
resolved, to renounce the world, with all the vain pomp and pride thereof.
Has any man had an uncharitable, contentious, and malicious heart; let him
examine himself, whether he be fully bent to purge out this old and sour
leaven of maliciousness or no.

If our outward humiliation be seuer'd from this inward resolution, Aduersus
Marc. 4.
What is it but (as Tertullian speaks) Impietatis secreta superficialibus
officijs obumbrare. To hide the depths of wickedness under a Superficies of
holiness. I hope there is none such here; but if there be, let them know, that a
dissembling Nation is styled, The People of Gods wrath; Esaias 10. Verse 6.
because hypocrites are (to use the Philosophers phrase) in vltima and proxima
dispositione, in the last, nearest, and fittest disposition, to take fire at
the devouring flame of Gods wrath. In this day therefore of our solemn Fast,
and of our professed new obedience, it much imports us to be sure that we are
sound, and not rotten at the heart; least when we shall come hereafter to
plead with God, as those hypocritical Jews did; why have we fasted, Esaias 58.
and thou see it not. Why have we punished our selves, and thou regardest it
not? We receive the same answer. Behold, in the day of your fast, ye seek
your own will; Behold, you fast to strife and debate. If there be in our
hearts a resolution only of abstaining from meat and drink for certain
hours, but no purpose of waining our selves from our own wills, all outward
shows of intended reformation, will but make to our deeper condemnation. Qui
laudatur ab hominibus vituperante Deo, non saluabitur ab hominibus damnante
Deo. He who is praised of men, whilst God accuses him, cannot be saved by men,
when God will condemn him. But I am charitably persuaded, that every one of
us, who this day present our selves unto the view of God, has brought with him
a new heart, fully resolved upon a new and holy life.

2. (Oreturne ye disobedient children.) The Israelites term it Coming.
(Behold, we come unto thee.) Both words note unto us one and the very same
thing; to wit, the forsaking of our wicked and sinful ways and the walking
in the undefiled way of Gods Commandments. For as sin, is Auersio a
Creatore, and conuersio ad creaturam. An inordinate turning from God unto the
creature; so on the contrary, Godliness or righteousness, is a turning from
the vain creature, and a Returning or coming unto God our Creator. August.
Ad Deum non locis mouemur sed moribus. We come unto God, not by shifting of
places, but by changing of our manners and practices. Coming unto the Church
(as now we do) is but coming unto the material house of God: ceasing to do
evil, practicing to do well, that is our true returning unto God. Es. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord. If there be not this outward practice, answerable
unto the pretended inward obedience of our hearts; out of question the former
pretense was but false and counterfeit. Nemo veraciter dicit, Parisicensis.
volo, qui nonfacit illud quod potest. No man truly says: I am in Will and
Heart resolved, unless according to his ability, he endeavor to perform his
resolution.

But every man will allege for himself, that he is none of those that come
unto God in pretended resolutions of obedience; he comes in deed, that is, in
the practice of a Godly life. Let us examine a little the truth of this
allegation. There is but one way of coming unto God; there are many crooked
bypaths (yet broad and beaten ways too) which carry us quite away from him. He
who walks in the way, which Gods Word has chalked out unto him, he and none
but he, is coming unto God; and how few be there that care either to find or
follow this way; They which follow the guidance of their own corrupt and crafty
reason, may come unto wealth or worldy preferment, but certainly by this way
they can never come unto God: and how many be there that wander in this way
all their life long. But the Apostle has given them their doom. 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceiues not the things which are of God, neither can he,
for they are foolishness unto him. They which follow the bent of their own
sensual appetite, may wallow in bodily and filthy pleasures; but by this way
they can never come to God, nor to those pleasures which areat his right hand
for evermore. Last of al, they which walk in the way wherein the Multitude
walks, and follow only the fashions of the present time, they may at length
arrive at that place, where they shall meet with most company, but never there
where they shall meet with God, and the best and most blessed company. Seneca.
Tritissima quaeque via maxim decipit. The most beaten and broad way, leads us
farthest out of the right way. What therefore remains, but only this? If thou
would have assurance, that thou art in the number of those that truly come
unto God, see whether thou take his word for a lantern unto thy feet, and a
light unto thy paths; for this alone is the straight way chalked out by God,
and bringing men unto GOD. And let this suffice for the Act of our coming unto
God; the Circumstances of this act must now be handled, which are in number
three.

The first, We; that is, All we, the whole Congregation, Behold, we come.
Had not their coming been a joint and general coming, they could not
thereby have obtained that which they sought for. What was that? The remoouall
of such heavy judgments as lay upon them, and the auerting of more heavy,
which by the Prophets were threatened against them. A particular man by
returning unto God, may turn away a particular judgment hanging over his own
head; but where the rebellion has been general, and where the judgment
prepared is some general calamity, there it must be a general conversion and
coming unto God, that must turn away his wrath. Ezekiel. 14.14.
Noah, Daniel, or Job, may deliver their own souls by their particular
repentance, but they shall save neither sons, nor daughters, they only shall
be delivered, but the land shall be wasted. If the Sea roar and swell,
threatening to break down the banks, and ouerflow some large plain; it is not
the care of one or two in keeping or repairing their banks, that can prevent
the inundation: even so when God, (that I may use the phrase of the Prophet
Jeremy) shall roar from above against a nation, and be ready to swallow them
up: If there be not a general endeavor in stopping him from making a breach,
the endeavors of some few cannot prevent the deluge of his wrath. Would we
therefore (the people of this land) prevent a general calamity, which out of
doubt hangs over our heads for our general impiety; Iet us troop together,
and one call upon another; Hos. 6.
Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has spoiled us and he will heal
us, he has wounded us, and he will bind us up again. Let the children of
Israel, Ier. 50. Verse 4.
and the children of Judah Come Together, and weeping seek the Lord their God:
In brief, let us all joining together, hands, hearts, and voices, say truly
and unfeignedly unto God, Behold, we come unto thee; and then there is no doubt
to be made, but he will turn away his fierce wrath from us. But alas, what
hope or likelihood is there of such a joint and general returning unto God?
Every man indeed seems willing that others should turn from their sins and
come unto God, but the most are desirous to stay behind themselves, or to be
the very last in this return. The Laity are much troubled, and heartily
grieved at the Scandalous sins of the Clergy, and by all means they would have
us forced to come unto God jointly and generally, without leaving any one
stragler of our company behind us. But when the matter concerns themselves, I
see no such general displeasure against their own sins, no such care or
endeavor to return jointly and generally unto God in their own persons. And
I am afraid we of the Clergy are quit with them in the same kind: inueighing
mightily against their sins, and crying aloud unto them, Return, and yet in
the mean time going on in our own. I might say the same of the great and
mighty men of the land, compared with the poorer and meaner sort of people.
Both have their proper and known faults; each of them are wondrous earnest
that the other might be reclaimed, and neither so forward as they should be, in
reforming themselves. I see but one way to make us come jointly and Generally
unto God; and that is, if we can fall amongst our selves at an unwonted and
unheard of, but most allowable and happy strife, who shall be the first in
coming unto God. I am sure there is every where strife more then enough for
worldly precedence: I would I were able to kindle in your hearts a spiritual
ambition about this Holy Precedence, in coming unto God. Let us of the Clergy
begin the contention; and as we have a prerogative of more near and special
attendance upon God in regard of our sacred function: so let us strive to come
first and nearest unto him in holiness of conversation. If we prove dull and
slack herein, you the Nobles, the Magistrates, the great men of the kingdom,
step forth, and claim your privilege. The high Officers of the Kingdom in
Civil matters challenge a right of precedence before other men: but this is
not all; take notice I pray, of your full right. You are styled and enrolled,
Officers of Gods Kingdom, Wisd. 6. Verse 4.
and therefore you must hold your precedence, as well in the Service of God as
of the King. If neither Priests nor Nobles, Ministers nor Magistrates, will put
in for this right of precedence: you of the commonalty, you of the lowest and
meanest of the commonalty, strive to get the precedence from us both. It is
neither pride nor evil manners, in this case to thrust before your betters.
Nay, in so doing, you make your selves more holy then your Priests more noble
then your Princes. It was the saying of a Philosopher; Philosophia stemma non
inspicit. The Divine may say as truly; Theologia stemma non inspicit; Divinity
looks not upon pettigrees. He is nobly borne, who is borne again of the
Spirit; he is honorable, who makes it his honor, to be one of the first and
foremost in Gods service. Eccl. 10.20.
There is a seed of man which is an honor able seed: and this honorable
seed are they which fear the Lord. Now my wish and prayer unto God, and my
earnest exhortation unto you is this; that you would all grow ambitious of this
honor, that you would lay aside all other strife, and make this your only
strife, who shall first leave his sins, who shall first come unto God. If
this strife were once a foot amongst us, no doubt but we should come jointly
and generally unto God, as the Israelites here did.

(We Come) in the present Tense; not we will come ere long; not we will
consider upon it when will be our fittest time to come unto thee. No such
matter. Here is obedience without delay, present coming, answerable unto Gods
present calling. When God calls upon sinful men to repent and return unto
him, the most give him an answer, not unlike that which Felix gave unto Paul,
Act. 24.26.
Go thy way for this time, and when I have convenient time, I will call for
thee again. But we must not refuse Gods convenient time, and think to make
him wait upon our convenient time. No, the practice of these Israelites must
be our pattern and instruction. Prosp.
Obedientia non discutit Dei mandata, sed facit. True obedience does not debate
the case when God commands, but presently falls in hand with executing his
command. Excellent is that example of faithful Abraham. God says unto him,
Genesis 12.
Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers
house, unto the land that I will show thee. And so Abraham presently departed.
Even so when GOD bids the true seed of faithful Abraham, to leave their
corrupt affections, to forsake their wonted wicked courses, and come into that
land of Righteousness which he shows unto them, they presently leave the
one, and come into the other. Delay is always dangerous in matters of
importance, but in this our coming unto God, it draws three Mischiefs after
it, and they are mighty mischiefs too.

The first is, I have married a wife, Luke 14.20.
I cannot come: so sinful men answer when God inuites them to come unto him by
true repentance; We are wedded to our own lusts; we cannot come. But who has
made this marriage betwixt thine own heart, and thy sinful lust? Who is it
that persuades thee, to forsake the commands of God thy Father, and of Holy
Church thy Mother, and to cleave unto this strumpet, which thou call thy
wife? Sure the Author of this is neither better nor worse, but even the devil
himself. Now consider seriously; is the infinite Majesty of the great God of
heaven, a fit Subject to have such a scorn and contumely put upon him? What
earthly King would not storm and rage at the Indignity, if calling one of his
servants to come unto him, he should answer. Sir I am sporting with some of
mine idle companions, and therefore your Highness must be content to wait my
better leisure. But if hereunto he should add; here is an old Rebel and
Arch-traitor against your Majesty, who persuades me not to come at your call,
and I must be ruled by him; this would aggrauate the matter, and make it be
taken far more hainously. This in effect is all that the Fornicator, the
Drunkard, the Covetous, the Ambitious person has to say for himself, why upon
Gods call he comes not presently unto him. His sinful lusts entreat him to
embrace them yet a little while longer: and the devil whispers unto his heart;
Nazianzen.
Da mihi quod praesens est, Deo quod futurum est, mihi florem aetatis, illi
reliquias. Give me the present time, allow God the Future, give me the flower
of thy youth, let God have the bran of thine old age. Thus wretched men to the
infinite dishonor of their Creator, let the devil take his choice, and put
God to wait for his leauings; which in all likelihood will in the end prove
either nothing, or worse then nothing.

The second Mischief which follows upon it, vltimum Terribilium, the last and
most terrible evil that can befall a man, who is not yet in hell. These things
considered should make a Christian who has any care of his own soul, to
beware of the devils Dilemms, who always advises men in the point of
Repentance, as the Philosopher did in the case of marriage. If a young man ask
his counsel; when shall I repent, and return unto God? his answer will be,
Nondum, not yet, it is a great deal too soon. If an old man ask him the same
question, his answer will be, Nunquam, not at all, it is now much too late.
But we may build upon it, that whenever God calls unto us, (as at this very
present he does unto us all,) it is neither too soon nor too late, and
therefore let young and old presently come unto him.

The third and last Mischief, Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, Eccles.
5.7.
and put it not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord
break forth, and in thy security shall thou be destroyed. The longer thou
make the patience of God, expect thy return, the heavier will the load of
Gods judgments light upon thee, Gregory.
for not returning Quo diutius expectat, durius damnat. The longer he waits,
the harder he strikes: Do not thou tremble to think, that whilst thou art
sporting with thy sinful lusts, Heb. 3. Verse 11.
God may be Swearing in his wrath, that thou shall never enter into his rest?
What was it but delaying to come when God called, which drowned the old world,
which consumed Sodom with fire and brimstone, and which at length carried away
the Jews into the Babylonian Captivity? And why may not England fear, lest by
the same fault, we suddenly draw upon us the like destruction? O consider
this, Psalm. 50. Verse 22.
ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you. O consider this ye that fear God; and that he may embrace you
within his arms of mercy, say presently unto him from an unfeigned resolution;
Behold, we come unto thee.

Having spoken of the Generality of the Persons which must come, and of the
Present haste to be made in coming; the last Circumstance remains; which is,
the Direct Course here used: (We come unto That.) They come in a most Direct
line unto God himself: And in this straight line, they move not only toward
him, or till they come some what near him, but they come up close unto him;
never resting, until they come to rest, as it were in his very bosom. This
alone is the Straight, Short, and perfect way of coming unto God; other
courses, are but crooked by paths, or circular compassings, and will not answer
the expectation of the Comers, as shall be cleared unto you in the particulars.

It is a rule in natural Philosophy, Omnis motils est propter indigentiam;
Every thing moves for supplying some want wherein it stands. Now the sinner by
this motion which we call Repenting, Returning, Converting or Coming (for all
is one) seeks after three things, whereof no one can be had, but by coming
directly unto God himself for it. And the least of these three things is of
more worth, then all the wealth, all the honor, yea all the world besides: and
therefore must be duly sought.

The first is Venia, a more proper and direct course, then to come immediately
and directly unto God the Father, by the True Way, God the Son, taking for
our guide God the Holy Ghost? In this motion there is no crooked turning into
by lanes, no circular and frivolous running in a round, but a most direct and
straight coming unto God. And this is just as God would have it. Jeremy 4.
Esaias 43.
O Israel, if thou return, return unto me, says the Lord: I, even I am he,
that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake. And therefore Tertullian
said well in this case; Quo fugiam poenitendo, nisi ad eius misericordiam cuius
potes^atem contempseram peccando? Unto whom shall I fly for pardon in
repenting, but unto his mercy, whose power I contemned in sinning? And as for
pardon of faults, so likewise for Release from Punishments which we feel or
fear, the same direct course unto God must be holden. For the same hand which
has wounded us, can only heal us, the same mighty arm which has broken us,
Hosea 6.
can only bind us up again, as the Prophet speaks. The young Prodigal when
he came to his right mind, understood that none but his Father could either
pardon his faults, or free him from his miseries: and therefore his resolution
is; I will arise, and go to my Father, Luke 15.
and say; Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, etc. You know
the gracious entertainment which he found. Shall we then when we find our
selves troubled in conscience with the guilt of our sins, hope to get
absolution and remission from sinful men, standing in as much need of
remission as our selves? By no means: For, 2 Cor. 5. Verse 18.
albeit the ministry of Reconciliation be committed unto men; yet there was
never man invested with the Authority of Remission, Mat. 9.6.
but only the man Christ Jesus, who was God and Man in unity of Person. Shall
we when we feel the smart of Gods scourges, or tremble for fear of some
future punishments, hope to clear the score by purchasing some plenary
Indulgence from Christ's pretended Vicar. Away with such foolery. Let the Pope
first prove that he needs no pardon for his own sins, or that he can pardon
himself, and then let him try what good his pardon can do unto others. And
as for release from any punishment, whereunto God has adjudged a sinner, I am
sure that if it were but one fit of a burning ague, the Popes plenary
Indulgence, with that most favorable and liberal clause, Quantum se extendunt
claues Petri, can do him no help or good at all. Do we herefore seek to be
freed from the burden of sin which presses our consciences, or from the burden
of punishment which lies upon our backs, or hangs over our heads; let us take
the only straight and direct way, which is, by a true Faith, and a new life to
come unto God; and in so doing we may assure our selves of finding that which
we come for.

There is a second want, that comes from above from the Father of Lights, James
1.17.
and therefore if any man lack this heavenly gift, let him come to as he it of
God, which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, as the same
Apostle speaks. To imprint this lesson in our hearts, Blessed Saint Paul
makes it a usual Salutation in the forefront of his Epistles; Romans 1.7.
Grace and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. The very
heathen Philosopher had some glimmering of this Truth, that man's goodness is
Gods gift: which made him say. Seneca.
Bonus vir sine Deo nembest. Nulla sine Deo bonamens. There is no good man; nor
no good mind in any man without God. Does the soul therefore of any man
hunger and thirst after righteousness, does it long to be refreshed with the
dew of divine grace, Ier. 2.13.
seek it at the Fountain of living waters, and not in broken pitts, which can
hold no such precious water. Some are so foolish as to think spiritual grace
may be found in holy water, in Relics and such like superstitious
observations. Some hope to fetch it from Rome, Loretto or Jerusalem by a
tedious and long pilgrimage. Some suppose the directest and readiest way, is to
beg it of the Saints, and especially of the Blessed Mother of our Savior
Christ. But God con^eigheth not his grace into the souls of men, thorough any
of those channels. We must come unto him for it, and in the use of his
ordinances, we shall receive heavenly grace immediately from the hand of our
heavenly Father. Parisiensis.
Gratia immediate ex ipso Fo^e descendit in cor humanum, alium alveum, aut
aliam causam non habet. Grace does immediately descend into the heart of a man,
from God the Fountain of grace; other course or other cause it has none. All
therefore that thirst after this sanctifying grace must come directly unto God
for it. Here every man will be ready to say; there is none of us so wretched
and profane that comes not directly and daily unto God, for this gift of
heavenly grace. I will show you what manner of men refuse to do this, and then
I will leave it to every man's own conscience, whether he be in the number, or
no. Those who find not themselves ouer-pressed, and wearied under the burden
of their sins: Those who feel not in themselves a hungring and thirsting
after righteousness; those that care not for the means of obtaining grace; to
wit, Prayer, the Word, the Sacraments: In brief, those that are more desirous
to enjoy their sinful lusts, then to subdue and conquer them: these, and all
these refuse to come unto God for his sanctifying grace. Nay, I may go a step
further; If God come and offer his grace unto any thus disposed, they are ready
to thrust it back; and had much rather obtain from God (if it were possible)
a dispensation to live still after the sinful lusts of their own hearts,
than a power and strength to overcome the sinful lusts of their own
hearts. If GOD should presently offer unto us all, our choice of these two; how
many of us would be at a stand which to choose? How many may we justly suspect
would choose the latter, and the worser part? I press this no further; Let
every man judge of himself by that which has been said, whether he say unto
God, as these Israelites did, Behold I come unto thee, for thy sanctifying
grace.

Now there remains the third and last thing which a sinner returning seeks
after, but one direct course to obtain it, and that is by addressing our
selves as humble petitioners unto God, and saying: Behold we come unto thee,
to beg that which we know we cannot merit. Romans 3.
For all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and have no other
hope to obtain it, Romans 6.
but by way of free gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And yet let me tell
you this; that if we come unto God for it as we should, that is, by faith and
holiness of life: this very coming is a most certain leading way thereunto,
though not a deserving cause thereof. It is a short but a sound determination
of S. Bernard; that good works, or a godly life is, Viaregni, non causa
regnandi. The Apostle has taught us the same doctrine; Romans 2.2.7.
that by continuance in well doing, we seek glory and honor, and
immortality and eternal life. But, alas, how many be there in the world that
dream they seek after eternal life, and yet never take this direct course of
coming unto God for it? Will your proud Papisticall merit mongers come to God
for it and beg it at his hands? No sure. They will rather urge God to bring
it unto them, and pay it as a due debt, which by their condign merits they
have long ago deserved, secundum aequiualentiam rei adrem, as their Jesuitical
Doctors have taught them to speak. Do profane Epicures, and ungodly
worldlings seek it by coming unto God for it? No questionless: They rather
seek it from the devil; as if they believed not only that boasting lie of
his, Luke 4.
All the Kingdoms of the earth are mine, and to whomsoever I will, I give
them: But as if they believed that which the Father of lies durst not affirm;
that the kingdom of Heaven was at his dispose, and that by his service it
might be gained. Last of all, Do hypocrites (think you) and dissemblers come
to God for eternal life? Nothing less. They make a show sometimes of coming
toward God, and drawing very near unto him, but in their hearts they are
resolved never to come at him. It should seem they think to get into heaven,
not by coming unto God in the plain and direct way of a lively Faith and a
holy life, but by deceiving God, and shipping in at some blind back-dore of
their own making. But to shut up this point, and withal the former part of my
Text. Let every man that desires either pardon of his sins, or release from
Gods judgments, that hopes either for infusion of sanctifying grace here, or
participation of eternal glory hereafter, come to God for all these, and come
to him in that direct way which he has appointed. And thus much for the
Israelites protestation of obedience.

We are now come to the other branch of my Text, which contains a Declaration
of those Motives which induced them to obey; in these words. (For thou art the
Lord, our God.) Here is a double chain to bind men unto obedience. The
strong iron chain of Gods infinite Power and universal dominion, which ties
all men alike: (For thou art the Lord,) The pleasant golden chain of Gods
special love and mercy, which in special manner tied these Israelites unto
him. (Our God.) He that acknowledges God to be the universal and Omnipotent
Lord over all the world, fear should drive him to obey his commands. He which
believes him to be His God, love should draw him to obey his commands. He whom
this double chain cannot bind unto obedience, is in a far worse case then
that Demoniack in the Gospel, Mark 5.3.
Whom no man could bind, no not with chains. Let us begin with the former.

God is here acknowledged, The Lord. Not a Lord, over this or that Nation,
within the precincts of this or that place; but The Lord, over all nations,
over all countries, over all Lords, over all Creatures. I am The Lord, this is
my name, and my glory I will not give to another, Esaias 42.8. Now God is such an
universal Lord, in three respects:

First, he is the Lord Creator, Psalm. 100.
It is he that made us, not we our selves. Not our earthly parents; who were
unable to frame the least part of our bodies, much more unable to breath into
us living souls. Qui silium generat, Lactantius.
non habet potestatem vt concipiatur, vt nascatur, vt viuat. He which begets a
child, has neither the conception, the birth, nor the life of his own
child, within the limits of his power. If our Parents had been our Makers,
we had been but like dead idols, which have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, hands and handle not, feet and walk not. This ground work being now
laid, that God, is the Lord of all men by creation, let us consider whatforce
this ought to have in drawing us to obedience. First, I am sure, that God
himself judges it a most forcible motive. Why else should he set such a
Memento upon it? Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Eccles. 12.
Out of doubt God knew that it was impossible even for a young man to grow
rebellious, whilst he remembers the Lord to be his Creator. Why should God
charge every wicked and ungodly man, Deuteronomy. 32.18.
with an Oblitus es Domini Creator is tui, Thou have forgot the Lord thy Maker;
but that he knows, if this were not forgotten, his commands would never be
disobeyed. Not only God, but all good men have conceived the force of this
motive to be so great, that upon the apprehension thereof, they presently
conclude in their own souls: Come let us fall down and kneel before the
Lord our Maker. If Grace were wanting, yet Reason is able to make this
inference; If God be my sovereign Lord by right of Creation, I cannot resist
him but to mine own destruction. For woe will be unto him that strives with
his Maker. Esaias 4.9.
This reason makes all creatures though deuoid of reason, ready to obey at Gods
beck. God made the Sun; and therefore if he bid it stand still in the
firmament, it dares not but stand, if he bid it go back so many degrees, it
dares not but go back; though in its own nature it rejoices like a Giant to
run his perpetual course. God made the fire; therefore if he forbid, it dares
not burn the three children, no not singe so much as one hair of their heads.
The like obedience to their Creator has shown it self in the most fierce
beasts, in the most ravening birds, in the most venomous Serpents. What shall
we say then is the cause, that this most forcible reason, has so little force
in moving reasonable men unto obedience? That whereas every child if he be
asked who made him, can presently answer, God; yet few men when GOD who made
them asks for their obedience, have learned to answer from the heart, Behold
we obey. I can give no better reason here of then this: that men deceive
themselves, whilst they suppose they firmly believe that as an Article of
their faith, which they only assent unto for company or fashion sake, because
other Christians hold it for an Article. Such a belief, is but a slight
opinion swimming in the brain, it is no true and lively faith, rooted in the
heart. Such men when they call God their Creator, deal with him as the jews
did with Christ; who clothed him in a royal robe, and salute him with the
royal title of a King, and yet at the same time they scorn him, buffet him,
and spit in his face. Does not the Drunkard, the Fornicator, the Sweater, and
in a word every bold and rebellious sinner deal with God in the same manner?
He calls him his Creator, he bows the knee unto him as to his Maker, and yet
he seares not to cast the filth of his sins into the very eyes of this his Lord
and Maker Cuires nominisubiecta negatur, Tertullian.
nomine illuditur. It is but a flat mockery to give God high titles, and to
deny him answerable duties: and those which do it, are but Christians in
name, and Infidels in deed and truth. The true Christian that believes from a
sound heart God to be his Maker, cannot but in some good measure from the heart
obey God his Maker.

Secondly, more especially of mankind. For God is not like an artificer; who
when he has finished his work, quits his hands of it, and leaves it
for-lasting or perishing to the strength of the materials, whereof it consists
No; we must conceive a perpetual Manatenentia diuina (as the Schoolmen term
it) without which, men and Angels, heaven and earth, with all the creatures in
the world, would in a moment fall back into that Nothing out of which they
were at first made Something. Upon this ground Durandus maintains; Durand.
Verum est dicere de quauis creatura, quod quamdiu est, creatior a Deo. We may
truly say of any creature, that so long as it Is, so long God Creates it. His
meaning is, that Creation and this Conservation are the same action being
considered in God; and only differ thus: That Creation respects the Being of
the Creature, as newly produced out of Nothing by Gods infinite power: and this
Preservation respects the Being of the same creature, as continually supported
from falling into nothing, by the same infinite power of GOD. But to let
Schoole-speculations pass; the Scripture can best teach us, how this title of
Universal Lord Protector belongs unto the Almighty. Colos. 1.17.
He is before all things, and in him all things Subsist, says the blessed
Apostle. And again, Omnia portat, He bears up all things by his mighty
power. Heb. 1.3.
So that if this our great Supporter, should but for a moment withdraw his
Preserving power, the whole world in the twinkling of an eye, would vanish into
Nothing. Neither is it our Being only, which depends upon Gods continual
preservation; but all our well-beeing is also derived from his gracious
providence and protection. It is this bountiful Lord which opens his hand, and
fills us with his blessings; which holds his hand over us, and keeps us
out of manifold dangers, which stretches out his helping hand unto us, and
pluckes us out of all our miseries. Such a General Powerful and Careful Lord
Protector, is our God unto us. Now this being granted, is it not an effectual
motive to make all men dutiful and obedient unto such a Lord? I am sure that
our Sovereign Lords upon earth, for this very cause of protecting their
subjects, and maintaining them in peace and safety; challenge and justly
challenge, Romans 13. Verse 6.
both obedience and tribute at their hands. How much more then may the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven, who protects both Prince and People, challenge the
tribute of obedience from them both? Out of doubt he will and does require it,
and therefore it is our best to pay it. The wise Solomon tells us, Pro. 3.
There is no rising up against the King. And the Hebrews have a Prouerbiall
saying: Migrandum ex loco in quo Rox non timetur. It is time to leave that
Country where the King is not feared: as if always some great judgment were
hanging over it. What then may we think is like to befall that Nation, which is
up in rebellion against their heavenly King, which deny obedience to their
omnipotent Lord, and gracious Protector? I am either much deceived, or this
matter does very nearly concern us. No Nation in the world has seen more
apparent effects of Gods admirable protection over them, then we have done. No
Nation in the world has been more laded, and over laded with plenty of all
manner of blessings, then we have been: And (which I am sorry may truly be
added) no Nation in the World has showed themselves more careless, and
thanklesse and graceless, toward so gracious a Lord, and mighty Protector
then we have done. I cannot think of the general impiety of these times,
but me thinks I see withal a terrible black storm gathering over our heads:
me thickes I see God withdrawing his wonted favorable protection from us, and
suffering us to be overwhelmed with such judgments, as our folly and impiety
has long ago deserved. There is but one means to prevent those miseries
which hasten toward us; and that is, betimes to cease from farther provoking
our mighty and gracious Protector. Jeremy 25. Verse 6.
Provoke me not to anger by the works of your hands, and I will do you no
barme: it is Gods own promise, by the mouth of the holy Prophet.

I am now come to the third and last Respect, The Lord; that is the Universal
Lord over all mankind. And this is, in regard of his Judiciary Office and
Power, which makes him the true Lord Chief Justice through the whole world.
For the Office, it is in express terms ascribed unto him by the Psalmist.
Psalm. 9.7.
The Lord has prepared his throne for judgment; for he shall judge the world
with righteousness, and the people with equity. And this Office, does not
only extend it self to the punishing of the wicked who hate God; but to Gods
own children also when they disobey him. Psalm. 89.32.
I will visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. None but such profane Atheists, who wish God out of this Office,
durst ever deny it to belong unto him. Marcion was anciently branded in the
forehead for this heresy. Iudicis officium a Deo remouet, and ei solum
bonitatem adscribit, says Tertullian. But no doubt long since, his own
experience has made him recant this error in hell. It may be, though God have
this Office of an universal Judge over all the world, yet this Circuit is so
large, that he wants Power or Means fully to execute it. This cannot be
imagined; the contrary so evidently appears thorough the whole Scripture. Genesis
6.12.
When all flesh had corrupted their ways upon earth, an end of all flesh is
presently determined by the Judge of heaven; and the whole world is sentenced
to be drowned; and the sentence is as easily executed, as if it had been
pronounced but against some one particular man. Genesis 18.
When the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah had pierced the heavens, God adjudged
them to be burned with fire and brimstone; and presently he rained fire and
brimstone upon their heads. I will not trouble you with heaping up more
examples of Gods power in this kind; I had rather stir you up to fear and
obedience, upon consideration of the irresistable power of this Supreme and
Universal Judge. Shall the Lion roar and shall not the beasts of the field
quake? Shall the great ludge of heaven threaten vengeance against rebellious
sinners, and shall not dust and ashes fall down at his feet, and humbly sue
for mercy? Shall the Devil himself upon the knowledge of Gods supreme
Judiciary power believe and tremble, and shall men more Devilish then the
Devil believe God to be an Omnipotent Lord and Universal Judge, and yet never
tremble at the matter? It were hard to think there were any such Giants in the
world, who durst fight against God, and despise both the Office and Power of
this Sovereign Lord, and Universal Judge, but that we see them daily with
our eyes, and hear them with our ears. Is not the strong Churh-robber one of
these Giants, who dares openly say; Psalm. 83.
Come let us take the houses of God into possession; never fearing that which
follows: O my God, make them like a wheel, and like stubble before the wind.
Is not the abominable swearer one of these Giants, who dares toss and tumble
the reverend name of God in his foul mouth, though God have threatened that for
such irreligious oaths the land shall mourn. Is not every filthy fornicator,
every beastly drunkard, and in a word, every shameless and daring sinner of
the race of these Giants; who knowing and confessing that this great Judge has
already passed a sentence of death against these sins, 1 Cor. 6.9.
yet sport themselves with them, and gibe at the Judge himself. Iush, the Lord
shall not see it, neither will the God of Jacob regard it. But I hope there is
none here of this rebellious rout: nay I hope every man here present is in
all humility and obedience ready to say unto this great Lord and Judge, as the
Israelites do in the Text. Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord,
our God. And now let us pass from the General Motive, unto the more special
in the two last words, (Our God.)

(Our God:) The former Motive was common to the Israelites with all other
nations: for God is the Creator, Protector, and Judge of all men: but this is
proper unto them, as they made the Body of Gods visible Church, for it is the
Church alone, which can challenge God by peculiar right to be her God. And
this she may do in a double respect. Iure confederationis, Iure redemptionis.
By right of Covenant, or confederation; and by right of Ransom or Redemption.

First, Abraham. I will establish my Covenant betwixt me and thee, Genesis 17.7.
Verse 10.
and thy seed after thee. And for further ratification of this covenant, God
would needs have the seal of circumcision put unto it. If this be not enough,
God over and above has confirmed it, Ezekiel. 16.8.
by swearing thereunto. I swear unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee
and thou becamest mine. In respect of this special Covenant, God claimed the
jews for his special inheritance and peculiar people; and they challenged him
for Their God, in a more special manner, then all the world besides could do.
Now as God was by a special covenant God of the Jews under the Old Testament,
so now he is become God of the Christians under the New. Our Baptism is the
sealing of this Covenant, wherein the blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, receive the party Baptized into special favor and protection: and the
party there indents with the same blessed Trinity, so soon as he shall come to
understand this Covenant, presently to forsake the Devil and all his works,
constantly to believe Gods holy Word, and obediently to keep his
commandments. Now I have showed the Nature and quality of this Covenant, which
then warranted the Israelites, and now warrants us Christians, to call God, Our
God; let us consider how forcible it is, or ought to be to draw us all unto
obedience.

First, this very Covenant must put us in mind of obedience; because otherwise
we loose the Benefit there of, for not Taking hold of the said Covenant. Chap.
56. Verse 4.
The Prophet Esaias has taught us, that the keeping of Gods commandment, and
choosing the things that please him; is the very taking hold of this Covenant:
and therefore it will follow from the contrary, that he despising of Gods
Commandments, and doing those things which he hates, is the loosing of this
hold.

Again we are farther to consider, that all our happiness or unhappiness in this
life, and after this life, depends upon the keeping or breaking of this
Covenant. Esaias 1.19.
If ye will consent and obey, you shall eat the good things of the land. But
if you will not obey, Leuit. 26. Verse 15.
but despise mine Ordinances, and break my Covenant, then I will set my face
against you, etc. It is a Chapter worthy of our most diligent perusal. For in
it as in a glass we may clearly see, how it comes about, that we the people
of this Land, who were sometimes crowned with all Gods blessings, begin of late
to be stripped out of them one after another, and are in danger of being
deprived of them all. We may likewise see, from whence it comes that we have
been consumed at home with plague and pestilence, that abroad we have fallen
before the sword of the enemy; in these and all other judgments which have or
shall light upon us, we must take notice of Our God, Leuit. 26. Verse 25.
as auenging the quarrel of his Covenant. What quarrel can God have against us
about this Covenant? He has a double quarrel. First, for our Hypocrisy; in
that we call him Our God, and make show as if we were his peculiar people; in
that we call him Our Father, and pretend that we are his true children, and
yet in the mean time we will neither serve him as Our God, nor love him as
Our Father. Jeremy 3. Verse 19.
It is Gods agreement with his people: Thou shall call me, saying, My Father,
and shall not turn from me. He that will needs call God Father, and yet will
turn away from him in the course of his wicked life: If God call him son, it
will be no more to his comfort, then when Abraham said to the glutton in hell.
Son, Luke 16.
Remember that thou in thy life time tookest thy sinful pleasures, and
therefore now thou must be content to undergo eternal torments.

But yet God has a farther quarrel against these Covenant breakers, and that
is not only for their hypocrisy, but for their plain treachery. For as if it
were not bad enough to forget the Covenant established betwixt God and them,
they most traitorously account, Heb. 10. Verse 29.
the blood of this Covenant as an unholy thing, and make a new confederacy with
Gods known enemies, the world, the flesh and the devil. They shame not to
boast and brag of this their new league. Esaias 28.15.
We have made a Covenant with death, and with Hell we are at an agreement.

But let every man that by virtue of the Covenant calls God his God, detest all
by pocrisie, abhor all treachery; and remember that his happiness depends not
upon the entering into a Covenant with God, but upon the true keeping of the
Covenant. And for the more effectual stirring up of every man here present to
repentance and newnes of life, according to the tenor of the Covenant, I will
add this one thing. That whatsoever our carriage hitherto has been, this very
Covenant may assure us, that Our God, and Our Father, neither will nor can
refuse graciously to accept us into favor, upon our submission and amendment.
He is engaged by special promise. 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
If my people, among whom my name is called upon, do humble themselves and
turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear in heaven, and be merciful to
their sin, August.
and heal their land. Promissa haec tua sunt, and quis falli timeat cum
promittu ipsa Veritas? These are thy promises, O Lord, and who needs doubt the
performance, where Truth it self makes the Promise? But if any man should
doubt whether this Promise be strong enough to bind God, to accept the
submission of a rebellious servant; yet there is no doubt, but his tender
fatherly affection is strong enough, to make him accept the submission of a
Repenting Child. Ier. 3.14.
Ephraim is my dear son, therefore my bowels are troubled for him; and I
will surely have compassion upon him, says the Lord. Let us therefore now at
last come unto our God, with humble, lowly, and penitent hearts, and then we
shall speed no worse then the Prodigal child did: That is, our loving Father
will have compassion upon us, he will run and fall upon our necks, Luke 15.20.
he will kiss us, and put the best Robe, even the rich Robe of his
wel-beloued Sons righteousness upon us.

There remains the other title of Redemption to be briefly touched, in regard
whereof the Israelites term God, their God, and on the other side God also
terms them his peculiar people: And this Redemption was twofold: God was
called their Strong Redeemer, and they were styled the people whom God had
Redeemed, in regard of that famous and miraculous deliverance out of the
Egyptian thraldom. God esteemed this Temporal and Corporal redemption so
great a benefit, and so forcible an inducement to Obedience, that he thought
it fit to be engraven in the forefront of his ten Commandments. Yet this is
not it which I purpose now to insist upon. There is therefore another
Redemption wrought by the bloody Passion of the Messiah; obscurely represented
in the Leuiticall Sacrifices, more plainly described by the Prophets, but most
evidently painted out unto us by the holy Apostles. This is our Spiritual and
eternal Redemption, whereby we are redeemed out of the laws of the devil,
from eternal Death and Damnation of body and soul, which otherwise, we must
have undergone, and endured world without end. Now albeit the General Power of
this redemption extend it self unto the whole world; yet the Declaration and
Application thereof belongs in special manner unto the Church, and therefore
it is the Church which out of this respect, calls God, her God; and it is
likewise the Church, which for this cause God owns as his peculiar people. This
is the Redemption whereof every member of the church ought with holy Job, to
take special notice. Scio quod Redemptor meus viuit. Job 19.
I know that my Redeemer lives. And not only so: but I know that this my
Redeemer has ransomed both my body and soul, not with gold or silver, but
with his own precious blood; 1 Cor. 6.20.
to the end that being thus Bought with a price, I may glorify him both in
body and soul. If all which has been formerly urged, cannot persuade men to
return to the obedience and service of God, yet this Motive, that he is Our
God, and that by Right of Redemption should enforce us thereunto. Our Creation
out of nothing was an infinite benefit, and ties us straightly to God our
Creator. But this our Redemption at such an inestimable price, when we were
worse then nothing, is infinitely greater then that other infinite benefit, and
ties us in a more strait band unto God our Redeemer. Our Creation cost God no
more but the word speaking, Dixit and factum est, he said it, and he did it:
but our redemption was not so easily wrought; Multa tulit fecitque Deus,
sudauit and alsit. What man so thanklesse that would not for ever acknowledge
him for his good Lord and Patron, and strive to do him all acceptable service,
who had but redeemed him from the Turkish slavery, and rowing chained in their
gallyes. How much more then stand we obliged in all duty and service unto our
God, who has redeemed us from being the slaves of Satan, from the chains of
darkness, and everlasting damnation. They have no sense of this Redemption,
nor no part as yet in it, who are not inflamed thereby to serve God in
holiness and righteousness, Tit. 2.14.
and to become a peculiar people unto him, zealous of good works. But alas,
where shall God our Redeemer find such zealous servants, amongst millions of
men that confess and profess themselves to be redeemed with his blood? The
World and the Flesh have a world of Servants at command; nay the devil
himself is so well attended, that Saint Cyprian brings him in, thus bragging
against our Savior Christ, and insulting over us silly and sinful wretches.
Sermon. de Eleemosyna.
Ego pro istis necsanguinem fudi, etc. I have spilt no one drop of blood for
any of these, I have taken no pains to do them any good; nay all my study and
pains ever was, and ever shall be, to bring them to death, and eternal
damnation. Notwithstanding all this; Ibid.
Tuos tales demonstra mihi Christ, O Christ, (if thou can) show me so many,
so busy, so painful, so dutiful servants of thine, as I am able to show unto
thee every where of mine. O what a shame is it unto us all that bear the name
of Christians, Hec dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli: That such things
may truly be objected against us by the devil, and cannot truly be denied,
or confuted by us.

O what a grief is it unto our Lord Christ, that a cursed Murderer should be
able to entise away so many servants, from a blessed Redeemer? This point
should rather be prosecuted with tears, then words; nothing now remains, but
that every man here present, search into his own heart and life, inquire and
find out his own proper sins, turn speedily from his wicked ways; and
that all of us say with a joint and constant resolution as these Israelites
did: Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord, our God.

THat Almighty God who has this day called us unto him by his word, draw us
unto him by the effectual operation of his holy Spirit; that so renouncing the
service of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and returning unto the Service
of our true Lord; we may recover his favor here, and enjoy his everlasting
favor hereafter. Grant this most merciful Father, for the infinite merits of
thy wel-beloued Son, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
Praise, Power, Majesty, and Dominion, this day and for ever Amen.

FINIS.

