THE HOLY ROODE, OR CHRIST'S CROSS: Containing CHRIST Crucified, described in
Speaking picture.

By JOHN DAVIES.

And who in Passion sweetly sing the same,
Do glorify their own in Jesus NAME.
Crux Christi clauis Coeli.

LONDON Printed for N Butter

To the Right Honorable, well accomplished Lady, ALICE, Countess of Derby, my
good Lady and Mistress: And, to her three right Noble Daughters by Birth,
Nature, and Education, the Lady Elizabeth, Countess of Huntington, the Lady
Francis Egerton, and the Lady Anne, Wife to the truly Noble Lord, Gray, Lord
Chandois that now is; be all Comfort when so ever CROSSED.
THough long, yet (lo) at length What was designed,
To you and yours (great Lady) now is come
To your fair Hands, to move your fairer Mind
To mind His pain that is true pleasures Sum:
For, Siren-pleasures, that but Sense allure,
Must with the pleasures flowing from this pain
Be clens'd; else those will run to Helles impure;
While these to Eden fair reflow again.
The Cross (true Tree of life) does fairly grow
In amidst thereof; of whose fruit if you taste
The Nectar'd Juice will so your Soul oreflow
That She will be ioy-drunke with that repast!
To Flesh and Blood this Tree but Wormwood seems,
How ere the same may be of Suger-chest;
But* That which quickens Flesh, the Cross esteems The (...)

To be, of Comforts, better then the best!
Upon the Cross (as on a Touch) we may
Try our Souls value whether great, or small:
If there, it (washed with Water-Strong) does stay,
We may be sure it is most Angelical!
But (with a touch) if from this Touch (the Cross)
It fleetes, as if the Cross did Cross i'ts kind,
Then, does it show that it is full of Dross,
Till in Afflictions flames it be refinde.
But you (with Solomon) have erst suruaid
(Nay proved) the value of Earthes dearest Joys;
Then hardly can your Judgment be betrayed,
Unless sense will not see their felt annoyes.
Now, as you are the Root from whence do spring
True royal Branches, beautifying their Stock;
To this Tree bear them: and, fair Branches clinge
To It, as Iuy to the immortal Oak:
For, royal Branches to the royalst Tree
Do cleave by kind, since there they kindly thrive:
Then, Ladies, of this Tree embracers be
Which, when ye die, will make you more than live!
When sensual pleasure filled has a Cup
Of her sweet Liquor for you (since too blame)
Stir it about before ye drink it up,
With some part of this Tree to purge the same,
Else, like sweet Poison, it will bane the Soul;
But, highly-lowly Ladies, (good, as great)
Your great Minds Powers (borne great) can soon control
Vain Pleasures siege, and so their Spoils defeat:
For, Pleasures most ore'come the weakest Minds
Vnfenc'd with Virtue, lying open to Vice:
Whose Judgments eury flash of Pleasure blinds
Borne but to Honors shame and Prejudice.
Then, O firm Quadruple (in Unity)
Of highly borne, (so, kindly noble) Hearts,
I wish all Pleasures flow from Caluery,
(Most holy Mount) into your inward'st parts.
And still I Will pray (without Times smallest loss)
The Cross may bless you from your Comforts Cross.
Your Honors humble Servant, and devoted Beadsman. John Dauies.

To the Author.
THine Art and Subject both such Worth contain,
That thou art best requited in thy pain.
EDW. HERBRET Knight.

TO M. JOHN DAVIES, my good friend.
SVch men as hold intelligence with Letters,
And in that nice and Narrow way of Verse,
As often they lend, so often they must be Debtors,
If with the Muses they will have commerce:
Seldom at Stawles me, this way men rehearse,
To mike Inferiors, nor unto my Betters:
He stales his Lines that so does them disperee:
I am so free, I love not Golden-fetters:
And many Lines fore Writers, be but Setters
To them which Cheat with Papers; which does pierse,
Our Credits: when we show our selves Abetters:
To those that wrong our knowledge: we rehearse
Often (my good John; and I love) thy Letters;
Which lend me Credit, as I lend my Verse.
Michael Drayton.

Ad Libri Lectorem.
WRite on, and have the Palm: continue still
In sacred style, to treat of Powers divine:
Inuoke no mortal Grace: for, Angels will
From Heaven descend, to grace this Tract of Thine,
Changing each black into a golden line.
Write on: O blessed Subject! God, and Men,
In Heaven, and Earth, approoues, applaud thy pains:
Zeal seeks not Art: yet, see no barren Pen
To common Trifles has enlarged the reins,
Nor sucked the borrowed blood from stranger veins.
Hence, All distressed may to their Souls apply
True, saving Comfort: for, the Love that could
Enforce a God for wretched Man to die,
Cursed, crossed, and scornd, tormented, bought, and sold
And all for such, to whom such Grace he would,
Cannot, in Justice, but extend relief
To such as mourn their sins, and rue his grief.
Thrice happy then be Thou, stird up to spend
The Gifts he gives thee, to so blessed an end.
N. Deeble.

To all passionate Poets.
YE Poets, that in Passion, melt to Ink,
Wherewith Melpomen draws her saddest Lines,
So melt; that so my thirsty Pen may drink
Of you, made Liquid for the sadd'st Designs:
For, were all Spirits of Poets made entire,
And I therewith inspired; and, had I Pens
Made of Times saddest Plumes, yet full of Fire,
All were too cold for Passion for these Threns!
Here is a Ground for Art, and Sorrows Souls
(Divinely help) to prove their Descant on:
This World of Grief so whoorles on Passions Poles
That still it Varies, though it still be One!
Then Brains, if ere ye did your Owner steed,
My Heart hereon, through my Pen, make to bleed!
JOHN DAVIES of Hereford.

THE HOLY ROODE OR CHRIST'S CROSS.
SONET.
SInce all, that All, is altogether vain,
Uncertain, mortal, momentanie, vile,
Which this Sin-Biac'd Bowl, the Earth, contains,
My Penn an Heavenly Ditty shall compile.
Uouchsafe, sweet Christ, my Paper, be thy Cross:
My Pen, that Nail, that Nailed thine holy Hand:
Mine Ynke, thy Blood, wherewith thou did ingrosse
The acquittance of my Uowes infringed Band:
The Subject of my Song, let be thy Glory;
The Burden of the same, thy Glories praise;
The Sum whereof, thy Passions sacred Story,
Let these be all, and some of all my Lays;
For, heavenly Quires, by nature, do rejoice
When Art, in Graces Quire, reares Natures Uoice.

WHile that blessed Body, Savior of each Soul,
(Whose Bodies are the Temples of his Spright)
Hung on the Cross, by Death, DEATH to control
The Temples Veil Stones, Graves, Earth, Skies, and Light,
Rent, claue, op't, quakt, and (thundering) waxt obscure,
To see LIFE dye, and Grief their God devour!
These lifelesse Bodies, wanting Souls, and Sense,
(With sense of his Souls, Soule-tormenting, smart)
Condole (prouok't by Pitties violence)
His pain (though they of pain can feel no part)
They senseless are, yet pains that sense exceed,
Make their obdurate senseless Hearts to bleed.
And will thou Man, Gods Image, Angels Lord,
Emperor of Earth, and all her Breast does bear,
Made so (in love) by him, not him affoorde
(Seeing Him dye for thy Love) one silly Tear?
O Air and Earth why do ye not conspire
To burn this Turfe, that Water wants, with Fire?
As Well the Cross, the Hammer, Nails, and Spear,
Did crucify thy Jesus, as the Jews:
No, no, thy sins his Crucifiers were;
That by his death, they might their life excuse.
O Sin how sinful art Thou, since thou must
Excuse thy Crimes, by crimes much more unjust?
Is It not enough the Soul quite to subvert
Wherein Thou live, but must thou spoil Him too
Through whom the Soul does live, by whom Thou Art;
And so do That, that does thy self undo?
Then, blame not Faith, thy foe to spoil thy State
When thou thy self, thy self do dissipate.
Think Man (whose Feet are swifter fa^re then Thought
To do what ere is opposite to Good:)
Think that thou see him on his face long straught
In Prayer, and in Passion sweating Blood:
Since from al parts for Thee his blood out flies,
Give Him one Drop of Water from thine Eyes.
A Bird there is (as Pliny does report)
That in the time of treading sweateth blood;
That Bird, Ciconia height sweates so in sport,
But this kind Pelican in maestiue mood:
So That, in pleasure, sweats begetting young,
But This, in Pain with sanguine sweat among:
This kind, most kind, Soule-sauing Emperick
His own blood broacheth so our Souls to save;
And for our Healths He maks his own Heart sick,
Yea dies: that by his Death, we life might have:
Then since this blessed by-parted Man-god dies
For Man's love, Man's love should be like likewise.
Think now thou see (O ioy-griefe-breeding sight!
Joy for his merit, grief for his annoy)
Perditions child with Men, Swords, Staves, and Light,
The Lord of Light to catch, and so destroy:
Now think thou see that Reprobate by birth,
(With kiss) betray the Lord of Heaven and Earth.
Then see, ah see, how They (Limbs of that Lord
That Lords it in Deaths gloomie Continent)
His tender hands bind with a boisterous cord,
So strait, that straight, with rigor violent,
It seems to cut in two those tender hands,
For, soft flesh yields, when such rough force commands.
And can Thou see, (O Thou thou careless Man
Thou worm, thou insect, slave to base Contempt!)
Freedom thus bound for thee? if so thou can,
And yet live loosly, thou art from grace exempt:
O that the God of grace, as Man should die
For man, whose grace in looseness most does lie!
Now think, O think, thou see those hounds of hell,
(That yelp out blasphemies about their pray)
With vngraue gate, to run do him compel,
And with tumultuous noise him lead away:
Ah see how He that staid the Suns swift course,
Through thick and thin does (sta^lesse) run perforce!
Jerusalem, O fair Jerusalem,
Figure of Heaven, built on celestial soil!
Yet wast beheau'nd through blessed Bethelem,
Shall yet her heavens bliss in thee suffer foil?
O be thou not ingrate, but dash to dust
(With thine own downfall) thine own folk unjust.
Think now thou see the sons of Babylon
(Infernal furies) furiously present
Meekness it self, this harmless holy One
To Annas, high Priest, low hels President:
Where he with arms and hands (meek lamb) stands bound,
To hear, what sense of hearing might confound.
Here Truth it self with Falsehood foul is charged,
To which for making mild and just replies,
A cursed Fist on his blessed face discharged
A furious buffer that enflamed his eyes:
Ah see thy God how he does reeling stand,
With blood-shot eine by force of hellish hand!
O damned hand (fell engine of reproach)
How dare thou strike that awful sacred face,
Before whose dread aspect the Heavens crouch,
Before whose Majesty's most glorious grace
The Seraphins with reverend fear do quake,
And all the infernal Legions trembling shake.
What frantic fit, what rage did thee incense,
What fiend, what desperate fury made thee dare
To offer him that barbarous violence,
That is of God the lively Character?
Why did not dread lest his high hand of power
Upon thy pate would sudden vengeance power?
Saw thou not Justice sitting in his Front,
As well as Mercy in his eyes to sit?
Did both at once thy cruel eyes afront,
And yet thy heart and hand not staid by it?
Did Deity in his face make a stand
Yet That not make thee (Devil) hold thy hand?
Then is it clear thy Hand is none of thine,
(Much less thy Heart that did thy Hand direct)
But it is Hels, and wrought Hels damned design;
Or else that Grace, that Face might well protect:
Nere durst the Devil tempt him with such force,
Then though the Fiend be self ill, thou art worse.
Can thou (O tell me, tell me can thou) Man,
With th'eie of Thought, behold this drierie sight
With dried eyes? Those eyes that whilome ran
With blood for thee, wilt not one drop require?
Why should the Sun and Moon (the Heavens bright eyes)
Then look on thee but as thine enemies?
Now think, O think, thou see (O savage sight)
His foes inhumane hale him thence in haste
Along the streets with clamor, rage, and spite,
To Caiphas house, where he was so disgraced
As never Man, much less a God could be,
Yet never God more good to man than he!
Bound (as before) he stands, (in whom we rest)
Afront the face of that pernicious Priest;
Who, with the Scribes and Elders, there are pressed
In their reproachful slanders to persist:
Mean while (meek Soul) though he from guilt be clear,
Yet stands he mute, as though he guilty were.
See the coniuring, proud, remorcelesse Priest
Rend, in fell rage, (too like a furious fiend)
The pompous vestures of this Pithonist,
When Christ does (urged) aright his cause defend:
Whereat the rest, in depth of scorn, and hate,
His divine Truth, with taunts do deprauate.
And to express the rancor of their spite,
They blindfold him, and make his face as it were
A Drum, to call his Foes against him to fight;
For, still a tab'ring on his face they are:
So fast their fists do fall as Drum-sticks, while
The Drum does sound Alarm to the broyle.
But that which does all credit far exceed,
(But that all credit to this Truth is due)
They in his lovely Face (O loathsome deed!)
Do spitting spall, or rather spalling spue!
O Heavens can ye endure to see your King
More vilely used than Toad, or vilest thing!
O wonder! far surmounting wonderments!
O more than most profound humility!
Do they (fiends) varnish with foul excrements,
That Face whose grace the Heavens does glorify,
And he endure it? what should we endure
When he (most pure) for us was made s'impure?
Men if they spit do choose the fowlest place
Where to bestow their eie-offending fleame:
Is no place fowler than his heavenly face
To cast that filth that reaketh hellish steame?
O dongue, O dust, O heir of rottenness,
VVilt ere be proud seeing such humbleness!
God silent is whiles Diu'ls do spit on him;
The heavens are whist, whiles hell reuiles their Lord:
The measure of abuse, up to the brimme,
These hellish furies fill in deed and word:
What could Gods hate inflict* since hell began
That was not heaped on this God and Man?
The wound was sore that craved a salve so sharp:
The disease shameful that foul shame must cure:
Though David healed Saul with sound of harp,
Our David's self must swoune ere health procure:
So many Saul's possessed with Satan's store,
Must make the remedy exceeding sore!
O Pride! the swelling Sore that naught can swage,
But such extreme deiection of the Highest;
O Sin! that do within the marrow rage,
Can nothing kill thee but the death of Christ?
O depth profound of Heavens just doomes! who may
Tracke out The Almighty in his pathlesse way?
He (patient) bears these contumelious wrongs,
So to supplant the kingdom of our pride;
He, (only wise, knowing what to all belongs)
Knew base we were, unless he should abide
Baseness it self, to honor us thereby,
And knew we could not live, but he must die.
Think now how he, that gives eternal rest,
Did restless pass away that hellish night;
Where Darkness children still did him molest,
With whatsoere his soul could most despite:
If any (forced by sleep) began to nod,
Like Devils they wake themselves by grieuing God.
There sits he blindfold, that does all things see;
Bats flying in his face, that light do loath;
Each one as irefull as an angry Be
Do sting his blessed Soul and Body both:
O restless hate that rest reiects; wherefore?
Because the Lord of Rest should rest no more.
Ye heavens weep out your world-enlight'ning eyes;
Shower down the Sun and Moon in Tears of blood:
So (in gross darkness) make a Deluge rise
Of Gore, to glut these furies with that flood:
For, such a bloody work of darkness done
(By fiends, or furies) nere saw Moon nor Sun!
O hell, that do all Cruelties surround,
Blush with bright Flames (that black to burn are wont)
Until thy faces flush these fiends confound,
Since thee in crneltie they far surmount:
Light them with flames, coufounding with their light,
To see the meed of their past hellish spite.
But, O frail Muse, be not transported so*
With passion past the patience of thy Christ;
Who prays for those that thus do work his woe;
Then (O) do not his prayer so resist:
But he is God: but merely Man can nere
Endure such liellish rage to see, or hear!
Kind Nature, Night ordained for sweet repose
To tired lymbes, and wits, through Days turmoile;
But they the same quite opposite transpose,
And in tormenting Christ, themselves they toil:
How can it be but, in eternal Night,
Justice, with restless plagues, should them requite.
What difference is between those Hymns divine
The Angels chaunt unto his praise in heaven,
And these discordant Notes of harsh Repine
They are as Fame, and Shame, no less vneu'n:
For, Sanctum, Sanctum, sing those sacred Quires,
But, Crucifige, Crucifige, theirs.
O sweet celestial Spirits Angelical
Are ye not mazed with worlds of wonderment
To see the Subject of your Praises all
To such shame subject, yet therewith content!
Your Tongues unable are, though most divine,
Such Pain and Patience rightly to define!
What temper is that heart, that is so hard
That feeling this, from bleeding yet forbeares?
What substance are those eyes, that in regard
Of this distress, dissolve not into Tears?
If Eyes seeing this, melt not, and Hearts that feel,
They are not Hearts, nor Eyes, but Flint, or Steel.
But hark! now Crows and Curses interchange,
The Cock and Peter strive to crow, and curse
(Who should exceed) but Peter (O most strange!)
Gives Three for Two, and yet he had the worse:
Were not infernal Legions and thief Fiends
Enough to vex thee Christ? but must thy Friends?
Were thou so hardy Peter in thy word,
What time, in peace, thou vowd'st with him to die?
And were thou no less hardy with thy Sword
In the first fight? and, from him now wilt fly?
That Man that ouercomes must wear the Crown;
Thou art no Man, a Wo-man put thee down.
Though All forsake Him, thou will never fail Him:
These be thy vaunts, and (vaunting) this did vow;
Yet thou, with grief, do with his Foes assail him,
And to a Maid, more than a Maid, do show
Thy woman-weakenesse, weaker than a woman,
For, better is a woman far, than no man.
Saw thou that Man was God? yea God and Man
In all his works? and did He by his power,
Strengthen thee Weakling, (for, He all things can)
To march upon the Seas foot-failing floor?
Saw thou by Revelation, He was Christ?
And yet, for fear of his Cross, him deni'st?
Fear thou that Cross, that is the Tree of Life?
What! loath'st thou Death? and yet do fear to live?
Do strife eschew, that is the end of strife?
Will thou not take, because thou will not give?
Is thy Soul rational? and yet thy Soul
Does Reasons reason brutishly control?
Did He in love (O 'twas a matchless favor!)
Take thee with him (more firm to make thy faith)
To see God, this God glorify on Thabor?
And, heard'st his voice, whom Heaven and Earth obai'th,
Say 'twas his Son, more bright than Sun, thou saw
Yet from God, and his Son thy self withdraw'st?
Soule-wracking Rock, (Faiths Rock of ruin) Peter,
Art thou for Christ his Church a fit foundation,
That in Faith, from Faith, sans Faith art a fleeter?
Tends thy faiths fleeting to Faiths confirmation?
If that stand fast, that has so false a Ground,
It most miraculous must needs be found!
Did thou desire (with glory ravished)
To Tabernacle Tabor there to dwell?
Would thou in Heaven with Christ be glorified?
And not consociate him in his woes hell?
Art thou austere in life? yet, sensual, Thou
Eschew'st the Gall, and wilt but Honey chew?
Gods Councels are his own, therefore unknown;
All whose Intents no rules of Reason want;
Else, that to thee, he has such favor shown
What reason is it? But, God is God, Igrant,
By whose Prerogative he may do All,
And make thee and his firmer by thy fall.
Do thou esteem it such a foul reproach
To know that Wisdom whence all Knowledge springs?
Think it no shame to set such shame abroach
As cracks thy credit, and the King of Kings?
Was Grace s'inglorious found, that for thy grace,
Thou gracelesly abiur'dst him to his face?
Could they acknowledge him that were his foes,
When thou deniedst him that were his friend?
By thy denial they might well suppose
That he was such as (falsely) they pretend:
Weep Peter weep, for foul is thine offense,
Wash it with Tears springing from Penitence.
It Was time to turn His Soule-conuerting Eyes
To thee perverted Peter, reas'nlesse Man;
Lest brutish fear, which did thee (Beast) surprise,
Should make thee (as thy self) thy God to ban:
Can Mercies eyes behold a fault so foul,
With loving look, and not in anger scowle?
They loving looked; O constant Lord of Love!
What is vile Man, that Man thou valuest so?
Must his Redemption make thy heart to prove
(Though he false-hearted be) such hels of woe?
Let Love it self, this Love alone admire,
That loves for hate, and dies through Loves desire!
Those glittering Suns (his bright transpiercing eyes)
On Peter's eyes, as on two Fountains, shine;
By whose attractiue virtue Dropsarise,
Then down distill in showers of Angels wine:
Who with heavens host therefore, their tongues employ
To praise their God, in hymns, stark drunk with joy!
Who cannot love, to think on love so high,
That loves in Mercy, Justice Objects hate?
Yea, loves a Man that does that love defy;
Who cannot die for such love, lives too late:
Let never Adams sons, through Eaues offense,
To God and Nature use such violence!
This hellish Night being ended, then suppose
This heavenly Day-starreled to Plutos court:
(Pilats I would say, but respect of woes
He there endured, made true, and false report)
Yet did this Comet clear make Pilate pause,
Ere doomed him as contagious by the laws.
In the divine sweet features of his face,
(That might an heart of steel relent with ruth)
Pilate, no doubt, beheld a world of grace,
And well perceived his Innocence and Truth:
Yet must he die, do Pilate what he can,
And for his Judge that Monster is the Man.
To doom to death Rights wrongers is but right,
Although we wrongfully, do deem them so;
That Is wronging Right, as Men, that have no sight
In that which righteous God alone does kno:
But when the Conscience cries the doom is wrong
The tongue pronounces, Hell confound that Tongue.
Dismissed by Pilate, see thy most just Judge
From this Judge most unjust, led to a King
Much more unjust; lo, how He Is forced to trudge
Through thick, and thin; hark how their clamors ring
About his Ears; and, see the people flock
To see whereat to wonder, gaze, and mock.
To Herod come, that long had longed to see him,
See now (as if some Iuggler he had bin,
That would show tricks to all men that would fee him)
How he prouokes Him some trick to begin:
But, for He silent stands, and thwarts his mind,
He holds Him but a Fool, and fool unkind.
Oye great Princes little do ye know
What wrong you do unto your high estate,
Tinsult through pompous pride, on States below,
And think all Fools not frolickt with like Fate:
Ye are no Gods, and therefore know ye not
Whom ye abuse, and what may be your Lot.
This Fool, wise fool, holds Him, full wise, a fool;
And on the Mantle must, that fools does fit:
He learned his wisdom in gross Follies school,
But, Wisdom on her Throne in Christ does sit:
One seemed, not was; the other was, not seemed;
Yet seemed a God indeed, though Man was deemed,
He man was deemed indeed, that stird up strife,
And crossed the course the way ward world still runs:
Life was accused, with deadly sin, in life;
God, was a Devil deemed, by Satan's sons:
A Devil deemed, or Man that had a Devil,
But such a Man is worse, or full as evil.
But, Wrong (that wrencheth every right awry,
And does her self, her self often contradict)
That Supposition now does flat deny;
And for a fool he is taken, and named, and nickt:
Had he a Devil bin, or they as wise
As Devils be, more smooth had bin their lies.
Here Wisdom, that baptizeth with his Sp'rit
All godly wise, is baptized for a fool:
Their angers glowing heat, with this despite,
They think, in red-hot raging hate, to cool:
If his love liked the fool, that fools detest,
For us poor fools, he liked that he loved least.
Olet, yea let weak Humane-wisdome veil
Her Peacoks plumes, and make swift wing from Fame;
By this Example let her courage quail,
And have no heart to hurt her Honors shame:
If he whom Angels praise, and Heavens adore
Endure such shame, let Earth seek fame no more.
He was accused, of what not? so 'twere evil;
Glutton, Wine-bibber, loathed Samaritan,
Damned sinners coapesmate, one that had a devil,
Soule-slaying Schismaticke, nor God, nor Man,
But Hatreds Hydra, bred in Stygian Poole,
And to conclude all closed all with the Fool.
O had I Art to satisfy Desire,
(That would, with Words, throw down Man's pride to hell;
That would past Heaven, if it could, aspire;
And makes the Bulk with rank ambition swell)
I would upon this Ground, set such a Strain
As should surmount the reach of Voice, or Brain!
Meekness look on thy self, and blush for shame
To see thy self, thy self surpassed so:
Humility, low, low, stoop thy high fame,
Thou art surmounted far, far, God does kno!
Thou boundless flood of Virtues confluence,
Thy bounds in him have endless residence!
Look Glory on thy Lord, thy God behold,
Invested with Contempts derided coat;
Yet see what constant Grace his face does hold!
O earth, frail earth, thy Props strong patience note;
And never lift thy self, thy self above
(To love thy self) unless this Lord to love!
See, see, how he, in midst of all Extremes,
(The proper Place where Virtue is confi'nd)
Though mad Misrule his name, with shame, blasphemes,
Yet his rare patience passes humane kind:
Which well be wraies this Man is more than man
That loves for hate, and bl^st, when Spite did ban!
How mute was he among so many lies,
Loud lies (God wot) braid out by his Accusers?
How still (meek Lamb) among so many cries
Offowle mouthed hounds, his hunters, and abusers?
In few, he showed so many Gifts of Grace,
That men might clearly see God in his face!
God in his face for, mong the sons of men
Was not a fairer, or Form more divine:
The Paragon of Beau^ie was he then,
Which, in his sacred shape, did brightly shine:
For Beauty was constraind her self t'excell,
When she him made fair without Parralell.
Yet could not so great grace, (Grace, great as God)
Infused in all his parts, protect this Man
From the most roguish Whip, and slavish Rod;
But, he must brook them both* do what he can:
And yet he did what none but God could do;
Which he, they sed, did like a devil too!
But, what will not Spite say, to work her spite,
Against what Good soere, that thwarts her will?
She Will call the brightest Day, the darkest Night;
And God, a Devil; Good, the cause of Ill:
For, if her Conscience once be cauteriz'd,
She is a very Fiend and worse aduiz'd!
For, Rage is mad and cares not what she does;
And Spite, enraged, cares less what she says:
Then what is to be expected from them both?
But Words and Deeds that God, and Man dispraise:
Though God reigns over All, by Natures right,
Yet is He subject to Man's hate and spite!
The Heavens Sovereign, is thus subject made
To Hels damned vassals vilest villainy;
Yet Faith, and Reason, discreet Souls persuade,
That Hell is subject to Heavens Deity:
Then by this short account, which yet is right,
Hell is not half so bad as Hate, and Spite.
Yet, though they befarre worse than what is worst,
They (only) fill the Jews hard, hollow hearts:
From whose abundance their tongues (most accursed)
Do speak; and so are moved their other parts:
If Hate, and Spite, be cursed Hearts only mouers,
They must be Murders spightfull-hatefull lovers.
These spights thus past, ensues Spite, past despite;
For, to the Pillar bound, He Is post alone:
Without one friend t'entreat, or wrongs to right;
Compast with Hearts? nay Stones, more hard than stone:
For on his virgin skin (most delicate!)
Flesh-tawing Whips engrosse the deeds of Hate!
And yet this was but Pilats favor to him,
A favor with a witness, witness Wounds!
Nay rather Wound; for, they, quite to undo him,
With wounding Stripes, each Wound, in one confounds:
For, from his Heels to Head He does appear
Not as a Man, but ghastly Wound he were!
O Heavens! wrap ye the Earth with endless Wonder!
Gaze Angels with immortal admiration!
Great Thunderer! why do forbear to Thunder?
And dash to dust this brasse-neckt Generation?
It well appears thou art from all Passions free,
That art not passion'd passions such to see!
O! can the Heart of Flesh be steeled so,
Or Steel it self, so Adamantine made,
As but t'vphold the Eye to see this woe,
And Heaviness the Heart not ouerlade?
Then may I boldly say, if so It can,
There Is nothing harder than the Heart of Man?
O! that there were some new words lawf'lly coined
Much more significant than currant'st words;
Or that all woeful words in one were joined;
And by that one more made, as Art affoords,
I would (though all, and more, too little were)
Make this his Plight, in colors right, appear.
Can any Thing, that has but feeling sense
Be so obdurate (though it feel it not
No otherwise than by Intelligence)
As not to melt away, in Passion hot,
To see these Passions? Passions call I them?
Yea so; but, yet much more than most extreme!
Romes World commanding Nation (though profane)
Did privilege their People from the Rod:
Are ye (Jews) for an holy Nation taken?
Yet whip vnholily Heavens holy God?
Whip him that with an iron Rod does bray
All flesh to dust, that dare his Word gainsay!
This sight does c'oud, with care, the Heavens bright Eyes,
To see such glory dimmed with such disgrace:
Goodnature hardly can it self suffize
With Tears, to mollify this most hard Case:
For, thus it stands, Christ (God and Man) abides
That Man, to heal himself, should wound His sides!
The plague for Slaves, on him these Slaves inflicts
The Whip's for Slaves, or Rogues that be unruly:
Yet Tyrrany, that good Laws interdicts,
On Innocence and Truth does lay it truly:
Truly their Falsehood, and their Tyrrany,
Is true Idea of all villainy!
If stones did, welling, stream forth Water store,
What time meek Moses rod had struck the Rock;
Then, if we see our Rock of refuge gore
Rent out by whips, and not our Founts unlock
To let out water-drops, It to condole,
It Were pity Mercies drops should purge our Soul.
O depth past sounding! Way past finding out!
Did thou in knowledge infinite foresee
That Man should fall, (made mutable no doubt
By thine own hand) thus to be raiz'd by Thee?
From all Beginnings pleasure tookst in pain,
To make the Slave for whom thy self was slain?
Here Flesh lay finger on thy mouth that mumbles;
Dispute not Wisdoms will, nor Mercies power;
Suffizeth thee that Grace her glory humbles
To lift, base thee, to top of Glories tower:
Do thou admire in silence, This, so geason,
Because the Cause thereof surmounts thy Reason!
For, this is such a gulf of mystery,
That Angels, Saints, nor God, as man can sound!
It Is darker far than hell to Reas'ns bright eye;
Wherein no rest nor bottom can be found:
The Suns eclipse the eyes of flesh annoyes;
But, Reasons eyes Gods sons eclipse, destroys!
God did from all eternity foresee
What man would do; and, what was Christ his lot:
Then might have chosen to have made man Be;
And so have spared Christ's pains, that spared him not:
But, that He (knowing all) gave way to It,
Confounds, in endless maze, all humane Wit!
Justice, and Mercy, as it seems to sense,
Were most impatient of their quiet rest;
(Since Virtues work, to show their excellence)
Which made deep Mercy, Justice high, digest!
For, other reason, Reason cannot give,
To make Faith such a mystery believe.
Had Men and Angels in their Justice stood,
Then, divine Justice vnimploid had bin;
And, Mercies power had nere bin understood,
Had it not bin for, most rebellious, Sin:
Then, did man's fall make resting-Mercie rise,
To strive with Justice for Gods glories prize!
Nor, wast alone for his own glory mere
That he did man create, or re-create;
But for man's good; that so he might appear
(That Nothing was before) in blessed state!
For, with that Glory He could pleased have bin
Which ere Worlds were, he had himself within!
Yet seeing Nothing, nothing can deserve;
And man, of nothing, being Something made,
Yea, such a Something, as all things do serve,
That God is good to man, it does persuade:
Then to the glory of his goodness, He
Made himself man, for man, and man to Be!
And, is Gods glory so high prized a thing,
That sor It He his own heart-blood will spend:
And from the height of heaven himself to fling
To hell, to make his Glory so ascend!
Then, mad are men, who for his glory Were,
To set at naught a Thing that is so dear!
Then, what are These (what shall I call them) Jews?
(The nam's too good, though now it is worse than ill)
What, what are they that so great grace refuse,
And in disgracing It continue still?
Hell, name thine own; sor, too poor is the devil
To yield, or name a Name so rich in evil!
God damned the Devil, for one sinful Thought,
And, put him quite past hope the help of grace:
But, He the Jews has from damnation bought;
Yet still they seek that Goodness to disgrace!
Then, clear it is, the Jews, so sold to Evil,
Are far worse, than what is far worse, than the Devil!
Now, think thou see this Soul of sacred Zeal,
This kindling Cole of flaming Charity,
Dispossed all in post; not for his weal,
But, for his further future misery.
Here see the true Character of Distress
For pity show'n to people pitiless!
O God! what Man, this miserable Man,
Would not have pitied? and with woe have pined?
No Eyes can weep, except for this they can;
Grief coming not for This, comes out of Kind:
Then what kind are those Men that joy at This?
No name can name them, they are so amisle!
Christ's darling Gospeller mu'sd that the Jews
Adored not Christ, as Jesus, for his deeds:
More mai'st thou wonder (Saint) that I refuse
To do His will, for whose amiss He bleeds:
Wonders, have less force to confirm belief,
Than to confirm true Love has his true grief.
What violence (surmounting violence)
Veiled his high Majesty to state so vile?
Was it not Love in highest excellence,
Man unto God, by Both, to reconcile?
For, God, and Man, did God, and Man accord,
Through Love, that nere agreed but with this Lord!
O Man! can thou, can thou O unkind Man,
A moment breath, and not breath out his praise?
What! is thy mortal life but on short Span?
And wilt not love his long love, thy short Days?
It Were pity then a Gods heart-blood should be
Like worthless water spild for loving Thee!
But look! (O Heart-diuiding dreyrie sight!)
See, see thy Jesus (O flint-hearted Jews!)
King'd with a Crown of Thorns (O spightfull spite!)
Of piercing Thorns, that do transpierce his Brows!
See how they mall it on, in ruthlesse rage,
That Thorns do seem his Braine-pan (bruiz'd) to gage!
Daughters of Sion, see King Solomon,
Crowned, by his Mother on his Marriage day!
Ye Sons of Salem, see Gods glorious Son,
Enrob'd with Wounds, and Blood, all goarie-gay!
All gentle Joseph's weep, none can do less,
To see your Brother brought to such distress.
Is that Head crowned with Thorns, upon whose Crown
Depends the highest Heavens resplendant Roof
By whose Were it possible.
reuulsion It would soon fall down,
Yet did a weak Post hold this Prop of Proof?
Who brought this strong Alcid^s down so lo?
It Was I his Deianire that served him so.
Yet, Heavenly Hercules, though plagued thou be,
Thy Hydra-labours will thee Deific;
We, Pagan* Ofsprings, aye will honor Thee,
Not as a Semi, but sole God; and cry
Holy Holy, Holy, Jesus Christ,
Lord God of Saboth, our true Eucharist!
O thou all-powreful-kind Omniparent,
What holds thy hands that should defend thy head?
Is Sin so strong, or so Omniualent,
That by Her power, thy power is vanquished?
Why, Sin is Nothing; O! then Nothing is it
That binds thy Hands, that nothing can resist?
Thy Head all heavenly wisdom does contain,
(That Is only wise) and stands it with the same
To wear a Crown that yields both Shame, and Pain,
And so seem proud of Dolor, and Defame?
Art glories God, and Pleasures Sovereign,
Yet lett'st their Contraries ore thee to reign?
Could not thy Head, that compass can, what not?
Compass Man's dear Redemption with less loss?
Thy wisdom never can be ouershot;
Then, shot the same at such a Crown and Cross?
O strange ambition of Humility,
To covet Hell, to give Hell, Heaven thereby!
For, what is the World, but Hell? yea, Hell at best!
Yet, for the World, He brooks these Hels of woes;
That so the World of Heaven might be possessed;
For, with his Saints, through Hell, He thither goes:
First He is Crowned, then Crossed, both with annoy;
But they are * Crossed, then Crowned; and both with joy!
But, O my Soul! to stir, in thee devotion,
Upon this ground of Grief thine Eye still fix:
See here the King of Heavens Earthly promotion,
Crowned with sharp Thorns, and made a Crucifixe;
Which (bruzing) broach His Brows; lo, for our sakes,
His Head is bruized, that should bruize the Snakes!
To King Him right, He Is Sceptered with a Reed;
As if his Kingdom were but like a Kex:
Then crouch they with, Hail King: Then straight Areed,
Who smote thee Jesus? Thus his Soul they vex:
O Bat-blind Fools do ye infatuate
That Wisdom that makes Wisdom govern Fate
To pity wretched Wights, orewhelm'd with dole,
An humane duty it is, which Men should do:
But, to deride a poor distressed Soul,
A savage part it is, and damned too:
Yet, such is their damned in humanity,
That they make merry with his misery!
O Thou that do the Heads condecorate
Of Kings Terrestrial, with Imperial Crowns;
Why lett'st weak Worms thy Head dedecorate
With worthless Briers, and flesh-transpiercing Thorns?
It Is to acquit the Penance of our Pride
By this Poll-deed, with Blood exemplifi'd!
The Spear the Pen, his precious Blood the Ink,
Wherewith he, Jesus, to this Deed subscribed;
And Consummatum est, the Seal did sink
To our Quietus est, that were proscribed:
Then, by that Jesus signed so with his Hand,
Sealed with his Gore, we clear discharged stand.
Ah might it please thy dread Exuperance,
To write th'excript thereof in humble Hearts
And give them us: Then, by Recgonizance,
We Will aye be bound to praise Thee, for our parts:
And if our indeuotion break our Band,
Our little All shall rest at Thy command.
Our little All; for, all we haue's but little;
Nay, less than nothing; all we have is Thine:
Wilt have those Souls which thou in us did settle?
Retake them as thine own; for, they are divine.
Wilt have our Bodies which thou did create?
Then take them to thee thou true Panaret.
Such forfeiture, were too too fortunate
For such unhappy Bodies, lucklesse Souls:
Then, would we ever our Bonds violate,
Since Freedom so their forfeiture enroules
In Book of Life, in Heavens Exchequer rich,
Where we, as free, as freely would keep touch.
And thou my Soul should be the Antitype
Of what thou art, since thou art Slave to Sin:
True Pattern of true Virtues Archetype
Then should thou be; and being, rest therein!
Yet resting so, that, thou should ever move
To Him, that has so dearly bought thy love!
That though Confusion shall dispuluerate
All that this Round, Orbiculer, does bear,
Yet, He that so does supererogate,
Shall aye, in order, my Thanks Organs hear:
The Orbs of Heaven shall stop, and Time shall stay;
But, they shall sound his Praise an endless day!
Feign would I fix my Thoughts, with these sharp Thorns,
To these sore wounds, that these sharp Thorns do tent;
Such Sight a squemish stomach ouerturnes,
But comforts mine, with Matter subiacent:
My Thorny sins, each Thorns deep Sepulture,
Does, in Charybdises of Blood, devour!
For, look how Pikes in Battailes-front are pight,
To bide the shocke of Foes, crossed every way:
So through his Brows these Thorns are crossed quight,
To bide the shocke of sins, which him affray:
These Thorns, through pierced (besides that is within)
Have length enough to pierce the Head of Sin.
But now my Soul make thou a swift regresse,
(Yet Rose-sweet is the ingresse to these Briers)
From whence, through sense thereof, thou did digress,
And view, with wonder, what the Heaven admires:
For, God that is most jealous of his honor,
For Men, most vile, endures most base dishonor!
Justice, unjustly, for Injustice deemed;
And scourged, crowned, wounded, pressed to die:
A Worm, no Man, this God-man, for Man, seemed;
For, formelesse is divine Formositie!
Dry Root, parcht Plant, burnt Leaf, and withered Flower,
Yet fruit It has, that has reviving power!
As when bright Phoebus (Landlord of the Light)
And his Fee-farmer Luna, most are parted,
He sets no sooner, but she comes in sight:
So, when our sins from God had us auerted,
The Lord of Life no sooner set in Death,
But gave us (Lunaticks) Life's light beneath.
He that the Earth within His Palm includes,
And Heavens Embrace-all measures with His Span,
A Rough-cast of thick Gore his Body shrouds;
Then, Blood exhausted, Flesh is weak, and wan.
For, as Thorns did his Head, conuulnerate:
So, Rods all round did Him excoriate!
It Is pleasant to recount our Woe in Weal;
These Stripes had I deserved, which He endures:
These deep Incisions, my Prides Swellings heal
Then must I joy in counting what It cures:
"To tell the Ierkes with joy, that joy do bring,
"Is both a wealesull, and a woeful thing.
These most Herodian-cruelties effected;
His People-pleasing Dooms-man Him presents
To Furies fell, (with Hellish rage affected)
That joy in His past Hellish Languishments:
Yet for He hoped to point at Pity than
In Sorrows Map; He says, Behold the Man!
Behold the Man, and not the God behold?
Yes Bifax, God and Man behold in Him:
His Person both those Natures does infold;
But, Man thou see, but God thine Eyes does dim:
Thine Eye is Mortal, and no mortal Eye
Can brook the splendour of Heavens Majesty!
Yet had thine Eyes bin equal (though obscure)
Thou might have clearly seen this spotless Man
A God in Word, in Deed in Life, in Power:
But he is most blind that will not see, and can.
The Earth did interpose it self between
Thee, and Gods son, else God thou might have seen.
But what prouok'd thee, Pilate, so to rue,
His case in case no more but Man He were?
Thou heard'st (no doubt) his Words and Works were true
Wonders, and Miracles; which made thee fear;
And, fearing, rue his Case: but Fear, nor Ruth,
Can make thee (False-heart) to acquit this Truth.
The more is thy Souls torment, by how much
The more thy soul did eye his Truth, and Power;
If his Disgrace, and griefs did make thee gruch,
Thy gruching soul, thy greater Grief procures:
If thou, unlike thy self, thy self do thwart,
Thy dole dies not, when thine own Cross thou art.
Can that clear Element, that quenches fire
(Although it clear thy Hands) thy Conscience clear?
Or quench a Souls just (with sin raged) ire?
No, Hypocrite, to wash thou art nere the nere:
But drops of grace, and Tears, well mixed with moan,
May pierce, with falling, the chief Corner Stone.
Nor can a Princes Laws, if most unright,
Excuse the Judge, that judges by those Laws:
Nor Ignorance shall Guiltiness acquit;
The Judge must judge his own, and Prince his Cause:
For, if his Laws would have him judge amiss,
He breaks Gods law, to keep those Laws in this.
Then Judges (though therefore ye be misiudg'd)
If Man, without God, make Herodian laws,
Judge not by them, though ye by them be judged;
Since Means to ill Effects, are like their Cause:
It Is better die (for love of Equity)
Than that, by us, an Innocent should die.
But, ah (alas!) alas it is too true,
Too many Judges of this Iron Age,
(With brazen faces) will cross Christ anew,
For Princes love, Rewards, and Patronage:
These, these are they, that make the World so ill;
Who make the Laws speak as their Sou'raignes will.
How many Lands groan underneath this Load?
Those Patrons of Oppression so abound;
Who make an Hell, where-ere they make abode;
And for Coin, crossed; the Cross of Christ confound:
For, having got the Law into their Hands,
Make Law, for meede, cross Christ, and Laws commands.
All Ages had a grudge of this Disease;
But, this Age lies quite speechless of the same:
For, Judgment often is mute (for want offees)
And fingers Things, in sign of death, with shame:
Christ's Cross him speed, that thinks to speed in Suits
That has but only Liquids for these Mutes. Tears.

Many a woeful Mothers sighing Child
Goes to the Gybbet, by their Judge misdoom'd,
Because they had not Judgments hands defiled
With that wherein she seeks to be intoom'd!
O crime of crimes! when Men must lose their breath
Not for their faults, but theirs that doom them death.
And many a Fathers, true begotten, Son,
Inuokes the Heavens, for judgment on their Judge;
By whom, both They, and Theirs, have bin undone,
Either for want of giving, or some grudge:
Who, through their Judges fault, are lands bereft,
And often by him hanged afterward for Thef^*
Then can no death, nor torment be too sore
For Judges, judging for love, fear, or meed;
Whose Skins were nailed to Iudgement-seats of yore,
That Judges Eyes, thereon, might daiely feed:
For, though the Prince be good, if bad they be,
His Realm is ruled, as naught were worse than He!
NOw, Soul return, with thy sole Souls return,
It will not be, they will not pity him;
Again He goes, no torment serves their turn,
But Death, with torment, must part Life, from Lymme:
Now, Barrabas is freed, Christ judged to die;
Onespils, the other sheds blood, diversely!
That Man-destroyer is from Death preserved;
This Man-preseruer, Death must straight destory:
Right's made away, and Wrong is still reserved;
In naught but in Christ crucified they joy:
So, do good Christians too, but here is the ods,
They are the Diu'ls Demeasne, but Christians, Gods.
The ruthlesse Crucifige now they cry,
Like hungry Hounds that close pursue the Pray;
Whose blood to suck, their pliant Judge they plie
With ceaseless clamours, Him to make away:
And thus (to urge him to it) they cry at once,
His blood be on us and our little oncs.
These Cries, for blameless Blood, diuerberate
The high resounding Heavens conuexitie:
That bloods loud Cries the skies do penitrate
With shrill Vindicta's irresistably:
"If Men have blood for blood, by Justice course,
"Gods blood in Equity has much more force.
Man's blood is spilt, for spilling blood of Man;
Because Man's spirit alone, resembles Gods;
But God's the thing it self; by Justice than
Between both bloods is ods, surmounting ods!
The Ransom of the World is rich, (Christ knoes)
Who spils it then deserves a world of woes.
The damned Doomes-man has him judged to death,
(The Diu'll that Diu'll elinguate for his doom)
O wau'ring Weather-cocke! what way ward breath
Turned thee about, from thy first holy-doome?
Does thy damned double Tongue judge him to die,
Whom self same Tongue, before, did justify?
Past is thy Judgment on this Judge of All;
His judgment on thee is, as yet, to come:
Thy doom, in thy own Thoughts was partial;
But He, on thee, shall give a righteous doom:
Pilate farewell; till then, Christ bids th'adue,
When fiends shall plague thee, as fiends plague him now!
NOw, Eye of Sp'rite, behold this Spectacle;
Christ's Cross him speed, Cross on his Back He bears;
That Tree, (that Soule-refreshing Vmbracle,
Together with our Sin) His shoulders tears:
"When Cross, and Sin and Gods most heavy hate
"Depend on Flesh, they Flesh do lacerate!
Ah! see how th'All-supporting shoulders bow
Under this Burden most importable*
And, how his Legs do double, as they go;
As forced to bear much more than they are able*
(Disabled through our frailty) lo, how He
Yields to th'oppression of this yielding Tree!
He, all whose life was nothing but a Cross
Of all Soule-vexing Crosses, life to wrack;
Those, by retaile he had, but This, in gross,
Is laid on him; so, quite to break his Back:
Backe-broken lo, He wends, with these grave freights,
To cast this Crosse-like Anchor in Deaths Streights.
No step He treads, but to those Streights they tend;
Crossed with Christs-Crosse, or a Cross per se:
He Mutes, and Consonants did add to the end:
His Mothers bitter tears the Liquids be:
The Jews the Vowels are, that spell his woe
That life expels; These make the Christ-crosse Row!
See how the sweat falls from his bloodlesse Brows,
Which does illiquefact the clotted Gore:
His Burden pains him so with pinching Throws,
That (laboring) lo, he faints with travel sore:
His corp'rall powers annihilated quite
(With Pains incursions) lo, yield now outright.
Now at a Stand He stays yet hardly stands;
For, bloodlesse, breathless, powrelesse, is his Body:
Now faints that Power that Heaven and Earth commands;
His Body bloodlesse all, and yet all bloody;
Drawn out by boyst'rous Blows sanguinolent,
Which make him stand with Body double bent!
O see my Soul, ah cast thy careful Eye
Upon this Miracle-surmounting Wonder!
The Body of thy God is wrencht awry,
And double bowed this massy Burden under!
Is He made crooked that was ever straight?
He is so made, but made so most unright.
Ah see how his most holy Hand relies
Upon his knees, to underprop his Charge:
Now Simon-Cyrene help, or else he dies,
The Cross has broke his Back, it is too large:
Then, take It off, lest Malice be prevented,
And He die yer fell Fury be contented.
Weep Daughters of Jerusalem amain,
Here, wash his weary Body with your Tears*
Though He, in Love, does will you them refrain,
Yet since He, for your Love, this Burden bears,
Help, with your sorrow, to condole his grief,
For, Mates in Mean, yield Misery relief.
Weep Joy and Mirth, although it cross your kind,
To see your kind Lord thus unkindly Crossed:
Crossed all, in all; in Life, Death, Body, Mind;
But, crossed least in his Cross, that crossed him most:
For, that, though eruell, most did him relieve,
Since it did end, the Deaths, that Life did give.
It Is mercy the condemned, straight to rid
Out of the pains, to which condemned they be;
Christ's cursed Cross then show this mercy did;
For which, ere since, it is called a blessed Tree!
Where Pain, it self, does pity more than Men,
Who will not pity, there, the Pained then?
It Is sed, the longer that the world does wear
The worse It is; the last Days are the worst:
But, these last Times, though bad, do nothing bear
That can, so martyr ought, that Nature nursed:
And did not Truth, it self, the same avow,
Who would believe this Tragedy were true?
Then who is a Particle of highest Pow're,
That will not weep to see It brought so low?
What Eyes so Gorgoniz'd, that can endure,
To see the All-vpholder forced to bow?
Then, since He Is bowed that canopi'd the sky,
Let Earth in center of her Center lie!
Dismount your towering Thoughts, aspiring Minds;
Vnplume their wings in flight pennipotent;
Since He that flees on wings of swiftest Winds,
And with Heavens Monarch is equipolent,
Deignes to detrude His Super-excellence
So low, to check base Earths magnificence!
O thou that back'st the Sun-bright Cherubins,
And gallop'st ore the glittering Lamps of Heaven,
Behold thy Son sole Lord of Seraphins,
Humbled to Earth; nay, with the Earth made even!
O let his deiect highest Lowliness,
Our pride, and thy fell plagues, for pride, suppress.
Remount us by His fall, from whence we fell;
He Is fallen in it hands of Sin, of Griefs the Ground;
Those self same Hands, threw us from Heaven to Hell;
Yet by's hard fall, O let us back rebound:
And for we are the Mammothrepts of Sin,
Cross us with Christ, to weane our joys therein.
Upon this Stand of Christ still could I stand,
To view, with Pitties Eyes His Wondrous plight:
My Muse is g^auell'd here in Silos Sand;
And all profunditie orewhelmes Her Spright,
That Weakness so should cross the Almighties Will,
As pressed to go, yet oppressed stands still!
NOw let a sacred Trance transport thy Spirit
O Man, ^o that vnholy-holy Mount;
Christ-crosse supporting Mount, where He did merit
By bitter death, from death, thy Life's remount:
Mount-Tabor All will mount to see his glory,
But few his grief, will mount Mount Caluarie.
There see, ah see, (though torture-tyred quight)
How He (weak Worm) creeps up the Hill in Haste:
Yet, lo, the ruthlesse Jews, with maine, and might,
(Beyond His might) do lugge him to His last:
As doubting feeble Flesh would faint, and die,
To cross their, Crosse-intended, cruelty.
Fell Envy dies with Death; but, Malice lives
In Life, and Death of those she seeks to bite:
The death of whom her, half dead, often reuiues;
Yet, grieves that Death has freed them from her spite:
Then Malice does against Mercy most rebel;
For she her foes pursues past Death, and Hell!
When Jonathan (all fearelesse) scaled the Rocks (...). 14

Where, charged he was with troops of Philistines,
His Man him equaled in sustaining knocks:
Then (lo) our Jonathan (charged with our sins)
Now climes up Caluerie, to foil our fone,
And shall we (cowards) leave him there alone?
When Saul's bold Squire had seen his Lord to fall Reg. 31.

Upon his sword, he forth with did the same;
And, rather chose death with his General,
Than spare his life to die with living shame:
Then since our Saul falls on his Justice Sword
For us, we die should, like wise, for our Lord.
Now have they scaled this mestiue Mountain top,
Ore-topt with dead men's Tops, and fleshlesse Shins:
(A grim aspect!) but here, with joy they hop,
Since here their Plays Catastrophe begins:
Among Deaths Tropheies, th'Engine of his Death,
Is laid along the Dead-Skull-paued Earth.
See, see, my Soul, (ah hark how It does crack!)
The Hand of Outrage, that deglutinates
His Vesture, glu'd with gore-blood to his Back,
Which his enfestered Sores exulcerates!
Ah ^^e a God! or rather Grave, God knows,
For, now more like a Grave, than God he shows:
There stands He shaking in a Feauer-fit,
While the cold Air his Wounds confrigerates;
Where on some cold Stone (faint) He Is saine to sit,
Which to it self his Sores conglutinates:
The while his Tort'rers make the Morteffe ready,
To hold the Cross, that must sustain him, steedie.
Which being done, see how their Teeth they grind,
And rudely rend, not raise, him from that Stone:
There stick the Cataplasmaes still behind,
As proofs how they do part this Holy-One:
They bear him to the Cross, but so they bear him,
As in their portage they do rather tear him.
See now thereon how they long-straught him stretch,
And first one Hand; fast to the same they nail;
Mean while hard by does stand a ruthlesse Wretch,
That against this Lamb, with open mouth, does rail:
Alas the while, what dolor is He in
Ah now, even now, sweet Christ, thy woes begin.
There with one Hand, nailed to the Tree, he lies,
Hand-fasted so to Dolors heaui'st Hand;
The while his foes protract their Tyrranies,
That so his Cross might still lie at a Stand:
Who fretat Time that fled, they thought, too fast,
And past, in pity, from the pity past.
Yet that no Time might escape, without offense,
They fill his Ears with Blasphemies the while;
The while Spite studies so to plague his sense,
That ceaseless plagues Times pity might beguile:
While Heminds nothing but their only good,
And freely bleeds, to save them with his blood!
His holy Heart does ache, more for their sin
Than for the Torments which they make it prove;
Who opes his Heart, to take his Plaguers in,
Till he Gods plagues, by Plagues, from them remove:
Did ever Mercy, Justice so oreflow,
To save Injustice, while it works her woe?
Mercy, orewhelm'd in woe, to Justice prays
To pardon unjust damned Cruelties;
And with deep sighs, and groans her griefs bewraies,
Lest Justice should confound her Enemies:
O Mercy infinite! how much are We
(Loose in our Lives, and Manners) bound to Thee?
And yet this Mercy, Patience, Grace, and Love,
Can naught avail, their rage to mittigate;
Who try what pain the perfect'st flesh may prove,
Yer Pains the vital Powers quite dissipate:
Trieye Conclusions, Devils, on your God,
That brooks your Ierkes to free you from the Rod?
Now Time, not Mercy, mooues their Hearts of Steel
(Because the Sun wends (mourning) to the West)
To take the other Hand like pain to feel;
Yet still prorogue the Consummatum est:
So, to the Cross that Hand they slowely fix,
And still his pain with mockes and mowes they mix.
Both Hands thus nailed; lo, how they skip for joy,
To see the blood come spinning from his veins:
And, for they would his sight the more annoy,
Like, worse than fiends, they triumph in his pains.
Then glorious is his Triumphs excellence,
That such spite conquers with such patience!
His Hands thus handled, then his feet they take,
And with a Nail of more than ample size,
They boar them through; which makes them so to ache,
That It wrings water from his Manhoods Eyes!
Weep Angels Saints, and ye Celestial Spheres,
To see your Glories Eyes, ecclipst with Tears!
Thus being fixed upon the senseless Cross
(How beit it cracked in token of its cares!)
Now here, now there, the same they turn, and toss,
Which scarce can bear* That, which her Burden bears: Sin.

If Heart of Oak, with these griefs, broken be,
What Hearts have they, that joy the same to see?
For, lo, with joy to see the same they hie,
While He, sweet Christ, lies nailed amidst the Throng:
Here stands one grenning with his neck awry;
There stands another, lolling out the Tongue:
Mean while, O Christ, thy pains no Tongue can tell,
Save only Thine, that knew'st such pains too well!
Well, yet at length his Body up they rear,
The poize whereof, constraines the Cross to crack:
Ah hark (my Muse) hark, hark, how in the Air
It groans to feel the God of Natures wrack:
Crack on, sweet Cross, and call for vengeance due,
Against those Wolves which Natures God pursue.
Thus being reared, He hou'ring hangs on hie,
In doubt, as yet, what place in the Aier to have;
For, now this way he reeles, and by and by
The other way, He Is tossed, like a Wave:
The while on Dolors Deepes, in storms of Strife,
With Arms displayed, He swimmes to lose his Life!
Now up He is, and past the Pikes thus far,
As one spu'd out of Heaven, and cast from Earth;
For, Heaven, and Earth do both against Him war,
Who travels now, with our Redemptions birth:
The whiles the Fiend does tempt Him, in these woes,
That so He might that blessed Burden lose.
But now, ah now ensues a pinching pain;
For, having brought him to the Sockets Brimmes,
(That should the reeling Cross, and Him sustain)
They iog it in to lacerate his lymmes:
No marvel though the Temples veil did rent,
Being near such tearing of th'Omnipotent!
O Christ, my Jesus, (dear, celestial Sweet)
In this annoy, thine ease, as should appear,
Was naught but this, to rest thee on thy feet,
When as thy Hands with hanging weary were:
And then to ease thy nummed feet again,
Thou make thy Hands thy heavy corpse sustain.
If for thine aching Head thou seek ease,
Then lo, a Wreath of Thorns bewraps thy Brows;
Whose piercing pricks, thy Head do so disease,
That it confounds the same with pinching Throws:
That Head, whose Members It exhilerates,
Now agonizing anguish macerates.
All Members feel the anguish of the Head,
In Animals whose Souls are sensitive;
Except, through Accident, the same be dead;
But Members to rejoice, when Head does griue
Is most unnatural; but Grace in this,
Makes Headsannoy become the Bodies bliss!
If toward the Heavens for help thou cast thine Eyes,
Lo, there thou see thy Fathers Brows to bend,
Against Man's sin, which on thy shoulders lies,
So that he looks more like a foe than friend.
If to the Earth, for help, thou look again,
Lo, there thyfoes stand pressed to increase thy pain,
In this extreme thy friends fled every one,
Albeit thou did foretell they should do so:
Only thy Mother, and thy darling John,
Stood by thee still, wringing their hands for woe:
These blessed Pair, repaired to thee then
When thou seem'dst left of God, and loathed of Men,
The hateful Homicide, the damned Thief,
Which on thy left hand hoong, derides thy power;
And for thou would not yield thy self relief,
Thou could not; he (wretch) thought, with thought vnpure:
So, many deemethy Members loft of Thee,
When they with mortal torments martyred be.
But Faith is most complete, when Sense has naught
Where on to give her, but the least repose;
When Means, whereby her Battles must be fought,
Fail utterly; yet, She no ground to lose:
This faith is worthy of the Cross, and Crown,
Because when all is lost, she holds her own!
This faith the Thief, that on thy right hand hoong,
Had in full force; for, what saw he in thee,
(Save extreme Patience in a World of wrong)
That he should think thee God and Man to be?
Who iustifi'd thee, to be iustifi'd,
And praid to Thee, as to Man Deified!
O thou true Thief, more true was never any,
Would in thy case I were for all thy pain;
Thy pains, to day, shall pass to pleasures many,
Too many for man's heart to entertain!
O blessed Thief (so blessed was never Thief)
To die with him whose death's thy Souls relief!
But now, O Christ, how far'st thou all this while?
Not well, I wot, though well it be for me:
Ah look how all thy foes do grenne, and smile,
To see thy vile advancement on this Tree:
Come down, say they, and save thy self, for why,
Thou art Gods Son, and therefore can not die.
But, these their words are most irronicall,
Proceeding from the depth ofscorne, and hate:
And all their words and deeds tyrannical;
Undoing all that do thy woes abate:
O! envious Serpents hatched in Hell belo,
What fiend a faultlesse Soul could torture so?
Down from the height of his exalted Cross
He casts his daz'led Eyes, with motion slow,
Upon his blessed Mother; ah how closse
Her Heart with woe is shut, to feel his woe!
His woe she feels; for, of her Flesh is He,
Then all His Bodies pains, Her Bodies be.
His Bodies pain, Her Soul and Body pines;
Her extreme love in all extremity,
His passions feel; for, such Love nere repines
To suffer with her Object feelingly:
If then, Her Loves life, Death of Deaths, indures,
Judge what a Hell of woe Her Soul immures!
Woman (quoth He) behold, behold thy Son!
(Thns said in few, as He had said thus much;)
Behold his end, that at thy self In respect of his manhood
begun;
Behold his Body, that nore Filth could touch,
Is now desil'd with Blood, and festred Sores,
Both which (thou see) that Body all begores!
Behold thy Son! now nailed unto a Tree;
Whom to thy Breast, of yore, thy Love did nail:
Behold his Head, which often was wound by Thee,
Now Thorns, sharp set, do wonnd, and sore assail!
Those Limbs, which thou have milk-bath'd on thy Lap.
Are now allore besmeared with Bloody Rappe.
Ah! see those Eyes, in which thou woont'st to pry,
As if therein thou saw a World of grace!
Now see them (sinking) stand, as Death stood by,
Whose ghastly presence inserenes my face:
Woman, behold thy Son! plagued thus for this,
That He, for Man's dear love his JESUS is.
O! Heart Strings hold, or rather Heart Strings break;
What Heart can hold, all this to see and hear?
Then can a Woman's Heart (by nature weak)
The heavy weight of Gods fell vengeance bear?
The plagues he felt, Gods wrath for sin inflicted,
For which, she is fellow-feelingly afflicted!
O blessed virgin Marie! (holy Mould
That bare the blessed fruit of lesse-flow'r)
Since Grace, against Nature, made thy Heart to hold,
That must be full of Grace, so full of Power!
O let Eternity thy Lauds enshrine
Within all Mouths, or Humane, or Divine.
And well mai'st Thou be called full of Grace,
Since that the God of Grace thy Womb did fill!
And blessed art Thou, for that blessed Case,
Among all Men and Women of good will:
For, they must ever bless Thee, that believe
Thou gave him Flesh, by which their Spirits do live.
O Star! giving light, for light, to Jacobs star,
Shine Thou with light translucent in that Sphere
His Sphere surrounds, and moves without jar;
In that immediate Orb to His appear
A glorious Lamp, to lend all Women light,
That walk, or wander in this worlds dark Night.
Let never Mouth be found so full of Gall,
As to exaugurate thy blessed Name;
But be Thou blessed with praise perpetual;
And let both Heaven and Earth sound out the same:
Since Thou bar'st Him, that on his Body bare
The Penance of our Sin, thy cause of care.
My Mother, and thine own (quoth He again)
O John behold; and, take thou mine as thine;
Be thou Her son, in all that does pertain
To all those blessed Sons, whose Sire is mine:
In love, in care, in diligence and duty,
Be thon Her Son, since this to Sons is sutie.
Comfort Her Heart, Her woe-crosse-wounded Heart;
She is a Wo-man, Man assuage Her Woe
With Manly Comforts; thou more cheerful art,
Although thy Gall be full of grief, I know;
Yet being strong thou better may sustain It,
And help Her Heart, with Grief split, to contain It!
You that pass by this place, Lam. 1. 12*
behold me too,
And see if any pains be like to mine!
Read on my Head what I was borne unto;
ACROWNE: and yet my Crown my Head does pine:
Witness the Holes the same makes in my Erowes,
And witness That, that from those Fountains flows.
See, see, ah see, how I, that made this All,
Am made (far worse than All!) A mere Offense!
Look in my face, if thou can for thy Gall,
And see onght there, like me, but patience?
For, there thou see (bathed in sanguine streams)
Where Pain, and Patience sits in highest extremes!
O you that pass by me, see how I hang
In torment such, as no flesh ere did feel;
As if all pains, in one, were in each pang;
As if the Serpent more than stung my Heel:
The ease I have, is Worlds of all disease;
Since Man shall fure the better, far, for These.
Number my Bones; for, now they may be so,
(Since bare they be) and tell how many must
Make up the true Anotomie of Woe;
For, in me you shall find that figure just:
Since PAIN was never proud of her degree,
Vnull, in Purple, she was crowned in me!
You that do pass by me, see how my Palms
For you are rent, and all their sinews cracked;
O give me then, at least, your Pitties Alms;
Since for your Treasons (ah) I thus am Rackt:
Then, since this Rack, from wracks does set you free,
Can you do less than love the Rack for me?
My Pains not only free you, from annoy,
(Yea, such annoy, as no thought can conceive)
But make you owe, withal, all endless joy,
Which, for your love, in'pangs of Death I give:
Then, O dear Pilgrims, pity you my pain,
And love, O love me, lest I die in vain.
You that do pass by me, my Feet behold,
(That in the way of Sinners never stood)
How they my Body bear, not as they should,
Yet as they should they bear It, for your good:
Then, wash my Feet (with Marie) with one Tear,
Since all your sins, they, with my Body, bear!
And see if you can any place epsy
About that Body, free from Wounds, or Bloes;
If not, then pity me, for whom I die,
Pity, O pity, my vnpittied woes:
But, if you cannot, woe be to me then;
For, I had nere felt woe, but for you Men.
The Fountain of my Blood (my Liuer's) dry;
In vain my thirsty Veins do suck the same:
No burning Cole can be more hot than I;
For, vehement pain, does all my parts inflame:
In every Nerve, like wild fire, it does rage,
Without one drop of Mercy It to swage.
See, see how Anguish makes my Soul to beat
My panting sides, for holding her in pain;
Who seeks (poor Soul) to shift her weary Seat,
Which plagues her more, the more she toiles, in vain:
Since thus in Love, for Man, sh'endures this doule,
Then, in love, pity (Man) my painful Soul.
And let it grieve thy Soul, my Soul to grieve,
That thus does languish for the love of thee:
O let not thine, with mine unkindly strive;
But that, but one Soul be twixe thee, and me:
And let true Love, in Deed, One, both us, make;
That am thus more than broken, for thy sake!
The time has bin (as knows ETERNITY)
I rid upon the glorious Cherubins;
And in my Hand held all Felicity;
That now am made a Packe-horse for thy Sins!
I was, as God does know, high as the Highest,
Till I, for thee, took on me to be Christ.
There was a Time, I was; what was I not
That was not more than infinitely blessed?
But now thy Curse is fallen unto my Lot,
And all to turn thy Curse unto the best.
I give my life for thine (as thou do prove)
Nay, Heaven for Hell, and all but for thy love!
The Time has bin when Angels compast me,
Still chaunting Hymns in honor of my name;
But, now am compast with a company*
Of wretched Worms, that gnaw mine Honors fame:
Which fame to me, (witness my woes) is dear;
Then, judge what it is such blasphemies to hear!
No Sense, Power, Part, in Body, or in Soul,
Nor parts of those Parts, but, in all extremes;
Tormented are, in part, and in the whole;
And quite orewhelm'd with diuine-furies streams!
Since then, O Love, I am thus plagued for Thee,
Pity, O pity (Dear Love) pity me.
Since God has lest me, as I Heaven have left;
And PAIN has put me where her life does lie;
Nay, since my self, am of my self bereft;
Since being LIFE, to give thee Life, I die:
Since, this, and more than this, is done for thee,
Pity (Dear Love) in Love, O pity me.
O! NATVRE, careful Mother of us all,
How can thou live, to see thy God thus die?
To hear his Pains, thus, thus for Pity call,
And yet to find no grace in Pitties Eye!
Thy Frame, dear Nature, should be quite dissolved,
Or thy whole Powers into Tears resolved!
His Anguish having this, in silence, said,
See, now, how He sore labors for the last;
The last deneere of Sins debt being defraid,
It now remains that Death the Reckoning cast:
But, heavy Death, because the Sum is great,
Takes yet some longer time to do the feat.
But now, my Soul, here let us make a Station,
To view perspicuously this sad aspect;
And, through the Iacobs-staffe of Christ his passion,
Let Us spy, with our right Eye, his Pains effect:
That in the Lab'rinth of his Languishment
We may, though lost therein, find solagement.
The Mind, still crossed with Heart-tormenting Crosses,
Here, finds a Cross to keep such Crosses out;
Here, may the Loser find more than his losses;
If Faith believe, what, here, Faith cannot doubt:
For, all his Wounds, with voice vociferant,
Cry out they can, more than supply each want!
This holy Cross is the true Tutament,
Protecting all ensheltred by the same;
And though Disasters face be truculent,
Yet will this Engine set it fair in frame:
This is the feeble Souls nere-failing Crouch,
And grieved Bodies hard, but wholesom'st, Couch.
Look on this Cross, when thou art stung with Care,
It cures forthwith, like Moises metl'd Snake:
What can afflict thee, when thy passions are
Pattern'd by His, that Pains, Perfections make?
Wilt be so God unlike, to see thy God
Embrace the Whip, and thou abhor the Rod?
See, see, the more than all soule-slaying Pains
Which more than all, for Thee and all he proved;
What Man, excepta God he be, sustaines
Such Hels of pain for Man, with Mind unmoved:
What Part (as erst was sed) of all his Parts
But tortured is with smarts, exceeding smarts!
His Veins, and Nerves, that channellize his Blood,
By violent Conuulsions all confracted:
His Bones, and Joints, from whence they whilome stood,
With Rackings, quite disloked, and distracted:
His Head, Hands, Feet, yea all from Top to Toe,
Make but th'imperfect Corpse, of perfect Woe!
O that mine Head, were Head of seau'n-fold Nyle,
That from the same might flow great Floods of Tears,
Therein to bathe his bloodlesse Body, while
His Blood effuz'd, in sight confuz'd, appears:
Then should my Tears egelidate his Gore,
That from his Blood founts, for me, flowed before.
O burning Love! O large, and lasting Love!
What Angels tongue thy limits can describe?
That do extend thy self all Love above,
For which all praise, Love ought to Thee ascribe:
Since skarce the Tongue of Gods Humanity,
Can well describe this boundless Charity!
Why do I live? alas why do I live?
Why is not my Heart Loue-sicke to the Death?
But, shall I live, my loving Love to grieve?
O no, O rather let my lose my Breath.
Then take me to thee, Love, O let me die
Only but for thy Love, and Sin to fly.
Stay me with Flagons, with Fruit comfort me;
Now I am sick, Heart-sicke of sweetest love:
Then let me live (sweet Love) alone in Thee;
For, Love desires in That, beloved, to move:
I live, and move in Thee; but yet, O yet,
I live to move; that is, to make Thee fret!
Shall Fleshlesse frailty, O! shall ever Flesh
Extercorate her filth Thee to annoy?
Or shall the same be ever found so nesh
As not to endure Paine-temporall, that light Toy?
The Heavens fore-fend that Flesh should so offend,
Since God, in Flesh, was wrackt, Flesh, marred, to mend.
Look Turks, and Pagans on this Spectacle;
See, through the same, the errors ye are in:
This is true Faiths entire Subtectacle;
Propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin:
This is God crucified, which ye despise,
Because His Manhoods meekness hurts your Eyes.
Tell me would ever Man but God, and Man,
Freely, of self accord, accord to bear
Gods Angers plagues, for Man, which no Man can,
That on this God and Man inflicted were?
None but a God, whose Power is infinite,
Can brook the pains that are indefinite!
Let go his Works, mere Metaphisicall,
Which World will witness, though the World does hate him,
(That might suffice to prove Him God in All)
And look but on the price his friends did rate him,
With all the plagues his powers, for Foes, sustain,
You must confess it is God that bides such pain,
And that your faith is false, and Golpell vain.
Who joy unmeasurable can bear, vnioy'd,
And Grief intolerable sustain, vngrieu'd,
Must needs be God; that is with neither cloyed,
And of his grace, by neither, is deprived:
This is that God, that All-supporting Power,
Our Faiths Foundation, and the Churches Tower!
To thee my God, my Lord, my Jesus Christ,
Will I ascribe all Glory, Power, and Grace;
Thee will I serve (say Pagans what they list)
And, with the Arms of Love, thee still embrace:
That for my love, in love, do deigne to die
This death of shame, my life to glorify.
O let the Sum of all, be all and some,
Comprised in thy Heau'n-surmounting praise,
That wast, that art, and shall be, aye to come,
The Subject of thy Subjects thankful Lays:
Who, with advanced voice, do Carroll forth,
The praise of thine inestimable Worth!
And since thy Soul, for me, is so conflicted,
My Soul, to thee, in griefs, shall be affected;
And, for thy Flesh, through love, is so afflicted,
My Flesh, for thy high love, shall be dejected:
Soul, Flesh, and Spirit, for thy Spirit, Flesh, and Soul,
Shall (longing) pine, in Flesh-repining Dole.
Mine only School shall be Mount Caluerie,
The Pulpit but the Cross; And Teacher none
But the mere Crucifixe to mortify;
No Letters but thy blessed Wounds alone:
No Commaes but thy Stripes; no Periods
But thy Nails, Crown of Thorns, Spear, Whips, and Rods.
None other Book but thy unclasped Side
(Wherein's contained all Skils Angelical)
None other Lesson but Christ crucified
Will I ere learn: for, that is all in all:
Wherein Selfe-Curiositie may find
Matter to please the most displeased Mind.
Here, by our Masters Nakedness, we learn
What Weeds to wear: by his Thorn, crowned head,
How to adorn us: and, we may discern
By his most bitter Gall, how to be fed:
How to revenge, by praying for his foes;
And, lying on his Cross, how to repose.
For, when we read him over, see we shall,
His Head with Thorns, his Ears with Blasphemies;
His Eyes, with Tears; his honnied Mouth with Gall;
With Wounds, his Flesh; his Bones with Agonics
All full: and yet (withal) to hear him say,
So Man might live, he would thus languish aye!
O Work without Example! And O Grace
Without deserving! Love! O largest love
Surmounting measure! that for Worms so base
And basely bad, such Hels of woes does prove!
Had we bin friends, what would he then have done,
That, being his foes, no woes for us does shun?
For, lo, he hangs in Torments most extreme,
Wrapped in the Intrals often thousand Evils;
While (Christ) thy foes thy noble name blaspheme,
And rave against thee like out-ragious Devils:
From out their banefull Bulkes all spite they spue,
Till PAIN did Hydra-headed Pain subdue!
But now, begin the angry Heavens to scoule,
And Phoebus hides from thee his golden Head:
Now, Satan toils, to tempt thy sacred Soul:
Now, sinkes thy Body down, as it were dead:
Now, quakes the Earth, now rends the Temples Veil,
And now thy Senses do themselves assail.
Now, frowns thy Father, with a dreadful look;
Now, burns his wrath, which fire thy Soul does fear:
Now, gape the Graves of Saints, which now awooke
From out the sleep of Death, wherein they were:
Now roares the Thunder in the gloomy sky,
Now Satan yelles, because his foile's so nie.
Orion, now, does muster misty Clouds,
Wherewith the foggie Air is dark'ned quight:
And now, thy Fathers face from thee he shrouds,
That whilome wont, on thee, to shine so bright:
All which compel thy Manhood thus to cry,
Ely, Ely, Lammasabacthanie!
Now, down thy holy Head begins to sink;
And now the Hand of Death does close thine Eyes:
Thy Tongue, enflamed with pain, now thirsts for drink;
Which being revealed, that want, Spite straight supplies:
Who gives thee(ah!) (to plague thy Taste withal,
In gall of bitterness) the bitter'st Gall*
But (by the way) here note, my mournful Muse,
The great! (ah terms I want aright to express)
The monstrous malice of these cankred Jews,
Who not content his Corpse with Pains t'oppresse,
Do nerethelesse his Senses seek to spill,
And grieve because his Soul they cannot kill!
O Sons of Sin, can ye see Iustice-Sonne
(So like the Son of all Impiety)
Thus made a Chaos of Confusion,
With Angels so to range you orderly,
Yet live disord'red? then (ah) what remains
But lookt-for Worlds of all confused pains!
Say, for his glory, he endures these Storms
Without respect of your peculiar gain:
Alas! what glory can GOD have of Worms,
But such as he might loathe, since vile, as vain?
Then, since he for yours (not his glory) dies
With shame, for shame die ye for his likewise.
Since He that is Lord of Bliss, and all Renown,
Dives to the Ground of Shame, and Sorrows Seas,
To fetch up Iemmes of Joy, for Glories Crown,
To place but on Man's Head, in Worlds of ease!
Then Man should to the Ground of deep'st annoy
Diue for like Iemmes, his Lord, alike, to joy.
Had we but Self-love in the kindest kind,
This love alone would force us this to do:
For, this Self-love (not like the other, blind,
Seeing what Joys such Woes do whaft us to)
Makes us, for our own future endless ease,
Love to be ducking still in Sorrows Seas.
Christ's bitter, and his latest draught thus drunk,
The Pangs of Death begin each limb to Rack;
Now picks his Soul, the Life's Lock of his Truncke;
For now his dear Heart Strings begin to crack:
Father, quoth he, to thee I give my Soul;
For now is finished both my Life, and doule.
And for the vp-shoot, Longius, with a Spear,
Does pierce his side, and cleeues his Heart in twain;
From which, as from an hallowed Fountain clear,
Both Blood, and Water gusheth forth amain:
Drink now an Health, my Soul; for, this is Wine,
Will all thy faculties, with grace, refine!
For, this is Christ, through whose sides (souls to save)
All Men are crucified: with whose last Breath
All Men gave up the Ghost: within whose Grave
All buried be: by whose arise from Death
All are revived: for, he, as we believe,
Did live to die, that we might die to live.
In Paradise from one self head did flow
Four Streams, of Earth, to bathe each droughtie limb:
From Christ (Faiths Paradise) Blood flows fo;
From whose Heart, through his Hands, and Feet, does swim
(On floods of gore) the Arc of grace, where in
The Elect are saved from being wrackt through sin.
And from his side (beside) came welling forth
Both Blood and Water full of Mystery;
Blood to purge sin, and Water of like worth,
To note new birth in Christian Infancy:
From all whose Bodies parts to parts, and whole,
Blood streamed forth to cleanse each Bodies Soul.
The Blood of Beasts effuz'd in sacrifice
Were Typical; yet pleased the angry Highest:
But that did this (most pure) Blood symbolize;
Those Shadows were dispelled by Jesus Christ
True Justice Sun, in whom no shadow is,
Either of Change, or Sin, or ought amiss.
Here, perpendicularly hangs the Line
By which from out the Worlds Maze men do go
Unto a World more ample, more divine,
Without which all go wrong to rightest woe:
Then go by this, you that would not be lost;
For, hereby you go right, how ever crossed.
And if foul Sins, glu'd fast to flesh, and Blood
So closely cling that they will not away
Unless unloosed with a sanguine flood,
This working Deluge will not let them stay:
Noes flood confounded all, save eight alone,
But this saues all that it has overflowed!
NOw has the great CREATOR, for Man's sake,
The second Adam cast into a sleep;
Whiles of his Heart-blood He his Spouse does make;
For whom His Heart does Blood, and Water weep:
Which compound Tears are turned to Joy, entire,
For his Heart-blood effects his Hearts desire!
Which dear desire, was one dear Spouse to have,
To be co-partner of his Griefs and Joys;
Which when he wooke, his God unto him gave,
To comfort him in comforts, and annoies:
Which when n he saw, He held (most fair to see!)
filesh, of his Flesh, Bone, of his Bones to be!
Now has the Monster Flesh-deuouring Death
Got him within his Bowels; but (thoughdead)
Look how a woman, groaning, languisheth
In Childbirth till she be delivered,
So groaneth Death, who trauelleth in pain,
Till of his charge he be discharged again.
And as the * Babylonian Dragon brake Bell, and Dragon.

So soon as Daniels Lumpes his Mouth had filled;
So, Death, that of Life's Lord a Meal did make,
In sunder brake, and utterly was spild:
His Mawe could not digest that blessed Bit,
Made most immortal by his eating it.
Nor could he vomit up this Bread of Life,
Which (Poyson-like, while it in him abides)
Had with his nature such incessant strife,
That it brake forth the next way through his sides:
Sending celestial Beams, not to the sky,
But to the Throne of highest divinity.
Nor could He (as some Beasts rechew their meat,
To cause the same the better to digest)
Rechew this Bread, so fast, and so complete
Made by his chewing, that it now must rest
As free from Passion, as from violence,
Guarded with Power, and Glories excellence.
O! that all Spirits of high Intelligence,
(By royal Armies) would themselves immure
In my blunt Brains; that, by their confluence,
I might express (with Nectar'd Phrases pure)
The praise that to this Passion right pertaines,
Whose sacred virtue, sacred Virtue, stains!
The virtue of this Passion is of power
Reuenges Red, to change to Mercies White;
This Passions virtue is so passing pure,
That Foul to Fair it turns, and Dark, to Light:
"The Land-marke to true Rest, when Troubles toss
"(In Sorrows seas) is Christ upon the Cross.
Ye vnconfused orders Angellick
In order come to take this Blood effuz'd:
Bring forth Celestial Bowls, with motion quick,
To which this precious blood may be infuz'd:
Let not one drop be lost of such rare Blood,
That makes men passing bad, exceeding good!
Cover this Aqua-uitae with your wings
From touch of Infidels, and Jews profane:
They have no interest in this King of Kings;
Whose blood they sucked, which blood will be their bane:
Make much thereof, since but the least drop of it
Is worth ten thousand Worlds for price, and profit:
Yet, let poor Spirited Conuerts, drink their fill;
And I will their dry Souls, till with it they swell;
Such divine surfeiting is wholesome still;
For, noisome Humors it does quite expel:
Yea, though, with grief, they swell, and break with pain,
Such grief brings joy, and makes them whole again.
The Elephants, of yore inured to war,
Before the Fight, some blood were used to see;
Which them incenst, the more to make them dare;
Then, if a Beast shall not our better be,
Since Christ we see quite drowned thus in his Blood,
We must endure the Rack, as he the Rood.
Five Founts he opens; whence, do (gushing) flow
Red Seas, to drown our black Egyptian sins;
That they no more may seek our overthrow:
Then, should we go, like Isreal's Denizins,
Though Wastes of Woes, orethrowing every Let,
Till we into the Land of Promise get!
NOw, to this Lifelesse, yet Life-giuing Body
Return my Soul; see, see, how like a Clod
He hangs, with gastly-grimme aspect, all bloody;
Ah who would ween this Man should be a God?
And yet what Man can doubt it, since He died
As Man, for Men, that this God crucified?
What cheer O holy Marie, Gods dear Mother?
How fares thy Heart, transpierc'd with Sorrows sword?
Thy Son is slain; yet sure there is none other
That kills, and straight reuiueth with a Word!
If He alone has this almighty power,
Doubt not but He himself, Himself will cure!
What! do I doubt that thou a doubt do make
Of his reuiuall? O! I wrong thee much
Ifso I should; for, thy Faith cannot shake,
Since it is stayed by Gods unshaken Touch:
Then, that thou should be thus, so woe-begon,
I see no cause, save Natures course alone.
Nature will yerne, when monstrous minded Men
Prodigiously do violate Her Laws:
But when they wrack her self, what will she then?
Will she not mourn? to grieve, has she no cause?
She were unlike her self, and her self foe,
If (touched so near) she were not touched with woe.
Then, sacred Saint, thou must have leave to mourn:
Thy loss is great, although thy gain be more:
Thy Heart must rend, to see thy dear Heart torn;
It needs must bleed, when Its so full of Gore:
If it be dry, through bleedings great excess,
Would Mine, for Thine, might bleed, and never cease.
ANd since twixt you is such proximitie,
That thou do thoroughly taste the smart he feels,
I Will turn my speech a while alone to thee,
To comfort thee with joy which Faith reueales:
And though thou now triumph in endless joy,
This might be sed to thee in thine annoy.
Thine Eyes that see (engulpht in seas of Tears)
Griefs Objects, greater than they are indeed,
Dissolve in Brine to season so thy Cares,
That Sorrow may thereon with pleasure feed:
"When Sorrows swellings burst out of the Eyes,
"The Heart does hold to give them fresh supplies.
Thine Ears believe all Sounds (how sweet so ere)
Are but the Accents of a Tragic voice;
The Angels Notes do seem but parts to bear
In the Confusion of an irksome noise:
"For, when the Body is without the Head,
"What Music makes the Trunk but dull, or dead.
The Echoes of thy Plaints do seem to thee
The mournful cries of Rivers, Rocks, and Hills;
As though their Maker them had made to be
True feelers of his Pains, thy Griefs, their Ills:
"For, when as Natures God feels violence,
"Nature makes naught that has not feeling sense!
Each glimpse of Joy to thee is like the Spoils
Of some rich Kingdom to her conquered Prince;
Which are the marks of her recurelesse foiles,
And, without war, his warring Thoughts convince:
"For, others mirth does then become our moan,
"When they make merry with our loss alone.
What ere delights the Ear then renouates
The woeful want of thy Sons fu gred Words;
For, Angels voice but recapitulates
The miss of That which sweeter voice affoords:
"And to be minded of the loss of Joy
"Does make us find, in old loss, new annoy.
As Love (that highly prizeth pricelesse Things)
Trebles the price of those of highest rate;
So, Reason and Judgment (Faithless almighty Wings)
Lifting thy Soul to see thy high estate,
Makes his Cross thy Crosse-Crosse-let (treble crossed)
Because so well thou know what thou have lost.
And all the Sweetes thy Senses apprehend,
Are but as Crummes of thy late royal cheer;
Which thy erst full-fed Soul do but offend,
And make thy Look more hunger-pin'd appear:
"The Pallat used to ful-disht dainty Cates,
"The homely crumms of course Crusts deadly hates.
Worlds-glorie is to thee a Lightnings flame,
Which does but light to see calamity:
For, out it goes when it has showed the same,
And Hell does leave behind, t'affront the Eye;
For, Glory, in his Grace, did so excel,
That Hea^u'n with it compared is worse than Hell.
For, killing in his own Life-giuing Death
The sacred life of lives; it does ensue
All livings Things died, with his yielding breath;
So made Death victor, and did Death subdue!
"But, by Death to subdue Life's conquering Foe,
"Is Life in Death though Flesh, and Blood say no.
No, no, sai'st Thou (dear Saint) as Flesh thou art,
Whose Blood does boil, in passion, for thy loss:
For, through his Death thy Life feels mortal smart;
So, his Cross, Tree of Life, is thy Life's Cross:
"For, Grace, and Nature being opposite,
"Does breed an endless bate twixt Flesh and Sp'rite.
When Faith does Reason into Love transmute,
Then Faith, through Love, surmounteth Reasons reach:
And scorns with Flesh and Blood once to dispute:
But in the Metaphy sicks Reas'n does teach:
Yet now thy Faith, and Love, and Reas'n conspire
To reaue thy rest in quest of thy desire.
Thy Love, by reason of thy miseries,
Engulphs thy Memory in grief so deep,
That thou forgett'st thy fore-past promises,
Remembering but (thy hearts ease) still, to weep:
"For, when hearts-ease does from the heart depart,
"Nature enforces Tears to ease the Heart.
But, yet the inward presence of thy Son,
His outward absence (dear Saint) may supply:
Who from thy Womb into thy Heart is gone,
That thou mai'st feel him much more vitally:
Then, in thy Heart (which Sorrows Sword does wound)
Hemakes his Tent, to Tent and make it sound.
But, if thou feel'st not yet this Lord of Life
Stir in that liueli'st feeling part of Thee,
It is since Passions there are yet in strife,
Sprung from his Passions which Perfections be:
But kept he not the peace in so great strife,
No, force of Nature could maintain thy life.
Thy Tears do (quenching) feed the sacred fire
That Natures Lead transmutes to Graces Gold:
Zeal blows the coals of thy divine desire
To have (as erst thou had) thy Son in hold:
But since thou have him in thy better Part,
As sure thou have him, as thy Soul, or Heart.
Yet, for his sight thy thirst is so extreme
(The Ocean of which comfort swells so high)
That though into thy Parts the Whole should stream,
Yet could it not their sore Thirst satisfy:
"For, that which is beloved, without annoy,
"The Senses severally would stillenioy.
Then having Him but in thy Heart, thy Heart
Has so much Sorrow, with that boundless bliss,
That Grace, by Nature, is perplexed in part;
So the whole Heart thereby perplexed is:
"For, till Flesh puts on immortality,
"It cannot shake off Natures Quality.
Yet were thou by his mouth forbid to weep,
Whose Biddings and Forbiddings are such Laws,
As all are bound religiously to keep,
Since, to infringe them, does Perdition cause:
And, since the union twixt you Two is such,
Thy weeping for thy self, himself does touch.
Took He not Flesh of Thee? then is the same
Thine, by the law of Nature, which is His:
For, Nature nearer union cannot frame,
Which makes thine Eyes to fashion Tears amiss:
And, since true Love does make you most entire,
Then must thy Tears fall cross to his desire.
But yet thou sai'st, but for thy Self thou weep'st,
When thou weep'st for Him, being one with Thee:
And so thou ween'st his holy Heast thou keep'st,
Who, for thy self to weep, gave liberty:
Nay, rather gave command, which to transgress
Must be most damnable, or little less.
The fault therefore, herein, (if any be)
Must be (thou ween'st) in being one with Him:
Which Sin, thou sai'st, proceeds of Grace in Thee;
Both which, in both thine Eyes, thou make to swim
Out of Election; so, presumptuously
Thou sinnest thus by Graces regencie:
For, if the Sun in Sable him inuolu'd
When Lights inlight'ner quenched was in his Blood;
If Natures frame was like to be dissolved,
To see her Maker marred in likelihood:
Then O! who cannot weep for such a loss,
His heart's more hard than (heart of oak) the Cross.
Thine Heart, and Eyes (for, both alike do move,
Since Heart and Looks are one in Deed, and Show)
Do pay him Tribute of religious Love,
Which He has paid, and thou to Him do owe:
For, what He paid thou ow'st by double Band
Which Grace, and Nature seals with thy Hand.
This dew of Grace nere falls but straight the Sun
Of Justice does exhale It to his Sphere:
And if the fowlest face It over run,
In Mercies Eyes It makes It Crystal clear:
For Eyes that so oreflowe, are Wels of Grace,
Wherein God loves to look, to see his face!
For, this imperial Water thy poor Heart
The Lymbecke is, to Still it through thine Eyes;
From Herb of Grace (called Rue) by Sorrows Art;
And, made, by quenchlesse flames of Love, to rise:
Wherein the Angels love themselves to plunge,
And joy to draine these drops becomes the Sponge.
Upon this Water-streames, with winds of strife,
Thy Soul does sail unto the Port of Peace:
To reign for ever in the Land of Life,
With him for whom these Surges never cease:
For since these Waves do whaft from Sin to Grace,
From Grace to Glory then, they pass apace.
Thy Sun is set, and at his going down,
These brackish Seas did rise to meet his fall;
That Tethis of thy true love, to thine own,
In her moist Lap receives this Light of all:
But since thou know, by Nature, he must rise,
Let Grace with comfort clear thy cloudy Eyes.
No doubt thou would (by force of that strong Tie)
Ensue his Steps, though glutted with his Gore:
And could a Death, with Hels of Torment, die,
So thou might live with Him, that dies no more:
"Then to be barred of what Love does desire,
"Turns Love to Langor, and her frost, to fire.
How lively were that Death, whose deadest Mean
The dead'st Cadauer, with a Touch, reuiues:
And makes immaculate Souls most unclean,
Being Death of Deaths that gives life of lives:
"And honnied were the death of such a life,
"Where Sin and Grace arc still at mortal strife.
For thou yet live as many Deaths to feel
As thou live hours; and, no less grief to taste
Then was thy welfare in his only weal;
Which, being extreme, then extreme woe thou have:
But, cheer thee (Saint) since naught, so violent
Can (though it perfect were) be permanent.
Live out thy living Death then, in such peace,
As to thy dying life may yield repose;
Let woes increase, past, present joys increase;
For, they do win, at length, that long do lose:
"And when as Griefe's enthroned in greatest grace,
"Then down it must, and Joy possess her place.
And though thy Soul lives more by force, then choice
Within thy dying Corpse, her living Tomb,
Yet, being there interred, she may rejoice
It did, and does both God and her enwombe:
Then O how blessed is that Earth of Thine,
That two such Sp'rites of life does still enshrine!
That Sepulcher of Death, and Seat of Life
Thy blisfull-blislesse-blessed Body, O
I want fit words (while Words are all at strife,)
Thy Bodies ten-times blessed state to show:
For, that stanch Chest those precious Jewels keeps
That keep the Chest secure in Dolors Deeps.
Then melt not, O melt not thy Heart away
In flames of Love, but love to love him still:
For, if thou heartlesse be, where shall he stay?
And if thou kill'st thy heart, thou his do kill:
For, thine is His, then for Him tender It,
With love that is, for lasting, only fit.
Thou think (perhaps) so well he loves Thee,
That if thy Soul for that dear love should die,
He would give Thee his Soul, thy Soul to be,
Since Soulelesse, now, his Body, yet, does lie:
But since from Death to Life he will remove,
He His must use; then keep Thine for his love
Thou can not fear his loss that all reliues,
For, ardent love quite kills the Ague Fear:
He can revive himself, that All reuiues;
And can make All, as if they never were:
Then since Faith holds, he is omnipotent,
Hold thee, by Faith almightily content.
Let those whose Faith begins but now to sprout,
Or senseless things that feel the force he felt,
Themselves unto their Makers fortune suit,
While their kind Bowels, in compassion, melt:
But be thou joyful, as thou faithful art,
"Since Faith sucks comfort out of holy smart.
The Place that held him, erst, thou held'st an Heaven;
The Time thou him enioy'dst, a merry May:
Comforts divine, the duties to him given;
The Air wherein he breathed, eternal Day:
If these seemed thus, whiles yet he lived to die,
What are they now he lives immortally?
Then let not Fear doubt more than Faith confirm,
Since doubts are Grounds for Grief to descant on:
And each mishap our hopes do make infirm;
Though It we meet not, with Suspicion:
"To force our friendship on a mortal foe,
"Makes Folly triumph in our ouerthro.
But, Love that has in Fears and Hopes no measure,
The more It longs her Object to possess,
The more it doubts thereof, the dire displeasure;
And being disseis'd thereof, does hope the lsse:
But O! this Love is humane, not divine,
For Faith will not let Fear true love decline.
Christ, to thy longing-loue, is as the River
Unto the chased Heart, which still he seeks;
And as Men thirsty, mind but moisture ever,
So love does think on naught, but what it likes:
If That Be not, It seeks no more to Be,
But Being, It would Be That, bond, or free.
Love cannot live without her Object long,
Since she then (longing;) lives a dying life:
Who weenes her Right, then, to her offers wrong,
As does the Husband that forsakes his Wife:
"For, in our deeds, which Reason might reprove,
"We escape vnshent, if they were done in love.
While love does lack the oil that makes it flame,
It is all Ear, or Eye, to hear, or see
Who can bewraie, or where abides the same,
That there she may in loy, or Sorrow be:
And listens unto News with longing-heed,
In hope thereby to find her longingsmeed.
If It be good, she hopes it is without peer;
If bad it be, she fears it is worse than ill:
But be it good or bad, she it must hear,
Although the joy or sorrow her may kill:
"Desire does never rest till that be had,
"Which, like to that Desire, is good or bad.
Clothe him with Diamonds that quakes for cold,
Or cramme his purse with crowns that is hunger-pin'd:
That, for a freeze Gown give his Jewels would,
This, all his Crowns for Crusts of coursest kin'd:
"As each supply supplies not each defect,
"So, naught contents Desire, but his Elect.
They that have most, are held most rich to be;
And they that have their wish, held most to have:
Then, as in Him is all that is wished of thee,
So He Is the Sum of all that thou can crave:
"It is the greatest gain that can be made,
"To get eternal good, for goods that fade.
But rest these Thoughts which Thee of rest deprive,
In Paradise where he (thou know) do the est;
For there, he said, the Thief should, with him, live,
That day that he of life was dispossessed:
"Then, when the life of Love is dead to Grief,
"And lives to Joy, Joy is dead Loves relief.
He, for us, captived our captivity;
And, what is that but death, the due of Sin?
Which now he triumphs ore, in victory,
That we might still rejoice, not grieve, therein*
"When Grief is slain, it is a wrong to Joy
"Our Powers, in Sorrows service to employ.
Yet greater cause of grief Grief cannot give:
But greater cause of joy, Joy cannot yield:
Grief, Joy resists, and Joy, with Grief, does strive;
Thus, twixt these two, still doubtful is the field:
But Joy, at last, (as true Grief does presage)
Shall Victor be, and no more Battle wage.
For, this is He (who though thus skarrified,
Tormented, slaughtred, and thus vilipended:
That is, indeed, the first Man deified,
Whom Men-of-God, as-God, to Men commended:
To Him the Prophets gave this Testimony,
That, He should Live, as Man to die for Many:
His Skin, the Whips; his Flesh, Thorns made unsound;
The Nails, his Nerves; the cruel Spear, his Heart:
Sharp Woes, his Soul; Gods wrath, his Mind did wound;
So, wounded was, in all and every Part!
Thus, his Soules-Soule was sacrifiz'd for Sin,
That so our Souls might, their lost glory, win.
His hand of Power, at first did figulate
The Belsire of Man's most unconstant kind:
And shall those Hands, that Hand did figurate,
This Hand-almightie, by their frailty bind?
No, no (alas) the Scepter's in that Hand
That does both Heaven and Hell, of right, command!
He, like the glorious, rare Arabian Bird,
Will soon result from his incinderment,
(Which flaming Love, and Charity had fired)
Of sole selfe-pow'r, and own arbitrament:
And though his Toils be (Silke-worme like) his Tomb,
Yet shall his active Sp'rite his Flesh vntombe!
Divinely then, with Triumph Caesared,
He shall reblesse Thee with ten Thousand Blisses;
Whereby thy Soul shall aie be ravished
With many millions of sweet Comforts kisses!
Whose Sweetes shall be so super-naturall,
That they, perforce, thy Cares shall cordial.
Then cheer thee sacred Virgin, mourn no more:
The worst is past, the best is now to come:
Thy blessed Womb, his blessed Body bore,
To die accursed, for which, He blessed thy Womb:
The Curse we caused, for which, He Death indures,
Then mourn no more, but let the Grief be Ours.
Fraile-Fleshes signiorizing Tyrant, fell,
(Usurping Monarchy in her Effects
Stearne Hydra-headed SIN, with Death, and Hell)
He by his Death, to free our Flesh, subjects:
Then let Life's Death, that Life's Death does reliue,
Kill thy quick woes, and thy dead joys revive.
Serene thy Woe-adumbred Front, sweet Saint;
Let Joy transluce thy Beauties blandishment:
Thy Son feels not (for Death is Sense restraint)
Yet sees, though dead, thy living languishment:
Which well he wots (though it of Love proceed)
Auailes Him not, nor mends His Killers Creed.
Thou know thy charge, thy Master thee imposed,
Sacred Evangelist, His Souls dear Love;
To thee her Son, as to her Son disposed;
O then discharge thy charge, for her behoue:
And like a Son, yield her sad Heart relief
With words that flow from fellow-feeling grief.
Come, come, O Joseph, Nichodemus come,
Make haste, post haste, to take his Body down:
He yet craves pity, though He yet be dumb:
Yet, by your ruth, your love may yet be shown:
Though fear of Men, did make ye God forsake,
Yet God, since ye are Men, will mercy take.
You did none other than his Minions did,
Whom, of base Grooms, his Grace did Minnionize*
Yet, in his Troubles all their Heads they hid,
And left him for their Sins a Sacrifize:
Yet since his Arms are spread, them to embrace,
Ye may be sure He Will take you too to grace.
Then since in love, ye have obtained leave
To take him down that, humbled, so was raised,
Then down retake him, and withal believe,
He shall (in Heaven remounted) aid be praised:
Up with your Scala-Coeli to the Tree,
To take down Heaven; for, Heaven of Heavens is He!
NOw, Soul suppose thou see these worthy Men
Laden with Linen, and with costly Gumbes,
Unto the blessed-cursed Cross to ren,
T'interre his Corpse which DEATH now ouercomes:
Where being arrived, the Ladders up they rear
To take Him down, with care, surmounting Care!
See how the Infant Church (whose feeble force,
Has scarce the strength to lift up Hand to Head)
Unites her powers, to take down his Corse,
That is alive, and yet is perfect dead:
See with what fearful care, the Nails they draw,
As if his Flesh yet felt, or them He saw.
What providence they use, with Linen large,
Crossing his dead Corpse, that to Death was Crossed,
That so they may the better wield that Charge,
And not, by poize, to let him fall be forced:
See how the Body doubles in their Arms,
While Faith their love, with feruor, double warmes.
For, Martyrs Deaths, give life to Martyrs more,
Till DEATH be tired, with reauing Them of Life;
This God did die, as nere did Man before;
For, He by yielding meekely, conquered Strife:
His Patience in such Passions, and such Spightes,
Does Life-inspire the faith of Proselites.
It is in vain, therefore, with Sword, or Fire,
To seek to plant a Faith which cannot grow;
For, Saints blood chokes It ere It can aspire;
And, like a Deluge, does It ouerflow!
"For, when the Church is bathed in Her own blood,
"She Is cured of all Diseases, in that Flood!
Who will not run into an Hell of Pain
For His Hopes sake; when he sees some therein
(For that same cause) to seem in bliss to reign;
And by that Bliss, eternal Glory win?
"It Is sport to die, when Life, and Death conspire,
"Fear to exclude, and satiate the Desire!
WEll, now, those Women, that were fled him fro
(When Tempests raged) are come, the Coast being clear,
To pay him their last Duty, since no mo
They shall not (as they doubt) Him see, nor hear:
Now every one is busied, busily,
To grace Him, Dead, that for their grace did die.
Now, down they have this dead Life-giuing Lord,
And now, their zeal, with divine adoration,
Performs Loves complements in deed and word:
Now, He has suffered, now, they suffer Passion:
They spice Him sweetly, with salt tears among,
And, of sad Sighs, they make their Obiit-Song.
O cruel hands (quoth one) that pierced these Hands;
But, far more cruel heart, that gored this Heart;
Cursed (quoth another) be their feet, that stand
In Sinners Way, who did these Feet endart:
O (quoth a Third) Pain, still that Head suround,
That, with these cruel Thorns, this Head has crowned.
Infernal Furies, whip them, that have torn
This blessed Flesh, thus whipped, accursedly;
And be their Flesh, with Wants, to nothing worn,
That thus have worn the Flesh of Deity:
O worm of Conscience, gnaw their Souls to naught,
That still did plague his Soul, and vex his Thought.
Let never Sun recheere them with his Rays,
That Justice Son have thus in purple clowded;
Let nere Mouth open, but spit in their dispraise,
That have these Lips in Death's pale Liu'ry shrouded:
"Thus all like Honny-Bees sweet murmr make,
"Against those Waspes, that spoiled their honny Cake.
Now, draw they forth their Aromaticke Gumbes,
His Flesh, most sweet, to make most oderous;
See, see, how, now, His Train (late scatt'red) comes,
Trooping, with drooping Hearts, most dolorous,
To help t'embalme Him, and condole His death,
And to consort His Carcass to the Earth.
See how, in Peace, they strive, in Love, contend,
To kiss, and rekisse, his gore-crusted Face;
And, with each kiss, Tears Floods their force extend
Which shall anticipate the others pace:
Lo, how they hug Him, with lowd-shaking cries,
Some, hug his Arms, and others Legs, and Thies.
But, blessed is He that has his Head in hold,
He holds his hold till crowd enforce him thence;
Yet ere he parts, his kisses millifold,
Bewray his love, and loving diligence:
And, as the Babe is loath to leave the Dugge
Forepin'd with thirst; so, at his Lips they tugge.
Sweet Jesus, give me leave, in strong conceit,
Among these holy Ones, to kiss thee once;
I, as unworthy, will their leisure wait,
With vigilant attendance for the nonce:
Though they, in love, are not my self above,
"For, who has most forgiven, most does love.
If not thy Lips, (for, I confess (dear Sweet)
I am un worthy such pre-eminence!)
Yet give me leave to kiss thy sacred Feet;
And wash them with my sad Tears confluence:
Let me, with Marie, who had much forgiu'n,
(Yet I much more) make Them my highest Heaven.
For, I (aye me) I am that Lump of Sin,
That made thy Soul so heavy to the death!
I, every day, afresh thy woes begin,
Breathing out Death, to thee, with my Life's breath:
Far worse than he that (blind) thy Heart did gore,
For, I do see, and yet do wound it more!
O Christ, with thy Rod, strike my Rockie Heart,
That it may flow for Thee, as Thine for me;
O let it bleed, in pity of thy smart,
And leave to think on ought that grieueth Thee:
Bleed Heart, weep Eyes, that Blood and Water may
Wash Blood, and Water, which I spilt, away.
Sweet, Honnied Sweet! look, look into my Heart,
See what Desires thy Love does power therein,
Touching thy Love; I know thou have the Art
To make the same, in Deed, thy Love to win:
Since thy grace makes the Will, and Deed, entire,
O give me grace to Do, as I Desire.
And as it is written of the Elephant,
That he is fierce, to see Grapes blood diffused:
So let me (Wretch) become most valiant
Against Death, and Hell, to see thy Blood effus'd:
Who art the Grape, which pressed on the Cross,
Yields wine of Life, and makes us live by loss.
When I behold thy still-fresh-bleeding Wounds,
I see the Deed, to work with the Desire
Of my Redemption; which, my Soul confounds
With shame, though It the same does life-inspire:
Whose good Deeds, by Desire, are only done,
Though good Deeds end, what good Desires begun.
When, when, dear Lord, O when shall I, (frail I!)
Resist to Blood, thy bloody foes resist?
When, for thy sake, shall I desire to die?
And in that dear Desire, in Deed, insist?
Till when, I hold my deer'st Desires to be
Unworthy of thy Cross, much less of Thee.
Can I behold thy Gore rough-casted Corse,
Thine, Head, Heart, Hands, Back, Side, Feet, wounded all,
And all to free me from thy Fathers Curse;
And all I do, is but therein to fall!
I Will trust Thy Secrecy; Hark, in thine Ear,
I am the worst redeemed with Blood so dear!
Then, good Desires can nere repay the Debt
Which thee I owe, by Deeds, sealed with thy Blood;
My self, thy Due, I should too much forget,
To seek to pay Thee with none other good:
For, I am Thine, Thou dearly paid'st for me,
Then both my Life and Death should honor Thee.
This World, this Hellish World, does dim mine Eyes,
(My Judgments Eyes) that they but darkly see
The way to work, by love, as work the wise,
(The godly wise) whose works tend all to Thee:
Then help me, Love, to work for Thee alone;
Mean while let me thy Passion think upon.
Now does this loving sacred Synaxie
(With divine Orizons, and devout Tears)
Ensindon Him with choicest Draperie;
And to the Sepulcher his Body bears:
And as they bear him step, by step, they pour
Down showers of Tears, which winds of Sighs procure.
But ah (alas) his Mother, all this while,
Like Niobe (as Poets feign) still sits:
All as she did her Senses reconcile
To senseless Death, and were in Tranced fits:
Without or Sp^ite or Life, or Heart, or Soul,
Her violent woes her Senses so control!
Now, Love, to his last Home has Him conuai'd,
That had no Hole, in Life, to hide his Head;
This Hole, in Death, shall do what Life denai'd,
Yet shall it not long hold Him being dead:
For, Heavens his Home, Earth's but the Babylon,
Upon whose Rivers banks, He still did moan.
Here Love contends with Custom; Love would keep
His Corpse without, Custom, within the Grave:
But Tyrant Custom, swaying Love does weep,
That Her dear LOVE she may no longer have:
And, for a Farewell, Volleys forth her Voice,
In Groans, and Sighs, and Lachrimable Noise.
NOw He Is interred that all the World intombes,
But in the Center of his Court divine;
Yet least Point of that Center, now, enwombes
This Lord, whose greatness nothing can contain!
Gods Peace be with Him, since He Is God of Peace,
Till by his power He makes his Death decease,
Vnheau'n your selves, ye holy Cherubins,
And give attendance on your Lord, in Earth:
Cover his Corpse with your Celestial wings,
From all that naturally annoyes beneath:
Descend sweet Angels (Legioniz'd in Ranks)
And make your Heaven on his Sepulchers Banks.
There warble forth your Hymns of highest praise,
In highest honor, of your highest Lord:
And Lullabie asleep his Watchers Eyes,
With secret Soule-enchanting sweet concords:
Whiles with Eie-blinding Beams of Glory dight,
He fair amounts, ^o frolic his Saints sight!
But tell me, O thou fairest Fair of Men,
Where do thou lodge? at Noonday, where do sleep?
O tell my Soul, and She will find Thee then,
And, as her Soul, Thee found, will safely keep:
For, Thou more clear than Springs of Esebo^
Have made Her, with thy more clear, Blood (...)!
Thy Wintry-* Woes are past, Spights storms are ceased;
Now flowers of Comfort, burgen every where:
Then rise my Love (thou can not be diseased)
Out of the * Rocks Holes rise, to me appear:
And, in the Holes of Thee, her refuge Rock,
My Soul from from deadly Sin, and Shame vp-locke.
Out of this Rock (as out of Paradise)
Run (through the Moss of my most feeble Flesh)
Unto my Soul (all soiled with Sin, and Vice)
Gihons of golden streams, her to refresh:
So, may it run, O still so may it run,
Till it has made her, black, as bright as sun.
O Gates of Heaven! oriental, glorious Gates!
O Wounds! no Wounds, but Hau'ns of Heaven secure!
Neasts of clean Doves, and Forts from fellest Fates!
Blessed Balme-Boxes, that all sores recure!
O let me living die, and dying live,
In these most holy Wounds that Life do give!
O let these Wounds, these Wounds indeprauate,
Be holy Sanctuaries for my whole Man;
That though sins sores It often coninquinate,
Yet, there, It may be made as white as Swanne!
O holy Wounds! Wounds holier than all Holies,
Still let your Bloods, be Floods, t'ingulph my Folies.
When Woes do wound me, wind me in thy Wounds
Sweet Jesus, that for me, with Woe, wast wounded;
When Foes, by Wounds, my Bodies life confound,
Then let my Soul in thy Wounds be surrounded:
There let Her rest securely, till she may
By thy high Grace, resume, in Bliss, her Clay.
When carnal Lust, my Flesh, (frail Flesh) inflames,
Then quench the same in thy Wounds, bleeding still:
When Fury, with strong hand, my Mind vnframes,
Then in thy Wounds reform It to thy Will:
In few, by this most bloody Immolation,
Let my by parted self have whole Salvation.
And thou, O just commander of this All*
To please whose Justice, Justice Death endured;
Thou, that I hat death made most patheticall,
Inspire me with Love, Hope, and Faith assured:
That while I breath this air, my voice may be
No light vain Air, but voice advancing Thee.
And deeply die each object of my Sense,
In tincture of thy Sons all saving Blood:
By which Aspect my Minds reminiscence
May ruminate the virtue of that good
That is our Summum bonum and the rate
Of Sin, Gods wrath, and just, though heavy hate.
O holy God! then look, O look on me
Through the through wounded Sides of thy dear Son;
O let my Scarlet Sins, pure purple be
In his dear Blood, my Sins Purgation:
For even as through read Glass, Things red do seem,
So, through that Blood, my Works thou good wilt deem!
The kingdom of the Flesh is swaid by Sin;
In Christ, that kingdom, thou have crucified:
Then, let me dwell that faultlesse Flesh within;
Since Sin subdues all humane Flesh beside:
Then, there, O there! let me both live, and die,
Since Life, by Death, there lives immortally!
The Devil, and the World (two Worlds of Strife,
With whom my Flesh conspires) my Soul assail:
Who, to destroy her self gives them a knife;
And so with them conspires, her self to spoil:
Then, if thou flesh her not with Christ, she dies;
For, she in my Flesh, lives none otherwise.
But, shall I make long Furrows on his Back?
Or still make Him but soape my Sins to scowre?
Shall He supply the Power my soul does lack?
Yet shall she still be idle with his pow're?
O no (Lord) no, that is not the way to win,
But, the only way to live, and die in sin.
Then help me; Lord, to help his helping might;
And, give me of thy goods, to grace his Grace:
Let not my sloth but clogge your active Sp'rit;
Although it do the Same, in Love, embrace:
"For, since in Action, Virtue does consist,
Help me to work together, with my Christ.
Had I all Faith, and Mountains could remove,
And though I gave my Body to the Fire;
All this were nothing, if I had not Love;
Then, lively Faith, mere Love does Life-inspire:
Since then, without Love, Faith does naught but die,
"Give me that Faith that lives by Charity.
Had I, of Men, or Cherubins the Tongues,
Knew I all Secrets, or all Prophecy;
Fed I the poor, with all to me belongs,
All these, without Love, do but, living, die:
And, since on Love depends the Royal Law,
O let my faith (Lord) work in Love, and awe.
Christ is a Rock of Refuge but to those
That fight thy Battles; then needs must I fight
Against both Thy, and My still-fighting Foes,
And, ever fly to Him, in want of might:
Let me rest on this Rock; but yet, so rest,
As, by my sloth, He may not be oppressed.
I long (sweet God) to see thy unseen Face;
Then put me in this Rocks most holy Rifts;
That I, with Moses, there may see thy Grace,
Since It cannot be seen, but through these Clifts:
But, if I be unmeet thy Face to ken,
"Show me thy back-parts; kind Lord! say, Amen.
God forbid that I should glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ: by whom the World is crucified to me, and I to the World. JOHN DAVIES
of Hereford.

SONETS.
1.
THe ofter sin, the more grief, shows a Saint;
The ofter sin, the less grief, notes a Fiend:
But often with grief to sin, the soul does taint;
And often to sin with joy, the soul does rend.
To sin on Hope, is sin most full of Fear;
To sinue of malice, is the Devils sin:
One is, that Christ may greater burden bear;
The other, that his Death might still begin.
To sin of Frailty, is a sin but weak;
To sin in strength, the stronger makes the blame:
The first, the Reed Christ bare, has power to break;
The last, his thornie-Crowne can scarce vnframe:
But, finally, to sin maliciously,
Reed, Crown, nor Cross, has power to crucify!
2.
ALthough we do not all the Good we love,
But still, in love, desire to do the same;
Nor leave the finnes we hate, but hating move
Our Soul and Bodies Powers, their Powers to tame;
The Good we do, God takes as done aright;
That we desire to do, He takes as done:
The sin we shun, He will with Grace requite;
And not impute the sin we seek to shun.
But, good Desires produce no worser Deeds;
For, God does both together (lightly) give:
Because he knows a righteous Man must needs
"By Faith, that works by Love, for ever live:
Then, to do naught, but only in Desire,
Is Love that burns, but burns like painted Fire.
3.
A Righteous man still fears all his Deeds,
Lest done for fear, or in hypocrisy:
Hypocrisy (as with the Corn do Weeds)
Still grows up with Faith, Hope, and Charity.
But it bewraies they are no Hypocrites,
That most of all Hypocrisy do fear:
For, who are worst of all in their own sights,
In Gods dear sight do best of all appear.
To fear that we nor love, nor fear aright,
Is no less perfect fear, than rightest love:
And to suspect our steps in greatest light,
Does argue God our Hearts and steps does move:
But right to run, and fear no whit at all,
Presageth we are near a fearful fall.
4.
COme, follow me, as I do follow Christ,
Is the persuasiu'st speech the Priest can use;
This Coniuration Fiends can scarce resist;
For, shame will quite confound them that refuse.
When Pastors show what should be done in Deed,
Their flock will follow them, though naught they say;
Since they the hungry souls and bodies feed;
And teach the rightest Truth, the readiest way.
Thus, worthy Priests get Reverence, Love, and Fear,
While wordy Ones scorn, hate, and shame do find:
For, Winds of Spite their highest sails do tear,
Who make themselves naught else but subtle Wind:
For, though a Foote-ball mounts often by the same,
Yet is It spurned and made the Peoples game.
5.
It Is not so blessed to receive as give:
Yet Men abounding in all Blessings take
Relief from All, yet they will Some relieve,
Since they see Riches here, Men blessed make.
Then, this Worlds blessed in Show, but cursed in Deed:
Christ's BODY in the Earth grows less and less:
Whose Members, that should one another feed,
Let one another pine through wretchedness.
Yet, seed is not the soyles wherein Its sow'n,
But his that sowed It: so, the Alms we sow
Is not so much the Beggars, as our own;
Since It in Them for our Souls gain does grow:
Then, of all Soyles that yield most Interest,
"The Belly of the Beggar is the best.
6.
Prayer, if it be complete, is of power
To overrule almighty Power and Grace:
For, It can their Omnipotence procure
To do what not? (if good) in any Case.
But as Queen Hester came before her King,
Two Maids attending, to support her port,
Leaning on one, the other carrying
Her Princely Train, in most maiesticke sort.
So, Prayer must attended be with Two,
Fasting, and Almesdeeds, commming to her King!
Then, what She will have done, that will He do;
Though She His Kingdom crave, or any Thing:
But when She comes not thus, the Act of Sin
Is readier than Temptation to begin!
7.
IN The Act of sin the guilt of Conscience
Does spoil our sport, since our Souls (fainting) bleed:
For, that Worm feeds upon our inward sense,
More than sins Manna outward sense does feed.
But he on whom Gods glorious face does shine,
The more his Griefs, the more his Joys abound:
For, who are drunk with divine Pleasures Wine,
Can feel no Torments which the senses wound.
Then it is a Torment nere to be tormented
In Virtues cause; nor, for Sins foul default:
And, no worse Tempting, than nere to be tempted;
For, we must peace attain by Sins assault:
Then blessed is the Cross that brings the Crown,
And glorious is the Shame that gains Renown.
8.
Virtue consists in Action; which consists
In doing That which Virtue does command;
But this injurious World the same resists,
Whose Actions are performed by Vices Band.
Then, hardly can the Willing, weak in Act,
Show forth the virtue of their active Will;
But that the World their virtue will coact
To act the Part of Vice with greater skill.
Then, let the Willing-weake the World forgo,
And act the parts of Virtue, where, alone,
God, and his Angels, may their Actions know;
So shall they be beloved, praised, and known:
"For, clear is muddy water standing still,
"But being stirred, it look like Puddle will.
And, hide me in the wildest Waste or Wood,
Yet Fame will find me out if I be good.
FINIS.
LONDON. Printed by John Windet for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, by Saint Austins Gate. 1609.


