BIEN VENV. GREAT BRITAINS WELCOME TO HER GREAT FRIENDS, AND DEAR BRETHREN
THE DANES.

When Love is well express in Word, and Deed,
T'wixt Friends, it shows they are right well agreed.
Imprinted at London for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop
near Saint Austens gate, 1606.

To the right noble Lord, Philip Herbert Earl of Mountgomerie, Baron of
Shurland: and the right worshipful Sir James Haies Knight.
TO you, Fair Hands, (Hands of my dreadest Lord,
Wherewith He feeds himself with sweet delight)
To You my Rimes run of their own accord,
Since in your Hands remains some hidden might,
That Like the Load-stoane draws (as with a Cord)
Mine Iron Numbers to your Lilly White:
They, to the North-point, point: O then affoorde
To take them to It; for, aye me, my sight
Cannot behold Light, lovingly abhorred:
Since for mine Eyes such Sunne-Beames are too bright:
Yet, lest at my presumption Scorn should boorde,
Detain them (if you please) to do me right:
But, if, when you have waide them, weight they be,
Or give, or take them, all is one to me.
The ever honorer of your most honorable virtues, JOHN DAVIES of Hereford.

BIEN VENV. Great Britains welcome to her great friends, and dear Brethren,
the Danes.
YE Angels which (in Soul inchaunting Quires)
Do celebrate your Sovereigns holy praise,
Who ever burn in loves refyning fires,
and Co^cords Tones to highest Thrones do raise,
Descend (by Swarms, on wings of Loves desires)
Discords to drown with Loves harmonious Lays:
And open Heavens Casements wherthrough fly ye do,
Right ore the place where one King lives in two.
And, were ye ignorant where that should be,
But open those wind-dores and ye soon should know:
For, to the Heavens the fame thereof does flee,
From now great Britain (highest Heaven below)
There shall ye find two great Kings so agree,
As if the one, the others Heart did owe:
Since Loves great Lord, and yours, does joy in this,
His joy to you (his Guard) is highest bliss.
Then, come (Celestial Soldiers) make a Ring,
About the Kings, wherein your King does joy:
A twofold Guard make for this twofold King,
Of Men, and Angels, from what would anoy:
Let Envy in your Targets leave her Sting,
That she may not anoy, much less destroy:
And whatsoere impugnes their peaceful plight,
On your resistance let their rancour light.
Britain, thou once did stretch thy conquering Arms
Where ere the four Seas with thy wings do war:
And though, through hurts, received in hot Alarmes,
(As maimed) thou could not reach scarce half so far;
Yet now thou have recovered thy harms,
Thine Arms those Seas embrace, but cannot bar:
For, had thou will, as thou have power obtaind,
By Sea, nor Land thine Arms could be containd.
The rather, since a King so gracefully great,
(Graced by Greatness as he It does grace)
Is one with ours, to make ours more complete,
As ours with Him makes Him in better case:
What foreign Power to shun their Angers heat,
Will not speak coldly, with a fawning face:
Whose Arms, together joined, can compass all
That stands between the great Turk and his fall.
Denmark exult, since what thou had, thou have:
Thou did of yore (thou wotst) command this Land:
That now again is present, which is past:
In Love, thou may the Land (inlargd) command:
For, it to thee is So united fast,
That one to other cannot choose but stand:
Withstand you whosoever will, you both, as one,
Must stand or fall, by force of Union*
O UNION! that enclaspest in thine arms,
All that in Heaven and Earth is great, or good,
(Thou Heavenly Harbor from all earthly harms)
Thou Damm, that staist the Streams of humane blood)
What humane Heart but (maugre Hatreds Charms)
Will not desire thee, as the Angels food?
Since through thy power thou makst man's power so strong
As not to offer, much less suffer wrong,
Thou Isle (which Thetis in her lap does lull,
And with Indulgence makes thee wantonize)
Now may thou feathers from thy Peacocks pull,
To set thee out, in eie-attracting wise:
Triumph with joy: for, now if thou be dull
The world, as base, will justly thee despise:
Since near thy Forehead stand two Kings of power,
To smooth it, maugre all that makes it lower.
Arches tryumphall to the Heavens erect,
Whereunder threefold-Maiestie may pass,
Whose beams on It, true Eyes may so reflect,
As do the Suns from clearest crystal glass:
Let all thy st^eetes with Obiectes dear be decked,
To show thy State is more then ere it was:
For, in no modern memory has been,
Two such great Kings in thee together seen.
O could Canutus (that victorious Dane,
That whilome did thy great State Signiorize,
Whose sword, through men, to thy Crown made a lane)
Now see his Offspring, in thy Paradise,
Adored of all thine, holy, or profane,
He would be ready to forsake the skies,
And come, with heavenly glory, to augment,
Great Britains glory, worlds great wonderment!
Ye noble Bloods to Honors Task assigned,
Let now your mounting Spirits make you mount,
Such Pegasses as may out-fly the wind,
And shiuer Staves, at Tilt (beyond your wont)
That Times to come in Poets Staves, may find,
Ye did great Arthurs Minions far surmount:
Proclaim a Challenge through the world to make,
Your valors known, for Kingly honors sake.
Ye read of many Chalenges proclaimed,
By Keysors past, that present Time admires;
And how the Victors have their Daughters claimed,
As the proposed Prizes by their Sires:
Outrun those Runners, since their fame is maimed
That run but through effeminate desires:
Run ye for glory, and your Sovereigns grace,
So shall your fames run far beyond your Race.
If Pomp to Prowess ere were kindly knit,
Now to your Prowess add ye pomp, sans pride:
And to your pomp the richest show of wit,
For, often such shows, do shows more simple hide,
And to the Showers glory gain by it,
That else perhaps (in gold) might not be eyde:
As Heaven has Stars her face to beautify,
So be you Stars, to make Earths Heavenly.
And like the Stars opposed, and disposed,
Produce ye wonders, mankind to amaze:
Let Denmark see great Britain, with her closed,
Makes the World stand in wonderment at gaze;
Since of their Mould it sees halfe-Gods composed,
That do the memory of others raze:
The manner of your motions fetch from thence,
From whence the Stars derive their influence.
So shall they be all glorious, like the Sun,
That runs oblikelie to the Heavens Race:
So, though your deeds for Pomp, and praise be done,
It is dispenc't with, by the Heavenly grace:
Since Princes they allow a Race to run,
As may, with pomp, divide them from the Base:
" The Time, and Place, and Persons may be such,
" That Pomp may show her All, yet not too much.
For, Charge is measured by Hability,
Not by the Cost, what ere the Charges are;
Shows most maiestick, fit most Majesty;
Which is in Earth, where Kings as one appear:
Uniting so their Rays of Roialty,
Which needs must make it great, as it is rare:
Then spare no Cost, since Gold for glori's made,
And glory now is got, which cannot fade.
For, Honors Challenge now is on her wings,
Flying (from Hence) through all the Continent;
Lighting no where but in the Courts of Kings:
Inciting all (in earnest meriment)
To prove their force, by Arms, which glory brings
Against the brauest British hardiment:
Is therefore now ye shrink (since gold is dear)
You Are far from Glory, since ye are so near.
If many Worlds ye seek, or Ages live,
Perhaps ye should not find occasion such,
As now rich Opportunity does give
To make you Fame-full though it empt your Pouche:
Two Kings thus met* make Kingdoms richly thrive,
Though it vnlines their Purse with wearing much:
Then, since but seld, or never Kings consort thus,
Be glorious now, or still inglorious.
Get Phaenix-feathers to adorn your Crests,
Wherein imparadize the Soul of Wit
With such device as only Wit disgests;
Yet fills him head-full with receiving it:
Your Lances tip with Diamonds; your Rests
Of Rubies make, this precious time to fit:
Arm ye in gold, that golden worlds may view,
Great Britain's metamorphos'd to Peru.
Let not the Sawes of each near niggard friend,
Regarded be, that ever speaks to spare;
Since there are times to spare, and times to spend:
According as our times, and fortunes are:
No Charge so great as Highness back can bend,
When its vpheld by Props, as rich, as rare;
Though Money be the sinews of the wars,
It must be spent too, to prevent those Iarres.
Great Britains Denmark, Denmarkes Britain is,
By transmigration one int'other gone;
Which does increase their beauty, strength, and bliss,
And firmes their form by transformation:
Then shall we not (as glad) triumph in this,
Since their two heads are now (or never) one:
Like horses, we our own strength do not know,
If when our strengths increase, no icy we show.
Look on the faces of these Danes, our kin,
How like they are to us; as if we were
Borne of each other, as we erst have bin;
If likeness then begets affection dear,
We may exceed in showing (without sin)
Our Loves to them, as theirs to us appear:
We have a Pledge of theirs, their dearest blood,
Our dearest Queen, whence our dear Princes bud.
Then welfare ye, by whom so well we fare:
And welcome ye, through whom we well are come
Unto that greatness, that we are as square
As any Potentate of Christendom:
All yours and ours conjoined as they are
Against other force invincible become:
Then are ye welcome for these deer respects,
To us, who you embrace with deer'st affects.
Though Comines
one has writ that well Historifies,
Much hurt ensues the interuiew of Kings,
Because their Trains each other often despise*
For, men in strife for Pomp, are devilish Things:
Yet where great Pomp is shown, in loving wise,
To show great welcome, no hurt from it springs:
Then what our pomp persuades, or we perform,
Is yours, and ours, since love does us conform.
Conformd by love, informd by wit, and grace
(As Nations civil, each alide to each)
We, as your Hosts, will give your (Guests) the place,
Whiles our Provisions do your welcome preach;
And you accept it with a joyful face;
So, in our Unity shall be no breach:
The Master of a feast the more he spends,
The more it seems, he loves th'inuited friends.
You do us honor by this visitation,
And make our State more stately by the same:
We Will honor you again in selfsame fashion,
So to corroborate your force, and fame;
And envy grieve with our congratulation,
Or make her groan within our Angers flame:
Be we still enui'd, never pitied be,
One comes of might, the other misery,
And enui'd be we shall, while we agree.
Thou Royal Seat of far renowned Kings,
( Britains great Monarks, Kings of great Britain,
Whose name from LVD, thy much-inlarger Springs)
Be brave, thy best friends now to intertaine:
Make all thy Swannes on thy fair Thames to sing,
No dying Songs, but songs that life sustain:
And in thy bright Streets be such song, or sed,
That make the dead, alive: the living, dead.
Thine outside hang with costly cloth of State,
And let thine insides be as fair, as fine:
Thy sacred Head, which no head ere can rate,
In an Imperial Crown (past price) confine:
With all thine All, thine All Condecorate,
That all may be in love with thee, and thine:
For, where Magnificence consorteth Love,
It Hatred makes Loves hottest passions prove.
Ring Bells, sound Trumps, sweet Bone-fires make to burn
With all that may delight, or Sight, or Sent:
Raise shouts for joy, while Spite thereat does moorne:
And bend, with Loves good cheer, the backward bent:
Let all from highest to lowest, in their turn,
Show some true token of a kind intent:
Love can do all things: then, when all our loves
Are joined in one, both Heaven, and Earth it moves.
Top thy Church Battlements with Streamers white,
To show thou peace enioy'st, and offrest peace
To all that do in civil strife delight,
If from Contention, they would so surcease*
" Sweet Love to love alures the bitter'st Spite:
" And in the life of Union, Ods deceasse:
O let no Dane have cause to say, or think,
We, at our ods, made their loves eyes to wink.
Inuest thy Churchmen in the Costliest Copes,
Though bitter Zeal it styles, Spots of the Beast:
And in Procession let them go by troops,
To sanctify the ground by Heaven blessed,
(Since with our loves it does increase our hopes)
That bears the Body of our Kingly Ghest:
And if blind Zeal do call it Papistry,
Say (though it stab) it tells an holy lie.
O ZEAL, dear Virtue! (that deuour'st the Souls
(Yea Souls, and Bodies of true holy Ones)
How art thou now abused by busy fools
Using thy name to pull Kings from their Thrones,
And in erecting of Scismatick Schools,
Whiles Charity, to see thy damage, groans?
No erring Church misleads her Commonweal:
But still it undergoes the name of zeal.
Throw from thy face the Mask, which Fraud puts on;
They keep not, but distaine thy beauty bright:
For, on it only shines Gods glorious Son,
That makes the wrongest beauty, rightest right:
Then, Masks do mar the sweet Complexion,
That Is made by Justice Sons adorning light:
Be thou thy self then, and thou so wilt shine,
That all the world, in love, will straight be thine.
Trans-Alpine Faith (that Works do much embrace,)
Work while thou will, so thy Works show that Creed
That sets forth Faith: for Faith, too bare, is base:
Yet, let no fair Work prove so foul a Deed
(To blot thy Browe with such, too black, disgrace)
As, for thy health, to make the SACRED bleed:
Win (if thou can) by seasoning Plaints, and Tears,
Not lose (alas) by powdring Prince, and Peers.
" Look what thou would be done unto, so do,
" Is true Loves Law, which we are tide unto.
Lo, by the way (provoked by thy wrong)
From mine intention have I thus digrest:
And sharply warbled on it in my song,
But yet (I hope) the relish likes the best:
Now to thee LONDON, and thy lovely Throng
Will I return: for in thee is my rest:
Yet rest I in thee, restless, Idly too,
Which being cross, cross Fortune makes me do.
Bring out thy Tables to thy open Streets:
Be open handed, as thou art hearted now:
In private eat no more thy dainty meats,
But, with thy Company, thy Cates allow
In Common, to the Danes, with kind entreats,
To make their hearts in kindness ouerflow:
That by that inundation both may be,
Floted to Heavens of earths felicity.
Bounty brings Honor, Honor bliss does bring
To those whom Honors holy hand does bless:
Then, as thou would have bliss, let every thing
Thou do, of Bounty taste: yea, touch Excess:
There, hold thy hand, since more grieves God and King,
Who Bounty loves, yet hates Riotousnesse:
But yet when Bounti's great by great Good Will,
She is deliuerd of Abundance still.
Then let thy Conduits run with rarest wines,
That all may freely drink all health to thee:
And to those Kings, their Heirs, and their Assigns,
By whom thou art, or may the better be:
Yet, O beware of Drunkards foul designs,
Take healthes, while thou from surfeit may be free:
" For it is no glory, but a foul reproach,
" To take (like Tuns) the wine that Shame does broch:
And, let thy Muses so in Pageants speak,
That they may make the clamorous Crowde attend:
Although their voice, through wants become so weak,
That they may seem to speak to little end:
Since the rude Multitude will silence break,
Though speak there may an Angel, or a Feind:
Yet what they speak, in Print, in Print may be
Conuai'd aloft, down to Posterity.
Thy Senators (in wel-beseene array,
With all the pomp that power may well effect)
Make them, for these great Monarchs, to make way
Through thy choice Streets (with gaudy glory decked)
And let thy Denizens their parts so play,
That foreign lookers on may it affect:
In Sum, let some, and all of thee, and them,
Resemble all in new Jerusalem.
O! that my Muse were winged with Angels Plumes,
That she might mount above the Roof of Heaven,
To view that glory which no time consumes,
It to relate, in sacred numbers even,
For thine example: that, as now, assumes
But glories shape, by Art, and Nature geu'n,
I blessed were, and thou were blessed in me,
By whom thou should beheauen all that see.
But ah (alas) my short-wing'd Muse does hant
None but the obscure corners of the Earth,
Where she with naught, but care, is conversant:
Which makes her curse her case, and ban her birth:
Where she (except she would turn ignorant)
Must live, till die she must, in mournfull-mirth;
Which is the cherishing the World does give
To those that muse to die, not muse to live.
Our Brains, wherein our Souls do exercize
Their chiefest Functions, wonders to effect,
If, while they work, the thoughts of wants arise,
The work stands still: since our Souls more respect
The Bodies wants, still crying for Supplies,
Then they do Wits superfluous pomp affect;
Or, if they work, and those wants cry out still,
The work is wondrous, but, it is wondrous ill.
For, when the Brains with crosse-Cares are distracted,
(They being the Instruments, Wit works withal)
What Thoughts, by them, can possibly be acted
But such as (in Commotion) rise, to fall?
For, then the thoughts are so, in Sides, compacted,
That they do run aside in general:
Then, cross World wonder not though Wit, in want,
Be, in his largeness (like thy Largess) scant.
This double-deskant single skill bewraies;
Its harsh, and most discordant to the Ground:
And Poesy, on this Point, too often plays,
As Well in This, as other Worlds around:
For, Poets of all Times their Times dispraise;
But through the Times Sides, so, themselves they wound:
And wounded so, (since so the Times they harm)
The Times forsake them, or them quite disarme.
Well, be it so, (though Well it cannot be
That is so ill with those that mean but well)
A weak Pen holds the heauiest part of me
(Which is my heart) from death; and does expel
The cares that kill it, by sweet Poesy,
Whereby, in grief, it seems in heaven to dwell:
Then, though it be a Portion for the poor:
Let me be rich in that, I seek no more.
And all my store (though rich beyond compare)
I would power out, to bid you BIENVENV,
Most welcome Danes: naie, I would nothing spare
To entertain my self; but all for you
Should out, as one that had no other care,
But with full measure, to give you your due:
And if I did Hyperboles affect
Art should discharge their MVCH on loves effect.
Since many welcomes may Suspect incur,
("For, fewest words the faithful'st friends do use)
On welcomes Declaration to demurre
More than I have, I might my Wit abuse:
Which held it meet my lines should reach thus far,
To raise the Sprits of some more happy Muse:
That may (as Mistress of Loves Complements)
Give you your welcome to your hearts contents.
Burnt Child does fear as well the Sparks, as Flame:
Your welcomes to our Wassels, and our Bordes
Were heretofore (as knows the world) to blame:
But then (perhaps) ye were our heavy Lords;
And we no Scruple made of our defame,
To ease ourselves, by double Deeds, and Words:
But, now ye come, our Hearts to yours to bind,
Your welcomes are as true, as you are kind.
True: for, your kindness now does grace us much:
True: for, we Brethren are by our Queen Mother:
True: since in Love and likeness we are such,
True: for, the ones case now becomes the other:
True: for, you make our hollow friends to grutch:
Though they (dissemblingly) the same do smother:
And, in a word, true, for you graund our bliss:
Then think your welcome kind, as sure it is.
While Seas, on either side, this Land shall bound
Your coming thus, and welcome shall appear:
In fair eternal Lines which shall be found
In our best Histories, and Poems clear,
The fame whereof through all worlds so shall sound,
That it shall ring in Times eternal ear:
Didoes deer welcoms to the Trojan Knight,
Shall, through this welcoms luster, lose their light
For, what made that in glory shine so long,
But Poets Pens, plucked from Archangels wings:
And some we have can sing as sweet a Song
As any Tuskane, though with him he brings
The Queen of Art, to right him, being wrong;
For, some can say their Muse was made for Kings:
But, be it made for Kings, or Gods, or men,
Soule-pleasing Helicon flows from their Pen.
And let none Tax them for this self conceit,
Since such conceit to every Maker is
Their Shade, which on their Substance still does wait:
Most Makers mar, yet make they none amiss:
Because their words have measure (though not weight)
Which makes them meet, how ever mean, by this:
Though some will say, there is more hope of a fool,
Then of the self-conceited in each School.
But what is this to that we have in hand?
How do these Strains concern our welcome Ghests?
No whit; but, hereby they may understand
That we have Reeds, and Pipes, and Harpes, and Wrests
To make them merry, and their Ears command:
As well as those, to whose Notes listen beasts:
By which we can so note their being here,
That in Fames Book it ever shall appear.
In golden Capitalls all Times shall spell
(As they pass by (in thought out-flying) flight)
How we desire those swift wingd Times to tell
The Danes, and ours made one united Might;
United by a Match that made us dwell
In safety, from the rage of worlds despite;
And how they came to us, the same to show,
That all the world might know it to be so.
Then drop down clear gold from your Pens apace
Ye braine-bred Goddesses most sacred Scribes;
I often ye inuoke to show your grace
To glorify our Sovereigns, and their Tribes:
That now so heau'nlie make our earthly case,
As scarce the perfectst Pen aright discribes:
No modern Muse had ere such cause to mount,
Or line her head at Aganippaes Fount.
On what poor Grounds did richest wits of yore
Bestow such descant as men yet admire?
Naso, loved Nuts, and praised them therefore
With Lines, wherein they burn in quenchlesse fire:
Virgills proud Numbers did a Gnat adore:
Homers, the fight of Frogs made to aspire:
These were the Gods of Poesy, and yet
They on these Plainesongs did rich descant set.
Then, how may modern Homers, and the rest,
Upon this Ground (that of it self does rise
To royal meetings of Kings highly blessed)
Make all their Strains rebound against the skies,
Sending their Echoes so, from East to West
With such an Accent shrill, as never dies:
The skil's but base to Cynthia to aspire
If he that mounts, be in the Sphere of fire.
Then, o how my dull Muse does (like a Swanne
Which blushes at her feet, though white she be)
Blush, since her feet are Ethiopian
Foul, in the eyes of twice fair Majesty:
For whose sake I this Balladrie began,
Prouokt by joy to see what now I see.
But each Epistle in each Pamphlets front,
Can tell that Kings t'accept mean Gifts were wont.
Yet least J should offend (as well I may)
I write the less, the less so to offend:
For, Brevity does Judgment often betraie:
That weens that well done', roundly brought to end:
Then, here my creeking Pen I Will force to stay,
(Though nere so forward) till the same I mend:
Which when I do, perhaps hereon I Will write,
That saddest Kings shall read it with delight,
FINIS.

