A BOOK OF Christian Prayers, collected out of the ancient writers, and best
learned in our time, worthy to be read with an earnest mind of all Christians,
in these dangerous and troublesome days, that God for Christ's sake will yet
still be merciful unto us.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

1578.

Cum Priuilegio.

Elizabeth Regina.

2. PARALIPOM. 6. Domine Deus Israel, non est similis tui Deus in coelo and in
terra, qui pacta custodis and misericordiam cum seruis tuis, qui ambulant coram
te in toto cord suo.

To the Christian Reader, zeal and knowledge in true and hearty prayer through
Christ Jesus.
David, a Prophet and a Prince, to whom the lord had done many, great, and
singular benefits, bethought him self, not so much to increase the^ by use,
as to requite them by thanks. He therefore, willing as a Prophet, and able as
a prince, but not able in deed, though willing so to do, opened his good
heart, and said: Quid retribuam Domino? What reward shall I give unto the Lord?
Being resolved, he answered: I will receive, I will call, and I will pay. Psalm.
116.

Do thou the like (Christian Reader) which art as far indebted as ever he.
And seeing that Jesus Christ him self calls, saying: Come unto me all you
that labor, and are laden, and I will refresh you. Mat. 11. Answer thou, I
come, Lord Jesus, I come. I come, and will pay my vows, promised to thee in the
presence of all thy people, even in the Courts of thy house, when I was
received into the household of faith.

I come, and will pray and praise thee for all thy benefits. I come, and will
harken to thy blessed word, and keep the same. I come, and will receive ye cup
of salvation, at thy holy table, in remembrance of thy death, with thanksgeuing.
In this sort, and so many ways, by Baptism, by prayer, by hearing his blessed
word, by frequenting his table, must we come unto him, and that with a lively
faith. The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Mat. 26* come unto him
therefore, especially by prayer. Pray that he would strengthen both flesh, and
Spirit.

And think it not superfluous to pray, because God already knows what we
need, and what we will ask. But pray, because God has commanded. Luke. 8.
Pray to humble thy self before the feet of his majesty. Pray because (...)
do hourly want that grace, which he will assuredly give. Pray therefore that
you may have. Mat. 7. And pray, least you fall into temptation. Luke. 12.

And because God understands, pray not thou therefore in a language which thou
understand not, but with Spirit and Understanding. 1. Cor. 14. Not with
mouth and lips only, but with the heart. Mat. 15. For the spirit also
helps our infirmities, making request for us with sighs which cannot be
expressed. Romans 8 As Anna, and Mary Magdalen, with tears from a groaning heart,
and spoke nothing. 1. Reg. 1 Luke. 7. For God must be worshipped in spirit and
truth. John. 14. And pray not with much babbling, and vayn repetition. Math. 6.
Neither be rash with thy mouth, neither let thy heart be hasty to bring forth a
word in the sight of God: for God is in heaven, and thou art in earth, and
therefore let thy words be few. For as a dream comes by multitude of business:
so is the voice of a fool in the multitude of words. Eccle. 5.

Prepare therefore thy self, and soul to pray. Eccle. 18. with tears. Match. 5.
with watching. Col 4. with alms. Act. 10 with fasting. Luke. 1. as ye
Ninevites. Iona. 3. as David. 2. Reg. 2. as Daniell. cap. 9. For with fasting
prayer is good. Tob. 12 Which exercises, as they are the only means, not only
to excite and stir us up to pray, but also to make them acceptable before God
through Jesus Christ: so also a great care and diligence must be used of us, to
use the same, not of constraint, but willingly giving our selves thereunto.
Luke. 5. without ostentatio^. Mat. 6. praying continually. 1. Thessal. 5.
without ceasing. Col. 1. as the widow. Luke. 18. and as the woman of Canaan.
Mat. 15. Praying always. 1 Thessalonians. 1 and at al times, day and night. 2. Tim.
1. in all places, every where. 1. Tim. 2. in the Temple, and congregation. Act.
22. and that bare headed. 1. Cor. 11. at home in thy chamber secretly. Mat. 6.
in thy bed. Psalm. 6. at meal and meat. Mat. 26. morning and evening. Psalm.
44. abroad in the field. Luke. 6.

The Scripture is full of examples Peter prayed in the upper part of the house.
Act. 10. Eliseus above in his chamber. 4. Reg. 4. Danyell in the kings chamber
secretly. Cap. 6. and among the Lions. Dan. 14. Moses in the wilderness. Iosu.
1. Ezechias the king in his bed. Esaias. 34. Jonas in the Whales belly. Cap. 3.
Christ in fields and gardens. Math. 26. and on his cross. Mat. 27. For the
place of prayer is not material. Ioh. 4. I mean of Private prayer: in which
consideration, pray in all places, and at all times, whether it be seven times
a day with David. Psa. 118. or thrice a day with Danyel. Cap. 6. Whether on the
Sabbath day, or at the ninth hour, especially when Gods Spirit shall move
thee so to do. For at any such time to defer thy prayer, until thou find a
better place, to sit, stand, or kneel, is as much, as to hinder (if not to
quench) Gods Spirit. Now it follows to whom we must come. To me (says
Christ) for without me you can do nothing. Ioh. 15. whatsoever you shall ask
the father in my name, it shall be given you Ioh. 16. Come to no earthly man,
for cursed is he that puts his trust in man. Ier. 17. and who shall deliver
his brother, or make agreement with God for him? Psalm. 49. Come to no heavenly
saint. For Christ is our only Mediator and intercessor between God and us. 1.
Tim. 2. and whom have I in heaven but thee says David? Psalm. 33. Come only
unto him therefore. And why to him only? For in him the Father is well pleased.
Mat. 3. No man can come to the Father, but by him. Ioh. 14. He only is present
every where to hear the prayers of the whole world. All power is given into his
hands. Ioh. 5 He only knows the secrets of our hearts.

But who shall come? Al you (says he) that labor, and are laden. How laden?
Not with bags of gold, and brags of righteousness. For he came not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance. Luke. 5. Present not therefore thy prayers
in thine own righteousness. Dan. 9. Play not the Pharisie, but pray as the
Publicane. Luke 18. And albeit God hears not sinners. Ioh. 9. yet yt is meant
of desperate sinners, and malicious despicers of Christ and his Gospel: not of
ye repentant, in whom, as it is requisite there be no brag of righteousness:
so is it as necessary, that there be a hearty confession of unrighteousness,
yealding to Gods mercy, and craving forgeuenes. Such, though they labor, and be
heavy laden, yet let the^ come. But how? with a true faith, nothing wavering,
or doubting. 1. Tim. 2. Iam. 1. without fainting. Eccle. 7. For the Lord is
nigh unto all those that call upon him faithfully. Psalm. 145. According to your
faith be it unto you, says Christ unto ye two blind men Mat. 10. What faith
was yt? Do ye believe, says Christ, that I am able to do this? we believe lord
say they. According to this faith they prayed for their eyesight, and had it.
Pray thou in the same faith for thy souls health, and thou shall receive it.
Persuade thy self that God cannot but perform (for Christ's sake) all his
promises of grace and mercy. Believe that Jesus Christ shed his heart blood not
only for our sins (speaking generally,) but for thy sins, and that he can,
and will help thee. To such a one Christ him self says: What so ever you
desire when you pray, believe that you shall have it and it shall be done unto you
But when you pray (says he) forgive if you have ought against any man, that
your Father in heaven, may forgive you.. Mark. 11. So that with this faith must
be joined peace and love with our neighbor. Mat. 6. and 11. Also a life
answerable to this faith. 1 Ioh. 3. Least either our prayers be hindered. 1.
Pet. 3. Or not regarded. Mat. 6. Or turned into sin. Psalm. 109. But who has
this perfection? Or whose prayers then shall be accepted? Come therefore in the
name of Christ For Christ is perfect, though we imperfect. his holiness makes
our prayers holy, when he offers the^ unto the Lord. His righteousness is our
righteousness, and he was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God. 2. Cor. 5. For to him that works not, but believes in
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Romans 4.
Let not thy sin therefore withdraw thee from this exercise: for none asks,
but he that wa^teth: none seeks to find, but he yt has lost.

Come therefore unto him thou that do labor, and art heavy lade^, carrying in
thy mind this one special note by the way, what it is thou will demand when
thou come unto him, and for whom. For prayers at adventure are unprofitable,
proceeding of custom from the lips, not of zeal from the heart. What we should
pray for, the Scripture teaches plainly. First, for the glory of God. Ioh. 12.
For the peace of Jerusalem. Psalm. 132. That the word of God may have free
passage. 2 Thessalonians. 3. that our flight be not in the winter. Mat. 13. For our
former sins. Eccle 81. For souls health. Psalm. 36. For wisdom. 2. Parali.
1. For increase of love. Phil. 1. In time of sickness. Exodus 8. In affliction.
Ia. 1

Finally, for all such things as the use and want of man does require, whether
they be earthly graces, or spiritual: always framing our petitions to that
certain and just rule of Gods will, to the which all manner of requests must be
referred: for we know not what we should pray as becomes us. Romans 8. And
therefore we ask and have not. Why? Because we ask amiss. Iam. 4. But this
trust we have, that if we do ask according to his will he hears us. 1. Ioh.
5. According unto this his will therefore, I mean his revealed will, known in
Scripture, pray for all men. 1. Tim. 2. For all Kings Esdr 6. Baruc. 1. For
all that are in authority. 1. Tim. 2. For the Ministers of Gods blessed word
Heb. 1. That God may open their vttera^ce Col 4. and increase their number.
Mat. 9. And that the word of God may be given us. Ephesi. 6. Finally, we must
pray one for an other. Iam 2. And for them that hate us wrongfully. Mat. 5.
Forgeuing not seven times but seuentye seven times. Mat. 18. And as Christ
forgave you, so do ye. Col. 3. For as the Chirurgian cannot sou^dly heal a
wound, so long as the iron of the dart which gave the wound, is lodged in the
bottom thereof: So likewise cannot prayer profit, so long as the heart is
cankered. Therefore forgive thy brother if he repent him. Luke 17 if he repent
not, yet forgive him, do good unto him, so shall thou heap coals of fire on
his head. Romans 12. It follows: And I will refresh you. Wherein thou may
behold (Christian Reader) the assured mercy of God in Jesus Christ, and the
effect of true and hearty prayer. For if thou shall confess with thy mouth, the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him up from the
dead, thou shall be saved. He is rich unto all the^ that call upon him. for
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans 10. Ye shall
go and pray unto me, and I will hear you (says the Lord) and you shall seek
me, and find me, because you shall seek me with all your heart, and I will be found
of you, and I will turn away your captivity. Iere. 29. Seek and you shall find.
Mat. 6. God is true of his promise, and therefore we find in Scripture, that at
Moises prayer the plague ceased. Exodus 8. Miriam by it was delivered from his
leprosy. Number. 11. By prayer Anna was of a barre^ woman made fruitful. 1. Reg.
1. David obtained forgeuenes for his manslaughter, and whoredo^e 2. Reg. 12.
Helias caused great plenty of rain. Ia. 5. Ezekias overcame Zenacharib. 4. Reg
19. Toby prospered. Tob. 4. Susanna delivered from death Dan. 13. By prayer
Queen Hester delivered her and her people. Hest. 14. Jonas was delivered out of
the whales belly. Jonas. 2 By prayer Lepers were cleansed. Luke 17. the blind
restored to sight Luke 18. The palsy cured Mat. 11. many men and we omen
obtained health for their sons, daughters, and servant. Mat. 8. and. 15. By
prayer the lame was restored to lims. Ma. 4. the deaf men to hear. Ma. 21.
the dome to speak Ma. 12. By prayer remission of sins was obtained. Ma. 11.
and the holy ghost purchased for the Apostles, and all the faithful. Ma. 26.
To be short, wonderful is the strength and force of prayer, without the which,
nothing prospers with us fortunately.

But yet here remains a farther question, how it may stand with Gods
immutable will, and decree, that our prayers should be of such strength and
force to alter ye threatenings which are decreed, and therefore of force must
come to pass. I answer God never promised any thing in scripture, for the
most part, except it were the absolute promises concerning Messiah and such
like) but it has a condition annexed unto it, either expressly, or to be
understood. Likewise, he never threatens (for the most part) but a condition
is added thereunto. As for example. Adam was created of God that he should have
lived continually in blesed estate, if he would so remain: this was the
condition, and the decree. Destruction was preached to the Ninevites, if they
repented not: this was the condition, and the decree. Niniue repented and was
not destroyed, but saved: was therefore Gods decree altered? no? For he decreed
their destruction, but upon this condition, if they repented not. Pray therefore
(if thou be godly,) that he would give thee the grace to continue: and if thou
be sinful pray that he give thee the grace to repent. And thus very well our
prayers have strength to stay Gods wrath, his decree remaining immutable,
because it is threatened but upon a condition, if we repent not.

But whence has prayer this strength? of it self? No. For we being justified
through faith have peace toward God (yt is the favor of God) through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Romans 5. So that Christ is our mouth whereby we speak to the
Father: our eyes by which we see the Father: our right hand, by which we offer
to the Father. Which Christ, except he be our advocate, neither we, nor all the
saints, can have any thing to do with God. For no man comes to the father
but by him. Ioh. 14. Why then are not our prayers always heard, having
continually such a spokesman, who has all power both in heaven and earth?
Truly because either we ask amiss, not according to Gods will, and that
which is not for us to receive, or it pleases the Lord to defer our requests,
for trial of our faith and patience. Hereupo^ it was that David said:
Expectans expectaui Dominum. With long waiting, I waited for the lord and he
inclined unto me and heard my calling. Psalm. 40. Pray therefore continually,
with faith, love, and understanding, in the name of Jesus Christ: pray for all
men, at al times, in all places, and for all things according to Gods will. Though
thou be a sinner, though God foreknoweth the heart, though his decree be
immutable yet pray unto him in Jesus Christ, and he will refresh thee. Of this
I thought good to admonish thee (Christian Reader,) because it is an easy thing
to pray, but to pray aright, is a thing very difficult. Here are prepared for
thee zealous, and godly, prayers, some translated out of Latin, and French,
some made by the best learned of our time. Use the^ as I have taught thee, yt
they may be to good use. Accuse not mine insufficiency in teaching but amend
thine own imperfection in praying: praying that we talk not smoothly, and
walk crookedly, but yt we may give to God ye father our maker, obedience: faith
to Jesus Christ our redemer: and mortification of the flesh to God ye holy
ghost, our comfortor. Fare well in Christ Jesus.

R. D.

The Preface, or preparation to prayer.
O Lord, my good God, and Father, blessed be thy name for ever: dispose my
heart, open my lips, and guide me by thy holy spirit, to a true acknowledgement
of all my sins, that my prayer may be heard of thee, in the name of thy Son
Jesus Christ, So be it.

A prayer to be said at our first waking.
O God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom no man knows but by thy
special gift: grant, that unto the rest of thine exceeding great benefits
toward me, this, which is the greatest that can be bestowed upon mankind,
There shall come a rod forth of the stock of Iesse, and a graffe, etc. Esaias.
11. There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise of Israel, etc.
Number. 24. The birth of blessed M^ry the virgin the mother of Christ, etc. may
be added also, namely that as thou have raised up my body from fast and sound
sleep, so also thou will deliver my mind from the sleep of sin, and from the
darcknes of this world. and after death restore the same body to life, as well
as thou have called it again from sleep. For that which is death to us, is
but sleep unto thee. I pray and beseech thee, that through thy goodness, this
body of mine, may be a fellow, and furtherer of all godliness to my soul in
this life, so as it may also be partner with it of the endless felicity in the
life to come, through Jesus Christ thy son our Lord. For whose sake, and by
whom, thou geuest us all good, and wholesome things to our welfare, Amen.

Another.
MUch better is the light of the soul, and the insight of the Mary the mother
of Jesus betrothed to Joseph her husband, before they came together, was found
with child by the holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just man, etc
Math. 1. But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred, and take a
wife, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she may be given thee to wife.
for to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6. mind, then the light, or
eyesight of the body. The eyesight of the body every silly beast has: but the
sight of mind none has but men. Yea none have it but wise men.

Thou therefore O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the greatest of all lights, the
only true light, the light from whence springs the light of the day, and the
son. Thou light which inlightenest every man y^ comes into the world. Thou
light, whereon there comes no night nor euentide: but continuest ever bright,
and clear as at midday. Thou light, wherewithout all things are deep
darcknesse, and whereby all things were made lightsome. Thou mind and wisdom of
the heavenly Father inlighten my mind, that (being blind in all other things)
I may see nothing but that which belongs to thee, and that I may thereby
walk in thy ways, without fantasying, or lyking The seed of the woman shall
tread upon the head of the serpent, Gen, 3. The Angel said to him, the Lord is
with thee thou valyant man. Judges. 6 (...) in (...) the ^ngell Gabriel, was
sent fro God to a city in Galile, (...) Nazareth, (...) virgin affianced to a
man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, etc. Luke. 1. of any other
light else. Lord I beseech thee inlighten mine eyes, that I may never slumber in
darcknes, least my ghostly enemy say at any time, I have prevailed against him.
Amen.

* A prayer at our vprising.
OUr first father Adam, being tumbled down from most excellent, and glorious
highness, into the dungeon of shame, and sinck of all sin, was relieved, and
lifted up again by thy hand, O Savior Jesus Christ. And we likewise, should
lie wallowing in the same plight for ever, if we were not raised up by thee.

Wherefore O most merciful Redeemer of mankind, like as thou of thy goodness,
have raised up this heavy and burdensome body: even so vouchsafe to lift up my
mind to the knowledge, and love of thy highness, Amen.

And Mary arose and went with have into the hilly country to a city of Judah,
and entered into the house of Zacharias and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to
pass, etc Luke. 1.

And Moses returned to Iethro his father in law and said to him, I pray, etc.
Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my sprite does rejoice in God my
savior, Luke. 1.

I Thank thee O Lord Jesus Christ, that it has pleased thee to give me good
rest this night past: And I beseech thee likewise to prosper me all this day
following, to the glory of thy name, and to mine own souls health. And thou
which art the true daylight, that never knows any euentide: And the
everlasting dayson, which quickneth, cherishes, and cheereth all things,
vouchsafe to shine into my mind, that I may not stumble into any sin, but by
thy guyding come to eternal life, Amen.

Another.
I Thank thee O holy Lord, father almighty, and everlasting God, that thou have
vouchsafed to keep me this night through thy great mercy. And I beseech thee
of thine unmeasurable clemency, to give me grace so to pas this day now
coming, in all lowlynesse, Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon
thou stand, is holy ground. Exodus 3. Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle
did blossom and I will make cease, etc. Number. 17. When the days were
accomplished, Mary brought (...) her first ^e ^otten son and ^rapped him in
swa^l^ng clothes, and laid him in the manger because there was no room, (...).
meeknes, chastity, charity, patience, goodness, fear, and warynesse, as my
seruise may please thee, through him which shall come to judge both ye quick
and the dead, and the world by fire: keep and preserve me from all evil, from
all stumbling and giving of offense, from all wilful sinning, and from all the
crafts, and assaults of wicked feends, and enemies, seen, or unseen, through
our Lord Jesus Christ thine only begotten son. To whom be praise and glory
with thee for evermore, Amen.

* A Prayer at the putting on of our Clothes.
MOst gracious and merciful savior Jesus Christ, thou know how we be borne,
clothed, and clogged with the grievous, and heavy burden of the first man, who
fell away unto fleshlynesse, through disobedience. And when the viii. days
were accomplished, that they should circumcise the child, his name was then
called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived, etc.
Luke. 2. Abraham circumcised his son Isaac, when he was eight days old, as
God had commanded him, etc. Genesis 21 Let every man child among you be
circumcised. That is ye shall circumcise the fores skin of your flesh, etc. Ge.
17 Uouchsafe therefore I beseech thee, to strip me out of the old corrupt Adam,
which being soked in sin, transformeth him self into all incumberances, and
diseases of the mind, that may lead away from thee.

Rid me also quite and clean of that his tempter the deceitful Eve, which
turns us away from the obedience of thy Father. Clothe me with thy self O my
redeemer and sanctifyer, clothe me with thy self, which art the second man, and
have yealded thy self obedient in all things to God thy father, to rid away all
lusts of the flesh, and to destroy the kingdom thereof, through righteousness.

Be thou our clothing and apparel, to keep us warm from the cold of this
world. For if thou be away, by and by all things become noume, weak, and stark
dead. Whereas if thou be present they be lively, sound, strong, and lusty. Abner
said to David, make covenant with me, and be hold, mine hand shall be with thee.
etc. 2. Sam. 3. The Queen of Sa^a bring gifts to Jerusalem to Solomon, with a
very great tray^e. etc. 3. Reg^ 10. ^here is the king of the Jews that is
(...) for we have (...) his star in the East, and are ^ome to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem* etc. Math.
2. And therefore like as I wrap my body in these clothes, so cloth thou me all
over, but specially my soul, with thine own self, Amen.

A Prayer to be said at our first going abroad.
I Must be fayn to go abroad among the snares which the devil, and his
handseruant the world have laid for me: and I carry with me besides, the stinges
of mine own flesh. Guide me therefore, O thou most sure guide, be thou my
leader, thou God of my welfare. Defend me O captayn, from the traynes, and
stalles that are laid for me: that whatsoever things I shall meet with, I may
make no more account of them, then they are worthy of: but keep on my way, with
mine eyes so fast fixed and settled upon thee alone, as I may not deal with any
thing further (...) the days of Purification after the law of Moses, ^^re
accomplished, they brought Jesus to Jerusalem to present him to the lord, as it
is written in the law of the lord, Luke. 2. God said to Moses, sanctify unto me
all the first borne, that open al manner matrices among the children, etc. Exo.
13 Anna bare a son, and brought him into the house of the Lord in Siloh, and
the child was young, etc, 1. Sam. 1. forth then it has respect unto thee. Lord
show me thy ways, and lead me in thy paths for thy Sons sake. Amen.

* A Prayer to be said at our returning home.
O How excellent, and joyful shall our returning home be into the everlasting,
quiet, and blessed house of heaven, where there is no troble, nor incumberance
at al. All the mirth, and gladness of this world, is but a shadow in comparyso^
of the pleasures that are there. Nothing O Lord, is liker to thy holy nature,
then the mind that is settled in quietness. Thou have called us into that
quietness, and peace of thine, from out of the turmoiles of this world, as it
were from out of storms into a haven: Which is such a peace as the world
cannot give, and as passes all capacity of man.

Behold, thy brother Esau is comforted against there, meaning to kill thee. Genesis
27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy self this night to morrow,
etc. 1. Sa. 19^

^rise and take the babe and his mother and fly into Egypt, and be there till
I bring thee word, for Herod will seek the babe to destroy him. So he arose
and took the babe and his mother, etc Math. 2

Houses are builded for us to repair into from the anoyance of the wether, from
the cruelty of beasts, and from the waves and turmoiles of this troublous
world.

Grant now, O most merciful Father, that through thy singular goodness, our
bodies may so resort into the^, from our outward doings, as our minds may
yeald them selves obedyent unto thee, without striving: and that they may the
better, and more quyetly exalt them selves into that sovereign rest of thine
above. Grant that nothing may disturb, and disquyet them here beneath: but
that all things may be quiet and calm through that peace of thine. The peace
of Christ be to this house, and to all that dwell therein. Amen.

* A Prayer to be said at the setting of the Sun.
He shall breaks down their altars, he shall destroy their images. For now they
shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord, and what should a
king do to us? Ose. 10.

Moses cast the ^ab^es out of his hands and brake them in pieces because of
their idolatry, etc. Exo. 32 The Philistines find Dagon fallen down be fore
the ark of the Lord etc. 1. Sam. ^.

WRetthed are they (O Lord) to whom thy daysun goes down, I mean that son
of thine which never sets to thy saints, but is always at the noonpoint with
the^, ever bright, and ever shining. A droopy night over dreepeth the minds of
them even at hie noontide, which depart from thee. But unto them that are
conversant with thee, it is continually clear daylight. This daysun that
shines in the sky, goes and comes by turns: But thou (if we love thee in
deed) do never go away from us. O that thou would remove away this
impediment of sin from us, that it might always be day light in our hearts,
Amen.

* A Prayer to be said at the lighting up of Candles.
GReat and thick darcknes ouerwhelmeth our hearts (O Lord,) Saul said to Doeg,
even thou and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, etc. 1. Sa.
22 A^halia seeing her son to be dead, destroyed all the kings seed. But
Ieho^heba. etc. Reg. 11. Herod caused all male children to be slain that were
in Bethlehem and in all the costs thereof from two year old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc. Man. 2. until thy
light do chase it away. Thy Daysun O most wise workmaster, is as the cresset of
this bodily world: and unto the spiritual world, the cresset is thy wisdom,
from whence springs the light both of our bodies, and of our souls. At the
coming of the night upon the day, thou have given us Candles for a remedy of
the darkness: and for a remedy of our ignorance after sin, thou have given us
thy doctrine, which thy son (who loves us most deerelye) has brought down
unto us.

Wherefore thou fountain and teacher of all truth, make us through both those
lights, to see such things as may drive away the dimnesse of our minds. The
light of thy countenance is sealed upon us O Lord, thou have put lightsomnes
into our hearts: Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light to my paths.

And Jesus when he was baptized, came straight out of the water. And lo, the
heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the spirit of God descending like a
dove, etc. Math. 3.

Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand^ upon the se^, etc. Exodus. 14.
They curt^ down a branch with one cluster of grapes, and bear^ upon. etc. Number.
13.

A Prayer to be said in the Evening.
O Lord, my God, my Father, and my savior, forasmuch as thou have granted me
the grace to come to the end of this day, and have created the night for man to
rest in: I, casting my self most humbly down before thy holy majesty, beseech
thee most hartelye to show me this goodness to the residue of thine infinite
benefits, that I may so rest this night, to the comfort, and refreshment of
mine infirmity, as my heart may still be lift up unto thee: And my soul have
her spiritual rest as well as ye body takes his. Let not my sleep be
unmeasurable to please excessiuely the ease of my flesh: but only to suffice
the necessity of my nature, that I may be the better disposed to thy service to
morrow.

God spoke to Jacob, get thee out of this country. Jacob took all his gooddes
and cattle, etc. Genesis ^1. David asked counsel of the Lord, saying: Shall I go
up into any cities of Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take the babe and his mother and go into
the land of Israel, for they are dead which sought the babes life. Then he
arose and took the babe etc. Mat.

Preserve me also from all uncleanness both of body and soul, keeping me from
all temtations of the enemy, and from all dangers that may befall me. And
because I have not passed this day without offe^ding thee after diverse sorts
and manners: Like as now in the absence of the sun, thou sendest darcknes to
cover all things: so also vouchsafe to wipe out all mine offenses, by thine
infinite mercy, so as they may never come to reckning before thy judgment
seat.

All which things I ask, and crave of thee, in the name, and for the sake of
thine only Son, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, according to the rule which
he has given us to pray by saying:

Our Father which art. etc.

* Another.
The tempter came to Christ saying: If thou be the son of God, command that
these stones be made bread. But he aunswering, said, it is written, Man shall
not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

Esau sells his birth right for a m^sse of portage, etc. Genesis 25. The woman
seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of the fruit etc. Genesis 3.

LOrd Jesus Christ, to whose vnconsumable goodness we be beholden for all things:
which have granted the cherefull light of the day, unto al men both good and
bad to do their business in, and mercifully given them the sweet stilnes of the
night, to refresh the pores of their silly bodies, and to put away the cares of
their minds, and to assuage their sorrows. Forasmuch as thou thy self
performest al these things much more beneficially to them that love thee, to
whom thou geuest a far greater light by the grace of faith, to do al deeds of
godliness by, then does the shining of the Sun unto the world: In so much as the
promyses never suffer them to faint, but the comfort of thy Spirit puts
away all cumberaunces of mind, far more effectually then any sleep of the
body. And the wholl Helyas stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord
heard the voice of Helyas, etc. 3. Reg. 17. Heliseus coming into the house and
behold, the child was dead and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4. Christ cried with
a loud voice, Lazarus come forth. Then h^ that was dead came forth, bound band
and foot with bands and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto
them, etc. John. 11. man rests not more sweetly, or safely in any thing, then
in thy mercy (O dear Redeemer:) I beseech thee that if I have done any thing
this day through humayn frailety, and negligence, which has offended thine
eyes, pardon it for thy wonted goodness sake, and grant therewithal that this
night may be happy to me by thy prospering thereof, pure by thy preserving of
me, and safe from the nightly illusions of wicked feendes, through thy
protection, so as this sleep may make both my body and mind, more cherefull,
and lusty to serve thee to morrow.

Moreover, because this life has not one hour certain, whenever the
e^entide thereof comes, and the long sleep of the body grows upon me, from
which we shall not wake till the dead rise again at the sound He was
transfigured before them and his face did shine as the sun, and his clothes
were as white as the light. And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and
Elias, etc. Math. 17. Abraham said, Lord if I have now found favor in thy
sight. etc* Genesis ^1. N^buchadneser a^swered: Lo I se^ four men loose walking
in the midst of the fire. Dan. 3 of thine Angels Trumpet. I beseech thee
lighten thou then the eyes of my mind, so as I may not sleep in everlasting
death, by the quenching of my faith, but rest in thee, to whom even the dead
are alive: Which lyuest, and raignest with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one
God world without end, Amen.

A prayer to be said when we unclothe our selves to bedward.
THis body which is become vnha^some, and vnwealdy through sin, shall be consumed
by little and little, and delivered again to the earth, from whence it was
taken. There shall the end be of this vanity, which we have purchased to our
selves by our own folly. Now therefore, thou O most loving Father, which have
set me together: David said to Nathan I have sinned against the Lord. etc. 2.
Sam. 12. Aaron looked upon Myriam, and behold, she was leprous. Number. 12. Jesus
said, Many sins are forgeuen her, for she loved much. To whom a little is
forgeuen he does love a little, And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgeuen
thee, etc. Luke. 7 dissolve me in such wise as I may feel my self to be
dissolved, and remember of whom I am overcome, and consider whether I must go.
Take me not unawares and unprovided to thy judgment seat: but like as we be
willing to put of our clothes, which we shall put on again when the night is
past: so let us not be loath to put of this body, which we shall receive again
after that the night of this world has run out his full race, Amen.

A Prayer to be said at our going into bed.
WHen the day is ended, we give our selves to rest in the night: so when this
life is ended, we rest in death. Nothing resembles our life more the^ the day,
nor death more then sleep, nor the grave, more then the bed. Uouchsafe
therefore, O Lord our governor, When Christ came nere Jerusalem he beheld the
city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the lest in this
thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19. Who shall have
pity then v^on thee O Jerusalem, or who, etc. Iere. 15. Their feasts are turned
into lamentation, their Alars, etc. 1. Mich^. 1. and defender, both to shield
us now lying unable to help our selves from the craftines and assaults of our
cruel enemy: and also to call us then unto thee, when we shall be yet more
unable at the finishing of the race of this life, not for our own deserts, but
for thy own mercy sake: yt we may live and walk with thee for ever. And now let
us so fall a sleep in thee, as thou only, and those exceeding, great, and
incredible good things may in such wise be present always before us by ye
insight of our minds, as we may not be absent from thee, no not even in sleep:
that such dreams may both keep our beds, and bodies pure and undefiled, and
also chere our hearts with that blessed joy of thine In trust whereof, I will fall
on sleep, and take my rest, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer when we be ready to sleep.
The women sang by course in their play, and said: etc. 1. Sam. 2^ The children
of the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2.

Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread their g^^^entes in ^he way, other cut
down branches of the trees and strawed them in the way. And they that went
before, and they that followed, etc Mark. ^^*

TAke me into thy protection, O Lord Jesus Christ our defender: and grant that
while my body slepeth my soul may wake in thee, and cheerfully, and joyfully
behold the happy, and gladsome heavenly life, wherein thou art sovereign with
the Father and the holy Ghost: and the Angels, and holy souls of men are most
blessed fellow Citizens for ever and ever, Amen.

* A preparation, or preface to Public Prayer.
ALmighty God, and heavenly Father, I will come into thy house in the multitude
of thy mercy, and in thy fear, will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

I have loved the habitation of thine house, and willingly am I present in the
congregation of thy Saints, praising and confessing thy holy name.

Jesus went into the temple and began to cast out them that sold and bought,
saying unto them it is written, Mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have
made it a de^ of thieves. Luke. 10

Is this house become a den of thieves, whereupon. etc. Jere. 7. Mine house
shall be called a house of prayer for all people. etc. Esaias, 56,

Come let us fall and bow down before the Lord who has made us, because he is
the Lord our God, and we the sheep of his pasture.

Exalt the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool, for he is holy.

Lord I make my prayer unto thee in an acceptable time: even in the multitude
of thy mercies: (O God) hear me in the truth of thy salvation.

I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise and will call upon the name of the
Lord.

I will pay my vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his people,
in the courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.

I will run in the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge mine
heart.

Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes. Open mine eyes that I may see the
wonders of thy law.

When Iosephes brethren saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 3 Absolon rose up early
and stood hard by the, etc. 2. Sam. 15.

Behold a woman a Cananite, came out of the sea coasts* and cried, saying unto
him: Have mercy on me O Lord, etc. Math. 1^.

Then will I take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

I will sing with the Spirit, and in understanding, and say, Amen.

*A short speech before the Lords Proyer.
O Heavenly Father, O most merciful God, I most wretched sinner am unworthy to
lift up my hands and eyes unto thee, or to trouble thee with my prayers.

Nevertheless, forasmuch as thou have commanded all men to pray, and promised
that thou will hear us: And moreover, prescribed us a form of Prayer in
express words, by thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ: being driven by thy
commandment, and trusting to thy promyses, I pray They appointed unto him
thirty pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray
Christ his master. Now on the first day of the feast of vnlea^ened bread, etc.
Math. 26 Judas said: Come let us sell him to the Ismalites, etc. Genesis 37 So
Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potipher, etc. Genesis 30 unto thee in the
name of my Lotd, with all the godly upon earth, saying as he has taught us.
Our Father, which art in heaven. etc.

* A Prayer to God the Father.
MOst loving Father, which being most high, dwell in the highest places,
harken to the prayers of thy servants, yet wayfaring here on earth, whom thou
of thine unspeakable goodness have vouchsafed the name of thy children, and
giving them the most precious pledge of thy Spirit, have granted them leave
to call upon thee with reverent boldness by the name of Father: we pray that thy
holy name may be so known through the wholl world, that like as in the
heavenly City, thou alone art the glory of all folk: So on earth, no man may
glory of The foolish virgins came also sayng Lord Lord, etc. Math. 25. The
great Dragon that old serpent was cast out, etc. (...). 12. Jesus knowing all
things that should come, went forth and said unto them ^home seek ye? They
answered him Jesus of Nazareth, Jesus answered I (...) he. Judas also etc.
John. 18. him self, but all men acknowledge their own unworthiness, and thy
bountifulnes, and glory in thee, which is the only true glory.

And because we have diverse and hard incou^ters to endure against the world,
the devil, his ministers, and the flesh which we bear about us: we beseech
thee even with sighs, that thy kingdom may come. That like as in heaven all
things submit them selves to thy majesty with trembling: so also thy Spirit
may reign in our hearts, making us to acknowledge thee the king of all kings,
then the which nothing can be either greater, or better.

And as in thy holy palace there is no rebellion, so let all mortal creatures
put away all fleshly lusts, and with all their hearts obey thy kingly
commandments, both in prosperity, and adversity, life, and death: assuring
them selves, that thou can not will any They appointed unto him thirty
pieces of silver, and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ
his master. Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, etc. Math.
26 Ioab took ^b^er aside peaceably, and smote him under the ribbe that he
d^^d. etc. 2. Sam. ^. Simon to redeem Jonathan, sends money and the children
to Triphon etc. 1. Macha. 13. thing but that which is singularlye good: and
that the same is singularly good even because it likes thee. Which will of
thine it has pleased thee, O most dear Father, to express unto us in the
holy Bible, that we might know it. But no man is able to fulfill thy
commandments, unless thou give him the grace, and of thine unspeakable mercy,
take our inability in good part.

And forasmuch as according to thy sons doctrine, we taking no ^hought at all
for the time to come, do hang wholly upon the providence of thee our most
bountiful father: give thou us daily at thy pleasure, whatsoever the necessity
of this life requires. But before all things, because that according to the
saying of thy dear servant Paul thou art chiefly the father of Spirits, feed
our souls with spiritual food, whether it be that we have need of When
(...) the father of Chanaan saw the nakedness of his father, he told his two
brethren, etc Genesis 10 (...) is mocked of little children crying unto him: Come
up thou baldhead, etc. ^. ^eg. 2. (...) Christ (...) his face, and bu^feted him
(...) Prophecy ^^to us O Christ who is he that smote thee? Peter sat without
in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. 26. milk because we be weaklinges, or that
we be able to brook substancialler meat, because we be grown to further
years of discretion.

The meat that gives life in deed, is the knowledge of thee by thy holy
Scriptures, and the grace of thy spirit, whereby we grow up in thee through
daily increase of virtue in the inner man, until we be fully men, grown
according to the full measure of thine only begotten son Jesus Christ. By thy
word thou begatest us when we were nothing, by the same have thou be gotten us
again, unhappily borne of Adam, and by the same do thou feed and cherish us
now again begotten.

For, that is the heavenly bread, that is the new wine, wherewith all the
blessed spirits are continually and happily fed, which (dwelling in thy house)
do praise thee for ever and ever.

Whereof if thou vouchsafe to bestow (...) let Barrabas lose unto the^ and
scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of the
governor took Jesus in to the common hall, etc. Math. 27. The plowers plowed
upon my back, and furrows long did cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job
with sore voyles from the sole of his foot etc. Job. 2. some portion daily upon
us thy children, the hunger and thirst of worldly things will decrease in us
from day to day. And although thou have forgiven us all our sins once already
in holy baptism through faith: yet notwithstanding, because that as long as we
carry this mortal flesh about us, and bear the treasure of thy grace in
earthen vessels, we sin daily through natural infirmity, so as we have daily
need of thy mercy to forgive us our slidings: let us not fall quite and clean
out of thy favor, but let us continue in that peace, wherein we be set at one
with thee by the blood of thine only begotten Son: and therewithal grant,
that as thou have mercifully pardoned all our misdeedes, so we for giving one
an other, their daily trespasses, (which are small or nothing in comparyson of
our offenses toward thee) may maintain mutual peace, agreement, and When
thou* art done all thy duty, stere down that thou may receue a crown etc.
Eccle. 22. (...) said unto David, who art thou that criest to the king, etc. 1 Samuel 26 And the souldi^rs platt^^ ^owne o^ thorn upon his ^ead, an (...) in
his (...), and bowed their knees before ^im and mocked ^im, saying: God (...),
etc. Math. 2* charity among our selves. For he that bears any grudge or
hartburning toward his neighbor, cannot have the favor of thee which art ye
God of peace. But forasmuch while we go a warfare in these tents of our
bodies, the malicious tempter, from whose tyranny thou have set us free by thy
son Jesus Christ, cease not to try al his policies to draw us back again
into bondage: we beseech thee give us not over into his hands for want of thy
defense for he seeks the destruction of our souls. But grant us such grace,
that we (contynuing in the fellowship of thy most loving Son through faith and
charity) may finally come to the life where there is no offending, nor any
danger to be doubted of at Satan's hand.

* Another in Jesus Christ our Redeemer, by S. August.
Pilate took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying: I am
innocent of the death of this just man, look you to it. Then answered all the
people, etc. Math. 27.

Iezabell sent a messenger unto Helias saying The Gods do so to me etc. 3. Reg.
19. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniell and cast, etc. Dan. 6.

I Call upon thee, O God, I call upon thee, because thou art nigh to all them,
that call upon thee in truth. Thou art the truth, teach me I beseech thee in thy
mercy: O holy truth teach me to call upon thee in truth: For how I should so
do I know not. Teach me therefore I most humbly beseech thee, O most blessed
truth. For wisdom without thee is folishnes, to know thee is perfect
knowledge. Instruct me with thy divine wisdom: and teach me thy Laws. For I
believe that he is most happy who is instructed by thee, and taught thy Law. I
have a desire to call upon thee, which I pray thee that I may do in verity.
What is it to call upon truth in truth, but to call upon the Father in the
Son?

Truly (most holy Father) thy word is the truth, and the beginning of thy
Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son,
etc. Gene. 22. (...) was there gathering sticks* and Eliah called her, and
said, etc. (...). And Jesus bare his cross and came into a place named
Golgotha, where they cruci^^ed him and (...) other with him (...) side one, and
Jesus in the midst of them, etc. John. ^^. word is truth: For this is the
beginning of thy word, that thy word was in the beginning.

In the beginning it self I worship thee, O thou principal beginning: in the
very word of truth, I cry to thee most perfect truth. In the which, O thou the
very same truth, teach and direct me. For what is sweeter then to call upon the
Father in the name of his only begotten? Then to move the father to compassion
by mention of his son? Then to pacify the king by name of his well-beloved
child? For by this means the offender is released from prison: the captive set
at liberty. By this means they that have received the sorrowful sentence of
death, are wont to purchase not only pardon, but unhoped favor, if they plead
the love of the well-beloved Son. By this means, servants that And when they
were come to the place which is called Caluarie, there they crucified him and
the evil doers, one on the right hand, and the other on the left, etc. Luke.
23. Tubulraim wrought (...) every craft of brass and iron, etc. Genesis 4. Esaias
the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and fasted on a tree, etc. do
trespass, escape their masters punishment, when his loving Son is their
Intercessor.

Even so, O almighty Father, I pray thee for the love of thy omnipotent Son,
draw my soul out of prison, that it may confess unto thy name. Deliver me from
the chains of sin, I beseech thee, by thy coeternall and only Son: and most
mercifully restore me to life, by the mediation of thy most precious son,
sitting at thy right hand. For what other Intercessor I should appoint I know
not, but him who is the propitiation for our sins, who sits at thy right
hand pleading for us. Behold my Aduocat with thee O God the father. Behold the
chief Bishop, who needs no other bloody expiatio^, for that he shines imbrued
with his own blood. Behold the holy and welplesing Sacrifice, With the ribbe
which the Lord God had taken from the man, etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses
thou shall smite the rock and water, etc Exo. 17 One of the soldiers with a
spear pierced his side, and forthwith ran there out blood and water. And he
that saw it bare record and his record is true. And he that etc. John. 19.
offered up, and received in all sweetness. Behold the immaculate Lamb, which lay
still before the shearers: who being buffeted, spit at, and opprobriously
rayled at, opened not his mouth. Behold, he who sinned not, took our sins
upon him, and with his stripes healed our infirmities.

A Prayer to God the Son.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the maker and redemer of mankind, which have said that
thou art the way, the truth and the life: the way, by doctrine, precepts, and
examples: the truth, in promises: and the life in reward. I beseech thee for
thine unspeakable loves sake, where through thou have vouchsafed to employ thy
self wholly in the saving of us: Suffer me not at any time to stray from thee
which art the way, Joseph took the body and wrapped it in a clean l^nnen
c^oth, and la^d it in his new tomb which he had hewn out even in the rock
(...) rolled a great ^one to the door, etc. Math. 27. As Soon as the s^^ne was
down, Iosu^ commands that the^, etc. Iosu. 8 Then they arose and went all
night, and tok^ the body, etc. 1. Sam. 1^ nor to distrust thy promyses which
art the truth, and performest whatsoever thou promysest: nor to rest in any
other thing then thee, which art the way, beyond which there is nothing to be
desired, neither in heaven nor in earth. By thee we have learned the sure and
ready way to true salvation, to the intent we should not wander any longer up
and down in the mazes of this world. Thou have taught us thoroughly what to
believe, what to do, what to hope, and wherein to rest.

We have learned of thee how vngratiously we be borne of the first Adam. We
have learned of thee, that there is no hope of salvation, but by belief in
thee: and that thou art the only light which shines before us all, as we
journey through ye wilderness of this world and through the night of our own
hearts, from the darcknes of Egypt, to that blessed land which thou have
promised When Joseph was come to his brethren, they strip^ him, etc. Genesis 37.
So they took up Jonas and cast him into the sea and the sea, etc. Jonas. He
laid it in a tomb (...) out of a rock wherein was never man yet laid. And that
day was the ^reparing of the Saboth, and the Saboth ^r^e on. The women that
followed after etc. Luke. 23. to the meek, and to such as follow the footsteps
of thy mildness. For in us there was nothing but deep darcknes, in so much
that we could nether see our own wretchedness, nor where to seek remedy for it.
But thou vouchsafing to come down into the earth, and to take our nature upon
thee, of purpose to drive away the mist of our ignorance with the light of thy
doctrine, and to direct our feet into the way of peace, by thy precepts: and
have paued us the way to immortality by thy example, and of abushy and rough
way, made us a plain and smooth way, by treading it out with thine own
footsteps.

Thus art thou (which can no skill of error) become our way, wherein (to the
intent we should not faint) thy goodness has vouchsafed to stay us up with many
great and sure promyses. For who can tire, when he reme^breth, that For fear
of him the kepers were astonished and became as dead men. But the Angel said to
the women: Fear not, for I know you seek Jesus which was crucified, etc.
Math. 2^. Samson arose at midnight and took the doors, etc. I^dicum. 16 And the
Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2. if he walk in
thy footsteps, the inherytance of the heavenly life is prepared for him?
Therefore it is thy will that hope should be as a sure staff, to hold us up as
long as we be in this journey. And thy goodness was not contented with that,
but forasmuch as thou knoest the weakness of our flesh, thou refreshest our
strength from time to time with the comfort of thy Spirit, to the intent we may
come running cherefully unto thee. And as thou being become our way, put
aside all cause of straying: so being the truth, put away al cause of
distrust: finally, being become our life thou give us grace to be dead here
unto sin, and to live through thy spirit, whc quickneth all things, until that
in the resurrection when all mortality shall be rid quite and clean away, we
shall live with thee, and in thee for ever, at which time God shall be all in
all. The king said unto Daniell: O Daniel the servant, etc. Daniel. 6. When I
had past a little from them, then I found him, etc* Cant. ^. Jesus app^a^ed
first to Mary Magdalen^ out of whom he had ^ast (...) she went and told them
that had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 1^ For it is everlasting life
to know the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost to be the one true God: whom
we see now by faith, but as through a glass, and in a riddle: but as then we
shall behold his glory at hand, and be transformed into the same Image. And
therefore I beseech thee o most merciful Savior, increase thy servants faith,
that I may never stagger in thy heavenly doctrine: increase mine obedience,
that I may never swerve from thy commandments: and increase my constancy,
that (walking in thy steps,) I may neither be intised with Satan's
allurementes, nor discouraged with his terriblenes: but hold out to ye death in
thee which art the true way: increase my faith, that (trusting to thy promyses)
I may never faint in the endeavor of godliness, but forget the things that I
have left behind me, and go always Jesus said to Thomas put the finger here
and see my hands and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faythlesse, etc. John. 20. And Jacob called the name of the place P^in^ll, etc.
Genesis 32. (...) answered: he Lord be with us why then, etc. Iud. 6. forward to
more perfection. Increase thy grace in me, that (being dead every day more then
other in my self) I may be alive, and led by thy Spirit: fearing nothing but
thee, then whom, nothing is more amiable: glorying in nothing but only in thee,
who art the true glory of all the saints: coveting nothing but thee, who art of
all things the best: and finally, desiring nothing but thee, who with the
father, and the holy Ghost art the full and perfect felicity, for all ever.
Amen.

A Prayer to the holy Ghost.
O Holy Spirit, worthy of all worship, which make up ye almighty trinity,
which proceedest from the father, and the son, and art equal to either of
them, differing from them in only propriety of person, which of thy and Enoch
walked with God, and he was no more seen, for God took him away etc. Genesis ^.
There appeared a charet of fire. and horses of fire, to Elias went up by a
whirlwind. etc 2. Reg. 2 So after the Lord h^d spoken unto them he was received
into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, ^c. Mar. 16 goodness forgeuest the sins of them that amend, which
with thy holy breath cleansest men's minds, comforting them when they be in
sorrow, cheering them up with pure gladness when they be in heauynes, leading
them into all truth when they be out of the way, kindling in them the fire of
charity when they be a cold, knitting them together with the glue of peace
when they be at varyance, and garnishing, and enriching them with sundry
gifts, which by thy means profes the name of the Lord Jesus: by whose working,
all things live, which live in deed, whose delight is to dwell in the hearts of
the simple, which thou have vouchsafed to consecrate for temples to thy self.
I beseech thee maintain thy gifts in me, and increase the things daily which
thou have vouchsafed upon me: that by thy governance, the lusts of the flesh
The birth of blessed Mary the virgin the mother of Christ, etc. There shall
come a rod forth of the stock of I^ss^, and a graffe, etc. Esaias. 11. There
shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise of Israel, etc. Number. 24.
may dye more and more in me, and the desire of the heavenly life more quicken
and increase.

Let me so pass through the misty desert of this world, by thy light going
before me, as I may neither be defiled with Satan's vices, nor be entangled
with any errors, disagreeing from thy truth, which the true catholic church
has delivered us by the instinct of thee, which live and raignest
everlastingly with the Father and the Son, Amen.

* A Prayer to God for his Spirit, and grace to pray effectually.
Eternal and most merciful Father, we know not our selves, neither can easily
understand, what, or how we should pray as we ought.

But thou art able to do exceeding But thou shall go unto my fathers house,
and to my kindred, and take a wif^, etc. Genesis 24. I will speak for her that she
may be given the^ to wife. for to thee does the right of her, etc. Tob. 6. Mary
the mother of Jesus betrothed to Joseph her husband before they came together,
was found with child by the holy ghost. The^ Joseph her husband being a just
men, etc Math. 1. abundantly above all that we ask, or think.

Give us the Spirit o Lord, to help our infirmytyes, which makes request for
us unto thee, with sighs which cannot be expressed.

I lift up mine eyes to thee that dwell lest in the heavens.

Stir up my heart and mind o Lord, come into me o spirit of God, that I may
come unto thee with heart and soul, not with mouth and lips only.

Give us thy grace that we may call upon thee as true worshippers in spirit
and truth, with the inward attention, without hypocrisy and ambition.

Grant that I ask nothing of thee but that which may agree to thy holy will,
to thy praise and glory, and to the health of my soul.

Inspire me also with an assured hope to obtayn these things, when I shall and
in the ^i mo^rt, the Angel Gabriel^ was sent from God to a city in Galile,
na^med Nazareth, to a virgin affianced to a man whose name was Joseph, of the
house of David, etc. Luke. 1. ^he ^a^de of the wom^n shall ^read upon the head
of the serpent, Genesis 3. The Angel said to him the Lord is with thee, ^hou
valyant man. ^udges. 6 ask of thy merciful goodness with a strong and sure
faith.

Neither let my prayers o Lord, prescribe the time when, and how they should be
fulfilled.

But let me submit my self to thy holy will in all things with hope, patience,
and humility of heart.

Thy will be done in earth o Lord, as it is in heaven.

I will wayt patiently o Lord for thee, that thou may incline unto me, and
hear my prayer.

Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and
as the eyes of a maid unto ye hand of her maistresse: so our eyes will wayt
upon thee o Lord, until thou have mercy upon us.

Grant us also thy grace, that we present not our supplications before thee
for our own righteousness, but for and Moses returned to Iethro his father in
law and said to him, I pray, etc. Exo. 4. My soul does magnify the Lord, and
my sprite does rejoice in God my savior, Luke. 1. And Mary c^ose and went with
have into the hilly country to a city of Judah (...) entered into the house of
Zacharias and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass, etc. Luke. 1. thy great
tender mercies, and in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ.

In his name, through faith, we come to the throne of thy grace, and receiving
the spirit of adoption, we cry Abba Father.

Strengthen us O Lord, least the unworthiness of our life withdraw and entice us
from prayer.

Assist us therefore O most merciful father, that we may pray every where,
lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting, with supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks for our selves, and for all men.

Grant this through Jesus Christ our Lord, who is also at thy right hand and
makes request for us: To whom with thee, and thy holy Spirit, be all laud, and
glory, Amen.

When the days were accomplished, Mary brought forth her first begotten son
and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in the manger because there
was no room, etc. Lu. 2.

Put thy shoes of thy feet for the place whereon thou stand, is holy ground.
Exodus 3.

Aarons rod being put in the tabernacle did blossom and I will make cease, etc.
Number. 17.

* A Prayer for the whole Realm, and the body of the Church, with the members
thereof, according to their estates, and degrees.
ALmighty God, heavenly father, thou have commanded thy faith full to pray one
for another, promising them to hear them, for thy dearly beloved sons sake.
Therefore upon trust of thy promises, and in respect of the great and urgent
necessities that show themselves on all sides: and specially forasmuch as
Satan strayneth himself to ye uttermost, to bring this land to confusion, and
to stop the course of thy gospel: I thy humble servant make suit and
supplication unto thee my good Lord God, in whom is my refuge and hope,
beseching thee who art the father of light, to vouchsafe to inlighten the hearts
and minds of all men, because it is thy will that all men should be saved
Abraham circumcised his son Isaac, when he was eight days old, as God had
commanded him, etc. Genesis 2. Let every man child among you be circumcised. That
is ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, etc. Ge. 17 And when the
viii. days were accomplished, that they should circumcise the child, his name
was then called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was
concei^ed, etc. Luke. 2. and come to the knowledge of ye truth.

And forasmuch as thou have commanded us to pray inespecially for kings and
Princes, and for all such as are set in authority, that the company of mankind
may live peaceably, and quietly under them in all godliness and honesty:
considering how burdensome crowns and scepters are, and how hard the wealding
of them is, and how difficult a matter it is to discharge them well, whether it
be in respect of themselves, or of their subjects:

I beseech thee my God with all my heart, as well for our blessed sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, as for all other princes whom thou have placed in like degree
of pre-eminence, to give them the same which Solomon craved of thee long ago,
whose prayer thou did accept, as having put the same into his heart and mouth
by thy (...) is the king of the Jews that re^orne* for we have ^ene his star
in the ^ast, and are come to ^orship him. ^he^ Herod the king ^eard this, he
was ^roubled, and all Ieru^alem etc. Math. ^ Abner said to David, make covenant
with me, and be hold, mine hand shall be with thee. etc. ^. Sam. ^. The Queen of
Saba bring gifts to Jerusalem to Solomon, with a very great tray^e. etc. 3.
^eg^ 10. holy spirit, which teaches us to pray likewise, and helps our
infirmities.

O Lord our good God, thou have set her up to reign over thy people, give unto
her thy handmaid, and to al other princes thy servants, give them wisdom and
understanding to judge thy people, and to discern between good and bad, that
they may not be unprofitable, and much less hurtful in so holy a vocation.

Give them wise, sage, and virtuous Cou^sellers: and remove far from them al
ambitious, spiteful, deceitful, and dissembling persons. Give them such Judges
as are lovers of ye truth, haters of covetousness, and eschewers of all
partiality: that their people may be governed with all equity and vprightnes,
the good men maintained in their right and innocence, and the offenders
punished according to their deserts. God said to Moses, sanctify unto me all
the first borne, that open al manner matrices among the children, etc. E^o. 1^
An^^ bare a son, and b^ought him into the house of ^he Lord in ^iloh, and the
child was young. etc. 1. Sam 1. (...) ^uri^^cation after ^e (...) of Moses,
^ere accomplished, (...) Jesus to Jerusalem to present him to the lord, is it
is written in the law of the lord, Luke. ^. Grant also O Lord, that all they
who^ thou have put under their charge, may yeald them their due and rightful
obedience, so as there may be a good and holy union between the head and the
members, and thereby it may be known to all men, that the states of all
kingdoms, and government of all Commonweales depend upon thee alone: that
thereupon they may all glorify thee, and sing psalms of praise, and
thanksgeuing.

Also I pray unto thee O Savior and father of truth, for all those whom thou
have ordained to be true Shepherds to thy faithful, and to whom thou have
committed the charge of men's souls, and the dealing forth of thy holy gospel.
Guide them by thy holy spirit, that they may be found faithful and diligent in
their holy vocation.

And on the other side, drive away Arise and take the babe and his mother and
fly into Egypt, and be there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek the
babe to destroy him. So he arose and took the babe and his mother, etc Math. 2
Behold thy brother Esan is comforted against thee, meaning to kill thee. Genesis
27. Michaell spoke unto David: If thou save not thy self this night to morrow,
etc. ^. Sa. 19. the false shepherds, which are men of corrupt mind, ravening
wolves, vainglorious, covetous, and such as serve to no purpose but to destroy
the churches. And forasmuch as thou requirest that all thy children should have
a zeal to thy house: grant the Queens majesty, and all other Princes, grace
to purge their people from all sects, heresies, and superstitions, that ye
church (under their charge) may profit, and grow from day to day in the truth
of thy gospel, unto all righteousness and holiness of life.

Let it please thee to make a general deliverance and restitution of thy
churches through the wholl world, by sending forth laborers into thy harvest,
able and sufficient men to gather the poor stray sheep together, under the
sheephooke of the great shepherd of our souls thy son Jesus Christ.

Moses cast the tables out of his hands and brake them in p^eces because of
their idolatry, etc. Exo. 12

The Philistines ^nde Dagon fallen down before the ark of the Lord etc. 1.
Sam. 5.

He shall break down their altars, he shall destroy their images. For now they
shall say, we have no king because we feared not the Lord, and what should a
king do to us? Osc. 10.

As touching their hearers, unto such as profes thy name already, give true
perseverance in faith, charity, and all good works, to the glory of thy name,
and to the health of their own souls. And as touching the residue which walk
as yet in the vanity of their own minds, touch thou their hearts, and give them
enlightened eyes, that all of them may yeald them selves to serve and please
thee. Finally, o God of all comfort, I beseech thee have pity upon the
miseries and afflictions of all thy creatures in general, of the nations whom
thou visitest with pestilence, war, or famine: of the persons whom thou smitest
with poverty, imprisonment, sickness, banishment, or other thy rods, whether it
be in their bodies or in their minds: and specially of thy chosen, that suffer
for the testimony of thy gospel.

And forasmuch as it has pleased Herod caused all male children to b^ s^aine
that were in Bethlehem and in all the costs thero^ from two year old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently searched, etc Mar. 2. S^ul
said to Doeg* (...) thou and fall upon the priests and Doeg the Edomite
turned, etc. 1. ^a 22 Athal^a seeing her son to be dead, destroyed all the
kings seed. But Iehosheba. etc. Reg. 11. thee to be so good and gracious to our
sovereign Lady, and to do her the honor, that whereas other Realms are in
grievous trobles, thou have given her rest in this her land, and sent hither
the bowels of thy son Jesus Christ, to have refuge here in their oppressions.
Grant her the grace to be a true nourisher and nurce of all such as are thine
according to the saying of thy prophet Esaias: so as she may have a true
compassion both of them that are here, and of all others: that at the
accomplishment of thy promises, when it shall be said, come ye blessed of my
father, possess ye the kingdom which was prepared for you from the
foundations of the world, thou may vouchsafe o heavenly father, to receive
her among the number of thy children, for the love of thy son our Savior
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, So
be it.

God spoke to Jacob, get thee out of this country. Jacob took all his gooddes
and cattle, etc. Genesis ^1.

David asked counsel of the Lord, saying: Shall I go up into any cities of
Judah, etc. 2. Sam. 2.

The Angel said to Joseph: Arise and take the babe and his mother and go into
the land of ^^^rael, for they are dead which sought the babes life. Then he
arose and took the babe etc. Mat. ^

*Another prayer for the church, and all the states thereof, by John Fox.
LOrd Jesus Christ, son of the living God, who wast crucified for our sins,
and did rise again for our justification, and ascending up to heaven,
raignest now at the right hand of the Father, with full power and authority,
ruling and disposing all things according to thine own gracious and glorious
purpose: we sinful creatures, and yet servants and members of thy church, do
prostrate our selves and our prayers before thy imperial majesty, having no
other patron nor aduocat to speed our suits, or to resort unto, but thee
alone, beseeching thee to be good to thy poor church militant here in this
wretched earth: sometime a rich church, a large Church, an universal church,
And Jesus when h^ was baptized, cam^ straight out of the water. And lo, the
heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the spirit of God descending like a
dove, etc. Math. 3. Lift up thy rod and stretch out thine hand upon the sea,
etc. Exodus. 14. They cut down a branch with one cluster of grapes, and bears
upon, etc. Number. 13. spread far and wide, through the whole compass of the earth:
now driven into a narrow corner of ye world, and has much need of thy
gracious help.

First the Turk with his sword, what lands, what nations, and countries,
what empires, kingdoms, and provinces, with cities innumerable, has he won,
not from us, but from thee* Where thy name was wont to be inuocated, thy word
preached, thy sacraments administered: there now remains barbarous Mahumet,
with his filthy Alcoran. The flourishing churches in Asia, the learned churches
of Grecia, the manifold churches in Africa, which were wont to serve thee, now
are gone from thee. The seven churches of Asia with their candlesticks (whom
thou did so well forewarne) are now removed. All the churches where thy
diligent Apostle S.Paul, thy Apostle Esau sells his birth ^^ght for a m^sse
of pottage, etc. Genesis 25. The woman seeing the tree to be pleasant, took of
the fruit etc. Genesis 3. The tempter (...) to Christ saying: If thou be the son
of God, command that these stones be made bread. But he aunswering, said, it
is written, Man shall not live by bread only, etc. Math. 4. Peter and John, and
other Apostles so laboriously trauayled, preaching and writing to plant thy
gospel, are now gone from thy gospel. In all the kingdom of Siria, Palestina,
Arabia, Persia, in all Armenia, and the Empire of Capadocia, through the whole
compass of Asia, with Egypt, and with Africa also (unless among the far
Ethiopians some old steps of Christianity peradventure do yet remayn:) either
else in all Asia and Africa thy church has not one foot of free land, but is al
turned either to infidelity, or to captivity, what soever pertayneth to thee.
And if Asia, and Africa only were decayed, the decay were great, but yet the
defection were not so universal.

Now of Europa a great part also is shronk from thy church. All Thracia, with
the empire of Constantinople, all Grecia, Epyrus, Illiricum, and now Behold a
woman a Cananite, came out of the sea coasts* and cried, saying unto him: Have
mercy on me O Lord, etc. Math. 15. ^ certain man was diseased 38. ye^res, when
Jesus saw him lie and knew, etc. John. ^* And in the (...) of the night, Jesus
went unto them, walking on the sea, etc. Math. 14. of late all the kingdom
almost of Hungaria, with much of Austria, with lamentable slaughter of
christian blood, is wasted and all become Turks. Only a little angle of the
west parts yet remains in some profession of thy name.

But here (alack) comes another mischief, as great, or greater then the
other. For, ye Turk with his sword is not so cruel, but the bishop of Rome on
the other side is more fierce and bitter against us, stirring up his bishops to
burn us, his confederates to conspire our destruction, setting kings against
their subjects, and subjects disloyally to rebel against their princes, and all
for thy name.

Such dissension and hostility satan has sent among us, that Turks be not
more enemies to Christians, the^ Christians, to Christians, Papists to
Protestants: He that is without fault let him cast the first stone. etc. John.
^. Jesus seeing their faith, said to the sick of the paulsey, son, etc. Math.
9. And he took the v. loaves and two fishes and looked up to heaven and
blessed, and brake and gave the loaves to his disciples and the disciples. etc.
Math. 14. yea Protestants with Protestants do not agree, but fall out for
trifles. So that the poor little flock of thy church distressed on every side,
has nether rest without, nor peace within, nor place almost in the world where
to abide, but may cry now from the earth eue^ as thine own reverence cried once
from the cross: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Amongst us Englishmen here in England, after so great storms of persecution,
and cruel murder of so many martires, it has pleased thy grace to give us
these Alcyon days, which yet we enjoy, and beseech thy merciful goodness still
they may continue.

But here also (alack) what should we say? So many enemies we have, yt envy us
this rest and tranquillity, and do what they can to disturb it. They which be
friends and lovers of the Bishop Christ cried with a loud voice, Lazaru^ come
forth. Then he that was dead came forth, ^ound hand ^ foot with bands and his
face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them, etc. John. 11. Hel^as
stretched himself upon the child, and the Lord heard the voice of Hel^as,
etc. ^. Reg. 17. He^^^ens coming into the house and behold, the child was
dead and he stretched, etc. 4. Reg. 4. of Rome, although they eat the fat of
the land, and have the best preferments and offices, and live most at ease, and
ayle nothing: yet are they not therewith content. They grudge, they mutter and
murmr, they conspire and take on against us. It fretteth them that we live by
them, or with them, and can not abide that we should draw the bare breathing of
the air, when they have all the most liberty of the land.

And albeit thy singular goodness has given them a Queen so calm, so
patient, so merciful: more like a natural mother then a Princes, to govern
over them, such as neither they, nor their auncesters ever read of in the
stories of this land before: yet all this will not calm them, their unquiet
spirit is not yet content: they repine and rebel, and needs would have with
the frogs of Esope, a Ciconia, an Italian Abraham said, Lord if I have now
found favor in thy sight. etc. Genesis 18. Nabuchadneser a^swered: Lo I see
fouremen loose walking in the midst of the fir^. Dan. 3 He was trans^^gured
before them and his face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were as white
as the light. And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, etc. Math.
17. stranger, the Bishop of Rome to play Rex over them, and care not if all the
world were set a fire, so that they with their Italian Lord might reign alone.
So fond are we Englishmen of strange and forain things: so unnatural to our
selves, so greedy of newfangle novelties, never contented with any state long
to continue, be it never so good: and furthermore so cruel one to another,
that we think our life not quiet, unless it be seasoned with the blood of
other. For that is their hope, that is al their gaping and loking, that is
their golden day, their day of Iubile, which they thirst for so much. Not to
have the Lord to come in the clouds, but to have our blood and to spill our
lives. That, that is it which they would have, and long since would have had
their wills upon us, had not thy gracious pity and mercy raised up to us this
our Jesus said, Many ^innes are forgeuen her, for she loved much. To whom a
little is forgeuen he does love a little. And he said unto her, Thy sins are
forgeuen thee, etc. Luke. 7 David said to Nathan I have sinned against the
Lord. etc. 2. Sam. 12. Aaron looked upon My^iam, and behold, she was leprous.
Number. 12. merciful Queen thy servant Elizabeth, somewhat to stay their fury.
For whom as we most condignly give thee thanks: so likewise we beseech thy
heavenly Majesty, that as thou have given her unto us, and have from so many
fold dangers preserved her before she was Queen: so now in her royal estate,
she may continually be preserved not only from the hands, but from all
maligna^t devises wrought, attempted, or conceived of enemies both ghostly and
bodily against her.

In this her government be her governor we beseech thee, so shall her majesty
well govern us if first she be governed by thee. Multiply her reign with many
days, and her years with much felicity, with abundance of peace, and life
ghostly: that as she has now doubled the years of her sister and brother, so
(if it be thy pleasure) she may ouergrow Who shall have pity then upon thee O
Jerusalem or who, etc. Iere. 15. Their feasts are turned into lamentation,
their Altars, etc. 1. Micha. 1. When Christ came nere Jerusalem he beheld the
city and wept for it, saying: O if thou had even known at the left in this
thy day those things which belong unto thy peace etc. Luke. 19. in reigning,
the reign of her Father.

And because no government can long stand without good counsel, neither can
any counsel be good except it be prospered by thee: bless therefore we beseech
thee, both her majesty, and her honorable Counsel, that both they rightly
understand what is to be done, and she accordingly may accomplish that they do
counsel to thy glory, and furtherance of the gospel, and public wealth of
this Realm.

Furthermore we beseech thee (Lord Jesus) who with the majesty of thy generation
do drown all nobility, being the only son of God, heir and Lord of all
things, bless the nobility of this realm, and of other Christian realms, so
as they (Christianly agreeing among them selves) may submit their Nobility to
serve thee, or else let them feel Christ riding to Jerusalem, many spread their
garments in the way, other cut down branches of the trees and st^awed them in
the way. And they that went before, and they that followed, etc Mark. ^^ The
women sang by co^^ese in their play, and said: etc. 1. Sam. 2^ The children of
the prophets came to meet Helisha, etc. 4. Reg. 2. O Lord, what a frivolous
thing is the Nobility which is without thee.

Likewise to al magistrates, such as be advanced to authority, or placed in
office, by what name or title soever: give we beseech thee a careful
conscience uprightly to discharge their duty, that as they be public persons
to serve the common wealth, so they abuse not their office to their private
gain, nor private revenge of their own affections: but that justice being
administered without bribery, and equity balanced without cruelty or parciality,
things yt be amiss may be reformed, vice abandoned, truth supported,
innocence relieved, Gods glory maintained, and the Common wealth truly served.

But especially to thy spiritual Ministers, Bishops, and Pastors of thy
church: grant we beseech thee (O Lord Is this house become a ^en of thieves,
whereupon. etc. Iere. 7, Mine house shall be called a house of prayer for all
people. etc. Esaias. 56. Jesus went into the temple and beg^n t^ cast out them
that sold and bought, saying unto them (...) written, Mine house is the house
of prayer, but ye have made it a (...) of then^s. Luke. ^. Prince of all
pastors) that they following the steps of thee, of thy Apostles, and holy
Martires, may seek those things which be not their own, but only which be
thine, not caring how many benefices, nor what great Bishoprics they have, but
how well they can guide those they have. Give them such zeal of thy church as
may devour the^, and grant them such salt, wherewith the whole people may be
seasoned, and which may never be unsavory, but quicned daily by thy holy
spirit, whereby thy flock by them may be preserved.

In general give to all the people, and the whole state of this Realm, such
brotherly unity in knowledge of thy truth, and such obedience to their
superiors, as they neither provoke the scourge of God against them, nor their
Princes sword to be drawn against her will out of the scabberd of long
sufferance, The chief priests and the Scribes and the Elders of the people,
consulted how they might take Jesus by suttletie and kill him. But they said,
not on the feast day, least any uproar, etc. Math. 26 When Iosephes brethren
saw him a far of, etc. Genesis 3 Absolon rose up early, and stood hard by the,
etc. 2. ^am. 19. where it has bin long hid. Especially give thy gospel long
continuance amongst us. And if our sins have deserved the contrary, grant us
we beseech thee with an earnest repentance of that which is past, to join a
hearty purpose of amendment to come.

And forasmuch as the Bishop of Rome is wont on every good Friday to accurse
us damned heretics, we curse not him, but pray for him, that he with all his
partakers, either may be turned to a better truth, or else we pray thee
(gracious Lord) that we never agree with him in doctrine, and that he may so
curse us still, and never bles us more, as he blessed us in Queen Mary's time.
God of thy mercy keep away that blessing from us.

Finally, in steed of the Popes blessing, give us thy blessing Lord we beseech
thee, and conserve the peace of thy Judas said: Come let us sell him to the
Ismalites, etc. Genesis 37 So Joseph was brought down into Egypt, and Po^ipher,
etc. Genesis 30 Then appointed unto him thirty pieces of silver, and from that
^^me Judas sought opportunity to betray Christ his master. Now on the first
day of the feast of vnleaue^ed bread. etc. Math. 26 Church, and course of thy
blessed Gospel. Help them that be needy and afflicted. Comfort them that
labor, and be heavy laden. And above all things, continue and increase our
faith.

And forasmuch as thy poor little flock can scarce have any place or rest in
this world, come (Lord) we beseech thee with thy Factum est, and make an end,
that this world may have no more time nor place here, and that thy Church may
have rest for ever.

For these, and all other necessities requisite to be begged and prayed for,
asking in thy Christ's name, and as he has taught us, we say: Our Father which
art in heaven, etc.

Another.
O Singular lover of us, Christ Jesus, O Bridegroom to whom thy Church is most
dear, and which have Jesus at his last supper as they did eat, took bread,
and when he had given thanks brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying:
Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Math. 26. Melch^^^ech brought forth bread and
wine, and he. etc. Genesis 37 Moses said to the people of Israel: This is that
bread. etc. Exo. 16. promised that thou will never fail her: increase her, and
multiply her with good issue like the father, that is to wit, like thy self.
Make us to be all of one mind both in thee, and in the things that concern
thee, so as we may verily be that body whereof thou art the head, being (as it
were) glewed, and fastened together with mutual charity, kindeled with that
everlasting fire of thine, which have so loved us, that thou have spent thy
blood and thy life for us.

O Christ, the author and perswader of peace, love, and good will: soften our
hard and steely hearts: warm our ycie and frozen hearts, that we may wish well
one to another, so as al men may perceue us to be thy true disciples. And give
us grace eue^ now to begin to show forth that heavenly life, wherein there is no
disagreement I saw all Israel scatred as sheep^ that had no shepherd, etc. 3.
Reg. 22 Helisha said: behold thou shall see it with thine eyes but thou etc. 4.
Reg. 7. (...) said: all ye shall be offended by (...) this night etc. He said
moreover unto them, sit y^ here while I go and pray yonder. and he took Peter
and the two sons etc. Math. 26. nor hatred, but peace and love on all hands,
one toward another, Amen.

Another.
THe Church is one body, derived from thee (O Christ) the head thereof, into
diverse members, knitte to thee, and together among themselves, with the knot of
mutual love, a great mystery of Gods goodness. Now look how great a benefit,
love, unity, and peace are: so great a mischief is dissension, the mother of
hatred. The author of the former is God, and the author of this other is the
devil. And like as nothing can be devised more blessed, then to have the
Earthlye church to imitate the concord of the heavenly church: so nothing is
more wretched then the contrary, which is the Image of hell.

O head and father of ours, thou Jesus knowing all things that should come,
went forth and said unto them Whom seek ye? They answered him Jesus of
Nazareth, Jesus answered I am he. Judas also etc. John. 1^. The foolish
virgins cam^ also sayng Lord Lord, etc. Math. 2^. The great Dragon that old
serpent was cast out, etc. (...). 12. only art of power to perform what thou
listest. Therefore gather thou us together dispersed: and knit us together now
iarring, and rent asu^der with opinions: unite us together whom hatred and
enmity has set as far at ods as can be. Grant that all of us which are
regenerated, and renewed by baptism in thy name, may cloase together in one
body, meet for such a head as thou art, the^ the which none ca^ be imagined
either better or greater.

Let us be all of one mind, let us set our hearts all upon one thing, namely
upon thee the only almighty god, and singular lover of us: which art also a
most meek man, and wast nailed to the cross for our sins, and art the
redeemer of mankind, and the setter up again of the whole world. Lord assuage
the great number of waves, wherewith this Ship of thine Ioa^ took (...)
peaceably, and smote him under the ribbe that he (...). etc. 2. Sam. 3. Simon
to redeem Jonathan, sends money and the children to Triphon etc. 1. Ma^ha. 13.
Judas had given them a token saying: Whomsoever I kiss, he it is, take him and
lead him away. And as soon^ as he was come, h^ goes to him and says: Master,
master, etc. Mark. 14. is assaulted and shaken. Awake Christ Jesus and save
us, or else we are like to suffer sore, and horrible shipwreck. No strength, no
wisdom, no riches of men can now help us, there remains no hope of remedy.
Only thy merciful look can save us from this cruel storm, and make it calm
again. Therefore put to thy helping hand, that we being preserved by thy power,
may glory in thy name, Ame^.

* Another.
O Lord Jesus christ, which through thine almightye power did make all
creatures both visible and invisible, which by thy heavenly wisdom gouernest
and disposest all things in most beutifull order, which by thine unspeakable
goodness, preseruest, maintaynest, and quicknest all things, and which, through
thine infinite mercy, ame^dest The Jews (...) Christ in his face, and buffeted
him saying: Prophecy unto us O Christ who is he that smote thee? Peter sat
without in the hall, and a maid, etc Math. ^6. When Cham the father of (...)
saw the nakedness of his father, he told his two brethren, etc Genesis 10 Helise^s
is mocked of little children crying unto him: Come up thou baldhead, etc. 4.
Reg. 2. the things that are crazed, buildest up the things that were fallen
down, and quicknest the things that were dead: vouchsafe (we beseech thee) to
turn thy countenance at length to thy singularly beloved spouse the church,
even that mild and gracious countenance of thine wherewith thou cherest all
things in heaven, in earth, above the heavens, and under the earth: vouchsafe
to turn those meek and merciful eyes of thine wherewith when thou beheldest
Peter, he repented him by and by: and wherewith thou beheldest the scattered
people, and wast moved with pity because they wandered like stray and
scattered sheep for want of a shepherd.

Thou see O good shepherd, how sundry sorts of wolves are broken into thy
sheepfold, of who^ every one cries this is Christ, insomuch, that even the
perfectest might be drawn into error, The plowe^s plowe^ upon my back, and
furrows long did cast, etc. Psalm. 131. Satan smote Job with sore boyles fr^
the sol^ of his foot etc. Job. 2. Pilate let (...) lose unto the^ and scourged
Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified Then the soldiers of the governor
took Jesus in to the common h^ll, etc. Math. 2^. if it were possible. Thou
see with what winds, with what waves, and with what storms, thy little ship is
tossed, out of the which it is not thy will that there shall be any safety.
What must follow but that all of us must needs perish, if she should be
drowned in the waters?

We acknowledge and confess, that our own sins have procured us this tempest.
We acknowledge thy righteousness, and bewalle our own unrighteousness: but yet
therwithall we appeal to thy mercy, which (according to the psalm of the
Prophet) exceeds al thy works. We have endured much punishment already, being
ouerworn with so many wars, ouerspent with so many exactions, vexed with so
many kinds of sicknesses and plagues, ouerflowed with so many floods, and
scared with so many strange wonders threatening us from the skies: and yet for all these And the soldiers platted a crown of thorn upon his head, and a
reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees before him and mocked him,
saying: God (...), etc. Math. 27 When thou have done all thy d^^ty, ^^tte down
that thou may receue a crown etc. Eccle. ^2. Abner said unto David, who art
thou that criest to the king, etc. (...) 1. Sam. 26 mischiefs, following one
in another neck, there apeareth not any Haue^ any where to rest in, but sorer
things seem to hang still over our heads.

We complain not of any rigor on thy behalf (O most meek Savior,) but we
acknowledge thy mercy in that behalf also, for truly we have deserved far
sorer things. How be it, O most merciful Jesus, stand not thou upon the due of
our deserts, but consider what becomes thine own mercifulnes, without the
which, not even the Angels were able to stand before thee, and much less we
that are but earthen vessels. Have mercy upon us O pitiful Redeemer, not for
any worthiness of ours, but give that glory to thy holy name. Suffer not the
Jews, Turks, and others which either know thee not, or else envy thy glory, to
brag continually against us and to say: Where is Iezabell sent a messenger unto
Helias saying The Gods do so to me* etc. ^. Reg. 19. Then the king commanded
and they brought Daniell and cast, etc. Dan. 6. Pilate took water and washed
his hands before the multitude, saying: I am innocent of the death of this
(...) man, look you to it. Then answered all the people* etc. Math. 27. their
God? Where is their Redemer? Where is their Savior? Where is their Bridegroom
whom they boaste of? These reproaches light upon thee, while thy goodness is
measured by our adversities. Because they perceive not that this chastising is
to our welfare, they deem us to be forsaken.

In time past when thou did sleep in the ship, and the tempest that arose
threatened destruction to all that were in it, thou did awake at the crying
out of a few of thy disciples, and anon at thy almighty voice the surges sank
down, the winds were whist and still, and the troublesome storm was suddenly
turned into a great calm. The du^be elements knew the commandment of their
maker. Now in this far greeuouser tempest, whereby not a few bodies, but
innumerable souls are in danger: we beseech thee to awake at the and Jesus
^are his cross and came into a place named Gol^^otha, where the^ crucified him
(...) therewith (...) and (...) the most of (...), etc. ^ohn. 1^. Abraham took
the wood of ^he burnt offering* and laid ^t upon Isaac his son, etc. (...).
^^. Beho^d the wi^ow was there gathering sticks* and Eliah called her, and
said, etc. (...). cry of thy whole church being in peril. Behold how many
thousand me^ cry out, Lord save us or else we perish.

The tempest has overcome all cunning of man: nay rather, we see that the
endeavor of such as go about to help it, does turn to the contrary. There
needs thy voice O Lord Jesus, say no more but tempest be still, and by and by
the wished calmenes will show it self. The Lord would have spared the
innumerable thousands of wicked people that were in Sodom and Gomorra, if he
could have fou^^ but ten righteous among them all. Now there are many thousands
which love the glory of thy name, and which long to behold the beauty of thy
house: and will thou not at their intreatance release thine anger, and remember
thy old mercies? will thou not through thy heavenly cunning, turn our
foolishnes to thine Tubulta^^ wrought cunningly every craft of brass and iron,
etc. Genesis 4. Esaias the prophet was cut in the midst with a saw, and tasted on a
tree, etc. And when they were come to the (...) which (...) Calua^^e, there
they crucified him and the evil do (...), one on the right hand, and the other
on the left, etc. Luke. 23. own glory? will thou not turn the wicked folks
evil doings, to the benefit of thy church? for thy mercy is wont to be then
redyest at hand, when things are so far past recovery, as no strength or
policy of man can help them. Thou being the only author and maintayner of
peace, art only he yt makes things at one, though they be never so much at
odds. Thou did dispose the old Chaos, wherein the seeds of al things lay
confused, and turmoyling among them selves, without any order or comlynesse:
and by wonderful order knit the things together in everlasting league, which
strive together by nature. But how much more shameful a Chaos is it, where
there is no love, no faith, no keeping of covenants, no reverence of laws, no
awe of such as are in authority, no consent of opinions: but every man singes
his own song as One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side* ^
forthwith ran there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record and his
record^ is true. And he that etc. John. 10. With the ribbe which the Lord God
had taken from the man, etc Genesis 2. The Lord said to Moses thou shall smite the
rock and water, etc Exo. 17 in a black sanctus? Among the compasses of the
Skies there is no disagreement, the Elements do keep every one his place, and
every of them exec^^^eth his own office. And will thou suffer thy spouse, for
whose sake all things are created, to go to wrack by continual discord? Will thou suffer wicked spirits, the authors of discord, to execute tyranny in thy
kingdom unpunished? Will thou suffer that strong fellow whom thou have once
thrust out, to get possession of thy tents again? When thou dwelledst as a
mortal man, among men, the devils fled away at thy voice. We beseech thee O
Lord, send thy Spirit into the hearts of all them that profes thy honorable
name, to drive from them the wicked spirits, which are the scholemasters of
riot, covetousness, ambition, lechery, vengeance, and discord: and (that I may
As Soon as the sun was down, Iosue commands that they, etc. Iosu. ^ Then
they arose and went all night, and took the body, etc. 1. Sam. 13 Joseph took
the body and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his new tomb
which he had hewn out even in the ^ock and rolled a great ^tone to the door,
etc. Math. 27. use the prophets own words) a clean heart create in us O God
our king, and renew thy holy Spirit in our bowels, take not thy holy spirit
from us. Give us again the gladness of thy salvation, and strengthen thy spouse
and thy spouses shepherds with a principal spirit. By this spirit have thou
set things in heaven and earth at one: by this spirit have thou assembled and
knit so many tongues, so many nations, and so many sundry sorts of men into the
one body of thy church, which cleaves unto thee her head by the same spirit.
If it may please thee to renew him in all men's hearts, these outward
calamities will by and by cease, or if they cease not, yet shall they at least
wise turn to the behoof of them that love thee. Set this confusion in order O
Lord, and let thy spirit spread forth it self upon the waters of wavering
opinions.

He laid it in a tomb ^ewen out of a rock wherein was never man yet laid. And
that day was the preparing of the Saboth, and the Saboth drue on. The women
that followed after etc. Luke. 23.

^hen Joseph was come to his brethren, they stripped ^im, etc. Genesis 37.

So they t^ke up Jonas and ^ast him into the sea and the sea, etc. Jonas.

And forasmuch as thy spirit (which according to the saying of the prophet
contains all things) has also the knowledge of the voice in him: grant
that as all which dwell in thy house have but one law, one baptism, one God,
one hope, one spirit: so also there may be but one voice among all them that
profess thy catholic truth. At thy going up into heaven, thou after the manner
of such as triumph, did scatter abroad diverse rewards from above, give
gifts unto men, and bestow sundry presents of thy spirit among them. Renew
now again thine old bou^teousnes from above: give the same things to the
Church now drooping, which thou gave to her at her first flourishing forth.
Give unto her Princes ye awe of thee, that they may so govern the common weal,
as though they should shortly yeald an account of every The wepeth continually
in the night, and her tears. etc. Lamen. 1. Call me not Naomi, but call me
Mara for the lord has given, etc. Ruth. 1. ^here was Mary Magdalene and the
other Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. The next day that followed the
day of preparing, the hie priests and Pharisees, etc. Math. 27. thing to thee
the king of all kings. Give them of the wisdom which is always about thy
throne, that they may see what is best to be done, and perform it in their
deeds. Give unto the shepherds whom thou have vouchsafed to put in thy
roomth, the gift of prophesy, that they may interpret the mystical
scriptures, not by man's reason, but by thy inspiration. Give them the
threefold charity which thou did demand of Peter when thou gave him
charge to feed thy flock. Give them the love of sobernes and chastity. Give
thy people willingness to obey thy hestes, and forwardnes to serve them by
whom it is thy will to have the affairs of this world ordered: so shall it
come to pass, that if by thy inspiration the Princes command things seeming
thee, and the Shepherds teach things accordingly, and the people obey For
fear of him the kepers were astonished and became as dead men. But the Angel
said to the women: Fear not, for I know you seek Jesus which was crucified,
etc. Ma^h. 23. ^amson arose at midnight and took the ^ores, etc. Iudicum. 16
and the Lord spoke unto the fish and it cast out Jonas, etc. Jonas. 2. their
good government and godly teaching: the church shall with such good order soon
recover her former dignitye and quietness to the glory of thy name.
Notwithstanding that thou had appointed the Ninevites to utter destruction,
yet did thou spare the^ as soon as they turned to repentance: and will thou despise thy spouse casting her self down at thy feet? which uses sighs
in steed of sackcloth, and tears in steed of ashes?

Thou have promised forgeuenes to such as convert, and yet is it thy gift that
a man returns to thee with all his heart, to the intent that all our good
things should redound to thy glory. Thou art the maker, repair thy creature.
Thou art the raunsomer, save ye cost which thou have bestowed. Thou art the
Savior, suffer not them to perish which hang wholly upon thee. Thou (...) and
behold Joseph was not in the (...), etc. Gen ^ (...) my soul loves: I sought
him but I found him not, (...) Mary stood at the sepulcher we^^ng, and as she
wept, the bowed her self into the sepulcher and saw two angels in white
sitting, the one etc. John. 20. art the Lord, maintayn thine own possession.
Thou art the head, succor thy members. Thou art the king, give us reverence of
thy laws. Thou art the Prince of peace, inspire thy love into us. Thou art
God, have mercy upon thy humble suitors.

According to S. Paul's saying, be thou all in all men, that the wholl company
of thy church, may with one mind and one voice in consent yeald thanks for her
obtained mercy, to the father, and the son, and the holy Ghost, who being the
perfect pattern of concord, are distinct in propriety of persons, and yet in
nature but one, to whom be praise and glory for ever, Amen.

*A Prayer for the Queens Majesty.
WOnderful (O most excellent and almighty God) is the depth of Jesus appeared
first to Mary Magdalene out of whom he had cast vi^. devils. And she went and
told them that had been with him which mourned, etc. Mar. 16 The king said unto
Da^iell: O Daniel the servant, etc. Daniel. 6. When I had past a little from
them, then I found him, etc. Cant. 3. thy judgments. Thou king of kings. Lord
of Lords. Thou which at thy pleasure do take away and transpose, root out
and plant, confound and establish kingdoms: Thou of thy singular goodness, have
delivered our Queen thy handmayd, when she was almost at deaths door: yea thou
have delivered her out of prison, and settled her in her Fathers throne. To thee
therefore do we render thanks: to thee do we sing laud and praise: thy name
do we honor day and night.

Thou have restored again the liberty of our country, and the sincerity of thy
doctrine, with peace and tranquillity of thy church. Thine, thine was the
benefit: the means, the labor, and service was hers. A burden to heavy (alas)
for a woman's shoulders: yet easy and tolerable by thy helping hand.

Assist her therefore O most merciful And Jacob called the name of the place
Peniell, etc. Genesis 32. Gedeon answered: ^he Lord be with us why then, etc.
Iud. 6. Jesus said to Thomas put the finger here and see my hands and ^ut forth
thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faythlesse, etc. John. ^^.
father, neither respect her offenses, or ye deserts of her parents, or the
manifold sins of us her people: but think upon thy wonted compassion, always
at hand to thy poor afflicted.

Preserve her kingdom, maintayn religion, defend thy cause, our Queen, us thy
sheep, and her people. Scatter thine enemies which thirst after war. Let them
be ashamed and confounded that worship Idols. Let us not be a pray to the
nations that know not thee, neither call upon thy name.

Strengthen and confirm O Lord, ye good work which thou have begu^. Inspire our
gracious Queen thy servant, and us thy poor flock with thy holy spirit: that
with vncorrupt life, we may so ioyn purity of religion, as we may not yeald
and bring forth wild and bastard fruits: but mild and sweet grapes, and
fruits beseeming repentance, and So after the Lord had spoken unto them he was
received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. And they went forth and
preached, etc. Mar. 16 and Enoch walked with God, and he was no more sent, for
God took him away. etc. Genesis 5. There appeared ^ charet of fire, and horses of
fire, so Elias went up by a whirlwind. etc. 2. Reg. 2 meet and conuenyent for
thy gospel, to the intent we may enjoy this immortal treasure immortally, and
that living and dying in thee, we may finally possess the inheritance of thy
heavenly kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For, thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen.

* Another.
O God most excellent creator and preserver of all things, we cast our selves
down before the feet of thy majesty: and inwardly feeling how unworthy we
are to have our prayers heard of thee, we dare not lift up our eyes to heaven.

Nevertheless, whereas we were conceived in sin, and therefore (as all Adams
children) deserved untimely birth: Yet thy Fatherlye hand has Knowledge of God
in Jesus Christ is life. Mahomet, and his Alcoron is perdition brought us
forth, and caused us to be borne, yea and granted us to live in this blessed
time of thy gospel: to the intent that dying with Christ, we should rise again
to eternal life.

But alas (wretches that we are) we have deserved thy just indignation by
returning to our old vomit. And yet thy grace surmounteth our sin,
continually calling us to thy sheepfold, by the voice of thy gospel. Blessed
be thy holy name for sending us that light, when we were in darcknes: that
spirytuall drink, when we were in deadly thirst: that heavenly food, when we
were hunger starued. And like honor and praise be ascribed to thee only (O
Lord) for giving us such, so wise, so zealous, so godly, and careful governors
of thy chosen church of England: whom thou have raised up by the light of thy
gospel, to guide us in the same Love of God is in spirit, and truth. Idolatry,
is Spiritual adultery. thy light, and to feed us with the same thy heavenly
food.

We magnify thy name day and night, for that inestimable benefit of thine,
bestowed upon us thy people of England, in cas^ing thy chosen creature, ye
nurce of this thy church, our Queen, and governor, from worldly vanities, to
the care of thy kingdom, and into the communion of thy Saints, by the preching
of thy gospel. When she gave not sufficiently attentive and diligent ear to
thy blessed word, albeit thou did correct her, and other ungrateful
creatures of this our nation with thy rod, yet eue^ in this point also thy
clemency surmou^ted our double wickedness. For behold when as thy justice might
have depryued us of her, thou of thine infinite mercy did deliver her out of
prison, set her free from the Lions jaws, crowned her with a diadem of gold,
and put Above al take the shield of faith. Ephe. 6. Behold thou have ca^^ me
out. Genesis. 4. Faith. apprehends Christ Jesus. Cayne. dispaireth of mercy.
the Royal scepter of this Realm in her hand.

Moreover (O singular, and most precious treasure of al treasures) thou through
her means and ministry have brought again Christ Jesus, once banished out of
England.

These (most merciful father) be the principal jewels of thine inestimable
riches bestowed upon us: which, the more excellent they are, the les are we
worthy of them, because we have misbehaued our selves toward thy majesty, in
daily sinning more and more against thee: in so much that feeling the same in
our consciences, we be driven well near to despair. But when we call to mind
thy sure and sweet promises in Christ's precious blood, we are thereby
refreshed: and, recovering strength by hope, approach thy throne boldly, not
offering any thing for the satisfaction Hope. makes not ashamed. Judas.
ashamed, and hanged him self. of our sins, but only craving, that the
oblation of thine anointed, which is the iustifier and sanctifier of all that
are to be justified and sanctified, may make us clean, and so receive us into
thy tuicion. And seeing obedience pleases thee better then the fat of sheep
and the sacrifice of our lips better then the flesh, and blood of beasts,
grant that we may finish our sinful race in showing forth thy praise, and
keeping thy holy will.

And forasmuch as thou have thought good to set up thy servant our Queen, a
woman, and a frail vessel, over us, to govern this kingdom, and that she
must render an account thereof (a hard thing so to do) before the judgment
seat of thy son Christ: send down (we beseech thee) O Father, send down
such grace from thy high throne, upon thy daughter our Queen Elizabeth,
Looking unto Jesus the Author. etc. Heb. 12. Let al bitterness, and anger, and
wrath. Ephesians. 4. P^tience, ^uerco^meth all things. Wrath, deuoureth it self. as
thou know most necessary for the performance, and execution of so great a
charge.

Thou have given her Counselors: grant that she may use their council
happily. Indue them with godly, righteous, and careful hearts, that they may
be both willing, and able, simply and faithfully to consult, and also
prouidently to provide, as well for thy church, as for her, and us her people.

It is thy grace O Lord, that we her people, renewed with thy word, do suffer
our selves to be nourished with the same. Send forth therefore faithful
shepherds, godly, and true teachers to feed us. And drive away all hirelings,
and ravening wolves, from this flock of thine, and of thy Son Jesus Christ.

Besides this, so bless us the sheep of thy pasture, that we may never deny
Humility, is tender hearted. Pride, despises his neighbor. Be not high
minded, but make your selves. etc Romans ^2. Woe to the crown of pride, etc.
Esaias. 28. thee the chiefest honor: Our Queen thy Deputy, her obedience: And our
neighbors mutual charity.

Furthermore, of thy goodness, maintain peace and tranquillity, defend our
Queen, her kingdom, and country from bloody wars: and especially protect
her and us from hollow hearts, and from civil tumults, and co^spiracies, which
have shaken the greatest part of Christendom.

And because the affliction of every poor creature appertains to her, in as
much as she is thine, inspire the magistrates under her with thy holy spirit,
that they may willingly and carefully maintain justice, and provide for the
relief of Christ his poor members, whose treasurers both she and we and all
others are, whom thou have blessed with thy earthly benefits.

Hear our prayers we beseech thee, Be (...), and tender hearted, etc. Ephe 4.
Avenge not your selves* but give place etc. Romans 12. Mercy, bears with
infirmities. Cruelty, seeks revenge. for the sake of thy son Jesus Christ
our Redeemer. To whom, with thee, and thy holy spirit, be all honor, and glory
for ever, Amen.

* Another.
O Almighty God, king of kings, Lord of Lords, the only God and governor of
all things: Thou art he, by whom alone kings do reign: Thou most high,
bear rule over all the kingdoms of men: Thou in Christ thine only Son
being the most gracious father of thy chosen church, do for the comfortable
nourishing of it, dispose the Royal state among men.

Through this thy grace it is come to pass, that we the English nation, now a
portion of the same thy church, do enjoy the government of Elizabeth our Queen
whom thou have against all practices of thine adversaries delivered out of
perils, Concord, supporteth one another. Discord, destroys one another. Three
things rejoice me the unity, etc. Eccles^asticus, 25. The (...) of the proud
is bloodshed. Ecclesi. 27. and by thy mighty hand brought to reign over us.
Mercifully guiding her, thou have made her to us a mother, to thine afflicted
flock a nurce in that benefit which we have in liberty of true Religion, and
common peace. Merueilously protecting her, thou have kept her to defend us,
that we might use and hold this benefit quyetly.

And even now in thy mighty marvelous mercy, thou have discovered the
practices of such crafty and cruel enemies, as purposed to spoil her of us,
us of her, and both her and us of thy Religion, and of peace, determining to
deliver us over to the tyranny of that shameless sinful man of Rome, and to the
bloody sword. In which purpose of mischief if thou had permitted them to
prevail, we had suffered for our sins at thy hand, O Lord, most justly, but
at their hands most unkindly, unnaturally and unjustly. For we do offend Love
nourishes with joy. Herod murthereth infants. thy Majesty many ways: we
offend not them any ways. Yet such is their waywardnes that they do hate us:
Yea such is their wickedness that they will hate us, only because we do
profess to serve thee in truth. For this cause they conspire against thee, O
GOD, like hypocrites, against our Queen like traitors, against our common
country like spoylers, against us even as Cain did against Abell. But thy
great goodness has devised better for us, then they do: Thou have spared us
whom they would have spoiled. Thy wisdom has unfolded their wickedness. Thy
providence has prevented their purpose. All honor, praise, with thanks in the
congregation, and by every member thereof be given to thee, O God of grace, O
Lord of pity, O Father of mercy for ever and ever. And now we beseech thee, O
merciful father, be not provoked with our sins to give us over to the lust
of Christian sousdior harnised. Hell Temptation overcome. Put on the whole
armore, etc. Ephe. 6. Stand ^ast in the faith, etc. 1. Cor. 16. our enemies,
do not make us a reproach to these heathen. Let not the Jew, the Turk, the
Papist, triumph against thee in our overthrow, saying: where is now their God?
But of thy rich mercy in Christ forgive our sins, by thy renewing spirit
amend us, and work out the good work which thou have begun among us. Confound
and bring to naught the attempts of these and the like enemies, as thou did
at Babell. Infold them in the folly of their own devices, as thou did
Achitophell. By thine angel smite their force, as thou did to Senacherib. In
their desperate attempts let them be drowned, as was Pharao. In their treasons
overtake them, as thou did Absolon. If any of them are to be converted, turn
them as thou did Manasses. Otherwise let them feel their due punishment, as
did Dathan with his conspirators, that of these also there may be left Wisdom
is better then gold. Sardanapalus an imprudent king. an example of thy justice
to the posterity. We do likewise most humbly beseech thee to continue thy
goodness toward us, even of thine old wonted mercy. Deliver our Queen
Elizabeth from evil. Direct her in the true knowledge of thee, to acknowledge
thy b^nefites toward her, and her duty toward thee. Kindle more and more in
her heart a zeal to serve thee her self, and to have thee served of us
sincerely. Guide her still to govern us justly in godly peace.

Give unto us also which are subjects, thankful hearts to thee, faithful to
her in thee, and charitable toward all men: that all which live under her
government, Counselors, Ministers, and every other in their place and calling,
may be thoroughly sactified in holiness to live before thee.

Thus prolonging her reign over us, plant thou in it thy Religion among us, and
in us, so that it may with power reform Understanding reaches the heaven.
Ignorance is as a beast Understanding is a welspring of life. etc. Proverb. 16
Be ye not like horse, and Mule. which. etc. Psalm. 32. and rule us, and remayn
to our posterity after us, that the praise of thy name may so continue in the
hearts and mouths of the English nation, as England may say for ever: The Lord
be praised.

A Prayer for the Ministers of Gods word.
LEt thy Priests (O Lord) be clothed with righteousness: and let thy Saints
rejoice. Pour out thy spirit of wisdom and understanding upon the Ministers
of thy word, that they may know the mysteries of thy holy will. Give them the
gift of utterance, that they may set forth the abundant riches of thy gospel.
Write thy laws in their hearts, and thy testimonies in their bowels, that they
may lead thy people into all truth, and rule thy church with discretion. Make
them good work Go to the (...), O thou Slouggard. etc. Proverb. 6. The
Slothful man hides his hand in his. etc. Proverb, 26. Industry gathers
reward. Sloth brings sleep. men, faithful shepherds, and wise builders: that
they may mende the broken walls of Jerusalem, feed the flocks of thy sheep
with the bread and water of life, husband thy vineyard, and dress it in due
season, repair thy holy sanctuary, and bring in the vessels dedicated to the
service of the Lord. And finally, shine with such light of holy and pure
conversation before men, as they may edefie no les by example of life, then by
instruction of teaching: To the intent that me^ beholding their modesty,
meeknes, sufferance, patience, and other virtues wherewith thou have endued them
to the benefit of thy Church, may be won to thy gospel even by the holiness
of their conversation: and be compelled to confess to the glory of thy name,
that thou doubtless, live, raignest, workest and dwell in them, Amen.

Memory is a treasure house

Oblivion is as a grave.

Wherefore I put you in remembrance, etc 2. Tim. 1.

I am counted among them that go down etc. Psalm. 88.

* A Prayer to be said for all Magistrates
THey that are in authority over us, are as the helm in a ship, as the eye in
the body, and as the mind in ye soul, and therefore thou O Lord have commanded
us to further them with our seruis or succor, and our prayers. For great is the
profit that we receive by good princes and magistrates, and great is the harm
which they do being otherwise. Wherefore it is to be wished that they might be
good, godly, virtuous and nobleminded.

Besides this, great is the burden which they bear in governing well:
forasmuch as they must make an account thereof unto thee, whereas we in the
mean while, are free from that danger. Unto thee therefore (O Lord Jesus Christ)
do we make our supplications David executed right and justice, etc 2. King. 2.
Thy princes are rebellious, and companions, etc. Esaias. 1. Justice ^udgeth
rightly. Tyranny oppresses ^ight. for them, even unto thee which art the
perfect pattern for all Rulers to follow and imitate: as who being most
singularly good, and wise, can neither err nor do any thing amiss. Grant
we beseech thee that all those who^ thou have ordained as Shepherds of thy
sheep to rule thy people under thee: and specially that our most gracious
sovereign Lady Elizabeth, and her most honorable Counsel, together with all
her Nobility, Clergy, inferior Magistrates, and under Officers may be so
enlightened with the brightness of thy light, so guided by the direction of thy
spirit, and so inflamed with the love of thee, and of thy people committed to
their charge, as they may in all cases espy the truth, and minister right,
equity, and justice, with mercy, always having their eyes upon thee, to
follow and execute the things which thou have Strength showed in the arm.
Holofernes slain by Judith. He girdeth me with strength, etc Psalm, ^8. He
said he would burn up, etc. Judith. 6. commanded, and not which they
themselves list, so as they, drawing all together by one line, according to the
pattern which thou have set before the^, may well and thoroughly perform their
charge to thy glory: and we obediently yealding our selves to their godly
commandments, may lead a holy and quiet life under them likewise, to the
glory of thy name, Amen.

A Prayer of Children for their Parents.
LOrd God, whose will it is that next thy self we should yeald most honor to
our fathers and mothers: forasmuch as among the duties of natural love, it is
not the least to sue unto thy goodness for the welfare of our Parents: I beseech
thee preserve my Father and Mother, with all their household, David took a
good courage to him. etc. 1. Reg. 2. I desire that you faint not, etc. Ephe. 3.
Courage is bold in Christ. Cowardice faynteth in trial. first in the love of
thy Religion, and next in safety from all incumberance and grief both of body
and mind.

And unto me, grant that they may not have any trouble by my means: And
finally, that I may enjoy the favor of them, and they the favor of thee, which
art the soueraign father of all, Amen.

A Prayer for charity, or love toward our neighbors.
LOrd, inlighten and instruct our minds, that we may esteem every thing as it
is worth, and yet not make the less reckning of thee, since nothing can be made
better then thou. And secondly, let us make account of man, then whom, there is
nothing more excellent among the things of this world. Make us to love him next
thee, either as likest our selves, or as thy child, and therefore our brother,
or as one ordained Temperance watches, and bridleth. Intemperance overcomes
the heart. A wholesome sleep comes of. etc. Eccle. 31. For tables are so full
of vomit, etc. Esaias, 28 to be a member of one self same Country with us.

And cause us also even here, to resemble the heavenly kingdom through mutual
love, where all hatred is quite banished, and all is full of love, and
consequently full of joy and gladness, Ame^.

Another.
SOften our hearts O Lord, that we may be moved no less at the necessities and
greefes of our neighbors, then if they concerned our selves, or the cases
that touched us nearest, and let us think them to befall even to our dearest
friends. Let us pity them as our selves, and in their common adversity let us
also communicate with the^ by compassion, that as we would have pitied our
selves for the like cause, so we may be moved with pity toward those whom we
see oppressed with the Use a little wine for thy stomach. 1. Tim. 5 Woe unto
them that (...) up early etc. Esaias. 1. Measure in wine. comfort. Excess
walks vvantonly. same adversities. O most mild, and merciful Christ, we
beseech thee brethe upon us the spirit of thy meekenes and goodness, that like
as thy pitying of us made thee to endure most bitter death, and torments for
us, so our pitying of our neighbors may lead us to succor them to our power,
Amen.

Another.
WHere Charity and Love are, there is the congregation of the Saints. There
is neither wrath nor disdain: but steadfast charity for ever. Therefore grant
us O Lord God, that we may love one another unfeignedly: for where love is,
there art thou: and he that loves his brother, is born of thee, and dwells
in thee, and thou in him.

And where brethren do glorify Sobriety watches her mouth. Voluptuousness
^yoteth. Let us which are of the day be sober. 1 Thessalonians. 5. For it is
suffycient for us, etc. 1. Pet. 4. thee with one accord, there do thou pour
out thy blessing upon them. Love us therefore O Lord, and shead thy love into
our hearts, that we may love thee, and our brethren in thee, and for thee, as
all children to thee, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer for the afflicted, and persequuted under the tyranny of Antichrist.
O Merciful Father, who never do forsake such as put their trust in thee:
stretch forth thy mighty arm to the defense of our brethren, by the rage of
enemies persequuted, and grievously tormented in sundry places for the true
profession of thy holy Gospel, who in their extreem necessity cry for comfort
unto thee.

Let not thy long suffering, O Lord, Whose apparailing let not be, etc. 1. Pet.
3^ The steps of a strange woman. etc. Proverb. 5. Chastity is secret and
clean. Uncleanness is like a Goat. be an occasion either to increase the tyranny
of thy enemies, or to discourage thy children: but with speed, O Lord.
consider their great miseries and afflictions. Prevent the cruel devise of
Haman. Stay the rage of Holophernes. Break the counsel of Achitophell. Let
not the wicked say: Where is now their God?

Let thy afflicted flock feel present aid and relief from thee O Lord, look
down upon them with thy pitiful eye, from thy holy habitation: send terror and
trembling among their enemies: make an end of their outrageous tyranny: beat
back their boldness in suppressing thy truth, in destroying thy true servants,
in defacing thy glory, and in setting up Antichrist. Let them not thus proudly
advance themselves against thee, and thy Christ, but let them understand and
feel that against thee Perseuera^ce ^ndureth to the end. Reuolting, a Sow in
the mire If they continue grounded in faith. 1. Tim. 2. He that endures to the
end shall be saved. Mat. 10 they fight. Preserve and defend the vine which thy
right hand has planted, and let all nations see the glory of thine anointed,
Amen.

* A Prayer for our brethren, that are in adversity.
MOst gracious, and merciful savior, we find by experience almost every
minute of an hour, that this life of ours is fraughted with adversities,
which grow unto every of us either out of the sinfulnes of the flesh, or of each
man's own folly, or of other men's spitefulnes.

Besides this, other men's misfortunes are both an increase, and an example of
our own. For we see by them, that the like may befall us: and brotherly charity
compels us to be sorry for them. In respect whereof thou also have commanded
us to weep with them Charity feeds the hungry. I was an hungry, and ye gave
me meat. Mat. 25. If thine enemy hunger, feed him. Prouer. 25* that weep,
and to mourn with the^ that mourn, and to be like minded one toward another,
as members all of one body. Thou therefore, O merciful Redeemer, which have
borne our infirmities, harken to the prayers which we pour out before thee,
for the relief of our bretherens adversities: and increase not our sorrows by
the sorrows of our friends. Rid them out of their miseries, that they may the
more quietly set their minds upon thee, and we (through thy gracious goodness)
be discharged of no small piece of our heaviness. Or, if it be not expedient
either for them or us (for thou only know what is expedient for every man:)
at least wise give them power of mind, and strength of b^dy, to bear their
sore crosses the easilyer, so as neither their bodies may be unable to abide
and endure the pains, nor their hearts quayle under the grief, Charity gives
drink to the thirsty. I thirsted, and you gave me drink, Mat. 25. The Niggard
witholdeth drink from the thirsty. Esaias 32. whereby they might be driven to
do, say, or think any thing which thou might mislike of, or which might
turn to their own hurt through impatience or despair, Amen.

A Prayer for them that be in poverty.
THey that are snarled and entangled in ye extreem penury of things needful
for the body, cannot set their minds upon thee O Lord, as they ought to do:
but when they be disapoynted of the things which they do so mightily desire,
their hearts are cast down, and quail for excess of grief. Have pity upon
them therefore O merciful father, and relieve their misery through thine
incredible riches, that by thy removing of their urgent necessity, they may
rise up unto thee in mind. Thou O Lord prouidest enough for all men Charity,
harbo^eth strangers. I was a stranger, and ye lodgeed me. Mat. 25. I have not
suffered a stranger to lie without. Job. 31. with thy most liberal and
bountiful hand: but whereas thy gifts are, in respect of thy goodness and free
favor, made common to all men, we (through our naughtines, nigardship, and
distrust,) do make them private and peculiar. Correct thou the thing which our
iniquity has put out of order: let thy goodness supply that which our
niggardlynes has plucked away. Give thou meat to the hungry, and drink to
the thirsty: Comfort thou the sorrowful: Cheer thou up the dismayed:
Stre^gthen thou the weak: Deliver thou them that are prisoners: And give thou
hope and courage to them that are out of heart.

O Father of all mercy have compassion of so great misery. O Fountain of all
good things, and of all blessedness, wash thou away these so sundry, so
manifold and so great miseries of ours, Charity clotheth the naked. I was
naked and ye clothed me Mat. 25 If a brother or Sister be naked or destitute.
James. 2. with one drop of the water of thy mercy, for thine only Son our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

* A Prayer to be said for our Euilwillers.
MOst merciful Redeemer, thou have commanded us to pray for them, both which
wish us evil, and (as much as in them lies) do work us evil: and that have
thou done, not only in words, but also in deeds, of purpose that we should
follow thine example. We pray thee therefore, to shead in to us the spirit of
thy mildness, that we may patiently suffer both the evil will, and the evil
speech, and the evil doings of our enemies, as we hear say thou did, and
as we daily perceive that thou do still.

Let us nether requite wrong in deed, nor take upon us to revenge our selves
Charity visits the sick. I was sick and ye visited me. Math. 25. Let it not
grieve thee to visit the sick. Eccle. 7 in words, nor wish, or desire any such
thing in heart or mind: but let us be so far of from all revenge, as we may
even do them good, and help them to the uttermost of our power, and with
earnest prayer and supplication crave good things of thee for them: namely,
that thou vouchsafe to give the^ a good mind, and al other things which thou
know to be for their welfare, profit, commodity, and soul health: so as we
may be thy children in deed, which bestowest thy bounteousnes not only upon
the good and thankful, but also upon the wicked and unthankful: and also thy
kindly disciples, which prayed thy father to forgive their most unrighteous
tormentors, Amen.

* Another.
MOst merciful, and loving Father, which hate not any of the Charity,
visits prisoners. I was in prison and ye came Math. 25. Onesiphorus often
refreshed me and was not. 2. Tim. 1. things which thou have made, but
suffer and bear with men's misdoinges, winking at them, to provoke them
to repentance: We beseech thee most humbly, even with all our hearts, to pour
out upon our enemies with bountiful hand, whatsoever things thou know may
do them good: and chiefly a sound and vncorrupt mind, wherthrough they may
know thee, and seek thee in true charity with their wholl heart, and love us
thy children for thy sake.

Let not their hating of us turn to their harm, neither let us in any wise
hurt them, seeing yt we cannot do them good for want of ability. Destroy the^
not O father, for their hatred toward us, but save them at our intreatance for
them. Lord we desire their amendment, and not their punishment. Separate them
not from us by punishing Sight. Let thine eyes behold that is right. Proverb.
4. them, but join and knit them to us by thy favorable dealing with them. And
seeing we be all ordained to be Citizens of the one everlasting City, let us
begin to enter into that way here already by mutual love, which may bring us
right forth thither, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

* A confession of our sins.
O Lord my God, everlasting and almighty Father: I acknowledge and confess
before thy holy and high Majesty, that I was bread and borne in sin and
corruption: and that since my birth I have not ceased, nor do cease daily to
transgress thy commandments. In respect whereof I cannot escape ruin and
destruction according to thy rightful justice. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as I
am sorry that I have offended thee, and do condemn Hearing. The ear of ielosy
hears all things. Wisdom. 1. both my self and my sin: and forasmuch as it
has plesed thee to love us, even when we were thine enemies, and for assurance
thereof, to give us thy only and well-beloved son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to be
a mediator, and advocate between thee and us, promising us that we shall
obtayn whatsoever we ask of thee in his name.

Uouchsafe O most loving God and merciful Father, to pardon and forgive me in
his name, and for his sake: and not only to cleanse my heart from all vanity
and uncleanness, but also to govern and guide me by thy holy spirit in all my
ways, that I may live according to thy holy and heavenly commandments all
the days of my life, to the glory of thy name, through ye same thy well beloved
Son, So be it.



Taste.

The mouth tastes the meats Job. 34.

* A Prayer for remission and forgeuenes of sins.
SO huge is the heap of our sins, and in so sundry wise have we offended (O
righteous and holy lawmaker) that unless we lift up our minds to the
considering of thy goodness, we must needs despair. Thee we displease, to thee
do we bid battle through our wicked deeds. To thee do we profes enmity,
even to thee which art almighty, which have no need of any thing, whom nothing
can hurt: and yet art thou the party that does first offer peace and atonement.

Because nothing happens oftener to us the^ to fall into this disease, we have
need of nothing so much as of the medicine of thy mercy, and thou do
always offer it us redely, and set it before us.

Smelling.

Give a sweet smell as incense etc. Eccle. 39.



Wherefore grant we beseech thee O most mild and kindharted Father, that we may
both discern our diseases, and know the remedies of them, and seek them (as it
becomes us) at thine only hand, who art wont to grant them so easily at our
requests, for the love of thine only son Jesus Christ, Ame^.

Another.
MOst merciful and gracious father, I beseech thee let not other men's
naughtines hurt me, but rather let their goodness further me: thou art the
terrible ielious God, which reuengeth the wickedness of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate thee: and
again on the other side, art treatible and mild, insomuch that thou show
mercy unto thousands, in them Touching. Touch no unclean thing. 2. Cor. 6.
that love thee and keep thy commandments. Add this also as an increasement
of thine exceeding great goodness, that the faults of my forefathers in the flesh
light not upon my head, but that the weldoing of thy son Jesus Christ who is
our father, may succor me. Be not angry with me for their sakes that begat
this body of mine, but let me feel thee favorable to me for Jesus Christ's
sake, who has begotten my soul new again, Amen.

Another.
WHen we look upon our life that is past, Lord, what a dunge on of errors,
naughtines, and wicked doings opens it self suddenly unto us, so as there
is none of us all, but he may be ashamed to look upon himself, and quake for
fear of the wickedness of his time to come. For Esaias. 2. and. 19. Math. 24.
Mark. 13. Luke. 17 The sun shall be darkened, the moon shall lose her light, and
the stars shall fall from heaven. who can warrant us that the same shall be
any better then that which is past? Nay, who ought not to wonder at thy
mercifulnes, and to honor it O dear Father, which have withheld thy vengeance
so long?

We come to thee in exceeding fear, O great judge, most humbly beseeching
thee, that the vengeance of them all heaped together may not light upon us, but
that the love which thou bear to thine only son our Lord Jesus Christ, for
whose sake thou bear with us that have deserved utter destruction, may hide
them out of thy sight, and wipe them out of thy remembrance. For if thou (O
Lord) look narrowly to our sins, Lord who shall abide it? In deed we confess
that we be more chary in keeping men's laws then thine, whereas
(notwithstanding) the obaying of Two men shall be in the field, the one
received, the other shall be refused. thine yealdeth greater reward, and the
breaking of them yealdeth greater punishment.

Alas, how sore are we nouseled in sin by custom, in so much that as now we
can almost do nothing else, and yet we perceive not when we do amiss. O how
small an account do we make of it? We lie wallowing up on the ground in dirt
and dung, and yet we never strain our selves so much as to lift up our heads,
that we might not rot as we lie. What father would forbear us so often in
breaking his commandments? Yet not withstanding, thou O God do bear with
us, and winkest at our sins, and thy goodness and long sufferance allure us to
amendment.

To thee therefore be glory, and praise, for ever and ever, Amen.

Two women shall be grinding at

the mill the one shall be received

the other shall be refused.



Another.
O Souerain creator of al things, when I consider what manner of majesty I have
offended with my sins. I do even shudder at mine own rashness. When I bethink
me how gracious and bountiful a father I have forsaken, I abhor mine own
unkindness, When I perceue from how blessed freedom of mind, into how
miserable thraldom I have cast my self: I condemn mine own madness, and I
utterly mislike of my self, and my conscience is put in such terror, by thine
vneschuable justice, as I see nothing before me but helfire and disparre.

But on the contrary part, when I behold that infinite mercy of thine, which
(according to the record of the prophet) surmounteth all thy works, and
wherthrough thou art (after a sort), The Sea shall swell higher the^ any hill:
and shall fall again as low, fishes and monsters of the Sea shall appear with
roaring voice. greater then thy self, whereas (notwithstanding) thou art
greatest without all comparyson. A certain cherefuller breath of hope blazeth
out upon me, and refreshes my mind. For why should I despair of forgeuenes
of my sins at his hand, which in the wrytings of his prophets does so often
allure sinners to repentance, crying out that he desires not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should turn again and live?

Again, how ready thou art to pardon such as amend, thine own only begotten
son does beat into our heads by many parables, as of the lost groate, and the
finding thereof again: of the shepherds bringing home of his stray sheep upon
his shoulders: but most evidently of the prodigal son, whose Image I see
plainly in my self.

Unkindly have I forsaken my most The sea and all fluddes shall burn, trees
and herbs shall drop blud^ Cities. and all buildings shall be ouerturned.
loving father, lewdly have I wasted al his substance, and (in following y^
lusts of the flesh, and in putting of thy commandments out of my mind) I have
tumbled my self into most shameful slavery of sin, and am brought to
extreme beggary, and I see not whether I may fly for succor, but to him, from
whom I am run away.

O let thy mercy receive him now submitting himself, whom thou have he thereto
borne withal so gentely in his straying from thee. I am unworthy to lift up
mine eyes to thee, or to call thee by the name of father. Nevertheless
vouchsafe I beseech thee, to cast thine eye upon me: For thy loking toward
the sinner, makes him to revive when he is dead, and to return home again
when he is lost.

Uerely I am beholden to thy look for this mislyking of my self at this
Stone^ shall tu^ble together, and make a huge none. Tirr^ble earthquakes shall
make me^ hide themselves. Valy^s shall be (...) and hills brought low. present.
As Soon as thou did vouchsafe to look upon me as I wandered far from thee,
by and by thou did restore me mine eyes, that I might see in how great misery
I was. And thou me^st me by the way, inspiring me with a mindful desire and
longing for the innocence which I had forgone.

Slave that I am, and worthy of all manner of punishment, I seek not that thou
should embrace me and kiss me: I crave not the long robe and the ring, which
are the badges of the former dignity that I did hold scorn of. I sue not to be
received to the honor of thy children: It shall be a benefit great enough for
me, if thou admit me but into the number of thy basest servants, even of such
as are bronded, and brought again from roging, that I may at least wise be some
hanger on unto thee, for in thy house there are many roumthes.

They that hid themselves shall run forth like mad me^*

The bones of the dead shall appear above the Sepulcres.

The powers of heaven shall be shaken.



It shall not grieve me to be counted among the abiects in this life, and to be
racked with repentance, and to be sullied with mourning, so I may not be
separated from thee for ever.

I pray thee, and I beseech thee by the death of thy dearly beloved, and only
begotten son, impart thy spirit unto me to cleanse my heart, and to strengthen
it with his grace, that I slide not thither again through oversight, from
whence I was called back by thy mercy, Amen.

* Another.
I Have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek out thy servant O Lord, for I have
not been unmindful of thy commandments. The offenses and ouersightes of my
youth remember not O Lord. Be mindful on me according to thy mercy. For thy
goodness sake, Every one living shall dye presently. Heaven, earth, and all
elements shall burn. The dead shall rise. O Lord, keep my soul, and deliver
me: so shall I not be ashamed of putting my trust in thee. Turn my mourning
into joy. Rend my sackcloth asunder, and compass me about with gladness, that
my tongue may sing to thee without prick or sting of conscience, Amen.

* Another.
IF thou look straightly to our sins (O Lord) Lord who shall abide it? But
forasmuch as there is mercy with thee, I have waited upon thee for thy laws
sake O Lord. My soul has held out in thy word, my soul has trusted in thee
O Lord. For with thee there is mercy and plenteous redemption, and thou
redemest Israel from all his iniquities, Amen.

Another.
Knowledge of God in Jesus Christ is life.

Mahomet, and his Alcoron is perdition



THou have chastised me O Lord, and I am broken as an untamed young bullock.
Turn me and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God: for when thou had
once turned me, I amended and when thou had showed me my faults, I struck my
thigh. I was ashamed and blushed, because I abode the reproach of my youth.

Another.
O Good Jesus, O sweet Jesus y^ son of the virgin Mary, full of mercy and
truth, O sweet Jesus have pity upon me according to thy great mercy. O loving
Jesus, I beseech thee by that precious blood of thine, which thou did
vouchsafe to shed for us wretched sinners upon the altar of the cross, put
away all my sins and despise me not in mine humble suit calling upon this thy
most holy name of Jesus. This Love of God is in spirit, and truth. Idolatry,
is Spiritual adultery. name Jesus is a swet name, this name Jesus is a
healthful name. For what else is Jesus but Savior? O good Jesus which have
created me and redeemed me with thine own blood, suffer me not to be damned
whom thou have created. O good Jesus let not my wickedness destroy me, whom thy
almighty goodness has made. O good Jesus consider what is thine in me, and
whatsoever is otherwise wipe it away. O good Jesus have mercy upon me while the
time serves to have mercy least thou destroy me in the time of thy dreadful
doom. O good Jesus, although I miserable sinner have justly deserved
everlasting punishment for my most grievous sins by thy rightful justice: yet
do I appeal from thy rightful justice to thine unspeakable mercy, and
therefore pity thou me as a loving Father and merciful Lord. O good Jesus, what
profit is there Faith. apprehends Christ Jesus. Cayne. dispaireth of mercy.
Above al take the shield of faith. Ephe. 6. Behold thou have cast me out.
Genesis. 4. in my blood, that I should go down into everlasting corruption? For
the dead shall not praise thee O Lord, nor yet they that go down into hell. O
most merciful Jesus, have mercy upon me. O most sweet Jesus, set me at liberty.
O loving Jesus, be favorable to me sinner O Jesus admit me wretched sinner into
the number of thy chosen. O Jesus the health of the^ that trust in thee. O Jesus
the welfare of them that believe in thee, have pity upon me. O Jesus the sweet
remission of all my sins, O Jesus the son of the virgin Mary, pour thy
grace, wisdom, louingnes, charity, and humility into me: and in all mine
aduersityes give me holy patience, yt I may be able to bear thy cross with
thee, to love thee, and to glory and delight in thee for ever and ever. Amen.

Another.


Hope. makes not ashamed.

Judas. ashamed, an^ hanged him self.

MOst righteous and merciful god, remember that thou art pitiful, and that
thou art my redeemer. As thou art a judge to condemn offenders: so art thou
also God to acquit thy servants, and a creator to save thine own work, and a
Savior to save him that believes in thee, and is baptized.

Wherefore O Lord, mind not thy justice only as against a sinner, but be
mindful of thy goodness as toward thy creature: mind not thy wrath as
against an offender, but be mindful of thy compassion as toward a poor
wretch of thine. Spare me O Lord which art my salvation, and desire not the
death of a sinner. Spare my sinful soul. My God, in thee do I trust, and unto
thee do I commit my soul. O merciful God have pity upon me, have pity upon
thy humble creature. Deal with me according to thy mercy, O thou that art
blessed for ever. Amen.

Patience, overcomes all things.

Wrath, deuoureth it self.

Looking unto Jesus the Author. etc. Heb. 12.

Let al bitterness, and anger, and wrath. Ephesians. 4.

Another.
O Most merciful Lord, how can I be good which have bin evil even in the good?
I sinned, and thou winkedst at it. I continued long time in my wickedness, and
thou continuedst as long in thy loving kindness, of purpose to bring me to
repentance, and to show me favor. Thou therefore that have born so long with my
offenses, give mercy to me miserable wretch. For I believe that whatsoever thou
determinest to forgive me, it shall be as if it had never been done.

My whole life O my God, makes me afraid, because that when I sift it
thoroughly, there appears welnere nothing but sin, or barrainnesse in it: and
if there be any fruit in it, it is either so thin and slender, or so imperfect,
and corrupted by some mean or other, that Be not high minded, but make your
selves. etc Romans 12. Woe to the crown of pride, etc. Esaias. 28. Humility, is
tender hearted. Pride, despises his neighbor. it may well, either utterly
displease thee, or at least wise not like thee. Therefore being abashed at the
multitude of my sins, but yet trusting to thy gracious goodness, I acknowledge
and confess to thee my maker and Redeemer, which have promised forgeuenes to
offenders, that in sin I was conceued, in sin have I been brought up, and
in sin have I lived all the time of my life unto this day. I find not any
sin, wherewith I am not defited by some means or other. Thus is my soul
filled with misery according to the desert of my sins. Thus is my soul
brought even to the gate of hell. O my God if thou deliver me I have cause to
thank thee: if thou deliver me not, yet have I no cause to blame thee, for
thou art righteous.

Alas, how have I lived? what a number of evil things have I said and done?
Mercy, bears with infirmities. Cruelty, seeks revenge. Be courteous, and
tender hearted. etc. Ephe. 4. Avenge not your selves: but give place etc. Romans
12. I am ashamed that I have lived so: my conscience tells me I have deserved
damnation: but I am sure that thy mercy wipeth away all offense. Wipe away mine
iniquities therefore O Lord, with the multitude of thy mercies, and by the
desert of thy most bitter passion, and death, Amen.

Another.
WOe is me wretch that I am, how often have I fallen in rising, and lien still
when I was fallen? I have heaped sin upon sin, often promising amendment,
but never perfourming it. I have always returned again to my vomit: and to my
former offenses I have added new, and worse. Behold O most merciful God, I
hide not my sins, but I bewray them: I do not excuse, but accuse my self,
for I know mine iniquity well enough. Surely I might well enough despair in
respect Three things rejoice me the unity, etc. Ecclesiasticus, 25. The strife
of the proud is bloodshed. Ecclesi. 27. Concord, supporteth one another.
Discord, destroys one another. of my outrageous sins, vices, and infinite
ouersights which I have committed, and daily do commit without ceasing, in
thought, word, and deed, and by all other means wherein man's frailty may
offend, were it not that thy word O Lord, is become flesh and dwells among
us. But now I dare not despair, because that he, submitting himself unto
thee, to the very death, yea even to the death of the cross, has taken away
the handwriting of our sins, and nailed it to his cross, crucifiyng the same
and death both at once. Therefore I beseech thee for thine only begotten sons
death sake, wipe away all my iniquities, and be merciful to me the miserablest
of all sinners: to the intent that being set free from sin, and justified
before thee through the righteousness of thy son, I may sing praise to thy
name, and glorify thee, together with Love nourishes with joy. Herod
murthereth infants. the same thy son, and the holy Ghost, from this time
forth for evermore, Ame^.

Another.
MY soul is weary of her life: I will speak in the bitterness of my heart: I am
sick, my life is brought weak with misery, my bones are bruzed as in a mortar,
and therefore I fly to thee (Lord) as to my physician. Heal me O Lord and I
shall be wholl: save thou me and I shall be safe. And because I trust in thee, I
shall not be put to shame. But who am I O gracious God, that dare speak thus
boldly unto thee? I am a sinner, wholly bred, born, and brought up in sin, a
rotten caryon, a filthy vessel, worms meat. Woe is me. Spare me O Lord. What
victory were it if thou should fight with me and overcome me, which am less
then the stubble before the wind? Pardon Put on the whole armore, etc. Ephe. 6.
Stand fast in the faith, etc. 1. Cor. 16. Chastity is secret and clean.
Uncleanness is like a Goat. me all my sins, and lift me poor soul out of the
mire. Surely Lord (if thou will give me leave) thou should not shun him that
comes running to thee. For thou (O Lord Jesus) art my God, and yet art thou
flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bones, joining thy self to my humain nature
without leaving the right hand of thy father: and being both God and man in one
person, and yet contynuing still that which thou wast before. And to what end
have thou done this so high and inconceivable thing, but that I should come
running boldly unto thee as to my brother: and thou mercifully impart thy
Godhead unto me?

Wherefore up Lord and help me, up I say, and put me not back for ever. Like as
the heart seeks after the fountains of water: so does my thirsty soul long
after thee the living spring, to Wisdom is better then gold. Sardanapalus an
imprudent king. draw water of comfort out of the Saviors wells, that it may
no more be a thirst when it comes to appear before thy face.

Come the joy of my heart, that I may take pleasure of thee. Show thy mercy to
me to glad my heart with all. Let me find thee for whom I long. Let my suit
enter into thy presence O Lord, and let thy hand save me. Lo here the man that
was caught of thieves, wounded, and left half for dead, as he was going toward
Jericho. Thou kind hearted Samaritane take me up. I have sinned to to much in
my life, and done evil in thy sight. From the sole of my foot, to the crown of
my head there is no sound piece in me. Had not thou helped me by thy dying
upon the cross, my soul should have gone to hell as it has deserved. But I,
O merciful Jesus, am a piece of thy so dear ransom. Thou Understanding is a
welspring of life etc. Prou^^b. 16 Be ye not like horse, and Mule: which. etc.
Psalm. 32. Understanding reaches the heaven. Ignorance is as a beast have
shed thy precious blood for me, refuse me not. I am the sheep that is gone
astray, O good shepherd seek me out, and bring me home to thy fold again,
that thou may be iustyfied in thy sayings. For thou have promised me that in
what hour soever a sinner does figh for his sins, he shall be safe. I am
sorry, I acknowledge mine iniquities, and mine offenses are always in my sight.
Of a truth I am not worthy to be called thy son, because I have sinned
against heaven, and against thee. Make me to hear of joy and gladness. Turn
thy face away from my sins, and blot out all mine offenses. For thy singular
mercies sake cast me not away from thy sight. Deal not with me according to my
sins, neither reward me according to mine iniquities: but help me O God of my
welfare, and for the honor of thy name deliver me: deal Industry gathers
reward. Sloth brings sleep. Go to the Pismere, O thou Slouggard. etc.
Proverb. 6. The Slothful man hides his hand in his. etc. Proverb, 26.
favorably with me according to thy good pleasure, that I may dwell in thy
house all the days of my life, and praise thee for ever and ever with them
that are there, Amen.

Another.
MOst gentle master Jesus christ, how often have I transgressed the rule of thy
doctrine? How often have I despised thy commandments (O holy Lord?) When thou
badst me return, I returned not* When thou did threaten, I was not afraid:
When thou did deal mildly and gently with me, I becam the curster: Above
seventy times seven times have I sinned against heaven, and in thy sight: who
shall wash away so great filth? who shall scrape of this daubaken dung?
Whatsoever Peter say, thou Wherefore I put you in remembrance, etc. 2. Tim. 1. I
am counted among them that go down etc. Psalm. 88. Memory is a treasure house
Oblivion is as a grave. must be fayn to wash us thy self, for we be not able
to wash our selves, but in all things that we do, we have need of thy
merciful washing. The traitor Judas was admitted to eat with thee at thy
table, but he was shut out from this healthful washing, and in the end could
not be washed for defacing the honor of his apostleship with cursed covetousness.

Howbeit forasmuch as with thee is the well of life, and the bottomless poole of
all compassions that ever have been: vouchsafe that we, whom thou have washed
in baptism, whom thou have washed with thine own blood, and whom thou washest
still from time to time, by forgeuing our daily sins, may be removed from the
puddles of this world, and from the mire of this present life, to the most
pleasant kingdom of thy glory, Justice judges rightly. Tyranny oppresses
^ight. David executed right and justice, etc 2. King. 2. Thy princes are
rebellious, and companions, etc. Esaias. 1. where there is neither scab, nor
soreness of eyes, neither issue of blood, nor uncleanness of body, nor any need
of more washing, because the substance of thy brightness shall be fully
incorporate into our bodies, according to thy promyses, which thou must needs
fulfill. And therefore go through with the good work which thou have begun,
and bring it to perfection according to thy good pleasure, Amen.

* Another.
BOw down thine ears to my words O Lord, and harken to my cry. Harken to the
voice of my prayer my king and my God, have mercy upon me and hear my prayer.
Upon the multitude of thy compassions will I enter into thy house, and worship
toward thy holy temple. Lord rebuke He girdeth me with strength, etc. Psalm,
18. He said he would burn up, etc. Judith. 6. Strength shevved in the arm.
Holofernes slain by Judith. me not in thy rage, neither chastise me in thine
anger. For thine arowes stick fast in me, and thy hand lies heavy upon me.
There is no health in my flesh at the sight of thy displeasure. There is no
ease in my bones at the sight of my sins. For mine iniquities are gone over
my head, and lie heavy upon me like a sore burden.

Have pity upon me according to thy great mercy, and according to the multitude
of thy compassions wipe away my sins. Wash me more and more from mine
unrighteousness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge mine
unrighteousness, and my sin is always in my sight. Greatly have I sinned
against thee, and done evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified in
thy sayings, and overcome when thou art judged. Behold I was conceived in
wickedness, and my mother bred me Courage is bold in Christ. Cowardice faynteth
in trial. David took a good courage to him. etc. 1. Reg. 2. I desire that you
faint not, etc. Ephe. 3. in sin. Turn thy face away from my sins, and wipe
out all my iniquities. A clean heart create in me O God, and renew a right
spirit in my bowels.

Thrust me not out of thy presence, neither take thou thy holy spirit from me.
Give me the comfort of thy saving health again, and strengthen me with a
principal spirit. For thou, Lord, art good and pitiful, and of much mercy to
them that call upon thee. Thou, O lord God, artful of mercy and compassion,
flow to wrath, but full of pity and truth. Therefore shall the righteous
praise thee, and sinners shall be converted unto thee, Amen.

Another.
I Am gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant O Lord, for I am not
unmindful of thy commandments. Enter not into judgment with thy servant A
wholesome sleep comes of. etc. Eccle. 31. For tables are so full of vomit,
etc. Esaias. 28 Temperance watches, and bridleth. Intemperance overcomes the
heart. O Lord, for no man living shall be justified in thy sight. Who knows
all his sins? Cleanse me from my secret sins, and for other men's sins
bear with thy servant. Call to mind thy compassions (O Lord) and thy mercies
which have been from everlasting. Remember not (Lord) the misdeedes and
offenses of my youth. Be mindful of me according to thy mercy for thy goodness
sake (O Lord) for it is exceeding great. Make thy mercies yet more wonderful,
O thou that sauest the^ which trust in thee. Turn not thy face away from me,
neither shake of thy servant in thine anger. For in death no man is mindful of
thee, and in hell who will praise thee?

What profit is there in my blood, that I should go down into corruption?
Shall dust give thee thanks, or utter forth thy truth? Look back upon me, and
hear me O my God: Inlighten mine eyes that I Measure in wine, comfort.
Excess walks wantonly. Use a little wine for thy stomach. 1. Tim. 5 (...)
that rise up early etc. Esaias. 1. sleep not in death. Withhold not thy
compassions aloof from me, but let thy mercy and truth always preserve me,
Amen.

A comfort after craving of mercy gathered out of the psalms.
IN thee O Lord do I trust, therefore shall I not be confounded for ever:
Deliver me in thy righteousness I beseech thee my God. Cast a chereful
countenance upon thy servant, and save me for thy mercies sake. Lord let me not
be put to shame, for I have called upon thee. For sake me not O Lord my God,
depart not from me. Make have to help me O God of my welfare. Why art thou
heavy O my soul, and why do thou trouble me? Put thy trust in God for yet
will I praise him, because there is help in his countenance.

Pitiful and merciful is the Lord, For it is suffycient for us, etc. 1 Pet.
4. Let us which are of the day be sober (...) Sobriety watches her mouth.
Voluptuousness ryoteth. slow to wrath, and of much compassion. He will not be
always at variance, nor be angry for ever. But look how high the heaven is
above the earth, so highly has he made his mercy to prevail upon them that
fear him. Look how far the East is from the Weast, so far has he set our
sins from us. And as the father pityeth his own children, so does the Lord
pity them that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, and he considers
that we be but dust.

Therefore will I tarry the Lords laysure: my soul wayteth upon the Lord: in his
word is my trust: my soul wayteth for the Lord, from one morning watch to
another. Let Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and
plenteous redemption: and he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities. Yea
the Lord is good unto all Christian souldior harnised. Hell Temptation
overcome. Whose apparailing let not be. etc. 1. Pet. 3. The steps of a strange
woman. etc. Proverb. 5. men, and his mercy is above all his works. Praised be
the Lord, Amen.

A Prayer in commendation of Gods mercy received, made by S. Augustine.
BEhold (O my Creator,) many things have I craved, but not deserved the least.
I confess, alas I confess that these thy benefits are not due unto me, but
rather many and most strange scourges. Yet for that Publicans, sinners, and
thieves (in a moment delivered out of their enemies jaws) are mercifully
received into the shepherds fold, I am so much the more imboldned. For thou, O
thou maker of all things, albeit in all thy works thou art marvelous, yet in
thy works of mercy thou art surpassing marvelous: whereof thou thy self have
spoken by one of thy servants, saying: His mercy is above all If they continue
grounded in faith. 1. Tim. 2 He that endures to the end shall be saved Mat. 10
Perseuer^ce indureth to the end. Reuolting, a Sow in the mire his works. And
that which thou spakest in general of all thy people, we trust thou have
verefied upon every one severally, saying: My mercy will I not take from him.
For thou despisest none, reiectest none, thou terrifiest none but such as most
horibly are afraid of thee. When thou art angry, yet do thou not revenge,
but do bless with thy riches such as have kindled thy wrath, if they shall
cease.

O my God the horn of my salvation, and my defe^der (miserable wretch that I
am) I have provoked thee, I have wrought wickedness in thy sight, I have
kindled thy wrath, and deserved thine indignation. I have sinned, but thou have
spared me. I have grievously offended, and as yet thou do forbear. If I
repent, thou forgeuest me. If I return, thou receiuest me. Yea, if I prolong
to come, most patiently thou Charity feeds the hungry. I was an hungry, and
ye gave me meat. Mat. 25. If thine enemy hunger, feed him. Prouer. 25. do
tarry my coming. Thou call him back that wandereth: thou allurest him that
resists: thou taryest for him that is slow: and imbracest him that returns.

The ignorant is instructed by thee: the mourner comforted: they that fall,
raised again, and delivered from destruction: to him that asks, thou do
give: he that seeks thee, finds thee: and to him that knocks, thou do
open.

O Lord God of my health, behold, what should I object? what should I answer?
no refuge without thee: no corner is hid from thee: thou have showed me the way
to live well: thou have given me the knowledge to walk aright: thou have
threatened hell fire: and promised the glory of thy paradise.

And now O thou father of mercies, and God of all consolation, so strike
^^aritie ge^eth drink to the thirsty. I thir^ted, and you gave me drink, Mat.
25. The Niggard witholdeth drink from the thirsty. ^say ^2. me with the fear
of thee, that (standing in awe) I may escape thy threatening: so restore me to
the joy of thy saving health, that (loving thee) I may enjoy thy promises.

O Lord my strength, and might, my God, my refuge and deliverer, inspire my
mind what to think of thee. Put into my mouth how to call upon thee. Give me
such works as may please thee. With thee a sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice:
also thou do accept an humble and contrite heart.

My God, my helper, enrich me with these blessings, strengthen me with this
armore against mine enemies, perform in me this coldness, to quail the fiery
flames of my sin. Give me O God this stay, for the troubled passions of my
desires. Let me not be of their number (O Lord the strength of my health) who
believe for a time, and Charity, harboreth strangers. I was a stranger, and ye
lodgeed me. Mat. 25. I have not suffered a stranger to lie without. Job. 31.
shrink away in the hour of temptation. Ouershadow me in the day of battle,
my hope in affliction, my help in tribulation, Amen.

* A complaint of a sinner, in that he sins again after repentance, by S.
August.
BEhold O Lord my light, and life, I have craved such things as I want: I have
set down such things as I dread, but my conscience biteth me: the secrets of
my heart accuse me: and that comfort which love does minister, dread expels:
which zeal does move, fear does withdraw: my deeds give cause of dread, but
thy mercy cause of trust. I am animated by thy clemency, but drawn back by
reason of my wickedness: And to confess the truth, the shame of my sins is
always in mine Charity clotheth the naked. I was naked and ye clothed me Mat.
25 If a brother or Sister be naked or destitute. James. 2. eyes, which drives
away all confidence of mind.

With what face shall he entreat for mercy, who is worthy of hatred? and he
that meriteth punishment, with what boldness can he demand praise? He provoke
ye judge, who seeks to have a recompense, but neglects his purgation. He
insolently, and worthy of death, tryumpheth over the king, who (albeit a
traitor) sueth for an undeserved reward. He exasperateth the loving affection
of his father, who before due time, usurps the prerogative of inheritance.

O my father, why do I renew the memory of my deeds? Death is my due, yet
life is my request. I have moved my king to indignation, whose safeguard I call
upon unshamefastly. I have despised the judge, whose aid I crave over boldly.
Proudly have I disdayned Charity visits the sick. I was sick and ye visited
me. Math. 25. Let it not grieve thee to visit the sick. Eccle. 7 to go to him
as to a Father, whom now I presume to take my protector. O how late do I come?
Alas, alas I hasten very slowly: Alas that I run to thee when I am wounded,
who in my safety neglected thy rod: I cared not for to avoid thy punishment,
who am now grievously disquieted because of present death: I have given my self
wound upon wound, for that I feared not to heap sin upon sin: My green
scarres have I galled again, for that my former sins are renewed by reason of
my late iniquity: And what thy heavenly medicine had perfectly cured, my
wickedness has festred: And that skin which did ouerlay, and cover my sore,
breaks out into corruption, because my misdeedes newly committed, frustrate
thy mercy which thou before had granted: For I know the sentence, that in
what hour the just Charity visits prisoners. I was in prison and ye came
Math. 25. Onesiphorus often refreshed me and was not. ^. Tim. 1. shall offend,
all his righteousness shall be forgotten. If the righteousness of the just be
abolished, how much more the repentance of a sinner, running to his accustomed
wickedness? How often have I returned as a dog to his vomit? and as swine to
their wallowing mire?

And seeing that it is impossible for me to reckon up all, I confess that I
have instructed the simple how to sin: the unwilling I have persuaded: I have
enforced them that refused: and I have given consent to them that of the^
selves were willing.

How many snares have I laid for them that walked aright? to them that sought
the way, I have showed, and opened the pit. So that bold I was to sin, and
to forget it I feared not. But thou just judge, writing up my sins (as in a
sachell) have kept my paths, and have numbered al my footsteps: thou Sight. Let
thine eyes behold that is right. Proverb. 4. heldst thy tongue, and did keep
silence: thou have been long suffering. Woe is me, thou speak at length as
one in travail.

A Prayer against despair.
MAny say to my soul there is no help for him in his God. But thou Lord art my
maintayner, my glory, and the holder up of my head. Depart not from me in the
time of my need, but defend thou me till this storm be ouerpast, Amen.

A Prayer upon the minding of Christ's passion.
WHat man is this whom I behold all bloody, with skin all to torn, with knubs
and wales of stripes, hanging down his head for weakness toward his shoulder,
crowned with a Hearing. The ear of ^elosy hears all things. Wisdom. 1.
garland of thorns pricking through his skull to the hard brain, and nailed to
a cross? What so heinous fault could he do to deserve it? What judge could be
so cruel as to put him to it? What hangmen could have so butcherly minds, as
to deal so outragiously with him? Now I bethink my self, I know him: it is
Christ.

Art thou he that excellest all ye children of men in beauty? in whose lips
grace was shed most plentifully, yea, even with Gods own hand? where the^ is
that beauty of thine? Where is that grace of thy lips? I find it not, I see
it not, fleshly eyes conceive not so great a mystery. Open thou the eyes of my
mind. Bring thy divine light nearer unto me, and give me power to look more
wistly upon thee.

I see it is Jesus the son of God, the unspotted lamb, without sin, Taste.
The mouth tastes the meats Job. 34. without fault, without offense, which
took my wickedness upon him, to the intent that I (being set free from sin)
might be brought again into Gods favor: rise again from my fall: return home
again from banishment: and attayn to the end for which I was created. That
which I deserved, he suffered: and that which I could never have attained unto,
he gives.

O my Redeemer, deliverer, and savior draw me to thee, that (being always
mindful of thy death, trusting always in thy goodness, and being always
thankful for thine unspeakable benefits) I may be made partaker of so great
reward, and not be separated from thy body through mine own unthankfulness, so
as thou should have been born in vayn as in respect of me, and in vain have
suffered so many torments, yea and even most bitter death Smelling. Give a
sweet smell as incense etc. Eccle. 39. of thine own accord for my sake, Ame^.

* Another.
MY mind beholds thy body crucified for my soul: O that thou would also
crucify me with thee, so as I might live, or rather not I, but thou my Lord
Christ in me. Who will give me to die with thee, that I might rise again with
thee to life everlasting? Thou dyedst for me, that I might live through thee.
Thy flesh is crucified, O Christ: crucify thou the power of sin that reigns
in me: that being stripped out of the old Adam, I may be transformed into the
second Adam: to lead a new life by shaking down, and dispatching away of all
wickedness, unbelief, and tyranny of Satan.

Let thy yoke become sweet, and thy burden lightsom to me through Touching.
Touch no unclean thing. 2. Cor. 6. thy cross: that I (following thee
willingly and cherefully) may come to the same place where thou art: that is to
wit, to thy most blessed, and immortal father, from whom nothing may ever
separate us hereafter, Amen.

Another.
O Most high and singular obedience, wherthrough thou did submit thy self
to innumerable torments, yea, and even to most bitter, and reproachful death,
because it lyked thy father to have it so. O noontide of fervent love, and
su^shine never drawing toward euentide, show us where thou feedest in the
midst of the day, and where thou shroudest thy sheep from cold. O would to god
we might be transformed into that cross of thine, that thou might dwell in
our hearts by faith, rooted and grounded in charity, so Esaias. 2. and. 19. Math.
24. Mark. 13. Luke. 17 The sun shall be darkened, the moon shall los^ her light,
and the stars shall fall from heaven. as we might with all thy holy ones,
comprehend the length, breadth, height, and depth of thy cross, which exceed all
the strength and wisdom of the world, Amen.

Another.
I See a wonderful kind of love. Thy highness boweth down ye head, to yt
intent we should hope to be heard, and be heard in deed. Thou offerest the
kiss of peace and atonement, yea and that of thine own accord, being the
party grieved and wronged, unto us that have done the wrong.

Thou reachest out thine arms to embrace us: thou stretchest out thy bored
hands to give us al things abounda^tly without holding any thing back: Thy side
is open unto thy heart, to receive us in thither, if we will enter in at the
open door: Thy feet are fast nay led, to ye intent that we may know that Two
men shall be in the field, the one received, the other shall be refused. thou will never depart from us, if we depart not from thee.

O father and Lord of ours, thou see the hardness of our heart, and much
rather y^ dulnes of it. It is not enough for us to be allured and called so
gently, so sweetly, and so lovingly: but thou must be fayn even to draw us,
pull us, hale us, and drag us. Create a new, and obedient heart in us: for this
old one that we have already is stony, it feels no gentleness, it is not
moved with any hope of the great good things that are promised, Amen.

Another.
O Lord Jesus Christ, ye everlasting sweetness and triumph of them that love
thee, exceeding all joy, and all longing, thou sauer and lover of repentant
sinners, which auowest that thy delight is to be among the children of Two
women shall be grinding at the mill the one shall be received the other shall
be refused. men: and therefore in the end of times, becamest man for men's
sakes: remember all the foretast and grief of sorrow, which thou did endure
even from the instant of thy conception in the humain nature, forth on: but
most of all when the time of thy most healthful passion was at hand, according
to the eternal ordinance which God had purposd in his mind before al worlds.
Remember the grief and bitterness which thou feltst in thy heart, even by
thine own record, when thou saydst: my soul is heavy even unto the death. And
at such time as thou gave thy body and blood to thy disciples at thy last
supper, did wash their feet, and comforting them sweetly, toldst them of thy
passion that was at hand.

Remember the sorrow, anguish and grief which thou did suffer throughout thy
whole tender body, before thy The Sea shall swell higher the^ any (...) shall
fall again as low, fishes and monsters of the Sea shall appear with roaring
voice. suffering upon the cross, at such time as after thrice praying, thou
did sweat water like to blood, wast betrayed by one of thine own disciples,
apprehended by thine own chosen people, accused by false witnesses, condemned
wrongfully by three judges in thy chosen city, at the time of the passover, in
the flourishing youth of thy body: and being utterly giltlesse, wast delivered
to the Gentiles, bespitted, stripped out of thy own garment, clothed with another
bodies apparrail, buffeted, blinfolded, bobbed with fistes, tied to a post,
whipped, and crowned with thorns.

O most sweet Jesus, I beseech thee make me mindful of these thy pains and
sufferings which thou abodest for my s^nnes, that I might be discharged and set
free from them, and mine atonement be made with thy father, through thy
chastisement. Make me to abhor The sea and all ^^uddes shall burn, trees and
herbs shall drop blud, Cities. and all buildings shall be ouerturned. my so
detestable cursednesse, which could not be put away but by thy so grievous
punishments. Make me to be heartily sorry for my sinfulness, and to eschew my
offenses, which draw thee to the suffering of so great torments. Make me
mindful of thy great love to me, and to all mankind, and let the infinitenes
thereof, kindle an unfeigned love in me toward thee and my neighbor. Let this
thy unmeasurable goodness breed in me a willing mind, and desire to abide all
things patiently for thy sake, and for the truth of thy gospel: And let it
engender in me a despising of all worldly and earthly things, and an earnest
lo^ging and endeavor to attayn to the heavenly heritage, for the purchasing
whereof unto me, and for the bringing of me thereunto, thou have endured these,
and all other thy most bitter and intolerable torments.

Stones shall ^u^ble together, and make a huge no^e

^irrible earthquakes shall make me^ hide themselves.

Valyes shall be filed and hills brogh* low.



Wherefore I beseech thee grant me true repentance, amendment of life,
perseverance in all goodness, a steadfast faith, and a happy death, through the
merits of thy sufferings, that I may also be made partaker of thy blessed
resurrection, Amen.

Another.
O Lord Jesus, the very freedom of the Angels, and the pleasure of paradise,
remember the terror and grief which thou did endure at such time as all
thine enemies stood about thee like a sort of Lions, vexing thee with
buffetings, spittings, scratchings, and other intolerable dealings: and
martyring thee with reproachful words, grievous stripes, and most grievous
torments. I beseech thee O Lord for thine own sake, and for thine exceeding
great mercies sake, which caused thee to abide these things for our They that
hid the selue^ shall run forth like mad (...), The bones of the dead shall
appear above the Sepul^res. The powers of heaven shall be shaken. redemption,
deliver me from all mine enemies visible and invisible, and grant that I may
find both protection in this life, and endless felicity in the life to come,
under the shadow af thy wings, Amen.

Another.
O Jesus, the framer and creator of the world, whom no measure can comprehend
within bounds, and which hold the earth in thy hand, call to mind thy most
bitter pain which thou did endure when they nailed thy most holy hands to the
cross, and likewise struck through thy most tender feet, making thy wounds
still more and more paynfull, because thou wast not agreeable to their fancy:
and so drawing and retching out thy body to the length and breadth of the
cross, that they loosened all the sinews of thy members.

Every one living shall dye presently.

Heaven, earth, and all elements shall burn.

The dead shall rise.



I beseech thee grant that my continual minding of this thy most holy and
bitter pains upon the cross, may cause me to stand in awe of thee, and also
to love thee, Amen.

Another.
O Jesus the heavenly physician, remember the anguish, pain, and grief, which
thou did suffer by the rending and tearing of all thy members, when thou
wast hoysed up, and nailed to the cross: insomuch as there was not any one of
them that remained whole and sound, so that there was never any pain found like
unto thine: for there was not any place of thee left whole from the sole of the
foot, to the crown of the head, and yet even then (unmindful of all thy
pains) thou prayedst meekly to thy father for thine Emperors and kings, we did
reign:
But now the earth, does us detayne.
The Emperor. Of Monarch and Emperor: I am the conqueror. The King. Ke^sar, or
king: I must th^e bring enemies, saying: Father forgive them, for they wot not
what they do.

I beseech thee by thy loving kindenes and mercy, which caused thee to suffer
these pains for my sake, let thy passion be the full pardon of all my sins,
Amen.

Another.
O Jesus the mirror of eternal brightness, and fountayn of vnconsumeable
goodness, which hanging upon the cross, did thirst for the salvation of man
mankind. I beseech thee kindle in us the desire of all good works, and quench
in us the thirst of all fleshly lusts, and both cool and kill in us the love
of all worldly delighte, Amen.

* Another.
O Princely Jesus, the strength and triumph of our minds, which for The Duke,
Duke though thou be: dance after me* The Marquis. Marquis of state: march with
thy mate Dukes and Marquis we have been:
Naught now but bones are to be seen.
our sakes did suffer such anguish of heart, that the bitterness of thy
death, and the exclamation of the Jews vpbraiding and reuyling thee, made thee
to cry out with a loud voice: O God my God, why have thou forsaken me?

I beseech thee forsake me not in my distress, but be at hand to comfort me,
and deliver me, specially in the time of death, Amen,

Another.
O Jesus the bottomless sea of all mercy, I beseech thee by thy deep wounds:
which pierced through thy flesh, into the marow of thy bones, and into the very
bowels of thee, pull me out of the gulf of my sins, and hide me in the holes
of thy wounds, from the sight of thy Fathers just wrath, until his displeasure
be ouerpast, Amen.

We Earls and Barons were sometime:
Now wrapped in lead, are turned to fl^me.


The Baron. Barons of nobility: swear to me fealty.

The Vicount. Earl or Vicount: give thy account.

O Jesus the mirror of truth, the sta^dard of unity, and the bond of charity,
remember thine innumerable wounds wherewith thou wast torn from top to toe by
the wicked Jews, so that thou wast all on a gore blood: Which torment thou
did suffer in that chaste body of thine for our sakes, O most meek Jesus,
leaving nothing undone on thy behalf, that might be for our benefit. I
beseech thee write all thy wounds in my heart with thy most precious blood,
that in them I may read thy great love toward me.

Let the remembrance of them be laid up continually in the closet of my heart,
that the sight of the pains and greef which thou sufferedst for my sake in thy
passion, may make me to love thee more and more, and never to give over until I
be come unto the treasure of all goodness and joys, which I beseech The
Archbishop Archb. and Metropolite: thee and thy Province I visit. The Bishop.
Bishops grave and old: are sheep of my fold. Bishops we have taught the lore:
That all must enter deaths door.
thee to grant me for thine own sake O most sweet Jesus, Amen.

Another.
O Jesus, the only begotten Son of the heavenly Father, and the brightness and
Image of his substance, remember the hearty commending of thy spirit into thy
Fathers hands, when (having thy body all to torn, and thy heart full of
anguish, and having erst uttered the bowels of thy mercy) thou gave up the
Ghost. I beseech thee for this thy precious deaths sake O king of Saints,
give me strength, to withstand the devil, the world, and the flesh, that being
dead unto the world, I may live to thee only. And whenever this banished,
and wayfaring soul of mine shall depart hence, I beseech thee receive it home
into the hands of thy mercy, Amen.

Both sheep and shepherd all must dye:
We taught the same, the same we try.


The Doctor. Doctor divine at last: thy reading hour is past.

The Preacher. Preach no more about: thy glass is run out.

Another.
O Jesus the true and fruitful vine, remember the abundant flowing out and
sheading of thy blood, which thou did send out of thy body most plentifully,
as out of grapes pressed at the wine press, at such time as thou did tread
the winefat alone, and begannest to us of the cup of water and wine, by the
soldyars thrusting of thee into the side with his spear, so as there remained
not one drop more in thy body: But finally thou wast as a bundle of mirhe
hanged up aloft, thy tender flesh shrunk, the moisture of thy bowels dried up,
and the marow of thy bones wasted away.

I beseech thee O most sweet Jesus, by this most bitter death of thine, and by
the sheading of thy most precious blood, wound my heart with such repentance The
Lord. Come lordings all: dance at my call. The Knight. Go hence sir Knight:
it is almost night. We Lords and Knights of late:
Now lie in low estate.
of my sins, and joy of thy love, as my tears may be my food day and night.
Turn thou me wholly unto thee, that my heart may dwell with thee continually,
and my conversation be acceptable unto thee. And let my life be such, through
thy goodness, as I may praise thee for ever with all thy Saints in the life to
come, Amen.

Another.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living God, who for the salvation of the
world drankest eyzell and Gall upon the cross, like as at the giving up of the
Ghost when thou had finished all things, did commit thy soul into thy
Fathers hands: so do I betake my soul into thy merciful hands, beseeching thee
both to preserve it here from all sin, and in the end to receive it in peace
into the company of thy chosen that are departed, that I may Behold the Squire
as in a glass.
For as thou art, so he was.
The Esquire. Esquire the brave: It boots nor to crave. The Gentleman Lusty,
or sad: Thou must be had. with the^ praise thee everlastingly, which live and
raignest etc. Amen.

* A prayer upon the minding of Christ's resurrection and ascension.
O Lord Jesus, O good Jesus, which did vouchsafe to die for my sinnnes, and
rosest again for my justification: I beseech thee by thy glorious resurrection,
raise me up from ye grave of al my vices and sins, and give me part daily in
the first resurrection, that I may be made partaker of the second resurrection
also.

O most sweet Jesus, which art gone up into heaven with glorious triumph, and
sit at the right hand of thy Father like a most mighty king, draw me up to
thee: make me to run after thee for the sweet sent of thine oyntmentes: The
Judge. Come on judge: With me to trudge. The Justice. Sir Justice arise: come
to my assise. Judge and Justice sentence have:
To ly as captives in the crave.
make me to run without tyring, by thy drawing and pulling of me forward. Draw
the soul that thirsts after thee to the rivers of everlasting suffifanze
which are above: yea verily draw me to thy self which art the living fountayn,
that I may so drink of thee, according to my capacity, as I may live for ever.
My God, my life, thou welspring of life, fill my mind with the streams of thy
pleasures* and make my heart louesick with the sober drunkenness of thy love,
that I may forget the things that are vain and earthly, and have thee only in
my mind continually. Give me thy holy spirit, which is betokened by those
waters, which thou have promised to give to them that are a thirst.

Grant (I beseech thee) that I may long with all my heart, and labor with all
my endeavor, to attain to the place whether we believe that thou did ascend
No law, no plea* no drift:
From death can make a shift.
Sergeant at law. Leave the Laws: and hear my cause. The Attorney. Plead as
thou lust: With me thou must. the fortith day after thy resurrection, so as I
may be conversant in this vale of misery but with my body, and always in
heaven with my heart, so as my mind may be where thou art, even where thou my
incomparable and deer beloved treasure art, that I may sing praises to thy
name, from this time forth for evermore, Amen.

Another.
O Brother of ours, O natural son of that father whose sons thou make
us by adoption, O head of our body, we see that thou art king of heaven, forget
not thou thy earth, wherinto thine inestimable love of us did bring thee down.
Thou from out of that place geuest hope to us thy members, that we may come
thither as thou art exalted already. O guard and defense of us, what can now
hurt us so long as The Mayor. Mayor I thee call to my guild Hall. The Shirife.
Shirif for execution: I have a commission. The Mayors and Shirifes do pas with
speed
And others them in place succeed.
we trust in thee? Most wretched are they that know thee not, and most happy
are they that do ever behold thee. Blessed are they that knew thee here in the
days of the mortality of thy flesh: But more blessed are they that see thee
in heaven, and shall see thee reigning in the chief goods of thy father.

O love and delight of mankind, O only hope of us, embrace us with thy favor,
kiss us, shead thy spirit into our hearts, and make our minds to run
continually upon thee, to our exceeding great comfort. Lift us up, lying flat
upon the ground, open our eyes, and lift them up unto thee. Open thy mouth to
call us, and open our ears to hear thee: that we (setting thee alone before
us for our marck to direct our life by) may square out all our doeings, words,
and thoughts by thee, Amen.

We peace did keep in Princes name:
Now death does charge us with the same.


The Bailife. Come Baylife, no bail: with me shall preuayl.

The Constable. Constable I arrest: to my ward be pressed.

A Prayer to Christ ascending, and reigning in glory.
OH good Christ, our first begotten brother, and tender hearted Joseph. Oh
natural son of that Father, to whom we are made children of adoption through
thee. Oh our head, reigning on high in glory, forget not us thy poor members
here on earth, where into abasing thy self, thou camst down and sufferedst for
us most cruel death. Out of this thy throne of majesty and glory, thou putst
us in assured hope and confidence, that we also shall attayn to that blessed
place whether thou art gone before to take possession for us. Oh our strong
tower of defense and succor, what can hurt us now trusting in thee? Most
unhappy are they which are ignorant of thee. Most happy are they which always
behold thee.

The Physician. By thy water, I do see: thou must away with me.

The Astronomer. Look not so hie: low thou must lie.

No art, or medicine can prevail:
When death does purpose to assail.


Blessed are they which have known thee here in the days of their mortality,
but more blessed are they which see thee in the heavens, and shall see thee
reigning with thy Father in joys incomparable.

Oh Lord, the only joy and comfort of our souls, show us thy loving
countenance: embrace us with the arms of thy mercy: receive us (O good Joseph)
thy younger brethren, with the kiss of comfort: pour into our hearts thy holy
spirit: pluck us up from the earth and earthly things: open our eyes and lift
them up unto thee: open thy mouth and call us unto thee: open our ears, that
we may hear thee, so that whatsoever we do speak or think, it may be
directed unto thee alone, our Redeemer, Mediator, and Advocate, Amen

Death wins the field:
All arms must yeald.


The Herald. Herald in thy shield: bear grass in green field.

Sergeant at Arms. Sergeant see thou stay: Al glory must away.

A Prayer at our going to a Sermon.
MAny and sundry ways O lord, do thou utter and show forth thy light unto
us in this great darcknes of ours: But no way more effectually and plenteously
then by thine Apostles, and by them that have succeeded in their charge. Great
and plentyfull is the harvest, as thou thy self have told us, but few are the
haruestfolkes. For the most part they be all ignorant, and ouercast with the
cloud of darcknes. And as for true preachers that teach as they ought to do,
the number of them is very small.

Therefore we beseech thee (O thou Lord of the harvest) send workfolks into thy
harvest. Send us teachers of thine own teaching, furnished with the spirit of
thine own wisdom and goodness, The Tru^petor. Trumpet give sound: all must to
the ground. The Pursiuant. Go su^mon by message: to come without baggage. All
must needs die, we need not tell:
Our message has been sounded well.
that (being good) they may be willing, and being wise, they may be able to
preach, not themselves and their own devices, but thee only.

And unto this man also grant the treasure of thy wisdom, that he may pour
it out upon us to our salvation.

And in us open thou the windows and doors of our hearts, that we may so
receive into us the wholesome light of thy most holy word, as that ye good
seed which shall fall into us, be neither choked with briars, thorns, and
brambles, nor burnt up with drought, nor deu^ured by the birds of the air: but
battle as in good ground, and bring forth plentiful fruit to the praise and
honor of thy name, Amen.

A Prayer for knowledge, and understanding.
Hear my prayers O Lord Jesus, the everlasting wisdom of the We drum that
domes day now at hand:
Does call all soldi^rs to deaths band.
The Dromme. Drommer call together: al soldyars to my ba^^t The Fife. Fife see
thou play: to lead them the way. Father, which geuest unto childhoode, the
commodity of aptnes to learn, I pray thee add the furtherance of thy grace
to ye forwardnes of nature: that I may the sooner and more perfectly learn
knowledge and the liberal sciences: Howbeit in such wise as they may serve to
thy glory: so as my mind being furthered by the help of them, may attayn to
the fuller knowing of thee, which is the highest point of man's felicity. And
also, that (according to the example of thy most holy childhoode) I may daily
prosper more and more in age, wisdom, and favor, both before God and man, to
the glory of thy name which live and raignest etc. Amen.

A Prayer to be said before receuing of the Communion.
O Father of mercy, and God of al consolation, seeing all creatures The
Captain. Captain march with me: thy Captain I must be. The Souldior. Soldyar
have a courage: to thy long vyage. Death only makes Captains quail*
And hearty soldiers for to fail.
do acknowledge and confess thee to be their governor and Lord, it becomes
us the workmanship of thine own hands, to reverence and magnify thy godly
majesty.

First, for that thou have created us to thine own Image and similitude: but
chiefly because thou have delivered us from that everlasting death and
damnation, into the which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin, from the
bondage whereof, neither man nor angel was able to make us free. But thou (O
Lord) rich in mercy, and infinite in goodness, have provided our redemption to
stand in thine only and well beloved son, whom of very love thou did give to
be made man like unto us in all things, sin excepted: that in his body he
might receive the punishment of our transgression, by his death to make
satisfaction to thy justice, and by Use gain of Gold, and live in cost:
So as by death, life be not lost.
The Merchant. Neither craft nor trade: Can me persuade. The Citizen. Of town
and city: I have no pity. his resurrection, to destroy him that was author of
death, and so to bring again life to the world, from which the whole offspring
of Adam was most justly exiled.

O Lord, we acknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length and
breadth, the deepenes and height, of that thy most excellent love which moved
thee to show mercy where none was deserved: to promise and give life, where
death had gotten victory: to receive us into thy grace, when we could do
nothing but rebel against thy majesty. O Lord, the blind dulnes of our corrupt
nature will not suffer us sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample benefits:
Yet nevertheless at the commandment of Jesus Christ our Lord, we present our
selves to this his table (which he has left to be used in remembrance of his
death until his coming The Printers. Leave setting thy page spent is thine
age. Pressmen go play: printing must stay. We Printers wrote with wisdoms pe^:
She lives for ^ye, we die as men
again) to declare and witness before the world, that by him alone we have
received liberty and life: that by him alone thou do acknowledge us to be
thy children and heirs: that by him alone we have entrance to ye throne of thy
grace: that by him alone we are possessed in our spiritual kingdom, to eat
and drink at his table: with who^ we have our conversation presently in
heaven: and by whom our bodies shall be raised up again from the dust, and
shall be placed with him in that endless joy, which thou (O Father of mercy)
have prepared for thine elect before the foundation of the world was laid.

And these most inestimable benefits we acknowledge and confess to have
received of thy free mercy and grace, by thine only beloved son Jesus
Christ. For the which therefore we thy congregation, moved by thy holy spirit,
Death takes no bribe of wealth:
Death forces not long health.
The Rich man. Thy siiluer, nor gold: from death can thee wthold. The aged
man. By rig^t I must be bold: with thee that live so old. render to thee all
thanks, praise, and glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

Another.
WHat tongue, or what heart can worthily give thee thanks (O Lord Jesus) for
thine unspeakable love toward us? Who, to the intent to redeem mankind
forlorn, did vouchsafe to become man, and to take all the miseries of our
state upon thee: in so much that in the end, thou being a pure and unspotted
lamb, wast contented to be made a sacrifice for us upon the altar of the cross,
and to abide the punishment due for our sins, that thou might reconcile us
to thy Father: yea and both in life and death, thou did spend, give, and
bestow thy self wholly upon us, and for us.

And thy gracious goodness was not so contented, but also (least we might at any
The Artificer. No compass or art: can cause me depart. The Husbandman. Labor
no more: For I have store. No one devise, no art, no toil:
Could make us give to death the foil
time perchance forget so great louingnesse, or at least our trust in thee
might at any time quail) even now reigning in heaven, thou refreshest our
souls from time to time with the food of thy body, and cheerest them up with
the holy cup of thy blood.

Wherefore I beseech thee let thy spirit cleanse my heart, that I may not come
unworthily to that heavenly feast, and to the table whereat even the very
Angels do tremble: But that by thy sheading of thy self into my bowels, I may
grow manly in thee, and become the lustyer by spiritual increasements so as I
may continue to the end in the blessed fellowship of thy mystical body, whom
it is thy will to have all one with thee, in such wise as thou art all one with
the Father, by the knitting of the holy Ghost. To whom be praise, and thanks
for evermore, Amen.

In song* in dance, in pipes, in play:
We lost our life, now wrapped in clay.


(...) Musicion. Strike up thy play: Dance with me away

Another.
I yield thee hearty thanks (O Lord Jesus Christ,) for thine unutterable love in
vouchsafing to redeem man kind by thine own death: and I beseech thee suffer
not thy most holy blood to have been shed in vain for me, that I (growing up
in thee by co^tynual increase of heavenly strength) may be^ome a fit member of
thy mystical body, which is the church, and never swerve from that most holy
covenant which thou made with thy chosen discyples in thy last supper, by
distributing the bread unto them, and by reaching them the cup: and by the^
with all those that are graffed into thy company by faith in Baptism, Amen.

* Another.
The Shepeheard. Leave thy shep: And with me crepe.

The Fool. Of foolish and fond: I break^ the bond.

The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto thee


MY Lord Jesus Christ, who am I that thou should vouchsafe to come under my
roof? Can a sinful man deserve such grace? Certes (Lord) I am not worthy. Am
I better then all my Fathers were? Thou would not show thy self to Moses
one twinkling of an eye: and how happens that thou humblest thy self so much,
as to come down to a man that is a publican and sinner? And thou vouchsafest
not only to eat with him, but also to give thy self to be eaten of him. Hayl O
bred of life which came down from heaven, and which give life to as many as
receive thee worthily. Surely who so receives thee worthily, although his
soul be severed from his body by temporal death, yet shall he not dye for
ever, because that that separation is not a death, but a passing from death to
life: by reason whereof, he that eats thee worthily, begins to live with
thee for ever, when Time to live, and time to die:
God gran^t us live eternally
The ^eggar. Begging is done: For I am come. The Roge. Think I am best: For I
bring rest. he dies in this world. Thou art the bread of the angels, the very
sight of thee refreshes and gloryfieth the Angels. Thou art food for the
soul, and not for the body. Thou nourishest the mind, and not the maw.

He that eats thee, is turned into thee, that by partaking of thee, he may
become God, and yet art thou not changed into his substance as other bodily
meats be. But woe be to them that receive thee unworthily (O most holy food)
by the eating whereof aright, a man becomes God, is set free from all evil,
is filled with all goodness, and is undoubtedly made immortal. O sacred
pittance of our pilgrimage, whereby we pass out of this naughty world, to the
company of heaven.

Go to therefore thou believing soul, be merry and make good cheer, for thou
shall not dye. Feed upon these daintyes and stick not. Take thy fill of this
feast, Of Youth. Young and old: Come to my fold. Of Infancy. Fear not me:
though I grisly be. Time to live, and time to die:
God gran^t us live eternally
wherein the body of thy Savior is set before thee, to feed on. Man fell from
God by eating the food of the forbidden tree: But by this food he is relieved
again to endless glory.

* A Thankesgeuing after the receiving of the holy Communyon.
MOst merciful Father, we render unto thee al praise, thanks, honor, and
glory, for that it has plesed thee of thy great mercies, to grant us
miserable sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the
fellowship and company of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou have
delivered to death for us, and have given him unto us as a necessary food and
nourishment unto everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also (O We that were
of highest degree:
Lie dead here now, as ye do see.
The Empress. Empress though thou be Thou must away with me. The Queen,
Queen also thou do see: As I am, so shall thou be. heavenly father) to
grant us this request, that thou never suffer us to become so unkind, as to
forget so worthy benefits, but rather imprint and faste^ them sure in our
hearts, that we may grow and increase daily more and more in true faith, which
continually is exercised in all manner of good works: and so much the rather
(O Lord) confirm us in these perilous days and rages of Satan, that we may
constantly stand and continue in the confession of the same, to the
advancement of thy glory, which art God over all things, blessed for ever, So
be it.

A prayer for Gods grace.
It is sorrowful to be said, how great a wound our nature which is frail and
weak of it self, has received by sin, and how much ability and strength The
princes* Princes of hye estate: co^te^t you I am your mate The Duchess, Duches
and princes: Death daily conuinces. We that sat in the highest seat:
Are laid here now for worms meat.
it has forgone. It is not able to lift up it self, nor to stand, nor to go,
without thy help and aid. Whatsoever y^ mind of man thinks or deuiseth, it is
utterly ineffectual, and to no purpose if it be not grounded upon thy favor.
Nothing is strong except it be vphild by thy goodness, all things without that
do fall by and by to the ground. That is it which cleanses and scoureth us
from our filthiness, that is it y^ strengthens our weakness, that is it that
makes us cunning workmen in all virtues. Grant we beseech thee O Lord, that
this grace of thine may always accompany us, then the which there can no
greater gift be devised, neither is there any thing which thou bestowest more
readily and willingly, and therefore also more often. Let the same so work in
us, as we acknowledging how much need we have thereof, may both apply Beauty,
honor, and riches avail no whit:
For death when he comes, spoyleth it.
The Countess. Countess, or what thou art: I strike thee with my dart. The
Vicountesse. Vicountes I do not spare: For of them I ^aue no care. our selves
continually to crave it, and earnestly endeuer by well doing to keep it. Amen.

* A Prayer for faith.
EAsily, yea to easily O Lord do we believe man which is evil, untrue and
ignorant: but hardly* and slowly do we believe thee which art God, exceeding
good, most sothfast, and most wise. We believe men in the things that can do us
no good, but we believe not thee in the care of our salvation. Man is able to do
nothing, but thou art able to do al things. We can find in our hearts to follow
our se^^es which are so often deceived and yet we doubt of thee O God which can
neither deceive, nor be deceived. O how great is our unthankfulness and
ignorance. Alas how is man blinded of his own sin? But thou O Christ through
the pitifulnes and compassion The Baronnesse* Baronnesse brave and hie: Prepare
thy self to dye. The Lady. Ladies gay and fair: To you I do repair. No
state, no might, young nor old:
To resist death (...) behold.
of thy Father, art appointed as a guide in this our blindness, and as a
schoolmaster to our rudenes: yet notwithstanding, the greuousest inconvenience
in this blindness and ignorance is, that trembling and staggaring still from
time to time, either we conceive not ye excellent and most wholesome precepts of
our good scholemaister, or else we stand wavering and doubting of the truth of
the^. Blind wretch, how will thou escape the vengeance that is prepared for
thee: if thou shrink away from him, seeing thou neither know the way thy
self, nor beleeuest him that shows it thee?

O Christ which art the pure and everlasting truth, vouchsafe to shead thy
self so into our hearts, that as thou and all thy sayings are most true, so we
may take them for more certain then the things which we see with our eyes,
Death by his might does convince:
Empress, Queen Duches, and Prince.
The ^u^ges wife. Madame or justice wife: I am come to end thy life. ^he
Lawye^^ wife Beware thy husbands gayn Reward thee not with pain. or handle with
our hands, which are but senses of the body, that may and do deceive us,
notwithstanding that the foolish and beastly flesh do trust so much to them.
Assuage and settle these motions of the flesh, which drive us from time to
time, to the altering of ye thing that ought to be always most firm, and fast
settled in our minds.

Faith is a gift of thy inlightening (O Christ,) therefore shead it mercifully
and bou^tifully, in such wise into our hearts, as these faulty eyes of ours may
be enforced to behold it, even loath, and unwilling though they be. Lord, I
believe, but yet help thou mine unbelief. Lord increase our faith, Amen.

A Prayer for trust in God,
THe ground of man's decay was his trusting of himself: and the beginning of
his rising again, was The Gentlewoma^ Gentles brave and fine: Dance after my
line. Aldermans wife. Thou art clothed in skarlet: And yet art but my varlet.
Behold us here that sometime were gay:
How now we lie dead, all wrapped in clay.
his distrusting of him self, and his trusting to God.

O most excellent and singular wise guide, which leadest all them the rightest
and nearest way to everlasting blessedness, which trust thee truly and
unfeignedly. Grant that as we be blind, and weak in very deed, so we may take
our selves so to be, that we take not up on us to shift for our selves: but let
our looking be to see thee alone: and let our inabling of our selves be no
further, but to desire to follow thee going before us: to come to thee when thou
call us: to obey thee as thou guydest us: and to betake our selves wholly
unto thee, that thou who only know what way to go, may lead us to the
attaynement of our desires that way which we would never have set foot into of
our own accord, Amen.

Riches nor treasure avail nothing:
For death to earth all does bring.


Merchantes wife. Brave and never so nice: dance after my device

Citizens wife. Trick and trim, put of your hood: I am come to do you good.

* A Prayer to be said for the fear of God.
Grant Lord, that being taught by thy commau^dements, I may serve thee with
fear, and rejoice before thee with trembling, in all things standing in awe of
thee, least thou happen to be angry, and I perish out of the right way. For the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

A Prayer for love toward Christ.
THe ground of all happiness, is to love thee which art most excelle^tly good:
and the perfection of happiness, is to be knit unto thee which art most
excellently good, as we may become all one with thee, for that is the very end
of love. Therefore do we begin our blessedness here by loving thee, and Rich
man's wife. Though thou have silver and gold: Yet art thou within my ^olde.
Young woman, Fine and pretty in the wast: Come with me in have. As death in this
world has the victory:
So by death we hope to enter Gods glory.
we finish it in heaven by being knit unto thee. O most loving Christ, would
God we were so far in love with thee, that being swallowed up, and altogether
consumed in thee, we were one with thee, even as thou and thy Father art one, so
as we were no more our selves, but thou: nor any more men, but after a sort
Gods, as we being oll one thing with God, which is the highest, and most
perfect blessedness.

For God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him.
Now therefore I am alive, or rather not I, But Christ in me. To him therefore be
all thanks and praise for ever, Amen.

A Prayer to be said for cleanes of heart.
MOst merciful Jesus Christ, who being made in the likeness of sinful flesh,
have born our sins in thy Time to live, and time to die:
God gran^t us live eternally
The Maid. Fresh, galant, and gay: All must with me away. The Damsel. Fine,
proper and neat: And all is but worms meat. body, to wipe away all our
naughtines by thy death, and to make us clean, and new creatures acceptable
unto God. Scour us from the spots which we by our sins do daily cast upon
the whitenes that we have gotten by thee: And when thou have so cleansed us,
let thy grace maintayn us still in the same cleanes, that we may be worthy to
be called thine, both in profession and name. Lord cleanse me from my secret
sins and bear with thy servant in his other sins, Amen.

Another.
A Clean heart create in me O god, and renew a right spirit within my bowels.
Let my heart be made undefiled through thy inrighteousing, that I may not be put
to shame, Amen.

Farmers wife. Cease thy labor and pain: For I am thy riches and gain^

Husbandma^s wife. Toil no more I say: For hence I must away.

Time to live, and time to die:
God gran^t us live eternally


* A Prayer for the obtaining of a sound mind.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the light of al them that put their trust in thee, and the
only Physician of our souls, the light of mind which thou had put into us by
creation, is dimmed, defaced, and in manner extinguished by the fall of our
first Father Adam: and a horrible maime and disorder is fallen upon all the
powers and senses of our souls.

Our wit, reason, judgment, discretion, understanding and will are utterly
corrupted, so as of our selves we can not see nor discern any thing aright.

And when (through thine inlightening of us) we attayn to the sight of any
truth, yet does the stubbornes of our will rebel still against it, in so much
that we may say with thy prophet, that from the crown of our head to the sole
The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto thee
Countreywoman* Away with butter and cheese: For thy life thou must leese. The
Nurse. Give suck no more: For I am at the door. of our foot, there is not one
sound part in us. Wherefore make have to help us O Lord, least we fall into a
wilful lewd mind, and be cast into utter darcknes.

Create thou a pure heart in us, and renew a right spirit in us. Bind thou up
the sores of our souls, wash them with the wine of thy precious blood, and
annoint them with the oil of thy holiness. Repair that heavenly Image which is
defaced in us through sin, and adorn it again with thine own righteousness.
That we (being set in perfect state by thy means) may sing acceptable praises
euerlastinglye to thee in thy holy church, Amen.

A Prayer to be said for newness of life.
Unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my heart: In thee my God do I trust, let me
not be put to shame.

Shepeheardes wife. Be thou young or old: Thou must enter into my fold

Aged woman. Be the day never so long: At last comes Euensong.

From earth we came, to earth we shall:
For sin by death, has made us thrall.


Show me thy ways, and teach me thy paths, lead me forth in thy righteousness,
and guide me: for thou art my savior, in thee is my trust all the day long.

Teach me thy way O Lord, and guide me in the right path for fear of mine
enemies.

A clean heart create in me O God: and a right Spirit renew within my bowels.

Thrust me not out of thy sight O Lord: neither take thy spirit from me.

Give me again the comfort of thy help: and strengthen me with a principal
Spirit.

Teach me thy way O Lord: and I will walk in thy truth.

Knit my heart unto thee that it may fear thy name: give thy servant strength,
and save the son of thy handmayd.

Grant me thy servant life: and I The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto thee
The Creeple. Be thou poor or disesed: Thou must with me be pleased. The poor
woman. Be thou never so poor: Thou must enter at my ^ore. will keep all thy
sayings.

Make me to understand the ways of thy commandments: and I will talk of thy
wonders.

Remove from me the way of lying: and give me thy law.

Set thy law (O Lord) and the way of thy statutes before me: that I may ever
keep them.

Give me understanding that I may observe thy law, and keep it continually.

Lead me forth in the paths of thy commandments: for in them is my delight.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not unto covetousness.

Let not the foot of pride come near me: nor the hand of sin touch me.

Turn away mine eyes from vanity: and quicken me in thy way.

Strengthen thy servant in thy word: that I may fear thee.

The Infant. Lo, this little heart I strike with my dart.

The Fool. Of foolish and fond: I break the bond.

No state, no might, young nor old:
To resist death da^^ behold.


Behold I have lusted for thy commandments: quicken me in thy righteousness.

Let thy mercy come upon me (O Lord) let thy saving health light upon me
according to thy word.

A Prayer for true mortification.
HE that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own will, and to be
obedient to the will of God, the same had need to accustom himself to deny
his desires in matters of less weight, and to exercise ye mortification of his
own will in trifles. For if that our affections by this daily custom be not
(as it were) half slain, surely, surely, when the plunge shall come, we shall
find the more to do. If we cannot watch with Christ one hour, as he says to
Peter, we undoubtedly can much less go to death with him. Wherefore, that
Emperors and kings, we did reign:
But now the earth, does us detayne.
The Emperor. Of Monarch and Emperor: I am the conqueror. The King. Keisar, or
king: I must thee bring. in great temptations we may be ready to say with
Christ: Not my will but thine be done, (in that this commonly comes not to
pass, but where the roots of our lusts, by thy grace dear father are almost
rotten and rooted out by a daily denial of that they desire) I humbly beseech
thee for Christ's sake to help me herein. First pardon me my cherishing and as
it were, watering of mine affections, obeying them in their devises and
superfluous desirs: wherthrough in that they have taken deep root, and are to
lively in me, I secondly do beseech thee to pull them up by the roots out of
my heart, and so henceforth to order me, that I may continually accustom my
self to weaken the principal root, that they by roots and branches may lose
all their power.

Grant me (I beseech thee) that thy grace may daily mortify my concupiscence
The Duke. Duke though thou be: dance after me. The Marquis. Marquis of state:
march with thy mate Dukes and Marquis we have been:
Naught now but bones are to be seen.
of pleasure in things, that is, of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of
men, meats, drinks, apparel, ease, yea and life it self, that the horror and
impacie^cy of more grievous things, may be weakened, and I made more pacie^t in
adversity. Whereunto I further desire and pray thy goodness (dear father) that
thou will add this: namely, that I may for ever, become obedient and and ready
to do thy good will in all things, heartily and willingly to serve thee and do
whatsoever may please thee. For doubtless, although we accustom our selves in
the pleasant things of this life, to a mortification and denial of our
selves, yet we shall find enough to do when more bitter and weighty crosses
come.

For if thy son our savior (ever wont to obey thy good will) prayed so
heartily and often: Not my will, but thy will be We Earls and Barons were
sometime:
Now wrapped in lead, are turned to slime.
The Baron. Barons of nobility: swear to me fealty. The Vicount. Earl or
Vicount: give thy account. done, whereby he declares himself to be very man:
how can it be but we, whose nature is corrupt not only in nativity, but in the
rest of our whole life also, shall find both our hands full in great and
grievous temptations, wholly to resine our selves unto thee.

Grant therefore dear Father, for thy Christ's sake, I most heartily beseech
thee, thy grace and holy spirit, to be effectual in me, that daily I may
accustom my self to deny my will in more easy and pleasant things of this
life, that when need shall be, I may come unto thee with a resined will,
always steadfastly expecting thy mercy, and in the mean season, continually
obaying thee with readiness and willingness, doing whatsoever may most plese
thee, through Christ our Lord, which lives and reigns with thee and the holy
Ghost, world without end, Amen.

The Archbishop. Archb. and Metropolite: thee and thy Province I visit.

The Bishop. Bishops grave and old: are sheep of my fold.

Bishops we have taught the lord:
That all must enter deaths door.


A prayer for continuance in seking after Christ. by S. Augustine.
O How great is the multitude of thy mercies, which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee. Thou have laid them up but as to keep them: not to take the^
quite away, but to multiply the same. Such things as are hidden, commonly are
searched diligently, and once found are loved ardently. Our duetye toward thee
is not diminished, but increases more and more. Thy love is not transitory but
perpetual. They that love thee wax not cold, but hoate in their love. Thy
love is not dissolute. The memory of thee is sweeter then honey, to think of
thee is more delectable then pleasant meat. To speak of thee is all fulness, to
know thee is perfect consolation, to cleave unto thee is Both sheep and
shepherd all must dye: We taught the same, the same we try. The Doctor. Doctor
divine at last: thy reading hour is past. The Preacher. Preach no more about:
thy glass is run out. eternal life, to be separate from thee is everlasting
death. Thou art a living fountain to the^ that know thee, a perpetual food to
them that hunger after thee, thou art glory to them that seek thee, joy to
the^ that find thee. The smell of thee raises the dead, thy care heleth the
sick, thy light disperseth all mist, thy loving visitation expels all
sorrow. No mourning is with thee, all grief is far from thee, there is no
heaviness with thee, no poverty where as thou art, there is no necessity, no
difficulty in obtaining that good is. Darkness, terror, or hell fire, is never
there so much asnamed. No blindness of night, outrage of tumults, no hunger or
thirst, cold, heat or penury abides with thee. No sickness of body, no
corruption of mind, no emulation or contention, all ambition departs from
thee. There is no pensiuenes for the end, or fear of The Lord. Come lordings
all: dance at my call. The Knight. Go hence sir knight: it is almost night. We
Lords and Knights of late:
Now lie in low estate.
death, no travail of old age, no languishing disease. The motions or
affections of the air and diversity of times is not there known, for such is
the multitude of the mercyes which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
but do accomplish them in such as hope in thee O what a blessed laying up is
that which brings perfection: for this laying up is not losing, but a
preservation which tends to perfection.

O glorious king how true are thy judgments justified in them selves, truly
to be desired above gold and precious stone, sweeter then the honey and the honey
comb. O my life, my God, I beseech thee in the name of our Redeemer thy only
begotten son, most mercifully grant that I may observe and keep the same.
For I know that in keeping the^ there is great reward. Oh my God, my glory,
thou layest up thy treasure, Behold the Squire as in a glass:
For as thou art, so he was.
The Esquire. Esquire the brave: It boots not to crave. The Gentleman Lusty,
or sad: Thou must be had. to make me more desirous of it: thou hidest the
precious stone, to increase the love of it: thou do prolong to give it, that
I might seek it: thou make as if thou heardst not my request, that I might
persevere in requesting: to conclude, thou do promise thy saving health to
them that intend to seek it: and performest it in them that continue in
seeking, which is manifest by Mary which sought thy son Christ in ye
sepulcher, or rather sought thee in Christ, she being as yet in darcknes. Thou
did inlighten her that she might seek thee, and in seeking, thou did expel
darcknes, that she might be constant in seeking.

She continued in hope, and hoped in contynuance. And for that she continued in
hope, she inioyed the benefit of seeing thee. O happy and exceeding sight, O
perfect joy, and fulfilled, O The Judge* Come on judge: With me to trudge. The
Justice. Sir Justice arise: come to my assise. Judge and Justice sentence have:
To ly as captives in the grave.
beutifull face and cherefull countenance, O blessed hope, and fortunate
perseverance: except she had hoped she had not continued, and except she had
continued, she had not received the benefit of her hope.

In such sort therefore (O my God) thou art laid up for them that fear thee,
as thou may be found of them that hope in thee. So thou do prolong to be
found of them that seek thee, the sooner to approach to them that persevere in
seeking.

They that defer to come unto thee shall perish, but they that wayt upon thee
shall not be confounded. They that fear thee hope in thee: because thou art
their helper and defender, for by fear we have access to thy love. Thou art
to be feared as a Lord, and loved as a Father. Thy holy fear endures, because
it keeps them holy who^ it does No law, no plea, no drift:
From death can make a shift.
Sergeant at law. Leave the Laws: and hear my cause. The Attor^ey. Plead as
thou lust: With me thou must. possess. Nothing is wanting to them that fear
thee, because thine eyes are over them, and thy ears are ready pressed to their
prayers.

O my mercy and my refuge, my deliverer and defender, so give me fear, as also
I may love: so put me in fear, as thou increase also the desire of thee: and
so make me one of those that fear and keep thy commandments, that by the
obedience of thy fear, I may enjoy the fear of thy love, Amen.

A Prayer for spiritual joy.
LOrd Jesus, the redeemer and comforter of mankind, which have by thy holy
Spirit prepared far greater pleasures then the world knows of, for such as
refuse the false pleasures of this world for thy sake, tempering the troubles
of this life, with inward and The Mayor. Mayor I thee call* to my guild Hall.
The Shirife. Shirif for execution: I have a commission. Mayors and Shirifes do
pass with speed
And others them in place succeed.
secret solaces, and after a sort renewing from time to time a certain forecast
of the blessedness to come, to the intent that being cheered and refreshed, we
should come running to thee with gladder hearts.

I beseech thee grant that the anointing of thy holy spirit may often drive
from me all irksomnes of adversities, and cheer up my mind with healthful
gladness, even as he anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows,
in respect of thy humayn nature when thou wast here upon earth, which live
and raignest with the father and the same holy Spirit for ever, and ever, Amen.

A Prayer to be said in the time of sickness.
MOst merciful Redeemer, thou art always merciful, who art We peace did keep
in Princes name:
Now death does charge us with the same.
The Ba^^ife. Come Baylife, no bail: with me shall preuayl. The Constable.
Constable I arrest: to my ward be pressed. always the savior, whether thou
do send health or sickness, wealth or adversity, joy or sorrow. For it is of
great mercy when by outward afflictions, as it were by bitter, but yet wholesome
medicines, thou do heal the inward diseases of the soul: and by temporary
troubles which do last but for a short time, do prepare us to eternal joys
which endure for ever.

And thy self (O gracious savior) passing into thy glory through the gretest
afflictions of this world have trodden out to us by thy steps, yt way to true
and perfect felicity in the which no humble and true servant ought either to
disdain or to shrink to follow after his Lord and master so going before him.

But for so much as without thee we can do nothing that good is, I beseech
thee to indue me with thy heavenly grace, that I may take up willingly and The
Physician. By thy water, I do see: thou must away with me. The Astronomer.
Look not so hie: low thou must lie. No art or medecin can prevail:
When death does purpose to assail.
obediently this cross which thou have appointed unto me, and follow after
thee: and that I may drink of, as it were this medicinable cup, though bitter
unto the flesh, which thou, the heavenly physician do offer unto me,
patiently without grudging or murmuring against thee: And that I may with thy
faithful servant Job, and with unfeigned lips and heart, say: The Lord has
given, the Lord has taken away, as it has pleased the Lord, so is it come to
pass, blessed be the name of the Lord.

For if I have received gladly youth, health, riches, honor, and joy at thy
hands (O Lord:) why should I refuse patiently to take age, sickness, adversity
and sorrow at thy hands also? These things be in deed very grievous unto frail
nature and flesh: but thou my Lord: though most perfectly innocent, Death wines
the field
all arms must yeald,
The Herau^d. Herald in thy shield: bear grass in green field. Sergeant at
Arms. Zergeant see thou stay: al glory must away. infinitely have suffered
more grievous things for me, who have so often deserved hell. But yet thou know
the frailty of our humane condition and nature: wherefore I beseech thee, as thou
pourest sharp wine into our wounds to bite away the corruption of our sins,
so after the example of the merciful Samaritane, set forth in thy holy
gospel, to resemble thy self, and unto the sharp wine of thy correction, the
supplying oil of thy merciful comfort, whereby I may be able to suffer things
which otherwise are intolerable unto me.

And if it be thy pleasure to increase sorrow upon me, increase also thy grace
and gift of patience in me, and turn these worldly and bodily afflictions to
the profit of my soul, by my acknowledging of thy justice in punishyng me
worthily: and thy mercy in correcting me graciously, even like as a Father The
Tru^petor. Trumpet give sound: all mu^^ to the ground. The ^ursiuant. Go
su^mon by message: to come without ^ag^age. All must needs di^, we need not
tell:
Our message has bin sounded well.
has pity upon his children when he beats them, and by my submitting of my
own will unto thy holy will, and patiently taking of this thy proouing and
trying of me whether I love thee or no, may offer that sacrifice of obedience
which is acceptable unto thee.

And when thy Fatherly pity shall be contented with thy meek chastising of
me, then I beseech thee send calm after this tempest: quietness after this
trouble: and joy after this sorrow: that I may render thanks unto thee for
double causes, both that thou have first corrected and amended me an
unprofitable servant, and afterward have taken away the bitterness of affliction
with the softnes of thy comfort. In the one, having regard of necessity, in
the other, not forgetting my infirmity, and in both, as in all things, always
remembering thy mercy, unto the which We drum that domes day now at hand:
Does call all soldyars to deaths band.
The Dromme. Drommer call together: al soldyars to my ba^n^r The Fif^* Fife see
thou play: to lead them the way. I do commend and betake my self both body
and soul, now and for ever. Unto thee, with the father and the holy Ghost, one
God of most excellent majesty, be all praise, honor, and thanksgeuing, for ever
and ever, Amen.

Another.
LOrd Jesus the only health of the^ that live, and the only life of them that
dye: I yeald and give over my self wholly to thy most holy will, whither it
please thee that this silly soul shall abide any longer in the lodge of my
body to serve the, or that thou will have it to depart out of this world. For
inasmuch as I am sure that the thing which is committed to thy mercy cannot
perish, I will willingly put of this frail and wretched flesh of mine, verily
in hope of the resurrection, The Captain. Captain march with me: thy Captain
I must be. The Souldior. Soldyar have a courage: to thy ^ong vyage. Death only
makes Captains quail:
And hearty soldiers for to fail.
which shall render it to me in far better plight. I beseech thee strengthen
my soul with thy grace against all temptations, and against all Satan's
assaults, guard me with the shield of thy mercy, whereby thou made all thy
martires invincible in old time, against all horrible torments and cruel kinds
of death. I see there is no defense in my self: all my trust is in thy
unspeakable goodness. I have no desert nor good works at all to allege before
thee: But as for evil works, I have alas to many of them. Nevertheless my hope
is that I shall be reckned in the number of the righteous by means of thy
righteteousnes.

For my sake wast thou borne, for my sake did thou thirst, for my sake wast
thou hu^gry, for my sake did thou teach, for my sake did thou Use gayn
of gold, and live in cost:
So as by death life be not lost.
The Merchant Neither craft nor trade: Can ^e persuade. The Citizen. Of town
and city: I have no pity. pray, for my sake did thou fast, for my sake
did thou perform the great number of good works in this life, for my sake
did thou suffer so many bitter panges, and for my sake did thou give over
thy precious life to the death.

Let the things profit me which thou have given me of thine own free will,
thou (I say) which have given thy self wholly for me. Let thy blood wash away
the spots of my sins. Let thy righteousness hide mine unrighteousness. Let thy
deseruings commend me to the soueraign Judge. As my greef and disease increase,
so increase thou thy grace. Let not my faith waver. Let not my hope staggar.
Let not my charity wax cold. Let not my humain infirmity be cast down with
the dread of death. But even when death shall have cloased The Printers. Leave
setting thy page: spent is thine age. Pressmen go play: printing must stay. We
Printers wrote with wisdoms p^n:
She lives for aye, we die as men.
the eyes of my body, let the eyes of my mind look still upon thee with out
wavering aside. And when it shall have bereft me of the use of my tung let my
heart cry steadfastly still unto thee, Into thy hands I commit my spirit O Lord,
to whom be honor and praise world without end, Amen.

A Prayer to be said in the Plague time.
IT is no maruail O most righteous Father, that the elements of this world are
fearce against us, sometime with earthquakes, sometime with tempests and
lightnings, sometime with ouerflowing of seas and Rivers, sometime with
pestilent concourses of the heavenly lights, and sometime with corruption of
the infected air, for we do commonly abuse thy gifts.

Death takes no bribe of wealth:
Death forces not long health.


The Rich man. Thy silver, nor gold: from death can thee wthold.

The aged man. By right I must be bold: with thee that live so old.

We acknowledge that even in this case also the creatures serve and obey their
Creator, whose commandments we neglect so oftentimes. Also we acknowledge thy
fatherly nurturing of us, whereby thou call us back from the trust of this
world with gentle correction, and drawest us to the desire of the everlasting
life.

We humbly beseech thee to remember thy mercy even in thy wrath, and favorably
to withdraw the afflictions which thou have laid upon us in thy displeasure.
The infection of the plague shall do us no great harm, if we with draw our
selves from the infection of sin. But both those things are of thy gift (O
Father of mercy) namely, as well to have our minds free from the poison of
sin, as to have our bodies safe from the infection of the plague. Such as
have fastened the Anchor of The Artificer. No compass or art: can cause me
depart. The Husbandman. Labor no more: For I have store. No one devise no ar^,
no toil:
Could make us give to death the foil
their hope in this life, are wont in their perils to flee for remedy to such
shifts as these: namely some to certain saints as to S. Rooke, or S. Anthony.
And some to the superstitious arts of witchcraft. But we, who are fully
persuaded that no man can escape thy hand, believe there is no such safety as
to resort to thy self, and to fly from thy justice to thy mercy, as to the
surest and safest sanctuary that can be, forasmuch as thou never forsakest them
that put their trust in thy goodness: under whose protection even they that die
are safe.

A Prayer for health both of body and mind.
Doubtless the only true health is to be found in that part which is cheifest in
us, and lykest unto thee (O Lord) that is to say, to have the soul allied In
song, in dance, in pipes, in play:
We lost our life, now wrapped in ^la^.
The Mus^^i^n. Strike up thy play: Dance with me away and knit unto thee as
near as is possible, by loving and worshipping of thee which art our only
welfare.

But forasmuch as the same is annexed to the body, it feels the affections
thereof, and is moved by them. As for salues and medicines they do good when
thou listest: but they be superfluous and to no purpose, if thou list not to
work by them. Thou (I say) which art the founder of them, and of al natural
things.

Thine only will is the cause of life and death, and of health and sickness,
which thou layest upon us most commonly to chastise and bridle this body of
ours, which rusheth forth into unruly losenes in all things, like an unwieldy
and unbridled beast, ouerwhelming us with forgetfulness of the true health when
it grows to strong and ouerlusty. But thou (O Father) grant us so The
Shepeheard. Leave thy shep^ And with me crepe. The Fool. Of foolish and fond:
I break the bond. The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto me.
to be hole in body, as our minds may also be hole and sound. Or if it be not
for our benefit to have health of body, at least wise give us a healthy mind,
and lend us power and strength to bear our sickness, that the grief and
weakness of the body, appaire not the soul, Amen.

A Prayer in affliction, or adversity.
MOst merciful Redeemer which art always full of compassion, thou art always
our preserver, whether thou send us adversity or prosperity. For great is thy
mercy, and compassion, in that thou healest the inward man by outward
afflictions as it were by bitter medicines, and preparest us to everlasting
joys by temporal troubles. And for as much as thou thy self have traced us
out this true way to felicity Time to live, and time to die:
God grant us live eternally
The Beg^ar. Begging is done: For I am come. The Roge. Think I am best: For I
bring rest. by thine own footesteps: grant that I may patiently and obediently
drink this cup, which thou reachest unto me.

Grievous in deed are these things unto my nature, but yet have thou suffered
greeuouser things for me: and I have deserved far greeuouser things, for I have
deserved hell fire. Notwithstanding thou know the frailety of man's state, and
therefore like the merciful Samaritane, thou pourest wine into our wounds,
which makes our vices to smart, but yet thou alayest it with the oil of thy
comfort, to the end we should endure the things which also would be
intolerable. If thou think meet to increase our greefes, increase thou also
the gift of patience, and grant that these afflictions may turn me to the
amendment of my misdeedes. Or if thy Fatherly loving kindness think Youth.
Young and old: Come to my fold. Of Infancy. Fear not me: though I grisly be.
Time to live, ^ time to die:
God grant us live eternally.
this thy chastising of me to be sufficient, let this storm pass into calm
wether, that I may thank thee in both respects, as well for that thou have
amended thine unprofitable servant by gentleness, as also for that thou have put
away the bitterness of the affliction by the sweetness of thy comfort: having in
the one case, respect of necessity, and in the other, being mindful of our
infirmities. To thee therefore be praise and thanks for ever, Amen.

A Prayer upon the minding of death.
WHat do we daily all our life long but heap sin upon sin? and lode
wickedness upon wickedness? so as every day becomes worse then other, by
increasing the number of our offenses, and the wrath that is due for We that
were of highest degree:
Lie dead here now, as ye do see.
The Empress. Empress ^hogh thou be Thou must away with me. The Queen,
Queen also thou do see: As I am, so shall thou be. them. But be we once
escaped out of ye prison of this body, and received into thy company O Lord
God, we shall be quite out of doubt of the immortality of our Salvation. Sickness,
penury, and pain shall not come at us: no nor yet the vices of the mind, for
all those things are far of from heaven.

O Father, give us the light of faith that we may not stumble in the things
that are most true. Give us the love of thee wherthrough we come thither:
stablish our faith with charity, and increase our charity with hope which
vnderproppeth, strengthens, and holds us up in doing the works of
godliness. And forasmuch as our watching and warding here, and our warfare which
is ordained for great reward, are finished by death, and we cannot tell when
that shall come: thou which know all things The princes. Princes of hye
estate: co^te^t you I am your mate The Duchess. Duches and princes: Death
daily conuinces. We that sat in the highest seat:
Are laid here now for worms meat,
call me hence at such time, as may be most for my behoof to depart out of this
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer in danger of death.
MOst merciful Sauyor, inlighten mine eyes that I may never fall a sleep in
death, least mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him. They that persecute
me will be glad if I fall: but I have fastened my hope in thy mercy. Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, for no man living shall be justified in thy
sight. I will look before me at the Lord who is always in my sight, for he is
at my right hand, to keep me yt I be not moved. My heart is glad, and my tongue
reioiceth, and more over my flesh, shall rest in hope.

A prayer for good success, and for the direction of Christ in all our doyngs.
Beauty, honor, and riches avail no whit:
For death when he comes, spoyleth it.


The Countess. Countess, or what thou art: I strike thee with my dart.

The Vicountesse. Vicountes I ^o not spare: For of them I (...) no car^.

O God, and Lord Jesus Christ, thou know, yea and thou have taught us, how
great man's weakness is, or rather how unable he is to do any thing without
thee. If he trust to himself he must needs fall hedlong into a thousand
mischiefs. O dear father, pity thy childs infirmity, be merciful and
fouourable unto me, that I may see the true good things through thine
inlightning, have a longing to them through thine encouraging, and attayn to
them through thy guyding, utterly distrusting my self, I give over, and betake
me all wholly unto thee alone.

Thou have made me a man, of body earthly, transitory, and mortal: but of
soul, heavenly, firm, and immortal. Thou have endued me with a mind, that
is to say, with understanding, reason, and judgment, whereby to conceive The
Baronnesse. Baronnesse brave and hie: Prepare thy self to dye. The Lady.
Ladies gay and fair: To you I do repair. No state, no might, young nor old:
To resist death dare be bold.
the sovereign goodness, which is even thou thy self O God. And upon the
knowing of it, to be in love with it. And by loving of it, to be knit unto it,
and to be made all one with it, and so consequently, to become immortal, and
blessed.

But I (wretch that I am,) neglecting so great a benefit, do incline to the
lusts of the flesh, and spend all the powers of my mind about things that are
most vile. I ouerwhelme my self with earth, wherthrough, of heavenly, I become
earthly, and of Godlike, beastlike. Yet do thou not fail me, nor forsake me
O my God. For thou have called me to the partnership of thy kingdom. Thou of
thy free goodness, have washed me with water through faith in the name of thy
Son Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and thanks with thee, for that so great
and unspeakable Death by his might does convince:
Empress, Queen, Duchess and Prince.
^he ^udges wife. ^adame or justice wife: I am come to endethy life. The
lawyers wife. Beware thy husbands gayn Reward thee not with pain. benefit.
Neither stayest thou there: but thou do also offer me thy light almost every
minite to the intent I should see thee: and thou set my heart on fire, to
the intent I should love thee. But I unhappy wight do fayl my self, I feel and
perceive no more then if I were deaf, blind, or a stone. Like a tha^kles wretch,
I use not these so great benefits, but despise them. I like better of the base
things that shall perish: in th^^ am I busy, about the^ am I wholly occupied.
Thou leadest me one way and I shrink aside another way. Thou reachest me thy
hand, and I refuse it. Thou drawest me, and I drag back. Now and then I enter
into the way and by and by I look back again, and either cease quite and
clean, or else fall to loytering and lingering. O my God, waken me, quicken me
up, suffer me not to lie wallowing still in the mire, strengthen The
Gentlewoma^ Gentles brave and fine: Dance after my line. Aldermans wife. Thou
art clothed in skar^et^ And yet art but my varlet. Behold us here that sometime
were gay:
^ow now we lie dead all wrapped in clay.
me against naughty custom, inbolden me to despise things that are to be
despised, give me power to tread vi^e things under my feet, and cause me to set
my mind upon the highest, excelle^test, and best things.

Give me grace O God to harken to thy calling and to follow thy guyding. For
thou leadest us to store of all good things: thou offerest thy self and all thy
goods: give us grace to receive them. Thou show us the way to most singular
benefits, suffer us not to turn head until we have taken possession of them.

Give us constancy and stedines of purpose, that our thoughts may not be
fleeting, fond, and vneffectual, but that we may perform all things with an
immovable mind, to ye glory of thy holy name through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Riches, nor treasure avail nothing:
For death to earth all does bring.


Merchantes wife. Brave and never so nice: dance after my device

Citisens wife. Trick and trim, put of your hood I am come to do you good.

A prayer to be said against temptation.
This weak and feeble fortres of ours is assaulted continually with innumerable
enemies and engines: But yet if it please thee O savior Christ to fortify it
but with thy only strength, it shall abide invincible.

Thou thy self have been tempted, to the intent thou should have skill to
pity and relieve such as are tempted. Thou have had experience of the darts
that are thrown at us and though thou wast not touched with ye frailty of our
sinfulnes, yet art thou not ignorant of it. Wherefore (if it may please thee)
suffer us not to be assailed: Because the danger is very great that we shall
be overthrown. Or if it seem good to thy most rightful will, that we shall
needs come to the encounter, strengthen thou Rich man's wife. Though thou have
silver and gold: Yet art thou within my hold. Young woman. Fine and pretty in
the wast: Come with me in have. As death in this world has the victory:
So by death we hope to enter Gods glory*
us from above, arm thou us with thy holy spirit, encourage thou us with thy
presence, and let every of us feel the effectual working of that help which
thou did warrant to thine Apostle, when thou toldst him that thy grace
sufficed him, and that the mightines of thy power utters it self in our
weakness. We have no strength of our selves, and therefore we would feign shun
that battle as much as we can, but yet in such wise, as we submit our wills
to thy will, looking to be defended alo^ly by thy power and providence.

Wherefore we beseech thee go not from the helm of this brittle ship, that is
tossed in the waves of the manifold temptations, and afflictions of this
world, until thou have brought it to the quiet and safe haven of thine
eternal and blessed kingdom in heaven, Amen.

Time to live, ^ time to die:
God grant us live eternally


The Maid. Fresh galant, and gay: All must with me away.

The Damsel. Fine proper and neat: And all is but worms meat.

* A Prayer to be said against the world,
OH with what sleights this iugling world beguileth our feeble and dim eyes? O
how gay glitterings of things it shows a far of, that they might seem great
and worth the having, whereas in deed they be but small, empty, and to be
despised: that ye things might seem terrible which are but trifles: that the
things might seem meet to be shunned, which are conuenyent to be sought and
attained to.

It calls, allureth, inticeth, and flatereth: And if that will not serve, it
scareth, threateneth, and vexes. O most bright light of Gods truth, scatter
and rid away these misty clouds at once, and therwithall inlighten our wits,
yt we may not eschew any other things, then such as are against thee. For (to
Farmers wife. Cease thy labor and pain: For I am thy riches and gain
Husbandma^s wife. Toil no more I say: For hence I must away. (...) live, ^
time to die:
God grant us live eternally
speak flatly) these only are the things that are noisome and hurtful unto
us: Nor ensue, or seek after any other things, then such as are substanciall,
great, and beautiful in deed. Namely even thee the only, contynuall, and
everlasting fountain of al goodness and blessedness.

All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof is as the flower of the field.
The grass withers away, and the flower fades, because the breath of the
Lord has blown upon it. O how swiftly do all things fly away, and leave no
print of them behind them, but werynes and grief: they yeald no fruit at all.
Look how little they have profited them that were before us: as little will they
profit us that are present, or them that are to come. Such as that part of our
life has been which is forespent, such will the residue be, or rather much
worse The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto me.
Countreywoman Away with but^er and cheese: For thy life thou m^st ^ees^. The
Nurse. Give suck no more: For I am at the door. through default of age. Not
that God created it such, but we (through our own folly) do convert it to
evil uses.

Deliver us therefore from vanity, O Lord God, and give us stedfastnes in
seeking thy truth, and in sticking to it, so as we may set our whole minds upon
thy righteousness, and joy in nothing but in thee, and in thy son Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

* A Prayer against the flesh.
O Savior of mankind, we feel (alas to our great grief we feel) that our
spirit is clogged with the flesh, a reasonable thing, with a brutish and filthy
thing. While man was in innocence, reason made the spirit a soueraign: but now
the sinfulnes that we have received by inheritance from our first Parents, has
matched the rebellious flesh against her superior and ruler Shepeheardes wife.
Be thou young or old: Thou must enter into my fold Aged woman. Be the day
never so long: At last comes Euensong. From earth we came to earth we shall:
For sin by death has made us thrall.
the mind. And the more gentleness that is used toward this most unkind and
lewd bondserua^t the body: so much the worse and more wicked does it become. If
we follow it, it caryeth us into destruction, turning us away from God, to it
own earthlines and rottennes. O how unseemly an encounter is this, wherein the
flesh being matched against the Spirit, (that is to say, the bondslaue against
his Lord) strives with him for victory and prehemine^ce? sometime getting the
upper hand, so as his master is not able erewhiles to repress his boldness,
malapertnes, and lustines: because he bare with him to long, and to often.

But thou O Lord Christ, to whom all power is given both in heaven and earth,
which came to undo the works of the devil, which only art able to make the
thing clean which is conceived The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto me.
The Creeple. Be thou poor or disesed: Thou must with me be pleased. The poor
woman. To thou never o poor: Thou must enter at my ^ore. of unclean seed.
Reform our understanding, and will: Cleanse our hearts: Circumcise our minds:
Wash our souls: Stablish thy free and mighty spirit in us: Subdue us wholly to
thy good pleasure: And restore us the state by thy goodness, which we have lost
through our own naughtines, so as our flesh may be in subjection to the
spirit, and our affections be made obedient to right and uncorrupted reason.
Or at least wise, that although the flesh rebel, and fight against the spirit,
yet the power of y^ mind may be so strong* and the strength of our reason so
mighty through thy grace, as they may get the upper hand in all incounters, and
finally overcome all assaults, to the praise of the working of thy holy spirit
Amen.

A Prayer to be said against the devil.
The Infant. Lo, this little heart I strike with my dart.

The Fool. Of foolish and fond: I break the bond.

No state, no might, young nor old:
To resist death dare be bold.


Jesus Christ, our Lord God, our shield, our fortres, our strong rock, our only
defense, thou know, and it greeueth us to feel, with how great force, and
perilous policy, that old enemy of ours the wily serpent, that beguiled our
first parents in paradise, the roaring Lion that goes about night and day,
seeking whom he may devour. That destroyer, waster, and accuser of the saints,
the devil, comes upon us to assayl us, thou know how small, or rather no
power at al we have of our selves to withstand him, so that unless thou
succor us, he will easily deceive us by his craftynes, overthrow us by his
mightynes, and rend us in pieces by his cruelty. But we know that if thou do
but show thy self to him aloof, thou shall drive him away with thine only
look. For thou have overcome Emperors and kings, we did reign:
But now the earth, does us detayne.
The Emperor. Of Monarch and Emperor I am the conqueror. ^he King. Keisar, or
king: I must thee bring. him by thy death, thou have bound him, disarmed him,
and spoiled his house, thou have bereft him of all lordship and power, thou
have crushed his head, thou have cast down his throne, and dispossessed him of
his kingdom, thou have led away captivity captive, thou have cancelled the
obligation that he had of ours, and nailed it to thy cross: and finally, thou
have tryumphed over him in our nature, to our benefit and behoof.

We therefore, being weak, feeble, naked, unarmed, unskillful, ignorant, and of
no forecast, (but yet thy members through thy grace) beseech thee which art
strong, almighty, only wise, and prudent, vouchsafe to defend, maintayn, and
preserve us continually from that merciles dragon. Be thou our eye, our ear,
our hand, our loads man, guide, and captayn. Set thy self The Duke. Duke
though thou be: dance after me. The Marquis Marquis of state: match with thy
mate Dukes and Marquis we hau^ been:
Naught ^ow but ^o^es are to be seen.
in our defense against this our unappeasable adversary: disappoynt his
practices, confound his devices, break his bow, knap asunder his spear,
overthrow his holds, quench his fiery darts, put his armies to flight, and give
thy servants the upper hand of him and his, or rather overcome thou him and
his, in us, and by us.

Do but advance the standard of thy cross in our hearts, and thou dryuest him
out of the field. Under this ba^ner dare we march boldly against him, assuring
our selves that by the power thereof thou will deliver us from the hands of our
enemies, and of all that hate us, so as we may serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Which we beseech thee to grant us for
thy mercies sake, to the everlasting honor of thy most holy name, Amen.

We Earls and Barons were sometime:
Now wrapped in lead, are turned to flime.


The Baron. Barons of nobility: swear to me fealty.

The Vicount. Earl or Vicount: give thy account.

A Prayer to be said of a woman with Child.
THy wisdom and power shine forth in all thy works O Lord, but yet much more
greater, more manifest, and more wonderful are they in the shaping of man. Of
how small beginning do thou make so marvelous a living thing? sheading a
soul into it whose original is from heaven, to the intent he should long to
return thither as into his country.

And now, that thou have vouchsafed to make me (as it were) thy workhouse
wherein to fashion so singular a work, I most humbly and heartily thank thee,
beseeching thee, that as thou have given me ability to conceive, so thou will
give me strength to the perfecting of the thing that is in breeding, that I may
safely both bear it, and bring it The Archbishop. Archb. and Metropolite: thee
and thy Province I visit. The Bishop. Bishops grave and old: are sheep of my
fold. Bishops we have taught the lore:
That all must enter deaths door.
forth. Truly thou O merciful father, had of thine own goodness made this
work of childbearing easy, but our sin has made it sorrowful, and full of
danger.

O most gracious workman, let thy pitifulnes amend the thing which our
sinfulnes has marred, and either abate my pain, that I may not have need of
so great strength, tendance, and cunning: or else increase my strength, power,
and courage, that I may be able to overcome all the pain of my travel, Amen.

* A Prayer to be said of such as be under the Cross.
HOw long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

How long shall I seek comfort in Both sheep and shepherd all must dye:
We taught the same the same we try.
The Doctor. Doctor divine at last: thy reading hour is past. ^he Preacher.
Preach no more about: thy glass is run out. my soul, and find sorrow in my
heart day by day? mine eyes dazell for greef.

Unto thee O Lord have I cried: all the day long have I stretched out my hands
unto thee.

Will thou work wonders among the dead, or shall the dead arise and praise
thee? shall any man show thy mercy in the grave, or thy truth in destruction?

Shall thy wonders be known in the darck, or thy righteousness in the land of
forgetfulness?

Why do thou thrust back my soul O Lord, and hide thy face from me, no man
is mindful of thee in death, and who will praise thee in the grave?

Be still before God, O my soul, for my hope is in him: because he is my rock
and my savior, and I shall not be removed.

In God is my welfare and my glory: the rock of my strength and my hope is in
God.

The Lord. Come lordings all: dance at my call.

The Knight. Go hence sir knight: it is almost night.

We Lords and Knights of late.
Nyw lie in low estate.


Quicken me O Lord, for thy names sake: and for thy righteousness sake rid my
soul out of trouble.

For I O Lord am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmayd.

I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of praise: and pay my vows unto thee in
the sight of all the people, Amen.

A Prayer for Gods goodness, and for continuance of the same.
I Yeald thee thanks and praise (O Lord my God) for creating me after thine own
Image and likeness. For redeming me with thy precious blood. For admitting me
into the number of thy children by adoption, through the washing of holy
baptism, and for feeding me with the sacrament of thy body and blood.

Behold the Squire as in a glass
For as thou art so he was.


The Esquire. Esquire the brave: It boots not to crave.

The Gentleman Lusty, or sad: Thou must be (...).

Also I give thee praise and thanks, for that thou of thine infinite gracious
goodness, have patiently waited for my amendment, even from the time of mine
ignorant childhoode unto this hour, notwithstanding that I ran losely into
innumerable vices.

I glorify thee, and praise thee for thy often ridding of me from a number of
troubles, distresses, calamities, and miseries: and for saving me hitherto from
the often deserved everlasting punishments and torments both of body and soul.
I praise thee and glorify thee for thy merciful giving of me health of body,
soundnes of limbs, quyetnes of times, and working of good things, with many
other virtues.

My Lord God, I beseech thee of thy unspeakable goodness, to make perfect the
benefits, and good gifts which thou have begun in me. And whatsoever The
Judge. Come on judge: With me to trudge. The Justice. Sir Justice arise* come
to my ass^se. Judge and Justice sentence have:
To ly as Captives in the grave.
mislyketh thee in me, put it away and deliver me from all the troubles that
are yet to come, and from all the iniquity and naughtynes that I am wrapped in.

Dispose, and order thou all my thoughts, words and deeds according to thy
will. Keep me at all times, and in all places wheresoever I go, whether it be
in prosperity or adversity. And in the end bring me to the desired joys of
the present beholding of thee, Amen.

A general thanksgeuing.
O God which excellest in all goodness and wisdom. O heavenly Father, which art
full of mercy and clemency, when I call to mind the works of thy hands, I
cannot but wonder at thy great wisdom, and infinite goodness, which thou have
showed toward No law, no plea, no drift,
From death can make a shift
Sergeant at law. Leave the Laws: and hear my cause. The Att^rney. (...) lead
as thou ^ust: With me thou must. all thy creatures, especially toward me: Not
only in that thou have given me, being, moving, and life: but also in that
(besides thine other infinite benefits which thou have distributed in general
to all men in the world) thou have bestowed so many particular benefits upon
me, as it is impossible for me to rehearce them, yea or to conceive the^.

Thou have vouchsafed to deliver me by the light of thy gospel, from ye
darcknes of error, and ignorance: or rather, to draw me out of the horrible
dungeons of death and damnation, whereto I was condemned, in respect of the
corruptnes of my nature, and so conveyed me into the kingdom of thy well-beloved
son, who has given him self for my sins, according to thy good pleasure
and everlasting ordinance. Also thou have received me into thy Church among the
number of thy children: thou The Mayor. Mayor I thee call: to my guild Hall.
The Shirife. Shirif for execu^ion: I have a commission. Mayors and Shirifes do
pass with speed
And others them in place succeed.
have elected and chosen me through thy wonderful providence, to be to the
glory of thy mercy. And thou have inhonored me with the copartnership of the
everlasting inheritance of thy deer beloved son, to be of that royal
priesthood, which shall offer the sacrifices of eternal praise and
thanksgeuing to thy holy name in thy heavenly temple: now therefore according to
david's saying, what shall I render to ye Lord for all his benefits toward
me? I know that al my life ought to be consecrated to continual thanks
giving, to show forth (with his holy people and purchased possession) the
mighty works of him that has called us out of darckenes to his wonderful
light. The cup of deliverance ought not to depart out of my hands, nor the new
songs thereof out of my mouth.

But Lord, grant me the grace whc We peace did keep in princes name:
Now death does charge us with the same
The Bailife. Come Baylife, no bail: with me shall preuayl. The Constable.
Constable I arrest: to my ward be pressed. thou did show heretofore to David, a
man according to thine own heart. Who treating of the same matter, and rehersing
the records of thy goodness, said, of a truth Lord, I am thy servant and the
son of thy ha^dmaid, thou have broken my bo^ds a sunder. I will offer unto
thee the sacrifice of thankesgeuing and call upon thy name. Even so say I lord
of my self, and that by thy grace: I am thy servant, I am thy servant.

Thou have broken my bonds, and preserved me, and set me in safety. Unto thee O
king of eternity, immortal, and invisible, even unto thee (O God) who only
art good and only wise, be honor and glory for ever through Jesus Christ thy
son our Lord, and only Savior, So be it.

The Physician. By thy wate^, I do see: thou m^st away with me.

The (...). Look not so hie: low thou must lie.

No art, or medicine can preuayl:
When death does purpose ^o assayl.


Here begins the Letany and Suffrages.
O God the Father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven, have mercy etc.

O God the Son Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son redeemer, etc.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor ye Death winnes the field:
^ll arm^s must yield.
The Herald. Herald in thy ^hield bear grass in greenfield. Sergeant at
Arms. Sergeant see thou s^ay: ^l glory must away. offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins. Spare us good Lord, spare thy people
who^ thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us
for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vayn glory, and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceites of the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us. The Tru^petor* Trumpet give sound: all must to the
ground. The Pursuant Go su^mon by message: to come without baggage. All m^st
needs dye* we need not tell:
Our message has been sounded well.
From lightnings and tempests, from plague, pestilence, and famine, from
battayl, and murder, and from sodayn death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition, and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from al hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity, and
circumsition, by thy baptism, fasting, and temtatio^.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony, and bloody sweat, by thy cross, and passion, by thy precious
death, and buryall, by thy glorious resurrection, and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

We drum that domes day now at hand:
Does call all souldyers to deaths hand.


The Dromme. Drommer call together: al soldyars to my ba^ner

The Fife. F^fe see thou play: to lead them the way.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners ^oe beseech thee to hear us O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and stre^gthen in true worshipping of thee, in
righteousness, and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth, our most gracious
Queen, and governor.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee etc.

The Captain. Captain march with me: thy Captain I must be.

The Souldior. Soldyar have a courage: to thy long vyage.

Death only makes captains quayl:
And hearty soldyars for to fayl.


That it may please thee to be her defender, and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate al Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
the church, with true knowledge, and understanding of thy word: And that both
by their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to indue all the Lords of the counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to bless, and keep the Magistrates, giving them
grace to execute Justice, and to maintayn truth.

We beseech thee etc.

Use gayn of gold, and li^e in cost:
So as by death life be no^ lost.


The Merchant. Neither craft nor trade: Can ^e persuade.

The Citizen. Of town and city: I have ^o pity.

That it may please thee to bles, and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to bring into ye way of truth, al such as have erred,
and are deceived.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, to comfort and help
the weak hearted, to raise them up that fall, and finally to beat down Satan
under our feet.

We beseech thee etc.

The Printers. Leave setting thy page* spent is thine age.

Let printing stay: and come away.

We Printers wrote with wisdoms pen:
She lives for aye, we die as men.


That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort, all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that trauail by land or by water, al
women laboring with child, all sick persons, and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all Prisoners and Captives.

We beseech thee etc.

it may please thee to defend, and provide for the fatherles children, and
widows, and all that be desolate, and oppressed.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slaunderers
Death takes no bribe of wealth:
Death forces not long health.
The Rich man. Thy silver, nor gold: from death can thee wthold. The aged
man. By right I must be bold* with thee that ^^^uest so old. and to turn their
hearts.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to give, and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances, and to indue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we etc.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

The Artificer. No compass or art: can cause me depart.

The Husbandman. Labor no more: For I ^aue store.

No one devise, no a^t, no toil:
Could make us give to death the foil.


O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in. etc. And lead us not into temptation: But deliver us
from evil, Amen.

The versicle.
O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray
In song, in dance, in pipes in play:
We lost our life, now wrapped in clay.


The Music^o^^. Strike up thy play: Dance with me away

O God, merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, when so ever they
oppress us: And graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft, and
subtlety of the devil, or man, works against us, be brought to naught, and
by the providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants
(being hurt by no persequutions) may evermore give thanks unto thee, in thy
holy church through Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us, for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, ye
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us, for thy honor.

The Shepeheard. Leave thy sheep And with me crepe.

The Fool. Of foolish and fond I a^reake the bond.

The wise, the simple, and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto me.


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. As it was in
the beginning, etc.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably, with mercy hear our Prayers.

O Son of David have mercy on us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.
Time to live, and time to die
God grant us live eternally


The Beggar. Begging is done: For I am come.

The Roge. Think I am best: For I bring rest.

WE humbly beseech thee O father, mercifully to look upon one infirmities, and
for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we most
righteouslye have deserved: And grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee, in holiness,
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only mediator, and
advocate Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for the Queens Majesty,
O Lord our heavenly father, high, and mighty king of kings, Lord of Lords, the
only Ruler of Princes, which do from thy throane behold all the dwellers upon
the earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to (...). Young and
old. Come to my fold Of Infancy Fear not me: though I grisly be. No state,
no might y^ung nor old
To resist death dare be hold.
behold our most graci^us us souerain Lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish
her with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that she may always incline to thy will,
and walk in thy way. Indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts. Grant her in
health, and wealth long to live. Strength her, that she may vanquish, and
overcome all her enemies. And finally after this life, she may attain
everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

In the time of any common plague, or sickness.
O Almightye God, which in thy wrath in the time of king David, did slay with
the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy
mercy did save the rest: Have pity upon us miserable We that were of highest
degree*
Lie dead here now, as ye do see.
The Empress. Empress though thou be Thou must away with me. (...) Queen.
Queen also thou do see: As I am so (...) thou be. sinners, yt now are
visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did then
command thine Angel to cease from punishing: so it may please thee to
withdraw from us this plague, and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

*A Prayer of Chrysostom.
ALmighty God which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three be
gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests. Fulfill now (O
Lord) the desires, and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, grau^ting us in this world, knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come, life everlasting Amen.

The princes. Princes of hye estate: co^te^t you I am your mate

The Duchess Duches and princes: Death daily conuinces.

We that sat in the highest s^ate:
Are laid here now for worms meat.


* A Prayer to be said at the visitation of the sick.
O Almighty and eternal God, the God of al mercy: many and diverse are thy
chastisements, by which thou call us unto thee and thy son Christ.
Especially it is thy wonted clemency, to tame our flesh by sundry and sore
diseases: to awake, and shake of our sleep by dangerous infirmities: to
admonish us of our former wicked life, frayl of it self, by grievous anguishes
and torments, the messengers of death. Also by this thy cross, thou put us
in mind of thy Son Christ his cross: of his bloody sweat, and passion: of
the great, and last day of thy judgment: joyful to thine elect, to the
reprobate, a judgment day most horrible, O Lord, most horrible.

Beauty, honor, and riches avail no whit:
For death when he comes* spoyleth it.


The Countess. Countess or that thou art: I stri^e thee with my dart.

The Vicountesse. Vicountes I do not spare: For of them I ^aue no care.

Forasmuch therefore (O Lord God) as we find this our poor brother, weakened
with sickness, imprisoned here in his bed, sustayning the rigor of thy
punishment, and sharpnes of thy rod, whose conscience also, the feeling of his
sins, and fear of death does terrify: We wretched sinners, yet thy creatures,
and members of thy church, being flesh and blood of corruptible flesh as well
as he, most humbly, and most heartily pray, and beseech thy goodness, that thou will not show thy rigorous judgment upon him as he has deserved: But rather
cast thy eyes of mercy upon him: Look on him, as on one whom thou have
redeemed: Give him grace, and constancy of courage, that he may peaceably, and
patiently take this thy fatherly correction, submitting himself with all his
heart, to thy good pleasure and will, who have visited him.

The Baronnesse Baronnesse brave and hie: Prepare thy self to dye.

The Lady. Ladies gay and fair: To you I do repair.

No state, no might, young nor old:
To resist death dare be ^old.


Assist him in this his present danger, especially if his conscience discovered
before his inward sight, accuses him of any inward and secret sin. O our
God, our good God, God of al comfort and consolation, set against the same his
wounded conscience, the grievous torments, and voluntary sacrifice of thy
well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, who bare our infirmities, and endured the pain
which we had deserved, being made sin for us, when he suffered death for our
sins and offenses, which he washed away with his blood, and rising again from
the dead, is made our justice and present redemption.

Inspire this sick person with thy holy spirit, that now in his great anguish
and agony, he do feel the fruit and virtue of these benefits, receiving at
thy hands that great treasure of blessedness, ye remission of sins through thy
Death by his might does convince:
Empress Queen Duchess and Prince.
The Judges wife. Madame or justice wife: I am come to end thy life. The
Lawyers wife. Beware thy husbands gayn Reward thee not with pain. Son Jesus
Christ. Strengthen his faith in this last battle, that he may mightily repulse
all fear of the law, sin, and death, and courageously pas the way to eternal
life in Jesus Christ.

O Father of heaven, receive him body and soul into thy bosom. O thou
merciful Samaritane, pour oil into his wounds, and refresh his withered, and
dry heart, with that precious water of life, thy most sweet heart blood. For
thou only art that good Samaritane, thou only art he that do raise them up
that fall, heal them that are diseased, strengthen them yt are weak, and thou
only art he that geuest life, and sendest death. Therefore receive this our
brother to thee, for into thy hands he has committed him self body and soul.
Pardon him all his sins, all his secret sins and offenses, which have most
grievously provoked thine The Gentlewoma^. Gentles brave and f^^e: Dance after
my line. Aldermans wife. Thou art clothed in skarlet: And yet art ^ut my
varlet. Behold us here that sometime were gay:
And now lie dead all wrapped in clay.
anger, and thy rigorous judgment against him. In stead of death, give him
life in thy glory. But if yet thou have some further profitable work for him
to do in thy vineard, increase thy gracious will in him, that with greater
care and diligence then heretofore, he conforming him self to the example of
Jesus Christ, may live with us, and labor in thy Church according to his
vocation, and talent. Yet thy will be done in all, and by all, which art all in
all. Bless us also with these thy graces, as well as this thy sick creature:
and grant that we may give fear unto thee, faith unto Jesus Christ, and
mortification of Adam to the holy Ghost. Give us these thy graces through Jesus
Christ, the only salve, and savior of sinners: who to the great comfort and
consolation of all sinners, took with him into Paradise the thief that Riches
nor treasure auayl nothing:
For death to earth all does bring.
Merchantes wife Brave and never so nice: dance after my device (...) wife.
^ricke and trim ^ut of your hood ^ am come to d^ (...) good. was crucified by
him. The which Lord Jesus Christ lives and reigns with thee in the unity of
thy holy Spirit, one true and everlasting God, Amen.

* A Prayer in desire of the life to come.
IN the life to come, we must not think to enjoy any one benefit alone as we
do here, but al good things and all at once, even as many as are possible to be
thought, or not thought. For we shall enjoy thee, O God, who alone art all in
all things: And love shall make us one with thee, and so we shall be (as it
were) certain Gods. O when shall we have an end of this misery, and a beginning
of that joy? when shall I cease to live among such as are evil, spiteful,
cumbersome, and enemilike, and begin to live with Christ, who is Rich man's
wife. Though thou have silver and gold: Yet art thou within my hold. Young
woman. Fine and pretty in the wast: Come with me in have. ^s death in this world
has the victory:
So by death we hope to enter Gods glory.
courteous, good, friendly, and loves me most dearly? This body of mine is but
a prison to my soul. Yea and that a most darck, and loathsome one. This world
is but a banishment, and this life but sorrow and wretchedness. But where as thou
art, there is our home, our freedom, and our endless bliss. Twitch our minds
from time to time to the remembrance of so great happiness. Sheade into our
hearts the desire of so great good things, and therefore chiefly to be coueted.
Settle our minds, and give them (even here) some taste of thy joys, whereby we
may loathe and abhor these things, wherinto we run with such headiness,
embracing them fast between our arms, and laying hold on the^ with both our
hands: that we may shun, and hold scorn of these so harsh, and bitter things,
and covet nothing so much as the sweetness of thy company, O death how bitter is
thy sting:
That poor and rich to earth does bring.
The Maid. Fresh, galant, and gay: All must with me away. The Dam^sell. Fine,
proper and neat: And all is but worms meat. whereunder al good things are
contained, Amen.

* The fear of the Judge, and Judgment day.
O Lord, and God of Gods, revenger of wickedness, I know that thy coming will
be manifest. I am certain thou will not always keep silence, when fire shall
burn before thy face, and a mighty tempest shall rage in thy sight, when thou
shall call the heaven from above, and the earth from beneath, to severe thy
people. Behold in the presence of so many thousands of people, mine iniquity
shall be discovered, my sins shall be opened in ye sight of so many Angels,
and not my misdeedes only, but thoughts and words. Before so many Judges shall
I stand helpless, as have excelled me in good works. By so many evidences
shall I Farmers (...). Cease thy labor and pain: For I am thy riches and
gain. Husbandmas wife ^oyle no more I say: For he^c^ I must away. Time to live,
^ time to die
God grant us live eternally
be cast, as have given me example of good life. With so many witnesses shall I
be co^uinced as have admonished me with wholesome counsel, and by their
virtuous deeds have been paterns for me to imitate.

O my Lord I have not what to allege: I find nothing what I should answer.
And being now in this grievous danger, my conscience vexes me: the secrets of
my heart wound me: covetousness he^meth me in: pride accuses: envy consumes:
concupiscence enflameth: exces corrupts me: rauine defameth me: drunkenness
dries me up: slander renteth me in pieces: ambition supplanteth: rapine
sharply rebukes: dissension cutteth a sunder: anger disturbeth: lightness
makes me dissolute: faintnes weakneth me: hypocrisy deceueth: flattery
breaks me: favor lifts me up: but malice does goare. The wise, the simple,
and every degree:
Are by force compelled to obey unto me.
Countrrywoman. Away with butter and cheese: For thy life thou must leese. The
Nurse. Give such no more: For I am at the door. Behold, O my deliverer from
this wrath full generation, behold with whom I have lived ever since my birth
day, after whom I sought, with whom I kept faith and promise. The life which I
loved condemns me: which I commended disdaineth me. These be my friends in
whom I did repose my self, the gouerners whom I obayed: masters who^ I served:
counselors whom I did credit: Citizens with whom I dwelled: domistical
fellows with whom I was familiar. Alas my king and my God that I have so long
soiorned among the^. Woe is my light that I have dwelled with the inahbitants
of Cedar. And seeing that holy David said long, how much more miserable wretch
that I am may I say to long has my soul dwelt among them. O God my strength
no flesh shall be justified in thy sight. My help is not in the children of
men. Thus death has brought all things to naught. Set thy mercy aside, whom
shall thou find just when thou iudgest? And except thou justify the sinner in
thy mercy, who shall be found pure whom thou may glorify? For I believe O my
saving health that which I have heard: which of thy mercy to bring me to
repentance the sweet lips of thy mouth has spoken, that no man can come to
me except my father who sent me draw him. For truly thou have instructed me,
and most favorably with thy instruction have reformed me. I beseech thee
almighty father in thy beloved son with all the strength of my heart and
mind: I beseech thee O well-beloved son of god: I beseech thee O most holy and
most comfortable spirit of God, so lead me that I may hasten to the sweet
smelling favor of thy precious balmes. Amen.



Come ye blessed of my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Mat^ ^5.

Depart from me ye (...) everlasting (...) is prepared for (...) Math. 25.

The conclusion.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou king of kings, the great counsel and wisdom of
the father. O thou the great Shephearde of thy Pasture. O thou righteous Judge
of all Judges, preserve our Queen Elizabeth long to live with thy pore Church
of England, in health and wealth to thy good pleasure and will.

Bless thou the wisdom and policy of her counsel to the strengthening of
the same thy Church: the tranquillity of our Queen, and Country: inspire the
Ministers of thy blessed Gospel, with thy holy spirit, that they may be
sauery salt to season, and bright lights to the way of salvation.

Raise up faithful distributers of right and justice to the poor commons of
this Realm: diligent and careful magistrates to execute the laws aright, as
they will answer before thy tribunal seat at the day of judgment.

Finally to every of us thy poor sheep, let thy mighty hand and outstretched
arm (O Lord God father of heaven) be still our defense: thy mercy, and loving
kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son, our salvation: thy true and holy word
our instruction: thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and consolation unto
the end and in the end Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the prayers contained in this book.
A Preface to private prayer. 1 A prayer to be said at our first waking. 1 A
prayer at our vprising. 2 A prayer at the putting on of our clothes. 3 A prayer
to be said at our first going abroad. 4. A prayer to be said at our returning
home. 5 A prayer to be said at the setting of the sun. 6 A prayer to be said at
Candle light. 6 A prayer at the Evening. 7 A prayer at vnclothing of our
selves. 9 A prayer at our going to bed. 9 A prayer when we be ready to sleep.
10 A preparation to public prayer. 10 A short speech before the Lords prayer.
11 A prayer to God the Father. 12 A prayer to God the Father in Christ's name 15
A prayer to God the son. 16 A prayer to God the holy Ghost. 19 A prayer for
Gods spirit to pray effectually. 20 A prayer for the Realm and Church. 22 A
prayer for the church and states thereof. 25 A prayer for the universal church.
32 A prayer for the Queen. 40 A prayer for the Magistrates. 48 A prayer of
children for Parents. 49 Prayers for love toward our neighbor. 50 A prayer for
the persecuted. 51 A prayer for such as are in adversity. 52 A prayer for them
that are in poverty. 53 A prayer for our euilwillers. 54 A confession of our
sin. 55 A prayer for remission of our sin. 56 A comfort after craving of
mercy. 71 A prayer in commendation of Gods mercy received. 72 A complaint of a
sinner that he sins again after repentance. 74 A prayer against despair. 75
Prayers upon the judgment of Christ's passion. 76 A prayer upon the minding of
Christ's resurrection and assention. 77 A prayer to Christ assending to glory.
87 A prayer at our going to a sermon. 88 A prayer for understanding. 89 A
prayer to be said before the receiving of ye communion. 89 A prayer after the
receiving of the communion. 94 A prayer for Gods grace. 94 A prayer for faith.
95 A prayer for trust in God. 96 A prayer for the fear of God. 97 A prayer for
love toward Christ. 97 A prayer for cleanes of heart. 98 A prayer for
obtaining of a sound mind. 99 A Prayer for newnes of life. 99 A Prayer for
true mortification. 101 A Prayer for continuance in seeking after Christ. 103
A Prayer for spiritual joys. 105 A Prayer to be said in time of sickness. 106
A Prayer in the plague time. 110 A Prayer for health of body and mind. 111 A
Prayer in affliction. 112 A Prayer upon the minding of death. 113 A Prayer in
danger of death. 114 A Prayer for Christ's direction, and success in all our
doings. 114 A Prayer against temptation. 116 A Prayer against the world. 117 A
Prayer against the flesh. 118 A Prayer against the devil. 120 A Prayer to be
said of a woman with child. 121 A Prayer to be said of such as are under the
cross. 122 A Prayer for Gods goodness, and continuance of the same. 123 A
General thankesgeuing. 124 The Letany. 128 A Prayer to be said at the
visitation of the sick. 133 A Prayer in desire of the life to come 136 The
fear of the Judge, and judgment day. 137
FINIS.
AT LONDON. Printed by Ihon Day, and are to be sold at his long shop, at the
West end of Paul's.

Cum Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.


