EVERY-DAYES SACRIFICE.

Wherein are comprehended many comfortable Prayers and Meditations, very
necessary for all Christ^^ns.

ALSO, Many comforts for the sick which are afflisted by the sight of their
sins and the terror of death; Written by D. M. Luther, a little before his end.

With most true comforts out of holy Scripture of the knowledge we shall have
of one another in the world to come.

Translated by, W. R. S.

LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for John Parker, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1624.

The Translator to the Reader.
IT pleased Almighty God (gentle Reader) in his last great visitation 1603.
(amongst a great multitude of others) to take to his mercy al my Children, to
the great grief and sorrow of my heart, which caused me to remember the saying
of our Savior Jesus Christ in his holy Gospel: If these things be done unto a
green Tree, what shall be done to a dry? And therefore it beseemed me,
rather to prepare for my self, that I might be ready when it pleased God to
call me, then to lament for them which are at rest with Christ. All which
considered, caused me to read over diverse comfortable Books; and at last
light upon this, which as it appears in the beginning of this book, was first
penned for the comfort of one that was in great affliction by reason of
sickness; who, besides a great number of others, received great comfort of the
same; for which cause it was first penned. The like comfort has it, by the
goodness of God, effected in me; which moved me to undertake the publishing
hereof in as plain and fruitful manner as I could, for the good of every
Christian, without any borrowed phrases. And therefore such as it is, I commend
to thy favorable acceptance, praying God that it may work such comfort in thee
(and in all other that shall read it) as it has done in me, for the glory of
his holy name: unto whose most mighty protection I commit thee.

Exhortations to make the sick desirous of death.
WE be but strangers and soiourners, as were all our fathers: our days on
earth also are but as a shadow, and there is no abiding.

The days of man are the days of an hireling, yea wind and nothing.

We are made as dust, and must return to dust, as a leaf that is carried of the
wind, dry stubble, and a garment that is moth-eaten.

Man is burdened with many calamities: he comes up, and is cut down like a
flour, and he lies as it were a shadow: short be his days, and the Lord has
appointed him his bands, which he shall not pass.

Where is there any man that lives, and soeth not death?

Our days pass away swiftly, and we are gone.

A man in his time is but as grass, and florisheth as a flour of the field: for
as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone, and the place thereof knows it
no more.

Man is like to a thing of naught: his days pass away like a shadow.

Every thing has a time, yea, all that is under heaven, has his convenient
season. There is a time to be borne, and a time to die.

Death does not forget him self.

By one man, death entered into the world, and went over all men; and through
one sin of one man, all men are subject unto death.

All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass.

Our life is even as a vapor that appears for a little tune, and then vanishes
away.

Here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.

Whatsoever has been borne since the beginning of the world unto this day has
been subject unto death: and whatsoever is yet alive, or shall be born, must
needs die euery-while.

Whosoever receives life, must also suffer death remediless.

On this condition came thou into the world, that thou should leave it
again.

Thou have been sure of death, ever since thou wast conceived in thy mothers
womb.

Whatsoever thou have lived over the first day of thy birth, is superfluous and
too much; and God has suffered thee to live long enough.

There is no remedy, but that thou must needs die, and no man can save thee nor
defend thee: for, thou art dust, and must be turned into dust again.

Think none other in thy mind, but that the end of thy life is comne.

This misery geeth not only ever thee: for, great and small, rich and poor,
young, old, Lord, servant, man, woman, and all men must take this journey in
hand.

This debt have thou owed a great while, and thou must needs pay it; the sooner
the better.

If thou should be put to death or execution, with a hundred more besides thy
self, what should it avail thee, whether thou were the first or the last.

He that is first dispatched, is soonest rid out of his pain.

Thou have full well deserved at the hand of God, to die a worse and a more
sudden death: wherefore thou art bound to thank him, that he handles thee so
graciously.

This life is short: childehood flows away like water: youth and manhood are
full of sin and labor: age is full of infirmities, although not one among a
thousand does attain to it.

This life is but a prison, full of heaviness, calamity, bondage, incombrance,
painfulnesse, labor, travails, vnlustinesse, sin, diseases, temptations,
yea, it is nothing but a cross. From all which miseries, death does deliver us.

The day of death is better than the day of birth.

In the day of birth, thou art put to cold, heat, hunger, thirst, tediousness,
sin and wretchedness. In the day of death art thou delivered from all bodily
impediments.

Therefore do Job and Jeremy curse not only the day of birth, but also him
that brought the message to their father, that a child was born.

The bitterness of death which is sent thee, passes all the pain that ever
thou dibst seele in all thy life: but it lasts not long, and it is soon done.

Through the grace and help of GOD can thou wade through this danger, and
drink this cup.

Thou did never truly feel the passion of Christ in all thy life: wherefore
now in the hour of death thou shall patiently feel and taste.

In case the devil by force, for his last feat, would prove himself upon thee;
then be thou sure, that he is a mightlesse enemy, and is overcome by Christ,
and can get no more at thy hand, but only as much as thou fear him, and
doubtest in Christ.

If there happen unto thee any fearful temptation, give thanks to God, that he
handles thee so graciously: for, thou art worthy to have a more grievous
punishment.

The wicked spirit which tempted Christ, will not leave thee vntempted: but he
cannot prevail against thee; for, he has naught in Christ, nor in thee.

Many temptations shall assault thee, which thou must patiently suffer;
thinking, that the Lord might justly send thee greater temptations, which
nevertheless he leaves undone of his mere mercy.

When thy conscience does lay before thee thy manifould sins, and sends thee
to good works; then remember, that Christ has paid for thy sins upon the
Cross.

Let not unprofitable thoughts trouble thee; as, If God would lengthen thy
life, thou would think to become more holy, and more apt to die: for,
although thou might live yet (which is impossible) an hundred years, thou
can deserve nothing with thy holiness before God.

Although all creatures were against thee, yea, although God himself should
lay before thee his fearful indignation and terrible indgement, and show
himself none otherwise than as though he were thine enemy, and although thou
should see nothing but devils about thee, yet care not for it, whatsoever
thou feel: shut the eyes of thy mind: take hold of faith, and trust in the
Gospel. There is no Devil so strong, that is able to overthrow it. Trust to
God, and fear not. Cast all thy care on the Lord, and he will provide and
preserve thee.

Hitherto thou have been as dead, but now shall thou first begin to live: for,
death is a do^^ of life, a beginning of resurrection, and a departing from sin
and pain.

Forsake the world, and receive death (which is seat unto thee by the grace of
God) willingly: for, it is thy own, and must also serve thee for thy wealth.

This smart and pain is ordained for thee of God, and he does not chasten
thee because he hates thee, but that he may preserve and receive thee as his
son. Therefore faint not, seeing thou art chastened of the Lord.

No manner of chastising for the present time seems to be joyous, but grievous:
nevertheless, afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them
which are therein exercised.

The afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed upon us.

Tribulation, anguish, persecution, hunger, nakedness, peril, sword, death,
life, Angels, rule, power, things present, nor things to come, height,
lowness, neither any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love
of God.

If thou did truly remember and consider the unfaithfulness, falsehood,
blasphemy, and the Antichristian conversation and life of this world, truly
thou would not covet to live any longer.

A thousand lives (if it were possible) oughtst thou to lose, only because
thou have heard and tasted the gospel; namely, that thou have obtained
redemption and forgiveness of sins through the blood of Christ, and not
through thine own merits.

Thou have prayed daily, that it would please GOD to take thee out of this
evil world into his Kingdom, and that his will might be done. Wherefore,
seeing he will now, through his grace, bring thee into his Kingdom, thou
oughtst (as his son) willingly and gladly to obey, and to rejoice with all thy
heart, that thou, out of the devils Kingdom, out of this vallie of misery, and
out of this wretched life, come to thy Father, and all his Elect in
everlasting Paradise.

The Heathen, which notwithstanding were without hope, did, for ye love of the
life to come, destroy themselves: and should thou, being a Christian, to
whom so much comfort, hope, and everlasting life is promised, despair in
death, and desire not to die with all thy heart?

The Jews die merrily, which nevertheless have crucified Christ, and are
damned for ever: and should not thou, being a Christian man, be more earnest
and bolder to die; to whom such joy is promised, as ye eye has not seen, the
ear has not heard, neither has entered into the heart of man? and would
thou now give place to the miscreant and cursed Heathen and Jews, in bodily
dying?

The servant is not above his Lord, nor yet the Disciple above his Master.
Christ thy Master and Lord suffered and died for thee: thou must also suffer
and die.

All they which are baptized to die, are baptized: thou art baptized, therefore
art thou also baptized to die.

For Gods sake art thou killed, and art counted as a sheep appointed to be
slame. What were a slaughter sheep, if it were not slain? or what were a
Christian man, if he should not be assaulted, suffer, and die?

Faint not in this affliction, to which thou know thy self to be constituted.

Now will Christ thy Savior and Redeemer prove whether thou will stand by him
or no, whether thou will for his sake valiantly abide death, and be like unto
the shape of his passion, or not. Therefore suffer now as a good warrior of
Jesus Christ, and think not to be crowned, unless thou fight valiantly: for,
if thou die with Christ, thou shall also live with him, thou shall also triumph
with him.

Unfaithful and without honor is he counted before the world, that
giueth-ouer his hold in his dominions: and should thou not be without
honor, if in the necessity of death thou should shrink from Christ thy
Savior?

Take up thy Cross and death, and follow him.

Know thou not, with what great joy and desire all the Apostles and servants
of Christ have shed their blood for Christ's sake, and have gone even to meet
death?

For Christ's sake have thou not yet suffered any special thing. Therefore give
thy self willingly and joyfully unto death, as a sheep, for Christ's sake.

God is by thee in thy trouble: he will pluck thee out of it, and bring thee to
honor; and he is at thy right hand, that he may help thee.

Put now thy trust in God, and thou shall be helped.

Be of good comfort, and bestow thy stinking carcass* which is but
wormes-meat, upon Christ thy Redeemer and Savior, and trust only to him and
his holy Gospel, which is the power of GOD to salvation to all that believe.

Abide the Lord, and let thy heart take sure hold.

Commit thy cause unto the Lord, and trust in him: he shall order it well
enough.

Be sober and watch: for, thine adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, will
go about thee, seeking how he may denoure thee; whom resist, steadfast in the
faith.

Ye wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power, and
against worldly Rulers of the darkness of this world, against the spirits of
wickedness, yea, against sin, death, hell, and the devil. For this cause,
behave your self as a Christian champion, and take unto you the armor of God,
that ye may be able to resist in the evil day, and to stand perfect in all
things. Stand therefore, and your loins girt about with verity, having on them
a breast plate of righteousness, and shod with shoes prepared by the Gospel of
peace. Above all, take unto you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the
swo^d of the Spirit, which is the word of GOD. And pray always in all manner
of necessities.

A short instruction of the confession of sins.
FIrst, because all mankind by the laws of GOD: Secondly, and also out of the
sorrow of death, the cruel martyrdom and bitter death of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, by reason of our sins which he took upon him: Thirdly, and
also out of the fearful examples of holy Scripture, how God always punishes
the unrepentant, which continue in their sins, and are bound to confess the
same, if they will be quit thereof, and die happily.

Therefore should we poor creatures, with the great fearful miseries and
woes, wherein we (alas!) through sin are grievously fallen, repair unto our
dear God with hearty sighing and weeping earnestly call for mercy, as the holy
Prophet David did also; Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord. And
let us take heed, that we blaunch not our sins, as the Hypocrites and the
Pharisees did, Luke chapter 18. For, the Cherubins and Angels of GOD, which
are wholly holy, do cover their faces and feet, that is to say, all their
glory, works, and doings, and will not be praised; but do sing with their
voice, their Gloria, la^^, and Gloria in excelsis Dee; to the end that GOD the
Lord only may be acknowledged for holy, honored, and praised.

But in such confession of sur, let us not creep into corners, as Adam did,
Genesis the third chapter, but call upon God from the bottom of our hearts for
grace and forgiveness, through the worthy deserving of Christ Jesus, as jeremy
the fourteenth chapter: Lord, we acknowledge our wickedness, and the misdeeds
of our fathers. For, we have sinned against thee: and the offenses wherewith we
have angered thee, are great. But, for thy names sake, let us not be brought to
confusion. Let not the throne of thy glory be mocked. Remember yet, and let not
thy Covenant with us cease. Thou art yet the Lord our God, on whom we hope:
for, thou can do all this. So did David pray in the 25 Psalm; Remember not,
O Lord, the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: but think upon me
according to thy mercy, for thy goodness sake. And in the two and thirtith Psalm
he speaks very comfortably: I said, I will confess my transgressions, and
thou forgauest me the wickedness of my sins. Likewise Daniel in his ninth
chapter prayed, Lord our God, etc. we have sinned, and have alas bin wicked. O
Lord, for thy right ousnes sake turn away thy wrath and anger for our sins
sake, we are blamed of all them that are round about us: and now, our Lord and
God, hear the prayers of thy servant, and his complaints, and behold with
favor thy holy place which is destroyed for the Lords sake. So likewise should
every Christian comfort himself, and believe with his heart, that he for
Christ's sake, through such faithful prayer, shall surely obtain Gods grace
and forgiveness of his sins, as it is said and promised to all the
faithful, John 16. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you desire of
the Father in my name he will give it you ^id Jeremy 14 says Thou art the Lord
our God, and can and wist do all this same, Amen.

Here follow certain Prayers, how a man should call to God for grace, and
forgiveness.
O Almighty and Everlasting God, most gracieus and merciful Father, I poor
sinner acknowledge from my heart, and confess it also before thee with my
mouth, that I am (alas) a great sinner, conceuied, borne, and grown up in
sin: and so have many times transgressed thy holy commandments, with evil,
sinful, unclean, and unseemly thoughts, wo^^^, and wicked deeds. All which I
do repent from my very heart, and pray and desire thee of thy Grace, O heavenly
Father, indue me with the Grace, and forgive me all my sins, in the name of
thy dear and only Senne, my Lord and Samour Jesus Christ, in whom thou have
promised me comfort, and remission of all my sins. I comfort my self with
this gracious promise, John 6. where thy dear Son says; Who eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood; That is, Who believes on me, has everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Such godly and gracious promises of thy Son, do I trust unto and believe, and
am certain, that I, through such says, have forgiveness of my sins: and
shall be a child of thy Kingdom, and remain so for evermore, Amen, Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Thou Almighty and Everlasting God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of
Heaven and Earth, and of all Creatures, I poor, miserable and sinful
creature, come here before thy divine Majesty, full of sin and
unrighteousness, and fall down at thy feet before thy glorious Majesty: for I
have mightily offended thee my Lord and God, and sinned against thy
commandments and done against thy godly will.

But because I cannot other wise be quit and free from this my heavy burden,
but only through thee my Lord and God: Therefore do I now from my very heart
complain unto thee my woe and misery; and especially what I have at this
present franed in, and have accomplished the same against thy godly will:
besides all other (alas) which I daily commit, with deceit, in show and false
heart, with negligence, evil lusts and otherwise: whether it be with evil
thoughts, words or works, wittingly or unwittingly, secretly or openly;
whether it be against thee, or the love of my neighbor: All which I
acknowledge unto thee, and confess it also from the bottom of my heart; and
pray thee, that through thy grace thou will graciously and fatherly forgive me
all my sins. Have respect only to the bitter death, Martyrdom, and
bloud-shedding of thy only dear Son, in whom thou art pleased, who
innocently died for me poor sinner. O my Lord and God, look upon thy dear
Son, and especially on the great love which he showed unto us poor sinners,
when he went so patiently and willingly to death. O look upon the great
obedience which thy dear Son has ^us^^red for our sakes, and h^^^bled
himself upon the er^^^^, death, grave, and hell. O look also v^on the great
gl^^^ to, wherewith thou have adorned thy Son, in th^^ thou have made him
Lord over all. For which ^our, (...) b^ on ^ee, and ^^o^y, ^^ou would
graciously ^e^^^^ue me this days offense whereinto I, by temptation, (...)
s^llen, with all my form^r sames which I have done from my youth: For in sin
was I conceived, borne, and brought up, and yet do live therein without
ceasing: So that sin has gone through my whole body, marrow, and bones.
Therefore I beseech thee most graciously to remit and forgive me all such
sins, to cast the same behind thee, and never think more on them, nor punish
my body or soul, either in this world, or the world to come: for thou art rich
unto all that call upon thee. And because thou will not the death of a sinner,
but rather that he turn from his wickedness and live: therefore do I pray thee
to give me a good meaning to amend my life, especially in that thou have
promised me also, through thy dear Son, to give me whatsoever I ask in
his name.

Therefore do I pray thee through Christ, thou would forgive me all these my
sins, and pour thy holy Ghost into my heart, that I may constantly abide in a
godly life. All which grant unto me for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, my
Lord and Savior, Amen,

Another prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, the everlasting Son of God, for
grace, and forgiveness.
O My dear Lord Jesus Christ, I confess unto thee from the bottom of my
heart, with great sighing, that I am, alas, a poo^e sinner, conceived and home
in sin and iniquity, to have lived wickedly against thee and thy holy Word,
with ungodly and unthankful heart, for which I am heartily sorry.

But I am comfored in my heart, that thou will not the death of a sinner, which
thou have sworn and confirmed with an oath: That thou will not be angry with
me for ever, nor yet for ever punish me. Thou do call and entice all them
that are weary, oppressed, comfortless, sorrowful bearts and consciences, to
thee and thy holy Word: and namest thy self A heavenly Physicion, which take
upon thee our woes and miseries (wherein we through sin are fallen) and
bring to us thy everlasting help and refreshing, by Preaching of thy holy
Gospel, wherewith we may be helped for evermore: upon such thy gracious
promises come I to thee, and pray thee from the bottom of my heart (O my Lord
God and Savior) to be merciful to me poor sinner, like as thou have promised
such mercy, for the love of thy own grace and merits: Amen, Lord Jesus Christ,
Amen.

The Lords Prayer contained in a short form.
ABba, dear Father; we thy unworthy children call upon thee in the name of
thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, through thy holy Ghost, uphold us by thy holy
Word, give us honest and true Teachers and Preachers to distribute the same
amongst us: Release us quickly out of the Devils kingdom; bring us to thy
Kingdoom of Grace, and to everlasting life: And give us thy holy Spirit, that
we, as the Angels of God, may live holily, according to thy will and pleasure.
Nourish, bless, and preserve our households, Wives, Children, and Servants, in
this life: cover our trespasses and of fences, and give us a loving heart, to
forgive all those that have offended us. Let us not consent unto sin, nor
fall from thy only Word of salvation, but keep us from the evil Fiend, and
from all his deceites. Thou art a most mighty King, powerful to rule; thou
can, and wilt grant us all these things: For which we will give thee
thanks, and praise thee for ever, Amen.

A Prayer (wherein the confession of our Christian Faith is simply contained)
wherewith a man may call upon God for st^engthening of his faith.
O Almighty and everlasting God, which art a Father of all grace and mercy,
and a God of all comfort. for us poor sinners, which I and all Christians
(through revealing of thy Word) do acknowledge and believe for certain,
Therefore do I land, honor, and praise thee, dear Father of heaven, for such
thy unspeakable love, wherewith thou have graciously had respect to us thy
enemies, transgressors of thy commandments, and damned creatures: Namely, in
that thou have not spared thy only Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who is equal
with the God head, and with the holy Ghost: Especially that thou have let him
be incarnate for our sinful nature and doings, with our actual misdeeds: and
howsoever we have thereby deserved, and into manifold horrible reproaches; and
finally to yield himself to the shameful death of the Cross. And so of pure
fatherly love, have ordained him a Lamb, to carry my sins, and the sins of
the whole world upon the Cross, and to be a perfect Oblation therefore, and
do proffer, proclaim, and promise the same throughout the whole world,
command also the same to be believed, upon pain of losing everlasting
salvation: for thereby, and by no other means, must it only be applied and
impropriated to me, and to all the faithful, and to be our own.

Therefore, dear Father, do I constantly believe, according to the same
revealing of the holy Gospel, all this same, and doubt not thereof any thing
at all, as I thy Child am bound, and will do, not respecting my
unworthiness. In Christ thy only Son, are all my sins, and all which
believe, and boldly trust unto it, sufficiently punished, corrected, spent, and
through his perfect obedient death of the Cross, all killed and taken away:
And that I am, and also all Christians, through such faith, planted in the
Kingdom of thy dear Son (as the holy Scripture says) by whom we have
redemption through his blood: namely, remission of sins.

I believe also verily, that in the death of Christ thy dear Son, my death
is overcome, that it shall never hurt me nor consume me into damnation, (as
the Scripture says) Christ has ^a^ed of death for all; has taken into his
power, and brought to lighten vntransitory life and being, through his Gospel.

I believe also, that the destroying of ^^ell, which was done by thy dear
Son, is destroyed and torn asunder for me and all faithful; that the same
cannot consume or devour me, nor any of the right believers, as the Scripture
says, ^^ll, where is thy victory* And in another place; The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against the right Believers. And The Prince of this world is
judged.

I believe also, that thy Commandments, with all the power thereof which they
have, have no more right over me, although I cannot absolutely keep them: For
the Lord Christ thy dear Son has through his obedience perfectly kept the
same for me, and taken from them the right and interest which they had in me:
wherewith thou almighty, Everlasting, and Merc^full God and Father, art
satisfied.

I believe also, that the resurrection of Christ thy dear Son, is a new life
unto me, and to all faithful, unto everlasting life.

Finally, I believe also (as the Scripture says) that he is ascended into
Heaven, and has taken rule on the right hand of his Father: and answers for
me and al ye faithful, that henceforth the Devil and all his power is taken,
must be subject, and lie at the feet of me and all the Faithful.

Therefore I pray thee, O Lord GOD, thou infinite Fountain of all grace, that
through the power and working of the Holy Ghost, thou will give me such faith
and acknowledging this day and lawaies, to the end of my life.

And I pray thee also, my Lord Jesus Christ, which art true and perfect GOD
with the Father and the Holy Ghost; forasmuch as thou have put thy self under
the tyranny of the Law, which (by reason of sin) it had toward me and all
mankind, and have taken on thee my sin, Death, Hell, and damnation, which I
by all reason, right, and rigor thereof should have borne; that thou will help
to still and pacify these great misdeedes between GOD our heavenly Father and
me, especially in my conscience, which continually disquieteth me, through
the power of God, and of the Holy Ghost, which thou have promised to send us
from the Father. (...) so said, (...) m^^ (...) ^^^ek* th^^, bu^ th^^^ (...)
the^*

Thou art the only ever last (...), ^^vas^parable truth: There (...) do I
s^edfastly beleeu^, by knowledge of the S^^ty^u^e^, that thou art to m^^^^^^ ^o
all Ecleeuers a (...) h^pnest, a seat of Grace, and A^uacate so thy heavenly
Father and I believe ve^rily, (notwithstanding that reason is astonished
thereat) that through no other Oblation works, or means, either in Heaven or
on Earth, our sins, Death, Hell, and damnation, is overcome and taken away
and we at agreement with God thy heavenly Father, but only through thee Jesus
Christ; whereon I will trust, and also die thereon. Thereto help thou me, thou
dear God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

O LORD Jesus Christ, which with the Father and the Holy Ghost a^^ one
inseperable Essence, and a Fountain of all Grace: I thank and praise thee
al^waies, that thou have also revealed unto me thy grace for my better
comfort, as thou have endued thy dea^e Mother Mary, and also other Saints, with
great grace, and wrought wonderful works in them. I pray thee therefore
heartily to look upon on me with the eyes of thy mercy, as thou did look
upon the evil doer, which was hanged upon the Cross by thee, and did open
his heart that he confessed his sins, and was mightily afraid of them, but
yet despaired not, but confessed, and desired thy grace and mercy which thou
gave to him willingly and plentifully. Also Saint Peter which denied thee:
and Mary Magdalen in her sinful living: And have also respected Matthew the
Customer in open estate, Saint Paul a raging and earnest persecutour of
Christians: Also in the old Testament David, King Manasses the Tyrant, and
other sinners more, which thou did bring to repentance and confession of
their sins; and of pure love, grace and mercy (which thou did reueal unto
them by thy holy Word) have placed them with thee in thy Kingdom. Therefore
dear God and merciful Father, will I strengthen my self so much ye more, and
doubt nothing thereof.

These, and other godly people of worth, which thou of thy grace have taken out
of this sinful life to righteousness, are a comfort and example to me, and all
believing Christians, that thou wast merciful to them, and so wilt be to me,
and to every sinner which repents, according to thy own pure love, which the
holy Ghost, through faith in the Gospel, works in us both gracious and
merciful, and grants us a happy end in such acknowledging of thy Name. Which,
help thou me with, and all Christians (dear God) Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
which art in three inseparable persons, one only and everlasting GOD, for ever,
Amen.

Here follow certain Prayers, to call upon God for strengthening of our faith.
O LORD JESUS CHRIST, strengthen me also with thy holy Spirit in my fear and
quaking. And admonish me, that I think upon thy sacred Wounds in my last end.
And let not thy holy and bitter Passion be lost on me poor sinner, thou
which art therefore come, that thou may destroy the Devils work, and pay and
counterpoize my sins with thy hard and painful labor: and thou which have
sworn, Thou will not the death of a sinner. Strengthen my weak faith, and keep
me through thy Spirit of grace and of prayer, unto a happy end, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, I confess unto thee my great and manifold sins, and the
righteous wrath of God, and everlasting punishment which I have deserved. But I
comfort my self with the great love and pure mercy of thy Father; and pray thee
(seeing thy blood is more than the sins of the whole world, and thou art our
Mediator and Advocate) that thou will be Intercessor for me to thy Father,
that my faith do not diminish, and that I never despair of thy mercy for my
sins, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, increase my faith and trust in thee, that I despair not
of thy gracious mercy, nor in my greatest sin perish in unbelief. O Lord,
preserve for me thy promised grace in the holy Gospel: let it not come out of
my heart. Thou art my only comfort and hope: stand to me in this my sorrow.
Let not my poor soul come into the hands of my horrible. Adversary, and give
him no power over me. But show me thy goodness at this present: for thou art my
Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, I pray thee, through thy goodness and mercy, that thou will strengthen my soul upon thy holy way which lies before me, into thy
heavenly and everlasting Kingdom.

I believe, that thou diedst for my sake, have of thy grace and mercy forgiven
me my sins, and that everlasting life is promised to me. Of this my faith, O
Lord, shall thou be witness, and all thy Elect: and in this faith shall be my
last Will to die therein (O Lord) in thy pure mercy. And although I through
grief, want of sense, or other troubles, should fall off from the same yet (O
Lord) let m^e not die in unbelief and blasphemy: but strengthen and increase my
faith, that neither sin, hell, nor devil, hurt me. Thou art stronger, and of
more power than all they: whereunto I will trust. Lord, let me not be
confounded, Amen.

A comfort out of holy Scripture against the fear of sin.
ESAIAS 12. Behold, God is my salvation: I am safe, and fear not: for, God the
Lord is my strength, my Psalm, and my salvation.


The first Comfort.
How a man should comfort himself against sin, and the just anger of God, out
of the comfortable promises of the holy Scripture.
The first comfortable sentence.
GENESIS 3. The Seed of the Woman shall tread down the head of the Serpent.


THis is the first Evangelical Doctrine of the everlasting Son of God in
Paradise, revealed unto the fallen and damned mankind; whereby he might be
released again from death, Gods wrath, Sin, Hell, and power of the Devil,
and might obtain, through belief in these words, Comfort, Grace, Remission on
of sins, and everlasting life.

And with this Promise, have all the holy men comforted themselves, until
Abraham, two thousand years long: for, here does GOD tell us, that he, even of
pure love and mercy, will send unto us (poor damned sinners) his only and
dear Sount, borne of a Uirgine, to take upon him mortal and humane flesh and
blood; who should, with his absolute Obedience and Passion, pay the ransom of
our sins, pacify GOD's wrath kindled by reason of our sins, destroy Death
through his death; and with his victory, and rising again, restore again
righteousness, resurrection, and euerlastin^g life.

This comfort should we conceive with faithful hearts, and be certain
thereof, that the Devils works are destroyed for o^r sakes, and all his power
taken away; that we never need to be afraid of sin, death, hell, or God's
anger; but, through Jesus Christ our Lord, true God and Man, have gotten again
righteousness and everlasting life. Do did an honest Christian at ^reiberge in
Misnia, in the year of our Lord 1547, comfort himself with this sentence, and
got victory over the devil, who did trouble him by reason of his sins, and
GOD's wrath.

For, as he was troubled in his sickness, the devil came to him in visible
form with Ink and Paper, and sat him down besides the sick man, and said;
He should rehearse his sins: he was therefore there to write them up, and to
give sentence upon them. The sick man was afraid: but yet he remembered
himself of this sentence, answered the devil, and said he should write, The
seed of the Woman should tread down the head of the Serpent. Straight-waies
the devil vanished away, and left such a stink behind him in all the house,
as if he would baue choked them all.

The second comfortable Sentence.
GENESIS 22. Through thy Seed, shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed.


THis is the second Promise and Preaching of the Lord Jesus Christ. All other
mankind, from the first Adam until the last, were by nature full of
wickedness. God was angry with them, and became their enemy: for, there was no
blessing with them, but cursing, because they were sinners.

But through this Man Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, the only Son of
the Father, full of Grace and Truth, is the only right Seed of Abraham;
wherein all the Nations of the earth must be blessed, if they will attain
unto everlasting salvation.

In this Sentence, behold what Saint Paul writes to the G^lat. 3. where he
says, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law (for, it is written,
^ursed is that man which hangs on a tree); that the blessing of Abraham might
come among the Gentiles in sesus Christ; And we do receive the promised Spirit
through faith.

In this place Saint Paul places these two words one against another; First,
the curse; and then, the blessing.

All men are of themselves poor, cursed, and dam^ed sinners: For, as the
foureteenth Psalm says, They are all gone astray: there is none that does
good; no, not one. Against the which, this blessed Seed brings the blessing
unto us, and redeemeth us from the curse of the Law, in that he was a curse
for us: for he as the only immaculate Lamb of God, has taken our sins upon
him; and, as S. Peter says, Offered our sins himself with his body on the
Cross. We should henceforth be quit from sin, and live unto righteousness;
or, as Saint Paul says, To come to the blessing by him, and to receive the
Holy Ghost, and be the children of God. In this bespoken blessed seed did
Abraham trust, and was happy. Abraham believed always on God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness.

The third comfortable Sentence.
ESAIAS 43. Thou have made me labor with thy sins, and have made me weary with
thy misdeeds: I will wipe out thy transgressions for my names sake, and will not
think upon thy sins.


IN this comfortable saying the Lord Jesus Christ teaches us, that he only
has paid the ransom and satisfaction for our sins, with his bloody sweat,
bitter passion and death; and that he through his own merits has forgiven us
all our sins, in such sort, that they shall be wholly put out, and clean
wiped away before the face of God, and cast into the bottom of the sea, as
though they had never been, and shall never be thought upon.

Therefore let us not be afraid of ye great^es or multitude of our sins, that
we despair not of Gods mercy, as ^ain and Lucas did; but c^mfort our selves
with the ^^ssion and s^t^sfaction of our Lo^d Jesus Christ, and some upon th^s^
words.

So did king Ezec^^^s comfort himself, E^ay 3^. in his great tribulation, by
reason of his sins and the wrath of God; where he says, Behold, I was much
grieved for want of comfort: but thou have heartily accepted of my soul, that
it do not perish: for, thou castest all my sins behind thee; that is, thou will no more know nor think upon my sins. Likewise did King David also pray
in Psalm. 51. Wash me from mine iniquiry, O Lord, and cleanse me from my sins:
then shall I be whiter than snow. For no other washing of anointing on earth
can help.

The fourth comfortable Sentence.
EZECHIEL 33. So sure as I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the ungodly; but rather, that he turn from his wickedness, and live.


HERE the everlasting Son of GOD, our only Lord and Rock, swears an oath
by himself (because he has no greater), as true as he is a living, eternal,
and almighty GOD, he will not that a sinner die, and be damned for ever; but
that he, in acknowledging of his sins, and sure confidence of Christ's blood
and merits, in true invocation and good pretense turn unto GOD, so shall he
surely obtain remission of sins, everlasting righteousness, and the Holy
Ghost, with eternal life. Upon this dear, constant, and true oath, should we
have respect when we are troubled by reason of our sins, and Gods wrath, and
also in our last end: and say or think, I care not now how often, and how
greatly I have sinned, and angered my Lord God: but I look upon the oath, and
comfort my self, that the true GOD has sworn (and he cannot repent it) he
will not the death of a sinner: so will he not also, that I be damned, but
for his Sons sake will forgive me all my sins, and take me with him into
everlasting life. So did the holy Apostle S. Paul comfort himself and others;
as, in ye first epistle to Timothy, and in the first chapter: It is certain and
true (says he) that Jesus Christ is comne into the world to save poor sinners.

The fifth comfortable Sentence.
JOHN 3. So God loved the world, that he gave his onely-begotten Son, that
whosoever believed on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.


THis is one of the chiefest Sayings in all the new Testament, which JESUS
CHRIST (whom God the Father from heaven comma^ds us to hear) did himself bring
out of the bosom of his Father, and preached the same to his loving C^t c^^^
(...) ^^holar Nichodemus.

Wherein he teaches us his Father will, what the eternal GOD is determined
toward the world, that is, toward all great sinners as ever were in the
world, or yet may be; that he loves them, and will not have them lost.

And this great love did he show and set forth unto us, when as there was no
other means whereby the sins of the world might be taken away, Gods wrath
pacified, death and hell vanquished: then spared he not his only Son, but
did let him take humane flesh and blood upon him, and to fulfill all which was
impossible for us to observe, and suffer all pain and punishment, which all
the world with their sins had deserved.

Whereby Gods righteousness might be fully accomplished, and we released
from the curse of the Law.

This purchased treasure, through the only perfect oblation, the Holie-Ghost
does put into the Word of the Gospel, and into the holy Sacrament, and causes
to be preferred to the whole world.

All that believe, that is, which do acknowledge this only Savior, and
comfort themselves with hearty resuge to his demerits, shall not be lost, but
have eternal life. Therefore, let us out of these words, learn to know Gods
gracious will and fatherly love, and comfort our selves against all
tribulations, against sin, and against the Lords an^er.

These sayings the dear and godly man Master Doctor Martin Luther, and the
mighty Prince John Frederick, Duke of Saxon, of godly memory, have had in
their last hour, for a happy comfort; and so departed both of them happily,
and with merry and quiet consciences.

And even so did the poor Publican comfort himself in the Temple, Luke the
eighteenth chapter, when he did pray unto the Lord, God be merciful unto me a
poor sinner: that is to say, a wicked creature am I, and the most part of the
world: but I do recomfort my self with the fountain of pure mercy, and
endless love of my most dear God, which he has manifested unto me in the
passion and oblation of his only begotten Son our Redeemer Jesus Christ the
Righteous, who has paid and satisfied the ransom of my sins and ^a^ous
transgressions, and has pacified Gods wrath, and has given unto me
everlasting life.

The sixth comfortable Sentence.
MAT. 11. Come unto me, all you that labor and are ^eauie laden, and I will
refresh you.


WHat can we hear more kindly, yea or more lovingly, then that the
everlasting Son of God calls unto him all that be weary and oppressed in
heart, and troubled for their sins: and bids them come to his holy word,
naming himself a gentle and humble Teacher?

Let every one rejoice in his heart, that God has sent such holy comfort and
refreshing upon earth; and promises in plain words, that all, whether they be
poor or rich, young or old, shall surely find by him, rest, peace, joy,
refreshing, ease, help, and assistance, shall be comforted in their souls,
and be made alive again.

Therefore, when any is tormented by reason of his sins, that he feel his
heart troubled with sorrow, and almost overthrown with discomfort: Let him not
creep into a corner, or run away from the people, as Adam did, Genesis 3. but
let him run to the Lord Christ, and to these, and such other the like
comfortable words, which we shall find in the house of God before his face,
or where God has appointed, in remembrance of his name: that is, in preaching,
in the holy Sacraments, and in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles: for,
so soon as we seek Christ, he will meet us* as he says in the first
chapter of Zachary, Tu^ne ye unto me, then will I turn unto you So does the
Lord meet Mary Magdalen, a poor troubled sinner, from whom our Lord and
Savior had before cast out seven devils, and makes himself known unto her
soon after his resurrection, and comforted her heartily, when she sought him,
John 20.

The seventh comfortable Sentence.
ROMANS 5. But where Sin is mighty, there is Grace more mighty, through Jesus
Christ, etc.


Here does S Paul meet with a great tribulation, and heavy thoughts. When we
do often think, My sins are too great: Oh, if I had not such great sins upon
my heart, then would I hope I should be saved:

There does Saint Paul answer, If Sin be great, yet Grace is greater, and
exceeds far all our sins: that is, one drop of Jesus Christ's blood is
greater, more glorious, powerful, yea and stronger then all the greatest and
fearefullest sins of the whole world: yea, as a little moat in the Sun, is
not to be compared toward Heaven and Earth: so is the whole worlds sin not
to be compared to the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

And as the clear Sun darkens all the stars of heaven, that they cannot be
seen in day time (although they do stand in the firmament): even so, when the
right Sun rising shines from above, all sins are quenched. Whosoever with
hearty faith catches hold on the blood of Christ, his sins are all covered
before the face of GOD, that GOD will never see them: and is reckoned so clear
and holy, as if he had troubled no water all his life time.

For the blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of Almighty God, purges us of all
our sins.

So did the holy Prophet Esaias comfort himself and his people, in the first
chapter, where he says, Though your sins were like Purple, they shall be white
as Wool.

Likewise David the Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, in his deepest hell
and tribulation comfort himself thus, with the Lord is mer^ie and much
redemption, as in the hundred and 30. Psalm: for the more sins that Christ
forgiueth us, the more is his praise, honor, and glory: as he himself teaches
in the seventh chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, where he does speak of the great
and open sinner; To her are many sins forgiven, because she loved much. But
to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.

The eightth comfortable Sentence.
PSALM 16. I thank the Lord that has counseled me.


WHenas the first man (through the craft of the old poisoned and fiery
Serpent, and through their disobedience) fell into sin, Gods wroth, and
justice, which after succeeded upon all Adams Children; there was no comfort,
not counsel to sinde, except the help and redemption of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

But through the wonderful counsel of the high and godly Majesty, at the
intercession of the only and everlasting Mediator, our Lord Christ, it was
concluded, that the Son of almighty God, borne of the Father everlasting,
should take humane Nature upon him, pacify Gods fierce and just anger, and
bring us out of the Devils power, and ever counsel and help us, from whence he
carries the name: so that Flay the Prophet, in the ninth chapter (amongst
other glorious names) calls him a Counselor.

Now when we are overwhelmed by reason of our manifold sins and
transgressions, then let us cause such help, as a hearty and true counsel, to
be brought before us, by preaching of the holy Gospel.

And let it be preached unto us, that through confidence of his gracious help
and redemption, we shall be quit of our sins, released from death, and
obtain his grace, righteousness, and everlasting life.

This is such a true counsel, that in all tribulations we may stade, and have
some comfort therein: which David did acknowledge, and thereforre says, Had it
not been for thy Word, I had perished in my misery, Psalm. 119. and here he
gives the Lord hearty thanks for all such mereifull comfort and help: I thank
the Lord my GOD, which has counseled me

For, this is also a counsel of such power, that if a man should now depart
out of this life, and that neither goods, f^iends, riches, money, or gold, nor
any other temporal matter or thing, wherein he had peradventure here to fore
put his trust, can counsel or help; yet has he here by Christ's word, a sure
and certain comfort, and a powerful counsel, whereby he shall be r^ght and
well, yea prosper and be helped for evermore.

This dee the poor Christians acknowledge in (...): Therefore, when they
should depart out of this miscrable life, and leave all that is temporal, they
do take hold of this happy comfort and counsel of the holy Gospel in their
hearts, and die therein happily Thus Saint Peter comforted himself, John 6.
Thou have the word of life. And the Apostle Saint Paul, in the first chapter of
his Epistle to the Romans, The Gospel of Christ Jesus, is the power of of God
to salvation to all that believe.

How a man should comfort him self against sin, and Gods just indignation.
Other general comfortable sentences.
ESAIAS 1. IF your sins were red like blood, yet shall they be white as
Snow: and if they were like purple, they shall be like wool.

Esaias 2. The Lord will not judge according to the sight of his eyes, nor punish
according to the hearing of his ears: But will with righteousness judge the
poor.

Esaias 6. Thou keep continual peace, according to sure promise, for man
relyeth upon thee: Therefore rely you upon the Lord always, for God the Lord
is an everlasting Rock.

Esaias 27. God is not angry with me.

Esaias 38. Thou have heartily accepted my Soul that it perish not, for thou
have cast all my sins backward behind thee.

Esaias 40. Comfort my people (says your God) speak fair to leru ^ale^r, and
preach to her, that her warrefare is at air end, her misde^des are pardoned,
for she has received double from the hands of the Lord for all her sins.

Esaias 44. Israel, dee not forget me, I drive away thy misdeeds like a cloud,
and thy sins like a mist. Turn thee unto me, for I have red^emed thee.
Rejoice, ye Heavens, for the Lord has done it.

Esaias 53. He was wounded for our misdeeds, and beaten for our sins: The
punishment was laid upon him, that we might have peace, and through his wounds
are we healed.

Esaias 53. Through his knowledge shall my righteous Servant make many righteous,
for he bears their sin.

Esaias 64. Thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer; from the beginning hitherto,
that was thy name.

Esaias 66. I have respect to the wretched and him that is of a lowly spirit,
which is afraid of my Word.

^zechiel 33. So sure as I live, I will not she death of a sinner, but that he
turn from his wickedness and live.

Dan. 9. In the Lord our God is mercifulness, and forgiveness.

Zachary 9. Thou redeemest also through ye blood of thy Covenant, thy Prisoners
out of the pit wherein is no water.

Micheas 7. Who is such a God as thou art, which forgiuest sins, and releasest
misdeeds?

Ierem. He is merciful, he will take pity on us again, put down our
wickedness, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea.

Jonas 4. I know that thou art gracious, merciful, long suffering, and of
great goodness, and repentest thee of evil.

Psalm. 13. I hope upon thee, because thou art so merciful, my heart rejoices
that thou so willingly helpest.

Psalm. 25. The Lord is good and gracious, therefore directs he sinners upon
the right way.

Psalm. 22. I said, I will confess my trans ressions unto the Lord: and thou
forgauest me the inquity of my sin.

Psalm. 31. I rejoiced and was glad in thy goodness, that thou did consider
my misery, and know my soul in his need.

John 3. God has sent his Son into the world, not to judge the world, but
that the world through him might be saved. Whosoever believes on him shall
not be judged.

John 3 Like as Moses sifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the
Son of man be lifted up, to the end that all which believe in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life.

John 1. This is the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.

John 6. This is the will of him which sent me, that whosoever looks on the
Son, and believes in him, has everlasting life, and I will raise him up at
the last day.

John 6. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever believes on me, has
everlasting life.

Math. 1. The Angel says of Christ. He shall save his people from their
sins.

Matthew 9. I am come to call sinners to repentance, and not the righteous.

Luke 24. Thus it is written; and so must Christ suffer. And in his name do
they preach Repentance, and forgiveness of sins amongst all people.

Acts 4. There is no other salvation, nor any other name given to mankind,
whereby they should be saved.

Acts 10. Of Christ do all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, all
they which believe in him, should receive remission of sins.

1. Tim. 1. This is a true and worthy Saying, that Jesus Christ is comne into
the world to save poor sinners.

1. Tim. 2. There is one GOD, and one Mediator betwirt God and man; namely,
the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself for us, to the redemption of all.

1 John 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with GOD the Father, Jesus
Christ, who makes us righteous, and he is the atonement for our sins.

1 John 4. GOD has loved us, and sent his Son for a reconciliation of our sins.

1 Peter 2. Christ has offered up our sins himself with his body upon the
Cross; to the end we might be free from sin, and live unto righteousness:
through whose wounds you are healed.

1 Cor. 1. Christ is made to us from God, for righteousness, glory, and
redemption.

1 These. 5. GOD has not appointed us to wrath, but to attain salvation
through our Lord Jesus Christ, which died for us.

1 Pet. 1. Ye are not redeemed with transitory silver or gold, but with the
most precious blood of Christ like a guiltless and unspotted Lamb.

1. John 1. The blood of Jesus Christ makes us clean from all sin.

Mat. 9. Be comforted, my son: thy sins are forgiven thee.

The second comfort against sin, and the right wrath of God, out of examples of
holy Scripture.
BEsides these merciful promises, God has caused many comfortable examples to
be written in the sacred Scriptures; how he has taken the greatest sinners
to mercy, when they have meekely acknowledged and confessed their sins,
believed in Jesus Christ, and amended their lives; and all for the comfort of
us poor sinners.

For, when sin and Gods wrath is rightly felt in our hearts, some man is
sometimes so troubled therewith, that no comfortable Sayings will enter into the
heart: but he thinks always; Ah! GOD speaks not of such great sinners as thou
art.

But, that the merciful God not only promises forgiveness of all great and
manifold sins, but shows also indeed, what sinners and wicked people he
has justified; he has set down diverse examples, which in our fear and
despair we may set before us for a singular comfort.

First, as these: first, Adam and ^^e, the greatest sinners, blasphemers, and
murderers of all mankind; by whose sins and disobedience, all sin, shame,
death, and everlasting damnation, came over all men: and yet GOD made them pure
and holy, after his own Image.

Then when they were fallen into sin and disobedience, GOD showed this mercy
unto them, and received them again, for the promised blessed Seeds sake, as the
first Evangelical Promise was given to them for a comfort, Genesis 3. which
they beseeued, though they had no example of the forgiveness of sins.

Secondly, Abraham was an idolatrous man, and served the idols of Vr in
Chaldea: to him did GOD give the Promise of the blessed Seed, and made him a
Father of all Believers, that is, as Esaias in his fortith Chapter reports;
Comfort my people, says the Lord: for, their offenses are forgiven, and they
have received double from the Lords hands for all their misdeeds.

But this is double; that GOD first remitteth to us the sin, and releaseth to
us the punishment of the sin, and after gives us withal everlasting
righteousness and salvation, that we may live and reign with him in
everlasting righteousness, joy and glory.

Thirdly, David, though an abominable wedlock-breaker and murderer, has
forgiveness of sins for Christ's sake, and is saved for ever.

Fourthly, Manasses, the cruel and raging tyrant, who with a Saw caused the
holy Prophet Esaias to be cut in sunder (when he had preached eighty years in
great pain and labor) and spilled much innocent blood, set up all heathnish
idolatry, letting his own son pass through the fire; and lastly, offered him
up alive to Moloch: then, when he was in prison, he turned and humbled himself
unto God, and prayed him with tears; the Lord God did hear him, and brought
him again to Jerusalem, to the earthly and heavenly Kingdom, 2 Kings 27.

Fifthly, what a great sinner was the thief on Christ's right hand, and other
intolerable Usurers and Publican sinners!

Sirtly, how grossly have the dear Apostles oft-times gone astray! How
horribly fell Saint Peter, when he denied his Master, in taking-vpon him so
much, and cursed himself!

What innocent blood did Saint Paul help to spil, when he was a persecuter of
Christ his Congregation! For all these Christ prayed, forgave them all their
sins, and saved them for ever. Also through them he did much good in
Christendom.

Seventhly, Christ also had many sinners in his kindred, and are so registered,
which were his Grandfathers and Grandmothers according to the flesh; as, Judah
the bloodthirsty, Rachab the common Harlot and Heathen at Jericho; to show
thereby, that he was comne into this world to save sinners.

These examples has Almighty GOD (through the holy Ghost) written up for the
learning and comfort of us poor and wretched sinners, that we should believe,
God will forgive us all our sins for his Sons sake, as often and as
horribly as we have offended, not that we should think our selves safe, and
presumptuously sin on such mercy of the lord, but that we might have a sure
comfort and consolation against sin and damnation, that we despair not by
reason of our sins, or flee away from Christ: which is the only sin whereby
the world was damned, John the sixteenth Chapter: As the Apostle Saint Paul
also shows us this profit, 1 Timothy 1. where he writes thus: This is a true
Saying, that Jesus Christ is comne into the world to save sinners; among which,
I am the chief.

But mercy is showed to me in this respect, that Jesus Christ has showed
patience on me for example, that all that believe in him, should have
everlasting life. Therefore to God the eternal king, the vntransitory,
invisible, and only wise God, be all praise and glory for ever, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, thou only Fountain of all grace and mercy, thou never
did deny thine endless mercy, neither to Matthew, nor ye Publican, nor Mary
Magdalen, nor the lost son, nor to Peter nor Zacheus the Tolekeeper, nor to
the Thief on the Cross, nor yet to any mankind. Thou have spoken with
fatherly and comfortable speeches, Come unto me, all you that labor and are
heavy* laden, and I will refresh you. O take care of me, and look upon me
with thine eyes of godly compassion, even as thou did look upon Peter,

I, a poor and unworthy sinner, do stand before thee, laden with so many great
sins and offenses, that, by reason thereof, I cannot look up, being both
abashed and ashamed before that godly Majesty whom I have grievously offended,
and know not what to say. O Lord, be merciful to me a wretched sinner: turn
away thy wrath, and impart thy mercy with me. Which I do desire with hearty
tears, through the merits of Christ Jesus our alone Lord and Redeemer.

The third comfort against sin and Gods wrath, out of the holy Sacrament.
Esaias 4. THe Lord shall wash away the filthiness from the daughter of Sion, and
shall purge the bloody sin from Jerusalem by the Spirit of judgment, and by
the Spirit of burning.

Esaias 12. With joy and consolation shall you draw water from out of the Well of
Salvation.

Zach. 13. At that time shall the house of David, and the Citizens of
Jerusalem, have a free and open Well against sin and uncleanness.

Mark 16. Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.

Acts 2. Peter says, Repent, and let every one be baptized in the Name of
Jesus Christ our Savior for the remission of sins.

John 20. Christ says to his Apostles, Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins you
forgive, they are forgiven.

Mat. 26. Christ says, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed
for many for the remission of sins.

BEcause oftentimes tribulation and grief is so great, and sorrow with the
combat of death so ouertakes us, that we cannot hastily, and in such great
weakness, remember our selves of any sentence or example; and that a man
begins often to despair whether God has forgiven him his sins, and will be
merciful to him, and if Christ's blood especially be shed for him also: so:
there has the Lord, of his great love, not only given us his holy promise,
and set down comfortable examples, especially the holy and worthy Sacraments;
that is to say, Baptism, and his holy Supper: which he has instituted and
ordained for remission of sins, especially to all them that are baptized in
his blood, and absolueth every one of all their transgressions, that he may
be sure he is also clear thereof in heau^n before the face of God; and
feeds every one severally with his Body and precious Blood, to the end he
may be assured, Christ's Blood was shed for his sins, and his Body offered up
also for his mis-deeds, and gives the same to every one that receives the
same (in true Faith, acknowledging his sins, and in good pretense) all and
what soever he has earned and obtained with his Obedience, Death, and Passion.

With this holy Sacrament should we admonish and comfort our selves, when
sorrow, and the combat of death, is at the greatest, that we cannot remem^er
any thing else; and think and say thus much in our hearts: I am baptized;
whereby God the holy Trinity, has made an everlasting covenant with me, that
he will be and continue my GOD, and has not grounded the same upon my
goodness, but upon his infinite mercy, the merits of his only Son, and upon
the grace and power of the holy Ghost. So am I absolved through Christ, and
have oftentimes received the holy supper of the Lord according to his
institution: therefore I am certain of the forgiveness of all my sins, Gods
grace, and salvation of my soul.

For, if the everlasting, merciful God, and my Lord Jesus, with the holy
Ghost, would not have me saved, or taken me to mercy, he would not have
suffered me to be baptized, or called me to his Kingdom through his holy
Gospel, nor let me so often receive the holy Sacrament.

Therefore should we have these worthy Sacraments in great estimation, and
often resort to the holy Communion of our Lord, using the same in right
worthiness for confirming of our faith, and comfort against sin, and the wrath
of God in our last end.

A Prayer.
O Thou everlasting, true, merciful God and Father, I thank thee through
Jesus Christ thy dear Son, in ye power and unspeakable sighing of the holy
Ghost, that thou have suffered me to be baptized in the name and power of the
holy Trinity, and taken me up for thy child, and through power of ye keys have
absolved me from all my sins, and fed me with the body and blood of thy
dear Son, for the strengthening of my faith, and forgiveness of all my
sins.

And I pray thee, dear Father, that thou will vphould me through thy holy
Spirit, in true says and confidence to my end, that I may sleep in peace like
to holy Simeon, and rise again with the righteous to everlasting glory,
through Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer to be said, when a man will receive the blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
O LORD JESUS CHRIST, thou living Son of God, which before thy Death and
Passion did institute and ordain to all Christians a new Testament of the
most worthy Sacrament of thy most holy Body and Blood: which I poor sinner am
not worthy to use, or take thy holy Body and Blood into my unclean mouth, or
upon my sinful tongue: and that thou, being so great a Lord, should come
under the cover of my house, or into my unprofitable Body, I am (alas!) not
worthy. But I pray thee (O dear GOD and Brother) open thou my mouth, touch thou
my tongue, and purge thou my heart from all sins, and make me thy poor
servant worthy of thy most holy Testament, that I may receive, take and vse'
thy most worthy body, and pure dear blood of thy Sacrament, to the health and
salvation of my soul, strengthening of my faith, amendment of my life, in
burning love toward thee, true love toward my neighbor: and bring me to
everlasting life, Amen.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving.
O Almighty and everlasting God, I praise and thank thy godly mercifulness,
that thou have fed me with the flesh and blood of thy only Son Jesus
Christ, my Lord and Savior, and do pray thee most humbly, thou will with the
Holy Ghost so work within me, that I which have received this blessed
Sacrament with the mouth, may also with constant faith, conceive and always
keep fast thy godly grace, of remission of sins, and justification with
Christ, which is therein showed and promised, and everlasting life through our
Lord Jesus Christ thy dear Son, who with thee in unity of the holy Ghost
lives and rai^neth, one true God for ever and ever, Amen.

A godly confession of the dear and worthy man M. John Stoliz.
MY sins do trouble me.

Gods grace ioyeth me.

Two things know I,

A poor sumer am I,

God is mereifull:

The first, acknowledge I; The second, believe I.
O God be mereifull to me poor sinner.

God gives.

Christ meriteth.

Faith conceiueth.

Works do witness.

Come to help me, thou good God; weak is man's help in tune of need.

Esaias 42. The bruised Reed shall be not break, and the glowing Tow shall ^ee
not quench out. O Lord strengthen and increase our faith, Amen.


Of Gods gracious and ever lasting Providence and Maintenance, a most true
comfort.
Psalm 37. WHen I have but thee (my Lord Jesus Christ) I care not for heaven
or earth. When my body and soul fail me, yet art thou always God, the
comforter of my heart, and portion.

Zachary 12. OVer the house of David and over the Citizens of Jerusalem, will I
power out the Spirit of Grace, and of Prayer, for they shall look upon me,
whom they have pierced.

Here does the Lord promise to send his Holy Ghost to us poor sinners, as
Saint John in the 15. and 16. Chapters, often makes mention of this promise:
for because we are weak and of little faith, when sin and Gods wrath do
terrify us, to the end our faith cease not, then shall the Holy Ghost (as a
true Comforter) strengthen and comfort us, and be witness to our hearts, that
our sins be forgiven, and that weere in grace, and she children of GOD, and
shall help us to sigh and pray with unspeakable sighing.

Therewithal also shall the How-ghost for the comfort and strengthening of our
faith, admonish and show us the holy wounds, whereby we may acknowledge, that
he was wounded and pierced for our sins, and his blood shed for the clensing
and washing away of all our sins.

II. Esaias 54. SO have I sworn, that I will not be angry with thee, nor yet
reprove thee: for the Mountains shall remoone, and the hills shall fall away;
but my Grace shall not, ^oe away from thee, and the Conenant of my Peace shall
not fall away, says the Lord thy compassioner.

GOd the Almighty has (through Christ, his hest beloved Son) erected a
Conenant of peace with us, and confirmed the same with an does, That if we do
believe in Christ, he will not punish, nor yet concernne us for evermore, but
continue our dear and loving Father eternally.

Such promise is so certain, that the Mountains shall fall down; yea Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, before such words fail.

A very glorious and comfortable cause does the Prophet set heereunto. The Lord
thy Compassioner has said; that is, God is so merciful, that he will not
condemn you for your sins: Whosoever believes in Christ with a faithful
heart, shall rest in grace, and he will for ever release and help him out of
all misfortune.

III. Esaias 54. Fear them not, thou shall not be ashamed. Be not weak, for
thou shall not be mocked.

THESE are fair and comfortable words. The Holy Ghost sees how flesh and
blood do forment us Christians; for although they have exceeding promises, and
sure comfort, yet is this weakness continually by it, that their hearts be
fearful, and weak. They are astonished at the devils power, and are afraid
by reason of their unableness: for because examples do stand before our eyes,
how God does sometime let the godly fall, therefore fear they the like will
happen unto them: but God comfort them, they shall not be ashamed nor
mocked: that is, God will not let them die or perish in their sins, but he
will redeene them and help them for ever. For, to be ashamed is nothing else
in the Scripture, but when hope fails and is in vain.

So the Rich man hoped in his money and goods, but he was ashamed thereby; for a
thousand things may happen to them, where neither money nor goods will help at
all. So must therbe ^shamed, who hope upon I clatrie, and their own goodness.
But they which set their hope on God, that he will, for Christ's sake, be
merciful, and help, and save them, this hope is sure, ^letteth them not be
ashamed. So did David comfort himself, Psalm 31. Upon thee do I trust, let
me not be ashamed, release me through thy righteousness.

III. Esaias 54. Thou shall be prepared through righteousness Thou shall be
far from force and wrong, that thou need not be afraid thereof, for it
shall not come near thee.

Here must thou not apply these words, force, wrong and fear, temporally;
for with Christians here it shall not be otherwise, but that they shall be
oppressed, and sundry ways made afraid, as Experience shows. And Christ
says, In the world you shall have sorrow.

But the Holy Ghost speaks of Force, Wrong, and Fear, that is ever and
eternally; from which Christians are sledde away through remission of sins
(which they believe through Christ) for they know that GOD is their Father:
although he let them suffer corporally, they comfort themselves with his help
and grace, and know, whilst they have Christ, they cannot miss.

V. Esaias 49. Sion says, The Lord has forsaken me: The Lord has forgotten me.
Can a woman forget her Child, that she take not pity of the son of her
body? and although she should forget it, yet will I not forget thee: Behold,
I have marked thee in the very hand.

When the Lord God a little suffers us to fall into apparent need, cross,
and sufferance, and helps not quickly; then fails oftentimes our comfort,
and we think God has forgotten us. In such tribulation, he shows us a
comfortable Image to look upon, and to learn thereby to strengthen our faith.

Thou art (says he) a father or mother, and have loving children: tell me, if
thy child should be for a while from thee, could thou forget it? Oh no, it
is impossible for any that are in their right wits, or that have any reason or
understanding: for children come from the heart, and go to the heart again.

But to me, says the Lord, it is more impossible, for my heart is not so
sickle as man's, neither is my grace so short or narrow.

I have an eternal grace and mercy; therefore can I as little forget my
Christians as mine hand, they are noted in my hand.

I think on them continually, they are always before my godly eyes, that I
must see them, and cannot forget them, yea and do uphold them also, through
the right hand of my Righteousness, so that no man, neither Sin, Hell, Death,
nor Devil, can by any means pull them out of my hand.

VI. Psalm. 8. Thou have put all things under his feet.

We poor Creatures are afraid of this vile naughty world, the Turk, Death,
and his beggarly sickness, and of the very Devil, and are afraid of his
tyranny and hellish power, which is natural: but when we acknowledge our Lord
Jesus Christ, and what power and might he has, wherefore need we be afraid?
As the Church sings very comfortably out of the six and forty Psalm.

If all the world fell devils were, and would us all devour:
Yet need we not the^ for to sear, of us they have no power.
For this Champion, which is always our Savior and Emanuel, is always by us,
and has such power to defend us, and to uphold us, that he will be our
steadfast rock and bulwark against all our Adversaries, Sin, Death, and the
Devil, and preserve us evermore: for God the Father has put all things under
his feet.

And this saying must not be understood of Sheep, Oren, wild beasts, and
Fishes of the Sea, but by this word (All) understand all Devils, all hellish
rabblement, Turks, and Heathens: In summ^, the very gates of Hell* all
sickness, Plague, Pestilence, etc. is all put under Christ's seet, that is to
say, under his power.

Therefore is it a sure comfort unto us, that we have a strong courageous Lord
to defend us. For all the Devils (how horrible soever they seem) with all
their armies and hellish power, are no^ able to make a Christian die, without
the will of the Lord Jesus Christ, they must all acknowledge him to be ^he
^^^rd, and now the k^ee before him. When dare not once s^^re, rec^pt (...) be
^is will; much less, seeing he has with his own blood bought us to his
everlasting Kingdom, and will not hinder us of our salvation.

This comfort should every Christian be sure of, that he may say, I believe
in Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.

I am certain that Jesus Christ is Lord of heaven and Earth; yea, of all in
the water, in the depth of Hell: that he has all in his hands, in his power
and command, in such sort, that all the Devils, Hell, and Death, how raging
soever they be, cannot crook a ^^ire of me, or of any member of Christ.

Also, all diseases, sickness, or pestilence, without his will, cannot poison
one little vein in me: But if it do happen with his will, then must it not
be hurtful unto me, but a furtherance and serviceable to my salvation.

A prayer.
O My God, my Lord, and Father, show unto my poor soul, that it may perceive
thou art my rock, bulwark, shield, tower, treasure, defense, trust, help,
refuge, protection and goodness; that I in this my great need and
tribulation, may, through thy godly grace, have help and assistance against my
adversaries, and be preserved for ever.

Lord, upon thee do I trust, let me never be ashamed.

Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit: O Lord, thou true God, release
thou me, Amen.

General comfortable Sentences, wherewith a man may comfort himself with Gods
eternal preservation.
Esaias 41. THOU shall be my servant, for I have chosen thee, and cast thee not
away. Fear not, I am with thee. Go not aside, for I am thy God, I strengthen
thee, I help thee also, and I p^eserue thee through the right hand of my
Righteousness.

Esaias 43. Fear thou not, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name,
thou art mine.

Psalm 31. Lord, on thee do I trust, let me never be confounded, deliver
me through thy righteousness.

Item.

Be comforted, and not dismayed, all you that tarry for the Lord.

Psalm. 32. The ungodly has many sorrows, but he that trusts in the Lord,
shall be compassed with goodness.

Psalm. 91. Though a thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousand on thy right
hand, yet shall it not touch thee.

Psalm. 91. Upon the Lion and Adder shall thou go, and tread upon the young
Lion and Dragon.

Psalm. 23. Goodness and mercifulness shall follow me all my life time: and I
shall dwell in the house of the Lord for evermore.

John 14. In my Fathers house are many dwellings: if it were not so, I would
have told you: I go hence to prepare the places for you.

John 14. I will not leave you fatherless: I live, and you shall also live.

John 14. I will come again, and take you unto me, that you may be where I am.

John 12. Where I am, there shall also my servant be.

Item.

When I shall be lifted up from the earth, then will I draw them all unto me.

John 10. I know my sheep, and am known of mine: and no man shall pull them
out of mine hands.

Romans 8. If God be with us, who shall be against us? who also has not spared
his only son, but has given him for us; how can hes not but give us all with
him?

Romans 8. I am sure, that neither death nor life, neither Angel nor
principality, nor power, neither things present, nor to come, neither height,
nor depth, nor any other creature, can separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer.
LAud, praise and thanks, be unto thee, my Lord Jesus Christ, for thy holy
incarnation, for thy martyrdom and litter passion; out of which I acknowledge,
that thou art my Redeemer and Savior; and do believe, that thou have overcome
sin, death, hell, and the devil, that they cannot hurt me. With this only do
I comfort me: heervpon build I: there stands my hope: there will I be found.
Only be gracious and merciful unto me, as I doubt not of thy sure promise.
O Lord, let me not sink or despair in this my great tribulation and
necessity, but preserve me happily by such sure comfort, Amen.

Esaias 49. Thou shall understand that I am the Lord; of whom they shall not be
ashamed, which tarry for me, etc.


A comfort for poor sick people, which are troubled by reason of their
grievous sickness.
Psalm. 118. THe Lord thastiseth me, but gives me not over to death.

Psalm. 119. It is good for me that thou have chastised me, that I may learn
thy Laws.


WHen any outward misfortune, cross or sickness falls upon us, then are
we sundry ways assaulted: we behave our selves impatiently, and do comolain
and weep for it. Such impatience is a great torment to a Christian: for, when
the devil can do nothing else on him, then comes he with impatience, that
many in their miseries do snarle and powt.

But if we could remember this only word, as David says, It is good, Lord,
that thou have chastised me; we should rather weep and cry when we are
without crosses, sickness, or other adversity. But, what prosit or goodness
this Cross is of, should every Christian earnestly think on in all his
temptations.

The chiefest profit of the Cross, is this: First, that thereby fleshly lust
and desire may be hindered, that it be not lascivious, and throw us not into
damnation, as our noerest enemy which we daily carry in our bosoms: for, as
a man must spur a Horse, and hold him with the bridle, and bring him forward,
Psalm 32. so must the Lord God also spur and bridle our old Adam through the
Cross; without which correction, we shall never come there, whereunto woe
through the Cross have cause.

2 Then shall we thereby be driven to the Word, and to Prayer, and brought
also to be penitent, as the Prophet Esaias says; Only mischance and tribulation
teach us to mark the Word; or (as David chastised me, that I might learn thy
Laws.

3 If it should always be with us according to our own carnal wills, then
should we be proud and insolent, etc. But when God catches hold on us with
sickness or any other cross, then we acknowledge our disability.

4 We shall be thereby occasioned to esteem and acknowledge Gods gracious
and almighty help; that he is to us a Rock, a Bulwark, Defense, Protection,
Help and Strength in all our need and necessity; without which gracious help,
we despair of all things, and must be without comfort. Now, when the devil,
with his poison, pestilence, and beggarly sickness, is worst-minded toward
us, and scatters his plagues and sickness among us, yet then have we
Christians GOD for a sure comfort: we are under his godly protection and
defense, and do trust always on Gods help; therefore shall we never be ashamed.

5 Then, when we have obtained and gotten GOD's help, others shall in like
manner be therewith strengthened and comforted, that they, in all their
tribulation and need, may set their comfort and hope on the Lords gracious help.

6 Although the Cross do bring such profit, that many more causes might be
rehearsed; yet the greatest comfort under the Cross is, that we be thereby
assured, that we are the children of God for ever, and so shall remain; seeing
that every father corrects his dear child, if he take it up (to the end it
may be kept in kindly obedience) Hebrews 12 Proverbs 20.

And here it goes after the common Proverb, as often as the honest Parents do
say before their Children,

O dear Rod,
Thou make me good:
Thou make me gentle to be,
That the Hangman
Be not troubled with me.
Such causes, how fatherly soever our Lord God means, that he lays so many
kind of crosses upon His; and withal, the great bountiful goodness and
profit that the same tribulations bring unto us, let us earnestly think upon,
when we are in misery, sickness, or other calamities, and not murmr against
GOD: for, he knows his creatures best, and can tell what is good and
profitable both for soul and body. So did the Lord Jesus well see before, the
tribulation that his Disciples should have after his death and passion: but he
comforted them, John 16. It is good for you that I go hence: for, if I go
not, the Comforter will not come to you; but, if I go hence, I will send him to
you.

Therefore should we set our will to GOD's will, as Syrach in the 2 Chap.
admonishes: My Child, if thou will be Gods Servant, then prepare thee to
tribulation: lean thou unto God, and shrink not, that thou may be always
stronger. Suffer whatsoever happens unto thee, and be patient in all thy
troubles: for, like as gold is tried in the fire; so shall they whom God
pleases, be tried through the fire of adversity.

I. Against the first assaulting under the Cross. God esteems us not.
Esaias 27. I The Lord do keep my vineyard, that is, my Christians, and water it
quickly that his leaves do not wither: I will preserve it day and night.


Here does God the Lord comfort us, that his Christians should not be grieved
with the Cross: for, he compares his Christendom to a pleasant Vineyard that
stands open on all sides, that every one may come in; and no man keeps it,
but lets it ly, yea, that it wants rain, and all will wither and be dry. So
do we also think under the Cross, that God cares not for us, else should
we he better. But it is certain, that God himself will be Guardian over his
Christians, and will send them the rain of grace and comfort in all their
temptations, as he here says, ^^^e Lord do keep it, and will quickly water
it. I will keep it both day and night, that no man hurt it: that is, My
Christians shall not meet with any evil, so graciously will I watch and ward
them. But ho^^ is such watching and warding, and yet a man does not see it?

Although it seems, God h^th no great respect with his guar^ing of temporal
things, and whatsoever is corporal (whil^st they belong not to his Kingdom),
yet must ye world and the devil let it alone, and not do all things as
pleases them, seeing the hairs of our head are numbered: As we have an example
thereof in Mat. 8. that the devil, without Christ's leave, could not go into a
filthy Swine. And such do the Histories sufficiently show. But the right guard
and protection of us Christians, goes inwardly to the heart; which, God with
his holy Spirit and Word puts into us, and day and night keeps us, that sin
grow not quite over us, and that Satan be not too mighty for us.

Of such guard speaks he shortly after. The sin of Jacob shall thereby cease,
that is, through the Cross God defends us against sin, and mortifieth the
old Adam.

Many a one does lie in his bed; who, if he were well, would do all
mischief. Many a one has another assaulting, which drives him to Sermons and
Prayers, and to amendment of his life; who, if that were not, would care
nothing at all for God or his Word.

Against such assaulting, should we earnestly think upon this defense of our
Lord God: for, the world does not see it, and the Christians also sometimes do
forget it in their need, and think, God does not regard them, he has forgotten
them. So did David comfort himself, Psalm 32. Thou art my d^fense: thou will
keep me from sorrow.

A Prayer.
O Lord, thou keeper of Israel, which do neither slumber nor sleep, and have
promised to thy faithful that lift up their eyes toward heaven to thee, and
tarry for thy godly grace, comfort and help, that thou will keep them day and
night in their tribulations, and with the comfort of thy holy Spirit wilt
moisten their hearts, and graciously accept of them, which is easy for thee to
do: I pray thee, let me not forget thy watching and warding in my adversity,
nor be weak in mine own cause; that thou would keep me from trouble. O keep
me from all tribulation. O keep me from all evil. O keep my soul and deliver
me: let me not be ashamed. O keep thou my going out, and coming in, both now
and for evermore, Amen.

II. Against the other a^saulting, God is our enemy.
Esaias 27. With me is no anger.

Lamen. 3. The Lord troubles, but he has compassion again according to his
great goodness: for he vereth not nor troubles man from his heart.


O God, whosoever could believe this, should yet be merry although he were
ill. But all sorrows and complaints come of this, that we think, God is angry
with us. Therefore he gives us in Esaias a pleasant similitude: I cannot be so
angry with my Vmeyard, that is, with my Christians, because I attend the same
so diligently. It is a dear Jewel unto me.

Therefore do I dress it, I hack it, I cut it; not that I hate it, but
because I love it, and will further it, that it bring forth fruit; which
otherwise would not come forth, if I should not in such sort hack it, and cut
it: for, although it seem not friendly, that the hedger stands over the Vine
with his knife, and cutteth it, has the Mattocke in his hand, and heaweth it
with all his might, yet is it but for the good of the Vineyard, that it bear
the more fruit.

So shall you, my dear Christians, says the Lord, understand it sol kewise,
and hold it for a certain, that I love you, Proverbs 3. when I come over you
with the Cross, with the Wine-hook and Mattocke, cut and hack you.

Another fine similitude gives he afterward of plowing, in chapter 28. Hearken
with your ears, and hear my voice: When a Husbandman breaks and ploweth his
field, it seems that he does much harm, especially when he oftentimes in
the year, yea, three or four times, turns it over, and ploweth through the
same. Wherefore does he it? It goes here after the common Proverb; The
fourth kind brings the fourth Sheaf.

Therefore does he not let it rest after plowing: but when he has plowed
through his field, he sows it; then follows fair and goodly fruit. So,
says the Lord GOD, do I also. I plow you with the Cross, and send one thing
after another; now poverty, then sickness; etc. which does grieve you: but
it proceeds not of anger, as if I were your enemy: it is done for your good,
that the stones and rocks may be rooted out, and the ground made ready for
fruit. Therefore do I chastise you through right and doctrine.

Likewise does leremy in this place also comfort: The Lord troubles me, etc
For that is his work, as Psalm 4 says. He deals strangely with his Saints,
he thrusts them first unto hell, and lets them come into need, before he do
help them out: he lets one be first sick, before he make him whole.

But, in such Crosses and Tribulations, does he leave them helpless? No; but
has such a heart as is full of love and compassion. Therefore is he merciful
again according unto his great goodness; and shows himself like a helpful
GOD, and bears a fatherly heart toward us. For, like as a father does carry
an heart toward his dear child, in that he restrains him, to the end he
come to goodness, and may see both joy and honesty in him: So in GOD's heart
toward us also that he vexes not, nor troubles us men from his heart, but
that he may preserve us his dear children to his glory, kingdom and
everlasting life.

Here of have thou a fine example of Joseph, which prayed a long time: he was
guiltless, and cast into Prison. God heard him not so soon, else had he come
home to his parents, and been a poor shepherd all his life time: but afterward
God took pity of his misery, released him of his imprisonment, and made him a
great Prince over all the Land of Egypt.

So will God also do with us his dear children: a certain time will he leave
us, to be troubled in misery: but afterward will he accept of us, and take
pity with his everlasting mercy, will perfectly rejoice us, preserve and bring
us to everlasting glory.

A Prayer.
O Lord God, heavenly father, which of thy fatherly well meaning, wilt keep me
thy dear Child here on earth under thy rod, to the end I may be like thine
only Son, both in passion, and afterward in glory: I pray thee comfort me
in my tribulations and crosses, with thy holy Spirit, that I despair not; but
according to the promises of thy Son, do take sure hold of this comfort,
that the crosses of me and all faithful, be but a little, and that thou will
with thy grace, accept of us again in our troubles, with everlasting pity,
that everlasting joy may follow; That I (through this hope) may with patience
overcome all misfortunes, Amen.

Lamen. 3. It is a precious thing for a man, that he carry the yoke in his
youth.


MAny a one does GOD lay his cross and yoke upon, betimes in his young blood
and youth.

Although our flesh and blood do shrink for it, and would gladly forbear it,
yet should we know, that it is a costly thing for a man, that he be exercised
from his youth under the Lords yoke, and be rocked with the dear Cross, for
thereby teaches he, not only to esteem much of Gods help, but also to
thank God from his heart: for his gracious care has kept him thereby from so
many terrible sins (which the Adversary in his youth did trouble him with.)
And because he is from his youth used to the Cross, therefore is he patient,
for he knows well, that he shall find no better life here. Therefore has
he is mind and longing to another world, and occasioned to pray unto GOD, for
the gracious co^^^ing of his kingdom.

For such and the like causes, will GOD preserve us always under his yoke.

For when one cross is scant past, there comes soon another. And here must
(...) tell an example of a Christian Pastor and Preacher, which soon after the
beginning of the Gospel, did preach in the precinct of Weida. This honest and
godly man (without doubt) loved the Lord GOD and his holy Word entirely,
therefore was the Devil his sore enemy. And GOD the Lord (through many
afflictions) did try his faith.

For first, not only he, but his whole household, wife, and children were
taken with a long lasting sickness of the French disease, on which his wise
and children died. Not long after, the horrible plague of Pestilence fell upon
him: in the time of which sickneg, the wilde-fire kindled in o^e of his arms,
that he was forced to have the same sawed off: and was after wards bereaved of
his senses, that he was kept in chains. Upon whom the Lord showed himself so
gracious and merciful, that he gat his senses again But shortly after, when
he sound himself very ill and weak, he called on his dear God, with these
and such like words.

O Dear God, I thank thee for thy gracious help, and everlasting Redemption,
which thou have showed to me poor sinner, through thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, and let so happen unto me, that thou might preserve me in the same
thy everlasting grace and mercy. Oh, how many tribulations and sicknesses have
thou laid die upon me from my youth, have visited me with ye French disease and
Pestilence, have let my wife and children die, sent the wild fire into my
arm, to be bereaved of my wits and memory, and have given me the same
again: O my dear GOD, what will thou do more with me, and what is thy
pretense?

Even at that hour, as he thanked his dear GOD for his everlasting help,
that he had so heartily accepted of his Soul, and yielded him further to GODS
will and pleasure, without doubt for dissoluing of this life, praying with
Saint Paul with his heart, the falling sickness took him, by the means
whereof he departed out of this life, but was perfectly heard.

As God now dealt with this Christian, in sending him one sorrow after an
other: First, on his wife; then shortly after upon his children, and his own
body, etc. So will he often times do with his Christians in this life, from
their youth, and it shall stand us in good stead. For, nothing can be dannable
to them which be in Christ Jesus.

This same is somewhat a horror for our senses to hear: but a Christian should
yield himself with patience unto Gods will and pleasure, as this Christian man
did. For like as the Lords yoke is a very costly thing; so again is it also a
costly thing to bear the same with patience, and tarry for his help.

Therefore, whosoever is subject under the Lords yoke and cross, let him here
learn with the Prophet David, to comfort himself, and to pray thus:

O dear God, behold how I am here in subjection under thy yoke, with many
miseries and troubles. I know (if it be thy will) that thy right hand can
turn away all. But if it be not thy godly pleasure to help me bodily (as
thou know what is best) then give me the comfort of thy holy Spirit.

I rejoice, and am glad of thy goodness, that thou have respect of my misery,
and know my soul in adversity, Psalm 31. I hope upon thee, for thou art
merciful.

My heart rejoices, that thou so willingly helpest.

Therefore (O dear God) although thou kill me, and let me die under thy
yoke and cross, yet will I not doubt nor despair of thine everlasting help.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the flesh is weak, and impatient. O dear Lord, burn,
hew, strike, and plague me how thou will; I only pray thee for patience and
meekness, Amen.

III. Wherefore God lays the Cross upon us.
Esaias 48. Behold, I will cleanse thee, but not as silver, but I will make thee
selected in the Furnace of Affliction, for my sake will I do it.


WE poor Creatures have often gone away from God, and forgotten him. Therefore
it is needful that he do cast us into the melting Quen, like unclean and
falsified silver, to be cleansed and purified, to the end he may again have a
pleasure and delight in us: And so we, delivered from sin, and comne again
into the fear of God, may keep his word.

This is (for all that) no evil thing, but the chiefest pretense and means,
that God spares thy Soul, takes a while thy body, thy goods, wife, and
children, etc. Therewith he thrusts thee into the furnace of affliction,
that thou may thereby learn to acknowledge thy sins, to be sorry for them,
to humble thy self before GOD, and pray for Gods grace, etc. whereas otherwise
(if thou did not stick in this furnace) thou would always go forward
in sin, and more and more fall into damnation.

But now, whilst thou do convert, God has a liking to thee, and takes thee
again to his mercy, for his Names sake, that is, only therefore, that he
will through Christ be merciful unto us, to the end we acknowledge his Name
and Mercy, and praise the same.

1 Cor. 11. When we are judged, then shall we be chastised of the Lord, that
we be not damned with the world.


Here does Saint Paul show the cause why God does lay the cross upon his
people.

He does the same, that we may attain unto his holiness. For it is certain,
if GOD should give to us all that we would willingly have, we should be
safe, and have no regard of our sins, neither think on the Word or Prayer.

But when all goes over and over, and now one affliction, and then another
happens, then has a man cause to hasten, not only to prayer, but also to
think, how we with our sins have well deserved such correction: And
therefore henceforth to prepare our selves more earnestly, for amendment of
our lives: As it is said in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Our Father in Heaven
does chastise us for our good, that we may attain unto his holiness.

A Prayer.
O Dear and heavenly Father, who of thy well meaning and love, to keep me
under thy childely obeisance for obtaining of thy holiness, and to make me
selected, have laid so manifold corrections upon me: Take pity on my Soul,
and come to help me in these mine afflictions, occurrences, and temptations of
the raging Devil.

Deliver my soul in this great need from the hellish dogs, Amen.

Lament. of Jeremy 3. It is a costly thing to be patient, and to tarry for the
Lords help.


MAny men do often fall under the cross, into Impatience, and Despair, for
they know not yet what ye good God means toward us with the Cross: and this
impatience is a great affliction of the Devil, by which the unfaithful are
brought, either to seek means that be forbidden, or through despair (when a
had conscience meets with it) do run their own heart out, do poison,
drown, hang, or kill themselves, etc. for they have no comfort in their
hearts. It fares with them, as the Prophet Micheas in the 7. Chap. says, When
the day of thy Preacher comes, they shall not know what to do.

Against such afflictions does Jeremy here strengthen us: O (says he) what a
terrible and woeful thing it is, when a man will not acknowledge, what a loving
heart God has toward him? He begins to be impatient, murmureth against God,
and despaireth: against which, if any do think thus in his heart, I know I
have a merciful God in heaven, who esteems of me, as of other his dear
children; and will through these my afflictions, sickness, woes, and miseries,
etc. put me in mind of my sins, and admonish me to repentance, that I may
be more godly, and shall keep me from sin: These are precious and happy
thoughts, for they are the comfort of the Holy Ghost, and worthy to be praised.

For whosoever has such thoughts in his heart, is patient under the Cross,
seeks help by GOD with prayer, and hops for the Lords gracious hour of
help, and is of sure hope that it will come; if not corporally, yet the Lord
will perfectly hear him: Therefore tarrieth he for his help with patience.

So did the Prophet Abacuk comfort in the 2. Chap. The promise shall be yet
fulfilled in due season, and lastly come to light, and not tarry away. Though
it linger, tarry you: it will surely come, and not stay.

A Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, give me thy holy Spirit to strengthen me, that I may
bear thy will with patience, that both in good and evil, I may always break
my will, offer and mortify my self, and not murmr against thee, although I
think it goes otherwise with me, then I gladly would; I would rather that it
went always after my will, that I might be without Crosses: but O Lord, do
thou thy will upon me, and give me obedience and patience in all Crosses and
Afflictions, Amen.

IIII. God will also deliver from the Cross.
1 Cor. 10. GOd is trusty, who will not let you be tempted above your
ability, but makes the temptation to get an end, that you may bear it,


Here does Saint Paul encounter with two great afflictions which greatly
hinder our faith, especially when we groan and lie bedred: The first, that we
think the Cross to be heavy, and too great, and fear we must under it go
to the ground: The second, that we see no way nor means whereby we may be
helped; then we make account we are undone, and begin to doubt and to despair.
Therefore does Saint Paul here comfort us: Why should you so despair under
the cross? you have yet a true merciful God, which lays upon no man more
then his ability, yea, he himself gives strength and power to them which be
not able, and makes the affliction a gracious means and end, that how heavy
soever the same seems, yet those which are his, do go through with it, and
bear it: for the cross is to a Christian but a slight burden, and a light
yoke, Math. 11. under which the Lord himself did put his godly arm, neck
and shoulders, and will comfort them, as he promises, Esaias 51. I, even I am
your Comforter, etc. And how long or endless the cross seems to our
understanding, yet shall there be a happy end, and but a small thing, as the
Lord himself reckoned his suffering, that it was but little, John 16.

So also the Lord GOD comforted his Christians: Yet a little while, then shall
my anger for thy sins, and my displeasure have an end, Esaias 10. Here does
the Lord give a fine comparison, John 16. of a Woman in Childbed, with whom it
seems also, as if the Cross were importable, both Mother and Child must go
together. The poor woman can do no more, but yields her self in such smart
and deadly pain, unto Gods will and pleasure, and says: Whether I live or
die, I am the Lords.

Now when the pain is at the greatest, and no power more to bear: behold, it
goes then after the common proverb, Where man's help ends, there Gods help
begins, It is but for a little time, and then in stead of death, two lives
are brought into the world, and the woman thinks no more on the pain, for
great joy that she has brought a merry birth into the world. Likewise should
we also comfort our selves, that it is but a while, then shall Gods help be
unto us; and in stead of sorrow, joy and comfort shall be found.

A Prayer.
O Thou most true and good Lord GOD and Father, give me, for thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake, through thy holy Spirit, a strong trust in thee, that I may
assure my self, and go through with all the afflictions of the Cross; and
steadfastly believe (although the Cross, to my thinking, and to all men's
reason, seems too heavy and importable, and withal endless) that it press
me not down, but be unto me a light burden, and a light yoke. And lend me
likewise strength and ableness, in putting-to thy holy arm and help to bear,
it till I (through thy godly help) shall with patience overcome ye same; and
that thou would send to me a happy end, and hour of help, with grace, Amen.

Romans 8. I am assured, that the sufferings of this life are not worthy of the
glory of God, which shall be showed to us.


Here Saint Paul the Apostle puts all the miseries of mankind together, what
name soever they have; All diseases, plagues, sicknesses, crosses and passions,
and how heavy and great such woes and miseries do seem unto us; and says, If
all the troubles of this world were heaped together, yet were all much too
slight to be compared to God's glory. Why will thou then complain so much of
troubles and man's miseries? It is but a little times: and then shall follow to
every Christian Believer, an unmeasurable and everlasting glory.

Here in this life let no man think that it will be better with him, as Christ
himself says; In the world you shall have troubles, etc. For we are here in
the devils house: if thou hold not with the host, thou shall have small favor
in thy lodging. Many a one thinks he will go to another place, and flee away
from the mischief: but wheresoever he comes, he finds the host at home.
Look what great dangers the Apostle Paul endured, as in his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, and eleventh Chapter: but, the hope of everlasting life, and
glory to-come, carried him through, that with patience he overcame all.

As it is true, that No eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor ever came into
the heart of man, vhat joys, habitation, and glory is prepared for Christians,
and shall be revealed unto them:

So is it most certain, that they shall have holy, clear, immortal and
powerful bodies; and therefore need not fear any humane miseries, death nor
devil. And all these great gifts shall they have through Christ for evermore.
All shall be Gods, and have enough. A poor scabbed boy or wench, a poor
scholar, a despised beggar, etc. which put their trust in Christ, shall have
more, and be more rich, th^n all the Emperors and Kin^s in this life: for,
they shall possess the everlasting glory; in which, the Lord Jesus Christ
shall crown them with his vnwithered Garland of honor, to everlasting
heavenly honor; as we use to set Garlands on for an honor. All worldly
honor shall be but childrens play to such honor and glory: for, there shall
the Christians in glory he like the Son of GOD himself; yea, Lords over all
tyrants and persecuters, over the holy Angels, who shall be their servants,
shall stand about them, and wait on them; and shall in such honor and glory
have a merry, constant, and quiet conscience: where no misfortune more shall
overthrow their joys, their everlasting righteousness, innocence, and
salvation. Of which glory we all should comfort our selves in all our
afflictions: then may we, through such hope, with patience overcome the Cross.

So does Saint Peter comfort us: You shall rejoice in the salvation, who were a
small time in sorrow. Likewise S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 4. Our small and slight
troubles cause to us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory: for,
we look not upon the visible, but on the invisible things.

A Prayer.
O Dear and heavenly father, I acknowledge, that I, for my sins sake, have well
deserved all woes and miseries, wherein I do stick, besides everlasting
punishment. But I thank thee with all my heart, that thou have (through Christ)
redeemed me from such everlasting woes; and do believe, that these my sorrows
and troubles are but small, and that upon the same, shall follow to me and all
the faithful, an everlasting, and above all measure, an exceeding glory.

I pray thee, that thou will preserve me in this poor troublesome life, which
is so full of woes and miseries, through comfort of thy holy Spirit in sure hope
and patience, to thy everlasting honor and glory, for thy dear Son Christ
Jesus sake, his redemption, death, power, resurrection, life and glory, Amen.

Set thou thy cause on God indeed.
He will thee help in time of need.
For, he that God does trust,
Speed well always he must,
Help thou, Lord God, every where;
The body here, and the soul there.
A COMFORT against the fear and terror of Death, and the Grave;

BEING An Exposition of Doctor MARTIN LVTHER, written a little before his end.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for John Parker. 1624.

An Exposition of D. MARTIN LVTHER, written a little before his end.
JOHN 8. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If any keep my word, he shall never
see death.


HOW incredibly is this spoken, and against manifest and daily experience, in
that we see one carried away, and buried!

Yet it is true, when a man seeks after Gods Word with his heart, believes on
him, and upon the same sleeps or dies; he sinks and goes hence, before he might
see death, or beware thereof, and is for certain saved by the Word, in that he
believes, and determines to depart from hence. Therefore should we Christians
not be afraid of death.

John 5. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on
him that sent me, shall have everlasting life, and not come into judgment, but
shall pass through death into life.

THis may be called an excellent comfort, and ratified with a solemn Oath,
That we Christians, when we only believe in Jesus Christ, and that the
Father sent him for our righteousness; then need we take no care for dying,
nor be afraid of damnation, but do pass through this temporal death to
everlasting life: that is, so soon as we are dead before all men's eyes, we
are, in the twinkling of an eye, with God in everlasting life. Who would then
fear to die? O unbelief, O original sin, that thou should so hardly
believe so many Promises, so many Miracles, and such solemn Oaths of the true
Son of God, made unto the Saints and children of Christ.

John 11. I am the Resurrection and life. He that believes on me, shall live,
although he die: and who lives and believes on me, shall not die for ever.

IN this Saying, the Lord teaches us for what cause death is no death to us,
but a beginning of eternal life: for, our Lord Jesus Christ lives, and is the
Resurrection and the life, because we are members of Christ's Body, incorporated
to him in holy Baptism.

Therefore shall we live with him for ever, as sure as he our head lives;
only because our life is hidden with Christ in GOD. But when Christ our life
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory, Colos. 3.

O Lord, strengthen my faith.

1 These. 4. For if we believe, that Jesus Christ is dead, and risen, so shall
they which do sleep in Jesus Christ, be carried away with him, etc.

1 Cor. 11. Behold, I tell you a mystery: we shall not all sleep.

THE Holy Ghost has a strange speech; who calls that a Sleep, which the
world names Dying; and the dead, sleeping.

With these words does the holy Ghost declare unto us in a familiar comparison,
that the death of Christians is no death, but a life; and describes to us the
temporal death of the faithful Christians, after the friendliest manner.

For, even as there is nothing tearer or pleasanter to a sick body upon the
earth, than a sweet sleep, when he stretches himself in his body, and tumbles
himself certain times to and fro upon his bed, and feels grief, as if a man's
head did ache. But before he be aware, a soft sleep falls upon him: there
sleeps he, and knows not how or when. He hears nothing, nor knows he
any thing: he sleeps away both thundering and lightning; neither can he tell
how long he has slept. When he awaketh, his weariness and sickness is gone,
and he is as if he were newborn: which every one has tried oftentimes in
his sleep. So, says the Lord God, is it also with the death of every Christian.

When we have wrought our selves weary upon earth, and have suffered and
lived, and oftentimes tossed our selves to and fro upon our groaning bed, by
reason of our bodily sickness (for Christians must also, for their sinful
flesh sake, have their bodily sickness and grief); then when, in the last
combat, the sinful flesh and blood is killed, and the heart has yielded it
self prisoner, that we may be spunne new and holy (which is not done without
grief), a sweet sleep comes upon us, where all griefs and afflictions do
cease. There a Christian does not know how he fell asleep: he is not aware of
any death, nor knows he of any, but lives in the Lord GOD. And in this
sleep shall we sleep out all sin, defects, miseries, sickness, woes and
necessities, and shall awake at the last Day, and rise again in a new, holy,
spiritual, immortal, effectual, and clarified body, and shall behold GOD and
his glory face to face, and whole Christendom in everlasting joy. And although
one have slept five thousand years under the ground, it shall be as if he had
slept but one hour; as the Christians in old time were wont to describe unto
children, and to the simple, with example of the 7 Sleepers. With these words
should we comfort our selves against the fear and bitterness of death:
whereas we also believe, and with Simeon do sing with peace and joy, I hence
depart: in Gods will my heart is comforted, being quiet and still; as God has
said, Death is my sleep, I am not afraid.

O Merciful God and Father, I pray thee, through the death and resurrection of
thy Son, when I have lived and groned me weary, and that mine hour is comne;
grant me, O Lord, a sweet sleep, and take my soul into thy hands, Amen.

Dan. 12. Many which have slept under the ground, shall awake: some to
everlasting life, some to everlasting reproof and shame.

THe Prophet Daniel uses here to speak after an Evangelical manner, and
calls death also a sleep. As Christ speaks of the illuminate School
masters daughter, The Maiden is not dead, but sleeps: And names Death, a
sleep. And without doubt the Holy Ghost had respect here to the death and
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all power is taken away from
death, Esaias 25.

Therefore should we Christians remember such friendly, kind, and comfortable
speeches; That we speak not iestingly of the death of them that sleep, as the
wicked and rude people do: He is gone into the old World: He is gone into the
old Market: He is at Trores: His spoone is fallen down: No, it is called,
fallen asleep. S. Paul names it a departure, to be dissolved; Saint Peter, to
put off his Tabernacle, etc. But in what manner such sleep is, can we not
perceive or understand, more then of temporal sleep know we perfectly: As
for example, In the mothers body, the mother knows nothing till it stir: So
we in bodily sleep can do nothing; what can we know of the sleep of the Holy
Ghost? But Christ instrueteth us that believe, of such sleep, Luke 20. They
live in God, says he.

And here it is to be noted, that not only Christians have their sleep, but
the wicked also: but it is an unlike sleep, a soft and sweet sleep, against
an unquiet and heavy sleep. As when one is sick, he hardly sleeps: but he
which is in health sleeps soundly. But the ungodly do dream always of the
devil, as the Rich-man. Esaias 66. Vermis eorum non morietur: But the Christians
do rest in Christ, quietly and peaceable, like a little innocent Chilue, which
often sleeps so soundly (as a man says) Like a vong Hare. The same did D^uid
acknowledge, therefore says he, Psalm. 4. I will lay me down and sleep
quietly; for thou only, O Lord, make me to dwell in safety.

From such sleep shall be also a waking to all them which believe on Christ,
and have holden with his holy Word and Sacraments, and they shall be
comforted. They shall rise again to everlasting glory, and receive the
everlasting garland of honor, the Heavenly, everlasting and immortal Crown,
and escape everlasting judgment and shame.

But the ungodly which have done evil, forgotten the covenant of their
Baptism, and not believed on Christ, they shall awake to everlasting reproof
and shame.

A fair similitude of hoth resurrections have we, Genesis 40 on loseph, the
Butler and Baker: They were all three laid in prison, and came to liberty
again, which signifies the Resurrection. One of them was set free, came to
honor and to his Office again: The other was also quit of his troubles, but
comes to the Gallows: Joseph signifies our Lord Jesus Christ, who was also
put into this prison, but guiltless. The Butler signifies all honest
Christians which acknowledge their sins, and with hearty repentance and sorrow,
have believed on Christ: they shall at the latter day be placed with him in
everlasting glory. The Baker signifies all the ungodly: they shall be also
quit of their prison (that is, their Graves) but to everlasting damnation.

Surely, surely, the grave is a very soft resting bed for Christians, which the
Lord Jesus has before warmed for them, that they need not be afraid
thereof: Therein have they a good, soft, and quiet sleep. There shall they
always dream of the Vine. For the Vine signifies Christ; and the Grapes. the
sweet doctrine of the holy Gospel, as i^t Matthew 7. appears. Do men gather
Grapes on Thorns? John 15. Ego sum vitis vera, etc. There dream the
Christians in death and Grave, always on the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his
swee^e Doctrine. And in such soft dreams rest they so soft, that they think
many thousand years be as though they had scantly slept an hour.

But the Baker (that is the ungodly) dreameth always of the Devil, and how
the birds do eat his Bread out of the Basket. The Birds are the Devils, which
eat away Gods word from him: Such eating and gnawing must they feel for ever;
whereof we have a similitude, which our Elders fained of Prometheus, that the
Eagle did eat out his heart, and the heart did grow within him again, and the
eating never had end. The same do the wicked feel truly, as the woeful
tragedy of the Rich man shows.

That there are two resurrections, whereby all men may direct themselves, God
causes to be preached unto us in the time of Grace: Therefore, whosoever will
escape such everlasting gnawing eating consciences, hellish pain and torment,
let him take hold of the sweet doctrine of the Holy Gospel, and in the
Sacraments, put therewith comfort into his heart, trust, and believe, as Gods
word does plentifully show him; for so it must be, as Christ very comfortably
promises, Mark 16. Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Everlasting God and Father, which art not a God of the dead, but of the
living: For in thee do all they live, which rest under the Earth in their
Chambers:

We pray thy fatherly goodness, that thou will not let the thinking of death,
or of his sting, be a fear unto us; but wilt through grace of thy holy
Spirit, keep us in she right faith of thy dear Son, who is the truth and
life, and give us a good conscience, that we may live Christianly, and depart
happily out of this vale of misery, sleep in peace and ioy' and rest quietly,
until thou open our Graves; And thorough the sound of the trumpet, be waked
again to life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

1. Cor. 15. It is sowed a natural body, etc.

Here the Holy Ghost uses another word, and calls Dying, To be sowed, which
is a friendly similitude: we are the Wheatcornes (as Christ himself says.
Ioh. 12) Now is the seed which the Husbandman sows glory, and bring forth
much fruit, whereon God the holy Trinity shall have everlasting joy and
pleasure. Therefore should we not be afraid of death.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, come and sow us and our Children in thy Churchyard, that
we never need to be afraid for any trouble, need, wars, or hearts
sorrow, Amen.

Luke 2. The old man Simeon sings.

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace.

THis old Christian Simeon calls Death, a Departing in Peace, which is also
the saying of the Holy Ghost: for there is nothing in our whole body upon
earth, but vnrestfulnesse and disquietnesse, one after another.

But when we, our Lord and GOD, shall go out of this vale of misery, and come
into our everlasting Country, then come we unto Peace. What man would not
then once have also such peace and rest?

Philip 1. I desire to depart, or to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
which is also much better.

Here Saint Paul calls Death, A Dissoluing or a departure: for here we are
bound to sinful flesh, to pains and labor, and cannot sooner be quit
thereof, then through the happy hour.

2. Pet. 1. I know that I shall quickly put off my Tabernacle.

SAint Peter names Death here, the Going out of a poor, ruinated, sinful,
and woeful Habitation, and to be removed into a glorious paradise, or to put
off an old worn gown, and to put on an immortal and heavenly apparel,
whereof we ought by good reason to rejoice.

Esaias 26. Go hence (my people) into a chamber, and shut the door after thee:
hide thee awhile, till the indignation be ouerpast.

Esaias 57. The righteous are plueked away from their misfortune; and they which
have wandered righteously, do come into peace, and rest in their chambers.

HOW friendly and joyfully speaks the Holy Ghost of the death of Christians,
and gives the same five beautiful names!

First, Dying, he calls, Going into a Chamber, to go into a pleasant
Parlour, as oftentimes a man builds a pleasant room for himself, where he
would willingly heee alone, and be quiet from his children and household.

Secondly, he names death, Hiding one a while, till Gods wrath and punishment
be ouerpast, as when one stands underneath for soul weather, or hides his
daughter, when an army passes through, so does the Lord God lay us up, that no
misfortune hurt us.

Thirdly, Death is called, Plucking away from misfortune: for when GOD will
punish the World for their sins, he takes first his Christians away,
gathers them together, remooueth them into a place of safety, that they be
not hurt.

Fourthly, it is called Departing in peace, as Simeon did.

Fifthly, Resting in their chambers: for else upon earth will be small rest or
peace.

But the Grave of the Christians he calls, our Chambers and resting beds,
wherein no man shall disquiet us, or awake us, nor any man can drive us out,

There would many a one also have gladly a resting Chamber upon Earth, and
builds often with great charges in quiet places, even where he hears no
knocking or running, especially when he is sick; but all is to no effect, for
on Earth is no such fleeping Chamber to be had: we are awaked with care,
sorrow, need, world, and Devil.

So are our Chambers upon earth but hired Chambers: although we have bought
them, we know not when we shall go forth of them. But the Chambers in the
Churchyard are quiet, and our own. There shall no care, sickness, nor
Devil, make us unquiet, neither shall any man drive us out, till the Lord
Jesus awake us to everlasting life.

This is comfortably and joyfully spoken of the death of Christians, and of the
Grave: He that believes it, will beeglad from his heart for the hour.

Philip. 1. Christ is my life, and Death is my gains.

SAint Paul gives Death here, a fair name, his greatest and best gains: for
there he lays in exchange a mortal, needful, defective, sinful, weak,
sick, and imperfect body, and takes for the same again, for usury and
gains, an everlasting, immortal, holy, strong, and spiritual body, which may
be called a Gains: who would be afraid to die?

Psalm. 116. The death of his Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord.

BEfore the world and our five Senses, nothing is more horrible nor terrible
yea, nor more dishonorable, then death, and a dead body.

But before the face of Almighty God, the Death of Christians is the fairest
Relic.

Genesis 15. God says to Abraham, Thou shall go to thy Fathers with peace.

Here God himself names Death, a Going home into his Country, and to come to
his Parents and Friends; And withal, upon the journey, to be conducted with
peace.

As a child that has been long amongst strangers, rejoices in his heart,
that he may once go home, so should we also rejoice, when our deaths hour
approaches, that we may go home into our everlasting Country, and with all
Christendom, have an everlasting Nuptial day and joy.

Genes. 25. Abraham was gathered to his people.

SO does the Holy Ghost speak of Abraham's death: For here on earth we are
among a sort of evil degenerated people, with whom we shall be plagued and
martyred; as the Children of Ifrael were of the Egyptians, and of their
Taske-maisters.

This Sentence of holy Scripture, should we conceive and keep: wherewith we
may in dangerous times learn to prepare us, and to comfort our selves, and
pray with our hearts for an happy hour.

And when we see death before our eyes, or think thereof, not to be afraid.

Upon these sentences out of holy Scripture, have the honest Christians always
had goodly words, wherewith they have comforted themselves against Death: Of
which we will rehearse some.

Cicely, a godly Christian woman of Rome, when her kindred would persuade her
she should deny our Lord Jesus Christ, and what she did mean to make such
light account of her body and life, the highest treasure and best pawn we have?
She answered, If it had concerned only our life, we should not willingly
lose it. But I believe another better life, which lasts for ever, of which
JESUS CHRIST has preached unto us.

This true Martyr and Confessor of the true Christian faith, did take hold on
the right comfort. She was not afraid of the horrible Death: for, she knew,
that this temporal Death was a beginning of everlasting life.

Item, whereas we Christians do say and confess, Miseria hominis moritur,
non homo: that is, Of a Christian dies nothing but his wars and miseries:
he dies not. And it is true. No ioyfuller hour can happen unto us Christians
upon earth, than the happy hour of death: for even in the twinkling of an eye,
all our woes and miseries do (...) incessantly, deaths sting and sickness:
but when we are dead in the sight of the world, then do we first live, and
do never feel any more either danger or death. For, our temporal death is an
end of death, and a beginning of life.

Item, whereas the Christian says, Without the knowledge of Christ, death
(...) sin: (...) ledgeth Christ, to him is temporal death the best remedy
for sin; whereby finally sin is scoured quite out of our flesh and blood,
body and soul, that we never sin more.

Therefore we should (by good reason) be glad of death, that we may be once
rid of that shameful sin, wherewith we are plagued and tormented day and
night: as Saint Paul cries out over this prosecuting sin, Romans 7.

Now, as honest Christians have out of Gods Word, for their comfort, spoken
friendly and familiarly of death: so have they also given comfortable names to
the Graves, and to Burials.

Prudentius does call the Grave, Our Lord God's Iewell-house; wherein he has
his dear Gold and Relics, and halloweth the Ashes and Bones of his
Christians, and will at the last Day demand them again by weight.

The holy Scripture names the Buriall-place, A House of the Living, who dwell
there alive indeed. All other dwellings upon earth (although they be built of
pure Cypress and Marble) are but Pest-houses, where men do sicken and die.
Only the Graves of Christians are the Houses of the Living.

The Latin Church calls the Churchyard, A sleeping house. The Dutchmen call
it God's Field, wherein God sows us, as has been said before.

Besides all these, Christ our Lord was buried: he has hallowed and warmed
the grave for us, and left his linen clothes therein. And the holy Angels
dwell in the grave, do watch and keep us in our resting bed.

Now, he that is so instructed in Gods Word, and believes, desires from his
heart to be out of his groaning bed of sorrow, and to be in his resting bed.

Whereupon, the Lord Jesus Christ help us, through grace of thy holy Spirit,
Amen.

Romans 14. Whether I live or die, I am the Lords.

A Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, all they which are baptized in thee, are baptized in thy
death. I am baptized in thee, therefore am I also baptized in thy death. I will
with thy help die merrily and willingly; hoping, that as I have bin partaker of
thy troubles, I shall be also partaker of thy glory.

O Lord Jesus Christ, thou have prayed upon the Cross, Father, forgive them:
So, Lord, do I forgive all that have done against me, that thou may pardon
me of all my sins.

O Lord Jesus Christ, thou have called upon the Cross, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Lord, leave me not at the point of death.

O Lord, thou have said upon the cross, Eather, into thy hands I commend my
spirit: even so, Lord, do I commend my poor soul into thy hands, Amen.

Psalm 31. Into thy hands I commit my Spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord GOD
of truth.


An Epitaph of Gasper Huberin.
Oh a sinner! Born, alive, and dead am I.

Christ my Lord, Renew, forgive, and wake me up.

I am faithful. Preserve, make clear, and save me.

Psalm 4. I laid me down, and slept quietly, for thou only (O Lord) helpest
me, that I dwell in safety.


How we in the everlasting life to come, shall see and know one another.
I believe a resurrection of the flesh, and an everlasting life.
WHen one preaches of the resurrection of the dead, and has heard how the
dead do rise; there arises a question amongst many; If we also, in the
everlasting life to-come, shall know one another, as we do here? Of the
Resurrection is no doubt; thereof are we certain enough: and withal we know,
that, if any have a defect or want on his body, that he halted, were lame, or a
Cripple, and had not all his limbs, the same shall be all taken away in the
resurrection of the dead, and shall be altogether whole, and have all his
members wholly. But shall we in another life know one another? Heerto do the
learned men give this answer: Yes, we shall know one another there. Seeing
that God will make the whole man alive again with flesh and bones, shall
knowledge and memory be gone? Nothing at all.

Therefore shall you here learn, that we shall know all; not only those
which we now know, but those which we knew not, nor in our life time had ever
seen, the same shall we see, and know how to call them, and they us again.

The Learned also do say, that the Christians shall not only know one
another, but the ungodly also: and the wicked shall know them whom they have
here oppressed and persecuted, Sapience, chap. 5. There shall the wicked say
with repentance, Are not these they whom we have mocked? Oh how are they now
reckoned among the children of God!

I. Testimony of Scripture.
THe first proof they take from Adam. You know, that God made Heaven and Earth,
with all ye Creatures: and Adam was made last of all. Then GOD let all yt
Beasts pass by him: and when he saw them, he knew every Beast, and his
property, and gave to every Beast his name according to his property. As Adam
now named them, so must they be called at this present day. If Adam then in
the natural body, and before the Fall, had such sharp eyes, that he could see
the Beasts in his heart; as for example, what the nature and property of ye
Stork is, which has a natural born love to the old ones that have brought her
up: shall not we much more in the new spiritual body, which shall bear the
Image of Christ, be a thousand times wiser, and know all? This is a right
good argument.

The II. Argument.
THis is like the first, that Adam knew Eve so soon as God brought her to him,
when he had made her of his ribs, before GOD said one word unto him. There it
is rightly said, Ille est felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Therefore
said Adam (according unto the Hebrew speech) This is mercifulnes: she shall
have a true heart, and shall be called Woman, etc.

Whilst Adam in his natural life had such sharp eyes: shall we not much more
in the spiritual and everlasting life, have much sharper eyes, that we know
one another, and also those which in this life we have not known? I cannot
find any thought in me, to withdraw it from me, that it should not be.

The III. Argument.
THe third proof they take from Christ, when Mary Magdalen met him in the
garden, who (being yet in her sinful body) did quickly know him by his
speech, and likewise the Apostles also: much more shall we know one another,
when we shall have pure clarified eyes.

The IIII. Argument.
CHrist lays before us the Rich-man and poor Lazarus, which is no similitude,
but a true History acted; although it be wonderful and strange unto us, that
in another life they shall both know one another.

In brief: There shall be a right perfect knowledge, that we shall also know
the high Majesty of God, and see him face to face, as Job comforted himself,
chapter 19. I shall see God in my flesh.

Such knowledge shall happen unto us, as the custom was in old time amongst our
Elders, when they kept the hallowing of their Church, when all the friends and
kindred came together once in a year, which had in a long time before not seen
one another, as they use often at Easter and Christmasse to visit their good
friends. There are they known amongst the kindred: Is not that my Uncle? Is not
this my Aunt? Are not these also my cousins and friends? So that they know one
another with great joy. Then know, that at the later Day shall be the right
renewed day, that right Church Holy Day shall begin; where all Christendom
shall come together, make themselves known one to another, and shall have an
everlasting Church-Feast, a perpetual Easter-Feast, and a day of eternal joy.

These things should a Christian remember: for, they serve to this end, that
many a one may be comforted therewith, when he must depart from a good
Friend, Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, goes far off, and knows not at
his return if he shall find them in health.

Or else in the time of mortality, when we should depart one from another, then
may one comfort himself in thinking thus: I shall not yet lose him altogether:
I know, that our Lord God has appointed a Church-holy-day, where my dearest
children, brethren, sisters and good friends, come to me again: there will we
consult together for ever.

The same is a notable comfort, when his father, mother, and kindred be dead,
that he be not discour^ged, but know that they be but gone before him. And
therefore it is called thus: Coming again makes me sure,
That I esteem not departure.


A Prayer.
O LORD Jesus Christ, which art the conductor of life, thou through thy death
have overcome everlasting death in victory, made sin and death to be nothing,
and confirmest with a double oath, that we which keep thy word steadfastly in
our hearts, shall not see death eternally; do comfort and promise to us thy
faithful, that we shall be for ever in the height of joy and salvation where
thou art.

Therefore we pray thee from our hearts, O Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will,
through the grace of thy holy Spirit preserve us constantly in such faith, that
thy Kingdom may quickly come, that we may be delivered out of this vale of
misery, that we and our faithful Children, Parents, Brethren and Sisters, all
our kinsfolks, and all godly people (through thy spiritual grace) may be
brought one to another, as thou did bring to the widow of Naim, her dear son
in bodily manner. That thou would also (as thy Word comfort) graciously
grant, that as Adam in the state of innocence knew Eve, of whom he before did
know nothing; and as thou, after thy holy resurrection, did make thy self
known, we likewise may see and know one another in the highest joy of thy
salvation, and to thy laud and praise, may consult together everlastingly.
Amen, Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Here after follow godly Sayings and Prayers, taken out of the Psalms of David,
to be used in the extreme necessity of death.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy Indignation: neither chasten thou me in thy
heavy displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: my soul also is sore troubled,
but Lord, how long?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul. O save me for thy mercies sake.

O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord: consider the trouble which I suffer of them that
hate me, thou that liftest me up from the very gates of death.

O Lord, thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope,
when I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

Go not from me then: for, trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help
me.

I am powered out like water: all my bones are out of joint: my heart in the
midst of my body, is even like melting wax.

My strength is dried up like a potshard, my tongue cleaves to my gummes: but
be not thou far from me, O Lord, thou art my succor, haste thee to help me.

Tarry not long (O Lord) for I am very faint.

Quicken my soul (O Lord) and bring me forth in the way of righteousness,
for thy names sake.

Unto thee (O Lord) I lift my soul, my God, I trust in thee. O let me not be
confounded, lest mine enemies triumph over me. For all they that hope in thee,
shall not be ashamed.

Thou art the God of my salvation.

Call to remembrance thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses, which have
ever been of old.

Remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according unto thy
mercy think upon me (O Lord) for thy goodness.

For thy Names sake (O Lord) be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and oppressed.

The sorrows of my heart are great. O bring me out of my troubles.

Look upon mine adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sins.

O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put
my trust in thee.

The Lord is my light, and my salvation: whom then should I fear?

The Lord is the strength of my life: of whom then should I be afraid?

Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid: and though there rose up war against me, yet will I trust in him.

O hide not thou thy face from me, cast not thy servant off in displeasure.

Thou art my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God my Savior.

The Lord is my strength, and my shield: my heart hops in him.

In thee, O Lord, is my trust: let me never be put to confusion.

Bow down thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me.

Thou art my strong hold, and my castle. O be thou my guide, and lead me for
thy Names sake.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit: deliver me (O Lord God of truth).

O Lord, consider my trouble, and know my Soul in adversity.

My hope is in thee (O Lord) thou art my God.

Show me the light of thy countenance, help me for thy mercies sake.

Let me not be confounded (O Lord) for I call upon thee.

Thou art my defense, in the trouble that is come about me: O compass thou
me about also with the joy of deliverance.

Strive thou with them (O Lord) that strive with me, fight thou against them
that fight against me, and stand up to help me.

Awake, Lord, and stand up: avenge thou my cause, my God and my Lord.

Thou art my helper and redeemer, make no long tarrying, O my God.

Arise, O Lord, help me, and deliver me for thy mercies sake.

Have mercy upon me (O Lord) after thy goodness, and according to thy great
mercies do away mine offenses.

For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight.

Cast me not away from thy presence.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and hide not thy self from my Petition. Take heed
unto me, and hear me, and preserve my soul.

Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

Be merciful unto me (O God) be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in
thee, and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge.

Hear my crying (O God) give heed unto my prayer: for thou art my hope, a
strong Tower for me against the enemy.

Take me out of the mire, that I sink not.

Hear me (O Lord) and turn thee unto me, according unto thy great mercy.

I am poor, and in misery, haste thee O God for to help me: For thou art my
help, my Redeemer and my God: oh make no long tarrying.

In thee (O Lord) is my trust, let me never be put to confusion: For thou art
the thing that I long for, thou art my hope even from my youth.

Forsake me not, O Lord, when my strength fails me: for mine enemies that
lay white for my soul take their counsel together.

Go not far from me, O my God: my God, have thee to help me.

O remember not mine iniquities, but have merey upon me, and that soon.

Help me (O Lord my Savior) for the glory of thy Name: O deliver me, and
forgive me my sins for thy Name sake.

Comfort the soul of thy servant: for thou Lord art good and gracious, and of
great mercy unto all them that call upon thee.

In the time of trouble I call upon thee, turn to me, have mercy upon me,
give thy strength to thy servant.

Thou (O Lord God) art full of compassion, and mercy, long-suffering, great in
goodness and truth.

The snares of death compassed me round about, the pains of hell gat hold
upon me.

I found trouble and heaviness: O Lord deliver my soul.

Thy mercy (O Lord) endures for ever: despise not the work of thine own
hands.

Enter not into Judgment with thy servant (O Lord) for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified.

Bring my soul out of trouble, for I am thy servant.

A Prayer.
O My God, my Lord, and Father, now show unto my poor soul, that she may
perceive, that thou art my strong rock, castle, shield, tower, defense, hope,
succor, refuge, defender and goodness, that I in this great trouble for mine
enemies, through thy godly grace, help and assistance, may be preserved.
Lord, in thee I put my trust, let me not be put to confusion. Into thy hands I
commend my spirit: deliver me, Lord God of truth, Amen.

A Prayer.
O Father, receive again the thing which thou have created. O Son, receive
the thing which thou have governed. O Holy Ghost fetch the thing which thou so
bountifully have preserved. Three persons and one very God, I beseech you
remember not mine offenses for ever. For I cry, Lord God and Father, mercy.
Lord God Son, mercy, Lord God Holy Ghost mercy, Amen.

When thou departest from a sick person, say unto him.
IN your trouble and necessity, call unto the Lord and cry unto your God, and
he will hear your voice, and your crying comes before him in his ears: And
God which called you unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own
self, after you have suffered a little affliction, make you perfect, shall
settle, strength stablish and save you. To him be glory and dominion for ever
and ever.

FINIS.

