THE ENGLISH Secretorie.
Wherein is contained, A PERFECT METHOD, for the inditing of all manner of
Epistles and familiar Letters, together with their diversities, enlarged by
examples under their several Tytles.

In which is laid forth a Path-waye, so apt, plain and easy, to any learners
capacity, as the like whereof has not at any time heretofore been delivered.

Now first deuized, and newly published by ANGEL DAY.

Altior fortuna Virtus.

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue, and are to be sold by Richard
Jones, dwelling at the sign of the Rose and the Crown, near unto Holburn
Bridge. 1586.

blazon or coat of arms VERO NIHIL VERIVS



To the right Honorable Lord, EDWARD de VERE, Earl of Oxenford, Viscount
Bulbeck, Lord Sandford and of Badelesmere, and Lord great Camberlaine of
England, all Honor and happiness, correspondent to his most Noble de- sires,
and in the commutation of this earthly being, endless joys and an
everlasting habitation.
ZEVXES endeavoring to paint excellent lie, made Grapes in show so natural,
that presenting the^ to view men were deceived with their shapes and the birds
with their colors. When Apelles drew Venus (though the show of beauty seemed
woonderful) he daunted not in his workmanship, because he knew his cunning
excellent.

If in penning I were as skilful as the least of these in painting: I should
neither faint to present a discourse to Alexander, nor to tell a tale to a
Philosopher.

My honorable L. the exceeding bounty wherewith your good L. has ever wonted
to entertain the deserts of all men, and very apparaunce of Nobility her
self, well known to have reposed her delights in the worthiness of your stately
mind warra^teth me: almost, that I need not blush to recommend unto your
courteous view, the first fruits of these my foremost labors, and to honor this
present discourse with the memory of your everlasting worthiness. And albeit
by the learned view and insight of your L. whose infancy from the beginning was
ever sacred to the Muses, the whole course hereof may be found nothing such,
as in the lowest part of the same may appear in any sort answerable to so
great and forward excellence: and that the continuance of this slender
substance, is in no point matchable to many things of greater science,
passing under your honorable countenance: yet may your L. please to consider,
that presents (not out of the rich store and plentye a lone of the
wealthiest) are always received as testimonies of regard, in the reputation
of the mightiest: but sometimes trifles also ensuing of less ability, (not
honored or reputed of by their value, but by the generous estate and
surpassing bounty of the receiver) are accounted of, most especially.

For the shroud of my defense, that have so much dared upon presumption of your
accustomed favor, to infixe your honored name in the forefronte of this my
traueile: I can propoze no one in example unto your L. more worthy then your
self, who not unacquainted with the special parts and aeternized memory of
them all, have long since endeavored your self to become a noble pattern of
them all, the exemplifieng of whose praise, cannot by any speeches of mine, be
herein more greatly put forwards, then the same long since has been
published by the renown of your own proper virtues.

My humble request unto your L. is, that your gentle acceptance hereof may be
an encouragement to my after endeavors, for whose sake I know the same shall be
of many regarded, and the insufficiency thereof the better protected. In which,
besides the continual manifestation of your own worthiness, your L. shall
bind me to honor you in all duty and humblenes, praying the eternal creator
and guide of all your stately enterprises, to have the same with your L. in his
favorable protection.

Your L. most devoted and loyally affected. Angel Day.

The Epistle to the courteous Reader.
IT is now six years passed (courteous and gentle Reader) since importuned by
the earnest requests of diverse my especial friends, (more presuming on that
they conceived to be in me than of the verity it self, that thereunto might
induce me.) I took upon me in satisfaction of their great importunity,
roughly to lay out a platform or Method, for the inditing and framing of
all manner of Epistles and Letters, insomuch as for the confirmation of the
necessity of the work, and the matter of their demand, they had then showed
me many likelihoods and reasons, how much the same might profit, and how
well of diverse fortes of people the travail might be accepted.

The work being then superficially begun, without addition either of any
regard or industry to the performance thereof (my self having greater desire to
learn of others, then to become a special eye-marke to be noted of all
others) as times and seasons altered, so the fancy and conceit thereof in me
quickly changed, and the continuance of other exercises for the present more
auailable, made me to forget, what therein I had before time promised, whereby
the devise lay dead, and as matter of noe account was ever sithence turned in
oblivion.

Nevertheless about one month before Michaelmas last, the vacation having been
long, and little to do, I ransacking diverse bundels of old papers, among the
rest found out this foremost and for worn beginning, and the Printer as then
being by, and perusing what it was, told me also his opinion of the matter, and
that he deemed the travail thereof to be more then thanks-worthie, and
therewithal assured me would approve very necessary, whereupon his desire
and persuasion was (as one greatly affecting the benefit of his country)
that I would proceed on so good a ground, and so roundly went the progression
of our arguments forward, that it was at length concluded and I faithfully
promised, to finish some part thereof to be published in this instant term.

But considering afterward of the labor, and well perusing what before time I
had therein done, the order thereof so far misliked me, as that I altogether
resolved to alter the form thereby continued, and by such resolution enforced
my self to begin anew, by occasion of which, the latter grew greater then
before, and I was compelled by my faithful word and promise now to finish up
that in have, which before I could not frame my self to compass, upon long
continued leisure. Many no doubt shall you find the imperfections herein, which
as well my self by ouer-great have (not having so well as I might and would, if
leisure had served me) perfectly perused the same have happily omitted by lack
of foresight, in setting the Printer a work, whereby I was (I protest) forced as
fast as I could to scrible out the copy, and to deliver it to press, least
thereby he should be compelled to stay and hinder his work: as also by like
default of over speedy dispatch in the Printer, thereby misplacing diverse
figures quoted in the magent, where they are either mistaken, or sometimes not
used in those places at all. In occurrence whereof I desire the learned Reader,
as he shall find to correct, and the other users thereof to bear withal,
promising that in the next setting forth, the same with better regard shall
be considered, and God sparing life with more perfection delivered, the
residue of the faults being not many are in the page after this placed down
and corrected.

And now touching the order of this book following, I must advertise him that
is desirous to take profit thereby, that he first do circumspectly consider
with himself, the several rules in the particular chapters, preceding the
orders of these EPISTLES, in such sort as afterward they are distinguished,
and therein see, what to the better ordering and principal direction, of
whatsoever he shall take in hand to write, is therefore for his better
instruction enioined.

Next also by diligent animaduersion thereof, he shall the better understand
the several natures and properties, that in the parts of every EPISTLE, are
ordinarily to be required, besides the use of them in their several places,
and what force they bear, being so sorted out, according to their special
purposes and directions.

Next for the better inducement and leading the learner into a plain and
perfect platform of this METHOD following, and to the intent he may as near
as may be, or as his capacity at leastwise may any ways reach unto, know
skilfullie and not by rote, how or in what sort he shall happen to do either
well or ill, I have first (in a preamble or intermixed discourse, either
proceeding or interchangeably passing, before or with the kinds of the sundry
examples of every EPISTLE) declared the properties and use of those EPISTLES,
upon what parts and places, they and every of them do consist, with what
vehemency or less application they are to be inferred or quallified, so that
he who seems to have less knowledge at al (be it that he have perseuera^ce
to conceive or to distinguish the parts he sees there laid out before his
eyes) may with great facility, and without any show of difficulcie at all,
attain to whatsoever, herein prescribed, or by the circumstance thereof
intended to be in any sort delivered.

To the greater ornament whereof, I have applied such FIGVRES, SCHEMES, and
TROPES in the margent of every EPISTLE, even with the places where they are
used. And at the finishing up of this work, have determined in the end thereof
(which in the next term shall as a second part hereunto by gods grace be
published) to set them altogether, and there to explane to the Learners view
and for his readier use, their particular natures and qualities, that they who
(being unlearned, and having a pretty conceit of ^nuention of them selves) have
heretofore unknowing done well, may see how with skill and discretion
hereafter to pursue the same, and the ignorant also hereof, whose reach has
not been so ample as others, may be thereby informed what unto well doing is
most consonant and agreeing.

Now for the readier finding of those EPISTLES as each of their kinds are
suited forth in sundry EXAMPLES: Peruse but the head of every page, and under
the title of the book, you shall find what in the same Page is contained,
viz. Where the EPISTLES be, you shall have them noted in their kinds, as
Epistles HORTATORIE, DEHORTATORIE, SVVASORIE or DISSVVASORIE, etc. and likewise
in the admixtions, you shall find, PLACES or PARTS HORTATORIE, COMMENDATORIE,
PETITORIE, etc. as they fall out to be handeled.

This book showing these parts before remembered, I have termed by the name of
THE ENGLISH SECRETORIE, being in the consideration thereof nothing ignorant
what great perfection is to be required in such a one, by whose title the
same is christened, neither supposing the matter herein contained to appear
so sufficient, as perfectly thereby to enable what in the same function is to be
required, but because the orderly writing of Letters, being a principal part
belonging to a SECRETORIE, is by the METHOD hereof delivered to any Learners
capacity, whereout the scholar or any other that is unfurnished of the
knowledge thereof, may gather aid and furtheraunce, the better by such means
thereafter (if his industry serve thereunto) to become a SECRETORIE.

And for so much as this, being but the first part thereof, is also the first
work in show that ever I delivered, I determined as untimely fruit by
occasion of the hasty gatheryng of the same, to put it forth in common taste,
the rather to be satisfied what liking it carries. The relesse whereof being of
the discrete and skilful sort allowed, to furnish a place in any one corner of
their banquet: The other part heerefater shall I trust with better liking
return, in the after publishing, and to the followers thereof, right pleasing
and profitable.

Herein (over and besides the Chapters giuyng instruction as aforesaid to the
METHOD of these Letters) is only two kinds of EPISTLES with their several
parts particularly handeled, that is to say, DEMONSTRATIVE and DELIBERATIVE.
The second part shall contain IVDICIAL and FAMILIAR LETTERS, and at the end of
the same, the descriptio^s of the FIGVRES, SCHEMES and TROPES, as before I have
noted, and lastly thereunto annexed a Discourse of the parts and office of a
SECRETORIE, all which Godwilling I mean by all convenient leisure to perform.
Presenting in the mean time what herein set down to the general and
friendly regard of all men, beseeching that in courtesy they repute of my
travels, as foremost of all other things I therein respected a pub^^ke benefit.
In affoording whereof, they sha^ (...) more then belongs to Gentilitie, and
^^ourage me by whatsoever other means, to gratify their courtesy. Fare ye
well this fifth of November. 1586.

Faults escaped in printing.
Faults. Correction. Page. Line. there the 3 6 least. last 34 3^ ingeneralitie
nigeralitie 35 26 affection aff^^tation 38 15 forced farced 39 2 that he is
superfluous idem 10 is are 41 7 he we 66 10 force face idem 27 Magnanimious
Magnanimious 68 1 too so idem 12 gleanesse gladness 71 28 it is not that it is
212 24 Conciliatorie Consolatorie 211 in the title of an Epistl^.

The residue the learned Reader may correct with discretion.

A Table mentioning the Contents of this present Book.
Of an Epistle, the commodities and use thereof. ^ What is to be respected in
framing of an Epistle. 3 Of brevity required in an Epistle. ^ Of comelines to
be observed as well touching the p^rso^ as the cause. 13 Of^ the habit and
parts of an Epistle 18 Of contents gener all incident to all manner of Epistles.
23 Diverse orders of greetings, farewels and subscriptions. 24 Of
superscriptions and directions. 30 Additions of other things to be considered.
34 The division of Letters, and under what titles all sorts of Epistles are
contained. 41 Epistles Descriptorie* and the parts thereof. 43 An example of a
letter Descriptorie of a City. 45 An example of the state of a country. 48
An example describing the death of a Noble man. 49 A discourse of the parts of
those Epistles. 53 An example of aduertisements. 56 Places of praise or
dispraise. 5*9.60 Places of Confirmation and confutation. 61.62. An example
Lawdatorie solie touching the person. 63 An Epistle Vituperatorie touching also
the person. 73 Praise and dispraise of the deeds of men. 79.80.81.82. Of
Epistles Deliberatiue. 83 Efficacy of Praise. 84 Places of Exhortation. 85.86
An example of an Epistle Exhortatorie. 87 A letter Responsorie to the same. 92
Epistle Hortatorie to the study of Learning. 94 Epistle Hortatorie wherein the
exhortation is lenefied. 100 Aduertisements Responsorie. 105 Epistle Hortatorie
to the profession of arms. 107 Places Dehortatorie, or of withdrawyng from
any thing. 113 An example Dehortatorie from infidelity or rebellion. 114
Difference between Swasorie, and Hortatorie Examples. 121 An example Swasorie,
wherein a Gentlevvoman is councelled to marriage. 122 Places Svvasori^ or of
persuading. 126.27.28 Examples Svvasorie to the careful regard of one brother
to another. 129 A Letter Responsorie to the same Epistle. 132 Epistle Svvasorie
to perseverance in learned and profitable studies. 135 Places Disvvasorie, or
counsailing from a thing. 138.39.40.41.42 And example Disvvasorie, disvvading
one from the marriage of his daughter to an old vvelthie miser. 143 Epistle
Disvvasorie from vices ingenerall. 148 Epistle Diswasorie from ent^ing into an
action dangerous. 151. Places Conciliatorie, or means to induce favor. 158.
Epistle Conciliatorie from one of good account to his inferior. 159. Epistle
Conciliatorie from one equal to an other. 160. Epistle Responsorie annswering
the first of these letters. 162. Epistle Responsorie to the latter. 163. Places
reconciliatorie or of reconciliation. 164. Example Reconciliatorie from one
friend to an other. 165. Epistle Reconciliatorie from an inferior to his
better. 168. Places Petitorie or of requiring suing or entreating. 169.70.71.
Example Petitorie in a cause indifferent. 172. Example Petitorie in the nature
of reco^ciliatio^ from a son to his father. 174 Epistle Petitorie for travel
and council in an urgent cause. 177. An other of the same. 178. A letter
Responsorie thereunto. 179. Epistle Peti torie of an other manner of request.
180. An other of the like effect. 181. An other Example to the same purpose.
167. Places Commendatorie or recommending of persons. 185. An example
Commendatorie from a mean person to a noble man. 186 Letter Responsorie to the
same. 187. An other Epistle Commendatorie. 188. An Example Commendatorie from a
noble man to his inferior. 194. An other from a noble man in preferrement of
his servant. 195. An other from the same, in favor of Justice. 192. An
example Responsorie of denial to any of these. 193. An other, wherein is
allowance given to the demand. 19^. The third, wherein is doubtful acceptante
made of the same. 196. A Letter Commendatorie pleasantly conceipted in
recommending an unprofitable ^eruaunt. 198. Places Consolatorie or of
comforting in distress. 200.201.202.203. An example Consolatorie upon the
death of a son. ^04. Epistle Consolatorie in causes of hard extremity. 201.
Epistle Consolatorie on the death of her husband. 211. Parts Consolatorie.
217.218. Epistle Consolatorie pleasantly written. 219. Epistle Responsorie to
be conferred to the Epistles Consolatorie. 222. Places Monitorie forewarning or
disco^mending a thing 223.24.25.26. Example Monitorie to a stated and well
governed life. 227. Epistle Monitorie to the reformation of a covetous life.
231. Epistle Monitorie to a father to prevent his sons lewd demeanor. 229
Parts Amatorie or of love: The discourse whereof including letters s^^^ed upon
diverse sond^ie effects, continues to the end of the book. Almost all of which
Epistles before set down were ^owe suddenly by the Author ordered and invented
to their several examples.
THE ENGLISH Secretorie.
CHAP. I. Of an Epistle, the commodity and use thereof.
TOuching an Epistle, which usually we term a letter, no other definition
needs thereof, then that which use and common experience has induced unto us.
Definition of a letter.
A Letter therefore is that wherein is expressye conveyed in writing, the intent
and meaning of one man, immediately to pass and be directed to an other, and
for the certain respects thereof, is termed the messenger and familiar speech
of the absent: for that all occurrences whatsoever, are thereby as faithfully
aduertized, pursued* and debated* as firmly might fall out in any personal
presence or other wise to be remembered. The long use of letters.
The ancient use whereof is such, as from the beginning (si^ce characters were
first found) has had his continuance, and ever since as a faithful and
secret Ambassador has remained, of him from whom the foremost title has
had his direction and framing. Their diversities are sundry, as whereof ensues
a platform to every motion, Epistles diverse.
being in truth so manifold, as are the imaginations of each man's fantasy,
seeing that the declaration of every Letter is no more, then what the mind in
all occasions wills to have performed, and according to such instigations,
wherewith at that instant men are fed, when they write, takes his formal
substance, whether it be to require, council, exhort, command, inform,
commend, entreat, confirm, or whatsoever other intent determination or
purpose therein had, as cause and matter may fall out to be in any sort
required. To grow into the particularities of every benefit received by the
common use hereof, and the commoditye thereby ensuing, what might be said
more, then that which by due course every man has almost in practice. If you
ask of the learned, the universal contentment recerued thereby, expressed in
sundrytheir authorities will testify, who the rather to advance the efficacy
hereof, have by diverse methodes and orders prescribed in wrytinge, set down
the perfect instruction, use and mean, whereby men the rather may be induced to
the skillful perfection that in a matter of such excellency is to be required.
For besides that the Epistles of Cicero, VVriters of Epistles.
Lucian, Politiaen, and others are plentifully extant, some also of the
thoysest and best learned of late years, have endeavored by writing to
publishe in the Latin tongue, their sundry methodes touching the same, among
whom Erasmus, evermore famous for his studies, and Macropedius at large.
Lodouicus Viues, and Heg^ndorphimus, Learnedlye, yet brieflye, each of them
well approving the goodness, in that by several rules they have distingui^hed
the diversities, ground and skilful directions thereof. To dwell in tedious
discourses were but frivolous, although others might in like manner be alleged
in examples as copious. But now, if you will demand of the unlearned, they
then to whom the want hereof breeds so diverse imperfections, as with many
wishes they could desire to be amended, knowing how greenous it is to
participate their most secreat causes to an other, and to lay up their
chiefest trust in the affiaunce of an others credit, can be wray unto you. And
although pregnant wit ensuinge by nature, was the (...) cause that first bred
the invention of letters. And that every man naturallye can speak and set
down his own meaning, yet Art prevailing in the cause, and by cunning skill
marshalling every thing in his due order, proportion and place, how much more
the same is then beautified, adorned, and as it were into a new shape
transmuted, by such kind of knowledge, the difference that daily appears may
yield proof sufficient.

CAP. II. What is chiefly to be respected in framing of an Epistle.
FOR so much as by the necessary use of letters before laid down, a
commendable manner of writing and orderly framing the same, has in some sort
been already remembered: it shall not be amiss in continuing the intended order
hereof, that in this chapter we do now more fully endeavor to answer the
purpose, therein supposed. For the better manifestation of which, and to the
intent the ignorant and studious herein, may by degrees be led to the attaining
of that which unto the matter thereof may be approved most convenient: I have
first thought good to draw unto your consideration, certain special points in
this action of all other principally to be regarded. Three notes to be observed
in Epistles.
It shall then beseme that for such performance the better to enable him whose
forwardnes requires the same, these three notes in writing of all manner of
Epistles be chiefly admitted. First aptnes of words and sentences respecting
that they be neat and choisly piked, Aptnes, bre uity and come lines
principally required in letters
orderly laid down and cunningly handled, next breuity of speech according in
matter and dilation to be framed upon whatsoever occurrent: lastly comelines in
deliverance, concerning the person and cause, whereupon is intended the
direction to be framed. These three, as they are seldom in our common use of
writing, Comelines in deliverance.
among the ignorant at any time pursued, so unto him that desires by skillful
observation and practice, to become therein more wary and circumspect, are
greatly available to be used. And that we may the more conveniently
distinguishe each part of these properties in sort as they are to be followed,
we will first in the course of this Chapter examine and lay out the several
distinctions, wherein this kind of aptnes is principally to be considered.

As nothing therefore in the common use and conversation of men deserves more
praise, then that which is well ordered, Aptnes of words wherein to be
considered.
and according to the time place and presence usually appointed and discreetly
furnished: so in this matter of writing Epistles, nothing is more disordered,
fond, or vain, then for any one, of a thing well done, to take forth a
president, and think to make unto him self thereof a common platform for
every other accident, who with out consideration of the gravity or lightness of
the cause he takes in hand (much like unto a foolish Shoemaker, that making
his shoes after one fashion, quantitye and proportion: Ill imitators.
supposes the same forthwith of ability fit to serve every man's foot)
includes in like sort a common method unto every matter. Such imitators who
rather by rote then reason make havoc of wit with purchase of small
discretion, by such unnecessary capitulations, being often times far
different from their own intended purposes, are better prepared to deliver
unto view, Horace. Satyr.
the ridiculous Pike of Horace with an Asses head monstrouslye shaped, whereat
the Readers may laugh, and every one may sport, then certainly to manifest
their argument with such correspondent speeches as thereunto may be deemed
incident.

To avoid this so great and hard an imperfection, it shall specially behoue
him that endeavors well to write, advisedly with him self first to consider,
The foremost motion, in ducing argument.
the foremost motion inducing argument to the cause whereof he is intended to
^ebate, and being well studied and read in the purest and best kind of writers,
(whereof great plenty do now remain in our English tongue) seek to frame his
invention accordaunt to the example herein for that purpose (or to the like
effect) before him delivered, not in the self same speeches, but in the self
same order (the intendment whereof was not otherwise laid down, but only to
such end, and for the like observation) which order being distinguished in
the several parts of every Epistle, shall conduct the follower, to what end,
and upon what occasion, each matter therein was in that sort particularly
framed.

Next let him deliberate with him self, Of what validity the same shall be.
how much or how greatly imports the matter he takes in hand, to whom he
writes the same, and what in the handling thereof it shall principally
concern, that according to the validity or forceles conceit of the same, the
matter of his Epistle by aptnes of words may be measured and composed. Hereon
lies the chiefest maight and burden of each man's discretion, whereunto
oportunitye also seems a thing so necessary to be adjoined, as laboring the
one perfectly, and attending the other circumspectly, I see no reason, but he
that can frame him self to the variety of these, may with greater facility
reach unto the rest, the better to enhable him self hereafter if
advancement draw him to it to become a Secretorie.

And in as much as Letters are only messengers of each man's intendments, Time,
place and opportunity.
it shall be as apt unto every one, as any aptnes of words in any of them to
be delivered, to take notice of time and place, needful to give opportunity
to whatsoever in such occasions by him continuallye to be handled, the
necessary consideration whereof, because the same also somewhat hereunto
imports, I will in place convenient, where more at large the same may be
required, endeavor to enlarge it, pursuing in the mean time as in this Chapter
intended, the purposes therein to be considered.

Now the matter and importance of your letter thus deliberately advised, Form
of delivery.
the best form and manner of delivery, shall then, next to the same be
considered. Wherein it appears that kind of writing to have been deemed
always most excellent that in sentences is most exquisite, in words of best
choice, and the same most effectual, which to the argument, place, time, and
person, is most meet and appertinent, which entreating of hye matters is
weighty, in meaner causes neat and pliable, in the lowest plesaunt and more
familiar, in jesting that procures cause of delight, in praising commendable,
in stirring vehement and bold, in aduising gentle and friendly, in persuasion
sententious, and using gravity, in narration plain and resolute, in requiring
shamefast, in commending officious, in prosperous causes glad, in troubles
serious and more sad. And finally, that attemparating unto every circumstance
their sundry motions, in such fashion and order as unto the matter thereof is
most consonant, can most fitly and redely deliver the same upon whatsoever
occasion to be ordered.

And herein is especially to be considered, that of what validity or
inualiditie soever, the matter to be discoursed or written of may appear,
Choice and best kind of speech.
and to whomesoeuer of hye mean or low account the same shall pass or be
directed, that the aptnes of speech be therein so deemed, as ye choysest and
best manner of speaking may to every of these occasions be admitted. For a
weighty cause, and common direction, may not all in one kind of terms be
delivered, neither is it fit that in a letter framed to one of good calling, a
man should there in deal with him in speeches: as when he directs his
servant to seethe a piece of saltfish, or dress a mess of potage, but such
shall be the style as is the account of the party to whom it must go, Such
the style as the party in accounte to whom it goes.
and the weight of the cause that is to be handled, that is lofty when it is
required, neat, pliable, or more mean, if so it ought to be respected, only
providing that whatsoever or to whom soever we write, we always give our
selves as near as may be, to the most likely and best kind of deliverance,
avoiding all niceness and far fet fines to be used therein, the matter
hereof being but such, as if a man would by orderly speech, either weightily,
gravely, pleasantly, or familiarly, discourse or commune of his affairs
respectively, touching the person and cause, and in no point otherwise. This
only difference in letters as in all other speeches, that each man study for
his endeavor to write commendably, as in speech he gains most praise that
speaks most excellently.

CAP. III. Of Brevity.
THe next observation in an epistle is, ye we do accustom our selves unto
brevity of speech. What brevity is.
This kind of brevity is not as some indiscreetly have imagined, that which
consists in fewness of lines, and shortness of room in show of a side of
paper, but brevity of matter, wherein scope sufficient remaining for the
necessary demonstration and delivery of any needful occasion, men are barred
from frivolous circumstances, and especially enjoined therein to abhor all
manner of tediousnes. For which cause some and those a good sort, have been,
whose opinions have affirmed that continuance of matter ought not to be used in
a letter, for that the nature of an Epistle is thereby barred, and it rather
takes upon it the habit of an oration, then an epistle To this kind of
continuance are subject epistles, petitorie, and hortatorie, such also as in
commendation or vituperation of a thing or person are consequently framed,
the occasions whereof do many times inuit greater suggestions, Tolleration
of continuance.
and far larger circumstaunces, for approbation or diminution then any other,
according as cause and matter is in each of them requieed. The tolleration of
which notwithstanding ineither of these (besides also that it is both very
meet, and greatly necessary in such an Epistle) both examples of many learned
users thereof, and warrant of common custom have given argument sufficient,
insomuch as for ye better manifestation either of the goodness or badnes
incident to any of those causes, it seems of greatest furtheraunce, and
thereunto most convenient. And albeit the length of such kind of letters may
sometimes peradventure amount to so gross substance, as may rather appear
to be a discourse then an Epistle, yet in perusing the effects thereof it may
fall out that little or naught at all may happily be found, that shall be beyond
or besides the matter: whereon such district examination having passed,
Brevity in plenty of deliverance.
and nothing therein deemed vnnnecessarie to the argument, me thinks even in
that plenty of deliverance also, the brevity here in required should nothing
at all be omitted. For who knows not that is but meanly learned, that when to
be brief is commended in writing, it is thereby always intended, that a man,
with (only necessary) speeches may be pardoned to deliver his meaning: neither
is it without the limits of brevity when aptly and at full the same shall be in
this sort reported.

And for the better declaration unto the ignorant, how far the conceit
hereof may be induced only in writing of letters, I will first limite what may
be accounted necessary therein, and afterward endeavor to lay down how
contrary thereunto, men as well in the use as neglecting thereof, have
heretofore erred.

Necessary speeches I do accomp, twhatsoeuer is set down for the plain and
open delivery of every occasion, Necessary speech what it is.
to the intent the mind of the writer, and what he pursues may aptly, and in
good and ready sort be plainly conceived.

The repugnancie hereof is, when either with insufficient terms, or too much
curtolling our arguments in conceit to avoid tediousness, or otherwise with
often iterating, never thinking to have spoken sufficiently of a matter, either
to induce remembrance, or put forward our meaning, we abbreauiate or amplify
our Epistles: and when some others also of a conceit more curious then
necessary, striving to excel in variety of sentences, and copy of words
coined all of one suite, think therefore in paining themselves to write more
then needs, to be counted more eloquent. These imperfections as each of them
in truth are far different from that (necessary) herein required, so are
they indeed to be blamed, and each of them (where the defect remains) with
study to be amended.

He therefore that desires to be an imitator of these directions, let him
first be warned especially, that as the rocks of Scylla, he do abandon all
kind of strange and unused terms, (strange I mean for their insufficiency
in not according to the matter) tying himself in such sort to brevity, as
that the argument of his Epistle, lie not so obscure, that it rather seems a
riddle, needing some Oedipus to interpret it, then a formal declaration of his
meaning, behemently giving himself to avoid all superfluity of words,
Iterations and superfluity to be avoided.
frivolous and vain repetitions, wherein one and the self same thing is
iterated, still spoken of, and continually enforced, Let him always suppose
that in delivering of any matter, the best observation is, in playness sort
that may be, to lay down the effects, inferring afterward, lessening or
proouing, what unto the weight of the argument may be thought most
correspondent, not regardyng so much to have choice of words as perfection of
sentences, and those not unnecessary, or amplified superfluously over and
besides the needful setting forth of the matter.

Ouermuche more tolerable, then curtold brevity.
The error of this (ouermuche) has been so common to many men, as those who
have not been supposed unlearned, have many times by a ryfe and plentiful
conceit of invention, eftsoons incurred the same: but not in one kind with
the others. The fault whereof in them has many ways been the less
imputed, because by skill, and learned discretion they have been able not
unorderly to put down the same: In which action of theyrs, diverse the most
excellent have been of opinion, that in choice of two extremities, the more
rather then the les, might therein with greater praise be admitted. To
constrayne a Gyantes foot within a childs shoe, were both ridiculous for the
possibility, and insufficient for the wearyng: for that of necessity the
most part must be disfurnyshed, the shade of the whole foot being
altogether yet untouched: much more tolerable were it of the twain, to cast
the Gyauntes garment upon an infantes shoulders, the show whereof, albeit
boisterous, and the carriage tedious, yet the attire being of the finer
stuff, there may be drawn thereof many good parts, to the fashioning of a
more seemly garment, and remain afterward as pleasing to the beholders, as
comely for the wearers.

Among many that my self have known and often ^rd of, Affectation of too much
brevity.
that in most wonderful and serious manner ^e affected this obscure or rather
aenigmaticall kind ^reuitie, wherein not so much as the least part of the
^tter shall be almost discovered. I do remember a ^ttie jest, that I have
often heard repeated of pleasant ^ learned Skeleton, which being not altogether
imper^ent to this purpose, it shall not be amiss for the rea^s recreation,
brieflye to have discovered, and thus it ^s. There is besides Saint Albones a
place called ^argate which sometimes was a Priorie of Nonnes, ^d joined not
far from the Abbey there. A pleasant conceit.
To this reli^ous Priorie belonged a Myll, the watercourse where^, came from
the Abbey, and upon some displeasure, or ^noiance done to the Abbey grounds,
grew to be stop^d. The Lady Prioresse of the Nonnerye, seeing her ^lfe thus
highly injured, and bearing no stomach to ar^ue the matter with the Abb^t,
hasteneth by license to ^e Court, meaning to acquaint the king with her cause,
and from him to seek redress: where encountering with ^ kelton, she
communicates to him her counsel, and re^uireth in brief manner to have the
king thereof aduer^sed, by his skillful devise in writing, whereupon Skel^on
wrote, and the Lady misliked. It was too much, and ^he king importuned with
serious affairs, would never ^eruse it, why said Skeleton: shall I not deliver
to the ^King the state of your cause, what else answered the La^ye: But I will
have it most brief, in three words if ^t were possible. The conceited
scholar perceiving her ^umor, wrote immediately as follows.

Humbly complayneth to your high estate,
The Lady Prioresse of Margate. etc.
Two lines more were contained in this petition, the conueiaunce whereof being
pithie, yet including words (perhaps of worse interpretation) then by the
verity ye authors meaning might in truth be coniectured, ha^ since the
publishing hereof upon farther consideration been thought meet for modesties
sake to be left out.

But the Lady having by this time espied good ^ portunitie, rest the writing,
and viewing the quantit^ and not the substance, only pleased with the
breuiti^ she presented it to the king: who for the novelty of t^ show red it
with pleasure, and redrest it with lyking. T^ conceit indeed was pretty, and so
much the more apt, ^ cause so apilie it fitted the purpose, which by no mea^
could so well be informed in so short room, but by so ple^ saunt a conueiaunce,
as thereby was mentioned, the in^ spection whereof (he well knew) might be an
occasi^ (as it was in truth) to obtain respite for the suitor to in^ form the
rest. But this invention is not common, and the^ fore seldom happens to
purpose.

But now for our superfluous intrudors without eith^ wit or discretion,
Superfluous intrudors without skill or wit.
who carrying blunt conceits of their ow^ do never think to have spoken enough
of a thing without sinc or six times at the least, they return it and repeat
i^ again and again in a letter: and that their meaninges are never to be
comprehended but in over large deliverance, making sometimes three or four
letters in one, not knowing in the end which way they came in or when to go
out. It were a sport to see what odd kind of stuff, ^ those hammer headed
creatures could produce, whose inventions being more pliable to their common
exercises, then adapted to writing of Epistles, I willingly do let^ pass,
wishing only that the most towardly wits of all sorts, in their young years
trained up in any part of learning, when they come to that ripenes to use their
capacities, do rather inure them selves to the best form and manner of
writing, either by instruction delivered, or by order prescribed, then to
follow the common custom whereunto by confirmed ignorance they may be with
more facility induced, holding for firm^, by enhabling themselves to the
skillful handling of this practice, to be especially evermore enjoined, that
leaving too much prolixitie, they do endeavor to become brief, and eschewing
too much brevity, they write not obscurely, or rather so curtoll their
deliverance as no sense remains, whereunto who so binds himself, shall by
reasonable exercise in short time, attain to such ready performance as in the
parts of this method has been so specially required.

CAP. IIII. Of comeliness to be observed as well touching the person as the
cause.
TWo especial notes have already been debated, respectively to be considered
in the framing of an epistle, aptness of words, and brevity of speech: now
then to the third observation, which here I have concluded under this word
decoru^, Decorum, what it is.
named in english comely, or that which fitteth or best besemeth how or which
way soever. This kind of comeliness or beseeming (as well as in any other
behavior) being herein of like principal and most choice regard, extends
to the consideration of the person to whom, and of the cause whereof we mean
at any time to write. In account of the person, is to be respected, first the
estate and reputation of the party, Person, to whom we write, and the cause.
as whether he be our better, our equal, or inferior, next the lightness or
gravity, as whether he be old, young, learned, unskillful, pleasant, sage,
stately, gentle, sequestered from affairs, busied: or of what disposition,
show, or profession soever he be, that according thereunto, the method of his
Epistle may immediately be ordered.

In these estates of betternes, equality, or infeririour calling, the
excellency or debasement of each of them, shall be measured to remain,
according to the credit, countenance, estate, or dignity of him, from whom
the letter is framed, and by so much the more shall surmount or be lessened in
just account, by how much the nearer or farther of, each man is in calling to
him, unto whom he takes upon him to write, wherein a man may as soon
ouershoote himself by being too much officious, as bewray his ill nurture,
in not becoming s^^ficientlie obsequious.

Lightness or gravity, of those to whom we write.
In lightness or gravity of a man, we shall chiefly have regard to his
authority or profession, for neither all things to all men are convenient,
nor one thing to every man may easily be adapted. In one kind we frame our
letters to old men, in an other sort to young, one way to sad and grave
persons, an other to light or young fellows, one platform to Courtiers, an
other to Philosophers.

To honorable personages with duetye reserved, according to their calling, to
our betters evermore with submission, to our equalles friendly, to strangers
courteously, to our acquaintance familiarly, to our inferiors beningly and
favorably, to our friends lovingly, to our enemies sharply, and nippingly,
and finally to all kind of persons according to their estate government,
profession, or quality.

The person being now thus fully considered upon, we shall then have next
regard to our cause, Cause to be considered:
the conueiaunce whereof shall rest in the proper substance of all our
argument to be written of: Needful shall it be therefore, that the cause be
evermore measured according to the parties appearance, his credit or
worthiness, that the validity thereof be aunswerable unto the one and the
others goodness or greatness, that the intendment be sound, lawful, and to
no evil purposes, that it contain not matter of scurrilit^e, filthy and base
kind of villainy, that the very decorum required in all kind of writers, be
herein observed most principallte. And finally, avoiding all unseemly and bad
kind of deliueraunces erepugnant to civility, that nothing therein be found
that may be deemed ill sitting, or otherwise than beseems a direction so
worthy.

This decorum, the very direct square and measure whereof, conduces all things
with such exquisite performance, as whereunto never afterward ensues any just
reprehension, Horace de art poetica.
wills (as Horace in his book de art poetica excellently delivers) that
unto every thing be given his true nature, color and proportion, as well with
pen as pencill, abhorring as monstrous, and enemy unto skill, what otherwise
unadvisedly shall be portrayed or described, by reason whereof, whatsoever
carries with it self a just decorum, is said to be neat, apt, and comely,
the contrary whereof as altogether impugned, is said to be unmeet or
unseemly. And in so much as this decorum is a word among sundry that are
unlearned, more often repeated then many times well understood: I will
somewhat declare what order the same bears, in this kind of proportion. It
is therefore in an Epistle a singular Decorum, when of a common and mean cause
we yield common and plain speeches: An indecorum again, when upon a gross
conceit: a trifling toye a matter of no valewe, we seek to frame high and
lofty sentences.

To a person of mean condition, Decorum wills in writing we give a mean
regard, Decorum and indecorum.
and a great Indecorum it shall be to a person of greater account, not to give
sufficient and due regard. A matter of gravity delivered with weight, a matter
of sorrow reported with grief, a matter of pastime discoursed with pleasure, a
matter of folly intermingled with laughter, do each show the decorum therein
contained, and what agreement falls out in every several description, where
contrariwise, to a person sorrowful to write of iestes, to talk learnedly unto
a clown, to salute an old man with childishe fantasies, in causes of common
wealth to advance trifles, what thing more absurd or greater matter of
indecorum, can be found placed in any writing. I do remember where once I
did see an Enbleme, Enblemata, Alciat.
of Alciat in counterfeit by a cunning workman excellently depainted, and thus
it was: A man by his finger on his mouth remaining mute, yet very gravely clav,
not otherwise deciphered but by his apparel and countenance, the inscription
thus showed.

Cum tacet, haud quicquam differt sapientibus amens,
Stultitiae est index linquaque voxque suae.
When men stand mute what difference remaynes,
Twixt mad, and those whom wisdom rules at beck:
The tongue it is, that yeeldes or else restraines,
The perfect show of wit, or follies check.
And no marvel for that folly her self laid forth in wisdoms garments,
who will doubt that hears no^ her vtteraunce, but that her speech will sound
to great purpose, and like to the habit importe matter of great gravity. For
this cause seeing before speech had, which is the true note, and testimony
either of wisdom or folly, all men in their several callinges are holden
indifferent, yet do we see that when such men are discerned by their
speech, forthwith there falls a separation, and the reverence that all men
for the most part yield to discretion, makes sufficient apparaunce, what
regard skillful vtteraunce bears from such hateful folly. And since common
experience (according to their effects and conditions) gives almost unto
every person, what to say and speak, whereby they are not greatly
discerned, until in matters more weighty they are employed: yet how much more
in use of writing, the difference thereof shall sooner be made, in yielding
forth a certain trial of every man's discretion, according to the several
occurrents whereof he shall be occasioned to envite, I leave to every man's
practice to sound, and to the understanding of the grauest to conceive.

Now then, for so much as hereby appears, that only trial yields
difference of each man's ability, Trial only makes difference of wisdom or
folly.
and what by nature he is most pliable unto, whether wisdom or follye: and
that by how much the nearer each one for his endeavor, seeks to attain the
perfection by such means required, whereby ye finenes of each wit is the more
thoroughly sifted, by so much the more he is to be regarded, accounted of, and
especially commended. It shall behooue each one in framing his Letters (seeing
Letters also are but a formal kind of mutual talk, both speech and writing,
serving only to declare a man's meaning) to endeavor according to the weight or
lightness of the cause to contriue his actions, that they be such as wherein
this decorum both in person and matter may be embraced, and the repugnauncie
thereof to be utterly avoided: the ready mean of which, he shall the sooner
attain unto, by diligent regard had, and due observation of those three
especial notes heretofore already remembered. And now to the residue in the
discourse following, touching the method of these Epistles, to be in order
pursued.

Of the habit and parts of an Epistle.
SEeing an Epistle has cheeflye his definition hereof, in that it is termed
the familiar and mutual talk of one absent friend to an other: Character of
an Epistle general.
it seems the Character thereof, should accor^ing thereunto be simple,
plain, and of the lowest and meanest style, utterly deuoyde of any shadow of
hie and loftye speeches: yet nevertheless for so much as in the argument of a
great many of them (whose several distinctions hereafter shall appear) is
required a more high and lofty deliverance, partaking many ways with that
kind accustomed in Orations, and is therefore accordinglye to be necessarily
furnished with the points thereunto incident: we will for the present, sort all
kind of Epistles only into these two manner of differences, the one part
whereof shall be said to be general, and the other special. Under this
title of general shall be comprehended all such, Epistles distinguished into
general and special.
as either for fashions sake, custom, duty, courtesy, or other familiarity
do ordinarilye pass from one part to an other, rather of a pleasant conceit,
or some other more district or severe motion, then of any extraordinarye cause,
form, or substance in either of them contained. Such are those as whom either
long acquaintance or ancient familiarity, have caused interchaungeably to have
performed: or fatherly reverence, and servile duetye have bound, Letters
general are familiar.
by grave authority over children, kindred or servants, accustomably to be
continued. These, for the common and ordinary matter in every of them used,
being utterly exempte from any weight or grauitye at all, are rightly termed
by the name of familiar letters. They now that be special are such, the matter
of whom (as I said before) do admit both higher style and more orderlye
deliverance, according to the weight of the argument, in any of them to be
handled: Letters special.
and for this cause are termed special, as bearinge in them a resolute purpose
and intendment seriously to discourse, answer, implye or avoid, any certain
matter or causes, importing the present affairs whereupon the direction is
framed. Of them also are certain divisions, learnedly by skillful authors
that heretofore have been distinguished, the titles whereof I do omit, in an
other place then this more oportune to be hereafter remembered. These as they
are from the others many ways estranged in their several arguments: so unto
the conuaiaunce and expressing of their causes, appertains both other order,
and diverse parts in them (then in the residue) more fully to be considered. In
whose composition, that there may be a perfect platform gathethered of a more
certain proceeding, we will as others have thought meet, distinguishe their
several parts as they fall out to be borrowed in an Oration.

And whereas as well in all kind of writing and speaking, le tters when in is
continuance of matter.
wherein is or may be required any continuance of matter, it is very
necessary that whosoever should take upon him to answer the effects limited
and agreeing to the same, be therefore ready furnished and prepared accordingly,
it shall not be amiss herein to bring unto the readers consideration, what may
be deemed unto the accomplishement thereof, either of greatest furtheraunce or
of most necessity, by knowledge whereof, he may be the sooner settled in that
hereafter may be unto him prescribed to be followed. In such kind therefore
of Epistles, exactlye and with good perfection to be handeled, the learner
shall understand, that there are three things, by means whereof, for the
needful expressing and orderly deliuerye of any matter whatsoever, he must
of necessitye be furnished. Invention
Invention first, wherein plentifully is searched and considered, what kind
of matter, how much variety of sentences, what sorts of figures, how many
similitudes, what approbations, diminutions, insinuations and circumstaunces
are presently needful, or furthering to the matter in handling. Disposition.
Then Disposition, whereby is orderly, cunninglye, and perfectlye laid down
and disposed, every matter and cause in his due order, Eloquuotin.
proportion and place. Thirdly Eloquution, whose efficacy in speeches, neat,
pure and elegant, is in the other Chapter under aptnes of words sufficiently
already described. The first and the last of these three, as they are greatly
put forward by nature, which in some being far more curious of imitation and
study of the best, then in other some, whose will and conceit alike, do (by a
very instinct) affect and covet far more baser purposes: so besides the
furtheraunce continuallye achieved by often use of reading, shall herein be
greatly helped, in that for the self same purpose, and to the intent the
learner may as well in his native tongue, know the right use of figures and
tropes heretofore never by him understood, as also discern and v^e them, out
of others and in his own writings. I have at the latter end of this book,
Helps to Invention and Eloquution.
gathered together, all such Figures, Schemes, and Tropes here unto needful
and convenient, and there have by sundry familiar examples expressed their uses
and several effects, bewraying also unto the learners eyes, when any of them
are used, and to what purpose in every of the Epistles following, by noting
them in the margent of the same. In diligent conceit and aduerting whereof,
the use unto the practizer, shall in short time be found greatly available, by
the benefit thereby attained.

Now in as much as Eloquution, is annexed unto the style, which evermore is also
tied to the argument and substance of every Epistle: Style of Epistles
special.
it is to be regarded what style may generallye be deemed meetest for the
common habit wherein each of them may ordinarily be published. In the
recording whereof, we do find three sorts, especially in all kinds of
writing and speaking, to have been generally commended. Sublime, the highest
and statelyest manner, and loftiest deliverance of any thing that may be,
Sublime, Humile and Mediocre.
expressing the heroical and mighty actions of Kings, Princes, and other
honorable personages, the style whereof is said to be tragical, swellinge in
choice, and those the most hautiest terms, commended, described, amplyfied and
preferred also by Orators, with many excellent Figures and places of
Rhetorique. Humile, the lowest comicall, and most simple of all others, the
matter whereof is the meanest subject of any argument that may be,
entermedlinge in common causes, aduertisementes, and mutual effects of every
one, the style whereof sweepeth even the very ground it self, and is fittest
appropriate to our familiar Letters, for that in such familiar causes and
manners the same is soly perfected, in which nevertheless is Sua faceties and
elegantia quaedam, his certain kind of elegancie, pleasant and neat
conueiance, not altogether to be sequestered from that kind of deliverance.
Mediocre, a mean betwixt high and low, vehement and slender, too much and too
little as we say, in which are expressed histories, Declamatious,
Commentaries, and other intermingled actions, not of any in particular, but of
all in general, this style of all others may be adopted unto these special
kind of Epistles.

Thus then it follows that whether we write familiarlye, Skillful use of
writing.
or waightily, we must endeavor as near as may be that each be performed
skilfully, for that to neither of them may want learning, without the knowledge
whereof, what ornament can there be at all of this expected elegancie* The
particularities whereof included in these two titles of Invention and
Eloquution, both nature and skill do put forward as we daily see by a double
instruction. This therefore sufficing for those twain, Parts of an Epistle.
let us see what parts are supplied in an Epistle, succeedinge in the other
also, and ayding to Disposition. The first place is Exordium, a beginning or
induction to the matter to be written of, Exordium.
which is not always after one sort or fashion, but in diverse manners, as
sometimes by preamble, wherein either for our selves, or the cause we write of,
or in respect of him, for or to whom we write, we study to win favor and
allowaunce of the matter, sometimes by insinuation, wherein couertlye, either
in respect that the matter requires long debatement, or that mislyke may be
already grounded in him to whom we direct our Letters, we seek by cunning
reasons to show that the case so requyring is tolerable, or in the other that
rather equitye, then self opinion must and ought chiefly to be waighed, in all
which we undertake to be directed by the right rule and square, of common
intendment and reason: sometimes by a similitude, wherein by manifesting the
like of that we take in hand to have been commended, tolerated, or equallye
censured, we intend the same, or less force in our selves, at their hands to
be borne withal or accepted. Narratio, and Propositio
Then Narratio or Propositio, each seruinge to one effect, wherein is declared
or proponed, in the one by plain terms, in the other by inference, or
comparisons, the very substance of the matter whatsoever to be handled.
confirmatio
Then Confirmatio, wherein are amplyfied or suggested many reasons, for the
agrauating or proof of any matter in question. Confutatio
After Confutatio, whereby is diminished, disprooued or avoided, whatsoever to
be supposed, objected or agrauated. Peroratio.
Lastly Peroratio, in which after a breife recapitulation of that which has
been urged, the occasions moving affection are immediately concluded. These
are not altogether at all times used, but some or the most of them as occasion
serves, either admitted or rejected: besides which, others also are sometimes
remembered. The use whereof as in sundry Epistles they may be deemed
necessary, shall in their several examples hereafter pursued, appear more
euidentlye and largely.

CAP. VI. Of certain contents generallye incident to all manner of Epistles.
IN writing of all manner of Epistles, Four contents in an Epistle.
four especial contents are always continuallye incident. The manner of
Salutation, an order of taking leave or farewell, the Subscription, and the
outward direction. Salutations of ancient time, Salutation.
were wont to be fixed, Quasi omen faustum, a sign or inuiting to good hap, in
the front or upper part of the Letter: so did the ancient Romans, and in
like manner after their examples do at this day the most part of our
Latinistes. But seldom or never (especially of the learned and most curious
writers) is the same in our English directions, at any time accustomed.
Only this, where Letters are directed from one or more of the Council to an
inferior Magistrate or person, or from some Nobleman to such, whom he
entertayneth not in any degree of courtesy, or estate of society or
familiarity, the manner of commendations (which with us is retained for an
order of Salutation or greetinge) runs lightly in the beginning of the
Letter, and customably is delivered in this form. After our hearty
co^mendations unto your L. If it be from a number of ye Council to a Nobleman,
or otherwise in the singular number unto an inferior person as thus. Manner of
salutations.
After my hearty commendations unto you: where I have bin given to understand of
an agreement etc. But otherwise writing seriously to any man, the greting if it
be to one far our better is turned, to an acknowledgment of some kind of
duetye, or reverent account, and that most commonly at the end of the Letter,
which likewise in equality falls out in such place to be mentioned. Where
and how used.
And being in familiarities is adopted to no place, but beginning, middle, or
ending of the Letter, all is one, as seems most consonant to the vain, and
disposition of the party, and these also at all times not delivered in the
self word of greeting or commendations, but by diverse Epithetts and fine
conueyances, Epithetts.
as falls out to the matter of the Epistle, and the condition of the party
to be handled. This being at the end of the Letter, there shall imediately
follow the order of farewell, which t^yning so hard thereupon as it does, we
will put them both in one example of words and Epithetts, together with the
subscriptions, for the easier instruction of the learner and his better
remembrance, referring the notes of every of them to their places, where
afterward they are used in their several Letters.

Diverse orders of greetinges, farewels, and subscriptions.
ACknowledging my self deeply bound unto your L. for many sundry favors:
Variety of greetinges and farewels
I do remain in all humble reverence. Finding my self many ways beholdinge
unto your exceedinge courtesies I end. Remembering how much I am indebted unto
your L. for your sundry benefits: I confer the regard thereof to my
present imaginations, and do beseech thereof at your honorable hands an
everlasting continuance. All humble loyaltye and service protested unto your
honorable calling, I rest now and perpetuallye. Fearing in speeches, never
with sufficiency to manifest the conceit I have of your most honorable
favors: I solace my self with the remembrance, and humbly leave your L. to
your wonted perseuera^ce. Praying the Almighty to have your L. evermore in his
gracious protection, I humblye take my leave. Your worship in this, besides
many other occasions having perpetually bound me, how can I but rest such, as
you have expected and shall ever find me. Eftsoon recordinge my bounden
service unto your worship and my good Lady, I remain as ever before. Not
forgetting how many ways I am charged, in duetifull remembrance toward
you, I rest as I have protested. More grieved at my mishap and disabilitie,
then wanting either will or liking to do service unto you: I affie my self
evermore upon the acceptance of your wonted courtesy, and humbly therewithal
do take my leave. Commending the safety and good estate of your worship to the
almighties protection, I rest in all dutiful regard to the same. Rather
desirous to show my self thankful, then otherwise able in like sort, to
becomme in apparaunce so bountiful, I continue in full consent, etc. Binding
my self by all possible endeavors, never to be freed from the charge of so
exceeding benefits, I wish I might as I would, be unto you in very deed,
etc. UUishing unto you and yours, as much happiness, as my self am clogged
with carfulness, I surcease. Desiringe unto you no worse success in these
and all other your laudable endeavors, then my self have eftsoon craved in
performance of my cheifest travels, I recommende you to the tuition of the
Almighty. Not forgetting our accustomed greetinges and interchaungeable well
wishinges, my hastye Letter takes end. UUeighing how much you are already
busied, and not willing to keep you further occupied, I end my long and
tedious discourse, being in nothing exempted from wonted salutations and
accustomed kind of greetinges. Think not though my haste be such, but that I
remember (notwithstanding all this brevity) how greatly I stand charged both
to you and yours, to whom, and all the rest to you known I eftsoon commend me.

Rejoicing not a little at the health of you and all other our friends. I
hartelye bid you farewell. Rejoicing my self on your wel-wishinge, and the
hope I have to be returned in safety I commend my hap to fortune, and our
government to the Almighty. Rendering unto you as many thanks, as I conceived
comfort of your good entreatinges, I leave to detain you. Omitting what else to
be amplified in these or any other occasions I expect your happy return,
and in hope thereof do bid you farewell. Knowing how well I love you, the less
ceremonies I need to use in greeting you, only you shall remember to your
parents in most hartye manner to commend me.

Salute I pray you your friends in my name, and think in my best and most
serious wishes I never forget you.

My Father willed me in his behalf to salute you, and all the rest of your
acquaintance here do most heartily greet you. Forget not in what sort I have
heretofore received you, and think in the self same manner I do still
entertayne you. My greetinges to our friend R. let not be unremembered, and
deem that in all my vows I have (unto you all) most heartily wished. I had
almost let slip my commendations unto your brother, which for any thing I
would not had been forgotten, upon whom, as of greatest choice, I will make
my reposing.

The lyking I have to N. makes me here to remember him, whose good demeanor
as your own, I have in chiefest reconinge. My greetinges and paper have all
one end together, only our friendship indissoluble can never be forgotten.

Think how exceedinglye I have always well wished unto you, and accordingly
thereunto measure the rest of mine affection toward you. Haste compels me
to end sooner then I would, wherein notwithstanding I can never omit
sufficientlye to greet you, eftsoons recognizing as behooves your especial
good likinge toward me. I end as becomes me.

Innumerable of these and such like might be imagined both in greetinges and
farewels, the course whereof being furnished with such variety as it is, I
have left the residue unto the conceit of the Reader, accompting the plenty
herein set down, for any studious follower to be already sufficient.

And now to Supscriptions, Subscriptions.
the diversities whereof are (as best they may be allotted in sense) to
either of these to be placed, forewarned always unto the unskillful herein,
that writing to any person of account, by how much the more excellent he is
in calling from him in whose behalf the Letter is framed, by so much the
lower, shall the Subscription thereunto belonging, in any wise be placed.

And if the state of honor of him to whom the Letter shall be directed do
require so much, the very lowest margent of paper shall do no more but bear
it, so be it the space be seemelye for the name, and the room fair enough to
comprehend it, which Subscriptions in all sorts to be handled shall pass in
this order or substance to be framed.

Your L. most devoted and loyally affected. Your Honors most assured in
whatsoever services. Manner and variety in Subscriptions.
Your L. in whatsoever to be commanded. The most affectionate unto your L. of
all others. He that has vowed to live and die in your Honorable service. Your
L. most faithful and obedient Son. Your Lad. loving and obedient Daughter.

UUho but by your L. is only to be commanded. UUhose heart is your honors,
and his life by your L. to be disposed.

He that lives not but for your worship, and to do you service.

UUhose regard stretches unto your worship more then unto any others.

He that unto your worship has vowed to becomme most assured.

UUhom none have ever so much bound, as the deserts of your L.

Your Lordsh. in all humblenes. Your honors ever to be commanded. At your
worships gentle command. Your Lad. most bounden and affectionate. At your
honorable direction. Always attendaunt upon your L. pleasure.

Your worships in all good account. Yours ever loving and most assured.

To none so much as your self. He that in all accounts tendreth your welfare.
Whom by your only courtesy you have ever convinced.

The same which I expect from you, and not otherwise. Such as I am, or as you
wish to find me.

He that in his likinge is only yours. UUhome you have ever known, but never
approved.

UUhose liking only accompteth of your worthynesse. Such as you have ever
found me, and not otherwise. wise Yours in whatsoever to be employed. More
charie of your welfare, then careful of him self. Yours as you like to have
me. Yours faithful and ever assured. Yours or not his own. He who found you
but never knew you. He that once favored you, but sithence has vowed never to
regard you. Whose liking by your ingratitude has been quenched. In whose
account you once were, but now abandoned. Who once wished to love, but could
never hate thee. Whom thy deserts have made an enemy. Whom hereby you may
win, if you list for ever to become a friend. To each one loving, but of thee
most charie. Whose heart shall fail in any thing, sooner then in conceit
toward thee. He whose in loyaltye thou dide^t protest to be. UUho lives not
but to pursue thee. UUho ever looked on, but never loved thee. The same as you
left me. Such as you saw when you parted from me. The same and none other which
I have ever seemed to be. UUhose word has bound him, and faith shall assure
him. Yours most affectioned. Yours devoted till death. Yours whilst life
swayeth in mine inward parts. Yours as farforth as any others, etc. with many
other applications, whose Epithets are infinite, and rather upon the cause
suggested then otherwise, to be evermore added, altered, or couceaued. These as
the others may only suffice for the present purpose, referring what to be
expected, to the regard of a more curious or delicate invention.

And herein I thought good to aduertize the learner, that sometimes it
falls out, that this acknowledgment of duty, mentioned in the beginning of
the greetinges and farewelles, Acknowledgment of duty in the Exordium*
is in diverse Letters expressed in the foremost part, and the Exordium
therevppon framed (for that the same in truth is one of the parts thereunto
belonging effected in the person or condition of him to whom we write) which
to do, if in his writing also the same may be deemed necessary, he may then
use some other order of Farewell or taking leave, either by imitation of
others, or if he think meet, what herein else prescribed, consonant and
agreeing to the state and reputation of the same party to whom he writes.
Now then shall follow the directions, which on the outside of every Letter (the
same being made up and sealed) are for the most part infixed, and commonly
are termed by the name of Superscriptions.

CAP. VIII. Of Superscriptions and directions.
Superscriptions and directions of the Romans.
Among the ancient Romans, when learning first grew unto skillful
perfection, and men first devised excellentlye to write, there then began to
be extant in memory, diverse forms of wrytinge immediatelye, by the name and
title of Epistles, to be published to the posterity. In the directions
whereof, animated as I think with the virtues of their parents, and accompting
it (as in truth it was then so reputed) to be a great honor unto them, to be
entitled with the adopted name of the principal author of their families,
they sought no farther style of magnificence, but (were his parentage never so
statelye or honorable) being therewith contented, did only upon such
regard entitle their directions. For who that has been but ordinarilye
acquainted with the histories of their acts, but knows and has read, with
what reverence, those times (greedye of virtue, fame, and glory) entertaigned
the honorable deserts of such, as for the commonwealth and public
advancement of the state, have either aduenturouslye hazarded, or courageously
lost, a frail, uncertain, or transitory life, to the intent to purchase unto
their Country quiet, honor, or victory, and to them selves and posterity,
eternized fame and ever flourishing glory. Neither was their country unkind
unto them herein, which for their sakes, and for the reverend regard of their
virtues, have compensed the love which to their parents they could not show
to their children and succession in many degrees after them.

Such were the families of the Gracchi, Fabii, Cornelii, Hortensii, Horatii,
Metelli, Aemilii, Scipiones, and Fabritii. UUhereby I conjecture, that the
custom hereof, by such emulation adorned, became afterward a dignity, and
so succeeded in honor to every posterity.

Those Romans therefore, used only in the front of their Letters to write
first their own names, titles adoptiue and surnames, after that, his to whom
they wrote, and lastly their salutation or manner of greetinge^, giving also
like additions unto the other as to him belonged, whether it were by familye,
office, or some other dignitye. And this was the form. M. T. Cicero. M.
Varroni Sal. Dicit, or C. Caesar: Cornelio Balbo salutem dicit. But that
custom* according to the antiquitye of the time, is long since worn out, and
these days and seasons have induced unto us for every estate of calling, a
more statelye reverence, according to the dignity and worthynes of the same.

The reverend Majesty of Emperors, Kings and Princes, being advanced with a
more excellency and supreme magnificence. The names of Dukes, Marquises,
Earls, Barons and other Magistrates, with more solemn and honorable titles.

The offices of Estate and places most Noble, Diversity of estates.
amplyfied with larger honors, and names accordaunt to their several
dignities.

And albeit few are the number, that herein shall be occasioned to occupy
their pen, but (knows or almost every day) may understand the formal
application of every personages honor or worship: yet in so much as all sorts
are not perfectlye skilled, nor every man lives in place so convenient to
understand it, and that it has been parcel of a prescribed order so to do,
by those that have written the like method. I will set down so many examples
of estates for directions, as to the matter and purpose hereof may be adjudged
convenient, beginning from the highest, that are or have been, latelye
accustomed in our commonwealth (the sovereign Majesty excepted) unto the
meaner and most ordinarye used, and in present practice amongst us. And first
with the dignity of Archbishop, to whom in this sort we frame our direction.

Directions to an Archbishop. Bishop.
To the most reverend Father in God, the L. Archbishop of Caunterbury, or
York, Primate of England, and Metropolitan, his very good grace. To the right
reverend Father in God, and my very good L. the Lord Bishop of London. Duke.
To the hie and mighty Prince T. Duke of B. his most noble grace. To the right
honorable and my especial good L. the Lord Chauncellor, L. Chauncellor.
or Lord hie Treasorer of England. To the right Honorable the L. Marquise of
UU. Earl of UUilshire, L. Treasorer.
etc. To the right Honorable the Earl of L. Lord liuetenaunt for her Majesty
in the, Earls and in office.
etc. To the right honorable the Earl of H. Lord President of her Majesty's
most honorable Council established in the North. To the right Noble and my
singular good L. the Lord B. one of the L. of her highness most honorable
privy Council. Lords. Knights of the privy council.
To the right honorable sir W.M. knight, Chancellor of her highness court
of Ex. and of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council. Knight of the
privy Council.
To the right honorable and my singular good L. and father, or Lady mother the
Earl or Countess of N. To the right honorable and my very good Lady,
Countesses.
the Lady A. Countess of W. To the most noble Lady, and Paragon of all
virtue, the Lady M.H. one of the daughters to the deceased right honorable
Countess of P. To the prudent and virtuous Lady endued with all singularity,
the Lady F.D. To the most noble and towardly young gentleman G. T. son and
heir, Ladies. Gent. of estate.
or one of the sons to the right honorable L.D. To the right honorable sir
R.D. knight, L. Mayor of the City of London. L. Mayor.
To the right worshipful W.F. Esquier, sergeant at law, and Recorder of the
City of London. Re order. Justice of peace.
To the right worshipful W. L. Esquier one of the Justices of her Majesty's
Court of common Pleas. To the right worshipful and my singular good Lady
mother, Ladies of worshipp.
the Lady, D.H. To my very good father, W.C. merchaunt of the City of B.
Merchaunt. Alderman. Servant.
To the worshipful his especial good Master M. R. Merchaunt and Alderman of
the City of L. To my servant R.D. at C. etc.

Other examples besides these were needelesse to set down, for that if any
alteration at all happen herein, it is by reason of familiarity, addition of
offices, or change of titles. Only let herewith be noted, that when letters
do pass from some number of the council, Directions from the Council, thus
framed
or from any L. of the same, to a noble man or knight, these directions of
honor and worship are seldom used. But rather thus. To our very good L. Sir
I. P. Knight. L. Deputy of Ireland. To our very loving friends, the L. Mayor
of the City of L. and W. C. and R. P. Aldermen of the the same. To my very
good L. the L. T.H. To my very loving friend, sir T. P. knight. To our very
loving friends sir R. S. knight, Custos rotulorum of her Majesty's Count. of B.
and ^ W. and S. P. Esquiers, Justices of peace of the same shyre. The like
directions also are used of an Earl, to any of these estates to him inferior
in calling, and of a Baron to a Justice of peace, but if he be a knight, he
will commonly add unto him his title of worship. After which titles or
directions thus framed, it shall behooue (especially in the use of the
foremost) to set down the place, of dwelling or abode, as at the Court or else
where. At N, P. or D. giving the name of the place, Manor or house, where he
remains, to whom the superscription passes, and so is the direccion made
perfect.

CAP. VII. Additions of other things in this method to be considered.
NOW after all these parts herein mentioned to be considered, remains yet
some few points, which I have not thought good to pass unremembered. A
special note to him that would desire to be harkened unto in his writing, in
any wise to have regard to his opportunity, which in the chapters before laid
down, Opportunity.
I have sondrie times concluded under the nam^f time. Neither is the same time
herein alleged of such consideration, to be esteemed of small regard, but
rather in affairs importing the same, to be accounted of great weight. For
that I have seen some, and heard of many, that by favor of honorable and
worshipful, being in state to have obtained great matters, have
notwithstanding by their great rashness, Hurt of rashness.
and not aduerting time convenient, to require what they would, at the ^^ast
been of all hope of benefit utterly dispossessed. It is straung to see the
shameless condition of sum, and yet a thing that my self have many times
noted, Reprehension of importunacye of summer.
yea even in those of reasonable account, who having large and great ability
to wade thorough the weightiest of their causes, with honest quiet, and
sufficient contentment, yet conceauing a delight, never to be sequestered from
some coil of the world, will still be cloyed with many things, as it were
of purpose to occupy themselves, and with their continual bayting, to inure
their friends: In the course whereof the burden of their unprofitable
acquaintance, becomes so wearisome and tedious, that to him that prefers
his competent quiet, before a superfluous and unmeasurable encrochment, it
might seem more tolerable to pay out of his own pursse, for all the advice,
countenance, and pleasure that in a whole year might be reaped for him at
the hands of some other, then but for the space of one week to be pestered
with his messages. Yea, it is a pain but to read the lettters of such a one,
so intricate, so importunate, so peeuishe, so balde, Ill kind of letters.
and therewithal, so endless are the progressions of the same whereof not one
in a week, but four or five in a day, shall sometimes come coursing one after
another, because ^ee to whom he writes may stand the more assured, never to
be left unoccupied. Has not a man think you, a fair jewel of such an
acquaintance* especially when his nige^ralitie shall be such, as he had as leave
(for all this) see him hanged almost, whom he thus toyleth, as he should fare
but the value of ten shillings the better by him, I mean that of his own
frank will the sum thereof should drop out of his own purse to his safeguard.
But such as these, standing in the most worste degree of so detestable and
shameless importunacy, let them rest, and we in the mean time may admit this
regard, that having to do with our betters, touching our affairs we are by
duty, estraunged from any kind of tediousness wherewith to pursue them, No
sorts to be too much importuned.
be it with our equalles, humanity will not permit it, and standing with our
inferiors, bounty and courtesy will never allow it. And when as by any
occasion, we are with writing to commend our letters to any one, before our
selves preferred in greater account, His leisure to whom we write.
needful shall it be that measuring the state of our cause with the weight of
his calling, we either diminishe or amplify the same as by the one may be
urged, and by the other tolerated, knitting what we would (when leisure may
not attend it) in as short deliverance as may be, and (having scope of
allowance) to confirm it again in as weighty sort as can be. His humor and
affectation.
The humor likewise and account of the party to be understood, shall not be a
little furthering, as whether he be delighted with such continuance of
argument, or takes pleasure in short sentences, whether he would be sued to
with difficulty, or commended by entreatie, whether he affects pleasant,
vtteraunce, or is amated with gravity, whether he takes felicity in well
doing, or affoordeth it hardly. Requisite it is, that whosoever takes upon him
an entrance into any such endeavor, be well advised of all these, the rather to
purchase that opportunity which otherwise at most hands he may perchance
attain but very slenderly. For suppose the matter stood to be handeled
between my reasonable acquayntaunce and me, being suc^, whom perchance I
hold in some degree of familiarity, Want of opportunity.
it might hap, that for the good suppose and credit I have with him, he
would do much in a cause for me, wherein if unadvisedly I should press him,
by vehement writing, without respect of the present opportunity, twenty to one
but it might fall out, that he would utterly deny me, by means whereof, I
should ever after become frustrate of any hope, to attayn from him any
courtesy. Opportunity therefore is many times of greater force, either to
commend, or utterly disable the sum of each man's ability, wherein care is
chiefly to be had, that when those to whom our affairs are annexed remain
most busy, we do prosecute them with less vehemency. And in like manner
when leisure serves, that a man writing or importuning may be regarded,
Opportunity wherein it consists
not to ouerpasse by too much negligence, what with ease and small soliciting
may be obtained, yet this to be done with such consideration of the matter
and party, as that we forget not (if occasion so requires) that rather by
bounty or other courtesy, our request is to be harkened unto, then by vayn
challenge of any other respect tending to an enforced duty.

An other thing which I thought good to give in notice, is, to admonish the
learner to avoid in his writing, the giving forth of any unused words, Unused
words and confused delivery to be avoided.
or confused kind of delivery of any thing, the phrase whereof impugneth the
meaning of the writer, or is impropper to the sense or matter in handling, or
unfitting the state of the party to whom it is directed. As for example, one
that sometimes intended not a little of his own invention, took upon him to
write a love letter to a woman of very mean reputation. In which after he
had drawn God Cupid by the name of the blinded boy, from those parts of
favor that never were in her, and showed himself much passionate for the
love he ought her, he concludes the matter in this sort. Thus craving your
lawful benevolence, in not me rejecting, your answer comfortable and not
intolerable, etc. The woman not accustomed to such hot entertainment, and
rather bluntly before time pursued, then daintily entreated, began hereupon for
sooth to wax coy, and to intend great matter of her self, and vauntyng her
favor at a higher rate, the^ he belike seemed afterward willing to become a
purchaser of, remained as she was, and himself at his more profitable
studies. The conclusion of his letter was very improper, in somuche as
requiring liking by the name of benevolence, Words improper and impugning the
sense.
he both misprised his own demand, and seemed to induce a word more sounding
to a charitable relief, or courteous contribution of money, then to any such
purpose as he meant it. Besides your answer comfortable and not intolerable:
If these had passed in a jest it had been more convenient, but used bona fide,
it was too too bad, especially respecting the party what she was, from whom
one would have supposed, that such a one as himself, could never have
received (but by too much tolleration) any discoutentment at all. Errors
common to the learned as well as the unlearned.
This error we see is not only common to the unlearned, for as well this one,
who in his profession (as I was informed by him that showed me the letter) was
well reputed of, but also some of the forwarder sort, only by affection of
words, which they have used, ha ue been misliked and yet learned enough.
Among which a doctor of physic long since, intending to be very eloquent in
words, and such as every Carter should not conceive of began an Epistle to a
book by him published in this sort.

Egregious Doctors, and masters of the eximious and Archane Science of
Physic, of your Vrbanitie exaspe rate not your selves against me, for making
of this little volume of Physic. Considering that my pretense is for an
utility and a common wealth. And this not only, A ridiculous manner of
writing.
but also I do it for no detriment, but for a preferment of your lawdable
science, that every man should esteem, repute and regard the excellent
faculty. And also you to be extolled and highly preferred, that has and does
study, practice and labor this said Archane science, to the which none
inartious persons, can nor shall attain to the knowledge: yet notwithstanding
fools and insipient persons, yea and many the which, does think themselves
wise (the which in this faculty be fools in deed) will enterprise to smatter
etc. Was there ever seen from a learned man a more preposterous and confused
kind of writing* forced with so many and such odd coined terms in so little
uttering* But surely the man did it of a great conceit, for as appears by
the course of all his Epistle following, his wits were so pestered with an
angrye mislike, of the bad demeanor of some unlearned users of his science as
he thought with himself that every botcher should not be able to vent him, but
he should be a man of some reach at least, (...) Nevertheless how wise so ever
stood his imaginations: this one thing do I know, that diverse to whom I
have showed the book have very heartily laughed in perusing the parts of his
writing. Aieste.
For these egregious, eximious, vrbanitie, and exasperate although the words
be in some sort tolerable, yet because any of them almost are among us
never or very rarely used, and in this writing two of them especially very
vnpropperly placed, Vrbanitie and exasperate improperly placed.
the manner whereof sounds nothing pleasant. In so muuhe as exasperate is
propperly to set him in a farther rage, that is already furiously bent in a
thing, and besides by the action of an other manne then himself, who as it
were of a resolute will, and meaning would go about to procure it, so that it
may be well said, he did exasperate his furies the more, by inducing such a
speech, or such an act) but it cannot be so properlye required, exasperate
not your self for such a thing, Definition of exasperate.
especially when I am not therewith so much as in any mislike already, which
no man can at any time be, without he first know an occasion. your Vrbanitie
likewise being derived of the latin word Vrbanus, Of Vrbanitie.
whith is civil courteous, gentle, modest or well ruled, as men commonly are in
cities and places of good government, whereof that word takes his original,
ye word is not common amongst us, nor so apt to ye sense as if he had said,
your courtesy, your modesty, and so it might run thus: Let not your courtesies
be agreeued against me, or Let it not be offensive to your modesty, that for
the benefit of a great many, I have published this volume of Physic. The
ground was very good, for his intendment was, that the cause belonged to a
common wealth, wherein if any particular commodity seemed to be lessened,
wise men and such as were more studious of their countries good, then of their
own peculier gain, ought not to be offended. Then says he: And this not only,
but also I do it for no detriment, etc. UUhat confused deliverance is this*
how much more orderly thus, which sounds also more to his meaning. And this
also respected, in that I do it not for any detriment unto you, Correction.
but for a preferment of your lawdable science. Then his coming in with arcane
science, Inartious, fools, and insipient persons, had it not been less
improper if he had said profound science, and unskillful or unlearned, for
Inartious, and to have contented himself with his fools, without adding to the
same, insipient persons. Lastly he proceeds: And many the which does think
themselves wise (the which in this faculty are fools indeed) will
enterprise, etc. Here is, the which and the which, a phrase never with us
accustomed, nor with any good writer in his time (which was not many years
since) the sense whereof might in this sort more plainly be delivered. And
many who in their own opinion do seem very wise (but therein are in truth
very fools) will enterprise, etc. But of this enough, for that I think it now
high time to proceed to the rest, these two examples being sufficient to
admonish the learner, of the congruitie of his speeches and sentences, with
good phrases that be most agreeing to the meaning, and not improperly, to be
delivered, whereby he shall avoid the like error, and absurdity in conueyance
hereby expressed, and already so much reprehended.

CAP. IX. The division of Letters, and under what titles al sorts of Epistles
are contained.
SOmething have I digressed in order, contrary to that my former determination,
yet not altogether from the matter or purpose hereby intended, in as much as the
effects of that I have delivered, ^^ only to induce the reader into an
absolute and ready platform, of sound and perfect inditing, and as near as
any diligent foresight may aforde, to lay down what either best beseems or in
any wise impugneth the same, Herein could I have discovered unto you many
other imperfections that sundry times have appeared unto me in diverse
writings, the circumstaunces whereof, I willingly do omit, for that the
careful imitator of well doing, shall by this already said, with good
animaduersion easily find out his own disabilitie, and wherein he varieth
from any perfection, (examples in our english tongue thereunto leading, and
those of excellent good penning being so plentiful as they are) which as it
were by a line may conduct him, to the reformation or redress of what soever
offensive in any part of his writing. Now therefore leaving all other
by-pathes, we will directly proceed unto the orderly delivery and laying out
of our sunory forms of Epistles, Forms of Epistles.
the number whereof sorting from the variety of every several fancy, may be
supposed (as they are indeed) to be infinite. Nevertheless as far forth as
the most learned discouerers of the chiefest perfection therein, have hitherto
left unto us, we will by their imitation, limit our two distinguishmentes
before remembered, under their several titles to be divided. First those
Epistles therein mentioned to be special, for the special use and
observation of them contained, Four kinds or titles demonstra^iue,
Deliberatiue, Judicial and familiar letters. Parts: Demonstratiue.
we will divide under ye names and perticularities of Demonstratiue,
Deliberatiue, and Judicial. The others termed general in respect of the
general matter in them accustomed, shall pass as they did before by ye name
of Familiar letters. This Demonstratiue kind takes his name of Description,
maninifestatio^ or relation of any thing. Under which title are comprehended
all manner of Descriptions of Regions, Countries, Cities, gouernementes,
states, buildinges, fields, gardens, rivers, valleys, parkes, hills, walks,
prospectes, and what soever other like pleasures delights, and commodities:
according to their worthiness, goodness, stateliness, value and store: but
chiefly, and wherein they take their greatest force, do bear in them all
aduertisementes of persons, manners, conditions, applications, differences,
affections, inclinations, or any other quality, substance, or virtue,
incident to life or humayne government, tending to the praise or disprayse of
them or any of the^. Descriptory
The sorts whereof under this kind contained are Descriptorie, in which is
described any thing whatsoever, Laudatorie resting in praise, and Vituperatorie
which has in it the dispraise of a thing. The Deliberatiue kind concludes
Epistles Hortatorie, and Debortatorie, Swasorie, Parts. Deliberatiue. Parts
Judicial.
and Disswasorie, Concilatorie and Reconcilatorie, Petitorie, Commendatorie,
Consolatorie, Monitorie, and Amitorie: Judicial comprehends Accusatorie,
Excusatorie, Expostulatorie, Purgatory, Defensorie, Criminatorie,
Exprobatorie, Comminatorie, Deprecatorie, Inuectiue, and Complaining. Now those
that be Familiar, Parts. Familier.
have these several kinds: Epistles Narratorie, wherein we express to those
that are far from us, the affairs that presently are in hand with us.

Nuntiatorie, wherein we advertise the news of any public or private matters
unto our friends. Gratulatorie in which we testify our gladness for the
recovery, return, benefits, advancement, good hap, or likyng of our
friends. Remuneratorie, whereby we give thanks for courtesies, benefits, or
good turns received, or care or other liking had or shown unto us.
Collawdatorie by means whereof we recommend the name, person, virtue,
worthiness, actiuitie, valor, or what soever, of any one to preferment or
other service to be adapted, Iocatorie, wherewith, by a pleasant and sweet kind
of delivery of some pretty ieste or delicate conceit, we recreate the mynds
of them, to whom we write Prestolatorie: Wherein upon consideration of the
honor, valor, worthynesse or virtue of some one, we tender unto him our
services and attendaunce Obiurgatorie: In which we rebuke the ill demeanours
of our Children, servants, kindred, friends, or acquayntaunce. To these are
many letters Responsorie, and other Applications, the titles whereof are not
certain, but examples and occasions plentiful. All which I refer to their
several places each one as they follow in his kind to be successively
delivered.

CAP. X. Epistles Descriptorie and the parts thereof.
FOrsomuche as in Descriptions, are only declared and set forth at large, the
manner, order, state, government, proportion, goodness or value of any
thing: the epistles consisting solie thereof, be commonly without addition at
al, ei there of praise or mislike, or any other intendme^t, in respect whereof
they might in any one jot vary from that title of Descriptorie. Parts in an
Epistle descriptorie.
The force hereof comprehends chiefly a narration thorough out, in which is
contained (by laying out the several parts thereof) a perfect and plain
demonstration or description of any thing: In these sorts of Epistles, the
excellency of the writer, and paynter concurreth in one, who the more that
each of them studieth by perfection, Comparison of the writer and painter.
to touch all things to the quick, by so much the more nearer do they
both aspire, to that exquisite kind of cunning, that in each of these
differences, is absolutely to be required. The curious paynter in drawyng a
perfect piece of Lantskip, Painter.
presents many things unto the eye, the conceit whereof is marvelous, for
with great admiration we do there seem to behold, the most pleas^unt and
goodly valleys: woods hye, and decked with stately trees (some tops whereof
the wind seems to wreathe and turn at one side) then goodly rivers, hye
ways, and walks, large situate and hie climing hills and mountains, far
prospectes of Cities, Steeples, and towers, ships sailing on seas, and waves
blown up aloft, the element clear, fair, and temperate, with some shining
beams shadowing, and spreading over all these, wherein seems the delight so
rare, and climate so perfect, as very desire provoke a man to gaze of it, as
a thing in present life, and most certain view. And do I pray you, Writer.
our excellent writers degenerate at all from any part of these* does not the
learned Cosmographer in acquainting us with the unknown delights, situation,
plenty and riches of countries which we never saw, nor happily may ever
approach unto, admire us oftentimes and bring in contempt, Ptolomie and other
writers.
the pleasures of our own soil, and many times a hudge wonder, of the
unhard secrets never before reported of, De situ orbis.
the incredible operations of diverse things, and state so high and
magnificent. such as the very description and lively delivery whereof, makes
us believe that our eyes do almost witness the same, and that our very senses
are partakers of every delicacy in them contained. But omitting the weight
hereof, consisting in these worlds of such strange account, we what fine
invention does Virgill many times in his Aneidos, Virgill in his Aeneidos.
and with how much variety describe unto us the tides of the morning* how
greatly in his first book does he amuse the reader, with the lamentable
shipwreck and even then (as it were) appearing surges, and intolerable
turmoyles upon the sea happening to Aeneas': what darcknes, what tempests,
what rising and deepest fall of waves again, what winds, what mingling of
heaven and earth together does he there relate* Then after, his arriual on
shore and presenting to Queen Dido, how is the destruction of Troy in the
person of Aeneas to her described* In the fourth book likewise what an
excellent description makes he of Fame* how she weth he the banquet by the
Queen to Aeneas made, and how lively is the state and magnificence thereof
delivered* Innumerable of these, Ouidii Metamorphoseo.
both from him and the Transformed shapes of Ovid could I here record, the
excellency of each being such, as by the forcible vtteraunce thereof,
breeds as great delight as astonishment unto the curious searcher of the
same. And in as much as I have undertaken to conduct the learner by example,
how to behave himself in some sort herein, we will proceed with our
Epistles Descriptorie, Example.
the first whereof following, seems to be sent from a traveler to a friend
of his in England, the matter whereof ensues.

An example of a letter Descriptorie wherein is particularly described, an
ancient City by laying down the several parts thereof.
Exordium.
MY good uncle, the remembrance of your charge given me, and my promise to you
made at my departure out of England, binds me, (at my now being in quiet,
and with good leisure settled in Germany) I should return the same again,
with my accustomed and dutiful regard, in sort as I have ever in devoured my
self to do unto you. It may then please you, Narratio.
that remaining with my L. the Duke but a few days at Geneua, we hasted
thence to a City caled Norrumberghe, being Imperial, situate in the high
parts of Germany, where sithence, we have almost continually remained. And
albeit I could somewhat write unto you of our passages through diverse places
of the Country, yet insomuch as there is no part thereof so memorable as this
City wherein we now remayn, the description thereof at this present may solie
content you. The City therefore as it seems is most ancient, and as many
do suppose and affirm, at that time when the country was first in subjection
to thempire of Rome, was builded by Nero the Emperor, and of him takes his
name, as Norumbergh, in signification, Neroes Berghe, and so much the rather
does it appear, by sundry ancient monuments therein yet remaining. Situation.
The City (besides that it is situate in a most delicate and pleasant soil,
wooded and watered most plentifully on every side, with goodly trees, fair
and delicate rivers and springs) is both of great strength in the walls of the
same, and plentifully builded with high and stately towers on every part. The
edifices of the City are rare, and of most sumptuous and stately appearance,
insomuch as there is no one house in any row that exceeds an other in height,
but all of them builded leuel, by a very geometrical proportion. The insides
are not more polished with riches, and ornaments of great beauty, then the
outsides with bravery, the very fronts of all which, as well of rich as poor,
are most curiously embossed in a hard kind of substance (such I think as
is our plaster of Parris) with artificial and lively pictures, Deckinges.
containing histories of diverse memorable, and strange effects, and that with
such wonderful excellency, as any ways may be conceived. The cost hereof is
continually mayntayned, repaired, enlarged, and preserved, by a general
contribution of the most worthy and honorable of the city. Besides, the
coullours so fresh, so brave, and delicate laid in oil, for defense against
weather, wherewith they are beautified, and set forth, are very strange. The
streets are wide, Streates.
fair, and excellently well paued. The stone they use for the most part is
marble, white, gray, and black, whereof is great plenty, besides other kinds,
which very wonderfully they cut and square in diverse small proportions
artificially poynted and shaped. The houses are not high, but backward built,
and inwardly large. This city retayneth yet the ancient government of the
Romans, Government.
for at this instant, they have their Consuls, Tribunes, Senators, Pretors,
Quaestors, Aediles, and other interchangeable offices as sometimes had Rome,
being in her greatest prosperity. The attire also alyke to their dignities of
all sorts of honorable personages, accustomed to their callings. Plain are
their habits for the most part, Habit of the people.
and nothing sumptuous, retaining still one, and the self same ancient fashion.
The constitution of their bodies as well men as women, are fair, clear, and of
sound co^plection. Frugal in diet and expense, and no thing prodigal. My L* the
Duke is here of great sway, and entertained with honorable account, Conclusio.
Thus much have I thought good to advertise you in discharge of my debt and
your desire, attending by the return of this messenger the news of your good
health. To whom and all other our friends, in sound and good affection I
eftso ones do recommend me. At Norumberge this of etc.


An other example wherein the state of a Country is solie described.
I Dout not N. but that thy heart longs, and mind is yet unquieted, Exordium.
because of my sodayn departure from thee, and ignorance of my estate and
present being, whereof that thy desires may now at full be resolved: know my
good N. that not having been scarce six months from thee, I did long since
perceive my self to be out of England, and that it may appear unto thee,
that I have just cause so to say, thou shall somewhat understand by me the
state of this Country. We live here in a soil, delicate I must confess for
the air, Narratio.
and pleasant for the situation with good leisure I must tell thee may we
here attend our devotions, Pleasant air unfrequented.
as having no cares wherewith to encomber us, but the needles search of that
whereof we never find likelihoode to annoy us. As uncompelled by severe
decrees and interdictions we limit unto our selves an abstinence, thou
might think we do it of zeal, Inuoluntatie abstinence.
but in truth it is of want, wherein we have more fasting days by^ a great
many then abilitye to bear them. Our conversation is with elements, with
waters, with fields, with trees, with valleis, with hills, in the general
use whereof we find nothing else but their proper shapes. And if by chance
any other sorts of creatures do appear, they are naked shapes formed as men
and weomen, fierce, savage, wild, not capable of any our reasons, Hard
seeding.
nor we of their speeches. Our food is roots, dried fishes, berries, and I
know not what other harshe kind of fruictes, and sometimes fowls, besides a
kind of grain growinge in great coddes, whereby we sometimes obtain (though
not the natural) yet some use of bread, unlike to that you eat, in taste,
goodness or propertye. Our lodginges and places of repose are caves, Ill
lodging.
entrenched in the ground, the earth our beds, and clothes our coueringes.
And these also hard as they are, enjoy we not in quiet, but being awaited of
the naked multitude (whose policies insinuate by nature are far greater then
their strength)we are feign by much industry to prevent them: Danger.
into whose hands if any of us do chance to fall, our dead carcases in
hasty morsels are conveyed into their entrails. Hereby iudginge of our
estate, thou may accordinglye deem of our pleasures. Conclusio.
The next message that thou shall attend from me, shall be my speedy return,
the Seas and winds being not less favorable then they were at my going
forth. Mean while recommending my self to thy well wishing, and our safeties
to God. I end as thou know this of, etc.


An example wherein the death of a Noble man is only described.
Exordium.
THE decease (good Madame) of my L. your brother, has occasioned unto your
Lad. the sight of these Letters, wherein I have rather acquitted my self of that
whereunto by your honorable command I was enoyned, then any ways satisfied
the grief that by my self among many others, for his loss is entierly
conceived. The manner whereof, may please you now to be informed of, Narratio.
which was thus. On tuesday being the thirteenth of this instaunt, having as
it then seemed unto his L. and others, been reasonablye recovered from the
wonted force of his long consuming disease, being importuned by the dispatch
of some present affairs, as otherwise to have some conference with her
Majesty, he went from his house of B. to the Court, where all that day he
remained, and returned again at night, not for all this, finding himself at
all disquieted, or the least motion of any the panges wherewith before time he
had so often been vexed. The most part of that night he was very well reposed.
toward morning the next day, he began somewhat to be agrieued, Sudden sickness.
but nothing as acustomed* in which state the most part of that day he also
continued. At night again, having eaten some small pitance to supper, toward
nine of the clock, he began most vehemently to be passioned, Declaration of
his speeches.
till which time we all had very good expectation of his health and recovery,
which his L. perceauing, after he had been a while set up in his bed, he
said. I know my good friends and faithful love servant, that the great
zeal and love you do bear unto me, is a vehement occasion to kindle in you a
desire of wel-wishinge, and intendement of assured safetye toward me, wherein
I have more cause to thank your good wills, then mean thereby to imagine the
force of my disease, to be less then long since I expected, and exceedinglye
in my self have ever doubted, what words of comfort, protraction and delays
soever, have by the Physicians to the contrary been used. One great and
exceeding comfort unto me is, that living, I ever loyally demeaned my self,
and dying, I shall depart this world in her Majesty's good grace and especial
favor. Next unto that, the love of you my dearest friends and entierly
beloved servant and followers, whose hearts I know do pursue me, and whose
affections even to the last gasp of death I am persuaded to be ever firm and
fixed toward me. Your desires are I know, that I should live, according unto
which, the least mitigation that may be of my grief, you measure by and by to
the hope of amendment, which is not so. For that in all the comfortable
speeches that sundry times I have received from you, my self to whom the
inward effects thereof have been found most forcible, have ever mistrusted,
and by many probable circumstances adjudged the contrary. Long time endure I
can not, this know I well, happily a day two or three, I may yet be conuersaunt
among you, for my decease, that stands assured (the messenger whereof
continually knocks at the door of my imaginations, ready every hour to
assault my heart, and to carry away with him the spoils of a dying carcass)
will not permit I shall long time travel in this sort among you. And for my
self, stand ye all asserteined, that having long since peized in equal
balaunce, the long continuance of a frail, Mislyke of the world.
wretched, and travailed life, the most part whereof is carried away in
sleep, sorrow, grief, sickness, danger, and the residue also never freed of
care and all manner of disquiet, with the hope of an everlasting joy, happiness,
rest, peace and immortal residence: I find no reason why I should at all
affect the toil of such earthlye tediousness. Insomuch as having lived now
almost three skhore and thirteen years, and borne my self (honorably I
trust) in all mine actions and services, and further in the progression of my
ripest years, yea in this very instaunt more then at any other time am
regarded of my prince, and esteemed of my country, and among my peers reputed
in the highest degree of my fidelity: I shall now die as becomes my person,
worthelye and honorably. Be you therefore recomforted I pray you as I am, and
think that for all the love you have ought me, the services you have done me,
or tender care you do yet in my heauiest panges bear unto me, the chiefest
content you can do unto me, is that you be satisfied herein with me. That
being verilye resolved in my soul, of all that I have here said unto you,
and having ordered mine actions, Certain notice and liking of death.
and prepared my self thereto accordinglye, I do willingly, and with a right
contented mind, leave this transitory world so replenished as it is with so
many grievous casualties, and heartily do give my body to his natural course,
and my soul into the hands of the Almighty creator, for ever in his glory (I
trust) to be eternized. This speech ended, he continued till after midnight, at
which time, he had about two hours slumber, and so began his pain to
increase again. In which till wednesdaye following, almost in one state, he
for the most part remained, often-tymes accustoming him self with those that
were about him to prayer, many times recording to himself the goodness of
God, and his mercies to him remembered, and that with such zeal and enteire
regard of his hoped repose, as that it still seemed and was euidentlye
apparaunt how much he longed and thirsted for the same. In fine, drawinge by
little and little to an end, even in the very last pange, joining his hands
up to heaven, his heart and eyes thitherwarde fixed, he recommended eftsoon him
self to the mercy of his redeemer, and on thurseday last about two in the
morning dyed, His death.
to the lamentable grief of all that were about him, who heartily sorrowing his
loss, were forced to shed tears aboundauntly. The day of the funeral is not
yet certain, Conclusion.
but the same is intended very honorably. Recommending my self unto your La.
in all humblenes, I take my leave. At our sorrowful house of B. this of, etc.


THese three Letters being all as you see of one suite, A declaration of the
parts comprehended in every of these letters
yet diversely handled according to the several matters in them contained, do
bear in them two only parts of an Epistle whereof they be solye consisting. A
brief Exordium in each, and then Narratio throughout. Peroratio there is none,
because by collection there is no inference made of any the matters continued:
but a Conclusion used with brevity, wherein either greetinges or farewell to
knit up the Epistle is mentioned. The Exordium of the first arises from the
person of his Uncle, First Letter.
whose authority was a charge unto him, to inform the special notes of the
country. The Narration by demonstration of the particulers of the City
describes thereof the worthiness, statelines, and the excellencye, as first it
is mentioned to be ancient as builded by Nero. 2. Then pleasauntly situate
by reason of the air and fertilitye of woods and waters. 3. Next by the
sumptuous and statelye buildinges whose descriptions are extant. 4. Fourthly
the fashion, equality, and largenes of their streates and houses. 5. Fifthlye
their Magistrates and long continued government. 6. Sixtlye their apparel
reteyning yet the monuments of their autient dignities. 7. Finallye the goodness
of the soil measured by their complexions. The Conclusion knitting up the
state thereof, mentions a discharge of promise, and courteous
recommendations, etc.

Second letter.
The second Letter has his Exordium brief, of the freindship between both
parties, each longing to be informed of the others welfare.

The Narration occupies the description of unfrequented places. As first they
have only the commodity of the soil, which by reason of the air is well
situate, without any fruit at all thereof, because it is not inhabited.
Secondly there is nothing to encomber them with, but the care to defend
themselves, which is easy, and to get victuals which is impossible. Thirdlye,
nakedness of the people without civility, and thereby barred from any common
society. Lastly the subtlety of their disposition to lie in wait (being men
eaters) whereby some of their company have sometimes been entrapped. The
Conclusion shows a short return, and Fervent desire of safty.

The third caryeth his Exordium of the decease of an honorable peer, Third
letter
and the desire of her to whom he writes, to be advertised of the same.

The Narration by circumstaunces infers the sodainnes of his death, because
by some hope of recovery it was at that time unexpected. Then a recordation of
some worthy and honorable speeches by him delivered, being an argument of the
contempt ^e held of life, and the certain notice and likinge he had in
himself of death. After, his death. Lastly the celebration of his funerals,
the time whereof was not then known. The Conclusion is a determination of the
Letter, only in taking his leave and there withal ends.

Thus do you see the special points, whereupon every of these Letters do
consist, distinguished by the numbers in each of them severally contained, the
matters and occasions leadinge to the examples, whereof be infinite. For what I
pray you in particular, of any generality can be set down, but that the
same to the method hereof must needs be correspondent. In what kind of
argument can you wade, to recount any matter whatsoever, but the title hereof
shall in some sort or other of necessity he handled? Insomuch as the use hereof
being so plenty as it is, it falls out very seldom in his own proper
nature of an Epistle to be disposed, but in many other sorts of Epistles is
very commonly frequented: For examples sake, if in an epistle Commendatorie
we endeavor to commend any man to favor, office, or service with an other,
Demonstration praise and dispraise most used under other titles.
it is necessary that we manifest the person what he is, and what be his
qualities, which can not be without we fall into these kinds of descriptions
herein used, in demonstration of his virtues. If in a Swasorie Epistle we
should advise our friend to leave the City, and to come and dwell in the
country, we must of necessity by demonstration and description of the same
place, set before his eyes the benefit, pleasure, use, and commodity thereof,
by means of which he may the rather thereunto be induced. The like also many
times happens in Epistles Consolatorie, Petitorie, Exhortatrie, and
Monitorie, besides in Criminatorie, Defensatorie, Inuectines and others, in
each of which the virtues or vices of men are sundry times either extolled,
praised, preferred, urged, excused, alleged, proposed, dispraised, misliked,
or condemned.

Ne^dlesse were it therefore, to wade into all the particular examples hereof,
solie to be conferred in Epistles by them selves: only such as are needful we
will proceed in, referring all the residue contained in this demonstratiue
kind, to the examples, wherein in any other title they shall be tendered.
Applying there withal to the Readers consideration, that if he shall be
occasioned at any time to the description of any other thing or place herein
not mentioned, and not by imitation of these sole observations with facility
sufficient to be conceived: he may turn to the former titles above rehearsed,
and in the margent hereof likewise expressed, in some of which he shall not
fail, in one sort or other of that he lyketh or searches to be satisfied. One
example more semblable to the first as well for that it carries in it so
rightly the nature of this demonstratiue kind, without intermixion at all, as
also in respect of the very perfect and orderly delivery thereof. I will
prefer unto your imitation, the matter whereof upon occasion of the embassage
of Sir George Carry into Scotland, was written by M. R. Bows being there then
in his company, to the right honorable L. Hunsdon, containing only a
Narration of his enterteignement, with some occurrents mentioning the state of
the country at that instant, which by chance (in the writing hereof) among
other old papers happened into my hands.

IT may please your good L. On the twelfth hereof S George Carey and his
company came to the Town, with greater speed then the LI. here looked for:
causing them hereby (as they say) to omit sundry complements of
enterteingnement to have been showed to him, both in the way, and also at his
ariuall here. And albeit audience was required to have been given on the
morrow, yet it could not be obtained before this day, which delay was partly
excused by our sudden coming, but the chief cause appeared to be by the
vnreadines of the king.

On the morrow after our coming the Earls of Mar and Gowrie, the L.
Lindsey, the M. of Glamis, Justice Clearke, Clearke Register, and sundry other
of the Council and Gentl. came to Sir George, offering all courtesies to him,
and good devotion to her Majesty.

This day audience was granted, whereupon Sir George delivered to the king
her majesty's directions given him in charge, with such discretion and good
order, as answered fully the contents of his instructions, and sounded
greatly to his own commendation, giving me just occasion to think my self
happy, to follow one that could with such sufficiency discharge the duty
requisite on his part.

The king appearing to be partly passionate at the first, did acknowledge
himself greatly beholden to her majesty for her great benefits, with offer
and promise to be found thankful for the same, excusing still the abuses of
the Duke toward himself, and other unthankfulness showed to her majesty.
All which he would have drawn to have come rather by the oversight of
counselors, ad^ising and consenting to the causes of the same, then by the
Duke, that little meddled (as he thought) in such matters. And for his further
answer, he has referred it to his next conference, wherein it is hoped he
shall be brought to better understanding of his state, and of the doings of
the Duke, as by the next your L. shall have further advertisement.

The Duke continues as yet in Dunbarton, accompanied with the M. of Seton, the
M. of Leuinston, and sundry others besides his own company, he pretends to
have want of sundry requisits needful for his departure and transportation, and
thereon has sent to the k. to pray longer time, which is denied, and order
given this day unto him to obey, and to keep the appointment prescribed. The
piece of Dunbarto^ is well victualed and furnished, and albeit it is delivered
to the custody and charge of W. Steward for the K. yet it is in the dukes power
to command and dispose of the same as he pleases. Upon sundry respects the K.
and his LI. have deferred the conuention until the x. of October next, minding
to have the same at Edenbourgh, and thereby to establish both a good order for
the kings person, his house and revenues, as also for the policy of the
gouenment. And thus referring al others to the next occasion, with my humble
duty, I pray unto God to have your L. in his blessed keeping. Sterling the of
October, etc.


MAny aduertisments in this Letter, I have purposely ouer-passed, as well for
ye they were nothing furthering to example, as also something impertinent unto
the course hereof. Now follows it next, ye after these Letters, mere
Descriptorie as you see, we do treat of the other two parts apertaining also to
this form, which are Lawdatorie and Vituperatorie, the use whereof either soly
or intermixed in any other kind of Epistles, shall of one or more of these
causes take their original, that is to say, of the Person, Deeds or thing it
self to be commended, misliked, or dispraised. The Person of any one is to be
preferred or disabled, either by his birth, descent, parentage or auncestry.
Secondly, of his Childhood, being therein either well disposed, or untowardly
given, virtuously trained up, or viloly behaved. Thirdly, of his youth, in
which he is ever conuersaunt in studies of honest life, seriouslye given to the
knowledge of letters, affecting always unto laudable exercises, temperate and
sober in demeanor, or otherwise accounted dissolute and wanton, unhappily led
to the search of whatsoever mischiefs, affectionat to ye most basest conditions
and practices, not tied to any order, but wholly pursuing an uncontrolled
liberty. Fourthly, of his ma^ly years being frequented with civil government,
or living altogether without account. Privately and publicly in all manly
actions demened, or by apparent loosnes in each place discredited. In this
place is the some and worthiness of each man's behavior, with all plenty to be
described, or utterly to be impugned. For herein are the seasons wherein all
virtues with most regard are ever flourished, or extreme vice with all kind of
mischiefs most deeply pursued. Fifthly, of his old aye, the course whereof is
with ancient gravity continued, or by all kind of euilles most hainously
misprised, whose silver hayres are shining in virtuous happiness, or miserable
estate is drowned lothsomnes. Six^lye, in his end or departure out of this
world, agreeing to the saying of Solon, ye No man may be counted happy before
his death. For that in the expectation or attayning thereof, as at no time more
in all the life of a man, then chiefly appears, his virtue, constancy,
strength and worthiness, or otherwise his intbecillity, overthrow, shame, and
ignominious filthiness. Besides all these, many likelyhoodes are often taken
either to praise or dispraise of the Person, by occasion of the Nation or Soil
from whence he came, where he was borne or trained* From the general condition
or application of him self or of the people thereof, by the habit,
constitution of the body, complexion, looks, fame or other circumstances
thereunto incident by the virtues of ye mind, actiuity strength, swiftnes,
nimblenes, favor or beauty of the body. By the gifts of fortune, as honor,
wealth, worship reputation and kindred. And for as much as these demonstratio^s of
persons are wholly occupied eitherin praise or dispraise of their personages or
behauiours: the chiefess^ part hereof shall also consist in Narration, without
peradventure it falls out in the life of any one to have some one or more
things happened or of them supposed, ill beseeming or unworthy their
reputation, which either by defense, excusation, Confutation or Confirmation
must in some sort be colored, deminished or clearly au^yded. Examples
whereof do follow according to their particular occasions. In commendation or
vituperation of the deeds of any one we shall weigh with our selves what
notable actions have been, wherein he or she have honorably behaved
themselves, or by perpetual infamye thereof have deserved in each posterity
for ever to be remembered.

The goodness or badnesse, excellency or baseness of each of these are, by
all kind of speeches and arguments proving or improuing, augmenting or
lessening the same, to be necessarily maintained. And to the demonstration
thereof, do require all the parts incident or belonging to an Oration therein
to be supplied.

The places incident to either of these, Places of praise or dispraise.
are derived first from Honestum or Inhonestum, under which is comprehended
what is just or unjust, godly or wicked, direct or indirect. Honest is
always linked to Virtue. For whatsoever is either virtue it self, Honest
which is tied to virtue.
or affined with virtue, or derived from virtue, or conducing to virtue, is
absolutelye declared honest.

The distinguishment also falls out into these particularities, as virtues of
highest excellence adorning the minds, that is, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude,
and Temperaunce. It is therefore to be intended, that not only deeds and
actions, but also things themselves be of these and for these either praised
or debased. That only is praise worthy, which being rightly done bears the
remembrance thereof with pursued commendation. What soever then by sound and
wholesome persuasion tends either to the embracing of the good, or shonning of
the evil. Whatsoever includes either fidelity, true friendeship, equitye,
obedience or gratitude. Whatsoever conduces to true piety to God, thy
Country, Parents, Children and friends. Whatsoever appertains to the
seneritie of the law, to the admonishing of the wicked, and to the remuneration
and defense of the well deserved. Whatsoever tends to tollerance or pacient
for bearing of evils, to longanimitie, entering into hazard and dangers for
conscience for thy country, kindred or friends. Whatsoever concerns
chastity, sobriety, frugalitie and semely moderation in all things, that in
each of these is only adjudged honest and none others.

The contrary hereof, Dishonest.
which is inhonestum, includes likewise whatsoever is not virtue, or is
estraunged from virtue, hindering to virtue, or in nothing furthering toward
virtue, whatsoever is pertinent to Folly, injustice Pusillanimitie, or excess,
whatsoever by the evil therein committed is exempted from praise. Whatsoever
carries persuasion to mischief and seducement from the good. Whatsoever
appertains to infidelity, falsehood, treason, disobedience, slander, or
ingratitude. Whatsoever withdraws from natural regard and love of thy
Conntry, Parents, Children and Friends. Whatsoever impugneth the wholesome
laws and estate of every commonwealth, tends to a notorious example of
evil, hinders or ^lemisheth any others good deserving. Whatsoever enforces
reuengement upon every small offense, has in it no mean of sufferaunce, or
forbearaunce at all, entertaineth a lawless liberty of conscience to
perpetrate or yield to any unlawful action, or to become injurious to thy
Country, state or calling. Whatsoever is furthering to a dissolute living,
unbridled lust, covetous tenacitie, prodigality, or detestable excess.
These and such like, as coufounders of all civility and human government,
are confirmed to dishonest. Necessity.


Also from Necessity or Vtillitie, as to she we that the state of the person,
or the present matter in handlinge, or the necessity of the time, or other
enforcement, wills a person of such rare virtue, or one of so vile account to
be entertained, preferred, expulsed or rejected. Utility.


From Vtillitie, as wherein are either alleged diverse benefits or large
commodities, ensuing of the action, or that by means of retaining the same,
sundry nocuments, or instant hazardes, or dangers afterward like to follow
may be prevented. And the inutilitie by the contrary, when the matter therofby
likelihood may turn to as great damage.

From Difficulcie which is gathered by the circumsta^nces of the thing in
hand sometime respecting the person, Difficulcie.
The effects whereof are comprehended in this verse following.

Who, what, and where, whose means, why, how and when.

Places of Confirmation or confutation.
Out of the efficacy of all these, are places of Confirmation or Confutation
(belonging to every occasion of praise or dispraise) frequented and used.

By like circumstaunces also the Peroratio of every Epistle is furnished, in
breife enumeration of all the arguments whereof, and Amplification thereupon
used, we move the minds of those we write unto, either unto gladness if the
case so require, or to great compassion, if the matter in handling do so stand.

And here withal must the learner note, These places referred to other kinds.
that not for this title of Demonstratiue alone are these places set down, but
also for the Deriuatiue and Judicial, when, and as often as either praise,
dispraise, laying out, or enforcement of any matter shall therein be used or
accustomed: the consideration of the points whereof, is as occasion serves, to
be also adapted to those purposes. And now to the intent the particularities
of all these, being orderly distributed into their peculiar places, may the
better appear in the several ranches wherein they shall be supplied, and that
nothing so much as example conduces to a most perfect and speedy instruction,
I will both of the one suit and the other lay you down such reasonable
patterns, as to any consideration may be thought indifferent. And first will I
begin with an Epistle Lawdatorie, fra^ed in the person of him, from whom the
very Idea and platform of al princely excellency, in his time proceeded, the
memorable worthiness of whom, shall not fail in all worlds for ever to be
remebred*

An example of a Lawdatorie Epistle, solie touching the person.
THe fervent love, Exordium framed of the condition of the party to whom we
write.
and entier zeal and regard, wherewith your L. even in these tender and as yet
vnripened years, seems to pursue the virtues and honorable worthiness of the
most renomed and famous, and the reverend account wherewith in your most
secreat imaginations you have ever admired, and as it were emulated their
highest progrestions: has moved me in recordation thereof (and the rather to
deliver unto your L. Narratio.
the very true image and lively counterfeit indeed, of unblemished honor,
adorned with all princely and most surpassing noblenes) to propose unto your
view, a paragon so peirles, and of so rare and excellent performance, as
whereof no history has the semblable, no Region the match, nor any world
hereafter may eftsoon be supposed to produce the like. You shall not need my L.
to ransack volumes, to search out the lives of the most hon ored Scipio amongst
the Romans, Occupatio.
nor out of Greece to fetch Themistocles, or Alcibiades from Lacedemon or
Athens, Let Hanibal rest with his predecessors, who sometimes by vnbearded
fortune did honor to mighty Carthage, and (before them all) Achilles and
Hector, that made the fall of Troy so famous: And come we into our own
country, Synonymi^
the land wherein our selves inhabit, the soil to us native, and of all
others most dearest, and see you here my L. a prince of so rare and
incomparable worthiness, as your self will confess thorough out all the
course of his life, to have been of all others the most happy and virtuous
Edward, my L. young Edward (so held in his fathers life) under whose reign he
died, in England surnamed here for his noted excellencye, Proposition.
sometimes the black Prince. This is the prince whom Nature, F^rtune and
Virtue, to the intent to yield some apparent paraunt show of their wonderful
and mighty operations, Praise of the prince in general.
had above all others so especially enabled, with all kind of wished and most
exquisite perfections, as in that present season, in which the delicacie of his
aspiring glory arached the highest branch of honor from out her lofty seat
of dignity, it was denied to any other whatsoeu^^r, to exceed? Nay, but so
much as to become partaker with so rare a pattern of the like fruictes of
virtue, and never dying glory. And to thend (in rehearsing some few of the many
particularities of such sound and uncorrupted majesty) the radiant shining
beams resiant in so hie a personage, may with more facilitye the sooner be
discovered: we will first begin with his original and foremost infancy, that
by deducing from thence his complementes of all princelye excellency, even in
the very mouth of his entombed grave, Praete^^tio.
his bones may not be reposed without an immortal recordation, and the fame
of his very name celebrated by an endless memory. Needles were it my L. Of
his descent and parentage.
that I should tell you of this stately prince, that he were son and heir in
succession, to the most mighty and most renoumed Edward the third, king of
this noble realm of England, the most regarded virtues and invincible
cheualrie of whom, being then every where so surpassing, and of such
redoubted force, as (were it not that such memorable issue had sprung out of
his kingly loins, as wherewith the states of the mighty were daunted, and
Europe made to wonder) might hitherto have remained of fame compotent enough,
to have been compared unto the mightiest: but that I may rather report unto
you, that as gold, Parabola.
in the riches and glory of it self, bears price and value with the most
precious, yet having annexed unto his proportion, a diamond of inestimable
beauty, valor and goodness, becomes thereby far more excellent then before,
more shining and glorious: so this sovereign and puissant Monarch (admirable
no doubt by himself) yet having thus tied unto the sunshine of his happy
reign, the obscurer and eclipsing glory of all other nations, the very
Loadstarre and direction of all others trophe^s, Allegoria.
the sun itself of worthiness, and absolute concluder of every honorable
enterprise, how could it be but that the extinct of his prerogative must of
force exceed, and go beyond all others, when himself, by the very chay^^ of
honors self was so far advanced above any others. And albeit the high and
kingly worthynesse of so stately offspring and parentage, Obiectio.
might no question in sundry sorts, yield great and mighty glory to the
issue: yet that it may not be alleged that in taking upon us to commend the
personage of one, we should intimate the sovereignty of the other, as it were
by a defect of praise sufficient, to supply the want of our own, and that the
honorable reputation of another cannot fitly be said to be this man's
worthiness, without by the branch of his own desert, he had in his
proper right most effectually approved the same. Understand you then of him,
Anthypophora.
that which all men deem most princely and honorable, and there is none (were
it the stowtest ennemie that ever lived) but will most highly commend.
Anadiplosis per Emphasin.
This Prince, this honored Prince my L. Who even from the very cradle seemed
to be adicted to the knowledge, and fear of God, and very piety of sincere
and Christian Religion (besides that he was naturally so well formed and
instructed in good documentes as any might be) became in those very tender
years also, Of his infancy and childhoode.
so apt unto learning, as the mar^he or like of him therein, was seldom or
never in those days any where found, and in these times also may not easily be
heard of. Insomuch as of those that then knew him very well, it certainly is
delivered, that being but of the age of 12. years, his understanding and
knowledge in the latin tongue, was so perfect, his progression in the greek so
excellent, his skill and delivery of foreign languages so wonderful, his
princely towardnes in all things so rare and so plentiful, as many times moved
all the regarders to admire him, but found none of al his associats, Of his
adolescencie.
in the same exercises, that were ever able to follow him.

Now if (...) shall come to his riper years, and how therein he profited in
the towardly exercise, and use of arms, beseeming a Prince of so hie and
expected admiration, what could be wished in any one that in him was not fully
accomplished. So comely, and with such uncontrolled dexterity could he sit,
ride, and govern his horse, so courageously, and with such nobility could he
welde and use any weapon, either at tilte, barriers, or turney, with such hie
and approved direction, ordered he al his complementes to either of these
belonging, Paradigma.
as did well manifest the magnanimity and worthiness of his mind, and what manner
a one he would afterward become, toward the bewtifiyng of his Country. A
more plain and evident demonstration whereof, did at any one time in nothing so
much apeare as even then, when he was yet in his minority. For when there was
remaining as yet, no sign or token at al of manly show in his f^ce (being
nevertheless of stature seemly and tall, and of goodly constitution in his body,
well beseeming the years he then carried) also attendant on the mighty king his
father in the wars of France, Hiperbole per interrogationem.
what things did he there perform* what weighty enterprises and those
beyond all expectation would he undertake, in honor of his royal progeny:
was it not to to strange, that being in comparison of years, as it were a
child, deuoyd of so confirmed and ancient graffed experience as beseemed the
wars, Parenthesis
he undertook notwithstanding at xviii. years of age, with half his fathers
power (by incessaunt entreaty upon a most courageous desire of an ever
thirsting glory committed to his leading, with condition and charge either
there to eternise his death by an everlasting memory, or back to return again
with triumphant gained victory) to ioyn with the whole and mighty power of
France, and all the chivalry thereof, where (to his immortal and surpassing hie
renown) he attained upon them by the permission of God, Transitio.
a most memorable tropheye? But why dwell I in these slender discourses, (small
God knows in respect of those mighty conquestes by him afterward achieved)
in deteining you from the sweet and ardent remembrance of the rest? If he
being yet sequestered in years from any ripeness at all, Comparatio, ab
incremento.
when it was then to be supposed he most needed government, could by such
stately and invincible valor, so moderate his great and weightyest actions, as
to become at that very instaunt so redoubted and famous: what might we deem
of him afterward, being once perfectly established, in all kind of manly
directions, but that of necessitye he should by many degrees exceed, and go
beyond the foremost show of all his excellencyes, and the greatest expectation
that might be of all his progressions? and so undoubtedly he did. For being
once attained to man's estate, Hypophora
he grew immediately to become a Prince sage, His man's estate.
discreet, polliticke, and wise, in all his actions of rare and singular
circumspection and providence, benign, and of all others most favorable and
courteous, fortunate, and ever invincible in the wars, liberal to his
followers, and of a hye replenished bounty to every one, His outward actions.
a very Patron and defender of innocents, absolutely favoring always the
right, Magnanim^ous as touching his estate and the high and weighty
enterprises he took in hand, His inward virtues.
exceedingly feared abroad, woonderfully beloved at home, mixing always
thinterchaungeable exercise of arms, with continual study of learning. Of
such exceeding modesty and temperance as is merueilous: Insomuch as the king
his father being here in England, when in the great fight of Poicters he
had discomfited and overthrown in one day three mighty battles of the
French, and taken in the last of them king John and his son prisoners, he was
not puffed up at all with the honor of ^o^ stately and triumphant victory,
neither grew he insolent upon the same, but entertained the king and his son in
his own tent so honorably, and therwithal with so great nobility and surpassing
courtesy, as that he neglected not to serve them himself at supper, and
seemed verily at that season in all things, His bounty and great humility
to have bin reputed in his own intendmenr, as if he had never been conqueror.
The show whereof, so much increased his incomparable bounty, and so mightily
honored the estate of his victory, as that the king then confessed, that to
become the prisoner of such a one, it could be no disparagment unto so
mighty a sovereign as himself, seeing that he was by the force of that only
overthrow, made companion of the greatest nobility that ever he saw. His
modesty.
Many honorable parts could I here infer vnyou of him (infallible
arguments of his incredible modesty) for long after this, when this mighty
Prince had achieved so many and weighty honors throughout all France, as the
regard whereof made his name a terror, and his beck a command to compel
their sovereignty unto his fathers obedience, he was required by king Dampeter
of Castile, to help him against Henry his basterd brother, who had then
expulsed him and unlawfully usurped upon his kingdom. Whereupon having by the
courageous endeavor of himself and his knights, and by their sole and only
prowess, brought down the usurper, and driven him clean out of the country
(albeit his strength was such and the admirable favor of the people so great,
as might easily have invited him there, to the wearing of a crown) he
nevertheless of a high and noble disposition, holding it far more honorable
to make a king then to be a king: so far forth declared his temperance at
that very instant (not commonly happening unto every one, Apothegma.
especially in causes of a kingdom) as that he utterly abstayned so much as
to bear an appetite or liking thereunto: but to his immortal renown, placed
and restored therein again the true and lawful inheritour of the same, Eretoma
admiratio*
settling him (according as was first intended) to his crown and kingdom:
Could there my L. in any one have appeared greater arguments of magnanimity,
Justice, and Temperaunce, then was remaining in this Prince? Was ever any more
replenished with all kind of excellencies, then those wherewith himself was
posessed? Pelisindeton. nis
And yet if continual happiness in all worldly attempts, if never ceassing
and eternised famous victories, if the commendation and honor done unto him of
his mightiest enemies, if strength and glory of his country, and honored
titles of his victorious father, if confirmed leagues of diverse mighty
Princes, Confederates and Alies, if fervent and of all others the most
principal and ardent love of his knights, subjects and followers, if all or
any of these might any ways have induced him to the breach of either of
these virtues, Eephonesis*
what wanted to the furtherance thereof, that in and upon him, was not always
attendant and (as it were) continually powered. Was he not then wedded to
Honor, Metaphora
even in his foremost cradle? Did not Fortune immediately acknowledge him, and
confess that he was her darling? Seemed Virtue ever proud, but in his only
perfection? grew Fame at any time so impatient as even then, when as the most
convenient harbor of all her worthiness, she sought out his dwelling? Agreed
they not all with one voice to abandon the statelines of any others, only to
be resiant with him whom they held most charie of all others? Witness among
many other his more then ordinary attempts, the three battles (then which no
one thing throughout the world before or since became of more greater
remembrance) by him in his most youngest years, so miraculouslie foughten,
the one of which was at Cresseye against the French when he was but 18 years
of age (as you have before remembered) the 2. at Poicters, where died the king
of Boheme, and king John of France became his prisoner, the 3. against this
bastard Henry, for the kingdom of Castile wherein one whole intier fight the
same Henry bearing a mighty host was by mere surpassing valor and most worthy
prowess of this Prince discomfited, and by main force thereof expulsed his
seignorie. Al which exploits and many more besides, celebrating thereby his
eternal praises, when he had with greater glory, then well may be conceived,
furnished and finished, to the advancement of his immortal dignity: His death.
see death despitefull death, who joining with the malignitie of the wicked
world, hateful always to virtue, and satisfiyng ever to malicious envy,
bereft the unworthy earth of his most worthy life. But how? not as falls
out to every common creature, Charientisunis.
deuoyd of after memory, for why? the sovereign commander of earth, and
skies allotted it otherwise: neither beseems such stately Patterns of
honored Virtue, whose spirits carried with greater efficacy of aspiring
eternity, Confutatio.
then those whose duller conceits are adapted to more terre^e and gross
validities, should be exe^pted their perpetuity. And albeit in all the
progression of the wished life of this mighty Prince, any one thing was never
found co^trariyng, blemishing or in one sort or other impugning his honor (one
sole imposition or tax contraried in his government of Gascoigne excepted) yet
in the hiest estate of happiness wherein he always lived, was he never more
happy or glorious, then even in his very death: Insomuche as he then died at
which time in most honor and highest top of all prosperity, he was
principally established and chiefly flourishing: Praise of his death.
at that instant in which the tipe of his excellency was in no one title or
jot obscured: at that very season when in the whole course and practice of his
life, having still adicted himself to sound out the incertaine and momentarie
pleasures of the world, he had by perfect trial found out the small
validity and little affiaunce that was to be reposed in the transitory and
fading glory of the same. Even then when in exchau^ge of the eternal
habitation, (the incomprehensible joys whereof no eye has seen, ear has
heard, or tongue can express) he best knew how to leave this wretched life, and
to compass the sweet and wholesome meditation of the other. He dyed my L. as
he ever lived, virtuously and honorably, the determination of whose deceasing
corpse, was preparation to new joys: Peroratio*
and commutation of momentarie pleasures, an assurance of ever flowrishing
gladness. Thus see you my good L. before your eyes, the most certain and
assured counterfeite of very true nobility, furnished in the discouerye of
such a one, whose personage being in no kind of excellencye inferior, to
that in the highest degree may be of any other imagined: Epiphonema
deserves by so much the more of all honorable estates accordingly to be
embraced. Great is the ornament of praise, and precious the renown that
longs to such virtue: the diamond glimpse whereof equaleth in beauty the
fairest, and dimmeth by the very shadow thereof the glittering pomp of the
mightiest. Hypozeuxis
Beauty strength, riches, and comeliness fades, yea the world decays,
pleasure vanishes, and the very face of heaven it self perishes: Only
sacred virtue is immortal, she never dies, ever quickens, absolutely
triumphs, and over all other earthly monumentes even out of the deepest grave
for ever flourishes. Conclusio.
Live therefore my L. virtuously and die wheresoever or whenever, yet
howsoever honorably. My paper burdened with his long discourse, desirous
rather to recreate then toil your L. enforces an end. Recommending my humble
duty in whatsoever to your honorable acceptance.


THe respects of this Epistle argued in the personage of so noble Prince, have
carried in the matter thereof, the very show of the highest and chiefest
virtues, whereupon al commendation may be principally gathered. The several use
and applications of which, do in those parts herein mentioned specially
appear, whose distinguishementes (as of all others following) are quoted in
the margeant, with other necessary additions, together with such Figures,
Schemes, and Tropes, as either for ornament of speech or apt setting forth and
delivery of the places therein used are occupied in the same. For the better
signification whereof, if either Scheme, Figure or Trope, shall be here or in any
other Epistle following quoted, whose right and ready use, cannot by the
learners simple conceit therein be gathered, let him but turn to the latter
part of this book, and there (as before I promised) shall he find every one in
his true nature and kind to him perfectly and at large deciphered. And now to
the other examples, the next of which shall be Vituperatorie also touching the
person. Wherein as we have in the other, sought by all occasions and
circumstances thereunto incident, what to the furtherance of such requisite
commendation might be alleged* so will we herein imagine upon what grounds or
respects the occasions of disprayse, may as far forth otherwise in any other
quality be tendered.

An example of an Epistle vituperatorie, concerning also the person.
SIr, Exordium of the cause moving admiration
the strangeness of an accident hapening of late amongst us, has occasioned
at this instaunt, this discourse to come unto your hands. Narratio.
There was if you remember, at your last being with me in the country, a man of
great ability, dwelling about a mile from me, his name was B. and if I fail
not of memory therein, we had once at dinner together sitting (by occasion
of a pleasant gentleman then being in our company) great speeches of him:
the man I know is not clean out of your conceit, and therefore I will cease
in farther speeches at this present to revoke him. What general hate the
people bare him, and how ill he deserved from his first conuersing among them,
Propositio.
you have not I am sure forgotten, in somuche as he was called the Hell of the
world, Allegoria.
the Plague of a common weal, the Mischief of men, and the Bondslaue of the
devil. And no marvel, for what injury might be conceived, that was not by him
imagined? Expostulatio.
What evil could there be that he shunned to practice? what merciless dealing
that he would not proffer? what apparent wrong that he ceased to justify?
what execrable extortion that he cared not to commit? what villainy so damnable
that he durst not put forward? O God, it is incredible to think and impossible
to be surmised, Epiphonema.
how great, how forcible, how manifold, how mischievous, how insufferable, how
detestable, has been the original, progression, continuation and
determination of his most wicked and shameless life, and were it not that by
the incessant outcries, Paradoxin.
continual cursinges, and horrible denuntiations of the innumerable multitude
of those, whom in his life time he yoked, whom with his actions he feared,
whom with the weight of his endless wealth, he poized down, that they durst
not the^ whisper in secret, what now they openly discover, whereby the force of
his wickedness being then secret, became not as now so open and apparent. I
durst not me thinks of my self so much as surmise but the one half of that,
wherein he became so notorious, Hyperbole.
so rare and unused are the evils, wherein he seemed so thoroughly to be
fleshed. I have woondered sithence with my self many times: what soil it
might be, or what constellation so furious, as effected their operations in
production of so bad and vile a creature, at the time when he was first put
forward with living into the world: In the search whereof, I have been the
less astonished, insomuche as thereby I have grown into some particular
knowledge of his original and parents. His sire I have understood was a vilain
by creation, His parents
by nature, by soil, by descent, by education, by practice, by study, by
experience, his dame the common sinck of every rakehels filthiness: Metaphora.
the one of whom (after innumerable offenses committed whereby he deserved a
thousand deaths) was at the last for a detestable and notorious crime burned
peacemeale upon a stage in hollande, and the other (after sundry consuming and
filthye diseases, never able to rid her) was in like manner hanged alive in
chains for a most horrible murder in England. Expect you not then, Hypophora^
that the procreation and generation of such an issue, must by argument of the
Parents condition, sort to some notable purpose? you do I know, and in truth
how could it otherwise be likely. Now if hereby we should conceive of his
education, and how his childhood pass away, Apostrophe
being fostered up as he was, from one place to another, without any certain
abiding, but only Coelum omnibus commune, the common habitation of the world,
we must no doubt suppose that he saw much, knew much, practiced much,
ouerpassed much, and was glutted with very mu^he. And surely if I should give
credit to somewhom I durst believe, His childehood.
that knew him even then when he was not much more then a child, the very
years he lastly bare, gave not more assured testimony of what he now was,
then the season in which he then passed, did yield an inviolable approbation,
what in time following he would become, for even then, what rapine, what
theft, what injury, Ecphonesis^
what slander, what lying, what envy, what malice, and desperate boldness, and
daring to enter into any mischief, was in him thoroughly planted? There was not
(by report) any one thing whereby a man might afterward be coniectured to
become infamous, but was in him fully replenished. His Adolescencie.
Credit me, I conjecture so manifoldly of the sequel of his actions, as when I
understand what he was, so ripely, I marvel that he lived thus long so
wickedly. But shall I turn here from, to his Adolescencie, and she we what
therein I have heard? Truly it passes all capacity to be censured: and it it
is too too much to be thought upon. Confirmatio.
His pride, his boldness, his shameless continuance, his looks, his
gesture, his show, his living, his conversation, his company, his hauntes
showed still what he was, There was no rakehell, Congeries.
no ruffian, no knave, no villain, no cogging rascal, no hateful companion,
no robber on hie ways, no privy pilferer, but his hand was in with him, and
that he was a copesmate for him, no brothel house but he haunted, no od corner
but he knew no cutter, but he was a sharer with, no person so lascinious,
abject, vilde or dissolute, but he would be a copartner. Yet after all these
trades, hauntes, sharinges, and partakinges, he became at last to serve an
old miser, aged for his years, and miserable for his covetousness.
Desperate, Misery.
This wretched old man (as each one fancieth as he likes) conceived so
much of the odd youth, that he took him into his service, where, with bad
attire, and threed-bare diet, he lived with him a pretty season, somewhat more
then quarter master. In the'nd by whose theft God knows) the man had a chest
broken up, and a little coin and plate stolen, wherewith (becoming
desperate) it was delivered he hong himself for grief, and being now dead,
left no issue or other heir, to succeed his wretchedness and doble barred
hoord, but B. his man, who being a strong lubber, was by this time grown a
sturdy knave, and would needs be compted a man, and thereupon became owner and
intrudor to his masters pel^e, wretchedness and misery. His youth and age.
To reckon unto you since, how he came into the country here, became a
purchaser, how he has spent his youth, passed his old age, what briberie,
extortion, wrong, cruelty, rapine, mischief and al kind of villainy, he has
bolstred, perpetrated, followed: what infidelity, falsehood, revenge,
priuy-guile, treachery, betraying the innocent, Incrementum.
beating down the poor, fatherles, widows: how much evil has he done, and
what little good he has deserved, what should I clogge my self with the
remembrance, Aporia.
or troble you with rehearsal. It is to much I am not able, I cannot, nay it
were impossible to perform it. Transitio.
What rests then, but that I reach the scope, as in the foremost purpose was
intended, that having delivered his shameful life, I do report unto you his
shameless and unaccustomed death. See then the incomprehensible power and
justice of God, see the weight of his measure, see the wonderful
demonstration of his secret judgment, ^aronomasia.
how of a careless life ensues a cancred death, of wilful living a wretched
ending, of such money misers, so manifold miseries, as whereof I sigh to
think and grieve to remember. The man somewhat before his sickness grew into
an extreme numnesse, insomuche as he that never lusted to help others,
Pathos.
was not now able^ to help himself, nor any cared to relieve him, afterward
fretting and fuming, with himself as it seemed, that notwithstanding his great
mass of money, and huge heap of wealth, none could be entreated with prayers,
or hired with treasure, so much as to meddle with him, he grew into such a
frenzy, and consequently into so rank a madness, that he sat swearing,
blaspheming, crying, cursing and banning, and that most execrablie, his looks
were grimme, furious and changed, his face terrible, His inordinary sickness
his sight fiery and pearsing, those that saw him feared it, and they that
heard of it, durst not come nigh him. In conclusion, some that pitied him more
then his deserving, and grieved to see that, they could not redress in him,
caused a company to watch him others to provide warm brothes, and in
conclusion used all means possible to comfort him. But what can man do to
prevent the secret determination of tha'lmightie? For lo, whylest all men
left him, and each one stood in doubt of him, a company of rattes upon a
soddayne possessed his house, his tables, his chimneyes, his chambers, yea his
very bed, and his lodging, upon which and about which, they were so bold, as
in the sight of the beholders they durst appear and come before them, and
being stricken, abode, and were killed, and others come in their places: what
shall I say, His death.
the sight became so uncouth as al men shu^ned, each one feared, and none durst
abide it: whereupon the miser being left alone, thus pitifully died. The stench
of his corpse admitted neither dailight nor company wherein to be buried.
Hipallage.
Two only that were the co^ueiers of him, sickned vehemently and one of them
died, the other is yet scarcely recovered. Peroratio.
The matter hereof seemed unto me so strange, and therwithal so importunate to
warn us of our actions, considering how severely God punishes when he is once
bent to correction, as I could not but deeply consider of, weighing with my
self that such as was hs life, Homooeteleuton.
such was his death, the one being hated of many, the other not to be
tolerated of ^anye. The circumstance whereof, referring herewith to your
deep, consideration, I do bid you hearily farewell.


WE have not in the former Epictle, so much endeavored to praise and extol the
incomparable worthiness of a hie and mighty Prince, as the argument of this
letter has occasioned us to discommend the person of a most vile and wicked
liver: either of which, have bin the more amply set forth, to the end to
manifest thereby how much and wherein ye excellency or dignity of one thing, may
be either justly advanced or worthily condemned. Now touching the deeds and
actions of men. In what sort they are to be preferred or disabled, is also to
be collected out of the places before remembered. And herein it shall be
necessary to call in question whereout the parts thereof are to be drawn, as
from the body, wherein is included either plenty or want of strength or
actiuitie. From the mind as whence ensues Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, or
Temperance or ye coutrarieties thereof. From fortune as where-fro is derived
Honor, Worship or Wealth. Out of all or some part of these, do proceed the
weight and matter of any action, as if the state thereof consists in bodily
force, I do use thereunto valor, and strength, if it rest in sway or
government I confer therein Wisdom, Justice, and Modesty, if it be in
causes of common weal, bounty, estate, or liberality: I herein apply
Honor, Worship, Ability, or Riches. The action standing in regard of
Piety, reputation, Honor or fame, for the conservation whereof any one has
delte worthily or wonderfully: hereunto must we induce Fortitude, whose
property is stoutly to bear, in which is contained, Magnanimity, to covet
and aspire unto things excellent, and to contemn things base and less
permanent. Longanimitie constantlye and resolutelye, to endure. Patience,
meekely and willingly to tolerate. Then Temperaunce, the parts whereof, are
Modestye, Chastity, Continency, Sobriety, and Meekness. The Confirmation
and Confutation occupied in all which, are gathered of Honestum or Inhonestum,
as I said before, Utility or Inutilitie, Difficulcie, or Impossibility.

Examples of these might be sorted diversely as in the person of David, I could
commend his combat against Goliath, Laus ab honesto.
first ab honecto in that he being the servant of God fought against a
blasphewer, also in his Princes quarrel and the defense of his Country: ab
aequo, because it is meet and convenient, Ab aequo.
that in causes so perilous, the strength of each one be applied, A necessitate
insomuch as thereon depended the sauegard of the Prince and people. A
necessitate.
Ab vtilitate for that he killing such an enemy brought to their own country:
Ab. vtilitate
peace and quiet, and also brave the other part in subjection to his king and
people. A Difficili, A dificili.
because the undertaking thereof was so much the more weighty, by how much
himself was as it were an infant against a mighty Gyaunt, unarmed against him
that was armed, unfurnished, against him that had all manner of complementes of
war, weak where the other was strong: besides that, the terror of his
challenge and hugeness of stature had before daunted the army, and put them
all out of conceit, insomuche as the doubt was so general as no man dared, to
undertake the quarrel: herein only is praised of bodily force, his Actiuitie
and nimblenesse: of Virtues his wonderful Magnanimity ye by a courageous
desire durst undertake the same, his affiance in Justice, and equity of the
cause. His Piety to God, his Prince, and country. His Fidelity whose life was
not spared when each one drew back, to be brought in hazard for all these. Now
in causes of sway and government, a man might be praised for his great
wisdom, whereby in handling of some notable actio^ in embassage or
consultation, he has only by grave advise, industry, discreet search,
persuasion, or circumspection, compassed weighty matters to the common weal,
or thence anoyded huge and imminent dangers, Cicero in the coniuration of
Cateline, being a mighty ennemy against his own city of Rome, might herein be
an excellent pattern, who without stirring the people at al, without any manner
of bodily resistance or force of arms, without passing by any private or
indirect means, did by the sole matter of his Wisdom, weightines of speech,
forcible reasons, enforcements, rebukes, and persuasions, drive him clean out
of the City, and being expulced (to the common peace, tranquillity, and
surety of the same) did afterward by like demeanor, industry and
circumspection so prevent his purposes, so circumuent his policies, so turn
him vpside down, as he dared not, he could not, he shamed to perpetrate what
so often he had sworn and so many ways intended. For some one rare and
singular point of Justice men also might be extolled, as besides common
expectation executing the same. A president hereof might be the L. chief
Justice of England in the time of king Henry the fourth, who was so strictly
bent to the observation of Justice, as having one of the princes servants
arraigned before him at the kings bench bar, for a fellonie, and being one
that the young Prince greatly at that time of his youth favored. The Prince
came to the bar, and at the Judges hands required his servant: who
aunsweared that he was the king his fathers prisoner, and stood there, upon
his trial by law for his offenses, and that he could not in justice, nor
would (by his pardon) permit his deliuerye without his trial. The Prince
moved with such denial, struck the Judge on the face, and would by force
have with-drawne the prisoner. The Judge with-stood him, and aduertisinge him
mildly of the offense he had done to the seat and place wherein he sat of
justice, in such sort to strike him, stoutly caused hands to be laid on him,
and committed him to ward, whereunto (upon such advertisement) the Prince
obeyed, and accordingly remained in durance, attending the advertisement and
knowledge of his fathers pleasure. Here might be a great contention, whether
the worthy Judge in his equal administration and execution of justice, without
fear, whereon stood the hazard of his own life, being upon him that was in
succession to become his Sovereign Lord, were more to be commended: or the
Prince, in his subjection, and of all other most singular obedience were more
highlye to be extolled, the one daringe to do that was lawful, upon
whatsoever hazard, the other humbling himself to authority which he might
easelie have impugned. For no doubt there was as much virtue in the ones
obedience, as there was excellency in the others sentence.

Over and besides these in the honor, worship, or wealth of any man, his
deeds of Charity, either in Erection, Contribution, Conversion or Repairing
of any thing, whereby the commonwealth is benefited, virtue furthe red, or
the needy provided for.

Finally Bounty, Liberality, Courtesy, Modesty, Chastity, Continency,
Patience, Obedience, Sufferaunce, willing acceptaunce of death for conscience,
for fidelity toward their Prince, for their country, for their faith, these
severally for or by themselves, as well as in others are sundry kinds
commended. Presidents of Bounty. Of Liberality. Courtesy.
Presidents hereof might be of Bounty, as in pardoning what we might execute.
Liberality in rewarding the good, and relieuing common necessity, Courtesy in
meek and gentle usage, harkning to the complaints of the poor and grieved, to
the redressing of their wrongs. Modesty.
Modesty, in abstaining to execute upon our selves the fulness of glory, or
commendation due for our well deserving, in acceptance of honors, in
shunning foul and yrkesome shows, in looks, countenance, and demeanor,
Chastity.
tending to occasion of evil, Chastity, in the inviolable preservation of
Virginity, in purity of thoughts, words and deeds, be it with loss of
life. Continency, in withdrawing our selves from service of our appetite,
Continency. Patience.
and what naturally we covet. Patience, when gladly, meekely, and quietly, we
accept and endure whatsoever justly or iniustly is laid upon us. Sufferaunce
Sufferance, when with resolute preparation we are adapted and made ready to
take any trosse or affliction upon us. Now by the laying out of al these
particularities, you may perceive which way, and wherein the effects of
every of these places are thieflye furthered, and what be their actions
falling out in their several diversities: By choice and example whereof, the
learner may be the better prepared, in whatsoever he shall undertake or proceed
upon.

And for as much as it is a thing so unused and difficult (as I once said
before of Letters Descriptorie) to enter particularly into any one of these
parts by them selves, without sorting to some other end or purpose, the
effects thereof. As by the delivery of praise or dispraise of a person to
commend him for some use, or discommend him for the same, or in furthering or
condemning the actions of any, to exhort or dehort others from the like, or
otherwise by some occasions to defend or inueigh against either of both. And
so also touching things for, or by them selves to be proposed, either in
respect of their goodness or badnes, to procure a receipt of them, or otherwise
to abandon their forces. I should deem it superfluous in this place to put
forward any more examples, contenting my self that for instruction sake. I
have so plentifully given forth already these peculiar notes, which at such
times when they shall be then used, may be according to their directions
orderly and with great facility applied. Omitting therefore, what considerations
might hereunto otherwise be deemed pertinent, to the places in which they may
be frequented more convenient: let us now pass unto the next title of
epistles being Deliberatiue, and hereunto in order next ensuing.

CAP. XI. Of Epistles Deliberatiue.
FEw precepts more then already set down, may serve, either in the
generality of this Deliberatiue kind to be considered, or in the other part
Judicial to be pursued: for that in whatsoever has before been enioined in
the precedent parts of Lawdatorie and Vituperatorie, are here in all respects to
be followed. The first therefore of these sorts presenting themselves to our
handling, are epistles Hortatorie and Dehortatorie, the argument whereof being
derived from the parts before said shall besides consist of the motives therein
to be suggested. These kind of epistles reteining for the most part a
diversity of affections (which Nature has ordained as it were certain
pricks or pr^uocations within us, Motions spurs unto Virtue.
whereby to induce the ready and direct way to Virtue, or terrify us by like
degrees from pursuit of vices) have in them sundry oppositions, correspondent
unto all their properties. In exhortation therefore to any thing, over and
above the matter, in the Epistle laid down, we have these occasions and
circumstances whereby to incite those we write unto, to the acceptaunce or
allowaunce of the argument we have in handling, as praise that may ensue
thereof, Hope, fear, or hate of some one thing, love liking or compassion of
the cause, emulation of some what therein proposed, expectation thereon
depending, examples and entreaty.

Efficacy of praise.
The efficacy of praise is no doubt, of rare and singular force, to exhort and
stir up to well doing. For what I pray you is it, that prefers and
encourages the common actions and endeavors of all men, but the general
allowance and regard that is every where made of them? Is it not account alone
that gives encouragement to Virtue: Is Virtue so fully advanced in any
thing, as in the honor and commendation that is attributed unto the same: For
so and in such manner has Nature framed the minds of mortal men, that there
is no one of them living, that is of so base and contemptible aspirite, but by
praise and commendation he may be drawn up into a liking: which being so, the
force thereof in Exhortation must of necessity greatly prevail.

This shall we well perform, if we first conceive of the party with whom we
have to deal, what disposition, habiluments or other matter is in him,
furthering and convenient to the purpose where unto we exhort him and the
likelyhoodes of the same thereupon greatly to put forth and commend: or
otherwise if he have any thing before time waded into that action by
himself, then to praise that which is begun, and thereby exhort him to
proceed in so good a purpose, vehementlye setting forth the account and
worthiness of the same. And if before time he have behaved himself well
therein, we shall encourage him to the better, Encoragement.
showing that the more excellent the thing is, the more difficult it is to be
attained, for difficilia quae pulchra, and yet the difficulcie, not so great as
the praise, glory, and recordation thereof, shall thereby afterward be
returned honorable.

Likewise, if the state of the party do serve there unto, it shall not be amiss
to put him in mind of his parentage, fortune, virtue, nobility, wit,
towardnes of great expectation, and of all sorts generally well reputed, his
discretion, ability, age, and conceit, framed to such purpose, all of them
requyring no less then that we wish to be put forward at his hands, but all
this with great modesty to be delivered, that in seeming to prefer the
certainty of those virtues which are of good account, we do not palpablie
gloss with the party, to draw from thence those things that never came near
him, and this order of delivery shall herein avail greatly.

Very forcible also, Hope and fear.
is the proposed Hope of rewards, and Fear of inconvenience, the one whereof
avails much to exhortation, and the other to the terrifiing and withdrawing.
Love and hate.
Love and Hate likewise are of no less purport, for where Love is, what may be
found difficult, the same also ensues to Hate, for what can not hate and
mislike compass, be it by any possibility to be attained. If therefore we
sort these two contraries in one lincke togeathers, challenging one way, that
in respect of the love and regard he has ever borne to this or that, or to
such occasions as may provoke the same, and upon the just hate an other
way, he has so long time conceived upon so certain a ground as may be
alleged, he will now take in hand such a cause, or undertake such an action.

Commiseration, Commiseration.
, or Compassion of the lamentable estate of a thing, and the insupportable
wrack the same is like to fall into, is also of wonderful effect, and urges
many times, so much as what more may not be required in any matter. Aemulation
What vehemency also caryeth Aemulation? The force whereof is gathered of
Envy, (not that sluggish and execrable malice, which when it self is no ways
able to perform any thing worthelye, snatcheth and continuallye gnaweth at
the deserts of others) but that generous and noble kind, which sage Nature her
self has insinuate in our minds, emulating by a fervent desire to compass,
or possibly to go beyond what mightily, by others has been performed.

Expectation is not the least of the rest, Expectation
the doble force whereof, effects hereunto mightily, as in the actions we take
in hand, to consider how much stands us upon, zealouslye and happily there in
to proceed: in as much as we have enemies as well as friends that are lookers
on, wherein we shall frustrate the hateful desire of the one, who seriously
do awaite the worst success to all our enterprises, and satisfy the
courteous intendment of the other, unto whom (not to have good success) should
be most intolerable and greiuous.

Examples.
likewise, whose authority is most weighty herein, are greatly to be
preferred, by means whereof we do upon sufficient and grounded warrant of
liking, diligently commend, what certainlye is to be followed. Last of all,
Obtestation or entreaty.
are Requests and earnest entreaties, which no doubt do often times bear
great sway, especially among honest minds, prepared evermore to well doing.
The weight hereof is preferred diversely, as in regard of himself to whom we
write, of his Parents and ancestors, of the worthiness of the thing, or for
the commodity thereby likely to ensue, we vehemently beseech at his hands the
effectual performaunce of that whereunto he is persuaded. Thus have we passed
as you see, thoroughout all these parts, the rather to lay open to veiw all
manner of means that may be, ayding and furthering to the use of this present
method, the suits of every of which, are now to be sorted out into particular
examples.

An example of an epistle Exhortatory
I Have many times desired with my self (good cousin) to obtain some necessary
means, Exordium^
whereby to manifest the great good will I do owe unto you, and in some sort or
other to give you to understand, how much and how greatly I have tendered those
good parts, that many times I have seen and approved to be in you. And for
as much as Fortune has denied unto me the estate, reputation, and wealth, that
many have gained, and the most do covet, whereby I can not if I would,
bestow upon you such riches and treasure as might breed content unto others:
I am determined to impart unto you, that, which unto your present condition
seems most requisite, and wherewith use and common experience has here
tofore inuried me, in stead of wealth to give you words, in stead of gold
good, Paranomasia.
for riches reason, and in lue of living, to afforde you a loving and constant
heart. And whereas I am informed, that contrary to the expectation of some (who
over peremptorily have here tofore deemed of these your young years to be
laden with loosenes, Narratio.
and led forward by liberty) you have of your self, and of your own motion and
free will, obtained license and allowance of your father to go to Cambridge,
in mind to give your self wholly to study, and the sole fruitio^ of learning,
whether I shall more commend the motion hereof, Of praise.
or the action that thereby you have taken in hand, I do stand in great
doubt, in so much as the memory of the one can not be for the worthiness thereof
more permanent, then the glory of the other to your everlasting commendation
approved most excellent. It is reported of the mighty Alexander of Macedon,
that he was a king, that he was puissaunt, that he was warlicke, that he was
famous, that he was a Conqueror, and that he subdued the whole world, but when
he came to himself, to the conuincing of his own appetite, to rule reason by
the square of right, he became a meacocke, Synonymia.
a Child, an infant, what should I say, he was no body. How much more greater
then he was, had the worthy Prince remained, if as in the conquest of sundry
mighty kings, Regions, and provinces, so in all other things tending to the
suppression of his own peculiar effects, he had been no less or fully so
much as Alexander. Andiplos^s
Scipio, the most honored and renomed Scipio amongst the Romans, for his
sundry great exploites done in Africa, surnamed Affricanus, we do read,
atcheiued many valiant and incomparable victories, and were it but that sole
battle which he fought (when Rome was now at wrack, her nobilitye spoiled,
and her glory trod under foot, ready almost upon any reasonable condition to
be delivered into the hands of the enemy) in which he then freed his City,
repulsed Hannibal by a mighty overthrow, and thereby daunted so far forth
his pride for ever, as expelled from him all hope thence forward, at any time
else to become a conqueror: It could not otherwise be said without question,
Of example
but herein, yea in this only action, he deferued eternal memory, but was he
herein think you, and for this only matter thorough out all the provinces
recounted so famous? No assuredly. It was also his rare and most singular
virtues otherwise, that fully perfected and pollished the glory thereof. It was
also his rare Temperaunce, Modesty, Continence, and Sobriety, wherein with
wonderful admiration he exceedinglye flourished, Epiphonema.
and became extolled above all others. This was it, wherein more then Alexander
he became regarded and famous, the conquestes that by this means he daily
made of himself, returned more glory to Rome, more firm faith, and
reverence, then the forcible progression of all other his fatal overthrows
and victories: of so great and wonderful reputation is Virtue to all her
followers. This being so, how can I then say, but in this your action, you
have of your self right well begun, how can I think, but above many others
you have therein chiefly deserved. Wherein should I augme^t your praise, if not
in that you have hereby so well performed, Amplificatio
the force, operation, and effect of all which, has only consisted in
subduing your own appetite. Great commendation have you won I must needs
confess, and more then with common worthiness have you in this action demeaned
your self, but (my good cousin) it is not enough to have well begun in a thing,
without also therein you do use perseueraunce. Hannibal knew well how to
subdue, but he knew not how to entertain his victoryes. As you have already in
this your resolution gotten great good liking, so behooves both for the
preservation of what already won, Exhortatio.
and to induce a perpetual increase to the same, that you do ever more
frequent, and by earnest and zealous prosecution seek, still to entertain the
fruits thereof. Proceed then a Gods name, and go on, with good luck in your
enterprise, the more harder and greater you find the difficulcie in attayning
to virtue, the more vehement shall be your glory, and the more honorable the
reputation that thereby is pursued. Confirmatio.
For what has a man of all that may be left unto him in this world, whereof to
vaunt himself, but the memory of that wherein he has most worthelye
travailed. The rich reap possessions, which when themselves are once passed
away, are immediately distributed to others. The pleasures of the world are
momentarie, and after we are once dead we perceive them no more. Hypophora.
Worship, honor, and dignity, perishes even in the very self remembrance.
The reuennewes of the mighty, when life is once fled, are no more to be
tendered. Shall we then for a number of fruitles vanities, (the regard whereof
does never last longer, then whilst we are in present use of them) neglect the
search of that which is of all others most permanent? Ab aequo.
No surely. So behooves not such as your self, Praise of his ancestors.
that of your ancestors have had so many good encouragements, beseems not
the remembrance of their excellencies in you alone to be perished. It Is Virtue
believe me, that procures Fame, and solie Fame that makes men immortal. All
other means are feeble, as the original from whence they are derived is
incertaine. At leastwise, A necessitate.
it shall many other ways stand you greatly upon to continue this course, in
so much as by the aemulation of the virtues of others, you shall thereunto be
constrained, besides the love and regard that all men have borne, Of
expectation.
and ever do bear to the remembrance of virtue, the expectation of your
entierly favoring, and careful loving friends, who with great longing do
attend the prosequutio^ of your worthiness, Of Love.
the il conceit, malice and spite that some have had toward you, Of hate.
whereby to overthrow the good opinion of your father, who with greater
greedines then wolves themselves, Hiperbole.
with more envy then the Crocadile, and far more poison then the serpent, do
lie in wait but only to harken after the news of your declination, and the
dissolved purpose of this your good intention. Entreaty.
Finally my dearest and best favored kinsman, I do adjure you, pray you, and as
earnestly as I can beseech you, by the very pure, and intier love of virtue,
whereof you now shall become partaker, by the immortal Fame thereunto only
awarded, by the care you are bound and ought to have of your self, by all the
kindred that has tied us in affinity, together, by all the loves and possible
entreaty that I can, you do persist, continue, and remain firm, in this your
intended purpose. Peroratio.
In pursuit whereof, you shall minister unto your friends joy and comfort, to
your enemies shame and reproach, to your self praise and eternal regard, and
to al sorts of your acquaintance occasion to admire you. Preferring many times
my care and earnest affection toward you, with my manifold greetinges unto
your good self. I do bid you farewell, etc.


The exhortation contained in this letter pursues not any one thing in
particular, but Virtue in general, y^ intendment of the writer therein, was to
praise the well doing of his kinsma^, Intendmen^ often e last letters.
in abandoning such suspected affects as gave occasion to some (ill favoring
his person) to speak largely of his credit, and thereupon to disable him to
his father. In which he observes this mean, the Exordium concludes the
liking of him that wrote, and the favored parts that were in his account,
concerning the party to whom he wrote. Then he explaneth the purpose of his
letter by Narration, and thereupon the rather to encourage his well-doing, he
commends the act, Distinguishment of the parts.
confirming the worthiues thereof by a doble example. Afterward proceeds
again by amplificatio^ of the goodness, and exhorts to stability and
perseverance, approving by many circumstances, the frailty of al mundan things,
and the sole immortality of virtue. Besides, by the co^uenience of yr matter
required, by necessity, example of his predecessors, expectation of his friends
and enemies, love and hate of either of both, he prefers yr same. Lastly,
by adiuring and entreaty, and therewith comprehends a conclusion. Responsory
Epistles.
Now for because the knowledge of Letters Responsorie, are as needful to be
understood in the particular occasions hereof as any of the others: I deem it
not amiss, to set down the answer to each of these Epistles as they follow
in sequence, that being conferred together in one self matter, the
disposition thereof may the better answer the expectation of the Reader.

A letter Responsorie to the same Epistle.
THE regard of your exceeding good-wil, and weight of your advise and good
exhortations (my very good cousin) have moved me many times to think on you, A
modest admission of praise.
and to thank you for the same. I take no little comfort of your great good
liking of my determination, and that the endeavor thereof bears so forcible
allowaunce at your hands, as to reckon the same in so hie and great account,
Dicaeologia
as you do. I did I confess err a while, but how? as a young man, I went a
stray I grant, but not with perseueraunce, for I reclaimed my self ere I fell,
Excusatio.
and stood upright, ere by overmuch weight I slided to far in my purposes,
Errare, est humanum, sed persistere, belluinum. The course I have taken, as it
was estraunged from the opinion of many: so in the prosecution thereof, I hope
to use such pursuit, as willingly by declination, Assurance of his course
taken.
therein I mean not to become offensive to any. Fear you not sir, the account
is already set down, for notwithstanding my green years must yet of force
continue their note of imbecilitie. This prerogative yet remains, that I may
as I list adapt my opinion to gravity. Answer to his offer of good will.
You shall (good cousin) do me a great pleasure, if as I am partaker of your
love and entier affection, so I may sometimes be partner with you of those
exercises and sweet pleasures, wherewith your study is frequented: Weight of
his expectation.
I mean that with discourses of yours, you will now and than remember me. The
expectation of your good conceit may become a great spur unto me, the
assurance whereof let rest I pray you, by note of your letters, whereby you
shall often provoke me. Thus assuring my self of that I never yet distrusted at
your hands, Conclusion
your zeal and fidelity toward me, I regard you as faithful as I have
ever found you, and so will always account of you, etc.


TOuching these Letters of answer, there is seldom in them any observation at
all, whereby to bind them to the use of those orderly parts, that in all other
Epistles are to be followed. For that the matter of every answer depends
upon the places of the former direction, whereunto the same is ever more
applied, so that unless it be in an Epistle Defensorie, which is framed in an
answer to the accusation of an other, it rarely or never admits any
parts at all: but in that kind, by reason of the sundry arguments,
inferences, confutations, disproofes, and other circumstaunces that therein are
to be alleged, it bears the like order of the other Epistles, as in the
example thereof shall be hereafter declared. And now let us see one other
example of the same suit, wherein exhortation is given to the profitable study
of learning.

An example of an epistle Hortatory, to the study of learning.
IT is no little pleasure unto me, to consider with my self my good N. the
great trauail, Exordium.
cost, and pain, daily employed by your dearest beloved parents, ^nsinuation.
to induce unto you the precious, and of all other most delicate and sweet
pleasure of learning: the value whereof, is without all estimate, and the
comfort therein conceived, in no wise to be comprehended: the loving regard of
whom, and the most lamentable want of the other, when I do see you either with
some ill favoring aspect, to incline unto, or with some more then straung or
unused terms to account of, I can not but grieve with my heart, respecting the
linck whereby I stand charged to either of you, in so great appearance as I do
behold the same. True it is, Propositio.
that you are a Gent* that you are heir apparaunt to large and very great
possessions, that you are (for the years you bear) of comelye and goodly
personage, that you are in all things well accomplished, and every way as
beseems: but yet when I behold this favor, this comelines, these
accomplishmentes, and know you to be a Gent. and think upon your large
ensuing, revenues and possessions, me thinks there should yet be an ornament
to all these, and a thing of far more goodly show, and more surpassing value
wanting to the same, that might if it were well entertained, add more glory
unto all the others, then the weight of the rest were ever able to purchase.
For suppose that all these complements of yours are of large price, ^atiotinatio
and very necessary as they are in deed, and such wherewith the state of man is
greatly beutified, yet are they al but things pertinent unto the body, by force
whereof (setting only our shape aside) we do communicate in every thing, with
beasts, for with them we live, we move, we go, we eat, and enjoy the sensual
appetite of inward and outward abilities. But by benefit of learning,
Increme^tum.
of knowledge, of skill, we make difference of things, and are only thereby in our
selves distinguished from beasts. And if man which is the principal work of
god, Comparati^
was from the beginning a chosen creature, endued above any others, and
therefore pointed to exceed and go beyond all others, how much the more needful
shall it be for every on, according to such appointment to prefer and put
forward the use of the same. And seeing as well by the ordinance of God as
common use of reason, whereby we are governed and led, every man is induced to
propose unto him-self the exercise of things that are good and honest, and that
the same also among these, which makes a man nearest to his creator in
perfection, is of all others the most to be desired: how much available the^
and important is it, to every man to be frequented with learning, Confirmatio
the use whereof freeth him of common ignorance, and makes him capable of the
hie and lofty mysteries. And if in any study whatsoever the reputation of
honest and good is to be sought for, Of honest.
what I pray you the^ learning, may be adjudged more honester, which having
with it a certain kind of divine and sacred original, has from the beginning
of the world, been with all men in greatest price and estimation. What may be
deemed more honest, then that which from very asses and blocks, Correctio.
and (if it were lawful so to say) from brute men and beasts also themselves
makes difference, and without the which, there were left unto us from such, no
place at all of distinguishment. What then that can be said to be more honest,
which draws a man up to the divine contemplatio^ of the sacred majesty, to
the knowledge of the hie and heavenly things of worthy and iminent virtues,
and being sequestered by the want whereof he becomes no other wise then as a
hog, still groueling on the earth, searching only wherewith to fill his
bellye, neglecting in the mean time the expectation or regard of any other
statelye or eternal sovereignty. Of necessary.
Now therefore if the use of learning, as the thing of greatest account and
most worthy, is here set down to be so generallye, commended to all sorts of
men, how much more consonant and agreeing is it then to the reputation of a
Gentleman, who by what distaunce so ever he is measured in capacity,
Theworthines.
mind, order, state and government from any other common or ordinarye person,
by so much the more ought he in all endeavors to aspire and seek to go beyond
them. For where as all other men in their several vocations are for the most
part, and thereby as it were withdrawn from the special notice and eye-marke
of all public administration and government, The necessity.
the Gentl. contrariwise the more worthy and noble that he is in calling, the
more nearer he is to advancement, which by nothing so much as learning is and
ought to be preferred. And to say the truth, what profitable member can he be
in such a place, whose ignorance is far greater then his wit, and whose
knowledge is less then the least of that, whereof he ought to take notice and
experience. And seeing learning is of all other things a storehouse so plenty
and precious, Occupatio.
as whereof the wise man makes his treasure, the poor man his riches, and the
wealthy one his pastime and pleasure, shall the Gentl. who in all other things
by nature strives to be excellent, be in the greatest action of all others so
careless and negligent. Omitting that you will here allege the tediousnes of
study, Confutatio.
and a certain impossibility almost to attain thereunto, I must answer unto
you again that this comes not of the labor thereof, which to those that
willingly aspire unto the delicate taste of the same, yields great facility
with pleasure to be received: but of a slouthful and sluggish endeavor and
disposition. Exhortatio.
Far be it therefore good sir, that you being a gentleman in all other things
so towardly, and the son of such a one as you are, Praise of the person.
should with the touch of so great a blemish, be so thoroughly stained. So
worthy a descent as whereof you are derived such infancy and childehood
wherein so exquisitely you have been trained, Love.
so great love, and charge of parents wherewith you may be animated, do
inuit you far otherwise, and to a more excellent purpose. Let the sweet and
vnapprooued delight thereof provoke you, Delight.
the praise and commendation solie to virtue appropriate and belonging, Honor.
once prick you forward, thehonour and aduauncementes thereby continuallye
pursued. And if none of all these prevail, Profit.
yet the riches and rewards far greater the^ any earthly treasure, which are
thereunto incide^t. Example.
Think of the worthiness of those who by how much the more noble they were in
birth, by so much the more zealously they have trauayled, not shunning any
labor, sweat, tediousnes, skorning* yea bondage it self, whereby to compass
unto themselves the glory and rewards annexed to the dignity hereof And if no
other remembrance may be sufficient to stablish you, regard yet your living
father, and grandfather, the one of whom neglecting his ease and quiet at home
trauayled all France, Germany, and Italy to the intent to attain unto the
greatness of that whereunto you are so hardly persuaded. Neither think I that
you in whom all other good actions do so plentifully flow, Epilogus.
will herein alone with a little labor be terrified: wherefore my good N. I
eftsoons entreat you again and again, by all the love you have ought to
your name, fame, parentage and stock, and by all the expectation that in them
or any of them, is of your happiness conceived, you will proceed in this
purpose: the weight whereof besides the commodity and pleasure redounding to
her self, shall unto your parents and al others return most comfortable and
pleasing. Al which, recommending to your courteous and gentle disposition, I do
herewith take my leave. etc.


IN this epistle ye exordiu^, is by Insinuation wherein he covertly slideth into
ye commendatio^ of learning, the worthiness and necessity thereof, the rather to
win the party unto the favoring of ye same. This Insinuation is used (as in
this place) when we do suppose that ye thing we intend to write of, or to
persuade, is not so farforth liked as it might be, and according as it does
deserve at ye hands of him to who^ we write For which cause, we do first
covertly induce the necessity* to manifest that without reason, the matter is
not deemed worthy. Learning a thing precious.
And for as much as Learning of it self, is a thing so precious and excellent,
as whereof the praise is infinite, and the argumeent thereof weout compass, it
admits by such occasion the more greater circumstances, wherein largely but
not sully, the worthiness thereof may be described. Al places of proof therefore
are herein used, in declaration whereof, ye order perticipateth with the places
Descriptorie before remembered, as in many like examples it commonly falls out
to be oftentimes frequented. For in the distinguishment of the particularities
thereof, the circumstances are delivered of Honest, profitable, necessary, not
difficulte, or easy. The places of exhortation are by the worthiness, Places
of exhortation
goodness, love, profit, pleasure, delight, honor, example, and entreaty.
And here is to be noted, ye where this Hortatorie kind for the vehemency
thereof does carry in it many times a certain manner of reprehension, diffidence,
or mistrustful enioyning of the party to whom it passes, and that the
disposition and carelessness of some sorts of men are such, and so hawtie as
they will searce permit any admonishment, direction, or exhortation at all: it
shall for the lenif^yng hereof, be requisite to entertain with our selves,
this one special regard, Mitigation of exhortation.
that in writing to such persons, we do endeavor by many reasons to qualify
the sharpness hereof, and by a contrary course to deal with them. And for
that an honest and lawdable opinion of every ones actions, seems by
manifestation and delivery thereof unto the party, to induce most credence,
and that there is no man living, of so perverse and bad account, but he
desires at least, and reioyseth to be well deemed of in account among the
best, it shall herein principally appertain, that we do rather frame
supposals of such men's willingness, then quite to condemn them by any note of
negligence. As for example we may affirm, that not, for that we deem him
slow or not prompt enough to such things as we require, we do excite such a
one to well doing, but as it were calcar, addere currenti: we put forward his
readiness by our persuasions and entreatie perform the same. Or otherwise,
that we speak hot to such a one, that our exhortation could prevail above ye,
wherein long since be has showed himself to be a dealer, and thereunto most
willing, but rather to manifest the rejoicing we do therein conceive, and the
glad expectation we have of his farther continuance. Or thus, ye he will pardon
those exhortations, which not so much for the weight of themselves, as ye
liking we receive of his virtue, we have suggested, some whereof more of plenty,
then necessity are fallen from our pen, whereby we confess by such color to
egg him forward, who rather needs a bridle then a spurr in pursuit of the
same. The applications hereof* may no doubt, be of great force in the self
will of a number, who either by the supposed expectation, that they imagined
men do conceive of them, or by the weight of the greatest reason laid down to
their view, may be induced to many things. For suppose ye a matter exhortatory
herein so stood, as thereby in discourse of liberality to induce agent. of great
possessions, and very good descent to impart some pittaunce of that wealth
which he might well spare, to cause of a common wealth or contribution for
the poor, were it amiss (having both by the praise, goodness, and
worthiness of the act, and by example of some others, put him in mind of the
well deseruings thereby attained) to suggest some inclination of his own unto
the same, either by a surmised report to be delivered of him, or by
likelihoode, or by some demonstration, how far of so ever the verity thereof
do appear to answer the matter* Uerely it seems unto me, that if there
should be any spark at all of good condition resident in such a one, he
might by like degrees be drawn to some affectation therein. And insomuch as
the course hereof is not many times unfrequented. I will show you a like
example, wherein a gentleman of some account is in the self same manner induced
to the regard of a near kinseman of his own remaining in London, to whom his
allowance was so short and skant, and the fear of the other to displease his
graundfather so great, as by sorrow thereof it had like to have cost him his
life, and this was the manner of the same.

An Epistle Hortatorie wherein the vehemency of Exhortation is lenified, by a
more gentle or submissiue kind of delivery.
Exordium.
SIr I do not know whether by the great affection I do bear unto you and
yours, or by some stranger motion of my self, friendly wishing to all men, or
perchance supposing it a percell of my duty charitablie to exhort, or what
other cause you may deem that moves me in sort following to take upon me to
write to you. Nevertheless intending sufficiently of your courtesy, I have
thought meet in the behalf of the young Gentleman your son, Narratio.
whom with much ado I have entreated home to my house lying there very
sickly, both in respect of his sickness, and for the better remedy thereof
hereby to become a mean unto you. Propositio.
And albeit (such is his gentle condition) as from his own mouth I cannot
gather the occasion, yet is not the surmise thereof unsuspected of others, nor
my self by many circumstances am ignorant from whence the original does
proceed. For the better opening whereof, it shall not be amiss to call in
question his own estate, what you are unto him present, and what in time to
come, you both may, and (in respect of nature) will, or ought to become unto
him. Principally therefore touching his own state, it is yet green, weak and
almost of no force, and by ability so much the less, by how much the more
he has sundry occasions to be endamaged, namely by reason of his suits in law
and otherwise. Next drawing to your self, you are his Graundfather, the only
patron of his succession, and the principal part from whence the full
remainder of his joy, comfort and happy quiet is drawn to be reposed. Lastly,
you are in present unto him a severe governor, and a districte commander: In
time to come both of your self and his good inclination encouraging you, may
and shall be a resolute and settled foundation, whereupon the life following
which it pleases God to lend him, shall more substantially, and with greater
maintenance be led and continued. Praise of the person.
And albeit in all present actions and things afterward to be hoped, I may not
find means to discommend your gravity, who upon great wisdom, auntiet
experience, and perfect proof, do best know what beseems the education of
those, whom fatherly care chiefly concerns, yet because the conditions of the
son, are nothing such as craves so hard looking to, and that you may not be
nimis durus and perquam seuerus pater: such as in Terence Aedelphus is
alleged, that would induce an ill disposed son clam patre, and as it were
in secret, to do many enormities, not so much as the sound whereof, should
perchance ever attain the curious search of his fathers hearkening.
Lenisieng the exhortation.
I would be thus bold to say unto you, that being freque^ted with so mild a
condition as is in your son, in whom no ill disposition is found at all, you
should so far forth, yea in all outward show and common actions (being at
this state and at these years as he is) become such unto him, as of whom he
might presume, be bold to vaunt, and the world to take notice and account of,
seeing that liberty never turns to loosnesse, that by nature is charged with
so many virtuous directions.

Leaving profane aucthorities and moral arguments, do we not see that in
the holy people of God, the seed of Israel, old Jacob himself, having happily
transported his old age, Ab exemplo
to see the blessed succession of Joseph, how lovingly he rejoiced upon them,
being the children of his youngest son, and according to their virtues, as
bred of his own loins, tendered and blessed them. What made David having
constrained the rest of his children (whose lives he knew) from his infancy,
and above al other, to nourish Solomon, and to edopt unto him, his princely
seat in succession, but virtue that followed him? What made many good men
besides, whose examples are innumerable, to give liberty to some of their
offspring and severely to correct others, but the contrary suppose,
conceived in either of them? But what? do I infer hereuppon, that to your
pupil, you are not a lo-Parent? no, for that I know the contrary. What then
do I complain of, would you know? Forsooth for that this love of yours, is
mixed with too much seueritye, you keep him too short, you restrain him too
much. Expostulatio.
What though, when God shall call you hence, you leave him in succession, you
mean to do well and more besides, is that enough? when he has by suit in
law, whereunto, you have put him forward, endaungered himself, spent the
greatest part of his little, is cros^ed with many evil practices, martyred
with a thousand cares, defectes, and wantes, and has thereunto, little or
almost no relief, supplye or good encouragement, but perchance hard looks,
and evil opinion of some, who in respect of nature, ought to be more friendly
unto him besides your self, is it marueyle if he be sick being thus
wearyed, so grieved, and in such sort turmoyled?

I do promise you Sir, it greeueth me to see it, and that I have so much
cause to report it (supposing your own condition to be flexible enough
toward him, Occupatio.
if it be not perverted) I do think if redress be not given, and that he
have present comfort, assistaunce, and good encouragement at your hands, he
will not be long lived.

Be therefore (good sir) favorable to your own, in respect of your self, and
that you are the original: he is not his fathers but your child, you ought,
you must, you are bound to tender him, to furnishe him, Incrementum.
to care for him. Needful is it, you do now call to remembrance, he is no
more an infant, but at man's estate, whom you have brought up to your likyng,
ordered for your likeyng, and bestowed at your likyng, because as all men
coniectured you made him your liking, by reason whereof you can not nor may in
any sort withdraw or call back, what you have before determined. Nature,
divine and human laws, common custom and society, do hereunto persuade
you, Amplificatio.
urge you, nay compel you. Behooves not, you suffer that government, for
which you are known to be wise, herein alone to be blemished. But what do I
infer thus much unto you, who (far better then my self) do know what
beseems you? Certes sir, not for that I doubt thereof, but because the care I
have of the action, makes me more zealous hereof. The long notice I have had
and estimate, I retain of your acquaintance, Epilogus.
the reputation of your self, and absolute expectation of the young gentleman,
have thus far incited me, wherein if I have proceeded farther then I ought,
think that it is in respect of the great good will I have ought. In the
acknowledgement whereof, praying all that possibly may be entreated at your
hands for your son I do right heartily bid you farewell. this of etc.


HErin do you see the order of the other Epistles in some sort qualified,
wherein presumptions and arguments of a loving care, are for the more facility
of the exhortation in many places suggested. Neither is the delivery so
vehement, or expressed with so many circumstances as are the other, because the
reputation of the party to whom it passed, and the declining matter of his aged
years somewhat bent to self opinion (managed by others likeing) would not
admit it. The matter hereof wrought yet so natural a ^egard in the old man, as
limitting his accustomed severity being before time without measure, he was
contented ever afterward, with more fatherly acceptaunce to entertayne his
son in all manner of occasions, as may something appear by an answer
hereunto returned, the effect whereof I have collected into this form
following, the rather for the orderly setting forth of the same, remembering
that, whatsoever herein to be delivered, by the name of a letter, supplieth ye
room of an example or president, which imports somewhat therein to be
followed. And in ye I shall many times hereafter according to the course of the
matter, be herein occasioned to put down diverse Epistles Responsorie, Notes
in Epistles Responsorie.
as occasions may serve for presidentes. I think it not impertinent if in this
place I do somewhat inserte concerning some observations in the same. Every
Responsory Epistle therefore, because it chiefly depends of the parts of a
former letter, requires this consideration to be had in ye framing thereof,
that it do fully answer every point of the Epistle whereunto it is appointed.
That therein above al other things we endeavor to avoid al tedious rehearsals
(the peevish affectation whereof is so unpleasant and burdensome unto the
reader, as nothing more intolerable) for ye I have seen the letters of some,
who to every point whereunto they have bin charged to certify, or make answer,
have repeted ye perticularities verbatim of all the former letter, and therewith
have made such a hotch-potch as has bin enough for two days together to clog
any man's conceit, and that with very slender recreatio^. Brief repiticions.
The custom hereof is too too il. But if necessity so requires ye there must
be some rehearsal made, let it remain for a direction to those ye will endeavor
to write well, that they study to gather but the principal matter therein, and
the effects thereof so briefly and closely to compact together, as ye no
length of the letter may therein appear. Which done, we shall by degrees pass
forward from point to point, and return every thing as occasion ministers. And
if any other matter fall out of new to be delivered, it shall not be il in such
kind of answers, sometimes to have ye same inserted. Thus much have I thought
good to lay down for the respects hereof. And now to ye answer of the last
letter.

A Letter Responsorie to the Epistle before going.
SIr I have well conceived of your letter sent unto me in the behalf of my
son. T. and do take very kindly whatsoever therein with good affection you
have so plentifully tendered* I am very sorry to hear of his sickness, and do
thank you many times for your loving conceit toward him and us, in that you
have bequeathed for our sakes his careful attendance to your own looking to,
the courtesy whereof, shall neither by my felf, nor by any other his nearest
friends be at any time forgotten. In sign that your good counsel has
prevailed with me, and that the weight of your words have been of force unto
me, I have sent him a letter herein closed and ten pound in money, by this
bearer, which I pray you of all loves see disbursed to his uses. You shall also
so much intend of me, as in my name to comfort him, and assure him hereafter
(upon his no worse deserts) of good expectation from me. For such farther
charge as you have bin at with him I leave to my self in as ample manner as I
may to see requited. In the weight whereof, I do pray you to be assertained
that you shall find of me such a one, who will not fail to his uttermost to
stand assured toward you. Because the vacation is now long, I hold it not
amiss if upon his safe recovery, my son do come down into the country,
the better to recreate his wearied conceits from his former melancholy. I
have appointed my man to attend him a while that returning back again, he may
bring unto me, the more certain and assured notes of his safety. Not holding
my self ill besteade to remain charged to one so courteous as your self: I
give you to the protection of the almighty, and my self to a speedy
requital. L. this of etc.


These examples for this Hortatorie kind might here seem to suffice, wherein
by the variety in them contained scope is given sufficient, for any
reasonable imitation to be gathered. And were it not that there is yet one
subject behind, whereunto (of some especial lyking that I have to the matter
thereof) I am most affectionate, I could herewith content my self without
wading any farther. But insomuch as the same is but my labor, to pen it, and
the delivery thereof may also make the example the more plentiful, I will
endeavor to put it forwards among the rest, the effect being as follows.

An other example Hortatorie wherein an honorable Gentleman is egged forwards
in the profession of Arms, and service of his Prince and Country.
SIthence the time of my little abode here in London being scarce forty
days, Narratio.
vnderstandding of the being in town of my La. your mother, I repaired
thereupon to her presence to visit her: there did I receive notice of your
being in Ireland, and that upon your honorable behauior and good service there
done, the L. D. did not only testify the same by his own handwriting unto
diverse of the privy Counsel, but also in especial letters besides commended
the weight thereof, unto the regard of her most excellent Majesty.

Propositio.
I did not a little rejoice to see that in such young years wherein commonly
falls out a contempt of al excellencies, and fantastical desire of
counterfeit vanities, you could (besides the common trade and custom of the
world) addicte your self wholly unto so weighty and honorable an exercise,
as by laborsome travel in the service and honor of your Prince, and country,
to put forward your self so timely. Credit me it is not a little pleasing unto
me to think thereon, neither stands my affection so slender unto your
fathers offspring, but that I must ever hold the reputation of their well
doing an advancement to my imaginations, and the sound of their good success
the very hermony of mine inward soul.

It is no new thing I confess, to see in these days a gentleman honorably
descended as your self, Longanimitie performs the excellency of virtue.
and of like worthy education, to attain unto learning, to become practiced
in arms, to put forward themselves in service, but to continue with resolution
to perform it with labor, to atchieue it with valor, to bear it with
honor, here is the excellency, this is the rareness, hence springs the
novelty.

Virtue retayning yet her ancient Majesty, though not pursued as in old
time, with such woonted vehemency, has three entrances, leading directly unto
her bewtiful passage, Virtue has three entrances.
by the ports whereof, whosouer is desirous to attayn her in her purest and most
glorious estate, must of necessity enter. First Fortitude, whereby he must be
enhabled to endure whatsoever labor and travel to be imposed, accounting
nothing difficult, to the end and sweet reward whereof her excellency is
appropriate Next Magnanimity, which by a vehement and haw^ie desire, reaches
unto things most excellent and of hiest and statelyest value, not regarding the
hard tough and maine force of the passage, with what pursuit so ever it must be
followed, so be it by such means it may be won, and the glory thereunto due,
may at last be attained: the reach whereof, tending to the last end and scope
of all his determinations, sweetneth all manner of travel, and induces
therewithal a contempt of what soever less valued or hindering, to the
worthiness of of the same. Then Longanimitie, enhabling by great constancy
with rare and accustomed patience, to awaite and endure the end, never giving
over upon whatsoever assaults, till the determined scope be by all kind of
industry fully and perfectly furnished.

For this cause, Confirmatio.
the most renowned part of Virtue is said to be excellent, for that many do
contemplate her a far of, but few or none at all do almost come so nigh her
as perfectly to see and discern her, insomuch as some nothing regarding the
singularity of that, whose sweetness they never tasted of become forceles of
the pursuit of so divine an excellency, and some other savoring a little the
deintines thereof, yet ouerreached with the tediousness of the enterprise, and
hindered by the opposition of a thousand vanities, are so astonished in the
first onset, as being therewith overcome, do by and by give over their
purposes.

Now therefore my C. if you will be a right favorer of Virtue in deed,
Adhoratio.
it behooves that by these possibilities you do (as a faithful regarder of
her divine and sacred essence) only seek to pursue her, and that with such
and none other respects, and to no other end and purpose, but for the sole
fruition of her stately and immortal deity.

The time now calls you forth, your Country, and soil wherein you were borne
and nourished inuiteth you, your praise already gotten, and hope of renown
ever after to follow, persuades you, the honor of your house and parentage
constrains you, yea every of these solie and altogether do jointly exhort
and command you, Exhortations mixed with praise.
that becoming the self same, you vowed and they long since have looked for,
you do now show your self such as was promised, and wherein the expectation
first conceived of you, may in no wise be frustrated.

Consider I pray you, that the reward of Virtue is Honor, the guerdon of Honor,
Fame, the scope of Fame, Aeternitie, Praise of the action ab honesto.
the seat of Aeternitie immortal and everlasting glory. In living in the
service of your Prince and Country, the profession you have taken in hand is
honorable, the charge honorable, the purpose honorable, and the end and
success thereof must needs be honorable, behooves then that your continuance
therein and your own deserts be also deemed honorable.

Think when you took upon you to bear Arms, you then received the first
cognizance of Virtue, you were entertained with Honor, you became apprentice to
Fame, and it was assured (that being with loyalty demeaned) you should at
length receive reward of ever flourishing glory: It is believe me no small
matter, that being a particular member, you are put forth as a pillar, upon the
proppe whereof reposeth one part of the weight of a common weal, that the
ioies of your whole country are fixed upon your well doing, Ab aequo necessario.
that in pursuit hereof a man's private cause is not his own, (the secret
revenge whereof may happily turn to an infamed mischief) but the cause of the
Common good, the public matter of all, and that whereof the scope is of all
others most sacred and honored.

Being entertained in sort as you are, you should highly wrong the opinion
of a great many, in drawing back from that, wherein you have been already so
worthily behooved, and in becoming less then that whereunto in your very
cradle you were at the beginning so principally ordained, for unseemly were it
that you should not have been hereunto at the first committed, unlawful not
to have persisted, and dishonorable (in due sort) not to see it accomplished.

Proceed then my C. in that wherunro your virtue your parentage, your soil,
and your fidelity have called you, A genere*
think what how much and how greatly it imports you, that having had so many
of your stately ancestors since their first original, that have been deemed so
worthy, it fitteth not your self alone in (so important actions, concerning
especially the honor of your Prince and country) should be found otherwise
then equal unto them in the highest quality. Ab exempl^
So and in such manner, and by such kind of means have the most ancient and
renowned worthies of the world become termed honored, and mighty. So
Epaminondas and Alcibiades among the Grecians, Aemilius Paulus, Fabij and
Scipiones amongst the Romans, have bin deemed most stately. For such cause
the acts of your predecessors and nobility of your deceased father have been
registered with the most worthy. A pa^^e.
O so sweetly might sound from out his breathing ghost unto your living ear,
that excellent verse of Virgill.

Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem,
Fortunam ex alijs.
Learn virtue (Child) of me and labors true,
But Fortunes chance, from others do pursue.
The signification whereof, what other thing may it else importe, but that
between them who being never eternised by any memorable action, having
confounded their death with obscurity, and such as never were borne, there
rests in manner no difference at al.

Ardua virtutis est via. It Is labors force that makes way unto Virtue, great
matters unto the furtheraunce of her are but easy, the meaner trifles, the
lowest, of no value. To overcome others by virtue is a thing most honorable,
but in pursuit thereof to be convinced of any other, A spe and metu.
is a thing most vituperable. You are now brought by Fortune unto a district
passage, whereby of necessity you must either by reputation of most excelling
worthiness finish the iourny, or recreant and discomfited, confess the utmost
of your imbecilitie. But what do I confer unto your view, the notes of such
and so many doubts and hazardes, knowing a mind insinuate in your self by
nature, Occupatio.
that could never so much as think or imagine of things contemptible, or of
any vile or servile quality at all* truly for no worse mean, nor to any
other end or purpose, but thereby to egg you forward by all kind of
possibilities, to the increase of your highest worthiness, that by how much
the more you shall go about to exceed any others, by so much the more greater
you may be commended and extolled above all others.

Epilogus.
Ease and security, are two pernicious ennemies of ever flourishing glory, the
industry whereof, preuenteth yet all circumuention, which either by sloth or
negligence may be imposed: the victory hereof is not any others, but your own,
nor the honor to any other appertaining but unto your self. Be therefore such
in continuance, as may fully be aunswerable to each part of your nobleness, and
God who is the creator of all things, and favorer of each stately accident,
bless your endeavors with the sustentation of Virtue, which is ever
permanent. At. B. this of etc.


Unnecessary were it to make further declaration of the order of this Epistle,
then has been already said of the others, for that the general places
hereof, are no more then were derived from the former examples. Only I must
note, that herein is no Exordium at all. But the Narration is the foremost
induction to the matter of the Epistle, as the learner may find out by
quotation of the margent. And now will we turn our selves unto the next sort
of this Deliberatiue kind, which falls out to be Dehortatorie. The nature
whereof, is by all forcible arguments that may be induced, to dehort and
withdraw from any matter offensive, or that may be counted evil.

The places Hortatorie, were as you saw drawn from the qualities of praise,
fortified in diverse sorts, as of the Person, of the Action, or of the Thing it
self, under which was comprehended what might be called Honestum. Now these
contrary wise, are enforced by the kind of dispraise, or disco^mendation of
that which we dehort from, be it in the Person, Action or Thing, and is derived
from Inhonestum. In the matter hereof, it is tolerable, by all sorts of
arguments that may be, to infer and object any thing, to the diminution or
defacing of that which we go about to impugn, as for example, if I should
dehort a man from rebellion or infidelity toward his country. I will
touching the action, show how unnatural the cause is he takes in hand, being
against his native soil* how horrible, by laying out the greatness of the
offense: How unjust, in respect that it is against his alleageaunce to his
Prince: How impious, in that it retains no piety, turns to the disturbance
of a quiet state, and breeds the subversion of all peaceable government. How
insufferable, by reason that good and wholesome laws are thereby infringed, all
sorts of honest and good men wronged, and consequentlye the commonwealth by
such means topsie turuie turned.

Touching the Person, if in him there has been at any time reputed Wisdom,
that might be alleged, I will affirm it to be Folly, his Fortitude I will
divert to Temeritie, his Moderation to Cruelty, his Boldness to Arrogancy, his
Haughtints to Pride, his Liberty to Loosenes, his Liking to Lewdnes, and
finally whatsoever other good part or Uirtue in him, to the worse and contrary
quality, as he that by so bad an endeavor, has ouerthrown what otherwise
might in him be else deemed praise worthy.

For the demonstration of these, all necessary circumstaunces may be implied,
whether to the advancement of the opposite good, or condemnation of the
present evil, be it by argument, likelihood, comparison or example, or by any
otherways or means whatsoever. And for that in the last Epistle, the
exhortation thereof tended something to the putting forward of a valiant
noble Gentlin the most honorable part of his progression, consisting in his
faithful and loyal service toward his Prince and country. This Dehortatorie
therefore shall now in like manner be, to pull back and withdraw an other
from a pretended matter, of injury, infidelity, or faithless dealing, by him
to be perpetrated to or against his country, whose several effects shall be
accordingly suited into these particularities ensuing.

An example of an epistle Dehortatory, wherein a noble Gent. is withdrawn from
infidelity or rebellion.
Exordium.
MY good G. my faithful loving country man and dearest of account (whilom all
and either of these unto me, so be it the frowning heavens and despitefull
wicked fate, had not once harbored the contrary) what shall I write unto thee,
or by what terms may I now salute thee. Erst wonted were my letters to pursue
thee careless in any cost, and familiarlye and boldlye to regard thee, now
blushing at thy uncouth hap, and careful of thy careless usage, they can not
without grief approach thee, nor once without sorrow intentiuelye behold thee.

Alas my G. what fury has led thee, what madness has bewitched thee,
Proposition
what hateful destiny has pursued thee, that being such as thou were, on
whom nature and the heavens as it seemed had powered al their gifts most
plentifully, thou would yet be led to deface so many parts of excellency,
with one hateful, ignominious and shameful blot, of so shameless, wicked, and
most heinous treachery.

Did thou for this cause take upon thee profession of arms, Distributio^
to become injurious to thy country, to bereave men of their patrimonye, to be
a destroyer of unity, a pattern of infidelity, the dishonor of thy family,
and consequently to thy self and dearest soil, a professed and open enemy?
Ah happy in all other things but in this sole enterprise, in the brochinge
whereof thou wast put forward to be made only unhappy, behooves with such
ingratitude to reward the first fawtor of thy familye? Was this the end of thy
birth, thy parents education, thy estate, thy wealth, thy possibility, to
become a traitor to thy prince, and a rebel to thy country? No no, my G. vilde
and too ill beseeming is the drift that has so ouer-taken thee, and ignorant
was he of that became thee, that first thereunto persuaded thee.

When thou lie armed in the feildes, Prosope^^
and (mustering thy ranckes in the day time) beholdest and look round about
thy country, think thou not then with thy self, in this soil was I borne,
within this land lies my patrimony, here had I first suck, and since have
the fruits thereof nourished me, and could I then become so far ungrateful
and unkind, as for all these benefits to destroy thee? Not so, nor in such
manner have the virtuous in the field been accounted so worthy, not for this
cause or in such actions, have men been said to bear themselves
honorably. Corolianus, thou wast convinced by the veiw of thy City and
mothers entreatie, and shall I unhappy man for all this, persist in this
cruelty.

Confirmatio
Justly and by great occasion credit me, might thou thus complain of so
great an injury, and all this being so true, as nothing more true: can it be
said that in prosecuting the same, thou may be freed from infamy? Epiphonema.
What I pray thee has made men famous, and canonized their memory, was it not
their munificence and valiant demerites in and toward their country? For in
what one thing are we more likened unto God himself, then in the worthiness of
our minds, the conclusions whereof, ought they at any time to be stained with
such hateful obloquie? Comparatio
The Ass runs thorough fire for the safeguard of her issue, and shall the
valiant man become negligent to the aid of his country? How far more
waightely then shall he be accused, who not only gives no aid at all to his
country, but also is thereunto a confederate and most cruel enemy? How
careless are such men of their fame, and how unlike of all others to those
memorable worthies, the precious regard whereof, unto them has been such,
as then goods, possessions, riches, kingdoms, yea life it self has been
held most dearest. Peruse but the ancient historyes of Rome, and look
there, Mutius Se^^ola.
of Mutius Scauola, the most invincible Roman, with what confidence went he
solie into the tent of Porsenna his and their countries capital enemy, with
intent only to destroy him. Furius Camillus.
The good Furius Camillus, who after many high and honorable services by him
don to the commonwealth of Rome, was by his own Citizens unjustly banished,
how far off was he think you, from this your opinion? For the Galls whom
before he had expulsed, having in the time of this his banishment asseiged the
City of Rome, and beeinge then very likely to have distressed the same,
insomuch as they had already forraged, burnt, and destroyed the whole country
round about, he more sorrowful at the likely ruin of his City, then grieved
at his own proper banishment, (moved thereunto of very piety and love to his
native soil and country) entered council with the Ardeats, and by his
wisdom, policy and great manhood so persuaded those people, that in fear
of their own mishap, they were content to levy a mighty army under his
conduct, wherewith he not only put back the enemy, but therewith so mightily
pursued them, as by such means he utterly freed and set at liberty his
dearest beloved City and country. What need we search abroad for such
foreign examples, Transitio.
and why draw we not rather home into our own soil of England? Epiphonema.
What Cronicle shall ever remain, or what english historye shall be ever
extant, that shall not euerlastinglye report, the deserved fame of that right
worthy and very noble act in deed, VValworth L. Mayor of London.
of Sir William Walworth Knight, once L. Mayor of this our City of London, the
remembrance whereof (to his perpetual praise, and endless confusion of all
others, who not only abstayning the putting in ure of such his memorable
virtue, but which is worse, shall endeavor by cruel force to tender violence
unto their sacred anointed prince, and of all others most favored country,
shall yet flourish for ever, Ill do you conceive or think on the worthiness of
that good man, who in the time of king Richard the second, when with a most
sodeine and strange kind of rebellion, the king was troubled, the Realm
pestred, and the strongest of the Kings subjects greatly feared, even at
that time when the proud fawtor and captain of this rebellious and rascally
multitude, durst hatefully and most vndutifullye to beard the king in his own
presence, and each man shunned to impugn the contrary: This valiant, this
good, Synonymia.
this right noble and most worthy Citizen, standing by, when the wretched and
presumptuous varlet, with so little reverence approached the king, and
remembering the services of many worthy men, that by an honorable adventure and
hazard of their lives had to their eternal memory, before time freed their
country with liberty, greuing that with so hie an abuse his sovereign Lord
being yet as it were a child, should there in his hearing, be so far forth
amated, he couragiouslye stepped unto the rebel, and taking him by the gorge,
proud varlet quoth he, that dare thus conte^ptuouslye demean thy self, unto
thy king and statelye sovereign, foul death betide thee, and shame quickly
consume thee, why answered the vilaine in great disdain, is it thou that
greeuest at that I have said? greiue replied the stout courageous Citizen,
Adnectio.
yea even I, it is I that grieve at thee, and happily should think my self
accursed, if thou should escape from me unrevenged, wherewith drawing more
close unto him, he pulled him from his horse by maine force, and stabbed him to
the heart with his dagger. The destruction of whom, bred such confusion unto
all the residue of his headstrong army, and sight whereof kindled so great a
fury in the residue of the kings company (who for that present upon special
considerations was there, attended on but meanly) that the whole rebellious
rowt were by such means ever after discomfited utterly, wherewith before that
instant the whole realm had like to have been turned topsie turuie. He and
such as he labored not by ambitious pride to arrogate unto the^ selves a
lawles extremity, but studied of mere love and entier zeal, how and which
way they might perform best service to their prince and country. O more then
ordinary affection, Ecphonesi^.
and feruencye of hie and statelye worthiness, in the regard whereof, life was
not sweet unto these men, whose living might not redound to become for their
dearest soil to be honored and famous. What then may I say my G. of that by
thee, and thy copartners taken in hand, whither will you be driven, what shall
become of you, Apotia,
how do ye behave your selves, who may receive you, in whose inward
conceiptes (not the piety and regard of any of these) no nor so much as one
spark of their loyalty, could so deeply be impressed, as whereby to with-drawe
you from these unnatural broiles. Dicaeologia.
What have you found in your dear prince, what in your loving country, what
in this city, what to any one of al your selves in particularity, that might in
such hateful manner incite you, and by occasion whereof you should thrust your
selves into so great an enormity. Confirmatio.
Believe me, and it shall verily be approved, the success hereof to return
unto you none other, then the very rewards of such infamy. I have known thee,
being far less in years then at this instant, to have been able to rule thy
self, and with plausible moderation to be endued in all things, could thou
then being a child perform this in thy self, and being now a man art not
able to endure it? There be I know about thee, that will persuade that all thou
do herein is virtue, that therein thou have great wisdom, much fortitude,
and notable moderation, that the action is hauty, the occasion liberty, and
the end glory. But how greatly they do err in so saying, let this
sentence of good Camillus stand for you and us indifferentlye, whose notable
speech spronge up from those his inviolable virtues, spared not this, to
affirm in presence of all the Senate unto the people. Let others (quoth he)
deem it a thing evil and reprochable at any time to be found faulty, A
worthy saying of Camillus.
in not yielding ready succors and aid to their country: Camillus for his
part is and shall be of that resolute determination, that it is and ought to be
reputed for evermore a thing detestable and vilde, and of all other the most
hateful and replenished with all execrable miserye. How thinks then your
gentle mind, of the action by this time? Is it (suppose you) any virtue that
thereunto prefers you? Comparatio.
Camillus adjudged that it was not reprocheable, but vilainous, so much as to
be found failing in ought to his country, and may it then be thought a thing
honest to become a persecutor of your country?

It is not Fortitude: but ^imeritie, that conducteth your enterprises, Finitio.
for Fortitude aspireth to far more noble and statelier purposes. The action,
and determination, you prefer therein is not (as fondly by you is conceived)
Honor but Haughtines, not Liberty but Loosnes, not Virtue but Viciousnes: why
then continue you in this sort togethers, upon so wicked and deuilish a
purpose? Why returnest not thou rather to thy self my C. and having long
before striued to emulate the praise of others by an unstained gentilitie, wipe
now quicklye off this foul blemish from thee, and covering the filthynes
thereof by a most incomparable fidelitye, become once again like unto thy
self. At the least wise, if the love of thy country, thy fidelity toward
thy prince, the example of Virtue her self, Love of virtue.
and so many her famous and renoumed followers (then which no one thing on
earth ought more to allure a man) may not herewith convince thee, let yet the
execrable and immortal hate, Hate.
that all good men bear to the practice of such kind of crueltye, the fear
of ever harboring shame, and erected ignomy, and never after hope (thy credit
once consumed) again to recover thee, let these I say constrain thee.
Whilst there is yet but one craze or slender flaw in the touchstone of thy
reputation, piece it up, and new flourish again by the greater excellency, the
square of thy workmanship. A few days are to be passed, in which there is yet
time, fame wounded in life may once be restored, if death do prevent thee, thy
shame and destruction is for ever shrouded. Peroratio.
The next news I hear from thee, may make thee fortunate, or me for thee
always unhappy. My longing would be satisfied of this wherein I dehort thee.
If only herein thou condiscende unto me, my self am thine, and to none so
much as thy self absolutely, I love thee, I require thee, I pray thee, and
pray for thee, that thou may as I wish, and would as I bid be for and
to me. Fare well if thou do well.


IN this Epistle is set forth at large, the chiefest number of al occasions,
inducing effects, and withdrawing from the purpose thereby discommended,
wherein I have endeavored as amply as I may, to sort every part thereof to his
greatest efficacy. Further might I proceed in these titles with some other
examples, but that the order hereof being so nerrely annexed to the others
following of Swasory and Disswasorie Epistles, it seems the very self same
observation of the one, runs almost both in the Hortatorie and Dehortatory
kind, into the intendment of the other. True it is, that in all things the
disposition of either of these Epistles, are for the most part a like, unless
it may be said this only difference to remain between them, that as the
Hortatorie stirs up with pricks, the Swasorie teaches by proves. The
perswader changes his opinions, the exhorter puts forward his
suggestions. In Swasorie Epistles we advise them that err, or otherwise are
staggering in doubt. In Hortatorie we prick forth the stouthfull, and
encourage those that are willing. And yet if we should touch these, as they are
laid out to the quick, the parts Hortatorie of necessity must sometimes then be
joined to this other of Swasorie, especially in the Epiloge, consisting ever
of effects and nothing of arguments. In conclusion the one and the other being
so indifferent, and of such likeness as they are, we will proceed from hence
(leaving this long dehortation, which for variety of matter was in such sort
continued) unto our Epistles Swasorie, and the residue omitted in the other, in
these also devise to be considered, adding by the way, that in searching the
several places of these Epistles, whereupon they may be said to consist, the
self same parts are herein to be required, as in the aduertisementes before
the Hortatorie Epistles are already remembered.

An Epistle Swasorie, wherein a Gentlewoman is councelled to marriage.
THe extreme grief wherein my self was a partaker with you, Exordium.
of the death of your late husband, would not suffer me (good Mistres E.) at
my last being with you, to deliver what then I thought meet for your estate,
and sithence have more at large considered upon to be for your profit. And
albeit your self are I know of discretion sufficient, and the number of your
friends of regard compotent, both to consider and council, what unto your
present affairs may be deemed most correspondent: yet may it not be ill
accepted, if my self of a great many, that have wished well to your person, and
favored evermore your good condition, do here in also amongst the rest, put
forward my meaning, and persuade you thereby unto that, which (though not
already may be fitting to your instant liking) yet to your present behoof may
return no question of soundest and best consideration.

And first I deem it not impertinent to refer unto your knowledge,
Insinuation by supposion o^ the estate of the pa^tie.
what I have thoroughlye conceived with my self of your being, viz, that you
are a widow, a Gentlewoman of very worshipful parentage and descent, the wife
before time of a Gentleman of as good reputation as living, as good aliance as
credit, that you are reputed modest, discreet, wise and well governed, that
you are and ought to be wary in your actions, and such as whereof the babbling
multitude may reap no advantage, and finally that by reason of the over
hastye determination of his life (whose continuance might have rid you of
innumerable cares) you are pestred with some troubles, the most part of your
living in suspense, and that whereof you deem your self most assured, hanging
upon so many hazardes, as hitherto remains doubtful, in what sort you shall
compass it, or with what liking to your self you may happily ouerpasse the
same.

Touching the first, Occupatio.
I warn not that according to your present estate, you do mind what you are,
what you have been, of whom you are descended, and in what sort you may best
provide with warines, to deal for all these: but drawinge to the latter, and
weighing on what terms you stand, how hardly you are bestead, what slender
means to avoid it, I repute him not the worst well willed that could advise
you with contentment, and little hazard, in what sort you might best
endeavor in all effects to answer it. Narratio and propositio.
It is reported unto me, that by the procurement of some, favoring your
advancement, there is now preferred unto your liking a young Gent. virtuous,
discreet and well ordered, the son and heir of a worshipful Knight, on the
choice and regard of whose parents, depends the best assurance of your
whole portion, in whose condition and behavior, albeit you find no one thing
to be reprehended, yet disclaim you to be married, you will hear of no
suitors, there must be in your hearing no speech at all of liking, and you mean
not so soon forsooth to set forward for a husband.

Distributio.
The course you do take herein, seems in my opinion very evil, insomuch as
contrary to that, which both your years, your estate, your living, and present
occasions do require, you forciblye are endeavored to make so indiscreet and
settled a resistaunce. Why La. do you think it profits at all the deceased
ghost of him that loved you (a young gentlewoman as you are scarce, exceeding
twenty years) to live thus solitary? Hangs the censuring of your modesty,
and acceptance of that which your best friends do wish for, and the wisest do
allow of, on the tatling humors of common supposes? If it be deemed once fit
for you to marrye again, Confirmatio
and that upon the wary and circumspect choice thereof depends a manner of
necessitye, and that now, before any one of yours almost suspected it, the
plenty of that might be charilie wished for, is laid already into your bosom,
behooves the respect of a little time which (being sooner or later so it be
performed with modestye, and answered with discretion) mattereth not at all
do deteine you so much, as thereby you are not able to see into your own
profit? Is it not I pray you a purpose honest that is tendered? Is it not a
matter lawful to be intended? Ab honesto
is it a thing unmeet for your present years at this instaunt to be reputed?
Is it not all in all whatsoever, in the best sort unto you, that might at any
time be regarded? Why then abstain you the entertainment of your own good? why
draw you thus backwarde from your own advancement? Why cease you to accept
that whereunto in the end, you must by mere force be compelled? If you will
believe me in any thing, or do suppose the weight of my credit to be
available unto you in ought, I would advise you in other sort, considering
that by declyning from a self opinion of that whereunto without such manifest
reason you are induced, you shall do most good unto your self, and give
occasion to them that loved you, to think that by so doing, their good counsels
have happily wrought the same, for advancement toward you. I had thought with
my self many times sithence the death of your husband, how much imported the
unsettled reach of your living, to be renewed in match with one of good calling:
Praise of the person.
see now God and Fortune more favoring your happ, then your self your own
well doing, have sent you such a one, as of whom you might vaunt, and iustlye in
all things be occasioned to account of. It now appertains that either by
fond self will, or to much unkindness, you shake not of from you, Confutatio.
the foremost occasion of your succeding happiness. I reck not what of the common
sort (more of ignorance then wit) may in suppose of the hasty conclusion be in
secreat alleged, their errors like their fancies, are as incertaine as
peevish. Be you only herein persuaded, to what most of al beseems you, and
think, that both in the waightines, and regard attributed to his and your own
worthiness, Vulitie.
you can for the present frame your self to nothing, that to your estate may
return so commodious, whereunto though no other matter at all enjoined you, it
were now sufficient that so forced a necessitye constrains you, Necessity.
whereunto the regard of your self and your own good fortune wills to obey.
Longer could I debate unto you the great liking of many, conceived of the
party, to the delivery whereof, by the report of your nearest kinsmen, I do
solie refer you, only studying in this, and whatsoever else I may by all
endeavors to pleasure you, whereof praying you to be most assured, I do in
all courtesy leave you. At B. this of, etc.


The manner of this Epistle differing somewhat in order from the rest, after the
Exordium thereof (in which is a declaration made concerning the person to whom
the same is directed, and limitation of time for the delivery of the
intendment) comprehends next a peculiar, description and laying out of the
party by insinuation, wherein whatsoever inferences thereof to be objected
against the matter in handling are consideratly preferred. After all which,
follows the Narration and Proposition togeathers. Then Distributio, in which
the parts proposed by the narration are particularly distinguished. And so
Confirmatio, etc. The places frequented herein are from Honest, Necessity, and
Utility: which also in the residue of this suit, are most commonly pursued.
The use of Swasorie kind, admitting such and so many diversities as it does,
is herein often beautified and set forth with those Descriptorie parts,
either concerning the thing it self, or the person of any one: to the which
is commonly annexed a certain kind of praise in the putting forwards or
advancement of the same. Wherein let it be supposed that my self (having
been a trauailer and delighted with the pleasure thereof) would go about to
persuade my friend, (being a young and towardly Gent. and one that has
sufficient maintenance thereunto, also of a good and sound constitution of body,
able to endure labor, and to away with change) to leave the delicacie of his
own soil, and now in his primier ^olity, to pursue strange coas^es, and the
admirable situation, bravery, pleasure, novelty and unknown wonders of other
countries: needful shall it be that I do first make a description of the same
places, their diversities and pleasures, either by skill or experience, to be
lai^ down as near as may be gessed. In which if any one thing chance to
appear, more excellent, more pleasing, or more wonderful then the rest, that
will* I set forth at large, and according to the worth^^es, quantity or
admiration thereof, prefer it to the uttermost, the rather to draw him to that
wherein I endeavor so fully to have him persuaded. It also I should go about to
induce an untoward son to the obedience of a well disposed father. I must
first describe the office and duty wherein as well by the laws of God, as by
impression of nature, children are tied and bound to an humble and reverend
regard of their parents. Next I will by doble example commend and extol with
praise* the tendered duty and loving obedience of those, who in all memory and
account are registered to have well deserved of their elders* and then the
infamy, shame, wicked end^ and destruction of such as by a secure, stubborn
and careless demeanor, have neglected or attempted the contrary, the
general praise or common mislike of each of the one or the other, shall be a
mean that our persuasions in such a cause may be deemed the more weighty.
Persuasion likewise of Friendship, of Love, of Conversation, of Government, of
Honest life, being subjects of those great Virtues, formerly in our
Hortatorie Epistles remembered, may herein by their several descriptions and
praise of their worthiness be plentifullye performed. As in Friendship the
description may be showed in the efficacy, which by nothing so much as example
is confirmed, and approved by the common affinity that each thing has with
other. The praise also by the sweetness of Society is preferred, by the
firm, trust, repose, and loyalty thereby assur^d, by the equal participation
of joys, of sorrows, of evils, of losses, of discomfortes, by a similitude of
the same condition, the same intendment, affection or liking, by the sum of
joys, happiness and felicity therein contained. In Love likewise, charged by
nature, by duty, by obedience, the descriptions and praises, are to be
handled in their several arguments. As by Nature, being descending from
parents to their children, being interchaungeable also between sisters and
brethren. By Duty, which principallye belongs unto God, to our country, to
our kinsfolk, to our benefactors and followers. By Obedience to our Prince, to
our Parents, and to our superiors. Conversation also Government and Honest
life, the descriptions whereof are in the hawnts, entertainment of companies,
moderation in all sorts of common and usual exercises, chaste, sober, and
laudable kind of living of every one. The praises unto them incident, deduced
from the estate, betternes, or nobility of any, endued withal or the greatest
n^mber of these.

To all which particularities may be added suggestions and diverse inforcements,
whereby to persuade a man to the acceptaunce and embracing of either of them,
as wherein the weight of all good counsels are chiefly preferred. These and such
as these are comprehended in epistles Swasorie, by the neat conueyaunce
whereof, we move the affects of any one to the allowaunce of our writing. For
which cause it shall behooue, that such reasons of inducement as shall be laid
down, do carry with them their pithines and vali^itie, beseeming the argument
we have in handling. ^o which end these brief aduertisementes may be received,
being as it were steps and degrees, wherewith the learner may be stayed up to
a more perfect consideration, of the purpose and delivery, of whatsoever he
shall be occasioned to write of, by the parts of this, or any other example, to
be the more plentifully ordered.

Another example of an Epistle Swasorie, persuading the careful acceptance and
regard of one brother to an other.
THe sound and entire familiarity wherewith your Par^ntes in their life time
sometimes entertained me, Exordium.
and the neerenes of neighborhood twixt both our friends, and long education
wherein jointly we have conuersed together, moves me at this instaunt somewhat
to write unto you in respect of the reputation, credit, and account that in
the world you now bear, and also the rather to win you to the regard of
that, which to the state of your present being, and worthiness of your former
offspring may be found meetest and convenient.

It is given me to understand of a younger brother you have here in London,
Narratio.
who at the time of your fathers dearh being committed to your charge, is for
default of maintenance, badly inured, worse trained, and most perilously by all
kind of likelihoode, thorough such sufferance in the loosenes of his living,
already hazarded.

Trust me, Propositio
I woondered not a little when I heard it, and so much the more was the matter
troublesome unto me, in that respecting it was not told in secret, it seemed
unto me by the looks and gestures of the whole company, that heard it, your
good demeanor thereby was very hardly censured, in that standing in such case
of credit as you do, your wealth so abundant, and and your Parents so well
accounted of, you would in this sort, and in that place of all others suffer
him to wander careless, whom you ought to have constrained, by any possible
carfulness. How ill beseeming it is both to you and yours, that it should so
fall out, you may by supposes many ways conjecture. For my part it grieved me
when I heard it, and I was not quiet till I found convenient time to advertise
you of it* And if my opinion may at all prevail with you, you should quickly
call him home from hence, and see him more better to be provided for, and more
worthily to be trained up. Consider I pray you, the life he takes in hand,
befitteth not such a one, whose original was so honest, Distributio.
is ill beseeming the younger brother of your self, unworthy his birth or name
of a gentleman, and altogether repugnant to the quality of your behavior or
any part of your living. You are to remember that he is yet very green, now
pliable to whatsoever may be impressed in him, as chafed wax apt to receive
any figure, like unto a new vessel to be seasoned with whatsoever licour, what
he now takes taste and savor of, that he holds, what habit you now cast up
on him, the same shadow he lightly bears: Great cause have you therefore
now to be wary how and in what sort he lives.

Your industry, your brotherly care, your love, your especial regard and
kindness it is, that must be aiding in this, Confirmatio
you and none other are the same on whom he relieth, you are to provide for
him, and it is your self that must answer him. Think that Nature, Love,
Duty, yea very Piety binds you unto him, who has none other left to depend
upon, but such as by possibility your self may become unto him. In the
consideration of which, Petoratio.
let I pray you my words become thus much regarded unto you, that herein as
in all other things you perform that beseems you. Longer could I occupy my
self to travel in this action with you, but that I deem it (more than
already) impertinent to require you, Greeting your self many times in my
name, I omit therefore farther to detein you* From my house in B* this of etc.


MUch more might be delivered of this swasorie kind, affording great store and
plenty of example, the patterns of which, being here severally set down at
large, would make the volume over great, and the habit too co^bersome for the
wearing. Suffiseth therefore, that in the matter preceding this Epistle, I
have showed you diverse other occasions inducing argument, whereupon these sorts
of letters may be framed, according to which, or any other imagination not here
supposed, whatsoever is intended to be written, may be orderly carried. The
difficulcie is nothing if the learner do but first consider with himself, what
it is he goes about to advise or persuade, by in sight whereof, he may
forthwith imagine what parts and places are therein to be occupied. Now then if
this argument fall within y^ compass of any one of these herein specified, he
may distinguish the same by the description and laying forth hereby already
delivered. If not, then by Imitation of the like, it may as fully be perfected.
And seeing we have intended by all these to proceed for the more easy
instruction as plentifully as we can. Let us first add the letter Responsorie
to this last Epistle, and concluding solie with one other example, refer
whatsoever after for this title to the readers consideration.

A letter Responsorie, answering to the effects of the latter Epistle.
SIr it discontenteth me not a little to be informed by your letter, of the
iniust suppose that men so unkindly conceive of me, touching the ill disposed
behavior of my younger brother, but most of all misliketh me, that you who
have so long known me, should with the rash conceit of the residue, adiudge
me so peremptorily, as partly being of common opinion with them, to deem by
the naked show of his ill estate, that the same proceeds either of my too
little care, negligent endeavor, or ill circumspection, in not respecting and
providing sufficiently what needfully beseems him.

Believe me sir, the conceit of all or any of these, touching what concerns
mine own peculier regard, are unto me most injurious, neither (to whom soever
have known me) did I in all my life as I think, give any such token or
matter of likelihood, as whereby I might be supposed so much to impugn my
self, or to have been injurious to any.

The boy I confess in nature is my brother, dear and charie enough unto me,
in respect we had one father and mother. How wary I have ever been over all
his demeanours, how watchful in the first prevention of all his untoward
purposes, how willing he might be trained up in that beseemed his parents,
the cost I have bin at, with him his tutors that should have cared for him,
those that have had most doings about him, can chiefly testify. If I should tell
it you, you would not think it, if it should be reported to many others, they
would scarce believe it. Before God sir, I must tell you, it is strange and
very sttaunge unto me, that being in manner a child, so well fostered as he
has been, so little knowing of want or penury as he has done, so vnwoontedly
accustomed to this hardness by him newly begun, in what sort he can endure
it, and with what appetite he can so grosely away with it.

Wit he has enough I confess, but too too evil addicted, conceit
plentiful, but most untowardly followed, qualities to be accounted of, but
vilely misled, Alas the remembrance greeueth me to think on it, and I would I
had spent largely to redress it. It is neither want of care, love, liking, or
looking to, that has procured it, permits it, or hinders to reclayme it.
It is the frowning heavens and his wicked destiny that performs it. The fire
the more it is covered, the more it breaks out and flameth. Allegoria.
The swift current never so little stopped, ouerfloweth the threshold. I would
be loath to infer unto you that (by what decree I know not ordained) he is
thus violently carried. Neither would I gladly stand upon these determinations,
that the force thereof may not in time be suppressed, But knowing the means I
have thereto applied, I promise you for my part, I hold it to be greatly feared.

Ths one conclusion may rest (sir) for your general satisfaction. The boie is
now near about you, find means I beseech you (for the love I know you owe
us) to win him once unto you, my self will be at any cost whatsoever, to
satisfy you: So thereby he may be redeemed, order him, deal with him, place
him, do to him what you list, or can suppose to be meetest, there shall not
want, to enlarge it, to cherish it, and to the uttermost to mayntaine it. Mean
while till you have approved what I have wished, and gladly would care to be
accomplished, deal fauourablye and no worse with me I pray you, then I deserve
for your own, and all others opinions. Thanking your good care, and
consideration had in his and my behalf, I do herewith bid you heartily
farewell. R. this of etc.


THe order of this letter seems unto me very pertinent unto the matter of the
former Epistle, aunswering fully in each point unto the effects of the same; In
the foremost part whereof, is declared the coffeehouse of the supposed
obiecte, because it was unjust though the show of the party ministered an
outward imagination thereunto very likely. Next that he who knew him so well
would enter, so rashly into the common conceit of those, that little
understood and less did intend of him. Afterward he opens his endeavors,
study, and inforcement of good education, excusing the hardness of the one by
the diligent prevention of the other, if possible it might have prevailed. Then
the abruption into lewdness, and the il hope of recovery, which not
resolately is concluded but doubtfully by Allegories coniectured. Lastly for
satisfaccion of all opinions, he requesteth his own trial in the cause, with
offer of whatsoever expense needful to procure a remedy which he greatly
coueteth and thereupon ends.

The argument of the next example tending to a reformation of the studies of
some one therein supposed, persuades a pursuit of matters enhabling to far
greater profit. And (as once before, and many times after, also it may in
other Epistles fall out) there is in this no Exordium, but the beginning hereof
bears solie a Narration, of whose nature and of all other the parts of every
Epistle I think needless in this place, or else where, more largely to speak
of, for that in a chapter before passing in the general aduertisemente of this
book, I have not left the same altogether vnsignified, each of which to the
intent they may the more fully appear in all sorts of Epistles wherein they
are placed, I have, and still do adioyn their notes in their several
applications, whereunto by conueyance of the matter, they are always
entitled.

An example of a Swasorie Epistle, wherein one is persuaded from fruitless
vanities, to more learned and profitable studies.
I Received on Saturdaye last a letter from your uncle, Natratio.
wherein amongst sundry other matters I was advertised, that leaving your
formed learned studies, whereunto with great cost and charge of your Parents,
you had benetrained, you have given your self whollye to certain things, the
regard whereof albeit in their moderate uses, I cannot disco^mend, yet in
respect of your former intendments, I can term the^ none other then mere
follies, and of all others most fruitless vanities.

I^ is reported with us for certain, that you are become an excellent good
dauncer, Proposition
that you are grown prettily skilled on instruments, whereon you play
reasonably, that you spend the time limited for more profit in the
University, in making of songs and most curious ditties, that you are very
fitly seated for wantonness, and worthily behaved for all curious and carpet
conueyaunces.

I would for mine own part nothing at al mislike what herein you have
frequented, weighing in deed that as they may be in sort entertained,
Distributio.
these qualities do very much beseem a gentleman, and are in their kind
seemly ornaments adapted to enery youthful rekoning: but studying them as you
do by themselves, inuring your self wholly to their delight, abandoning
whatsoever might best honor and bewtifie their worthiness, in respect of the
sole property of themselves and their own peculiar goodness, I say they are
vanities, trifles, things of no moment, and (in such respect) to be held in
each sound opinion of far less value and judgment.

The intendment of your going to the University was for learning sake, to
the intent to become an excellent scholar, Antimetabole.
not a curious dauncer, a master of Art, not an unthrifty master, a curions
rhetorician, not a conceited Musition, your uncles care, was by vilefieng his
wealth unto you, (the weight whereof by imminent perilles we see daily perish
before our eyes) to purchase for you the endowment of a far more greater and
assured treasure, by knowledge to decerne trifles, to win skill, to despise
trifles, that leaving small riches to inherit you, your self might gather
possessions whereby to enriche you.

Far misconceiued are you in my judgment, to relinquishe the hoped reckoning
of that you came for, to apply your self to that which few do account of, and
the wisest would never sweat for, you shall therefore if you will now be
ruled by me, return your conceit to a far more better purpose. You shall
call to mind, Comparatio.
that all studies whatsoever, by how much the more excellent each one
appears before the other, by so much the more assured are they in their
kind, and above all the residue, Amplificati.
with far greater estimate to be preferred: if so? then must you grant me
that no one jot upon earth (then sweet Learning, then precious and most
sacred Skill, then above al earthly things whatsoever most honored and heavenly
Science) is of so great and surpassing excellency. To lay out unto you
herein, Amplificatio.
how much more glorious is her shining hue above all others, how sugared her
plants, how deintie her fruits, how delicate her pleasures, how
incomparable her high and stately reach, how she participateth the skies, the
elements, the venerable conceit of hie and sacred mysteries, I need not, you
know it, Asynditon.
you have felt and tasted of it. But to show how much you misprise the force of
her virtue, how ill conceived, and far wandering, you were from the due
search of her glory, to make love to her handmaydes, to profess liking to
her seruanntes, to become sole intertainer of her vassals, hereon rests the
injury, this is it I complain of unto you.

And if either the sum and tipe of honesty placed in the weight of the
action, the necessity, meetenesse, and worthiness, the Utility and benefits
seven hundred fold co^pensing the travel, may (as earthly things have often
power to move one, Parenthesi^
above things of far higher estimation) induce you to her most dearest and
precious fruition, Anthypophara.
search then the favor of these your loving mistresses, and (seemly I grant
you may find them) but never shall they approve either, so wealthy or so
bewtiful. What then should let you to return to this glorious Lady, will you
because you are an earthly substance, follow the common reason of every
earthly creature, Oc^upatio^
humum sapere and alta spernere? or saying that the appetites of the one are
much pleasanter for the time, or far less tedious then the other, welde
your opinion by a peevish conceit of ease, to become a creditor to wantonness?

These imaginations as they are merely bad, Confutatio.
so are they ten times worse in pursuit, then they are sweet in the foremost
thought. Peeuishe were it, simply for you to stand upon these vanities,
(things wherein children have delight and young weakelinges do prove
conning:) you must suppose and harp upon the end that must succeed unto your
travail, and finding the reach thereof, pursue it with feruencie: Such
actions as these do only beseem men, and herein alone shall you show
your self such as you may desire to be, and your friends do heartely wish
you to approve. Alexander restless in the day time gaped for worlds, but
only in the night was rocked a sleep by the Muses, the pleasure where of
surcharged his appetites, and content of which, gave rest to his travels.

Too much impertinent were it for me to hale you on with arguments, Epilogus.
who only go about but by apparaunt shows to persuade you with warrantise:
Neither think I in the end you will approve otherwise, then ever I have
expected from you. Much more could I infer, that might greatly induce you to
that whereunto your own willingness must in the end, of necessity conduce
you. Only if in the weight hereof my persuasions may something prevail: I
shall not forgette in any worthy part thereof, at all times to commend you.
In which reposing my self for the present I end: this of etc.


WIth these persuasions, I think it meetest for this present to end, the
better to answer the parts of these examples so far forth already
discoursed on. Let us in the contrary hereof also, see how many ways and
with what forcible arguments, men may be dissuaded and withdrawn if need
be, from what to themselves or to any other that may return prejudicial or
offensive. For the better understanding whereof, it behooves first to be
advertised that the nature of these Epistles, being termed Disswasorie,
though they are somewhat affined to the other of Dehortatorie, yet do they not
in their deliuerye so vehemently as the others, stand upon the vileness,
badnesse, or lothesomnesse, of the thing dissuaded from, but as the Swasorie
differs from the Hortatorie, the one perswadyng to a thing meet or
indifferent, the other pricking or spurring forward to that which is most
excellent, so falls it in these two, to be at this time in like manner
considered. For the Dehortatorie in his propper kind, declares (as in the
example thereof you found) and goes about by all manner of circumstaunces to
approve, the impiety, hatefulness, shame, ignomie, or peril iminent or
almost inevitable, by prosequution or continuance of such an act.

This now far otherwise, Difference of dehortatorie and disswsisorie
for where commonly a thing stands indifferent in the use thereof, to be
either good or bad, with how great facility, if the likelihoode be any
thing, may we maintain by diverse reasons, the same to be material,
needful, good, and profitable: so in the contrary thereof, what can appear
so sound, but by insight and curious search into the bowelles of the same,
some one thing or other there may appear, unfit, unworthy, or to be but
meanly accounted of. As for example, let it be supposed that I would go about
to persuade a man, to whom something it imports to marry, and yet is
thereunto greatly unwilling, who doubts but many inducements may be laid
down to the weight thereof, seeming very much furthering, as (besides that it
may be reserved for a matter urgent, to show by what necessity he may be tied
(as it were) to ye same, as in ye decay of his house if he do not marry, or
the continuance of a solitary, loose, and bad kind of living, the dying of his
wealth and name at one instant together, having no heir of his offspring to
succeed in his Patrimony) it may also be inferred as very much pertinent, ye
sacred solemnization thereof in paradise, first by God himself appointed, then
his pleasure to enjoin the same to the worlds increase, then the care that
naturallye we have of issue to succeed us, the love and mutual society and
comfort between manne and wife, being of such mighty efficacy as
whereunto no liking is to be compared, the sweet pleasures, cares, and
delights interchaungeablie passing between them, perswsion to marriage.
each so dearly affieng themselves in the others contentment, solace, and
pleasing, the joy of procreation when there shall be a child produced, whose
infancy tatling with a pleasant lisping sound, shall become an incredible
delight to the parents hearing, with infinite other suggestions to be added
hereunto in the places of Confirmation. Now again. if I should go about to
dissuade an other from the self same thing, what might be imagined, Disswasion
from the same.
that hereunto could be found wanting, as (not reckoning the age of a man,
which many times more of dotage then discretion, pursues the same) it might
be intended, the sweetness of liberty, how much it conduces to the estate
of a man, which naturally coueteth, unrestrained and without controlement to
do that him likes, the matter whereof enjoying, be may ride, go, walk,
rest, eat, drink, study recreate, solace, and whersoeuer and in whatsoever
company pleases him best, use the conceit thereof to his own appetite.

Now having a wise (suppose the have al manner of perfections that may be in a
woman, yet is the delicacie hereof bereft him, for being once married, he is
no more to himself but to her, for her pleasure, to her choice, at her liking
with her contentment, must be then order his humors, his hours, his gestures,
his companions, his iournyes, his recreations, and what else he before time
might freely have used, his own liking is quenched, his liberty restrained,
and yet the loss hereof a heaven to ye which follows, if very happily he be
not matched: for imagine ye woman chosen do prove a scolde, waiward, selfe-wild,
malicious, frowning or suspicious, what a hell then is he driven into whose
serpentine and more then adder like disposition shall be such as would terrify
a thousand Deuilles. Incommodities of marriage.
If she be wanton dissolute, lewd, or loose in living, how on the other side,
shall he be then turmoyled, what is it that she will not presume upon, and
dare to hazard, how infamous shall her life become then to his living, how
little will she esteem of him, in respect of the large account she holds
of many others. If she be proud, then is she insupportable: if her wit be more
then his, then is she arrogant, if she be foolish, then a mocking stock, if
she be fair, then a spectacle to gase on, if soul, then a simpering poppet to
wonder on, if she be rich* presumtuous, if poor: then becomes she odious.
But being what she may be, or touching her own person the best she can be,
what intolerable charge brings she with her, what cost of apparel, what
care of diet, what household of servants, what expense for attendance, what
provision for Children, what furniture for house, what daily continual and
never resting carke and toil for her and hers, in conclusion, what one
discommoditie may be reckoned, that with her or for her, is not either tendered
or hazarded. Thus do you see what large scope rests for a man to wade in
either of these, the like whereof falls out in all other things, that may
seem indifferent. As if I should persuade one of a weak disposition,
Persuasion to wine.
or whose constitution of body, for phisickes sake or otherwise, sometimes
needs wine to drink, it might by many reasons be declared by the
necessary use, goodness, property, virtue, and holesomnesse thereof, the
operation of the same, how it recreateth, drives away heaviness from the
mind, rejoices and is confortatiue in the moderate use and acceptance,
Diswasion of the favor.
how much needful it may also be in some other causes to be received.
Contrariwise, if I would dissuade from the dealing therewith, then as many
ways will I bring in, the hurtfulnesse thereof, as how by taking too much, it
dulleth the senses, occasioneth drunkenness, makes ill digestion, engendereth
superfluities, weakeneth the spirits, drives a man to forget himself,
enforces him oftentimes to committ that which otherwise might very evil
beseem him, and consequently ladeth the body and mind with all sorts of
impedimentes and diseases. The like of these might be occasioned in the
education of children or servants, either to persuade from too little, or to
dissuade from too much looking to, sharpness, or correction. Likewise in
causes of right or wrong, in persuading to one of which, we shall do
furtheraunce to Justice, and in dissuading from the other, yield matter of
benefit. The self same also (to speak generally) may be inferred to any one
thing whatsoever, wherein the use or abuse may be adjudged to be either
commodious or offensive, in the practice or execution of the same. The
arguments of this Disswasorie kind, are chiefly enforced by the inhonestie of
the action, the indignity or ill beseeming of the cause, the discommoditie,
inequality, difficulcie, insufficiency, impossibility, ill conceit, or
intolerable admittance in the use, or compassing of the same. All these
notwithstanding in one sole Epistle, not at all times used, but either admitted
or rejected, as is in the matter and circumstaunce thereof many times to be
required. As in a cause of wrong, the Inhonestie of the thing in handling, by
illness, vnusednesse, injustice, oppression, detriment or damage thereby
ensuing is to be dissuaded, the Unworthiness by the credit or reputation of him
that tendreth the same, to be measured, the Il-conceit by the mislike that all
men generally do retain of the action, and high contempt wherewith they are
wont to entertain the memory thereof, the Discommoditie, by the exclamations
of the party injured, calling his honest fame in question, the Difficulcie by
the stoutnes of him to whom the same is offered and his known ^ ability to
withstand it, the Intolerable admittance, by the heinous appearance therein
delivered. Disswassions also may be used to a man not to entermedie in hie or
mean oecasions, so termed either in respect of his own deserts, respecting
or regar^ant to far better or more lower purposes, or in weight of his
ability or disabilitie, whereby he is put forward or drawn back in the
acceptance thereof, either by reputation or wealthines. Here the insufficiency,
impossibility or difficulcie is to be required, the more effectually thereby to
dissuade, by what therein coniectured to be hindering or disproouing to the
matter intended. Now by this already said, and by the application of the
several parts herein debated, to any other like occasion in writing to be
ministered, it may with more facility be adjudged, where and in what sort, and
to how much purpose, the whole or greatest number of these in any like
Epistle may be effected. The example inducing the orderly laying out of which,
in their several places now next of all succeeds.

An example Disswasorie, wherein a man of wealth sufficient, is dissuaded from
the marriage of his daughter, to the riches of an old wealthy Miser.
SIr, Exordium by iusinuation, of mislike of the cause.
I am not a little grieved for the love I ow you to see that in these ripe years
of yours, wherein men commonly are freight with discretion, you nevertheless
do very indiscreetlye go about to compass a matter so repugnaunt to reason,
or any manner of considerate, and sage aduisement, as whereat the world can
but wonder, and whereof all that know you, or by any means may understand of
the match, will no question greatly accuse and for ever condemn you. It is
delivered with us here for certain, that you are intended, Narratio.
(upon the doting affection of a miserable old man your neighbor, whose
years are as welfreight with diseases, and his manacled and benumbed old
joints with imperfections as his barred cofers with coin) to marry unto him
my niece and your youngest daughter upon a soddain, and that to the furtheraunce
thereof you offered to contribute of your own store, a reasonable and
sufficient portion.

Propositio.
Trust me, when I heard it at first, I deemed it as a counterfeit jest,
thinking that the man whom I so well knew before time, could not on a sudden
become such a paragon, as whereon a maiden of her fewture youth accomplishment
and favor, could so quickly become enamored, neither thought I that howsoever
the dotage of the old man stood as a conceit to smile at, that you for your
part would so much as vouchsafe to hearken to it, Incrementum.
especially at any time so seriously to speak of it, much less to open your
purse to become a purchaser of it, or by constrainte at all, to enforce her
favors, to give sign or token any ways unto it.

Distributio.
Alas sir, was there no one thing more wherein besides you could onershoot your
self, but only in so bad a purpose, an action so dishonest, an intendment so
vile, a matter so much impugning nature, as that the very earth, Hiperbole.
or hell it self, could not belch out against the fair Virgin, so huge and
so intolerable a mischief, to match I say, the matchless favor of so
young and dainty a piece, The inhonestie.
to the filthy tawnie deformed and unseemly hue, of so wretched and ill
favored a creature? What nature is this, to work unto her (whom of your own
flesh you have engendered, whom so long you have nourished, whom to such and so
many perfections you have trained) upon a sodeyne, nay even in one moment, to
manifest an occasion to cast her away, not yielding unto her heavy censure,
Discommodity.
so great a benefit as death, but ten thousand griefs, the least of all
which is worse then any death that may be, wherein comfortless she may
complain, grieve, and bemone her self without any relief at all, but by the
precious price and hazard of her own soul.

How unequally do you deal herein, Inequality.
to render unto her being scarce sixteen years of age, a husband enfeabled
by four skore years and vpwardes, whose toes are swollen with the gowt, and
legs consumed with the dropsy, whose lean carkase bears no appearance but
of old scarres, and stiffened limbs become unwieldy supporters of his pined
corpse, whom furs must fence from the least blast of cold, and dew of nappy
ale cherish with warm fires, Ironia.
whose night cap carries more store of heat, then all his body does of
agilitie or strength, and nose far more fruitful then fauorie, with
distilling drops down trilling from thence in freshest spring of the ioliest
seasons, makes ill favored refections. What wrong do you tender the poor
maiden therein? Indignity.
How unworthy and far ill beseeming is the same to her, who has such a
father, and apparently shall be known to be such a man's daughter? shall you not
therein be noted of great folly, will not all men laugh at it, pity it, cry
shame of it, and her self poor soul pray to God to revenge it:

It is too much intolerable believe me that you should endeavor in this sort
by color of your fatherly authority to constrain her, Confirmatio
whom (albeit she is your child) yet may you not thus forciblie compel unto
so unused and unnatural extremities. Consider with your self how grievous the
thing you go about to compass, may return unto her, and whereas lyking and
choice, Intolerable admittance.
is of all other things in case of marriage to be accounted most dearest, you
not only against her will, do endeavor to induce a breach thereof, but also
do give her over into the hands of such a one, whose inequality so far
forth diffeuereth from her appetite, as that it can not otherwise, but (as
unto all others so unto her chieflye) becomme insufferable. Have you no more
care of her that is your daughter, but when now you have brought her to that
pass, wherein she should participate the virtuous and modest use of that,
whereunto her years have adapted her, and for which end and sole purpose,
marriage was by Gods sacred ordinance at the first ordained, instead of a
loving and contented husband, Metaphora.
to give her a withered old truncke, in lue of sweet and mutual society, to
wed herto sorrow and ever loathed griese, to endow her with larger profit,
then with honest contentment, Hypophora.
think you that she is a stone, that her sonces from others are different in
their right operation and qualities, that she more or less in stranger sort
then any others, can become therein forcible or less injured. No sir, assure
your self, you must needs heap up no other but extremities upon her, it
can not be but if you proceed herein, you must of force undo her, the end
and conclusion is so utterly bad, as it can not be endured.

Return now therefore unto your self, and think herein what best beseems
your Daughter, Epilogus.
remember that what you take in hand in that action is ungodly, iniust, severe
and unnatural, that in giving such a husband, you shall give her (without the
greater grace of God) and him both to the devil. Consider, that you are with
piety, and to a christian purpose, and end to moderate your authority, weigh
with your self that the covetousness wherewith you are overcome is no
purchase to her of safetye. And balancing all these in the weight and cords of
equality, withdraw your self, and by such means become dissuaded from so great
an absurdity. So may you the more easily perfourm^ that unto her belongs to
a kind and loving father, and for the profit by this travail reaped at your
hands, bind her and all us with greater feruencye, to love you. Whereon
concluding the scope of all my former desires, I end, etc.


IN this Epistle, the matter (tending to a disswasion from so injurious and
^ard a match, as might fall out in two so indifferent and ^nmeete of complexion
and ages, as was that threed-bare for worn old creature, and this fair,
pong, fresh and tender maiden (impassible hitherto of any man as it seemed, and
therefore so much the more unfit in such bad sort to be bestowed) has in it
these enforcements whereby to draw the purpose thereof into the greater
mislike, viz. the Unhonesty of the action, by undertaking a matter so far
different from nature, reason or society, the Discommoditie, as upon the
admittaunce whereof, stands so great an hazard, as the loss of her own
soul, the Inequality, by comparison of youth and age together, the manifold
imperfections of y^ one, so much contrarying the alienated desires of the
other, the Indignity, wherein is measured the reputation, credit and ability
of her parents, in respect of whom, so indiscreet a match ought in no wise
without the greater necessity in that sort to be put forward. Now will we
proceed to one other example of the same form, though bnlike in substance,
and see what points therein may hereunto necessarilye be further then already
conceived.

An Epistle Disswasorie* wherein a young Gentleman is dissuaded from vices
ingenerall.
ABout seven days passed, I received Letters from my brother N. the long
expectation whereof, Narratio.
and desire I had to be informed of your well doing, made me inwardly to
rejoice at the first view of them, supposing that as I delivered you out of my
hands, I should still have found you in the same predicament, without
alteration, or so much as any surmise at al of that, whereof I have thereby
been to my small content and less satisfaction, at large advertised.

Propositio.
It is long since in deed that you were with me, at which time you were in
manner a Child, nevertheless in those tender years yet so towardly given, and
of so mild and gentle disposition, as there was great cause why then I should
esteem of you, and much matter offered to all others that knew ye, whereupon to
commend you: But now if it be true as I am informed, your actions are turned
quite contrary, you are become a chaungeling, you are no more the same, but an
other in quality, mind, and operation. The matter being so, Distributio.
it seems unto me you have taken a wrong course, in so much as in exchange
of Virtue you have chosen vice, The vnhonesty.
in steed of laudable exercises, a number of lewd qualities, in place of good
and honest usage, a life uncivil, lewd and savage, your company keeping is
without any order, your studies are careless, your pastime recklesse, your
tabling dronckennes, your living unthriftiness, finally blushing before time at
all things, for their nouelty, you dare boldly now to adventure any thing, be
it with never so great infamy. Indignity.
These things my good cousin, I must needs tell you are unfit for a Gentlman,
and much ill beseeming that education of yours, whereunto they were never
accustomed. From these by mine advise you shall weld your speedy course, and
quickly depart, and with some facility give over, calling to your remembrance,
that what approaches the condition of every ordinary person, is not meet for
your credit, and what in men of common account appears to be no blemishe, is
in your reputation adjudged to be a great and notable faultines.

When men desire to be well famed, and by true renoume to rise unto
worthiness, Distributio.
they fly sloth, and give themselves to avoid all occasions of idlenesle,
they endeavor to become painful and industrious, to covet things of hiest
account, and to be in company with the most virtuous. Their credit has no
support by vanities, Inequality.
they seek not their reputation among runnagates, they converse not with
Tavern haunters and bibbers, they live not with men of vild account, dissolute
and ungracious, such kind of means (as insufficient to glory) they deem
wretched and approbious.

You therefore, if you will be such as you ought to be, Confirmatio.
must also pursue the tract of these, the sweetness and delicacie whereof (if but
a little you will pierce into the sour and harshe taste of the other) you
shall quicklye conceive, mark but the praise, benefits estimate and good
report entertained with the one, and on the other side, Antithesis.
the discredit, shame, discommoditye and vile reconinge always made of the
other, and then judge by your own decernment how much and how greatly you are
led awry, in thus carelessly roming upon others invincible. And concluding with
your self, the ill conceit that all good men have of such hateful and
disorderly kind of living, Ill conceit.
return betimes, ere too late, Discommoditie.
^or want of good aduisement, you foolishly begin to cry out of your winning.
Principijs obsta, sero medecina paratur:
Cum mala per long as conualuere moras.


First stop the cause, to late does physic come, When evils small, to great
(by sufferance) run.

Parenthesis.
Credit me (whom ever you have known to favor you) the disgrace that
quickly you shall sustain, if betimes you relent not these euilles, will to a
good mind become so vile and so odious, as not without great sorrow and
grief, may be delivered away. I disguise not with you in that I say, for you
shall find it and approve it to be true. It is a shame for any man in those
years, Ignomie.
wherein of all others his towardness should chiefly be effected, to be
accounted then bad, vild, lewd, and ill demeaned, much more for a Gentleman,
whose education was so good, whose infancy so well trained, whose adolescencie
so formerlye with all kind of virtues endued, Comparatio
to become, now when most discretion should swaye in him, worse then before,
more disordered then when he was to be corrected, less commended in his own
government, then in an others entertaignment.

The love that I bear unto you, makes me the more largely hereof to inform
you, which for that I deem, not of any ill seed spronge out of your own
nature, to be grown up into such carnels, I do thereby adiudge, Consutatio.
that with more facility they may be disseuered, the branches I know are of
others wearinge, which I never wish to be so far forth liked, as to become of
your own gathering. From the inconvenience whereof, I hitherto have studied
thus much to dissuade you, as he that most of all desires above any other to
enjoy you. Epilogu^.
The have of the messenger, and wearines of writing enforce me to leave. God
who is the conductor of all happy endeavors bles^e you, and till I hear from
your self again, my self will expect the best reformation that my good
opinion may induce me, as yet to conceive of you. Fare you well this of, etc.


THE places of this Epistle, are for the most part as the other, wherein the
example for variety of matter and order of handling is only differing, the
laying out of every of these parts, do appear in the margent, for which cause,
I need to dwell the less upon distinguishment of their uses and properties.
There is yet one Epistle more of this suit (and then forward unto the others)
which because the matter of the same entertaigneth more points then these
already delivered, I will set down for example with the rest.

An other example Disswasorie, wherein the party is by diverse reasons,
dissuaded from entering into an action in appearance very dangerous.
I Have good brother, received your letters, Narratio.
dated the viii* day of this instant, which were with as great diligence as
celeritie, conuaied to my hands, and by the fidelity of the bearer have
understood to the uttermost what you willed, and both of that and your letter
have at large considered. Prepositio.
It seems therein unto me, that whether thorough ignorance of your own
good, or inconsiderate rashness of youth, or volu^tary intrusion of yourself
into your own harms, I know not, but the acion and course of your whole
Letter, is altogether to be misliked, and for the extremity thereof to be by
all reason utterly condemned, as whereunto you ought not to condescend, much
less to be seen in public to be a fawtor of, Incrementum.
and which is more, the only man thorough whose folly and immoderate
rashness, the same is solie to be accomplished.

O good God, what blindness is it that leads you, what senseless fury that
bewitcheth you, Ecphonesis.
what matter of evil that pursues you, as by the intolerable force whereof,
without any foresight at all, either of the goodness or ilnes of the action,
Distributio.
the lawles persecution thereof, the matter of your own reputation and
credit, the danger of law wherein you shall be intruded, the difficulcy
whereby it must be attained, the dishonest solicitation of your friends to so
great a hazard, the discommodity that thereon is attendant, and peril every
way that in the execution thereof cannot be avoided, you will notwithstanding
all this, forget your felfe so much, Parenthesis.
as in the accomplishment of a purpose so far different from the nature (I
will not say of a Gentleman) but of an honest man, go about to put in proof
what in the end must of necessity return to your own mifchiefe.

But you will say it is love, and extreme liking that compels you to so
forcible an action, as without the obtaining whereof you are no body,
Confutatio.
you can not live. Love say you? Alas what love term you this, that is laden
with so many disordered motions, call you this love? Nay rather madness, for
love is measured by no extremity, but in the honest and virtuous increase
thereof, Finitio.
where not by a harbraine fury, but by a discret and moderate assention, men
by degrees do climb unto that, the sweet and pleasant force whereof never
participateth any occasion of such unreasonable badnes. Why brother do you love
her whom you have sued for, Tde unhonesty.
and because by desert you can not attain her, will you undertake thereupon to
bereave her by force? How dishonest I pray you is the purpose of so great a
wrong? How unfit to be put forward in the worst kind of men, how intolerable
in a Gentleman? For if in the account of things dishonest, any action whatsoever
may appear to be vile, what the^ this I pray you may be deemed more dishonest,
more bad, or more vile?

And if it be punished extremely by the law, the taking away of a ma^s goods
against his will, Comparatio
what may he deserve that bereaueth the person of any one, being also a
Gentlewoman, such as to whom all humanity forbids to proffer wrong, and to
the honorable entertainment of whom, is appropriate only the nobility of a
Gentleman, Confirmatio.
nay in what sort may such a one be censured in the reputation of all honest
men, that in sort so violent, goes about to ravish her, not only offering
injury therein to her person, but also to her fame, reputation and offspring.

Think you that the intendment hereof can return credit to your living,
think you that by deliuerye of such fruits you may be reputed a Gentl.? No
believe me, it can not be, but according to the unworthiness thereof, it rather
shall give occasion to all that shall hear or understand of it, Amplificatio.
to accuse, blame, mislike, and utterly to condemn you. And what if no manner
of suppose at all were left, whereby to discourage and withdraw you from the
action, imagining that the purpose thereof were in all sorts meet and honorable,
and that to every man that could win his liking, by what force soever, it were
lawful, without discredit or any censure at all of mislike for such a one, to
compass it, do you think it a matter slight and easy for your self to
perform it? No no sir, you reckon to wide, you go beyond the moon, you are to
much deceived. Know you not the Gentlewoman is worthily descended, that she
has parents, The difficulcie.
brethren, Uncles, and friends to keep her, to rescue her, to defend her? Why
sir, is there no more to say but you will have her? You must have her? and by
maine force you will win her? you deal with no children I can tell, nor
weaklings as you account of, but men wise, valiant, well reputed, and of sound
government, who by so much the more just and right, the occasion is of their
defense, by so much the sooner will they, and are able to prevail against you
I recke not that you have courage sufficient, that you are hardye, bold, and
aduenturous (the use whereof being employed to good and laudable purposes, were
I confess much more effectuous) but herein how ever the case stands,
Impossibility.
I see nothing so likely as an impossibility, insomuch as if you be delighted
to become infamous, and in the memory of a shameless life to hazard your self to
a shameful death, then may you enter into it, once this I know that her can you
never find so slenderly accompanied, that with small force you can carrye her,
but within a moment always there will not be wanting a number that shall bicker
for her, from whose in-sight you are altogether unable, if her self consented
thereunto, to convey her.

Concessio.
But gr^nting unto your wi^full imagination, as much in all things as you can
desire, suppose you might win her, conueye her, keep her, and that the danger
of law limited at all no hazard (the contrary whereof you well know, being
guerdoned with no worse then loss of life) do but yet again return to your
self you must in the end call to mind your birth, your familye, your
profession, your manner of living: your Parents who were worshipful, your
stock highly reputed of, your profession Arms, your living a Gentleman, is it
consonant or agreeing to all or any of these, to commit any outrage, ye such
as to any were not so proper, Indignity.
as to a villain, a wretch, a rascal, such a one as neither by nature,
education, or custom knows to do otherwise. What would you exercise I pray
you on her, if you had her? Once you confess she does not love you, then no
question would she ten times more hate you, your answer I know would be
either by intretie to persuade her, or by force to subdue her.

The conclusion is frivolous, if being now her supposed well willer, you can
by no means allure her, immagine you then by prayers to convince her,
Consutatio.
after you have once showed your self so extremely to hate her? And if force
be it you pretend, it is repugnant to gentleness, yet (be it you neglect what
therein to be considered) assure your self her malice nevertheless toward
you will never be quenched. For that of our selves we can not freelye accept
of, we never by compulsion can be procured to like of. With you now, the case
is quite contrary, Perill^
for so iminent every way are the perils thereof unto you, as if her friends
should abstain it, yet the laws will punish it, and if no laws were at all,
yet God would revenge it.

If therefore you will hearken to me, you shall be dissuaded, from all such
intendementes, wherein if my self should have becomme so graceless, as to
have set in foot with you, iustlye we might have confessed each of us to have
been drowned in all unhappiness.

And now good brother, use I pray you that means herin, Epilogus.
that with greatest commendation may beseme you, weigh with your self, that
such distemperate motions are not to be followed, conceive that Virtue whose
servant you became in your first creation, forbids you to be led by such
sensual appetites, think that the honor of arms which you have professed,
extends not it self to the frail and weak subduing of a woman's condition,
who by reason of her sex rather challenges at your hands a defense, the^ any
manlike enforcement, besides, much unworthy should it be unto your reputation
by violence to dishonor, whose estimate and account by reason of your liking,
you ought to prefer with all honor. In fine frame your self to do that
uncompelled, which by force you shall be constrained to wish once to have
performed, so shall you ever do that beseems you, and give me cause, as my
dear and loving brother evermore to account of you. Our former love and liking
wills me evermore to greet you, your sister and mine commends her hartelye
unto you. Fare ye well. B. this thirteenth of November, etc.


IT apeareth in this Epistle to be Responsorie to an other letter, wherein is
to be conceived, that the writer was persuaded to join in that action, which
herein so greatly he disswadeth. Herein the places are more effectual then in
any the other examples, for that in deed the matter of this letter induces the
form thereof with far greater circumstances. In this, because the purpose
concerns an attempt to be taken in hand, is laid forth Difficulcie, Peril
and Impossibility, besides such other places as formerly in the other Epistles
you find also to be applied. And this generally must I note, unto you that
as well in these as in many others of like kind, the matter dissuaded is made so
much the more vehement by how much the circumstances thereof are truly to be
dispraised, or absolutely to be condemned, notwithstanding it falls not out
in all Epistles of this title in such sort to be handled. For sometimes men are
dissuaded from a matter, in respect of the little necessity thereof, and the
great unquiet thereby ensuing, though not in an other sort perchance to be
misliked, the weight resting peradventure far beyond their reach, and other
suppositions, the number whereof I leave in their self conceits to be
frequented: knowing the scope hereof to be so large, and the occurrents so
infinite, as it were impossible to set down examples, conducing to the
several imaginations of the same. Much no question avails it for any one
that studieth well to write, to be sufficientlye instructed in these two
kinds of Swasorie and Disswasorie, to know the better upon what grounds the
force of each of them may be delivered, so common are their places in diverse
other Epistles to be induced as in Petitorie, Monitorie, Reprehensorie,
Inuectiue and such others. Let it therefore firmly be advised for either of
these, that whatsoever we endeavor to persuade, all the commodities thereunto
incident may first be considered, then by circumstaunces the same are again
to be amplified, again if therein be any discommodities to be supposed, them
must we diminishe, or as much as we can refel, which under Confirmation and
Confutation are contained, and if any other common reasons besides the mere
matter of the thing may be imagined, they shall thereunto be annexed, as some
peculiar virtue thereunto encouraging, liking and good opinion, benefit,
honor, health* comfort* pleasure, and a thousand others. In dissuading
likewise, that all the discommodities, matters offensive, causes of detriment,
insufficiency, hazard, or whatsoever before remembered, be herein collected,
put forward and amplified, with like annexing of common reasons and
inducementes, as in the other is advised* and in the examples hereof, you see
to be tendered. And to say sooth, such intermixing of these two so ordinarily
happening in many letters, as very few matters do fall out in which some one
part of them is not sometimes handled: I know not what one thing almost may
be so certain and sound, as by cunning skill may not at the pleasure of the
writer in some sort or other be depraved, or out of the consuming flames
thereof again to be commended. For such causes therefore it shall be good that
the ordinarye places hereof, for the better perfection of the learner, be
very well studied and often exercised, which either by imitation to handle an
unlike matter in a like sort of an example, or by often or continual reading
shall greatly be furthered. And now will we see what in the other sorts of
Epistles we have to be performed, the next of which ensuing in order, and to be
proposed in this Method, is an Epistle Conciliatorie, whose use is preferred
in acquiring unto our selves, the acquaintance of some one, whom especially we
make choice of, or insinuating our selves into their favors, whom we desire
most to esteem of. These Epistles in their directions, do oftentimes pass as
well from men of good account to such as are something their inferiors, as
interchaungeably between those, who are accounted equals, but seldom or never
is frequented to such as are our betters. The occasion of this Epistle,
standing in the first degree, it is likely that he who is much our better
either of his honor, worship, or gentleness, will in plainest terms always
deal with his inferiors, whom in such sort he desires to be known unto, or
otherwise him self would willingly repute of. The sentence of these Epistles
are in the best sort to be adjudged, for that the purport of them includes
love, liking, friendship, the scope whereof induces matter heerin to be
framed. Now touching the second degree, order therein requires these brief
considerations. First that pithily and plainly we set down the cause moving us
to take knowledge of him we write to, or therevppon to move his acquaintance.

This albeit without some assentation may hardly be carried, for that all men
for the most part are affected more or less, to the advancement of their
own worthynesse: yet shall the writer by all possible means endeavor to keep
that Decorum herein, that he gloss not too palpablie, least by such means he
do incur a notable suspicion of flattterie. Next, if in our selves we do
conceive or imagine some one or more things, that are to such a one pleasing, or
whereof we may conjecture the regard to return unto him commodious, or to
confirm toward us a more special liking, that shall we modestly tender, and
devise without arogancie in some convenient sort to be signified. These are the
only precepts in this kind of writing to be solie considered, the observation
whereof are in sort following by example to be delivered.

An Epistle Conciliatorie, written from one of good account, to one that is his
inferior.
AFter my very hartye commendations unto you. This bearer and my servant whom I
greatly credit, has signified unto me many matters tending to your great
commendation, the report whereof, I have often sithence heard confirmed by
others. And for as much as touching mine own condition, I have always been a
favorer o^ Arts, and entierly accounted of the singularity of any one
according to his worthiness, I have so much the more greatly desired your
acquaintance, as one whom willingly I would do good unto. Promisinge that if
at some convenient time I may enjoy the pleasure of your industry, and
knowledge, together with some continuance of your good company. I shall not
fail in as ample sort as I can to your full satisfaction and contentment to
requite it. Mean while I would gladlye be informed by the return of this
messenger, at what time I may expect to see you, according to which I will
appoint horses, and send some up to accompanye you. And so for this present do
bid you heartily farewell. From my house of N. this twentieth of April, etc.


SMall distinction needs in these kind of letters, for that the order of them
is different you see from the first observations. Only the parts mentioned in
the aduertisments, inducing the form thereof are herein specified. The
variety of which is more districtly tied to the present humor of the writer,
and the cause inducing the substance, then by any special direction. But now
to the next.

An example Conciliatorie, from one equal to an other.
THE universal report of your excellency, each where declared, has moved me
good M. N. not only to admire you for the same, but among a great many others,
that regard and especially do account of you, has induced me also hereby to
pray your acquaintance. I confess sir, sithence I first heard of you, I grew
even then very desirous to see and to know you, but being this other day in
company of sir T. P. I there understood how much for your singular virtue and
learning, both of the good Knight and Lady, you were faithfully commended, and
entierlie favored.

This considerate opinion of theirs, has in my speedy determination spurred
me forward, and for my first morninges exercise, caused me to salute you by
these letters, the rather for that I have sondrie times bin informed with what
joyful and friendly conceit, you do entertain the familiarity of every
gentleman. And albeit there is little desert in my self to acquire so much at
your hands, yet this one request upon your favor will I presume to make unto
you, that not only I may be entertained with you as one whom you may please
to like of, but such, and in that degree as of whom you will so greatly
reckon as to stand assured of. Little God knows rests in me to pleasure
you, (the worthiness whereof, pleased his goodness, were so well aunswerable
to your virtue) as effectually you might have power in whatsoever to command.
This one thing can I deliver of my self, that since I had first capacity to
decerne of men's conditions. I have always studied to honor the virtuous, and
evermore with reverence to entertain their actions, a favorer I have still
been of the learned, and a diligent regarder of their greatest excellencies,
such as in mind more then in wealth would wish to be reputed happy, and to
my uttermost power gladly accomplish what might be deemed most worthy. Such a
one if you vouchsafe to like of, I wholly yield my self unto you, expecting
nothing more then at your convenient leisure I might find occasion to see you.
Whereunto referring the residue of all my chief desires, I do for the present
cease to detain you. London this fourth of June etc.


TO these Epistles might be added two several aunsweres: In both of which
there is required a special and well demeaned modesty, in the one of humility
to be according to his better, in the other of courtesy to gratify his
equal, each of them containing, a submissiue execution of that, in either of
their faculties and professions simply to be attributed, the diversities of
both of them not impertinent to these our instructions, I have in sort
following put down to be red.

An Epistle Responsorie aunswering to the first of these letters.
IT may please your worship, I have received your courteous letters, and by the
same as also by the messenger have fully conceived of your favor and loving
intendment toward me, for all which I can but render to the same my most
humble and dutiful thanks. Touching my self, I very gladly wish that there
were any thing in me, whereof you might take pleasure, or my self be the
better enhabled wherein to do you service: Such as it is I humbly render unto
your best command, and do pray that in as good sort as willingly I do tender
it, you may please in like manner to accept and account of it. Your man can
witness, that as yet I have some earnest occasions for a while to deteine me,
who otherwise would forthwith be well contented to attend you. And were I not
thereunto especially enjoined as well by the countenance and cre^ite of him, to
whose liking I have for a while bestowed my self, the importunity of your
servant might happily have led me with him presently down into the Country.
It may please you Sir to pardon me for a while, one month shall be the farthest,
the term of which being expired, I thenceforward do remain to the command
of none so much as your worshipp, to whose good acceptaunce I eftsoons do
recommend my self in all reverent duty. London this of etc.


The Letter Responsorie aunswering to the latter Epistle.
MOst worthy gentleman, I have understood by your gentle and friendly letters,
not only how much I rest beholding to your own self, and good opinion of
me, but also to the courteous and gentle knight and my especial good La. to
each of whom above all others I have found my self indebted most deeply.
Many ways might I advertise you how much I have in conceit to thank both
them and you, which that my desires may appear aunswerable to your wishes I
do leave, till personally in as present haste as conveniently may be, I may
find opportunity to see you. I am not sir altogether ignorant of the good
parts which by some (unto your self well known) has been advertised
heretofore unto me, and for which I do most willingly embrace you, and
heartily wish of all others to see you.

Assuring you that you have but prevented me in this one courtesy, which
before my going out of town, I was vehemently persuaded to have tendered unto
you, wherein nevertheless I rest satisfied in that by one so well accomplished
as your self, I have herein been so farrefoorth convinced. My business here
with my L. rests I hope upon a present dispatch, and therefore do I reckon by
Gods grace within these very few days to visit you. Mean while confessing
how much I stand charged unto your self for this sole courtesy, I do pray
that unto the worshipful knight, and also to his good La. you will report my
humble duty. As you wished and required, I do hereby salute you, and so
promise in such matters always to account of you, viz, yours etc.


NOw after these Responsorie letters, each aunswering in ample sort the
others tendered courtesy, I think it meet to return again to the order of
these former Epistles. The nature of which seems not to retain any such
force whereby an inferior person may in the terms or order thereof, approach
to require an inducement of love or liking from one that is his better, for
that it appears being handled in the same kind, it should rather be deemed
Petitorie then otherwise, for somuche as it behooves in such a cause, wherein
the case so ^andeth, the terms to be far more submissiue and humble, then in
this Conciliatorie by the matter thereof may in any wise be permitted.

The second matter hereof is now Reconciliatorie, in which (as derived from
the other) we are intended to proceed. The matter hereof imports a
reconciliation to those from whom we acknowledge in some sort or other to
have been disseuered, contrary to the bond of friendship or duty that therein
might happily have been required, whether by our own default or by whose or
what defect, as by the circumstance of the action may therein be required. In
the framing of this Epistle we shall record with our selves, in what league,
amity, or duty, we before time stood bound to him to whom we study to
be reconciled, thereupon shall we according to the district observation at
that instant held of the same, study either to qualify, adnichilate, or
utterly to extinguish the cause of falling of, the diffeueraunce, or breach.
Then shall we desire for the considerations thereunto inducing us, to be
retained again in his woonted faucur or friendly acceptaunce. These as in the
example following may in like order be suited.

An example Reconciliatorie from one friend to another.
THe regard of our ancient amity and long continued acquaintance, Exordium.
wherein so firmly and many years we have bin knit togethers, will not permit
(my good D. that we should for one slender grudge, (rather by the malice and
despite of others enuieng our old friendship, then by any occasion of our
selves, in ill time suggested between us) we should in this sort be disseuered.
True it is, Proposition
that before this time the like breach, or any one thing near unto the same
could never divide us, Pleonasmus
but what (mischief) shall I now term it or imagine to be the occasion, that
in so unlooked time, and upon so unexpected a chance, should in this hateful
and vilde sort, give mean to untie us, between whom so great a league of
love, so long confirmed and approved liking, so many protestations and
obtestations, has long since passed, as by the force thereof might have
enjoined us never to have fallen to this variance. But what cannot envy do?
what is it that cruel detestable and inueterate malice cannot perform?
Credit me, my D. for my part I am sorry that euersolly so much maistered us, as
to hearken in any sort to the stirrers up of such and so cruel bitterness,
And as my self was the first that by admittaunce and allowance thereof, gave
the foremost onset, by means of which grew this discontenting and unkind
department between us: so will I not be with the last that shall endeavor
within our selves a novel and more assured reconcilement to the intent the
fruits of our unfeigned liking approouing by such means the more forcible,
may render unto all the world a sufficient testimony, how hard and difficult
a thing it is to part those, whom (but only death it self) no one thing
hereafter shall ever be able to drive in sunder. Epilogns.
Be only contented my D. once again, to reestablish that which being a
little untwisted can never wholly be broken. Thy known good will, and hearty
zeal unto me, assures me not to distrust the same at thy hands, which thou
shall ever find to be graffed within me. This evening by Gods grace I mean
at our lodging to see thee, whether, and to thy self I do most heartely
commend me, this etc.


THis Reconciliatorie being different from that other Conciliatorie Epistle,
by reason ye argument thereof tends to renew that, which formerly might by the
other be before entreated for, carries the effects thereof as well as it does
between equals) so from an inferior person to one who in reputation is
somewhat more then his better. Upon presumption of whose favor, or by
negligence of his own dealing, having thrown himself into some disgrace ^^ such
a party, he may by means herein offered, reconcile himself in any sort he
list of humility. To ye furtherance whereof this example following may be
considered.

An Epistle Reconciliatorie from an inferior person to one that is his better.
Pleases my honorable good L. It was given me to understand about two days
passed by M. R. that your L. should very hardy conceive of me, in that upon some
urgent occasion I delaieed to yield that testimony unto his cause, which in
equity and reason I ought to do: and the rather for that by your L. earnest
entreatie and request I was estsoones thereunto required. The griese was not
small I sustained thereby, in that having received so many and sondrie
benefits, by your honorable favor accomplished toward me, whereby diverse
ways I remain in duty and honesty charged during my life unto the same, that
by one bad supposall, untimely suggested unto your L. hearing, I should stand
on so great a hazard as the adventure or loss of your good opinion, the
recovery whereof (as I conie^ured) should ^resolutelye seem, for that only
cause to be opposed against me. Your L. does I hope remember, that in my last
speeches had with you about the same matter (albeit before that time I stood
on some terms, doubting the malicious dealinges of the adverse party otherwise
against me, in reuengment of my plain and honest testimony therein) yet at the
last was it concluded that I should gather together all the notes ministering
furtherance to the cause, and thereupon deliver my true and certain remembrance
on record, touching and concerning the same. What care I have fithence used in
the matter, and upon intelligence had with M. R. how vehemently then in
satisfaction of what might any ways content your L. and be furthering to his
right. I still prosecuted the uttermost effects thereof, I had rather himself
should deliver the^ I to become a reporter. In somuche as I well know (how ever
any others have miss-informed your L. against me, himself as a gentleman, will
yet upon his word assure the truth and certainty. I did I must confess at
the first use some delays in the immediate dispatche of the thing, but how and
in what manner and to what end and purpose, let him also relate. Your L. I hope
will therefore do me that right as not to be evil persuaded toward me in a
cause wherein I have upon your honorable assurance and command entered so
far forth into, as thereby I stand assured to have purchased unto my self
matter enough of hatred, and by those whom (having refused by my silence to
entertain as my assured friends) I have by such means enhabled sufficiently
to become my heavy and most bitter ennemies. The hatred of whom cannot unto
me any ways become so injurious as the ill conceit of your L. should redounde
to be of all others most grievous. For mine own part (so much do I stand on
the reverend regard and account I bear unto your L. as were it not I rest
persuaded that upon the equal deliverance conceived of my willing mind unto
your service, you would again be reconciled in favorable and good opinion
toward me. I should so far forth be discontented, in my imaginations, as
never could I be at atonement, with mine actions, wherein by the least spark
of negligence whatsoever, I might have ouerslipped any thing that should become
displeasing, or otherwise offensive to the same. Your L. wonted honor and
bounty gives me great expectation of the contrary, and mine innocence and
true report of master R. does also in some sort assure me. Whereupon remaining
as he that always thinks his life no better spent, then for and in your L.
utmost service to be continued, I humbly surcease this day of etc.


THe manner of these Epistles might in an other purpose then herein expressed,
be also applied, as being Reconciliatorie, in the behalf of some other to be
written, as occasion may be offered, but forasmuch, as they in that sort
being handled do, for the most part, fall into the Swasorie or Disswasorie
kind, in the order of which, their arguments are chiefly to be continued. I
deem it besides necessity, to write any example at all concerning them, for
that when any such shall be brought in question, the substance and conueyance of
the state and cause, may readily to the same be drawn out of the places sorted
unto each of those kinds, as in the discourse before, is at large remembered.
For proof whereof, let it be considered, that if by an Epistle of this title I
should endenour to reconcile a man to his wife, or a woman to her husband, a
servant to his master, or a master to his servant, the father and the
child, the friend to a friend, the neighbor to neighbor, or kinsman to
kindred: Needs must I for the compassing thereof show some reasons how and
which way to induce these, and therefro must I of necessity run into diverse
persuasions, in the quality whereof, by whatsoever action I go about to
transpose, the effects must needs be concluded. Suffiseth therefore ye for
these epistles I have delivered sufficiently, and heerewith will we made unto
the next, Epistles Petitorie.
which in order hereunto are Petitorie. And inasmuch as these Epistles are so
named, for the earnest Petition or request in every of them contained, and that
the variety of things are such to be demaundes, and men's conditions so diverse,
at whose hands or from whom the same are to be received, required or obtained,
it falls out by consequence that according thereunto, the manner of the
Epistle must needs also be diverse and variable. For some things there are
which favorably and with great indifferency, are oftentimes to be required,
and bestowed as council, aid, patronage, good speeches, natural care and
regard and such other like. Some also and such semblable persons, as for
which, or to whom, to ask or sue, a certain kind of shame, is in a manner
tied, viz. in craving, borrowing, importuning, charging, or to vehement
troubling. The style and order and delivery appertaining to either of these is
greatly different. Touching the generality of both, to either of them it is
requisite that in the Exordium, an endeavor be used whereby to adhibite unto us
the good will, favor, or good liking of him to whom we write. Next that therein
we proceed according to our acquaintance with the party, his estate credit, or
support whereby to pleasure us. Thirdly that the cause we take upon us to
prefer, be just, lawful, and honest. Fourthly that it be in his ability,
or power, to council, aid, protect, prefer or relieve us. Fifthly, the
order or means whereby the same may be wrought and accomplished. Sixthly, our
gratitude and remuneration, worthily tied to the thankeful acknowledgement or
requital of the same. In the first sort of these, the cause standing
favorable, or indifferent, we may the more bolder endeavor to produce or lay
forth the aptness or beseeming thereof. In the second: greater modesty, and
a more shamefast deliverance is to be retained, the preferring whereof would
best be by Insinuation the better by covert means to wade into the depth of
our Petition. In this place a more then ordinary bathfulnesse to be admitted,
which gives no small furtherance to every demand, as audacious and wanscot,
impudency on the other side returns the greatest impediment in any thing to
be obtained. For no man willingly would do benefit to such a one, which in
manner goes about as of duty and not of courtesy to exact the same, and
rather as a commander then crauer, would impudently thrust him self to the
obteining thereof. And because the whole course hereof observed by way of every
Petition, is by inference of many circumstances to be altogether determined,
the order as I have related unto you before, must be conveyed by places
Swasorie, resting very often in confirmation of ye honesty, goodness, lawfulnes,
and needfulnes of our petition. And if ye Exordium be happily framed of his
person to who^ we direct our letters, it shall not be amiss that therein we
briefly do capitulate some part of his virtues, courtesies, humanity, bounty,
readiness to comfort, pleasure, or dorelief unto any, whereby we may privately
draw his favor and good acceptance unto us, besides if he have made us before
time beholding unto him, we shall gladly acknowledge ye same, and declare ye
being already indebted, we study more thereby to yoke our selves unto him. If of
our own persons, the^ shall we lay open, we what great expectation and regard
we do in our conceits entertain the deserts and worthiness of such a one,
modestly preferring what in favor of him, and common and equal love, has
passed between us. If of the interchangeable love, liking, and courtesy
whilome resting between our predecessors or ancestors, then the weight and
force thereof we shall put forwards accordingly. If of the the person of our
adversary against whom we demand any assistance, favor, protection, or remedy,
we may infer (if any such be) ye common mislike of both of us toward him,
and how ill he has deserved at eythers hands, and thereupon require aid against
him. If of ye thing or matter it self, the same be to be carried, we shall show
the value, godliness, goodness or common benefit of the same, that the matter is
unto him easy, to vsof great importance, and if without arrogancy it may be
done, we may enforce some occasions of benefit or other contentment thenceforth
to happen unto him. And if any discommoditie do happily seem to appear in
laying open the same, the likelihoode whereof may either alienate his mind, or
withdraw his assistaunce or other liking from us. that shall we either study
to extinguish or otherwise, as much as we may to qualify or avoid: By such
kind of means, behooves we prepare our selves to the delivery of our
Petition, which being in as apt and plain terms as may be laid open, we shall
by such inforcements (as in moving affections hereunto, may be deemed
pertinent) quickly and with great facility procure to be effected.

An example of an Epistle Petitorie in a cause indifferent.
Exordium.
THE study and great desire wherewith (Sir) I see you bent continually, to the
universal aid and benefit of all men, and for which to your great praise
you have generally so well deserved, and deservedly are every where reputed,
has moved me in the behalf of this poor man to become a Peticioner unto you.
About two months since, Narratio cum Propositione.
he had dealinges with a neighbor of yours touching a farm which he was
for term of years to take at his hands, and notwithstanding a promise and
grant thereof to this bearer made, in consideration whereof, he paid him
then in hand a good part of his money) the injurious cormorant glutting himself
with extorting from the poverty of this and many others, has sithence that,
not only passed a demise as his act and deed in writing to an other, but goes
about to defraud the poor foul of his money, the some whereof is the whole
patrimony, riches, and stock of himself, his poor wife and familye. And for
somuche as without the countenance of some one favoring the poormans right, he
is like to be ouerborn with the weight of the other, and so consequently to be
undone. Petition.
I have thought good to make thus bold to request your lawful favor in his
furtheraunce, that by your authority and means, some honest satisfaction and
end may to his behoof be performed, You shall do therein an act most honest
and laudable, Honesty of request.
dealyng for such a one, for the procuring of whose right, his hearty prayers
for your safety shall witness well the comfort you shall do him therein.
The mean to perform the same.
I am persuaded your speech and aid may herein prevail very much, as a thing
which with great facility you may cause to be dispatched. Remuneration.
And for my self, as I shall at no time rest unmindful of my request
tendered unto you herein, so shall I not fail in what I may to the utmost of my
power to satisfy you, by whatsoever possible requital. And even so with my
hearty commendations, I do bid you most heartily farewell: R. this twelfth of
April. etc.


THis Epistle notwithstanding the same is written in favor of an other, yet is
it Petitorie, and retains the parts thereof throughout, for in the first,
being the Exordium, the matter of the same is drawn out of the person of him
to whom it passes, by preferring his care and willingness to do good. Then
the Narration and Proposition setting forth the occasion of the demand. The
Petition next, the Honesty and goodness thereof, in respect the deed cannot be
but praise worthy, that is occupied in relieuing the poor, and furtheraunce
of the right. Then the Possibility and mean delivered to compass the same,
the one liable to his authority, the other to his travail. Lastly a
remuneration, by declaration of good acceptance and promise of requital. The
like order hereof is generally to be entertained through out all the residue of
these Epistles, whose observation in the other examples shall more particularly
be effected.

An example Petitorie in the nature of Reconciliatorie, from a son to his
displeased father.
Narratio.
IF floudes of tears sealed with hard and bitter sighs, if continual sorrow
and never ceasing care, if consuming griefs not of a diseased body, but of a
pestered mind, might have rendered sufficient and assured testimony, whereby
to persuade your lade^ ears surcharged by this time with the weight of my
incessaunt and continual cries: the intolerable woes wherein I live, secluded
from the right and name of a son, and barred quite from the sweet and gentle
term of a loving and kind father, had ere this time given mean of recovery
to my daunted and dismayed spirits, and kindled in me some wan hope, one day
to have found an hour so happy, wherein by a right conceit conceived of my
unkindly pleasures, or convinced by the importunity of those who have pitied
my evils, your natural care might in some sort or other have been renewed, to
the redress of all my forewearied and heavy groaning mischiefs. But
unfortunate as I am, that for all the humble suite so many times presented in
these and such like blubbered lines, Propositio.
so hardened is the mind of him I write unto, that whilome having been a dear
and loving Parents I may not heerin dare to tender, or so much as once put
forward unto him the appellation of a gracious and pitiful father. If it have
so pleased unto your gravity, Distributio.
in such severe manner still to deal with me, and that the hateful show of my
il deserts, is yet become of so loathed and detestable recordation, in this
very season unto you: then (as before time I eftsoons have done) I do
confess my letters untimely ly also at this instant to have approached unto
you. But if the long detained grace, Parenthesis.
by whose heavy want (your son might I say?) nay the forlorn and despised
issue of your aged years* (for so am I now forced to say) is perforce driven
almost into a desperate conceit and mislike of his living, may by the best
spark of expectation, be annexed to the most vehement effects, of his
prostrate and meekest submission, then groueling upon the lowest ground,
Petitio.
and humbling my highest imaginations to the deepest bottom, wherein your
implacable displeasures have hitherto been covered, as meekely and with as
penitent speches, as any grieved and passionate mind can utter. I do beseech
you sir, that at the last, you will receive (not into your accustomed favor)
but to your common and ordinary liking, the most disgraced of all your
Children, and pardoning the disobedience wherein he dared once so far forth
to provoke against him, the weight of your known anger, vouchsafe he may once
again be numbered among your famelie, though not partaking with your Children.

This sole benefit and last request if my burdened soul may obtain at your
hands, happilye I may then live, as comforted by the hope of that whereunto a
buzied and careful endeavor may once peradventure enhable me, otherwise, dyeng
in the ouerflowing matter of my desperate and continued griefs. I pray at Gods
hands that I may obtain that by mercy, which cruel destiny in my life
time could never win unto me, Peroratio.
by all possible entreaty. My submissiue duty aunswerable to the regarded
place of your fatherly authority, compels me to attend with all
humbleness the resolution of your clemency* In the hope whereof, resting my
decayed and ouerwearied imaginations. I live till the receite of your known
liking do assertaine, in what sort may please you to repute me.


THe style of this Epistle is vehement, because the passions of him from whence
it came were vehement, and is deducted as you see from the nature of
Reconciliatorie, which as well for the submissiue and lowest terms it bears,
as also for the urgent petition therein contained, I have rather chosen to
place among the Petitorie. The part of Honest herein delivered, is passed in
words meckest and of great obedience, wherein he studieth by all possibility
to mitigate toward himself, the too much severity of his father. The
Exordium is carried by Insinuation, expressing the vehement effects and
surcharged conceits of a mind more than ordinarily grieved. The Possibility
rests in the father, which commonly by nature is with some more facility
then estraunged difficulty, entreated toward his son. The Mean to
compass it, is his fatherly instinct, which by charged authority affects
nothing so much as obedience of his Children. Thus are the places required
herein, in sort as you see performed. And for because within any one title,
there is no one thing ^ffoording matter more plentiful, or with use more
common frequented, then this Petitorie kind, (Insomuche as whatsoever
contains any special or sole request in the substance thereof to be
accomplished, is hereunder concluded) I will sort you down so many examples
of all sorts, as that there shall not fail herein wherewith sufficiently to
instruct whatsoever in the like occasion is or ought to be required.

An Epistle Petitorie, wherein is craved travail and council to be assistant
upon urgent occasion.
AS one greatly emboldened by the forwardnes of your wonted courtesy and
liking, Exordium.
ever bent toward me. I have dared (Sir) once again upon presumption of the
like, hereby to entreat you, wherein you may see in what degree of affection I
do entertain you, in that not contented, I have already so many and so
oftentimes used you. I do by such means endeavor solie to make my self wholly
and to none other so much as beholding unto you. My man has returned me from
London, how by more then common celeritie I have in my suit been prevented by
my adversary, Narratio.
whereby it is like, my cause standing upon so great a hazard, it will go
very hard with me. Now if your wonted council, Propositio.
and friendly assistaunce be not speedely aiding, both the hope of benefit,
charge, and expense thereof will be lost utterly. In regard whereof, these may
be in as earnest manner as is possible to entreat you, Petitio.
that upon the attendance of my man, I may (as wontedly) use you. Your council
joined with a little travail may greatly profit me, Mean of performance.
and now more then at any time else exceedingly pleasure me. Wherein if it may
please you to yoke me farther unto you by the weight of your courtesy: I shall
not only endeavor by all possibility to requite it, Remuneration.
but also your self shall not fail at any time to find such a one of me,
as of whose travail, industry, or what other ability to pleasure you, you may
account assuredly. I have by certain other letters moved my L. to have
favorable consideration touching me, which as I am infourmed, his L. has.
What else to be performed herein, my man shall make known unto you. And thus
doubting as little of your friendship herein, Peroratio.
as of mine own thankful disposition, pressed always to the uttermost to
gratify you. I do heartily bid you fare well D. this of, etc.


An other of the same.
Petitio.
SIR I am so bold in my great necessity, under assurance of your
forwardness to do me good, to entreat your especial aid and furtheraunce
in two things, the one whereof this bearer shall instruct you in, the other
your self can best tell, for that I made you at my last speech acquainted with
the same. Both of which consisting in your labor and devise, I am of opinion
that none then your self can fit the occasion better. And truly such is the
force of imprisonment, Mean of performance.
as contrary to that you have wontedlye known in me, my understanding is
quite decayed, and forworne with my liberty, and where the spirits are so
destuned, it must needs follow, the memory can sound nothing but discordes.

Possibility.
In fine, sir it is in you to do me good, and to make me by this only action
for ever beholding unto you, wherein if I may so far forth presume of your
fidelity, Remuneration.
assure your self, that if ever God give me liberty, A. C. to none so much
as to you shall be yoked in courtesy. Good M. D. the matter hereof requires
some have, whereunto I most heartily entreat you. Fare ye well this of, etc.


A letter Responsorie to the same.
GOod M. C. needles were it you should entreat me to that, whereunto you
have found me always most willing, and such whom with small persuasions you
may induce to a far greater matter, then what in your last request you have so
earnestly desired. The messenger I have appointed to morrow morning to return
again to my lodging, at which time I will not fail to finishe, what in the
best sort I can conceive to be unto your occasions most furthering. Hard will
it be for me to accomplish that, wherein your self may be found so
imperfect, for that the dullest conceit forged from the most distempered of
your imaginations, can not but sound far better tunes, then the ripest of my
invention is any ways able to utter. Nevertheless, such as it is, or so
much as (by dislike of your own) you find mean to account of, that will I
prepare to your view, and put forward to your good speed, thinking it better by
deliuerye of a gross devise to satisfy the demand of a friend, then by
concealing the simplicity thereof to be censured by discourtesie. In
conclusion it is (sir) lawful for you to use the uttermost, and fittest to our
confirmed league of amitye, that (in whatsoever) you should approone me,
wherein I desire you conceive no more, then such as I entende to become, and
you shall assuredly find me viz. yours, etc.


HEre must I note unto you the last of these Epistles Petitorie, in which is
neither Exordium nor Narration, but foremost of all the peticion, and
afterward the parts following, the like whereof you may perchance find
hereafter. For that where practice and skill has sufficiently enabled a man to
write well, there is no necessity that such should be tied to rule, who being
of sufficient knowledge and capacity, are able to decerne what is meetest, and
accordinglye to direct the square of their own doings, sometimes one way,
sometimes an other, as in the intendment thereof, may to the present occasion
seem convenient and readtest. And as in this one letter, so may the learner
light upon many others, being different also from the observation herein
delivered, and sometimes abruptly entering into the matter without any
limitation at all, one other example whereof shall be next hereunto delivered,
the first beginning of which, declares the mean of accomplishment of the
request, before the peticion declared, whereinto by imitation the unskillful
may not rashlye enter, without good aduisement what in the performance thereof
may be chiefly considered. The Method of which notwithstanding, is in this
sort pursued.

An example Petitorie, concluding a brief request and courteous remembrance
of a thing before time promised.
NOW is the time (wherein if your pleasure be) you may perform what erst you
have promised. Mean of accomplishment.
I therefore desire you as heartily as I may, Petition.
that your intent being to do me good, you will now execute the same. And
albeit I dout not of your willingness herin, Acknowledgment of courtesy.
whose courtesy has not been strange toward me* yet rather enforced by
mine own necessity, and continual remembrance of my unprovided estate, I
prepare these lines, solicitors of your expected promise, which bearing in
their front a token of opportunity, would pray you not to let slip occasion,
but with as much speed as willingness to accomplish the same. Remuneration.
Remembering how many ways I am beholding unto you, I remain in account of
your courtesies, rather studious to think on them, then any ways able to
requite them. etc.


Another example of the like effect.
EVen as a bold beggar, the more he is relieved, Exordium of a simile.
the more he still preasseth forward upon the bounty of those, whom he
supposes to favor him: so fares it with me, who having eftsoon enjoyed your
travail to my no small benefit, am nevertheless so shameless as still to
importune you in the same. I have good M. G. I confess, Propositio.
by your good means received sondrie favors at the hands of my L. which I
can not, Acknowledgment of courtesy.
nor ever shall be able to requite unto you, the matter of my suit
notwithstanding hitherto depending before his honor, I neither can or may so
far forth withdraw my self, but I must needs now and then solicit you, as
the Gent. by whose only courtesy and perseueraunce in wonted care and good
affection toward me I do live, Remuneration.
and so living, continue my days and years with such assured respect, as
he that has sworn and vowed in him self never to forget you. It does sir so
much stand me upon the procuring of his L. letter in my behalf, for the
indifferent trial and hearing of my cause, Necessity of the matter.
as without (in special and earnest speeches the same be directed form to
the Justices and Commissioners). I am in great despair how the case will go
with me. It is you therefore good M. G. that must help me herein, and by your
only means I must be warraunted in this action, the intendement whereof
furthering so much unto right and cause of equity as it does, I hope his L.
upon your mocion will the easelier condescend unto. This is it that I require
at your hands, Peroratio.
and to the speedy dispatch whereof I may not cease to importune you. Whereon
concluding for the present, I do hartelye bid you farewell, etc.


Another of the same.
GOod M. D. I am more beholding unto you then I can well recount,
Acknowledgement of courtesy.
for the great pains and loving endeavor, wherein you have travailed about my
redemption as I may term it, which although it has wrought in effect my
assurance, yet is there somewhat more to be added according to my friends
direction, as by this enclosed you may at large perceive. Petition.
Wherefore sir I beseech you (as before) think it no pains to make a good
end of that which you have so well begun.

My request is, that you will now use this discretion for me, Mean of
accomplishment.
wherewith so many times you have stood me in stead, I mean in conference
with such persons, whose names herein shall be unto you delivered. Your
dealing circumspectlye with the^ handled (as no doubt you can) shall greatly
avail to my speedye dispatch. Monday is the day wherein I am like to win the
goal, which without you I shall never attain vnto^* for which your friendly
action, Remuneration.
both in this, and that already done, I vow to God while I shall live, to be
whole at your c^omaundement, I have sent this bearer to attend you to those
places, and therewith my most hearty commendations unto your self and your
bedfellow, whom I pray you to thank for her courtesy, Greetinges.
and let her understand, that if ever I shall have libe^ty, I will be more
thankful, then either my words can import, or at this instant is in my power
to manifest. Expecting nevertheless, as much by you to be satisfied, as if
there were in me to be hoped a greater recompense. Secrecy.
I pray you sir acquaint not this bearer with the cause, who thereunto is as
yet a stranger, and so I mean shall continue, notwithstanding I do now use
his travail for the present turn. My last conclusion requires your
convenient have, Dispatch.
for the performance of this occasion, in the consideration whereof, I pray
you to measure me as your most regarded friend, who in all actions whatsoever
shall be still bent to the beck of your assured liking, etc.


MUch more might be handled in this kind, the method whereof is one of the
most ordinarye of any sorts of Letters that are invited, for that the
greatest number of directions are commonly concluded in this matter, the
requests whereof doc either specially concern the writer, or are otherwise to
be respected in the behalf of some other. The occasion of which has carried
herein the plenty of so many examples, that by manifesting the diversities of
their orders and uses, the learner might not want wherein to be directed, and
choice of variety wherewith to be delighted. Now besides these hereby already
delivered, there are letters also might besuted under this form, which from
noble men or others, are many times written in favor of sundry persons,
containing requests in their behalfes to be performed, which notwithstanding
the difference of estates, in that the same do for the most part pass unto
their inferiors, yet seems the nature thereof to be Petitorie, but in a
different order of these to be altogether pursued. Insomuch as neither agrees
it, to use like circumstaunces of humility and entreatie, nor of pleasures or
courtesy, as in the other are required: but rather a necessary supposall and
assurance of their demaundes to be hearkened unto, in respect that of their
honors, reputations, or credites, it is intended they will require nothing,
but what with reasonable tolleration may be liked of. But in truth Hold the use
of such kind of directions in choice of both, rather pertinent unto the title
Commendatorie, for that whatsoever is therein written, in favor either of the
person or of the cause, may in respect of the honor or reputation from whom
they come, be better deemed in sort of a courteous demand, to recommend the
regard of the party or thing spoken of, then by the submissiue title of a
matter craved, or by any order of humility otherwise to be sought for, for
these causes I have thought meet therefore to adioyne immediately hereunto, the
same Epistles Commendatorie, Epistles commendatorie.
being so nearelye affined with those of Petitorie as they are. To these
Epistles belongs diligent animaduersion, that (for as much as in them the
parts both Demonstratiue and Deliberatiue are used, as well in describing and
persuading what in the person or action is either to be liked or commended) we
continue not over much upon either of the twain, especially writing to such a
one, who being so far before us, our selves may also seem in some sort to
depend upon, but with such brevity to carry the force thereof, as it may
thoroughly appear the weight of our speeches, rather to stand as a testimony
of that we know or conceive, then a disputation of a matter or thing like to
be. The places appertaining unto the kinds hereof, are altogether as in the
Petitorie are already declared, chieflye when the same, intends to a cause by
writing preferred to be favored. But if the Epistle do concern the person of
any one to be respected, we must beware that in the credible delivery of
whatsoever occasion tendinge to his praise of matter of preferment, we do the
same either by warrant of our own knowledge, or by such certain report of
others, whose assured opinion can not be misled in concluding the action. And
otherwise, if neither of these do in truth fall out to be certified, then shall
we show what informacion we have besides our own conceit, or peradventure no
other assurance at all but our own simple liking. Peticions also are
frequented in requiring favor to these causes, wherein stands in biest
regard the state, countenance or authority of him, from whom the letter is
framed, who accordingly thereunto may desire, that the rather at his request, or
upon his suit, or for his sake, or in regard of his liking, the person may be
accounted of, or the action furthered. Besides it may be added to the increase
of a more speedy perfourmance, the love (if any be, or occasion thereunto
sorting) we owe to him we commend, or in whose favor we write, either solie for
himself, or conuaied from his friends, his parents, the consideration of his
charge of wife, children, or servants, the wrong offered, benefit to be
attained, or whatsoever other matter to be deemed requisite or convenient. Now
from whence or out of what instigations, the matter of such commendation is to
be drawn, you have in the general chapters of this book already at large.
The circumstaunces of which, and whatsoever else hereby forewarned, shall in the
ensuing examples be more at large delivered.

An example Commendatorie, wherein is recommended to a noble man from his
inferior, the conditions and behavior of a Person.
Narratio.
IT may please your good L. This Gent. the bearer hereeof, with whom a long
time I have been acquainted, and of his qualities and good behavior have had
sound and large experiment, having been a good time a suitor unto me to move
his preferment unto your L. service. Recommendation.
I have now at the last co^discended unto, as well for that I know your L. to be
now presentlye disfurnished of such a one, as also that there shall hardly be
preferred upon a soden any one so meet as him self to supplye that place. And
thus much by your L. pardon and allowaunce date I assure unto you, Praise of
the party.
that if it may please you, in credit of my simple knowledge and opinion to
employ him, you shall find that besides he is by parentage descended from
such, as of whom I know your L. will very well account of, he is also
learned, discreet, sober, wise and moderate in all his actions, of great
secrecy and most assured trust, governed in all companies accordingly, finally
a man so meet unto your L. and for this present turn so apt and necessary, as
I can not easily imagine how you may be served better. Pleases your L. the
rather for the great good will I bear him, Petitio.
and hearty well wishing I owe unto him, to accept, employe, and account of him,
I nothing doubt but your L. having by such means given credit to my choice,
shall find him such, as for whose good service besides your honorable account
toward him, Peroratio.
you shall have further occasion to think well of me for him. Whereof nothing
doubting upon your admittaunce once passed, I do refer both him and my self in
all humblenes to your best and most favorable opinion, from my house in B. this
of, etc.


A letter Responsorie to the same.
AFter my very hearty commendations unto you. Sithence the receipt of your last
letters and recommendacion of P. B. into my service, I have had small occasion
either to write or send unto you till this present. And for so much as upon
your certain notice delivered unto me in favor of his preferment, I held my
self so well assured in all things of his behavior, as I doubted not
thereupon to receive him in place of greatest fidelity, and with undoubted
affiaunce to retain him: I have thought good hereby to let you to understand,
what great pleasure I have taken in his diligent attendaunce, assuringe you
that for many unexpected qualities, which I have approved to be in him, I do
wonderfully well like of him, and that with so good affection, as I intend not
to omit any thing that may tend to his adua^cement. In beholding him often
times me thinks he many ways does resemble his father, who in sound troth,
I do suppose might have been entertained with the best for his well deserving.
This bearer shall inform you of some especial causes, concerning my affairs
in the country, who^ I do pray you to confer with, and to afford your
travail for his present dispatch, which I will not fail heartily to requite
unto you. For your care had of my wants, and diligent supply of such a one I do
many times thank you, and have promised in my self for the same to becomme a
debtor unto you. And even so I do bid you heartily farewell. From the Court this
of, etc.


An other Epistle Commendatorie, of the sort before delivered.
Narratio.
MY very good L. I am informed by this Gentl. the bearer hereof, that by means
of one of your Chaplins, a motion has been made of his preferment unto your
L. service. And for so much as those his good friends are not now in town,
Propositio.
who in respect of their account with your L. might stand him in very good
stead: I understanding his willing mind and great desire thereunto (for that I
wish very well unto his advancement) have taken upon me hereby to entreat
(albeit I may not presume so far, as to prefer a man unto your L.) that it
may yet please you, upon my speeches to have the better liking of him.
Recommendation.
Assuring your L. that both by the credit of my La. F.M. who upon very good
conceit toward him wished his preferment, with her late deceased brother and
last L. C. and also by the knowledge my self have had of him, and others
besides, whom your L. has in special and choice regard, he is one so
sufficient, and every way so well furnished to do service to any honorable
personage, as by trial and proof made of whose good parts and behavior, your
L. shall not reap occasion of ill conceit, to whom soever have undertaken to
prefer him unto you. And if it shall notwithstanding seem farther convenient
unto your L. to make stay of his acceptaunce, Petition.
for some private causes he thereto unsatisfied, I shall yet in his behalf
nevertheless become thus far a suitor unto your L. that the rather at this my
earnest peticion it may please the same, to repute the knowledge hereby
delivered, in so good and assured account, as it may becomme a speedier mean
the better to induce your L. unto his good liking. For the conceit whereof I
shall think my self, as in many other occasions besides, Peroratio.
unto your honorable opinion most deeply beholden. In acknowledgment of which,
and respect of my humble and dutiful regard to the same, I do now and
evermore remain your L. etc.


THese two examples Commendatorie, are concluded to one effect, the foremost
whereof with little alteration, may become a president for any recommendation,
whether it be to favor, friendship, choice, or account, and not unto service
at all, for that herein is showed, in what sort men for their virtues may be
recommended. Now if there be any other particular occasion in the person,
besides these inducing matter of good liking, the same in place and stead of
the other, or together with the other may be then alleged, and the course
herein delivered at all times indifferently to be observed. And as these are
from inferior persons directed unto their superiors: so will we sort out some
others, that from noble men in like sort have been passed to their inferiors,
examples whereof are in like manner hereunto annexed.

An example Commendatorie, from a Noble man to his inferior, wherein one is
recommended to an office.
Narratio.
AFter my very hartye commendations unto you, where I am given to understand
that you are in election, and it is also very likely you shall be pricked by
her majesty, hie Sheriff for this year, of the Counties of Sussex and Surr.
Propositio
And that this Gent. the bearer hereof, is one whom for many respects I do
greatly favor, and for his learning, skill, and honest usage, have long time
used and reputed of. I have thought good by these my letters (if it so happen
you shall this year be named thereunto) to recommend his allowaunce also to
be admitted your vnder-sheriffe, Recommendation.
putting unto you such good and reasonable security as appertains for
discharge of the said office. And hereby also most instantly to pray you,
Petition.
that the rather for my sake, and for the especial choice and reconing I have
ever made of him, you will now before hand make certain acceptaunce of his
skill, by refusal of whatsoever other that may be recommended unto you for
the exercise of the same office, Peroratio.
assuring you for that I have well known and approved to be in him, you shall
be so well furnished, as you would wish. And besides in that you have gratified
me herein, I shall not fail in any sort I may to requite it. And even so I
bid you heartily farewell.


HErein is the honor and nobility of the personage greatly to be respected,
who by so much the more his estate countenance, or authority requires it, by
so much the less may it be considered, that in the inviting of these Letters,
he should with over large entreaty be charged, but rather with fewer speeches
and less circumstaunces to demand what he purposes. The conformity whereof
may be gathered out of the examples ensuing, according whereunto, he in whose
favor such kind of letters are to be directed, especially if the invention
being of his own procurement be brought to be signed) to take heed that the
regard of his honor and calling, in whose name the letter passes, be not by
too great humility of terms in any sort misprised.

An Epistle Commendatorie from a noble man, in preferment of his servant.
AFter my very hearty commendations unto you. Narratio.
This bearer having of long time continued in my service, and therein at al
times honestly, faithfully, and carefully behaved him self. Recommendation.
I have thought good herby to recommend unto your patronage. Propositio
And for as much as by reason of your office of Lord governor of V. in her
majesty's realm of Irelande, I am informed there are many offices and places
of great commodity remaining in your gift, upon your followers to be bestowed,
and that himself is also therewithal so greatly desirous in that kind of
service to be employed. Petition.
I do most heartily pray you, that you will not only for my sake be contented
to receive him into your service, but also in favor thereof and my great good
liking toward him, you will in any place of preferment about you, do him
that benefit and furtheraunce, as to one whom you wish thoroughly well unto, you
would willingly have performed. Remuneration.
Herein if my request may prevail, and that I may hereafter understand of
your loving care and good endeavor toward him, I shall find my self both
greatly occasioned to thank you, and in like manner, in whatsoever you shall
have mean to use me, be most willing to requite you. Peroratio.
And thus nothing doubting of your forwardnes herein, I do for the present bid
you hartelye well to fare. At the Court this day of, etc.


An other example, wherein is recommended the cause, and speedy furtheraunce of
justice.
Narratio.
AFter my hearty commendations unto your L. where I have been informed by this
bearer, being a poor tenant of mine, of a certain cause of his depending
before you in her majesty's court of kings benche, and that after many
thwartinges and evil practizes of his adversary, the matter is now driven to
an issue, and trial ready to pass thereon, from the benefit whereof by
corruption of some kind of person^, he has these three terms passed ben
already detained, to his great hinderaunce, and almost utter undoing. I have
thought good upon his humble suit to move your L. Recommendation.
in his behalf, and to pray you that at my instance, you will at some
convenient leisure examine the state of his matter, and being informed thereof
at large, Petition.
do him that speedy favor in justice and right, as he may not any longer time
therein be deferred, but that notwithstanding any cavil or objection
thereunto hindering, he may before this term passed in any wise have a trial.
In accomplishment whereof besides that you shall greatly satisfy me in respect
of the poor man's right, whereunto I wish great regard to be given, you may
also perform a deed so charitable, as whereby you shall perpetually bind him
his poor wife and children continually to pray for you. Peroratio
And albeit I nothing doubt herein your great willingness and voluntary
disposition to the same, yet that by reason of my request, the matter with more
diligence may be harkened unto, I eftsoons pray, and therewith hartelye do
bid your L. fare well this of etc.


TO al these examples Commendatorie, belongs three especial sorts of
letters Responsorie, in which is either flatly denied, absolutely allowed or
doubtfully accepted: What by force of those Epistles are seuerallye commended.
Of either of these suits I have thought good to to set down some directions,
the diversities whereof, at the choice of him that searches the same, may
according to his present humor be either rejected or followed.

An example Responsorie wherein is denied what in the foremost directions may be
recommended.
Pleases your good L. I received your favorable Letters and commendation
given in the behalf of M, L. with whom having had conference at large, I do
find nothing less, then what by your L. was of him delivered, and in truth it
does not a little discontent me, that as well in re guard of your honorable and
earnest demand made in his favor, as also that by many great and urgent
respects, I stand so deeply charged as I do unto your L. I cannot
nevertheless herein perform what I would. For that (besides it is yet
doutful whether I shall be to the same place appointed by her Majesty or no) if
I be chosen Shiriffe, I have two years since given my word and assured
promise to my Lord of L. that I shall then accept of such a one to the exercise
of the under Shiriffewicke, as shall by him unto me be preferred, According unto
which standing now in election for this year as I do, I am and ever sithence
have been yearly solicited to the self same purpose. Whereof I thought it my
duty to advertise your L. by these, most humbly craving pardon of the same,
in that I may not as I would, herein satisfy your urgent and vehement
request. Being as greatly discomfited in my thoughts, that I cannot now
perform what I would, as very unwillingly I am sequestered from the
entertainment of so discreet and well governed a Gentleman, as by your L. has
bin so especially recommended. Whereof instantly cyruing at your L. hands,
your good allowance and liking, I do with all humility take my leave This x.
of Mouember. etc.


An other Letter Responsorie wherein consent and allowance is given to the
matter required.
MY humble duty remembered unto your good. L. The Letters directed unto me from
the same, together with the gentleman in whose favor they were assigned, I have
entertained with regard, and accounted of with special liking. And so much the
more welcome were they, and by so much the greater do I repute my self honored,
in that it pleased your L. to make so good reckoning of me, as to prefer such
a one to so mean a place of service, as of whom you esteemed in so large and
especial account. Touching my self, your L. doubts not I hope, but that of
the least of yours I would have that especial choice, that thereunto may be
deemed incidente or any ways required, the effects whereof you shall have
aproued in this on, that for and in the zeal I bear unto your H. I will both
repute of, and favor him, besides what other advancement or preferment his
own deserts, or my aid may presently bring unto him, he shall at all times
hereafter become asserteined of, and in purpose most assured at my hands to
enioie it. Praying your L. in all other things as farrefoorth to stand my
gracious and favorable good L. as herein I shall not fail to accomplish, what
to the uttermost may be adjudged meetest and convenient. And herewith
beseeching the Almighty to have your L. in his eternal protection, I do in
all humblenes take my leave from, R. the seventh of August, etc.


The third Epistle Responsorie, wherein is doubtfully allowed or accepted of,
what to the same was most recommended.
MY Singular and especial good L. I have understood by your late letters, of
a certain fained and untrue suggestion, delivered by one of your L. tenaunts,
against the proceedings to him tendered and suppozed to be in this court,
according whereunto (albeit I was before time, not altogether unacquainted with
the clamarous condition of the party) yet did I nevertheless, as by your L.
was enjoined, examine at lardge the circumstances of the cause, and for the
better satisfaction of your L. have determined herewith to set down the truth
and certainty of the same. This R.L. whom your L. terms to be a very poor
man, is not (as in simple show he makes himself apparently to be) but is
rather such a one, as from whom (being narrowely sifted) your L. might sooner
draw a hundred pound of his money, then half an inche breadth of his honesty.
The argument whereof in nothing so much appears as in this one action, wherein
against a poor man in deed, he has very injuriously behaved himself, and
having extorded from him this bond now in suit (upon some conclusion, though
no good consideration at all) of the sum of one hundredth pound, goes about
upon a nice quillet in the condition, to prosecute the forfeyture of the same,
which in deed, by the district words of the writing, seems utterly to be
forfeyted. For relief whereof, his adversary complained in the Chauncerie, by
reason of the prosecution of which Bil, and notice perticularlie thereof given
to my L. Chauncellor, the said R.H. having diverse times agreed to comprimit
the matter, and yet gredie as it seems to obtain the forfeiture, still
cries on for trial, whilst the matter is still in debaring, for which cause
the same hitherto has only, and not otherwise been delayed. And forasmuch as
sithence your L. Letters received, my self very earnestly have traueiled to
make some conscionable and quiet end between him and his adversary, yet will
the same in no wise on his part be assented unto, by occasion whereof the
extremity of the law being very like to proceed, he is the next Term
without further delaie to obtain a judgment, and so the poor man on the
otherside, to be utterly injured: I thought it not amiss in aduertising the
substance here of unto your good L. to pray the same by your honorable
speches in credit of what here delivered, to procure the said R.H, to assent
to some reasonable order. So doing, what in conscience the poor man is then
liable to pay, in respect of the others charges, and purchase of his own
neglige^ces. I hold not to extreme to be out of the said bond deducted, because
in law he was something charged, though in equity otherwise he ought to have
bin cleerelie acquitted. Thus in discharge of my conscience herein, having so
much delivered unto your good L. I do recommend the honor and estate of the
same to the protection of the Almighty. London, this xiii. of May, etc.


NOW after all these Epistles, let us enter into one strange Commendatorie
kind, somewhat different from the order of the rest, being such, wherein the
party directing the same, being somewhat scant in delivery of ouerlarge and
too credible speeches, thought good to mittigate the force of the same by the
very parts of extremity it self, wherein of a merry conceit or some other
pleasant humor, he appears very unwilling to flatter, in reciting the
example whereof, because with many tedious precepts I have now a good while
wearied the reader. I may peradventure occasion some matter of recreation,
which by the single show therein gathered, appears in sort following to
have been performed.

A Letter Commendatorie pleasantly conceited in preferring an unprofitable
servant.
SIr I do send unto your view the bearer hereof (a man shaped as you see, and
as bold in condition as he appears in show) whom by all the superfluities of
summer ale, that has wrought in his giddie brain, I have been requested to
commend unto you. And in as much as in putting forward so unworthy a worthy, in
substance of so incredible allowance, it something behooves I hide not the
single gifts which by great search in many a good Hostrie, Tavern, and
Alehouse, he has by long travel and drowsy experience ere this time gained,
to his insupportable credence, I shall not spare in some sort to signify unto
you, what in regard of all these I am led to conjecture. Truth is Sir that he
is very well studied in the mystery of maltwormes, and for his peculiar skill
in decerning the nappie taste by the nutbrowne color of seller ale in a
frostie morning, he is become a sworn brother of the ragmans number, and
thereby stands enjoined never to wear furs or other linning in the coldest
winter, but only the warmth of the good ale which inwardly must harten him:
besides Sir, if you have occasion to credit him with a small parcel of money
in dispatche of a iourny, do but say the word, that it shall once lie in his
charge, and you may stand assured, that it shall be laid up so safe, as any
liquor in the world can safe conduct it from his belly. Take no care for your
kitchen, buttrie, or larder, for once a day he loves to see all clean before
him, Little apparel will serve him, for his liueries ensue weekly, out of the
brewers meshfat. His lodging he recks not, the chimny store, and billets ends
serve for fetherbed and coueringes. When you have most need of him, you shall
always be sure to go without him: if you delight in a pigs-nie, you may by
receiving of him, become sure of a hogshead. Great store of small liking you
happily may have to him, we know not what wonders the world may rend out, for
nothing is impossible where al things may be compassed. It may please you for
recreations sake to look upon him so you be not in case to surfeit, look what
ill liking you conceive, report back again I pray you in the inner facing of
his chimney casket, Omnia sua secum portat he is somewhat a foolosopher, for he
carries his possessions about him, for terram dedit filijs hominum, he must
needs then have a large dwelling. I pray sir, give him good words how ill
fauoredly soever you favor his acquaintance. For my part I request no
remuneration for the preferment, I have tendered toward him.

Thus much would I have done and more long since to be rid of him. His old
master being dead it is necessary some place to be pestered with him, he makes
great choice of your house keeping, if you can like to frame with him. Much
more might be delivered in the condemnation of his worthiness, but that I
leave to rehearse it, but now Sir, for your own appetite I leave to your
contentment: Blame not me, but him that ledd me, and so forth to an end.
Commend me, but not condemn me, for I shall once do you a better turn,
this is but the first, the next may be worse (better) I would say. And so fare
ye well, etc.


Epistles Consolatorie.
TIme it is now, I should leave this last title of Epistlrs, as having thereof
spoken already sufficiently, and give my self to the delivery of the next,
which are Consolatorie, so termed in respect, that in them is contained many
occasions of comfort, bestowed commonly on such as are grieved, according to
the weight or quality of the matter where with they are perplexed. And for
that the life of man is circumuented with so many, and so unlooked causes of
sorrow and grief, as it many ways needs to have the remedy of comforts to
be applied unto it, yet not the equality of al sorts of minds such, as in one
and the self same degree can accept and bear it: It shall therefore be meet
and convenient, that in devising to yield this sweet and gentle remedy to any
troubled conceit, we do so moderate the matter, as that in the Discovery
thereof, we rather strike not to a far greater impatience or extremity of
unmeasurable sorrow than before, upon untimely thrusting forward, or ignorant
pursuit of the same, seeing that the minds of some, are of so hie and
imcomprehensible stoutnesse, as they shonne in themselves, and account it a
slavery to be ore whelmd with woes. Others again so rise and abundant in
tears, as the least show of repetition in them, induces matter enough of
continual mourning, for which cause, we will sort these matters of comfort
into three several orders. The first whereof shall be at choice, plainly and
simplye as occasion serves to be delivered, in the argument whereof, we may by
generality persuade, that being mortal and frail as we are, there is no
cause for us in heavy sort to grieve, seeing unto a wise man no one thing can
return cause of disquiet, but the shrowde of filthiness, and darkened shame,
neither can he be hurt of any one without himself. These (the more sensible
they are with whom we deal and of greater capacity) the more vehemently may
we enforce by all sorts of forcible examples and assured promises. The second
of these must by insinuation be entered into, as suppozing a personage of a
hie and stately mind, the weightines of whose grief suppressed by a kind of
unconquered fortitude, we would go about to comfort. We may not with these
deal, as in case of common sorrow of the others, but rather insinuating a
denial, that respecting the invincible valor we know to be resting in their
minds, shonning to be tainted with the least touch of sweltring grief, we
do offer our speeches or letters to comfort them, whose hearts we know
cannot yield to any force thereof at all: but that, considering the great
validity of their wisdom, a mind in them so unconquered by any storms of
fortune, to be remaining, (not witstanding we see daily in others before our
eyes, the contrary and imminent cause thereunto, must of force confess to be
inducing) they nevertheless, by a most hie and stately instincte, by great
skill and approved experienee graffed within them, are and must be enabled
stoutly to bear, what others, as weakelinges do lie groueling under, by reason
whereof, we find greter cause to rejoice in the worthiness of so goodly a mind,
then occasion and ways to go about to relicue their sorrows. The third and
last likewise must in an other sort be conuaied, as finding the passionate and
perplexed conceits of some, yet fresh bleeding upon the heavy wound of their
sorrows, we may not abruptly enter with them, into the just occasion they have
so to be distempered, but rather for the lenefiyng of their grieves (for in
sorrow also to be accompanied breeds often some comfort) to seem to take
upon us one part of their evils, by declaration how grievous for some especial
causes the same becomes unto us, insomuch as by the handling hereof, we may
more fully intend in all our speeches to give heed to our own woes, then to go
about to deal at all with the others sorrows. For commonly it is given us to
mislike such as dissent from our affections, and love them again, who make
them selves partakers of our evils. Extenuation
It avails also very greatly to extenuate or lesse^ as much as we may the
cause of grief, either by the incertaintie of things casual, being in some
respects subject to frailty, or by the hope of short continuance, or by the
necessity of the action which may not be with-stood, or by some comfort or
expectation left to mitigate the same. The reputation also of wisdom,
gravity, permutation of times and seasons, the dimunition of the occasion
being nothing so great or urgent as we deem it, the indurance of the thing to
be a mean unto virtue, and (among all other causes) principallye to inculcate
as much as we may, Common condition of men.
the common lot and condition of all men, subjected universally to mishap, to
sorrow, grief, sickness, disquiet, injuries, wrongs, oppressions, and all kind
of euilles, the general recordation whereof above any other thing whatsoever,
swayeth over the passions of the mind, so forciblye by deep regard of the
vniuersallitie of the same, as that it soonest of all others bears down, the
weight of al kind of sorrows and ill conceauinges whatsoever. Herein the
quick sentences and pit^ie sayings of Philosophers, may also be a great
spurring, and finally al p^ssible arguments that may be, whereby men are any
ways persuaded or led to forget their evils. In this place it is principally
to be observed that in ministering comfortable speeches to the redress of any
mishaps, we do not by preferring of toys and sporting devises, seek for to
relieve them, for that albeit in times of pleasure the humor of the party
might in some sort be therewith greatly delighted, yet in causes of such
extremity all persons for the most part very batefully do endure the putting
forwards thereof as too much impertinent to the heaviness wherewith by
sorrowful remembraunces, their minds are commonly amated. But if the cause
be light, then may it not be much amiss to use some pleasant deliverance to
such a one especially whose appetite stands in or toward the same, but it
also in such loving, sweet and gentle sort to be done, as that true comforts
may seem to be mingled with those conceipted pleasures. Neither may we in any
case seek in vaunting sort to thrust into their private view, the present
tranquillity and happiness wherein our selves repose, the objection whereof were
too rusticall. For that as society in misery it self, lenesteth the force of
the greatest grieves, so the opposition of an others pleasure and freedom, is
a corrisiue or sting to the want of any one that is sequestered from the same.
All these observations in causes Consolatorie are greatly to be regarded, whose
uses being to be employed according to their several suppositions, I leave to
the discretion of the writer, in what sort he thinks meet to have their
efficacies performed.

An example Consolatorie of the the first sort, wherein a Gentlewoman is
comforted of the death of her son.
GOOD Mistress P. I am sorrye that my self must become the unlucky messenger
of mine own infortunitie unto you, Exordium.
and that in the fore-fronte of my letter is planted such extreme grief, as I
cannot but extreemly bewail, so often as I think of it. Nevertheless,
knowinge under what motions we live, and that above our reach rules one, under
whose beck the mightiest do stoop, and the greatest are made subject. I must
as my self, so likewise persuade you to tolerate all such chances
whatsoever, as falling from such absolute direction, to alter any one jot
thereof is impossible, and to resist the same, were to be deemed fruitles, and
altogether impregnable. Insinuation.
The care of my self (albeit many do know how much I tendered that I sighe
for) is not so much, seeing by reason I am led to be assured of the necessity
of our decay, as the motherly piety I have always persuaded my self to be in
you, and that I now already do fear, least forgetting the direct square of
our certain living, you will run into such untimely sorrows, as with
manifold tears will hardly be washed, and with innumerable sighs, will
scarcely be wyped away. But what shall I rehearse unto you a thing so suddeine
and unlooked for, as I protest by the heavenly maker and ruler of all things,
at the receipte of your last letters I never mistrusted, or once looked for too
have happened? your tears I see, even now awayte what I will say, and lo,
your immaginations do already deem the matter I must utter. At leastwyse i^
I would seem further to dissemble the occasion of my grief, and by hiding
the sum of all that may breed coffeehouse, to conceal what now I am
enforced to unfold unto you, the discharged messenger returned vncompleat,
would bewray the effects thereof before you. Narratio.
It is then your son good M. P. whose want I am forced to tolerate, and
whose presence you must now henceforth determine utterly to forbear. Your
last presage in commanding him to be seen living or dead, propositio.
has now returned his living to be discharged, and his earthlye coarse
unlooked for, to be covered with cinders. Had I thought it then (as by the
almighty I least mistrusted it) and had you prepared to have received him, as
then before was required, you could not more sooner have assured me his
retourning, then I am able now to perform him, at your present sending. He is
commanded to an other, Distributio.
that before did expecte him, he is swallowed in the gulf, that from the
foremost hour of his birth did hitherto await him. Now if you will say he was
young and might have lived, examples do show that younger then he have died.
If you will say you loved him greatly: God by your patience shall accept him
the more worthily. If you will say you are sorry for it, in that he was
virtuous: consider the world wherein he lived, that might have made him more
vicious. Finally to answer every objection that by you may be affirmed,
Confirmatio.
nothing herein can more fitlye be approved, then that in our life time we see
daily before our eyes to be happened. Know ye not, that all things do by
little and little grow unto ripenes and forthwith by degrees they fall unto
rottennes. Has not God and nature unto every thing after their greatest
perfection, included such certain limits, Epithetum.
that by and by they seem adapted to their latest confusion? Is there any
thing on earth so assured, that by unstayed incertaintie is not continually
guided? Among all fruits and blossoms on the ground, are there not some that
are sooner then others, even on their tenderest branches as it were already
ripened, and others again that by long lyinge are made rotten and mellowed?
All flowers spring not at one instaunt, Allegoria.
nor all blossoms with one sole blast are scattered. To man also is appointed
his certain bounds, unto which to be attained, and beyond the which not to be
exceeded, is already limited. Your son as timely fruict, so timely ripened,
and as firte for his season was as timely gathered. Confirmatio
It was necessary by nature he should be perfected, and the perfection
attained, by nature also he was consequentlye to be depryued. Only that his
sickness was natural, and that in the continuance thereof he wanted no
attendaunce, the credit of others as well as my self can testify. If
physique could have saved him, if syrropes, hot potions, or other necessaries
would have cured him, if tears and prayers might have kept him, you had yet
hitherto in safetye received him. He is dead, he is gone, and we musteafter
him. Of his first sickness he was whole and perfectlye recovered,
afterward from the Iaundis though somewhat weakened* yet lastly delivered.
But the inward moath that consumed him, would not suffer him to live, which
with such extreme gripes assaulted him, that being not able longer to
continue at the pleasure of God he dyed. It is your part therefore to be now
recomforted, Epilogus.
and therein with patience to refer your self to Gods determinate pleasure
and judgment, to which intent I have taken in hand this midnightes labor,
after the receipt of your letters, which were to be returned the next morning
early, by reason whereof I can no ways satisfy what you write for,
nevertheless resting hereafter to my utmost power to pleasure you, and
recommending my self also to your woonted courtesy, I end this fourteenth of
January, your careful friend, etc.


BY the course of this Letter may be perceived, the parts unto a Consolatorie
Epistle necessarilye belonging, the Exordium of which is of the conceipted
grief, incident to the unlooked show of the action. For the extenuation or
lessening whereof, are insinuated immediatlye after, the ordinance and decree
of the almighty God, the instabilitie of worldly chances in them selves never
permanent, the necessitye of evil annexed unto our natural condition, every
of which inducing (by circumstaunces) a less matter of grief in opening or
delivery of the Narration.

Afterward by Confirmation is approved, that it is not a thing new or
strange, but such as by continual vreme have daily before our eyes, that the
ordinary use of all living things are subject to like decaie, that the case
being so common ought* indifferentlye to be borne, that the thing is natural,
and therefore not to be impugned, by all which means are drawn the rather to
have the party comforted. From hence will we pass to the second example, and
consider therein what may be accomplished.

An Epistle Consolatorie of the same, wherein one is comforted in case of hard
extremity.
Exordium.
SEeing the instabilitie of worldly chances is such, as permits no one
thing living to remain steadfast, or in assured stay or certain condition at
all times to induce and continue: no marvel then (good Sir) if your self
being a mortal man, framed of the same earthly substance and quality,
incident to terrene frailty, and mundane imbecilitie, do as other creatures a
like participate the sudden evils, and daily alterations thereunto annexed and
belonging: a proof whereof, rests chiefly in your present state and being,
then which no one thing may induce a more serious advertisement of the vile
account and wretched contempt appropriate unto our living. Propositio.
And albeit diverse are the calamities wherewith not only your self, but
sundry others your loving friends careful of your present mishap, and grieved
to see the uncouth and bitter change whereinto you are happened, are
continually affected, Metaphora.
insomuch as there is not the stoniest and flintiest mind of all that ever
have known you, (your desperate vowed ennemies only excepted) but do in
some sort or other, bewail, and as it were grieve to see the unacquainted yoke
thereof, with such extremity to be cast upon you: I can not yet but greatly
commend the invincible Fortitude of your high and noble mind, who by how much
the more, the vehemencye of these sorrows are to you unknown, and therefore
the more unused, do notwithstanding not only by so much the less permit, the
^ig^ tie power of them to rule or bear swaie over you: but neglectinge or
(which is greater) despisinge the sharp prickinge stinge thereof, who by the
deep pearcing force of the same, is woonted to gall the remembrance of many
others, do also (as it were by a forcelesse contempt of such validities) not
only not give any token or sign at all in their utmost practices, but seem
rather to triumph over the strength that thereby they had rought, and by an
advised, sage, and woonderful modesty and discretion, plainly to extinguish
and put from you the fury of the same. Distributio.
Greatly I must confess, have you hereby deserved, and much more evil, by
the wise and moderate entertainment of these troubles, has to your adversaries
bin tendered, who in nothing so much do rest unsatisfied, as that in subduing
your body, they cannot also yoke and bring under by what soever extremity the
courage, and stately progression of your high and unconquered mind. Wherein
there is left in my opinion great cause of comfort even in the very greatest
of your misery unto you, that in the constant indurance thereof, you have power
to punish them, that would disturb you, and that in the perplexed imaginations
of their own wicked and malicious envy. Neither may this that you sustain be
rightly termed misery, or such a one as your self seem to be accounted
miserable, Confutatio
whose mind in the very captivity inflicted upon this your body is thus
freed, and accompanied with so ample and sweetened liberty. For these kind of
troubles as they are worldly, so have they power also upon the worldly parts of
a man, and therein are cohibitions of such earthly delight, as savoring more
unto the satisfaction of a sensual appetite, then conducing to the excellency
of the inward mind, do breed that ordinary restraint wherewith men mortally
conceipted, are for the most troubled. But to the sweet imaginations of a
pure and innocent mind, what is left wherewith to be discontented, but only to
have committed any thing vile, wretched, or otherwise ill beseeming the Virtue
and excellency wherewith the inward parts thereof are, or ought to be endued.
How many ways then are left unto you to rejoice, Confirmatio.
unto whose eyes the continual thirst of hie and sacred Virtue has long since
laid open the momentarie pleasures of this world, the liberty whereof is unto
a worthy conceit a mere seruage, Eicon.
in whose fickle and transitory affections reposeth so slender assurance, and
whose efficacies contemplate no other then vain and foolish obiectes: seeing
that you have thereby so well perceived how much the instinct of a brave and
delicate mind climeth far above the reach of the body, with a pleasant and
uncontrolled liberty. Anthypophora.
These things (impugning I must needs say a corporal appetite) permit you not
For such loss of riches, possessions, children or friends to become
passionate, or overcome with extreme grief, albeit participating as we do
with such natural causes, I doubt not but therewith you are sometimes
touched, though at no time convinced. For which cause as often as you happen
to fall into the remembrance of the same, suppose with your self that in time
the bitter sting may yet be repulced, and that the lot that is fallen unto you
herein, is no other but the common reward and hateful disquiet of the world,
wherein the most noble and worthy minds are the most vehemently assaulted,
and with deepest extremity by such kind of means pursued.

Pathos.
The recordation whereof, may return unto you one principal and great
occasion of comfort, in that by distinction of your worthiness, though you be
partaker of common trouble, yet are you sequestered from the entertainment of a
common opinion. Peroratio*
It does not a little rejoice me to see that with such impregnable stoutnesse,
you do so far forth endeavor to resist your appetites, wherein (besides the
expectation of that which is incident also to these alterations, a change I
mean, and renouation of wonted pleasures) you shall in the mean time give
greater glory to your actions, in not appearing for any worldly estate,
riches, or contentment to be surprised in your imaginations. Metonomia
Praying the comfort of al comfortes to bestow upon you the dew of his heavenly
grace, in assistaunce of your extremities, I take my leave this of etc.


A Consolatorie Epistle of the third sort, wherein a gentlewoman is comforted
of the death of her husband slain in the wars.
ALbeit my self (having received the sorrowful news of the untimely death of
my dearest kinsman, Exordium*
and your deceased loving husband) was in the first hearing thereof so greatly
troubled with the heavy news, as by reason of the great grief by me
conceived in the same, my self happily might seem to need that comfort,
which now I go about to bestow upon others: Yet weighing in my mind the
state wherein you stand, and being also informed with what great extremity
you have entertained the news of his loss, I cannot but in respect of the
great love I ought to him, and remembrance of the like care, wherewith he
principally favored you, enforce my pen hereby to yield unto you those
comfortable speeches by the verity whereof my self in so great a storm of
grief could hitherto as yet be very hardly satisfied. Narratio.
It was delivered unto me by my brother F.B. that being now a month or
somewhat more passed, since by letters out of H. the manner of his death was
unto you reported, you immediately upon the reading of the letters grew into
so great abundance of tears and to so wonderful impatience, as having ever
fithence continued the same, you will in no sort thereof be recomforted.
Assuredly my good coosin, I must needs conclude with your own speeches, and
the weight of your interchaungeable likings, Proposnio.
that there is great cause left unto you to become sorrowful, as having lost
the chief and principal jewel of all your worldly love and liking, the
favored companion of all your pleasant and youthful years, the entire
comfort and solace of your present happiness, and such a one, who above all
worlds, or any earthly estimation at all, accounted, honored, and entirely
more then any others received and loved you: but that you have so great and
urgent cause of extremity to continue, with so hard impatience as you do, it
befitteth not, it is unnecessary, yea it is in my judgment of al others the
most insufferable. For when it is not denied unto you, that you have cause to
mourn, it is not fittest unto the matter of your love, Distributio.
to weep over him and to bewail him, it is then thereby intended that there
must be a mean therein, that the force thereof must be limited, that the
apparaunce bear show of discretion. Do we not all know I pray you, and are
witnesses, that he was a mortal man, as our selves he was borne under the
same condition, that he must once die, that he had his time set, beyond which
he might not pass, and that God who gave him life thus long to live with you,
has now called him again, from this earth to leave you? Are we ignorant, that
nature compels the wife for her husband, the husband for his wife, parents
for their children, and kindered for their kinsfolk, to weep and lament? but
follows it not also therewith, that the loss and want of them being laid
down by an immooueable necessity; we can by no means afterward be in hope
to reclaim them? what great folly do we then commit in thus serching after the
ghosts of our deceased friends? or what other thing do we therein perform, but
yield a plain demonstration, that our tears are to none other end, but to
bewayl them, because they were mortal? whom death could never have shunned,
without they had bin immortal. Mitigation by the common hap of all.
Are we not eftsoons put in mind by the common casualtie of al things, that
there is nothing stable, that daily and hourly kingdoms decay, provinces are
shaken, countries destroyed, cities burned, towns wasted, people consumed, and
that it remains a thing so ordinary with us, daily to be conversant in these
evils) the loss of al, or either of which (if they may be accounted evils) why
then do we give our selves by unmeasurable grief, to a perpetual
continuance and renouation of those evils. But you will hereunto allege, that
it is love that inforceth you unto the same, and that such is the continual
remembrance you have, as you cannot forget him. Alas, how fruitles is this
love, Confutatio.
and zealous remembrance in the deliverance thereof? how far sequestered is
the vehemency of the same, from the serched recompense? why learn we not
rather of the wisest and worthiest, how to mitigate the impatience of our own
imperfections? In whose precepts, examples and councels, Ab exemplo.
if the immoderate use or enterteygnement of any thing be forbidden, shall we
not then in this, above all others be chiefly reprehended, when we enforce
our selves by continual meditation of our losses to shead so many tears to no
purpose: what if your husband had not now died, at this instant, he must you
know have died, he could not always have lived, yea but he died you say
untimely, what call you untimely I pray you? If in respect of the force
preuayling upon him, whereby he was slain, you name it untimely, then do I
grant unto it.

Finitio.
But if in regard of the time of his life you affirm it, I deny that the
same may then be said untimely. For why? has not the eternal creator of all
things ordered by his divine wisdom each matter to pass his course in sort
to himself best beseeming and most pleasing? how can you then say that to be
untimely which by his heavenly moderation was so appointed? assure your self,
if he had then been at home with you, he had also died, you could not have
prevented it his hour was come, so was it determined, which way could she
shun it.

What then greeueth you in this action? is it that he was slain? Consider with
your self it was in his princes service, his death was thereby the more
honorable, Incrementum.
for in so dieng, he died as a man, as a soldier, as a gentleman. Yea but you
shall never you say see him more: true indeed, but what of that? is this
death now greater then his absence before? (...)
yes forsoothe it is in deed, and why? because you had hope then to see him
again, Hypophora.
which by this means is taken away, very well. You did then while he was
living recomfort your self with hope, content your self now with necessity
because it must needs be so, (...)
and you can no ways amend it. Is not this an end sufficient to determine all
sorrows? If you weep, lament, cry out, and become grieved, requisite were it
the same should return to some end, that all your care, sorrow, grief,
lamentation, or what else should not appear fruitelesse, that the intendment
and determination thereof should be to some special purpose. See you then, herein
is no supply, the effects are berest, the end taken away. Be not the^ so
fond as to bedew that with your tears whereunto belongs neither redress, nor
mean of recovery. Who is he that would be so mad, as cry out unto him of
whom he might be assured never to obtain remedy? By cunning art beasts we
see though they be most fierce are tamed, A similie.
a mean is found wherewith to break the marble, the Adament how hard soever
it be, may be devises be mollified: Only death is of such force as no ways
can be convinced.

At the leastwise if neither of these arguments might move you to suppress
your exceeding sorrows you must finally consider that we are Christians,
Transitio^
and by the benefit of this corporal death, do make exchange of an
vncorruppted life, that the withdrawing us from this vile earthly body of
clay and filth, is a commutation to a sacred, and heavenly progression, and
that we have nothing left unto us, in all the travails, cares, disquiets, and
heavy turmoiles of this wearisome living whereof to rejoice us, but the
expectation we have of happiness and ever flourishing gladness. Suppose the
ghost of your husband were here present to see you, in all this extremity,
what think you, would he say? how much disordered imagine you would he think
you to be in your affections?

And were it not that so many costs had severed him both by land and seas,
peradventure wearied with your bitter outcries, in the conceited image, and
shape of death, you might in appearance here him, in these like speeches
accusing and rebuking such your distemperate actions. Prosopopoeia.
And with breathing spirit to cry out unto you saying. What is it you go about?
what mean you by tears to search out for a thing so irrecuperable? why
torment you your youthful years, with such unprofitable, or rather as I may
call it, desperate kind of mourninges? why with such unjust tomplaintes accuse
you fortune, and so often do appeal death and destiny of so heinous trespace?
Contraria.
Is it for that you envy my happy state, so soon transported from this
untoward soil, to a more prosperous felicity. Thus credit me, and in this
sort (were it possible he could speak unto you) would he accuse you, in which
consideration, were there not just cause think you (of such intemperance) why
you should be greatly ashamed? Believe me good cousin, there is neither profit
or liking at all, of this bitter continuance reaped, Confirmatio.
you have already waded sufficiently in your tears, you have mourned for him
in ernest love as beseemed a wife, it is now hie time you be after all this
comforted. Think that the greatest storm is by necessity at length
ouerblowen, Allegoria.
superfluity of coals increases rather heat then flame, the ardencie of
affection, with vehemency sufficient may be expressed, though not by
extremity enforced. What should I say unto you? you may not as other foolish
creatures, that are neither governed by wit, nor ordered by discretion, make
your self a spectacle to the world, but rather with such temperature (for even
in this extremity of sorrow, Parenthesis.
is also planted a rare pattern of modesty) seek in such manner to demean your
self, as the lookers on may rather pity you, by insight of your great
discretion, then in this sort to torment your self by a needles supposition.
Peroratio.
Much more have I considered with my self, whereby to satisfy my grieved
immaginations, wherewith being recomforted, and repozed in my secret thoughts.
I have deemed it necessary hereby to imparte the same unto you; beseeching,
that as well in regard of your self, as the little pleasure your friends have,
to behold you in this strange kind of perplexity, you will en joy the fruits
thereof with such sufficient contentment and satisfaction as very heartily I do
wish unto you. And even so tendering my self in all things to your courteous
and gentle usage, I do heartily bid you farewell, S. this of etc.


LOng have I continued the argument of these examples, the more plentifully
therein to show forth what variety of matter may be induced, wherewith to
procure occasions of comfort. The chiefest whereof are by extenuation or
lessening the force of whatsoever accident, seming to aggrauate the weight of
such sorrow or conceived matter of grief. Uery forcible no doubt is this kind
of reasoning, wherein all the places of discomfort being collected severally and
divided, each of them by it self is thereby either qualified, disanulled, or
utterly confuted. By which means the matter that before seemed to bear a
show so obious, terrible and grievous, seems very oftentimes, to be
afterward of none or very slender moment or account at all, In semblable
manner, by exaggeration or enforcing a matter to extremities, what thing may be
of so slender conceit, that thereby may not be raised to an ouglie substance,
so woonderfully swaieth the use of these twain in the generality almost of
all kind of writings. Whereof because I have so much already comprehended in
the titles Hortatorie, and Swasorie, and their several places therein also put
forwards at large. I mean not now to use any more speeches.

And now touching the use of these Consolatorie Epistles. It is to be intended
that over and besides the places hereby opposed, the forces are also delivered
in causes of bannishment, in loss of children, parents, goods or friends, in
times of imprisonment, slander, persecution, sickness, in miserable old age,
plagued by disobedience in all success of marriages, in poverty, and finally
in whatsoever grief of mine trouble or adversity. In each of all which is
used a great efficacy of persuasion for the mittigation of all these, as by
laying the troubles and uncertain state of the world, with innumerable euilles
annexed to the turninge wheel thereof, that the mischief cast upon our necks
is not to us alone, but common to all, who though not with the self same, yet
in some sort or other are alike disquieted, that the best way to expel the
grief thereof, is by meditation of our estates, the condition wherein we live,
the inevitable force of that which is befallen us, which because we are
worlolinges must needs in like sort beside us, how near thereby we may be
drawn in contempt of earthly vanities, the enticing baits, whereof are
enuenomed with so many and sharp poisons, that troubles are sent unto us from
God, to call us thereby home unto him, that they are the scourges of our
disobedience, that by such means we are discerned to be his children, that by
patient sufferaunce, and entertainment of our harms, we do nearest approach
unto him, which being in humayne shape on earth, conuersing with men, was
persecuted, slandered, took upon him the most despised estate of poverty, and
by cruel death was constrained, that they who are cloyed with most
abundance, have therefore the greater charge laid upon their necks, and that
no one then they are nearest to destruction, the height of whose estate, often
times occasioneth their untimely deaths, finallye that it were bootelesse to
strive against their forces, in ye wetherby seem ignorant of Gods pleasure
and ordinance, who working all things unto the best, knows perchance that
punishment to be most fittest for us, wherewith if we were not entangled, we
might happily forget him, and become careless regarders of his hie and mighty
excellency. So and in such manner may we wade in these actions whereof having
now delivered sufficient, we will ad hereun to one example more, and therewith of
this title conclude.

Au Example Consolatorie, pleasantly written to one, who had buried his old
wife.
THe posting news hetherward of the late decease of my good old misteris your
wife, has made me in the very going away of mine ague'fit, to strain my
self to greet you by these letters. In the inditing whereof I many times
prayed in my thoughts that I were as readelie delivered of this my tercian
fever, as your self are in mine opinion delivered and by such means rid of a
hateful and very foul encombrance. I doubt not sir, but you do now take the
matter heavily, being thereby dispossed as you are of such an intolerable
delight, as wherewith you were continually cloyed by the nightlie embracementes
of so unwieldy a carcass. I have I must confess very seldom known you for
any thing to mourn, nevertheless if by such means you be happily
constrained to change countenance, I have prepared a golden box wherein I
mean to consecrate all the tears you shed for that accident, to Berecynthia
the beldome of the Gods as a relic of your great kindship and courtesy.

Believe me T. I am sorry that mine ague had not left me, and that I were not
now in L. with thee, were it but to view thy looks and manlike behavior,
after so hard a bickering and encounter, as wherein thou was berest a heart of
gold so dainty as I promise thee to sum grave sober fellow, might have
become pretty concipted, and a very sweet pigges nie. Well T. if thou must
needs loose her, ferendum est quod mutari non possit, be not sad I pray thee,
well find out a better match wherewith to delight thee. Thou must consider
that it is requisite that all things should be done with indifferency, she
has left a thousand pound in goods and a C, mark a year unto thee, let
that content thee, what though she was not married a month to thee, thou must
be a patie^t man, her long continuance with so much wealth might peradventure
have glutted thee. The Gods have become more favorable to thy young years,
then thy self do consider of: She might I know have lived longer time for
age, (for four skore years old I grant is nothing) the woman also in very
good plight too, by Saint Margerie: but what of that? we must as I said
before, bear with necessity. I pray God thou be not overcome with sorrow,
but thou may take it quietly. There be men in the world that are so
careless of their fortune, and so very fools in their wishing, as they
could content themselves greatly to be in the like predicament with thee, but
thou I assure my self art of a clean contrary opinion, swear no more good
T. I am persuaded alone that it utterly discontenteth thee. But hear thou?
play not the mad man for all that, I will rather comfort thee my self, then
that thou should die for sorrow.

One thing greatly misliketh me, I heard say thou tookest an oath upon her
death bed never to marry again? see how love may lead men? good GOD it is
strange? I promise thee I could hardly be persuaded thou did so, without I
should hear the swear it. Be not so sottishe good boy, remember thy self,
and think on the Philosophers words: Non nobis solum nati sumus. thou may
have a wife man, and become the father of nintie nine children perchance ere
thou die. Forswear thou nothing good T. but building of monasteries and
entering into religion, for these my self dare undertake thou never wilt nor
mentest to do. I would feign talk longer with thee but I am weary, and
therefore intend to leave the expectation of the rest, till I fortune to see
thee. Fare (as otherwise thou can not choose) well, having neither old wife
nor fever, wherewith to encomben thee. At S. this of etc.


WHat answer now may be returned to all or any of these letters, is to be
expected according to the grief or present condition of the party. The
efficacy of the one whereof may be such, as endures small arguing, and the
inclination of the other so plausible, as bears with whatsoever may sound
unto them comforting. But for because the labor were endless to measure by
writing, the affections of each one in particular, I will only set down for
this one form, the generality which may be inferred to the circumstances of
any other. A letter Responsorie therefore, unto any of these Epistles, should
in the general parts thereof, contain (as seems me) a Remuneration or
friendly acceptance of their good wills, that so have been employed in
comforting, and (if the party so think meet, or the occasion so stands) to
commend the wisdom, learning, favor, care or liking, of him that so writes,
and therein also the good effects, the same have wrought, if some things
(that may be alleged) did not impugn it, showing his council is far less
vehement then our evil, and therefore swaieth not in respect thereof, in our
minds, so much as might have done with many others. In conclusion, that we
acknowledge nevertheless his great discretion therein, and deserved account of
his travel. Each of which places, how they are to be distributed appears in
the example following.

A letter Responsorie to be conferred to an Epistle Consolatorie.
GOOD brother. I have received your loving letters, wherein carefully,
discreetly, and effectually you have endeavored to minister sundry comfortes, to
my pestered and diseased mind, in all which I confess you have dealt with me
as appertains unto a faithful, courteous* and most regarded brother,
whereunto as much as possibly may be expected, I yield my self unto you for the
same most bounden and assured. Neither will I wrong you so much as to deny,
that in perusing the contents thereof, I was not sometimes by the force of
your arguments a little withdrawn from the deep consideration; and hard
suppose of my present evils, but entering again into mine own estate, and
finding how mightily the show of my forward mishaps swaieth over my
maistered spirits, I do imagine the greatness of my loss to be so much, as
in comparison whereof, whatsoever you have delivered either in the mitigation or
qualefieng of my harms, seems far less in quantity, than the smallest
that may be conceived of all mine evils. Folly were it for me to think or
you to believe, that the pensive imagination of a thing so near, as whereupon
concerned erst, the some of all my joys, pleasures, and happiness, could
with the vehemency of a sewe specches (more of zeal then equity delivered)
be suddenly removed. But (as has the adage) Omnes quum valemus recta consilia
^grotis damus, For council is plentiful in every one, whose concei^es by
freedom are exempted from any passion at all. Take it not so good brother;
that I think you not, for me, as well as my self, to be a partaker of my
grie^e, for I know in well you are, but yet the one proceeds of chariness,
the other of extremity, you in pity of my sorrows, and I in the very touch
of mine evils. What Time may do I cannot tell, to wear away, what presently I
feel to be forcible upon me, yet fear I the worst, but will give my self
notwithstanding as much as in me lies, to the practice of your councels. How
ever the case stands, I must acknowledge, that very weightily ^y you have
dealt concerning me, and for the same will never cease to thank you. Fare ye
well, this of etc.


IN this place will we conclude our Epistles Consolatory and pass out of the
same title to the next thereof (which (...) Monitorie) so (...) in resp^ct that
in them is ^ontayned an admonition, Epistles Monitorie
or fore warning, of what we mean to give in ch^^gere our friende^ or
followers, the one part whereof consists in skillful explaning the offense
of a thing faulty, which stands upon to be reformed, the other, in laying
forth to the unexperienced, such matters as he knows not, in sor^ as if her
with he were thoroughly acquainted. And in so much as there be few me^ ye
gladly like to be supposed overmuch faulty, or love much to be rebuked for
the greatness of their errors, the order therefore of these Epistles, in setting
forth what may be counted offensive, shall not accuse but admonish, from the
greatness or smalenes of the same, qualifieng the In^ter^esse of reprehension to
a certain manner of praise, how ever desert do at foo^^ to the furtherance
thereof. For in a gentle condition, or mind not altogether beat unto evil, to
suppose that the greatest part is to the better inclined, and it also in some
am ^^e sort to commend, breeds no small encouragme^t to do wall, he ^o whom
the a^m^nition passes weighing with himself, that (...) is not so far
ouergrowne, but that presumptions of his Virtues do yet sway in men's opinions,
or at the least wise imagining that men are ^gnoraunt altogether of that,
whereof they seem to take no notice at all, he will study ^he rather to
hearhen to such ^olesome directions, and accordingly to reform his manners
thereunto be times. And verily (as you have before in the examples Disswasorie)
so in this also it would not be amiss where we see an offense but new
beginning, to i^duce many good conditions of the party to be opposed aagainst
the same, and to lay before him, how ill sounding it would be to the due
commendation of the other, to be touched therewith. Or otherwise where we see
an inelination (though no matter in action) too evil, to say, that not for
that we see him spotted with such offenses, we do warn him from their forces,
but to the intent he may thereby the better be instructed, in the vileuesse
and discommended parts of the same, or that, because we are for the most part
led away and* easily sliding into evil, we set before his eyes therein, the
hazard and inconvenience thereof. Now if the matter be so far forward, as we
find it a plain and open imperfection in him to whom we write, let us then
consider the weight or inu^li^itie of the action, which being too ^wnstrous or
notorious, it then needs not admonition but sharp reprehension, and is thereby
secluded from the parts thereof, but being intolerable in his age or estate,
in whom the same is found, then shall we not aggrauate, but extenuate the
appearance thereof, showing that it is a thing common for men to fall, chiefly
young men, who by the furious sting of their youth, and want they have of aged
experience, are hastily led, the^ unto, but yet there withal how many ways
necessary it is, that he be withdrawn from the same, least happily the long
entertainment given to a fault, make it seem a great offense, and
consequently he be thereby led into far more dangerous evils. Hereupon may we
manifest unto him our love and tender care we have over him, rompelling us for
such cause to forewarn him, declaring that our selves falling into the like
errors, would be glad at his hands to find the like, if the skill and
experience of the party might have so much performed. An other kind of
admonishment there is also, when men deal with those who are highly before
them in account, unto whom either imminent danger, or occasion of great hate
or mislike pursuing the same, forbids in express manner to be admonished,
insomuch as their estate (being peradventure lofty; and of power to command
or sway over us) will not admit by writing to entermeddle with their actions,
and yet happily by reason of some hard dealinges, offered unto us or our
friends, might seem much to preuail in one sort or other to give them notice
of it, whereby to avoid if it be possible, the expected vehemency and
intolerable support of the same. With such men to deal; behooves if at least
wise we be greatly compelled thereunto, to make a recital of many virtues, such
as might be commendable and be ^tif^eng unto so great estate and authority,
and there withal setting forth the worthiness to the uttermost of what we
wish to be in him planted, we shall fa^sly affirm also those Virtues to be
insinuate in his person, and how much they are greatly furthering to his name
and reputation, by occasion of which, we may in the contrary have mean to
lay open all those vices, the insupportable burden, vil^enesse and execrable
hatefulness (or what ba^^ purpose soever is in them else included) how much
they impugn, the state, rule, or authority of any one, what blemish they
cast upon him in whom they are frequented, how they destroy the good parts
for which men mighty and gracious have desired to be commended, the conceit
whereof, may be with such facility and excellency induced, as that he to
whom we write, shall by great insight thereby receive a special view of his
own faultines, yea and by the couertnes of the same, shall also participate
within his own imaginations, the particular love and hate generally employed
to either of both, wherein what other thing shall we go about in silence to
admonish, but what in each of these ought to be refused or followed* which manner
of writing performed to such end and examples without shame and blushing at
all each one may lawfully use, otherwise palpably to affi^me those virtues and
praises to be in a man, in whose actions becoming most notorious in all kind
of apparaunce, no one thing is to be found so pleutifull as very wickedness it
self, this wore a flattery most detestable and of all others most filthy to be
in any writer received. And touching the causes wherein principally these
Monitorie Epistles are applied, their diversities are to these effects or the
like for the most part intended. As for example, a man fierce or crue^^ in his
government, be he Parent, M. or other may in his kind be admonished by the
inconveniences of the same, to beco^re more meek, more courteous, or more
loving. A person given to over much tatling, by showing the discommoditie of
inter-medling, how many (having been intercepted where they meant no harm)
and have ^y such means perished, how ^t breeds brables, dissension, and
continual hatred, may in this fort before warned of the proceeding evil
thereof. One too much given to his continual study by the hinderaunces of
health thereby happening, may be admonished not to bind him self so districtly
in the use thereof, as thereby to neglect his common and swe^t society.
Likewise all things wherein is too much of any thing may in this sort, by their
inconveniences be fore warned: all manner of matters hindering to quiet,
civility, modeslye, honest name or fame, learning, skill, friendship, love, or
what other spark or kind of virtue, by the facility of this argument may be
admonished. Finally, means, aides and helps to any of these orders of
government, and absolutely, all manner of things (any ways furthering as well
as hindering) to virtue, may herein be preferred, or induced, not by precepts,
but by contrariety, as by doing of good, to avoid evil, or by abolishing the
evil, to gain that is good. These are the limittes, and this must be the end
of this Monitorie kind, whereof that in their several parts they may the
better be explaned, let us now produce examples to be sorted to some of their
purposes.

An example Monitorie, concerning a stayed and well governed life.
THE execrable force of mischievous evil being such, Exordium.
and the maleuolent disposition of the frowning heavens to some kind of people
so great, as having once thoroughly planted the fatal sting thereof, in the
inward conceit of those that with tooth and nail, covet to participate the
barreine and accursed fruits of the same: it seems they be created to none
other end, but only by daring to perpetrate whatsoever matter of villainy, to
purchase to them selves by determination of a shameless and wicked life, the
limited reward of an unprovided shameless and ignominious death. The
inchaunted course whereof, perceauing in these dangerous times how much it
has bewitched the estate and course of the whole world, and considering:
there withal, that by reason of your fathers late decease, you being a green
youth, void of experience, bent to the trial of al companies, richly
possessed and wealthily endued, are now left into your own hands, and thereby
delivered from the plawsible and quiet moderation of a faithful and loving
guide, into the endless reach of a youthful, careless, and uncontrolled
liberty, has moved me in respect of the care that ever I erst had of you,
being yet but a child, and in assured testimony of the memory I have ever
protested to the ghost of your loving parente, to admonish you of some few
things, touching the order and conversation of your living, being a course so
important, as in the admittance and exercise whereof, can not but consist the
scope and after fruition of all your happiness, benefit, and lawdable
continuance.

Propositio
And first of all will I call unto your remembrance, that being the son of so
virtuous a father as you are, how greatly it imports unto your estate to be
well governed, that as well the precedent virtues as ancient possessions of
your antecessor, may in your person be evermore shining and resiant, that of
your deceased Parent (as well as in corporal shape and favor) you bear the
true image and show of his worthiness, that you stand not more in your actions
upon the glorious title or name of a gentleman, then of the very true and
extreme conditions and behauiours that rightly do produce and make a gentleman.
Distributio.
And albeit I sinde no great apparent cause (your youthful head) and unstaid
state of headstrong liberty only excepted) that may induce any argument or
supposall to the contrary, but that you are or may be such and of so worthy
and great regard, as touching your life and other conversation, deeply enough
may be adjudged to conceive of all or any part of these: yet knowing how many
and how sundry are the evils wherewith our mortal state is endaungered, how
diverse are the motions to wickedness, and how many ways are we ready to fall
into the crooked paths of the same. I could not but warn you, that coming
even now into the midst of the world as you do, you shall find sundry baits
and alurements drawing you into the worste and most vilest parts thereof, that
unless you were directly governed with the right rule and square of an honest
and sober life, twenty to one you not only fall very deeply into the
inconveniences thereof, but (without great and unexpected chance occasioning
the contrary) are like to be drowned and overwhelmed for ever.

You must call to mind, Monition by the circumstances.
that living in a place so ordinarilye frequented as is that City wherein you
are, and being in fellowship with so many and diverse sorts of men as you now be,
conuersing also with the innumerable multitudes of persons, of all estates,
conditions and faculties, as you there do, it is no difficult thing for a
young youth of your birth and quality to be led into lewdnes, of a wanton to
become dissolute, of a spender to be made a consumer, nor of a towardly
Gentleman, to be framed to an untoward companion. Much (credit me) may the
evil example of some lewdly given, conduce heereunto, making you to believe,
that to become a roister is credit, to be a swearer valiant, to show your
self a waster liberal, that to become a drunkard is fellowship, to maintain
rakhels is bounty, to be fantastical is youthful, and to be an unthrift is
to be counted gentle: but being ruled by me, you shall give heed to neither
of all these, being such and none other in deed as solie will breed your
destruction, but contrariwise in gaining of credit you shall become modest and
discreetly behaved, in being noted to be valiant, you shall be a supporter of
honor, showing your self liberal, it shall be in rewarding the good, in
maintaining of fellowship you shall use sobriety, in being bountiful you shall
remunerate services, in manifestation of your youth, you shall entertaigne
honest pleasures, and in being counted gentle, approve therewithal frugall.

Allegoria.
The Ass goes out in the morning to carry burdens, and in the evening
receives his prouendar for advantage. The Ox grazeth all day in the
pasture, and at night is carried into the butchers stall, their reward is
their feeding, and the contentment they require is only to fill their bellies,
behooves that men also who from beasts are sequestered by many degrees of
reason, should of their continuance and final determination live a like
careless? No verilye, it is too much unseemly. Confutatio.
Such illusions as these are not fit for a man, who by the nobility of his
creation was ordained to sway over, and not to become subject to such vilities.
You therefore being now at your own choice and liberty, must beware and give
great and diligent advertisement to all your ways, you must eschew and avoid
not only the very evils them selves, but also all occasions inducing or
partaking with those evils, you must imagine, that to be in all things
temperate and discreet, argues solie your reputation, shun vice as you would
do a serpent, fly wicked company as a pestilent infection, do always things
worthy your self, affect not so much the vaineglorious title of praise, as
desire how and in whar sort to deserve and win praise. Esteem nothing so
precious as time, abandon sloth, and in all thy society (as near as thou
can) accompany with the best. Consider that such as is the tree such is the
f^uit. Who toueheth pitch must needs be defiled. With the good thou shall be
made good, and with the evil tthou shall be perverted. Think none so great an
enemy as he that misledeth thee. Peroratio.
Misdeem no man willingly, and give occasion to all men to judge of thee
indifferently. These counselles (forewarninges of thy ruin or happiness) if
advisedly thou will heaken unto, and faithfully lay up among thy chiefest
secreates, it shall no ways repent thee to have been a man, nor discontent me
in this sort so much to have councelled thee, that pursuinge the effects
hereof, thou shall becomme such as I wish thee, and thy careful father if he
had lived would have been glad to have seen thee. The almighty giver and
moderator of all our actions, bless and keep thee. Farewell from my house at
D. this of, etc.


Another Epistle Monitorie, touching the reformation of a covetous life*
ALbeit good brother I know the matter of my writing will become offensive
ynto you, Exordium.
and that I am not ignorant what heavy adversaries you have, that daily do go
about to suppress the sound and faithful advise of those, who without
flattery do wish heartily well unto you, and studiouslye are busied at all times
for and toward you. Such nevertheless is the love and duty that I owe you, as
seeing you in so great an error as you are overwhelmed in, I can not in
respect of our brotherly affection, but I must needs warn you of it, whereof
if you become not repentaunt and a renouncer betimes, I doubt, not only the
world will cry out against you, but God also in high displeasure will be angry
with you. Narratio.
Truly for mine own part I am ashamed, and also it greatly greeueth me
every where to hear of the extreme covetousness and hard dealinges by you used
toward your poor tenants, and other the inhabitaunts about you, who not
withstanding that God has abundantly blessed you with riches more then
sufficient, you be yet so miserablye bent upon the world, as you care not by
what district and severe handling you do attain unto your wealth, only so you
have it or can come by it, you hold no conscience or question at all of the
winning it. Propositio.
Alas what cries do you procure against you of the poor and wretched people,
who being plagued with the hard yoke you lay upon them, are not able of them
selves to redress it, but only do pray to God that he will for them revenge
it. The matter credit me is too hateful, Monitio.
and so great is the oppression and wrong thereby offered, as it cannot
continue. Might my words become of weight unto you, I would wish you to leave
it, and if not for my sake, or in regard of your own credit thereby so
greatly blemished and impaired, and your good name and fame utterly by such
means obscured and defaced, yet for Gods sake, who commands charity and
right to all men, who wills that we do to every one as we would be done
unto, who forbids by such execrable lucre to heap to our selves so unjust
and filthy gain, you will refrain it, reform it, amend it. In truth you
do not know, how much evil thereby you procure unto your self, the blind
desire you have to heap up riches will not permit you to see, what ranckor,
mischief, impiety, terror and dread, you crowd so near togethers, the
little care you have of the world to come, so quenches your affections, as you
have not power to behold the enormity wherein you are so vehemently
transported. For shame abstain and become not the common obloquie of all men,
be not you the man alone whom so many shall curse, and all men for the most
part cry vengeance of. Otherwise if by no admonition you will relent, assure
your self, God who is the righter of all wrongs will in most seueere manner
compel you unto it, and in the end by great rigor punnishe you for it. It
little likes me that herein, so just cause remains, as whereby I am forced
in this sort to argue with you, Peroratio.
in which action the nature of a brother may give you to understand in what
sort I admonish you, and with what loving care I retain you, the consideration
of which, has moved me (as my self would wish in the like of whatsoever I
should have erred, to be dealt withal by you) to account the sweet rebukes of
a friend to be far more profitable, then the dissembling glozes of a cruel
and bitter enemy, to which end whatsoever I have said may in like manner be
conceived by you. Farewell L* this of, etc.


An Epistle Monitorie to a Father, touching the lewd and ill demeanor of his
son.
THough it seem an approved follye to cast pearls before swine, Exordium.
or to offer a golden saddle to an Asses back: yet (not that I think either
the Sow worthy of the pearls, or the Ass fit for the saddle). I have written
unto you, the one reason to manifest unto you, the vile and bad parts of your
son whereof you will take no notice, and of which this letter herein closed
shall bear sufficient testimony, the other for charities sake, to admonish you
which are his father; to his benefit and timely looking to, to wind him from
that, which by small sufferance may breed your woes and his irrecuperable
destruction. I have understood that having been found heretofore in the like
pilfering with two M. that he served, propositio.
and the secreat information thereof being brought to your ears, you misliked
his courtesy that told you, iustefied the matter to be false that was
delivered you, and not so much as examining the action at all (which a good
father would have done by all manner of industry) you allowed your son for
honest, and affirmed that it was impossible he should enter into any such
theiuerie. Distributio.
If I see the child of such a father come to an evil end I will not marvel
at all, seeing that besides the ordinary inclinations already graffed in his
young years, his parents are content by winking at it, to give him
furtheraunce, and in manner to affirm that it shall so be, insomuch as thereby
seems, the son has sworn he will never live honestlye, and the father
has promised that he will set him forward to Tiburne for his vilany. Is it
reason that men (of zeal and conscience) should go about to pity their
misfortunes, who have protested never by compassion to prevent in them selves,
the just and appropriate reward of their own evils? Dicaeologia
What shall I say to the unhappy father of such a son, or rather unhappy
child of such a father, whether shall I forwarne him or thee, the one
purposing, the other animating, to what unto each of you in the end must become
a particular desolatio^? Truly these things will not continue, they cannot long
hold. Well (not in respect that either of you have deserved so much at my hands)
but for pitties sake, I am content to bear with your infirmities, and (so you
will not urge me to your own harms) by your courteous, Finitio.
though not so much as honest usage (for honesty wills I should have mine own
again, or reasonable recompense) will part with my l^sses: but yet therwithall
warn you (to which end I have written this letter) that you prevent your
mischeiues betimes, you do consider the success of your own harms, Adagium.
so long the pot goes to the river, that at last it comes broken home,
every man will not deal with you as I do. It can not choose but you must
needs know, Confirmatio.
nay rather be a partaker of your sons evils, how ever you disse^ble with the
world, and face out the matter before people. Take heed I say. God when he
strikes smites home, you will else repent it, Mitigatio.
for it will none otherwise be. Because I have yet some hope, that by driving
into your conceit the enormity hereof, and discovering the pack which you
said was locked up from your seeing, I have hoped that at the least wise for the
fear of God and to save him from the gallows you will endeavor to chastise him.
I have sent this bearer, who can inform you of the truth, time and place of
that which you go about to shroud up so covertly, and if afterward you will
not bridle him, I protest his shameless forhead must be corrected by justice,
and the laws must further pass upon him. Surely, not for en^y of the person,
but for the shameless brow he bears, as one that had don none offense, to
provoke me by evil usage to blaze his faults, that otherwise by good counsel
would have covered the^* I think it a deed meritorious to have him punished. If
you have a desire as a father to cherish him, Epilogus.
have regard as a friend be times to correct him, otherwise you shall sooner see
him come to shame then any ways climb unto credit. But for ought I can hear
both father and mother are so addicted to the bolstring of his doings, as that
it seems they have already vowed their infamy to the world, and his life to
the gallows. Good council may do much, and though in taste I seem a bitter
enemy, the proof in trial shall be better then a fawning friend.


Diverse other patterns of sondrye occasions concluded under this title, might
besides these be here put down, whereof because I have so largelye spoken in
the discourse before these Epistles, and that as well this Monitorie as all
other letters passing under the Deliberatiue kind, do consist chiefly in
aduising or dissuading, whereby the Theme belonging to every of them is
enlarged, I think the examples already propone^ to be sufficient. And now the
last of all these deuisions yet unspoken of, is Amatorie, whereof because the
humors of all sorts, therewith being possessed are so infinite, and so great
an uncertainty, as perchance even in the very writing of his letter, the
lover him self is sometimes scarce certain of his own conceits, the less
must of necessity be the precepts of the same directions for that in some of
them we require and entreat, in other some expostulate the matters and
occasions falling in the neck thereof, other times complain, an other while
fawn and speak fair, then purge or clear the accusations supposed against
us. Finally innumerable are the supposes wherewith the raynes of love are
conducted. For which cause leaving the curious regarder of these, to the
ordering of his own imaginations upon what conceit so ever the same shall be
grounded, I will also amongst the rest present unto the readers choice some
small number of these, in pursuing whereof, the several occasions being
annexed, may give the more perfect measure unto the conueiance of their
particular meaninges. You shall therefore understand for the first of these
examples, that the writer thereof loving a Gentlewoman, whose inward virtues
surmounted far the parts of her outward favor, and having sundry times
received at her hands both allowaunce and liberty to declare his mind,
whereunto she nevertheless gave a modest and courteouz refusal, he thereupon
devised to convey the residue of his imaginations, into the melancholy form of
this letter following.

MAdonna, when I do consider with my self the sundry casualties and manifold
inconveniences, wherewith mortal men are daily afflicted, I do suppose that in
the chariot of this wearisome life there is more occasion left to behold our
inevitable miseries, then mean sufficient to be found, how and in what sort to
prevent their euilles. The naked ensamples of others yielding heereunto but a
bare addition, might peradventure seem of small moment for the confirmation
hereof, if happelye our selves by crooked mischaunces did not also in some
sort, participate the common occasion thereunto most chiefly ministered. But
leaving this generality to be applied in the utmost bounds of my self, it
may fall out that with your favor and courteous remembrance of my passed
speeches, having heard also, and herein pondered the just accusation of my
own infortunitie, you will rather pity the little pleasure that I have in my
bountiful penury, then think that unadvised I am led to exclaim upon the
sudden chance of my late injuries. To decipher you as a friend I can not. To
make you the choice occasion of my evil I may not. To leave you as a stranger
I dare not. And to give you over with silence I must not. To wade in all these
extreamities were insufficient to any one man's possibility, but to be touched
with the least of the^ breeds an unacquainted mysery. If I herein speak yet
blame me not. If I require aid, condemn me not. If too liberally I do proffer,
impugn me not. And if I stay on hazard, envy me not. Think good La* that if I
am attached with liking, the choice was my loving, if I prostrate my liberty,
the cause is your excellency, if I pine in extremity, your love yeeldes a
remedy. So it might stand with your modesty, I could infer herein many
occasions to your reading why and wherefore I love you: and might I not speak
the same presumptuously I could show you also why and how you could and might
vouchsafe to requite me. What necessity I have to urge me I leave to known
experience, how far I am induced by mine own intended loyaltye I commend to
silence. Only if my deserts by your favor may seem sufficient, I pray that
you will vouchsafe such remedy, as in trial may be found expedient. I would
be loath to seem importunate in cause of demanding, least I might seem
unfortunate that have bowed my self to your commanding. If I might not be
deemed partial, I would affirm that as I never found you discourteous, so in
any respect you ought not, nor in equity may becomme injurious, unless in
transgressing the bounds of love, you wilfully do infer more cruelty, then
at an other time may be wyped away with protested piety. Because my letters
shall not be tedious, I will end my complaint with this one peticion, that if
in the greatest of mine affection, I may deserve any little remembrance at
your hands, you will reward with good countenance my protested and inviolable
services, in the depth whereof accompanied with hope and expectation of your
assured courtesies, and vowing the residue of my living to the contemplation
of your surpassing excellencies, I seal up the foldes hereof with the
impression of innumerable sighs, and bequeath them as hastily as they may, to
the touch of your delicate hands. Being as you know.

More favored then fortunate B. E.


IMmediately after the writing hereof, having conuayed the same to her reading,
she seemed afterward to entertain his services, both with better liking and
greater favors, standing nevertheless on this resolution, that for any fnrther
proceediug, save only the conceit of that present courtesy, she would not in
any wise agree unto him, by reason whereof resolved in the increase of his
wonted services, and put forward thereunto by the vehemence of his affections,
who could not choose but love, where himself could obtain little more then
ordinary liking, and was some thing besides hope by many circumstances opposed
to his imaginations (as lovers for the most part grow very suspicious) to
compass any further proceedinges, Love having made him more melancholy then
before, he got him self to the most secreat part of all his lodging, and there
entertaigning the forcible parts of all his former passions, his pen bewrayed
in writing, ^what humors then attached him, which was deliuerd in order
ensuing.

IF the Gods were as pitiful to my peticions, as Fortune is cruel in
executing my evils: I could (good mistres) with less burden bear that which
with patience I am enforced to suffer, and peradnenture assure my self of that
whereof hitherto, with doubtful suspe^ce I am scarce able to attend the end.
But whether it be mine own follye that wilfullye intrudeth me into unknown
perilles, or that the Powers have decreed in prime of my pleasures to martyr me
with punnishementes, or hardly the destinies at my birth have foresworn my
happiness, I know not: but this my untimely pattern is able to approve, that
in all the iolitie I ever yet possessed, I have in the end found my self
mastred with a far greater torment. O that we could as warely prevent the
sequel of our evils, as we are ready in the front to object our selves into
headlong mischiefs, or else at the least wise, when we had once trod the path
of forgetfulness, we might not continually be drenched in our errors. I speak
this (dear mistress) not to impugn my latest greifes, which altogether I
account as insufficient, to reap the reward of so precious a jewel, and
only wish to continue in reverence of the desired saint, to whom of devotion
I have abandoned my security: but to manifest the misfortune, that always
has been attendaunt, with unlooked penance to guerdon the inforcement of my
continual labors. Is it then follye that I thus pine* Is it wilfulnes wherein
I now rage? Is it an error that I have planted my vows upon so dainty a
counterfeit? Am I deceived that embrace the virtues of such a sacred relic?
no surely. For I confess that Berecynthia in Rome was not so religious.
Ulysses paragon was not so precious, the fair Timoclea was not so wondrous,
nor wise Cornelia found so famous, as thou art to be honored for thy virtue,
esteemed for thy quality, advanced for thy dignity, and renoumed for thy
excellency. Believe me (and rightlye shall it be confessed) that I am herein
rather to be commended then discouraged, to be rewarded then hindered, that
could first frame my self to endure penance for one so worthy, and by
singular choice esteem her, that in her self, is becomme the sole pattern of
so excellent a propertye. But alas, as in the one I merit, so if of the other
by consequence I be deprived, what hope may there rest of my continuance, what
end of my labors: since an other must possess with liberty, that which I have
longed for with intolerable feruencie. What shall I then say, since my
faltering tongue is not able to speak, my quiuering hand unable to support the
weak force of a slender quill, may not endure to write, my senses stopped with
so many and doubtful imaginations are already forced, and by confusion
encombred? certainly might but crave, that of pity you will yet have
remorse of my labors, and since I pine in penury, feed me not with the harsh
fruits of such undigested extremity. So mighty Jove deal with me in my
choice, as I repent not my sorrows, ne recke the long and laborsome toil of
weary labors, to win and wear in the end the fruitful branch of thy
assured courtesy. Wherein not finding any greater obstacle, then that I fear
the hardness of that, which has been already subdued and maistered, and that
the delicacie once attained, the remainder, cannot so firmly be attached, as
the unripe fruits of increasing good will, would with liberality have
achieved. I can but wish that you were as I am, and would as I wish, become
the owner of him, whose only property rests in you, and whom you have
already counterchecked with such a command, as henceforth he has vowed
himself no more his own, but even yours alone whom he only tendreth and
serves.

B. L.


I Have heard the party much discommended, for the application of these
immoderate and superlatiue terms, of those who neither in outward appearaunce
or inward conceit of the Gentlewoman, seemed to perceive any matter at al
ministering such great effects, as herein were propozed: but what of that, such
was his fancy, and so regarded was his opynion toward her, as he could not
but extol, what in others judgments was but meanly to be commended. Love so
wrought, and therefore the less was he to be accused. But to the purpose,
these things thus proceeding he forgatte not as well in speeches as in writing
many times to solicit her forward conceit toward him, sometimes by
gratifiyng her with diverse sonettes, otherwise in admiring her praises (to none
so manifest, as to himself wonderful) As occasion served again with
letters, during all which, by misreporte of some one frequenting his mistress
company (as Love is never without Envy) she seemed to catch hold of some
one thing in her servant, ill pleasing to her fantasy, which, (for that she
meant but only to cauile with him, or otherwise to make it the original of
some after quarrel) she brake unto a friend of his at the last in great
secret. Jealousy hereupon began to frame strange countenaunces, good will went
to wrack, and nothing so ordinary as her daily mislike. He whom the same
most concerned, marueiling at the change, became at last acquainted with the
manner, and as he disposed himself to attend his mistress courtesy, and
accustomed license of parle, hoping thereby from her own mouth to be
assertained at large, she flang away upon a sudden, leaving a newcome
stranger, resting with him in her own chamber, to whom approaching an other
minckes, of more antiquity then courtesy, she skittered out these speeches to
the other in his solitary hearing. In faith I can laugh said she to see
pleasure bred by liking, and trust upon trial. These words to some better
effect were uttered by another gentleman (in her hearing) in the behalf of the
lover, to his mistress, but the lover perceiving thereby how the game went
posting to his woonted solitary closet, and reuoluing too' and fro, what best
befitted his alteration, concluded at last to search out if it were possible
at his mistress hands, the utmost occasion, yet before he departed being
better instructed in the some of all that stood against him, he lastly
resolved, to take notice of the action, and by just defense thereof to qualify
as he might, the most part of unkindness. The readiness of his pen and
conceipte concurring togethers, these lines sorted out according to his present
disquiet, in this disordered proportion.

MY good mistress, in that so carefully you have commended unto my friend, the
especial good care you always had of me, and wish of greatest choice and
liking (without that you cannot grant in your own person) might any wise
betide unto me, I do thank you, as he that in no state desires otherwise,
then to be beholding unto you. And albeit vnweeting to my self, I am
particularly touched with one special party, whose conceits I know not, nor
of whose fancy I am private, which I may not, nor am able herein to leave
unremembered, yet do I take it for noe less wonder, then strange, how the
vanity of such a surmise engendered upon no occasion, should raise so sudden
mislike, without matter of effect to maintain the continuance. For the man, I
know not, but as I have seen, for the cause, I enquire not, as being assured
of my truth, In neither part curious, as things never spoken of.

For which cause, seeing I find the inducement so rare, as the message you
have commended unto me, seems strange. I hope I may as justly withdraw your
opinion from the insufficiency, as the misreport of the other has led you by
too much credulity.

It is good Mistress, your sole and only good reckoning, and not the malice of
any other, that so much I account of your courtesy and good acceptaunce of my
endeuoures, that solie and of all others most princypalllye contenteth me,
from the benefit whereof, I nothing doubt but the protection of your former
liking, shall so farforth conduct me, as thereof I shall never be deprived
without due desert to the contrary. My loweliest affections being estsoones
recommended to your wonted courtesy, I continue. etc.


HErewith the other Gentle* that by this time had inckeling sufficient of
Distris Mawd^ins quippe, (by what means I know not) appearing marvelous ill
contented, to see his honest speeches abuzed, by such ill demeaned folly, had
prepared an other letter aunswering to the others saucy taunt, delivered as you
have heard reported before ye recital of this last letter. By the course of
which it appears she was attendaunt upon the Gentlewoman beloved, and had in
charge, by diverse occasions to accompany her, by which means over hearing
some words of this Gentle. and not thoroughly approouing the suit by the
follower, to whom upon some secret grudge she bare a particular envy, she
had first wrought the disgrace aforesaid, and the more to give him to byte
upon, glaunced out the other speeches formerly remembered, the conuaiaunce
whereof includes more matter then may be here rehearsed, but such was his
letter.

MIstres, what you are, I know not, and what I suppoze you to be I write not,
only for that I find you in the place of a Gentlewoman, I determine for this
season to entertaigne you accordinglye. And for that my new acquaintance, is
founded upon the delivery of a disdainful message, take it not I pray you in
skorne, that in some things I touch you, which have too far displaied your
self by your needelesse curiosity. Trust me, for mine own part, I neither
looked to see you, much less to be offended for you. I understand you are
nipped, I know not with what, and would be healed I know not by whom, for
which cause, finding such nicenes in your own conceiptes, you are angry with
Margerie, for keeping company with Marrian, which moved you to utter such
matter of modesty, that in aduising an other to beware, you must affirm, that
you could not choose bnt laugh to see pleasure breed by liking, and trust upon
trial. I am sorry believe me, you past away with empty hands (being so well
accustomed to lapfuls as you have been) and none in presence to greet you. I
wisse little soul your pretty else was an ace above 31* when you forgot your
self so far, to utter more then your charge. For albeit you had in command
to admonish, neither was it in your misterisse good pleasure, or pertinent to
her courtesy, that you by scoffing objections should skorne others, in things
especially whereunto in truth they were never parties, and the cause not
concerning your self, whom to be plain with I do suppose to have as little
discretion in the same, as you had consideration in delivery of the rest.
For which cause wishing you in his behalf, whom I love, to refrain your
privy skoffes without occasion, and envy without deserte, who for the Virtues
in him appearing deserves more allowaunce, then at the hands of a better then
your self might very well have perceived, I herewith end^ my letters.

He that would have answered you if he had heard you.R. B.


THe ill success of this letter, having set a higher color then accustomed,
on the top of Distress Mawdlins vizard, made her nose more rubie like a great
deal, then the color of the painters Vermilion, who being more chollericke
then of fleagme, could have served a fiery face to any skarlet die in this
town, but at this instant was somewhat whotter then a winters tossed. Whereupon
growing to great agonies, the market by her means was so enhaunst, that our
suitor at the next meeting could not so much as have a sight of that he liked,
neither by entreaty nor money. Now began the Lover to be perplexed, and
becoming as one in a strange country, void of knowledge or acquaintance,
knew not which way to bend his passage.

He cursed in his imaginations, the over rash charge of his friend, without
entertainment of any daliaunce, wherein mistress Mawdlin being touched with
Lapfulles, could not for her life be qualified we cartloades, so wonder fully
exceeded she by so great impatiency. Then was he angry with himself that
could not consider how silence at sometimes was far more necessary then
speech, and that he who has suits in hand, must otherwhiles honor a knave
with the service of a Lord, and be feign to set up a candle before the devil,
till his purpose be obtained. But after wit comes too late, and so he
resolved, and deeming it needful to the state of his liking (that with wodden
pricks would not easily be expelled) to assay (if he could) by all means to
entreat her, he once again gathered to him paper and ink, and breaking
forth into many and extreme tokens of a discontented mind, he settled in the
end his imaginations, to this present matter following.

THe great care I have (sweet misteris) as well to avoid any cause of mislike
on your part, as also to continue my self by desert in your craved good
likeing, have objected unto my doubtful mind so many and over grievous
imaginations as I partly stand in doubt to what side to incline. One while
calling in question the hazard of my hap, and the extremity I look to
ensue, if (not guarded with your courtesy) I be made a common object of every
envious opinion. An other while reputing my self not fortunate in whatsoever
chance may be tide me, being thus long banished from the sight of that should
most content me. On neither part comforted with any thing, because being
crossed with so many mishaps, I dare not hope for the remedy I would, nor give
place to the wish I have desired, seeing my self circumuented with so many
false and feined conclusions. I protest I never gave cause of offense to your
person, seeing the honor is more that I bear you, then the life I crave to
enjoy not possessing you. Think not (deer misteris) I could so far
degenerate to reward a Jews courtesy with fained treachery, much less a
gentlewoman, your good self, she to whom the best part of my life is indebted,
and for whom the sowrest death could not be to me unpleasant. Let not
therefore envious flattery prevail above truth and unfeigned loyalty, for so
much as to disprooue their reproaches rests yet in my life to verify. Which
only depending upon your courteous dismission of this bearer, remains till
then surcharged with dolors as:

He that is not his but yours: B. L.


Having thus finished what he meant, and by a convenient bearer, posted the
same to the hands of his implacable Misteris, hard were it to be coniectured,
how thoroughlie on each part the same was skanned. Misteris Mawdlin becoming
by this time, the very bosom of all her imaginations, forgatte not to tattle
what malice could utter, and swore by no beggars that if it rested at her
likyng, her self would look (I trow) to minse upon higher pantophles, then
to match with such underlings. The wenche was wise, and spoke of sound and
perfect skill, for well was she mortized in her punie years, and knew that to
deal with younger brothers, was nothing comparable to an elders possessions.
The gentlewoman notwithstanding, stood but very slightly (as I heard) with
him upon such trifles, only the quarrel grew upon other matter, and so
prayed she the same might rest. She deemed (she said) that very amply he
had deserved, which was not in posse at her hands to be requited, but what in
good will she might endeavor for him, how far soever different they were in
all other opinions, therein yet she stood confirmed, in some little more then
ordinary account to receive him. Finally she was not of her self alone, and
therefore enforced to limit her offers, in consideration of which, she prayed
him to be satisfied, and not to search or assay at her hands to have any
farther progressions. Sage Mawdlin in continuance of all this conference laughed
in her sleue, she thought by this time her cake had caught heat, and was now
somewhat more then dough, but he on the other side greeuing at nothing so much
as that he could not be satisfied in mind of the most substantial part of
her mislike, but that the passage of her speeches were conveyed over with a
manner of slight regard, as though if it were well taken or not she cared
not, and yet would be loathe (too overmuch coffeehouse) to break off,
notwithstanding never after hope might be conceived of any wished good effect,
was now in a greater muse then before. And frequenting oftentimes his mistress
ordinary passages in purpose, if he might conveniently once more meet with
her, to make his small and extremest matter of resolution against himself that
might be: it was a thing so impossible for him to compass by reason of the
continued drift of mistress Mawdlin, whose saintis^ countenance, was not so
pleasing unto him (for she fawningly still received him, though inwardly she
could not abide him) as some other he ^ish aspect, that what by her diverse
entercourses, or his misteris settled frowardnes he was never able by any
means to speak with her. Wherewith greatly enraged in deep disdain and most
hard mislike of such her discourteous dealinge, after many arguments and
encountrings objected in his secret imaginatio^s, he deemed in himself at last
how greatly he deserved to be accused, in that by pursuit of so peevish an
intendment, he would go about to make his discretion a laughing stock, to
those that had neither reason nor courtesy to account of it, and that by too
liberal a proffer of that which in no point (according to the least desert
included in the principal worthiness) might be esteemed of. Now began
reason a little to peer in one corner of his decayed conceits, and though the
former trodden steps of Love had before time left so many broad paths in the
greatest entry of his woonted endeavors, yet was he at this instant something
persuaded by degrees to reclayme himself, and if his hap were not too much
addicted to his auowed overthrow, to become a new man. Whereupon departing from
the place wherein he remained, he posted immediately to his woonted lodge, and
there being set down, twixt ancient settled Love and new erected mislike,
depending as it were in equal balance, not fully resolved to leave, and loath
in such disordered daliance to be thus continued, he framed these lines, which
in testimony of that he after performed, he causes to his misteris to be
forthwith recommended.

SHall I term you a friend as importuned by necessity, or induce you as a
stranger solicited with hope of some better courtesy: or mazed as I stand in
my doubtful dumpes, shall I now deem to gain that by entreaty, which trial
in many days could never have performed by enguaged lot of assured loyalty?
No trust me, I will henceforth neither speak nor proffer auowe nor gainesay,
but as counterchecked with my former pretense, I will seek to man my fortune
by a forced and continual silence. Cruel I cannot say that you are, that
proffer no more than you have promised.

Of unkindness I charge you not, as in whom never any good affection
toward me was planted. Discourteous I dare not aff^rme (although causeless I
have bin touched) because the same is a blemissie to the offspring of true
gentilitie. But thus much I may lawfully auerre, that I never deserved the
least part of injury that as reward of my approved good will has always
been proffered me. If Theseus had no more felicity in his labors, Jason in
his adventures, or Paris in his amors then I have found pleasure in pursuit
of thy worthiness, and quiet in abandoning my happiness: I blame them not to
be noted of inconstancy, rather then to be yoked to so hard an extremity.
Your words sauouring of too much despite, and countenance toward me
continually freight with intolerable disdain, enforce me to think that either
in deed I am become an unwonted and most vile abject, or else you have
usurped more over me, then former familiarity with a great many could
heretofore enforce within me. Which if by singularity you had obtained why
might not the same with like courtesy have been continued? But Fortune,
evermore envious of my good happ, willing always to mate me with a causlesse
contrary, giving me to be the servant of so dainty a misteris, must of
necessity herein show her blind bayardie: who not content eftsoons for my
good will to plunge me in the waves of her severity, like a peeuishe and most
har^braine guide, draws me on still to her cruelty, and will in no wise be
entreated so much as to look back on my passed euilles, but as blind and
sottish, runs pooring, as deaf plodding as inconstant wavering, not
certain whether she may throw me into Stix with Tantalus, or give me for an
endless pennaunce to the rolling charge of Sisiphus. Pardon me if my words be
more then woonted, since in the less that I have gained, I am forced to
complain of the more, which I never deserved. But why speak I here of
desert, sith it was never in my skill to pleasure you, in my hability to
profit you, nor in my choice to content you, which although I have often
willed, many times wished, and with great desire would have accomplished, yet
whether it were mine own ill hap or what other cruel destiny that denied me,
I leave to your indifferency to judge, and to mine own mishappe to testify,
which if with equality you will deem of, the evil shall surmount, that has
bin received above all the good that in fine was required. I would you could
have contented your self to have become the hope misteris of my good fortune,
as well as to my great grief, I have found you a known misteris of mine evils.

It is the property of a great many, to desire much and to be contented with
nothing, but I have requested but a little, and could not be satisfied with
any thing. If my demand at any time has been unlawful, I hold my peace
as convinced by mine own importunity, but if I have required nothing but
equity, why then am I sequestered from my hope with such hard discourtesie.
Your opinion I know not, and how it may hereupon conceive in my behalf I
request not, but contenting my self with mine own unworthiness, wishing that
the same might as worthyly have been deemed at your hands, as undeservedly
with others before you, it has been accounted of, since my speech has
troubled you, and my sight so much offended you, as I shall perforce surcease
from the one, so I assure you for the other I will wi^h as much resistaunce go
about to bridle my self, being contented to become your abject, and and yet
skorning to become hereafter to any other, like subject.


TO this letter of all others she only answered, wherein, as much as she might
she sought to discharge her self of all notes of discourtesie, declaring that
she was glad to see, that by discretion he would so well go about to order
his passions. But now in this mean time fell it out, that upon some occasion
greatly concerning her self* she was to compass a matter, wherein he only
was able to satisfy her, and without whom she could not in any sort
obtain it.

Hereupon mistress Mawdlin was called to council, whose opinion stood
unconquered, and would not have her to stoop in any sort, nor to be so much
recreant as either by courteous countenance or otherwise to give suspicion
that she would entreat him. He nevertheless, remaining nothing ignorant that
his service at this instant unto his Misteris might become grateful, yet not
presuming in respect of his former ill fortune, that touching her account, the
same might any thing profit him, in show of his own good nature and gentle
condition, as well as in regard of his former loving (for love also had yet
left in him, very so^md marks of his dwelling) he secretly dispatched the
same, whilste her self and mistress Mawdlin were thereon yet amusing.

Notwithstanding all which (so great was her discourtesie, and so much
persisted she, in this self willed opinion of her great counselor Mistress
Mawdlin) as albeit she well understood how much the same did aduant^ge her, and
that his exceeding courtesy becoming at all times a testimony most evident,
in what sort he reuerented her, and with how great loyalty he still endeavored
to pursue her, yet vouchesafed she not so much as her speech or sight, by any
one jot of apparaunce whatsoever, to give show that it was thanks worthy. But
our lover being thoroughly by this time accustomed to all these varieties,
contenting him self to have deserved well, though it rested not in her good
government at that instant to use him well, determined finally to give notice
thereof in this letter, and thereupon (with the same affection as before time)
never after to regard her.

IF I could suppose in my self any ways to be injurious to your affections,
it should manifestly appear unto you, that without the wreake of your self, I
could willinglye become a sufficient revenge of your utmost extremities. But
trust me, if in many things I have been faulty unto the world, unto your
good self I have no ways erred, unless in loving too much I have been
offensive to your favor, and for that I long since craved pardon. Sithence
which time, without complaint what I have suffered, I have studied so much as
in me, to with-drawe and forbid whatsoever might sound to the breach of your
least denial. And albeit my thoughts being free, by a curious desire and
reverence borne to your worthiness, yoked my inward conceiptes to the search of
whatsoever pleasing and most affecting to the scope thereof, by reason of
which, and by an invincible determination thereunto, I had placed the some of
all my bliss, and ensuing happiness, in the forward use and practice of the
same: yet sounds it to very slender approbation, that in your self being
beloved, there should so much coins and little courtesy be approved. I do
not suppose it to be unjust, that God has given unto women so strange a
condition, for that where men subject them selves to so vain a fantasy: it is
great reason they bear with them the burden incident to so vain a folly. If
I found not so great a scourge in these fruitles affections, I could with as
little reason make challenge to your favor, as you with small courtesy have
given me a sop of such savor. But happily it falls out as proper to your sex,
that till you know your selves to be certainly beloved, you have courtesy at
commandment, and liking at pleasure: and when good will is once offered, you
by and by wax coye because the same is proffered. Trust me, if I had thought
that things had therefore been of less price, because they are willingly
bestowed, the market should have been enhaunst before I would have bowed. But
seeing there is so far difference between us, as that your pleasure is turned
to my pennaunce, and your nicenes to my annoyaunce, with as much loss as by
restraint rests hitherto unrewarded, I will master my liking, til with more
usury I may be repaied in causes of love. Nevertheless not so far estranged
from you, but that in any cause of courtesy, I will not forget you are a
Gentlewoman, and therefore yet be content (as before time) in such sort to
respect you, whereof had it not been your contrary pleasure, you needed not as
you have done to make any exception. Not meaning hereafter to trouble your
remembrance with any more of my speeches, otherwise then beseems a familiar
acquaintance, I hereon do conclude my last determination and farewell.


Upon this resolution was defined all this matter of liking, occasioning the
several letters hereby in order delivered, the manner whereof both in respect
of the pleasure, as for the be^ter opening of the occasion to the full conceit
of their applications and meaning, I have the more largely laid forth. And for
as much as the diversities already delivered in this book, do arise to so
gross a volume, as se^meth in quantitye sufficient for the first perusing, and
that the laying hereunto the residue of the parts Judicial and Familiar, with
such other things as thereunto are intended to be added, would greatly and
more then ^oble have augmented the bigness of the same, I have thought good in
this place to determine this foremost work. Praying the courteous viewers of
these my labors, to become as friendly censurers, as gladly I have gone abaut
herein to publish my endeavors, so shall they bind me by their bounty, in
performing no more then they owe in courtesy.

Laus Deo and domino Jesus.

