WITS BEDLAM, -- Where is had,
Whipping-cheer, to cure the Mad.
The BOOK.
Those Epigrams feign would I owe,
Where every Word, is a Word and a Blow.
Reproses, where they are Well deserved; must be Well paid.

At LONDON Printed by G. ELD, and are to be sold by James Dauies, at the Red
Cross nere Fleete-streete Conduit. 1617.

To the Right noble Lord the Earl of Buckingham, be much mirth, permanent
Pleasure, and endless happiness, here, and else where.
TO Thee, whose Worth has doubled good-hopes Cape
Thrice in high pleasures Seas, I send this Toy,
To mock such Apes (or Beasts in humane shape)
As give us cause of laughter, and annoy.
Here Is Wit too rank, since sprung from too much soil;
Whereat such Apes as but Saints counterfeit,
Do mop and mox; good sport, in sport, to spoil,:
But, iustest lerkes their wry-mouths right shall set.
If some Lines broader be, than long, herein,
(To make the lash (with laughter) loud each blow)
It is, broad Faults to scourge with greater din,
To fear, much more than hurt, offenders so: (grieve,
Then when ( dear Lord) great cares your greatness
Laugh at these Ierkes (like Greatness) in your sleeue.
To the Printer.
PRinter, here is for thee; yet, it is not for me;
But clean against me: for, thei'l ban my Birth
Whose Crimes I scourge; but, that is good for thee:
For, most will rather buy their Plague, with mirth,
Than profit that, with pleasure, holds not Quarter;
Then, still French-crowne me, since I am thy Martyr.
And yet, least, so, I should no Martyr be,
Give me the Fame, take Gould and Blame to Thee.
Again, of my Self.
SOme (not a few) who long to raise their Name
In Proems to their Books, seem foes to Fame:
Nay, more than seem; who vow (to grace their
They publish Books for profit, not for praise: (days)
And, hate all friendship held with pride or fame,
Though to their Books, they use to put their name.
But I am none of those (dissembling so)
I Will speak the truth; And, therefore All shall know,
That FAME and I have been too long in love,
Now to be foes: Nay, still I Will strive to prove
The vt'most of mine Vt'most for her sake;
Yea life forgo, ere She should me forsake.
And if She ^aue me, through my Fortunes wrack,
I Will fly her; so, to bind her to my Back:
For Men by Nature, rather then thei'le be
Nothing, of Something; they desire to flee
Upon the Wings of euiternall FAME
Beyond Decay; and Be, though but in Name.
And be it that unsanctified Wit
With hellish Flashes may soon kindle it,
And make ^t burn in glory still; yet lust
I mo^e for That, than all that turns to dust.
Say, it is a burning fever of the Soul
To long for that which hurts, not makes her whole
And, that that Air is too too pestilent,
That makes the Sickness much more violent:
Yea, Water (though from Castaly it came)
Is best forborne if it but oils the Flame;
Yet can I not but say* yea, lowdly cry.
I love, nay doat on all Eternity,
Save that which has relation so to ill
As makes Eternity abhord: Yet fill
My Muse a Bowl of Nectar drawn from thence
Whence all Gods Stellifide have influence,
And I Will carouse so freely of the same,
That pain I Will bear, as pleasure 'twere, for Fame.
And though I reele beneath the Wheel of Fate,
Yet Fame shall follow me through love or hate:
That if to higher Styles I cannot climb.
All Times shall Style me Taxer of my Time.
It Is a mad world my Masters. And a merry world my Mistrisses.
O Brains, what Bounds are set to lymit you,
In madness? will you crack the Pan, your fence?
Will you be mad with Reason? are you true
Unto my Judgment, Sovereign of your Sense?
Lo, how you me expose to endless Spite:
To Censure, that may Patience quel to bear it?
Will you interre my Name in datelesse Night,
And for your Glory must I Shame inherit?
Do you contain such Powrs as are of force
To give me Honor for Wit well imploid;
Yet make 'twixt Wit and Wisdom such divorce,
As, with Worlds-hate, I shall be still anoyd?
Put that hate in one Scale (O Weight past Weight!)
And in the other put Airs worser name,
(Called same for Folly, or a vain conceit)
Will This, not light; That, heavy make my fame?
Shall aged Thoughts so doa^? Shall Childhood now
Invade my Judgment with so fierce assault,
That it to idle Fancies so should bow,
As still to bear the weight of Follyes fault?
And shall I sell my Birthright for such Grewell
As feeds, but fattens not; or, fats but Fools?
Will you to my good Name become so cruel
As still to have me whipped in Wisdoms Schools?
Be quiet Wit, leave beating of my Brain
To do the Work of playing but on Crimes:
To Scourge the Follyes of the World is vain,
If thy Whips Lines be naught but rotten Rymes.
Muses, why sleep ye? Will ye see me sink
Over head and ears in shame, who do adore you?
Stretch out your hands: what! from me do you shrink
To drown in deep disgrace while I implore you?
Brains, seek you glory of Herostratus,
To make your Findings cursed to Aftertimes?
Call in my Muse and check her thus, and thus;
What do I now? thus (x x x) cross I out her Rime^s,
Who knows how near the Article of Death
My Fame and I am? And what 'compt I must
Give for each vain and ill employed breath
I fetch for life? To what then do I trust?
My Fame. Why, that may dye before me? Or
My Pleasure? That dies with me. What is it then
Makes me thus plague (which I am forty for,
For having cause) my self and other men?
Faults; Faults and naught but fair and fowlest Faults,
Both in my self, and others I epsy.
Tush, they are nere mended with such mad Assaults
As make them worse, and many more thereby.
I hope of better: Aretine, whom Fame
Styled Scourge of Princes (such I leave to such)
Kept them in awe: So may an Epigram
With other soft-brow'd Sinners, do as much.
But, Oh, I am too broad; and, that does irke.
But how should I scourge broad sins otherwise?
Must I not make them bare before I ierke?
Who knows not that? Why then let that suffice.
What? Wit, how now? Have ' suces for these scapes?
VVilt thou turn Fool, yet wittily defend it?
Have thou so many anticke formelesse Shapes?
Yet ween'st it such as Wisdom cannot mend it?
Where art thou Wisdom? will thou suffer Wit
To run wild now in me; and havoc make
Of all my Reason in a frantic fit?
O Heavens! where am I? Do I sleep, or wake?
I yonder Sky the Sky? Is that the Sun
Which I have wakinge seen? Is this the Earth
Where safe I walked; and now will let me run
To break mine Honors neck, in brainsick mirth?
Are these the Folk I fool with, which I see?
Or shadows? Shadows? No. What else? Madmen
The greater number: so, will Martyr me
For whipping of but One, and fearing Ten.
A hall, mad Bedlams, now my Brains (like yours)
Begin to crow: my Muse, this Afternoon,
Must dance a Brawle: O! look! Apollo lowres
To see his Priest so subject to the Moon!
Gods me, how now? what strange confused noise
Of murmur hear I? O! the Earth does shake:
Powles makes her People volley-foorth her voice
Against me for their ierks. Ha^ke! O! I quake.
S'foote what are these that pynch me? Goblins?
A wanion on the Elues for me; What now? (Elues?
Pinch you behind, ye Nits, to save your selves?
Before me too? Saint George; then have at you.
What Weather's this? how soddain is this Storm?
Whence fall these Stones that so do batter me?
What! from the Winds wide Mouth? can they in-
I weigh them not a Mite, so light they be. (or me?
Hark how it thunders! All the world's afire
With flashes of the fury of the mad.
Look, look, they come; beware, retire, retire:
Hold Brains; this fear, I fear, will make you gad.
Apollo help me. No? Wilt leave me thus?
What! not one glance of favor in this Case?
Then, Luna help; be thou propitious.
Why, so: thou cheer'st me in this Wild-goose-chase?
But soft! What smell is this: It wounds my Brain?
Breath of Blaspheamers: Fie, is no Place free
From this so banefull Air? Can I remain
No where, but, lik a Plague, 'twill follow me?
O what a Hell is this? A hell? No, no;
It Is better than some Scapes, that more offend:
It Is but the bleating of some Calfe, or so,
That feels my Spleenes just Ierks; and there is an end.
Bitter zeal, is less than Love.
FAme, gathering out of her own motion strength,
And lively grown by labor in her flight,
I seek to hold; yet draw her out at length
With this my mirry Muse: But, here is the spite:
To follow Mirth, as maym'd, she ever uses;
For, Bolts from Dolts still cripple mirry- Muses.
A Caveat.
TO bite is but a dogged part; to sting
Is but a Snakes, Wasps, Hornets, or a Bees;
These Men do shun, since, Dole, or Death they bring;
Yet some have, often, a Medcine made of These;
So, though I biting, bark; and stinging, hiss;
Yet make of all a Medcine for thy Miss.
To Martial.
Martial, thou art still renownd for thy Free* wit;
But, often reproached for thy Looser-pen:
Yet, Wisemen (longing for a merry- Fit)
Read thee with Praise and Pleasure, now and then:
Then I (too proudly humble) think not scorn,
They Wit-all call my name for thy Fames horn.
The BOOK to Gravity.
Stern Gravity auert thy face from me;
Or, look not saddly ou me: for, I am
Too light, somewhere, for Eyes too sad to see;
And yet such lightness shows but Vice her shame:
But, to reprove Vice viciously, is more
Amiss, I fear: the salu's worse than the Sore:
Yet, Grace it self can hardly Wit persuade
That it is sin to call a Spad^ a Spade.
The BOOK to the Reader.
Look thou for Wit well relished? here, each Letter
Yields fresh-Wit seasoned well with Salt and Pepper:
Then, if they last not, or do prove vnsaury,
It Is through thy Foolry, rather than my Knau'ry.
Again.
ARt good; and bad thy wit? then, touch me not:
For, I do often ierke the honest Sot.
Art bad, and thy wit good? Forbear, much more,
To touch me: for, I lash such till they roar.
Or, art thou good, and great thy Wits extent?
Th'wilt love me, tho thou loathe mine Excrement.
But be thon good or bad: for Sixpence, I
Will glad and grieve thee, make thee laugh and cry
O! take my money,
For this Sowre-Honey.
Why Poets of the present times, be not so well esteemed as those of former.
It Is Entry that does make us better deem
Of men erst breathing, tha^ now drawing breath:
So, Poets, that now live; we disesteeme,
And read them not, with pleasure, till their death.
Of the worth of wittiest Works, or Books.
RAre Books are Of-springs of Wits most complete,
Distilled from purest Brains refined Spirits,
Which thereby are consumed: then, such rare merits
Transcend all Patrons Gifts how ever great.
Mercy with Justice.
SHould I, with ierkes of wit, whip every Vice
That now are wa^dring: I should make my book
Swell as it had the worst of Poisons took;
And, make men swell as poisoned, with the price:
But, some I Will whip; the rest I Will spare for some
Of more Wit, and less grace in time to come.
Those Li^es which all, or none do understand, Do neither with Wit, Art, nor
Judgment stand.
THose Rimes are best (though least of most esteemed)
That (like sage Platoes Suppers) best do please
When they diiested be; how er'e mis-deem'd
They be at first: And, so I would have these.
Of My self; and, this Babble, my Book.
SOme loathe to be laughed at for what they write;
But, I do hold that wrong these Writings right:
Then, judge of these too Foolish Writings state,
That only aim but to be laughed at.
Against Pse^cus the too cunning Palmister, and Poet. Epigram. 1.
PSe^cus is perfect in Chirosophy:
That is; he is hand-wise, stealing coningly:
But, often he is well laughed at for stealing Rimes;
So he is Hand-wise, and Head-foole too, sometimes.
Upon one named R^ Holland, who kept one Nell Cotton. Epigram. 2.
A Light yong-man, who loved the like yong-woman
Desired their Things to either might be common:
So, gave her, when her good will he had gotten,
A Yard of Holland, for a N.-ell of Cotton.
Against the nobly-desended Muscus, who wedded a Butchers fat Daughter.
Epigram. 3.
THe well-borne Muscus wedded has, of late,
A Butchers Daughter Fat, for Pounds and Plate:
Which Match is like a Pudding; since in That
He puts the Blood; her Father all the Fat.
Against Faber, the Earelesse forger. Epigram. 4.
FAber, the Forger, would himself bestow,
In marr'age feign; and swears he naught does owe
True: for, he is Earelesse, and hyres all he wears:
So, owes not so much as Clothes, or Ears!
Against Dromus, the Borrowing barraine, or bankroupt Discourcer. Epigram. 5.
DRomus, in talk, repeates but old-said Sawes
Of other M^s; and then Discourse with-draws:
So, (like a rotten Nail) he cannot bore
Through rotten wood without a way before.
Of Leoena, and her two friends; Spot, and Fuller. Epigram. 6.
LEoena, has two friends, that still maintain her;
The one, hight Fuller; the other called Spot:
Having a Fuller, she should have no Spot;
And yet the Fuller with that Spot does stain her:
Then, if thou can not put away her Spot,
Fuller, thou and thy Mill, are ouer-shot.
Of a poor Curate that would have pawned his Bible to a rich Precisians for a
Crown. Epigram. 7.
ACurat, poor* a rich Precisian, praide
To lend him but a Crown but for a Day;
But his request (precisely) he denaide:
Then on his Bible, he the same did pray;
But he (like a precise illiberall Clown)
Would take nor his, nor Gods-Word for a Crown.
Against selfe-conc^ited nine-bibbing- Phagus. Epigram. 8.
PHagus, is wise in his own Eyes (they say)
Then he is a Fool to drink them so away.
Against Gaulus the writing-country Schole-master. Epigram. 9.
GAulus, thou w^it'st thy self my scholar; and
Thou say thou do^^ it Scholars so to get:
But, for thine own, thou still do show my hand:
So, thou deal'st plain, thou can not Counterfeit.
Of Mutius, and Phormius bloudles single-Combate. Epigram. 10.
MVtius, in Field, has ^ought with Phormius,
(Since he thought Phormius often his wife did smack)
where, of the Surgeon, was but little use;
Yet, after, Mutius ran him through the Back:
But, Mutius ran him in behind so sore
Since Phormius often so vsd his Wife before.
Against Mollius, that i^ a most religious Turner. Probatum est. Epig. 22.
MOllius is most religious; but, the spite is,
He, like a Topp, set up, still turns: then he
Must still be whipped, to run the way that right is,
Else, like a Topp, he will rather turn then flee.
Of the poor, Lady Minthes frugality in taking a fair House. Epi. 23.
MInthe, has taken an House (with little pelse)
As fair, as highly r^^ted: but she setts
Her fore-roomes out; and backward lies her self;
And so she lives upon the Rooms she let^:
Then, if by lying Back-ward she does live,
She never goes Back-ward, but she still does thrive.
Of the French Fencer that challenged Church the Fencer at all weapons. Epi. 24.
THe fencing- Gaul (in pride and gallant vant,
Challengd the English at the fencing-skill;
The Fencer Church, or the Church Militant,
His Errors soon reproou'd, and knocked him still:
But since our Church him disciplind so sore,
He (rank Recusant) comes to Church no more.
Of Galla'es true lying. Epi. 25.
GAlla still swears she is a maid: but then
If true she swears, she is unknown of Men:
But all men know her commonly (it is said)
Then she does lie, or is their seruing-maid.
Of Caylus his rest in motion. Epi. 26.
ALl Motion cease when it has its end;
(So say Philosophers) Then, how is it
That Caylus loving long old Kate (his friend)
( Love being a Motion) now in mar^age knit)
Does be at her every day: what rest is this?
Why, Rest of Love, while Hate in Mo^ion is.
Against the freeness of Franks Love. Epi. 27.
HOw is it that Frank so many does be fool?
Bear all in hand; and love protest to all?
Faith her Hearts like her Soul: whole in the whole
And whole in every part, ^ee't nere so small:
So, had she hundreds, she might be alone,
Among them One; yet whole to every One.
Of Caius his loosing his Game by missing to take a Blott. Epi. 28.
Caius his Love, came to his Chamber late;
But, he that grace did not congratulate,
But with too bashful that; who, for the same,
(missing to take her Blot) qu^te lost her Game.
Of Flaccus his two Shadows to his one body. Epi. 29.
FLaccus is followed with a pair of men,
That (good for naught) do no^ght but do him ill,
And yet he shadows it: what marvel then
One Body should have two such Shadows still^
Again. Epi. 30.
FLaccus is almost sunk: of that I muse;
Having two Bladders which he s^ill does use.
Of one that l^st a great Stomach. Epigram. 31.
MAr^ swears he' has lost his Stomach: then if one
that is poor has found it, he is quite undone.
Of old Lixus his young choice. Epi. 32.
LIxus the weak old Dotherd married late,
a Maid, whom friends en^or^ed to that match
So she, perforce, made him her wedded Mate*
But he, ^ans force, does marriage Rites dispatch.
Of Maurus his Orpheus-like melody. Epi. 33.
MA^rus, last morn, at's Mistress window played
An Hunts-vp on his Lute: But she (it is said)
Threw Stones at him: So, he, like Orpheus, there,
Made Stones come flying, his sweet notes to hear.
Of Women's Maskes, Epi. 34.
IT seems that Masks do Women much disgrace,
Since when they wear them they do hide their face.
Of their Mantles. Epi. 35.
I Muse that Mantles, which were made to hide,
Should but discover Vanity and Pride.
Of the Precedence of Lawyers or Physicians, Epi. 36.
Often Lawyers and Ph^sitions strive for place;
But well ye wot the Fellons go before
The Hangman to the Gallows* Then the case
Is clear; the Lawyer should go first therefore.
Of Crispus mistak^rg things. Epi. 37.
CRispus took Phryna up ere down she was,
He takes things ill: it is not alone her Case.
Of old Linus his young service to Women. Epi. 39.
OLd Linus brags, he is such a woman's man,
As never yet was tir'de in serving them:
The old Slave lies: for ask his young Maid Nan,
And she will swear (and yet does not blasph^me)
He Is like a leaden Tuck, at Foynes, or Blows,
Whose Point and Pommel straight together goes.
Then what a shameless beast is this to vant
Of that foul sin which he, in Deed, does want.
Of Glaucus his mirth and madness. Epi. 40.
GLaucus, his mirth does cheer, his rage does
And so by both he gets both love and ^eare:
Then he (like Cheese) does help (when he is at best)
Digestion well; himself hard to digest.
Of Dauus his selling his great horse, for a small fault. Epi. 41.
DAuus has sold his St^ed for starting back
At sight of Armor, or the sound of Drum.
I muse he sold him then, that knew his knacke:
And bought him backward still, to fight to come:
But coming on so, late, his Lord ^ay under,
Then though a Jade a Jade sold it is no wonder.
Of Fuluiaes feather. Epi. 42.
FVluia still in her hair a feather wears!
So, still the lighter far, the heavier bears.
Of Wolfangus his great Nose and thin beard. Epi. 42.
I Muse Wolfangus Beard so thinly grows;
Yet it is no marvel having such a Nose:
For being huge, it yields such shade and breath,
That naught can prosper growing underneath.
Of one called Hoopes, his late embailment from Newgate for filching. Epi. 43.
ONe Hoopes, for filching, late being in the Iayl
Two greazye Guts, ere trial, were his Bail:
So cut is he, and they are in for him,
Where now they fret while they in swet do swim:
But ^^e be bound the i will never close their loops,
If such great Ba^rells get no better Hoopes.
To the most fortunate M. Robert Rooke, who married a most fair and virtuous
wife. Epi. 44.
ROoke thou art treble blessed in thy fate,
That without check, gives Beauties Queen the Mate.
Of Ianus the Justice, his imprisoning Angels coming from the hands of
sinners. Epi. 45.
IAnus (they say) the Justice, lately had
Some A^gels for a Bribe: But damned he,
That put such Creatures (that ou^ hearts do glad)
Into the hands of Justice, for a Fee!
Against Libiduis common protestations to his Dabbe. Epi. 46.
SWeet-lipt Libiduis to his whore does swea^e,
He loves her as his Soul: But better 'twere
He loved her as his Body; for, he does
Please that with whatsoere likes Tail or Tooth,
As for his Soul, I think he truly swears,
for he cares least for that, as well appears.
Of Sir Grobolus his valiant Stomach. Epi. 47.
CHiron the Centaure young Achilles fed,
With Blood and Lions ma^row (meat, and drink)
To make his Stomach great; Then so was bred
Sir Grobolus the greazie Guts, I think,
Whose stomach is so great (where his good will is)
That at the Trencher, he puts down Achilles.
Honor, is Virtues Shadow. Epi. 48.
IF Virtue make not Lords as well as Birth,
The Styles but Honors Stamp upon base Earth.
Again, Epigram. 49.
YEt some base Lords are Nobles (right) of blood
but, if they were right gold, they were as good.
Of the prodigal beggar Plasmus his great charity. Epi. 50.
PLas^us, is utterly undone by play,
And for his living, now, does fast and pray:
But though he fast and pray thus, still he breeds,
A Multitude, which, with his flesh he feeds.
Against Plutus his being penny-wise and pound f^olish. Epi. 51.
PLutus does give him that his horses breaks
Fu^l fifty pounds a year: But to him gives
That breaks his Sons but fi^e, with fifty Gleeks:
Thus his Sons breaker breaks while he grieves:
So, Plutus Beast's well broken: but his Child
Will (like a Beast unbroken) still be wild.
Against the ^^iudicious deprauers of men of Art. Epi. 52.
SOme empty heads, with too full envious hearts,
Deprave what comes from heads still full of Arts:
So, those obscuring Clouds with black reproaches,
Thunder against bright Art like empty Coaches.
A Couplet or two fastened to Sir Io: Harrington his Epigramme, to do his
Ladies Knight, Yeomans Service. Epigram* 53.
A Virtuous Lady sitting in a Muse
(As many times some virtuous Ladies use)
Did lean her Elbow on her knee full hard,
The other distant from it half a yard;
Her Knight to taunt her by a pri^y Token,
Said, Wife a wake, your Cabinet stands open:
She rose and blushed, and smiled, and soft does say,
Then, lock it, if you lust, you keep the Kay.
But he might have replide; good Wife, you mock;
My Key can open, but not shut the Lock.
Sit^ it is a Spring; and Kayes in general
Will do it, if it so openly to all.
Against wives that will not worship Baal. Epigram. 54.
BAal the Hebrew Word does signify
Husband and Lord (as Linguists have us taught)
But many wives (to avoid Idolatry)
Refuse to worship Baal; yet are naught!
How bad Husbands recompense a good House-wife. Epigram. 55.
A Good Wife's (like a Snaile) nere out of door
(Except her Head) to shun, and let abuse:
That makes bad husbands go abroad the more
To horn their wives (poor Snales) for keeping house
A good wife should be unlike the Moon. Epigram. 66.
A Good-wife should unlike the Moon appear,
(Which most appears when most she is from the
Not once appear but when her Sun is near: ( Sun)
But some, like Lunaticks, abroad do run,
Most when their Suns are furthest from their vewes,
So, multiply the Beams on their Suns Brows!
Of Nell that was married to some Thing, her self having Nothing. Epigram. 68.
NEll, no Thing has; which breeds her husband lothing:
Then this he only knows, that he knows nothing.
Of a Wanton Paires marriage in the night. Epigram. 69.
CLaro, for have, was married in the night:
That was because his wife and he were light.
Of Witty Stophus that married a fair Fool. Epigram. 70.
STophus, with his great wit, a fool has wed;
Strange death the liuing's bound so to the dead.
Of Spongius, overthrown by the Kings Arms. Epigram. 60.
THe Kings-armes-Tauerne, Spongius brings full low:
No marvel: Kings-armes Subjects overthrow.
Against Beastias his filthy Tongue. Epigram. 61.
BEastias foul Tongue still talks, and's Tail among,
Which shows more wit and grace then his foul Tongue.
Of some Merchants Wives coniuring. Epigram. 62.
SOme Merchants Wives conjure their Maids, in storms,
With Wands enchanting, working wonders so:
But on their husbands heads some conjure horns,
By their Familliers still, with them below!
Against perfumed fellows. Epigram, 63.
THey that smell least, smell best; which intimates,
They smell like Beasts that smell like Cynet-cats.
Of the traveling Eboracian Casus h^s strange fortune. Epigram. 64.
CAsus, the Eboracian, made aboade,
Two years in Palestine, and one at St^ade:
Whose wife, at his return, he found with Child;
Whereat when she perceau'd him to grow wild
She sai'd he got it; it is his own (she swears)
But then (if it be true) it well appears
His Organ of begetting longer is
Than the Turks Arm, that falls far short of this:
Then that must needs be propt up with a Forke,
That reaches from Jerusalem to York!
Of Friscus his secret jesting with a too earnest Lady. Epigram. 65.
FRiscus in secret, iested with a Lady,
(Which jesting Chaucer far more broadly styles)
Who, fearing fainting, called him Fool and Baby;
But he with jesting plide her all the whiles:
Then, if she called him fool, she did not fable:
For, fools are ever jesting with their Babble.
Of Hipocrites, pretending to have the Spirits Unction. Epigram. 66.
THe Unction of the Spirit some seem to have;
So, seem they pure whom vices most deprave:
Yet with that Unction sleeke them selves about,
Too like lean Kidneies, only fat without.
Against s^lfe-flattery. Epigram. 67.
THat flattery merits most contempt and blame,
Where flatterer, and the flattered is the same.
Of a most Honorable Error. Epigram. 68
CAliusius Sabine thought his Learning deep,
Since he about him Clarks profound did keep:
O^ that our Nobles would so nobly err,
They never should live their glory to interre!
Of a Flatterer. Epigram. 69.
A Flatterer (like a Wrastler) stoupeth low
To him he flatters; so, to overthrow:
God bless good Princes from such stoupers; and,
Place such about them as do upright stand.
Of a Freeman made too fast. Epigram. 80.
THe whore Lenaea wives a Knight at last;
So she, being loose, makes this free Knight too fast!
Of no fish called Salmon. Epigram. 81.
A Man, called Salmon, Siuern bancks dwelt under
That his wife Salmons spawned then, was no wonder!
Of Curtius open-handednesse. Epigram. 82.
CVrtius, does use his money as his slave;
But better it were he used it as his Friend:
For, otherwise twill leave him by his leave;
So will his friends without leave, in the eud:
Then use it Curtius as thy slave; yet so,
That thou make much of it, before it go.
Of Bestius hate. Epigram. 73.
BEstius does hate, not envy good men: why?
A Beast does hate, but never can envy.
Against Faustus, the profane swearing Swaggerer his hate. Epigram. 74.
FAustus still swears he lothes the married state:
But it must needs be good which she does hate.
Against Metra her deafness. Epigram. 75.
WHen Metra is solicited to Do,
She seems as if she gave no Ear thereto;
Put (dallying) uses strange diuerticles
Until she hears th'agreements Articles:
And then ioynes issue with the Suitors straight,
Who lightly ends the matter with some weight.
Of Cleobulinas dark Discourse. Epigram. 76.
CLeobulina, speaks by Parrables,
In Riddles (dark) her sense she does insold:
No Eagles eye (though help with Spectacles)
Can see the way her meaning to unfold:
But ask her for a Gown, what she will do?
Those words she will echo plainly, She will do.
What Lawyers are like. Epi. 92.
LAwyers are like the Tongues of Balances,
Foes to th'ore weighd with Coin and Countnances,
Who still encl^^e unto the weightiest side;
And there while weight remains, they do abide.
Laws were better to be like Hunters Toils, which they be not: Than like
Cob-webs, which they be. Epi. 93.
LIke Cob-webs, Laws still take the little flies,
When as the Waspe and Hornet scapes with ease
But Hunters Toils the great Beasts do surprise;
And let the little escape: were Laws like these,
The great should have less power the small to hurt
Or, if they did, they should be ha^p^^d sort.
Of the unbloody wars of Poets. Epi. 79.
THe Banquet of the Centau es made (^t's sed)
The Cups to fly at one another head:
And often such Banquets are with Mars his Mates,
Where Boles let out and take in blood of P^tes:
But Poets are more wise and merry m^n,
That freely drink and war but with the P^n.
Of Blaynus the Beggars cunning counterfetting. Epigram. 80.
BLaynus the Beggar, and sly Counterfeit,
With Birdlime, Meal, and Blood with ease, does set
Sores on his Limbs; so, Crus^ed cunningly,
That Hearts of Ste^le melt at his misery.
Thus, he being whole does break; yea thus break out,
To move men's mercy, as he sits without:
But if your Birdlime (Blayre) so take men sitting,
You make Men Dottrells, caught with Counterfetting.
Against Phanus his Modesty. Epigram. 81.
PHanus, the bashful Leacher, dares not name
those Parts which to abuse he cou^ts no shame:
O monstrous modesty^ that shames to say
That which to Do he holds but sport, or play.
Of Fluxus his constant change. Epigram. 82.
IN every Month even as the Moon does change;
So ^luxus state a change does still sustain;
Now fills, the^ falls (with Course unstaid, as strange)
Like a strong Felt, soon down, then up again:
Were he stark Lunatic it would not do so:
Yet like his Brains, his state does ebb and flow!
Against Phannius sad looks, linde with lightness. Epigram. 82.
PHannius, does se^d his Conscience to the Stews;
Yet up his Countenance demurely Mewes,
Like an Italians wises the worse for that;
For so it more deceaues in I know what.
Of Nichus good fortune, being robbed. Epigram. 83.
COpper-nos'd Nichus swears that robbed he was:
But I suppose the Thief was but an Ass;
For that he left behind him, and did lose,
The precioust Thing he had; which was his Nose!
Against Curtezans that color their whoredom with a catholic pretense. Epi.
84.
NAis, Lais, and ^hais, were not so near in name
As in their Trade, 3 whores past grace and sham
So whore, whore, whore come not in sound more near
Then some pure fasters, to that Belly-cheere.
Of a Knight, that did a work of darkness in the Light, and my sight. Epi.
85.
OF late, I chanced to see a Lady, light
(Light I may well say) from her bright Caroch
Where housed she was; wherein soon went a Knight,
Which I observed sitting in a Porch.
The Knight gone up the waiting-maid came down;
And left them in a Chamber next the Street:
The Maid, at door, conuerst; while (as his own,
Though nothing less) the Knight his Love does greet.
,,But Love is blind; and so saw neither lover
that through the glass they might be seen by day:
So in my sight, he did Knights-seruice to her
Against the Window, this light Ladies Stay:
For, since the Deed was dark, this virtuous Knight,
(With a free spirit) still pusht it into Light.
Of my Self. Epigram. 86.
Cornelius, Gallus, Sappho, Pindarus,
Anacreontes, Alceon, Orpheus,
Propertius, Virgill, Ovid, Inuenall
Callimachus, Philotes, Martial,
Catullus and Tibullus; These have sung
In seu'rall Strains of Love and whores among:
Then, have, I Precedents for what I do
Against over doing Drabbs that men undo;
But if the Bridwell Lash them nothing irks,
They will but laugh at these poor paper-Iirks.
Of Frontus his Formosity and Deformity. Epi. 87.
FRontus, the Gallant, is both fair, and foul;
Which Contradiction, faith can hardly win:
Yet being brave in Body, soild in Soul,
Maks good he is fair without, and soul within:
And though his Suits be silks of several forms,
He Is but inuolud with Excrements of Worms;
For which he is sued both within, and out;
And so his only beauty is in Suit.
Of Phormus his gelded Purse. Epigram. 88.
PHormus, had in his Purse two Rubies (rich)
When with his Turkesse (damned drab) he lay*
To find which Purse and Stones she sought his brich
While he found sport for which he de^re did pay:
For, when she found his Purse, she made no Bones
To g^ld it, 'ere he found it, of the Stones.
Of Rufus his mirry-sory night. Epigram. 89.
RVfus has found a Thousand pound (they say)
In but one merry night; and that in play
Which some call Game: but so much lost, in brief,
Was won in Game, but lost in deadly grief.
Against the false survey of one W: Perch (a foul^ deformed Low^) who, with
his mathematical Instrument, measured one Kate A^re amiss; yet made it full
e're he had done. Epi. 90.
A Perch, that wanted man's proportion,
Measured an Acre standing, in a Vale:
Who found it full when he the Work had done;
Yet it refused since false he found the Dale:
Of Ladies silke-stocks embossed upon the Top^, and S^ames with gold. Epigam.
96.
LAdies, is it not enough Silke-stocks to wear,
But they o^ Seames, and Tops must be embost,
With gold, or silver, though it never appear?
Nere? That were hard, and all that Charge were lost.
Who knows not, beauty still unseen, is vain
As is our bravery* but, who brauest be;
Or fairest, desire to have it seen, to gain
Some notice or respect; then, surely, she
That wears such Stocks, her knees discloseth often,
That some may see the Charge that is a loft.
Of two Gallants that agreed to ^ight, went out, were hurt, and returned
without bleeding Epigram. 97.
TWo Gallants needs would fight; Sword, Time,
Appoin^ed were, and all agreed upon: (and Place,
Then both rode out, and ran a Wild-goose-chase;
But both mistook the place: so, both, alone,
Returned again, both swearing they were there;
True: there where both we^e hurt a like with fear:
Then since their fearful hurts so equal were;
Let them shake hands to heal their hurts of Fear.
Of Iuliaes book^shnesse. Epigram. 98.
IVlia, is Bookish; and, does study still
To fashion Natures favors to her will:
Her Mirror is her Book, her time to pass;
And so she ever studies on her Glass.
Of Zenius his taking Tobacco with a whiffe. Epigram. 99.
ZEnius still takes Tobacco, with a Whiff;
Which (so) does make him drunk, that, when he speaks,
His Tongue does faulter in his Mouth, as if
He parting were: yet, when to part he seeks,
He falls; so, cannot part: and, so, he dies
In Show at least, but yet, in Deed, he lies!
Of the small respect had of learned men in general. Epigram. 100.
CAligula, envying the bright ^ames
Of Homer, Virgill, and grave Liuius,
Or^ethrew their statuaes, to or'ethrow their Names
But would these times had none more barbarous,
For, in this age, Caligula^s we find
That let them starve, that shine in either kind.
^
And so the Douch would be, but for the Pot.
Against the fantastical Attire that many Ladies wear now a days. Epi. 114.
IF Ladies Manners with their Ga^ds agree;
Then they Seem such, they would not seem to Be;
But if they would not Be as they are in sight.
Let them not wear what makes them seem so light
Of the strange dareing of young gallants of the^^ familier times. Epi. 115.
VErtumuus was a God the Romans served,
That gouernd Minds and could all shapes assume;
Oh! if that Quality were yet reserved
For some audacious Lads that would presume:
What Ladies Locks, nay what Queens Clossets should
Be left unlocked the Wags would be so bold!
Of Dawlus his unkind kindness. Epi. 116.
Crows will not feed their young til 9. days old,
Because their unkind color makes the^ doubt
Them to be theirs; which makes the^ to withold
Their help, till Time the truth by proof brings out,
If Dawlus then were witty as a Daw,
Having a Child so far unlike him self,
He would from him his helping-hand withdraw,
And let (...) undoubted ^ather keep the (...):
But (Natural) he, is kinder than a Crow,
To keep the Brat, whose Sire he does not know,
Against D. Tangus his swelling physic, Epi. 117.
TAngus, the Phisick-doctor, loves a Whore
Better then giving physic to the poor.
He has the art of Bawdry better far
Than Physic: yet, in both does make and Marr^:
He makes a Maid a VVhoore; so, mares her quite:
And makes a sound man sick, or dead outright.
What Virgin can resist, when he does boast
He can restore her Maydenhead, if lost:
Which at her marriage shall be found as strict
As any Gi^les that Love did never aflict.
When he does promise, by a phisick-feate,
To let the Womb and Pappes from growing great.
To give her Unguents and Complexions store
To make her Beauties rare Reflex^ons more:
To keep her Body still, in healthful state;
And make her mirry in despite of Fat^.
Which having Will to promise, Skill, to do;
What VVench can choose but love and please him too?
Tangus, your Art your Nature truly hits.
That helps or hinden Loves stil-burning si^s.
But take heed ( Tangus) how you empty still
The VVombes which you with working-phisick fill,
Least some repentant wench which used you have
Say at her end you used her like a Knave:
Then, let me thee admonish (without stripes)
Give no more Physic with such Glister-pipes.
Of the Physicians means and opportunity to be baudy. Epi. 118.
NO Craft, like that of Physic, has such times,
For baudy-matches, and such carnal crimes:
No houses are so close, nor walls so strong,
No Prisons nor no Monastries, among,
Which may or can the Emperick shut out:
Nay, more, he makes jealous husbands pout:
For, sole he must be with their Love sick wives,
To minister what they love as their lives.
Eudemus so did Physic L^uia, (sick)
And Vectius Valentinus did the like
To Messalina: So, they nere do fail
Of time to give close Physic at the ()
Of Leuis his Colors. Epi. 119.
LEuis goes al in coluors, light, as bright; swear
And stalks, speaks big: so that a man would
That he some Peacock were at the first sight;
For, he more colors has, and much more dear:
Yet he no color has, or small at most)
To keep a Lords wife at the Bare ones cost.
Of Curious his courage never cooled. Epi. 120.
BY Conquest Proculus, the Emperor,
Took, of Sarmatiam Maids, an hundred, which
In fifteen days and nights he did deflowre;
But, Her^'les in a night did hafe as much.
And Theophrastus tells in India grows
An Herb so rare, whereof when one has eaten,
He thre^score times and ten, at once, did cl^se,
In the Ven^^^an fight; yet escaped unbeaten.
Well; these are Prodigies, and are believed
No further than their tellers credit goes:
But Curious swears ^e never was yet deprived
Of force for that: so, all his time bestows
In Venus service; But, at last, some knocks
He needs must have; else scapes well with a Pox.
Against Glossus immoderate desire of glory. Epi. 121.
GLossus will do no good without you praise him,
So, in his goodness still vain glory stays him:
Like a full pierced vessel in his bent,
That will not run unless you give it vent.
Of f^lse Prophets. 122.
IF Prophets were derived of profitting,
Then Lawyers Prophets be, still Prophesying.
Of covetous Patrons. Epi. 123.
PAtrons are Latrous: then, by this,
They Are worst of greedy People:
Whose Cognizance a Wolfes-head is;
And in his Mouth a Steeple.
Of Fluscus the proud Miser, and his more proud and miserable wifes making
their Tomb before their death. Epig. 124.
FLuscus, and his grim wife their Tomb have made
Before their death; and in the Church it pight;
As some do make a Deaths-head and a Spade
To mor^ifie them with that mortal sight:
Yet These are humble made by This they make;
But Those do make That only for Prides sake:
Then how their thoughts should there entombed be,
Yet here live proud and hard, I hardly see.
Again. Epi. 125.
TO make that which bereaues vain Pride of breath,
Prides life in life, is pride in life and death.
Of Caylus getting by gi^ing ground to his enemies. Epi. 126.
CAylus, does thrive in giving ground to his foes;
So he in going backward, foreward goes:
Much like a Wyer-drawer, who has the kna^k,
To draw the more, the more he draws back.
How a Man more then Woman is s^rewd. Epigram. 127.
A False speech, Custom has for true, alow'd
In calling cursed Wives s^rewed: when in truth,
The Husbands of such wives are truly shrewd;
For, of the ensuing Sayings, it ensuth:
Who gets a Wife (we say) he wiued is;
Or, if apparel; he is appar^elled:
If Riches; he is enritched: So, by this,
When he has got a Shrew, he is Shrewed,
For, names of Sheep or Shrews all women keep;
Then men are Shrewd whose women are not Sheep.
That which is far fetched and dear b^ught is good for Ladies. Epi. 128.
MY Lady calls for Wine; yet ere she drinks,
She curiously demands what cost the Tun?
If it be said Ten-pound; she from it shrinkes;
And, mewing says she will none: But, let it run
Into another Bowl; then, bring it her,
And say it cost much more; she drinks it straight,
And swears it is much more delicate, than dear:
So, wine she measures by the prices weight;
This is a fever of the Mind; then, she
Should still, be kept from drink; so, cur'de to be.
Of my venturing in the Lottery. Epigram. 129.
I Longed to venture in the Lottery
An Angel; but was loath to part with that:
Did I both long, and loath? yes, that did I;
Long for a Prize, yet loath to be laughed at.
But yet I ventured; and fot that I have
That which I had; No hope my self to save.
If what I had I have, I Am as I was:
True: for I am, and was for this, an Ass.
My Rimes that ran before my reason into the Lottery. Epi. 130.
Crowns are inestimable: yet if I
With half one get 4000. Crowns I lie:
Yet that this lying Sin I should eschew;
Fortune (I find) has made me speak too true.
Of Leuis his heaviness and lightness. Epigram. 131.
LEuis, is light and heavy both at once;
Strange Paradox! for, he is ever drunk:
And therefore drinks he freely (for the nonce)
Until he other sinkes, or quite is sunk:
And then (as Drunkard know) himself he feels
Light in the Head and heavy in the Heels.
Against those that tax this present Age for blind ignorance, since it sees not
how to commend their pretended knowledge. Epi. 132.
TO tax the Age wherein we live for want
Of Learning, Wit, or Grace, is but to vant
Our private glory in the Ages shame:
Which is (alas!) too dearly purcha'st Fame:
Since he that seeks to rise by all men's fall,
His fame is, like himself, still loathed of all:
For, be it that most men, (mere lead) do sincke
Ore-head, that seek to swim in learned Ink;
And, quite are drowned when they do seek to gage
The ground of Arts full Sea, that swells with rage
Of heavenly Winds high raptures: yet there be
Some, that with diuing, can the bottom see;
And each least thing that in it mooues or lies,
Since, ^kilfully, they diue with open eyes.
Now, if this Some be not the greater heap
Of men: it was so when Learning was most cheap:
Men of all Ages were none otherwise;
Fools still surpast the number of the wise.
Then, let this Age that (on the Brow of Time)
Sees writ the former best of Prose and Rhyme;
And well can add (as former Ti^es have done)
To all Arts that were formerly begun,
With heavy Taxes not be so oppressed;
,,The Bird's too bad that fileth her own Neast.
Again. Epigram. 133.
THe Wits (though wild in this) have now a Strain
When they applaud each others versing^ Vein
To say, they write three Ages, if not more,
From being well conceived. Lord! this lies sore
Upon the Stomach of the present Age
Which says; It knows such Poets write in rage
Which still blinds Reason; so, they maddly write:
Then would they have the Age, but at first sight,
So mad to know that Language; which (percha^ce)
Them selves, in that, must often plead ignorance
Were they examined thoroughly to the quick?
God shield the Age should be so Lunatic:
As all Arts grow with Age; so, Wit has growth:
Then, the Age wants no Discretion, but the Youth.
Epigram. 134.
GReat Alexander, A^istotle Willed
To end his Book, of Beasts, which he began;
For which his pains he so his Cosers filled
As might suffize to make a Beast a Man!
It was eight hundred Talents mounting to
Four hundred, some score, thous^nd Crowns (at least)
And all for writing but of Beasts; which do
Make men no wiser than to know a Beast.
But though some modern VVriters write of Men
And of their better Parts (the Soul and Mind)
Yet of our modern Ke^sars (now, and then)
They get a Gird (perhaps) or else but Wind:
Belike to save their Art they guird them so;
And give no vent, lest it abroad should slow.
Of the unutterable idleness of our She-gallants (vngentle*gentlewomen) of
these times. Epigram. 135.
LOrd! how it would a Cato vex to hear
The sad'st discourses of some Courtly Dames:
As how the Gown does fit; how stand the Hair:
How the face slikt: how trickt their outward frams.
What Looks do most become; what gate is best:
How they should Sit, Lie, Rise; (and these last two
They Stand on most) how such and such were dressed:
Woe gives them place, and who do take it too.
What bowings they salute with; how they kiss,
(Or Lip or Cheek) and who the same deserves:
Who they do visit; who their servant is:
Who they least love; and who then most observes.
What women should be Coacht, (or Horst at least)
And who Caroch't with Horses full of life:
(O wanton Mares!) and where they late did feast.
Who Gold may wear: who Pearl or Stones less rife
Then be there old Crones (mothers of such Maids)
Who tell, how many Suitors they have had;
How many Gifts; how many loving Ayds:
Who makes them me^ry, and who makes them sad.
How fair they were in youth, what they have seen,
Heard felt, or ( fe^lingly) what understood?
What Lords once loved the^; who they might have been,
Who are of sullen, who of merry mood.
All this and (O fie, fie!) much more then this,
These, old and young, (no Barrel better hearing)
Still twattle to spoil Tim: (that precious is)
When they do meet; which irks a wise man's hearing
And if a sober young man lights among them,
His staidnes makes them reele with mirth, as drunk
With girds they wrong him, since he does not wrong the^
And, at his chaste behavior flee^ like Punks.
But a right courtly lad, that will be bold,
And toss, and touse, and wring, and wrong them most:
That Reacher only has their h^^rts in hold;
The Sober soul they hold a simp^^ Ghost.
Well Wanto^s take your time it will away:
Laugh while yea can, ye shall not while ye would,
Make fools of wise men; (fools so ever may)
And show good Carriage in your being bold:
But, when ye have done all, if I observe ye,
To Aftertimes, in Bryne, I will preserve ye.
Against the no less vain dis^ourses of our as idle He-Gallants. Epigram. 136.
But do vain Women herein only sin?
I would they did for Men's sa^es; but (alas!)
It is too true that Men offend herein
No less than Women* for, each golden Ass,
Or gaudy Cocks-c^mb: whole Meal-times engrose
In talk of Plays (that is now a Commonplace)
And Censuring of Plaiers; which is dross
Of Wit; and thus they question, too, the Case.
What Q^arrells (styled the Bysnesse) now depend?
Anh who about tha same have crossed the Seas?
Who seconds are, and who besides intend
The like? and when we shall hear more of these?
Who must call such and such t'accompt? for what?
Nay, that is no matter, since there is notice taken
Now of that Bissnesse, (so, engaged by That)
For, sour looks past in Powls or Milford-lane.
Who are behind hand for the Fool or Lie?
Who for a smarting ^est, or bruizing knock?
Who for a Stak^ miss-taken on the Bye?
Who for a w^^ooke, or directer mock?
Who do our London fine-Wiues Husbands horn?
What Punks are extant? where they may be found?
What Feather's best? what Color most is worn?
What Gallants store? and which are now a Ground?
What Fashion's in request? what Tailors go
Of rest to France for new? Who makes a Hose,
Or Doublet best? who steals most stuff? and who
By Tailors Bills and filchings most do lose?
Who Is most fantastic? and who wears his Weeds
After the newest Garb? what Lords we have
Like, or unlike themselves? who are but Weeds?
And who but emp^y heads held high and br^ne?
Whose Hawk slew best? what hou^d most glory wo^?
What Matches, late, were bowld? by who^, and where?
What rule was at the Race? what Race was run?
Who won or lost at either; here, or there?
How many Train-sents run were in a Day?
What Lords were at them? whose Horse got the Bell?
Who most did brag? and who most Bets did Lay?
Who odds did give? who give, and take as well?
T^^se are the Common-places which they use
That be our brightest Gallants in discourse;
And often among Relate they flying News
(How ever false) which is as bad, or worse.
Then, our She-gallants, foolish with excess,
Still come beneath like He Is for foolishuesse!
The Miseries of Marriage. Epigram. 137.
Continual Care; tormenting Jealousy;
Domestic Iarrs; vnbraidings with the Dowr
Comparisons of eithers liberty;
The doubtful end of Children; looks too so^r;
Wives Parents powrings; strange heirs; death of right;
Traitor and Thief, in Bozome, house, and Bed;
These miseries on most men married, light;
Yet think they live no life till they are Wed:
Its true indeed, they live no life till then;
That is; they live no life of wretch men.
Of Manes his obsession. Epigram. 138.
ER'e he was married, Manes says that he
Was tempted by the Devil; but, ere since,
The Devil has him in sat^ Custody
Whose fell tormentings pass his patience:
Then better tempted still, then so to marry;
Yet some had rather damned be than tarry.
On the death of Henry the fourth French King murdered. Epigram. 139.
THough Kings are Gods, yet shall they die like men:
(What shall be, shall be) but, most christian Kings
Have did like Beasts; nay, like Beasts most unclean,
Sought but for slaughter, like pernicious Things!
Two Henry's, Kings, most Christie^ Kings of France,
(Now drowned in their own blood) this truth desend;
And though the last had even predominance
Of Fates and Men, yet both have wrought h^^ end*
Once dryv^n to Diepe, by Fate (in deep distress)
He was; and thence by Fate brought back again.
War making way) to reign in quietness:
So, when he fled, his Fates bid Neptune reign*
His Flight, that so he might both live and die
In Purple; fatal, to French- Majesty!
Of the force of Beauty, joined with pomp, and Majesty. Epi. 140.
MArcus Antonius (as Plutarch shoes)
Commanding Cleopatra to appear
Before him (since she succored his fo^s)
She came in pomp (as one that had no Peer)
Along the River Cydnus in a Gallion,
The Poope whereof was all of mas^y Gold;
And underneath the like most rich Pauillion
She lay her self, more rich a thousand fold,
Surrounded with sweet Singers; and, with all,
The heaven li^t Instruments that Songs could grace;
Her Servants clad in Robes maiesticall
Brodred with Pearl, t'wixt richest Golden-lace,
Thus came she gliding, on the Silver Stream,
Forced with silver Oars, and silken Sails;
(Crowned her self with dearest Diadem)
Toward Anthony; with whom she so preuailes
That she Captived him, being Conqueror;
For, she on Beauties Privilege did stand
(Consorted with this Wealth, Port, Pomp and Power)
That She Commands him, that did her Command.
But though she made this Pagan much transgesse;
Some Saints in show, do often much worse with less!
Against Marcus his insatiablenesse, and baseness in his leachery. Epi. 141.
SO dearly did Darius still esteem
Of his night-pleasures, that his Bed was spread
Like a Pauillion; over which did seem
A Vine to grow, all Gold enamelled!
Which as an Arbor, did the Bed inuolue;
The Grapes whereof were Pearl as big as Plumbes;
Whose price was more than Algri^^ can resolve;
His Pillowes value worth unvalued Sums!
Yet Marc had rather lie with his Drab (though su^ck)
In Straw, than in this State, without his Punck.
Of making Aurum potabile. Epi. 142.
LApis Phylosophorum, nor (as yet)
Quinta-essentia could e're well be made:
But Aurum pot-abile (being wet)
Many dry Wags do make; and then does vade;
For, in proiecting Tauernes (night, and day)
Gold often to liquer runs, to run away.
Of Florus his wholesome Tongue. Epi. 143.
FLerus, did once affect the name of Man;
And then he sought a Virgin-^ray; since when
He has fresh-ayr'd it so, with his Tongues Fan,
That it is now as ^^^sh as it was then.
But since that private fights so fatal grew,
That one, or both must die, or lie by it;
(As Hell and vengance) he does such eschew;
And, on his Manhoods old-Store, lives by Wit.
But yet his Tongue is potent, full of spite,
That all Affections (tame or wild) commands;
And therein now consists his greatest might:
So, has Tongue the valor of his ^ands:
A good and gracious Tongue has Florus then,
Since it will rather make, than mar good-men.
On the gaging of Fumus his Jewel by his man, Epigram. 144.
FUmus, locks up his wife, as is the guize
Of the Italian; and, does put a Lock
Upon her Jewels since he dear does prize
What, being abused, base does make his Stock*
But his Man's K^y still opes it, who can do well;
So, opes the Lock to gage his Masters Jewel.
On Light bright Lucilla her white going. Epigram. 145.
LVcilla, lightly all in white does go,
To lay her Chastity a whiting so.
Of one speaking ill of me before many. Epig. 149.
ONe, before many, spoke but ill of me.
Yet rather I had one spoke ill (alone)
Of me, to many, that indifferent be,
Then many so should speak, before but One.
On Fugus his cooling his flaming fury with discretion, Epi..150.
THat Fugus, in a Duel, hotly f^ught,
Is no great wonder, being so well wrought
By his too busy foe: but, that he flew
(Without wings) from the field, is scarsely true:
It was no flight from fighting with his foe;
He did but walk to cool his fury so.
That the men of these new times, are much wiser then those of the old. Epi.
151.
IN old time, men were much less wise than now;
For, but with good they then could hinder ill:
But now, men (wiser grown) do well know how
To let one Mischief with another still.
Some stones to take, but (frozen) took up none:
Then (being Crossed) thus Gallus cursed alow'd;
Pox on it (quoth he) while that dog tare his hose,
Where Stones are tide, and Ban-dogs be so loose.
Of one that refused to lend friend 20. nobles, when he sent to him for it
with, and without a sure Token. Epigam. 157.
A Gamster borrowed five pound of a Friend;
which lost, he sent to him for five pound more
By'th'Token he five pounds before did lend:
But he refused utterly; and swore
That not a Mite, of him should more begotten
Until he truly had received that Token.
Of a Crook-back that defir'd an upright Judge to right his wrong. Epi. 158.
A Crook-back praid a Judge to right his wrong
Whe^eto the Judge replid, I would I could:
But (O!) you have been wrong your self so long,
That now I cannot right you, though I would.
When ^a^^ng but one only Thing in store,
You let an hundred use the same and more.
Of a Single eyed Fencer his blind match. Epigram. 160.
A Fencer, with one Eye, desired to play
For the other: which another would not do;
(As he had reason:) for, though it were day,
He could not stake, and see to play well too.
Of Tullus his d^sprouing a Tailors Will. Epigram. 161.
Brave Tullus made a S^ite of trym Attire;
For which his Tailor brought him in his Bill
Who therein so did Cross his due desire,
That he did quite disprove the Tailors Will:
Who, in a fu^^, thus said, he ^euer knew
Any brave Gentile deal so like a lew!
Of Drusus his gift in reuersion taken too soon in possessi^n. Epigram. 1^^.
WHen I leave off this Suit which now I wear,
(quoth Drusus to his Man) I Will give it thee:
But when, at night, he vncasd him (without fear,
Of his Suits loss) his man, that promised Fee,
Soon seized upon; and, wore the same: but, lo,
His Master chaste he was so saucy grown;
And asked him, what he m^ant to serve him so?
Why Sir (quoth he) I do but wear mine own:
For, when you left them off, you promised me
They should be mine: and so they are you see.
Of the Sacrifice of Lent. Epi. 163.
A Country-parrish (Westward-ho) called Lent,
By chance was set on fire, and burnd amayne;
One askd the name thereof, as by he went;
It Was told him Lent: who straight replide again,
Fridaies and Saturdaies (that make us wither)
Pray'ye put in too, and burn them altogether.
Against fighting in fashion. Epi. 164.
IF thou would fight in fash'on, now, thou must
Scorn all defense as Valor^ only shame;
And come up close, that Breast to Best may just*
Upon no guards, but at the Heart to ame.
This is the fashon'd fight this Time affords,
For ( Sw^z^r-like) we fight for (s^n^l^sse) spoil:
Then all as good to fight with Knives as Swords,
Since all Defense does but our honor foil!
Then Fencers, whereto serves your fencing-skill
Which you style Noble science? you (I think)
Should, to the Parliament prefer a Bill
Trepeale this Act of Custom, least it sinck:
For, Custom, and the Devil, do men persuade
To damn themselves, by fight, to spoil your trade.
Of mis-reading the lines of Crustus his face. Epigram. 165.
CRustus, the Roarer, getting in his face
A slash of late, an old friend did embrace
That knew him not till he himself bewraide,
Which don; his gamesome friend to him thus said;
" Pardon me, Sir, your faces Lines, by spite,
" So blotted be, I could not read them right.
In Medio consistri Vertus. Epigram. 166.
A Gallant, Courting of a gamesome Maid,
Said; Sweet, Oh let me kiss your Hands and Feet
In sign of humblest love! Good Sir (she said)
Both those for your sweet Lips are most unmeet;
,,But Virtue's in the middst; than, (Virtue) there,
If you will kiss, you may: if not, forbear!
Epigram. 167.
MAdge once set Hodge to watch when Puddings played
That on the fire were seething in a Pan:
Boy, play they now (quoth she?) not yet (he said)
At last they, boiling, brake, and all out ran.
Lad, play they yet (quoth she) quoth he young (Goose)
They now play all (like Gepsies) vast and loose.
So, chaste, why chaf'st quoth she? why, quoth the Elfe?
To zee a Pudding creep out of himself.
Of a Maids light hearing. Epi. 168.
I Have heard of you, Claius, said a Maid;
O, ^^t (quoth he) recant what you have said,
Least you be shent: for, if you heard of me
It Was i^ a Bawdy House, where ever be
Those I converse with: then if there you hear
Of me, or of mine Actions, it is clear
You are too blame to hearken for me, so,
Where Maids never come, but Whoores away they go.
Of Caprus his going a Procession. Epi. 196.
CAprus to pay his wife, in her own Coin,
Procession went, to find a Punke, he got;
Then paid his Vows, and Of^^ings; so, did join,
But though she were as cold as he was hot;
Yet, in pure zeal, she sacrifis'd the Ox
In Venus service, with her Tinder-box.
Of Quacus, his cooling his heat with Whey. Epigram. 170.
QVacus, drinks naught but Wha^, himself to cool,
Yet loves a Drab, as naught by Wine, he drunk
So, with his Babble, still he pla^es the Fool,
To make his wife, to weep, to laugh, his Puncke;
But, were I her; I would not fool it too,
To weep, but laugh; yet, for him, ever Do.
Epigram. 177.
A Wife, whose Husband lay a Bed diseased,
Went with his Water (scarce concealed from
To seek for help, or how he might be eased, (view)
And meeting with another wife she knew,
Who with her there did then expostulate,
About what then she bare, and how she fared:
Who told her straight, it was her Husbands State;
And went for help for p^ine about his Yard:
Has he a Yard (quoth she) and Cupids Martyr?
O! you are blessed: would mine had but a Quarter!
But, she should have a Yard her Back to mete,
For playing so, her Quarters in the Street.
Of Rampa, and her foul trading at the Fair. Epigram. 172.
RAmpa, the Sempster goes to Faires a pace
To sell her ware; and, so, to mend her Case:
But, there her case is marred; for on each pack,
She, packing loosly, proves a naughty-pack.
The while, at home, her husband keeps the shop;
And of that Fair sown seed still reapes the Crop.
Of mine Ou^rs^er. Epi. 173.
MY o'reth wart neighbor though, for debt, by night
He scarce dares show his scalp; yet builds so hie
(With quarter staves) as he ore looks me quite;
So, he is mine Oue^-scer^ere I dye.
Then shall my Will, to Ill, still foreward run;
For, he has horns, of power to see that done.
Of Homouthius his chaste adultery. Epi. 174.
HOmouthins has an Oar in each man's boat;
So, sinks his state and fame that else might float:
Thus commits Folly and Adultery too,
That has to-doe, with that h'as naught to-do.
Of Hornsbie's Incredulity. Epi. 175.
TEll Hornsby (that does keep a Tabling-house)
His Wife too fast does bear men in his Tables
Heel not believe the same for twenty Nobles;
No, though he see it, yet dumb is as a Lowse:
For, should he speak his living quite would fail,
Since all he has he holds but by the Tail.
Against the faith, hope, and charity, of our yoeng Master Hal. Epi. 176.
YOung Hal is wanton, with expectance still,
And, longs to have his Sire curbed of his will
By unexpected death; that, so, he might
Be Heir of all; and be an arrant Knight:
And so he may; for, of him proof I have,
He may be errant Knight, or arrant Knave.
To mine ingenious friend M. John Dumbarre. Epig. 177.
Four for her four Lines I bequeath her;
Up Pernassus often breath he^:
So, thy Muse, in latine-Ditty,
Shall sing long, lowed, short, and witty.
Of Nais her keeping an Ordinary and her being ordinary. Epi. 178.
NAis keeps and Ordinary, and entertaines
(like Ven^ce) all Gods good, or Devils Ills:
Protestants, Papists, Brownists, Puritanes,
Hand over Hip-well she their Bellies fill:
As some do hers; yea, in her husbands sight;
So, with his leave, she dubs him Vulcans Knight.
Again. Epi. 179.
NAis still does vaunt she is a Gentle-wo-man;
It Is true; for, she in love refuses no man:
Then, why do I so much misname her, Nais,
That is to men so sparing of her Nayes?
Again, for a parting blow. Epi. 180.
NAies keeps a house of carding, but, nere spins,
(Yet, often relies) unless it be the webbs
Of others woes: She, (lately low) begins
To rise apace: so, Floods do follow Ebbs:
She needs not, now, to ply Wheels Reels, or Rocks
Her Guests and Gamesters do so ply her Box.
Of Pagus the Pedagogus proud all-tong'd-Daughter. Epi. 181.
PAgus, the Pedant, learns his daughter Greek,
Hebrew, and Latin: nor is she to seek
In Spanish, French, and the Italian,
Douch, Danish, Spruce, and the Slauonian:
Yea, Verses makes in all these. Wondrous thing!
That any man a maid ^o up should bring,
While he commits Idolatry with her.
Which makes her scorn her mother her should bear,
Or he beget her (proud fool!) yet, I say,
When ^ire^ do play the Puppies, Puppies may.
Again of his uncharitable prayer. Epi. 182.
WHen Pagus Pupills play the wags, he bringes
Them in his prayer, which he, saying, sings:
So for their penance, plagues them in pure prayer
As if a murraine yet, were in that Air:
For, all his household, so, do know their crimes;
For which Clock like he strikes, and after chimes:
Then praying thus without pure charity,
His prayer turns to pure iniquity.
Of Roaring Neds endless End. Epig. 193.
THe wiseman Pogg, shows needy roaring Ned
(Who often blood has brocht, and often ble^)
His endless end: which (well) he cannot choose;
For all may see it will be an end^esse Noose.
A hard choice. Epi. 184.
I Feign would marry; but, more feign li^e sole,
Though without wife, I am but half my whole:
For, man and wife one body make; and some
By marrying, ma^re two Bodies. I am dumb,
Or, know not what to say: For, this good-naught
Makes me a fickle Sheptick in my thought:
Yet, when I mean to wed, I Will leave their School,
And, to be held more wise, play more the fool.
Of a Curat's having two wives at once given him in marriage. Epi. 185.
A Parson, that one only Daughter had
Matched her unto a Curat; but was glad
To give, for lack of Portion to lay down;
A Benefice, he held beside his own.
But, in this Gift, he gave his so made Son,
Two Wines at once, whereof this Gift was one:
For, Papal Constitutions are of force,
In this glad Match to make a sad divorce.
With which two wives he lives, with much ado;
The Teithe of one being Dowry to the two.
Of rich Rooke his kitchen-phisick against Vertigo. Epi. 186.
RIch Rooke eats bitter Almonds, as a Trick
To keep down Fames, e're to the wine he^ we^ds
And, so, he drinks til he with healths, be sick;
So, bitter Means have. thus, more bitter Ends:
But if this bitterness had turned to honey
He would have sunck the World with Mead for money.
Of Flauias paynting; and playing the Squirell. Epigram. 187.
FLauia is fair; yet paints her self: oh strange,
That true, to feined Beauty so should change!
She bravely goes; and yet her Case is thought
Bare, as her Pin-case, worn, with Pins, to naught:
For, she for Coin (Like Venice) takes all Nations
To exercise, in her, their Occupations;
While she goes (like a Co^ntesse) in her Va^le;
So, ( Squirrell-like) she is covered with her Tail.
Against Kit's weak wooing of Kate. Epigram. 188.
KIt, art a Man? yet, get Kate can thou not?
Oh shame! since with a Child she late was got.
Of Fuluiaes recreation, and occupation. Epigram. 189.
FVluia, for recreation (as she swears)
Danceth each day, as she were made therefore;
The while her Dancing-Mate so charms her ears
That soon she is bewitch't to play the whore:
So she (good hows-wife) turns her Recreation
(Which takes up all her Time) t'an Occupation.
On Phraxus his euer-secret passions. Epigram. 190.
But of his secret Passions Phraxus speaks
To his dear Mistress, while his grief she mocks
Since probably she weenes (since so he breaks)
His greatest secret Passion is the Pox.
Of Barbus his trial of a foolish conclusion. Epigram. 191.
BArbus, by night, once reading in a Book
That broad Beards argued folly; took a Glass
And Light, with all, upon his own to look;
Who burnt it* ^hen he saw how broad it was:
Then, in the margent, for this earnest jest,
He verily may write Probatum est.
Of the goodness and nec^ssity of Physicians. Epigram. 192.
SOme hold Physicians well may spared be
In every State where men, in order, live;
With whose opinion I can never agree;
And I have reason too; which thus I give;
If they were spared, then Men would (like a flood)
O'^ewhelm the World; Physicians then are good.
Of their Deerenesse. Epi. 193.
LIke Ha^kes, Physicians ever are esteemed;
Which as they kill Thrush, Partridge, Duck, or Crane
Are p^^z'd thereafter: so, is ever deemed
Physicians skill by those they kill, or ^^ne.
If but poor Clownes or Trade^-men they destroy,
The are held of small account: if Lords, or Ea^les,
Then more much, more: but if they skill employ
To kill a Prince, they are h^ld as d^ere as Peales:
Then all Physicians, that would feign be dear,
Employ their skill (at least) to kill a Peer.
On traversing the error of an Action. Epigram. 194.
ONe Lawier once an others wife did woo
That she with him would (...) t^o:
The issue joined, the husband (...)
(Seeing th'intruder quite his (...))
He right well swing'd them both for that comp^ction:
So, Canuased the error of their Action.
Of Poggius his poor success in Palmisiry and wooing Epigram. 195.
POggius (whose skill in Palmistrie is poor)
Took up his Mistress hand, therein to p^y;
Then said (and therewithal he sighed sore)
Sweet, all my fortunes in your hand does lie:
Then safe I Will keep them for, and from you too,
Quoth, she again; so, he for naught does woo.
Of true Love. Epi. 196.
TRue Love's in talk, and in society;
The rest, can Asses do as well as we.
Against the corrupt judgment of Bullus in choice, of his Wi^e.
BVllus has chose his wife but with his Eyes*
And left his Ears, lest they should them control,
So she played fair in sight the^* now, he cries
His choice, before his Choosers, playe^ him foul:
If foul she play, and he does see the same,
His Eyes, and not his Ears, are still too blame.
Of the Bastard Fluctus his being undone by his Drab. Epi. 197.
FLuctus his doing Drab did him undo:
And so a Drab has made and marred him too.
Of roaring Robulus his bloudlesse combats. Epi. 198.
SOme men fight bravely without brauing word
But roaring Robulus nere fights so;
Who ever braules; but, never draws his Sword;
Or, if he do, puts up without a Blow:
Yet, he being round with all, (not round to smite)
Ciphers their Number that will roundly fight.
Of Rufus his giving the lie, without a Stabbe. Epigram. 199.
RVde Rufus to his Mistress gave the lie;
For which she did protest Revenge, with speed:
But She no reason has for that; for why?
When women lie, they stand men most in steed.
Ioan's as good as my Lady. Epi. 200.
IOane in the Darke's as good as my Lady;
But I know a Ioane far better in Light:
Yet I Will not deny but my Lady may be
As lusty (at least) as Ioane in the night.
Of Gnuffus his mis-matching his matchless fair Daughter. Epiram. 200.
THe Crazier Gnuffus matched his daughter late
To no great rich, though ancient, gentleman
The good old man (according to his State)
Lo^es-duties paies her, yearly (as he can)
But since She spends so fast, she pines (I fear)
For want of Commings in her Charge to bear.
Against a foolish Pra^ler. Epi. 202.
THy Tong's so loose and light, that even thy breath
Makes it so wagge as it ^e^e still does stand;
Whose fustian Strains work Appr^hensions Death:
For, neither sad, nor mad them understand.
Of our English Gallant^ going in black in Lent. 203.
Our Gallants every Lent go al in black
As if with time they mourned for their offense
But their life show; it is but to hide the knack
Of s^btill lightness clokt with gr^^^ pre^ence:
Then, were it but for that, they black should wear
Since they are not so good as they appear.
Of Poets being dejected. Epig. 204.
SOme Lands there are where men are without heads:
Some, all hermaphrodits; some where the seeds
Of men are black as Ink: Some, where they hie
Without feet: Some, where they have but one Eye
Placed in their forehead, having heads like dogs:
Some, where they are half fish; and live (like frogs.)
In, or about the Waters: Some, where they
Have brows so hard that no steel p^^^ce them may.
Some where me^ change to wolves and beasts more vile
And they resume their shape they had ere while.
Some, where they mouthlesse are, and live by smell:
Some, where their length lacks half of half an Ell^
Some, where they G^ants be: Some, where they are
Four footed, hayrie, and like Beasts do fare.
Some, where they have a Foot of such ex^ent
That from the Sun it shrouds then like a Tent:
But Time nor Place such men could ever show,
That live quite hartlesse as m^st Poets now.
Of Women's Metamorphosis according to time and place. Epigram. 205.
SOme Women are in Churches Saints, or more;
Angels abroad; at home too like (...) Devil:
At Windows, Sirens: Parrots, at the Door:
And in their Gardens ^oats, or more uncivil:
Yet tradesmen that nere match til they have much,
In deadly danger are to meet with such.
It Is merry, when knaves meet. Epi. 206.
COnceipted youths* when they at wine are met
Mong other matters lig^^^y they inquire
What well pend Pamphlet la^ely out is set?
What merry Epigrams of ^oure Satire?
Then fall they to rep^at some ^ugred Li^es
Of this or that man's: When some lustful Gull,
Comes in with Nashes choosing V^lentines;
To wit, his Dildo known to every Trull.
I come (says he) sweet Linen by thy leave;
(O good, in faith, (says one) then on he goes)
Softly my fingers up their Curtains heaues:
And there Gomorrahs ^ilth (at full) he shows.
All that can say this as their Pater noster
Have seen the Lions, sweet well seasoned youths
About the Muses Minions still they muster
To get some swelling lines to fill their mouths:
But for their own Muse it does ever sing,
Rhyme without Reas'n a common English thing.
Against Balladders. Epi. 207.
CHerillus, that: of many verses, made
Seven only good: for which his poesy
He had seven gobbes of Gold; and for the bad,
He had a buffet on the V^snomy:
If Balladers, that but defloure the Muse,
Were so rewarded for their versif^ing.
It would (like Pan) appear upon their Brows,
Since out of tune they do so often sing:
For if seven lines they chance to draw aright,
They millio^s make that would make Patience smite.
None can be sad and glad at once; if it be not in contrition. Epi. 126.
STella, the Padua Poet, pleasant was;
Pox on it, how Puppie-like, with P. I play:
Ass for example: fie, away with Ass,
Ass, cannot set a Sample (I dare say)
He writes so ill: and so those Po^ts do
That will at once write light and heavy too,
For, at one time whose Muse is light and sad,
I muse not though his Muse does write as mad.
Of and against the word creep. Epig. 209.
Creep, is a Metaphor that is ever used
In controuerted questions of our faith;
Wherein the word (orevs'd) is much abusd;
For, this Schism then crept in, th'opponent says.
Though Creep be most significant to show
How Errors came in slowly, more and more;
Yet so to spur-gall Creep to make it go
still on that errand, shows our Tongs too poor,
Or Wit's too bare: But now such questions deep,
Do run abroad too fast they do not creep.
Of the power and price of gold. Epi. 110.
O Gold (the Darling of this later Season,
Sole Load-starre to all hearts, Star to all eyes
That can do all without or Rhyme or Reason)
How blessed are they that most do thee surprise?
By thee the jealous husband is appeased;
The desperat^ Rival is well pacifi'de:
By thee, the watchful'st Keepers soon are seisd;
By thee, th'vniustest wrongs are iustifide:
By thee, the Vest^ll, true Wise, Widow, Trull
Are bought and sold: the noblest Lady too,
Will wiue a Mony-Bag, if huge, and full,
Who know their service, then, poor Knights will do.
By thee each Lock is picked, each Gate ^lies open;
Nay more; thy crowns can mightiest kings vncrown
By ^hee, all things beaneth the heavenly Coape
In Natures power, are raised, or ouer^hrowne:
Nay more, the very Lord of all this All
(Who can no more beguile, than be beguiled)
Was sold for money; and a sum but small;
So thou art Dominus fac totum Stilde.
Yet run'st from me in Earnest, and in Game,
Though often I write with thee, to spread thy fame!
Again of the same. Epi. 211.
THe great'st are caught with Gold: for, give me It,
I Will, make the Great'st my friend with little wit:
But once if Gold and I at variance be,
The Great will scorn; the Small, abandon me
Though Wit and Grace I had* for, Wit, and Grace
Are precious made with Gold: else both are base!
Against Plumus his foolish pride. 212.
PLumus is high, yet higher is his Heart:
Loud, Pla^e and Coin he has; yet has he more;
More Lands than Wit; more Coin and Plate, than Art:
And yet the Arts (he swears) he does adore:
Hard-hearted Arts, that for his kind good will,
Permit base solly his high Heart to fill.
Of my incountring a Wa^-taile, while I held my tongue. Epiram. 213.
WHy fliest thou Muse, at Fame, that flies from thee?
Or seek'st to retriue that thou can not trusse?
Spare, spare thy Pains, and after Angels flee,
That make their Takers Great, as Glorious!
As at a Stationr's Shop I stood, at gave,
There chanst to light a Wag-taile (light as sine)
And asked for Epigrams in Caged Phraze:
Wherewith the Shop-man foorth-with showed her mine.
What he (quoth She?) the^ pulled her mouth ascue)
Alas (good man) is this his Poetry?
Yea (said my friend) the^ from her them she threw,
As if she felt them touch her honesty.
Still saying, He? yea, (said the seller (...);
And good they be, or else good Wits mistake
That h^ld them such; So let them be (q^^th she)
And, therewith all, another mouth did make,
Thus by a mouth so wrested quite away,
Had I like sentence: mean while mute I stood
(Poor Innocent) and durst not a^ke her why
She so did slight them that were held so good:
For, they are still defiled that Pitch do touch;
So, I forbear to touch this ^l^^y Thing,
Although She made me swell, and g^^eue, and grutch;
Vowing this bitter wayward VVaspe t'vn^ling:
But it is not possible I should prevail;
For, spite of me she will have it in her tail.
My Corollary.
But yet her pride, expressed with such disdain,
Humbled me much, that looked for much applause:
That Puttocke made me Peacocke veil my Train:
And thought her sent of purpose for that cause:
Thus waxt my mind more sweet b'her bitter doom
And so, sometimes the bad do better some!
Of roaring boys Resolutions. Epi. 214.
THe roaring Boys exclaim against their Peter,
And say, he did not as he liud a space:
Who melted at his death like Shelto^s Meeter
That Is harsh; but yet inclinde t'a little grace:
But he that holds it out, when he is in
(In Newgate) till they be at Tiburne trust,
Like a true Devil: (whose grace is all in Sin)
This man, in their account, is only just:
But, if at last to grace he once but yield,
He Is like a Boy, and did but like a Child.
Against carnal desire. Epigram. 215.
O Damd Desire, what spirit has thee inspired,
That (like the Moon) do wax and wane in change
Afflictions water cannot quench thee, fired:
Nor loathd Dis^ase estrange thee from the strange
Thy pleasure's but a moment (if it be
A pleasure which so soon to Pain does turn.)
And thought it wastes the Marrow feeding thee,
Yet still thou burn'st while thou have ought to burn
Thine heat is hateful (falsely called love)
Made by the motion of the fowlest Mind:
For when thou do thy sweetest pleasures prove,
They cloy, but not content thee: so, behind
Thy pleasure rests: which thou (tir'de) can not try;
So, thou art made but weak, not help thereby.
Against Chione her feeding on fat Woodcocks. Epigram. 116.
O Chione thine Eyes all Eyes do feast,
Thy Lake-laid Cheeks excel the reddest Rose;
Thine Iuory Front, and Alabaster Breast
Do m^n entice, as Carrion ticeth Crows:
I see great men thou drawst; and smile to see
How thou do plume on them, and they on thee.
Against Aglaope, her sweet voice, and sow'r vice. Epigram. 154.
AGlaope, (that courted is of States,
Whose Angels voice the Angels imitates)
Still lullabies all mortal Cares asleep,
Such due proportion still her voice does keep;
But yet her voice (as voice of People goes)
Does naught but ( Siren-like) work people woes.
Of Phagus his being a Papist inward. Epigram. 218.
PHagus his Panch is grown beneath his knees,
So many fat Recusants he deuours;
But does it but for good, the World well sees:
That Is for good Cheer, as long as life endures:
Than since he feeds on sheep Catholicall!
His Guts (at least) are most papisticall!
In defense of Women's well clothing and dressing themselves. Epigram. 219.
GAmphalantes, (that naked Labians are)
Live peaceably (poor Souls) since bare they be:
Adam and Eve the while they naked were,
They lived (good Souls) in great tranqui^lity!
And yet while men are bare, they live in peace,
As h^uing naught wherewith to vex each other:
But wom^n being bare, men would oppress
And so insult upon them altogether:
That makes all wo-men covet still good Clothing,
Lest men should fall to Lusting or to Lo^thing.
Of Knights of famous memory. Epigram. 220.
OF Cirus thus the Histories report
He knew his Soldiers names by memory,
Although they were (almost) a countlesse sort,
Yet he by name knew all that Company!
It Was strange (were done by Nature or by Art.)
But some Knights of my knowledge can do this;
Let any Pezant dwelling in that Part,
At New-yeares-tyde, but of a Present miss
Thei'l know him after twenty years (perhaps)
(O memory of rate continuance!)
Poor Pezant be thou ware of After-claps:
For, thou art well remembered with a vengance:
Such Art of memory such Landlords use,
As Capon-cram their kitchins with their Muse.
Against telling of incredible Truths. Epigram. 221.
SOoth-sayer Accius, in Tarquins sight, they say,
Did with a Razor forthwith cut in two
A Whet-stone; which I think (as well I may)
Is wondrous hard for men of God to do:
And if a man somewhere should this maintain
He sure should have the Whet-stone for his pain.
Then better leave (sometimes) some Truths untold
Least some men should true men for liars hold.
Against Canizius his witty familiarity. Epigram. 222.
CAnizius has a fine face't conceit;
A pleasant Wit, but most unprofitable:
To Cheat by Rules of Art he has the fleight;
And therewithal he is most affable;
For in an Hour, as well as in an Age,
Familiar grows, and shows his Consenage!
Of Aristotle's faith concerning women's flesh. Epigam. 223.
ARistotle, (who had no common Wit)
Thought common women should have adoration:
For, he to his Hermia performed it;
Yea, sacrifiz'd to her with veneration:
If all his Doctrines were like this, I knew,
His true disciples would not be so few.
Of Dawlus his finding of a light Jewel in the Dark Epigram. 224.
DAwlus, upon his Way, late, in the Dark,
A Jewel found, which every man Might wear.
It Was full of Spirit; nay more a fiery Spark,
That stood, t'enflame Desire of Vseing, There:
It was a precious Punck, yet seemed too cheap,
But found too dear: for, while he Cultured her
And therein sowing, She his Purse did reap
Grown to the full'st; and Inn'd it other where.
And so, at once his Crime and Cross he bore
For Closing in a Common to the poor:
Nay, sure, his Crosses She did all ingrosse;
For, for his pains, She left him never a Cross!
Of the best Playmakers deere-bought praise. Epigram. 225.
PLay-wrights your Trade is tickle, full of toil;
For, you are bound to please the thwartest Minds
Who (like cros-seas, that rough Winds still turmoile)
Tosle up and down your praise, with various Winds!
It Is easy to cry Hiss; but, it is not so
To silence it, and Claps of hands to raise:
Not as at brawling Dogs, where both We do;
But into Claps, that Clap up all with praise.
Those whom ye trade with, weigh your skill and pains
By their own gains; and, though al three be great,
They weigh not you according to their Gains;
But by your Skils, that Fame and Famine get:
Then of all Glory, purchasd by the small,
A Play-wright, for his Praise, pays most of all!
Againts Justice Boniface his injustice. Epigram. 226.
THough Justice Boni-face do lack much law,
Yet lacks no lawless skill huge Bribes to draw
So, sells ^e Justice for a current Fee,
That all may Justice current from him see:
If all his Justice current be, like this;
He may pass current where naught current is.
Against the manner of our modern Duells. Epigram. 227.
STay Gallants; ^un not on, with wrong too rise;
Away with this damned Custom which ye use:
Is It not enough to venture Soul and Life
On Valors terms, and no man to refuse?
But must I come up too, upon no Guards,
That Bulk to Bulk may iustle; (hit, or miss;)
And they exposed to scorn, that scorn not Wards;
Are we turned Beasts to think us Men for this?
Sir, do your worst; here stand I That to dare,
It I defendant be: If Challenger;
Have at ye, with brave courage; yet with Care
Of being Foild, that here but once can err:
If this no Manhood be, thus well to pass,
I hold the brauest Man, the plainest Ass.
Of my Foes and their dwelling. Epigram. 228.
MOst of my Foes dwell At the sign of Jerusalem between Strawberry Bancke,
and Prim-rose hill.
in Jerusalem;
The^, most are Turks, few Christians are with them.
Of a letter in favor, that proved an ^inderer in fact. Epigram. 229.
PAvlinus, prayed a friend, of noble Blood,
To write his Letter for a Benifice
Unto a Bishop for Paulinus good,
Which he did to Paulinus prejudice:
For, he writ coldly: so, the Letter proved
A letter of the suite the Letter moved.
On Glaius and bri^ht M^strisse Grace a Light-one, that lightened a work of
Darkness. Epigram. 230.
GRace in the Dark, stood full in Glaius way,
Whose brau'ry (like the su^) turned night to day
She would not mo^^ although she moved him much
Nor speak; although he did her homely touch;
Yea touched her to the quick in Sinful Case:
So, Glaius quickly deadly sin^d with Grace.
Of Signior Shancus his feeding upon Weeds turned into good Meat. Epig. 231.
SPruce Signior Shancus has good Clothes, and (...)
Escheated to him often, (great Lord of ^^^tle)
Yet often, in summer pawns his winter-weeds*
And them redeemes with those which Summer breeds:
So, makes great shift with small; great cause (I think)
His Clothes must yield him coin, and meat, and drink:
For, if, with Coin he should redeem his Clothing,
He should be Something that should feed on nothing.
So, Still should cry any food any feeding. etc.
On a work of Supererogation. Epigram. 231.
THere is a place upon this middle Earth,
Where men, that used much fasting, often did eat:
There, certain Terms of years they fed with mirth;
And, honesty the Place did then entreat.
But when an hous-wife, that was Catholic,
Or too too Universal, had set up
An Ordinary near, for dull and quick,
Away went they, with her, to dine; and sup:
It Was Charity to help a poor Begynner;
And, for her gain, in love, to use this Sinner.
Gf Vlalia's Visitations. Epigram. 232.
VLalia, in a Choch, as bright as Sunn's,
To visit Ladies goes from Place to place*
And, as she goes, the thundering Chariot runs
To show (as Phoebus does) her bright-light ^ace:
But, while she visits Ladies in pretense,
She entertaines some Lords Incontinence.
To Sir John Harrington. Epigram. 233.
I Dare not say your Wit was wisdom pointed,
When you in Ajax had your Wit anointed:
Since by no small Fools, yet accounted wise,
Such strains of Wit are held but Fooleries:
But, this I say, and say what well I wot,
( Ulysses upon Ajax played the Sot:
For, what you put in Ajax, was more worth,
By odds, than what Ulysses then put forth.
Of Faustine's plain and pert well-doing. Epigram. 234.
FAustine delights to dance, to Mask, and Mum,
But while she either does she does agree
(In sight, yet secretly) to Do with so^e;
Yet, so she does that every Eye may see
She Is a good Dooer: (badly-good) the whiles
She never deceaues those Eyes she to beguiles.
Of Fuluia her high flying. Epigram. 235.
FVluia now flies abrod (fly high my Muse)
Upon the restless Wings of high Desire:
She stoupes to none but Lords: for she does use
To fly no lower, but flies ofter higher:
She is well born and bred; so bears to breed (seed)
Brave Barns, full stuffed with bright (though Bastard
Of the Game called; Laugh and Lie down, Epigram. 236.
I See and laugh, still laugh at what I see,
De^ocritus, therein I play thy Part:
I see some Mad-dames, honest held to be,
That often in sport do whore it, by their Art:
Yet (merely) seem chaste, till they be ny down,
So still I laugh to see them laugh and lie down.
Of the force of my Lo: Mayors Pageant. Epigram. 237.
MY Lord Majors Pageant, though it be (I grant)
Weak for invention, (but of strong effect)
Yet draws some Mad-dames, like an Adamant,
So light they be, and light Shows so affect:
No; it is no Page ant maks them thither go;
But to be pressed for Venus service so.
Against saplesse Sottus his unkind heat. Epigram. 238.
A Thousand pound a year, yet hair, nor heir.
Has Sottus; but still wears, a Coife, or Cap:
If Man b^a Tree (turned upward) and his Hair,
Be as the Roots; then Sottus has no Sap
In Winter: no; for Virgoes heat before
Has dride him, with a Pox, and will do more.
On Sirrah and his Wife Sarahs false play with him, for his profit. Epigram.
239.
SIrrah, come hither; let me speak with thee:
hark in thine Ear; thy Wi^e plates false (they say)
With thee at Tick-tack: Peace; o silent be:
She hurts thee not; yet winnes much by her play!
A while ago, thou know, thou ^ast but poor;
But, since, by false play she so much has got
That now thou keep^st he Woolfe well, from the door;
Though yet (perhaps t^ou can not keep the Goats
For, she bears men a pace, (as rich a^ daynty)
So still she wins, for thee, the Horn of Plenty!
Of Gallae's too good agreement with me. Epigram. 240.
Even as a Glass reflects a man's own shape
Upon himself; so Galla does to me;
Sin les, when I sim^^e; nay gapeth when I gape;
And sigheth when I sigh; as one were we:
But o my mind this hollow Glass suspects:
Because she burns as well as she reflects.
Of Fannius his fear. Epigam.
FAnnius with fear of death, now, dead does lie:
And so he died, to kill his fear to dye.
Of Frigus that died the first night he lay with his wife. Epigram. 250.
FRig^s ioy-drown'd, dyed lying with his Wife,
So did through too (...), or too much life.
Of one who being a Dwarf, or little higher, kept a great tall fellows wi^e.
Epigram. 251.
FAlina, has good sport at home full often
Between her Ox, and Ape: Jack, come a loft.
Of Flauius single combat: who had a valiant man to his sire, was so himself;
but had a Whore to his mother, and a Rig to his daughter. Epi. 252.
THat Flauius fought bravely; and maimed his Foe
He as his Fathers own true Son did so:
But being thrust into the Belly,
Yet received it with laughter,
He took that of his mother,
And gave it his daughter.
The best Kings Ire burns more than Fire. Epigam, 253.
WHen the dark Cloud of Princes secret hate
Is ready to break out, out Flies it then
With lightning and loud thunder, to amaze
And quite root out the hated Man from Men!
Then as thou would not die by thunderclaps,
Incur no hate of Kings what ever haps.
Video et taceo. Epigram. 254.
AS he that (ouer-curious) Bane receaues
To know the quality and force of it,
Dies, by that force, er he the effect perceaues;
(And worthy too, for fooling so with Wit)
So, they that love to look too curiously
Into the lives of Kings, their fault to know,
Often so ore see themselves, in what they see,
That they, thereby, themselves quite overthrow!
For, such as are not pleased with Phoebus Rays,
That yields all comfort unto all that live,
But needs must see how he his Beams displayes,
And the whole Body, that such light does give:
No marvel though they blind themselves thereby;
Then winck (with Sem) when thou do faults discry,
For, no Spie's in such danger as this Spy.
To my dear Liege Lord King James. Epigram. 255.
VTopicall State-Writers (who do pen
With Idleness, and have no inte^rest
Nor knowledge in the rules tha^ gouer^e Me^)
New Models make of Rule, that still do rest
On disproportioned Joints of Reg^m^nt
Of Nations different in their Rules extent:
Which in the State of* kindle quenchlesse fires:
But thou rul'st right without these skyruy Squires.
Again to my Liege Lord King James. Epi. 256.
WHen those cursed hearts and hands (that sought thy death)
Distressed thee (deer Lieg) near thy latest Breath,
Yet then, like Gold in fire, thy Virtue shone;
That is; in worth, to look, and Be all one.
On Sir John Roe. Epitaph. 257.
ROe, thou art gone in height of Youth and Fame,
As from a Feast, ere Surfeit thee o'^ecame.
Of and against Earelesse Praxus. Epi. 258.
THe handle for true Virtue to take hold
Of old and young by; is the open Ear;
But, Praxus having lost his Ears, how should
He ere be virtuous or not vicious ere.
Against Sottus ^is long wrong knowledge. Epi. 259.
IT is unmeet that Sense abroad should stir,
And (like a wanton Rigge) at random run:
But when her sovereign Reas'n commands her
Upon some urgent cause; which being done,
T'returne with speed to her, that sent her out,
T'informe her in her doubt's of good or ill:
Then like a sober Handmaid, keep about
Her Sovereign Reas'n, to do what else she will:
But, Sot, his sense from Reas'n has rangd so long,
(And do^es on all) that all he knows is wrong.
Of the Carpet Knights Sir Sim Soust Gurnerd his Quater-braules. Epi. 260.
SIr Sim Soust-Gurnerd, loves notes fresh and sweet,
And has an Organ Chamberd next the street,
Whereon he plays of purpose as appears,
To have all passers by him by the Ears:
Yet sweetly braules in tune with strokes of Art,
But dares not strike a Discord for his heart.
Of Cracus his facing out Fals^ood or facing truth. Epi. 261.
CRacus if thou did know, (but O thou breakst
The heart of Knowledge with thine ignorance)
how il thou gard'st thy faith, for which thou speakst
Thou nere wol'st speak but with thy countenance:
For that scar^s babes since thou fightst (being stout)
Better with swords than words: than face it out.
Of false praise. Epi. 262.
THe praise of Arts, which ill we deem,
Like smoke goes out as soon as seem:
The rightest Seruingmen are the rightest Courtiers. Epi. 263.
COurtiers may seruingmen be styled: what then?
Then, cannot they serve God, for serving men.
How an Harlot is like Hell. Epi. 263.
A Strumpet's like the ugly mouth of Hell,
That night and day is open to receive
All sinners that will pay for sinning well;
Which still she stakes and of^ the Pox does give.
Counterfeit Piety is double iniquity. Epigram. 264.
OLd Will upon the Sabath will not lose
A Sermon for his Dinner; yet (though pure)
Cheates like a Devil: for, about he goes,
At play, all simple sinners to devour:
He needs not then, at Sermons sit so civil
For fear of hell, being an incarnat Diuill.
Against powdered Hair. Epigram. 265.
THe Days of old did Ashes use to throw
(In sign of meekness) on the humbled Head:
But now, in sign of Pride (in Heart, and Show)
Our Mad-dames cast sweet-powder in their stead:
But they whose Tops are ever powdered so,
Their T -- (most commonly)are Pickel'd too,
Against Gallus, his treachery and tyrrany to Galla. Epi. 266.
GAllus found Galla (e're she quite was lost)
Where Time and Place betraide her to his lust:
Yet first the faire-Maide his soul offer croft,
But he (like Ioab) stabbed, as her he bust:
Which she took patiently: how e're afraid:
And so a Goat like Man the Maid dis-Maide.
Against the stincke of Marens his sweetness. Epi. 267.
Lascivious Marc goes still perfumed I think,
But yet his sweetness makes his fame to stink.
Of the compassing of his lusts designs. Epig. 268.
MArc in the compass of his Lusts designs,
Is like a Circle in Geometry:
He; goes from point, to point, until he ioynes;
Then puts a Period to his Letchery:
A Period call it, or full point, or (.)
All Is one to him, so he therein does stick.
Against Gella and her consumption. Epi. 268.
GElla is light, and like a candle wastes,
Even to the snuff that stinketh more the^ lasts,
Against the ill cure of Gallus the Surgeon, upon Gaila. Epi. 70.
GAllus the Surgeon, now, is poor as Job
For healing Galla whom with Child he got:
He cu'rde one Wound, another with his Probe
He gagged too deep: and so was ouer-shot
In his own craft; who made her, to his shame,
So swell, that all his worth scarce heales the same.
Against Fuluiae's Transcendency. Epi. 271.
FVluia is brought to naught; then cannot she
In the Predicaments comprised be,
So, some Transcendent she must be of force;
But how that is, transcendeth my discourse^
Yet now I have it t'a hair; she does transcend
All that the Pox can m^rre and naught can mend.
Against proud great-bellied Ventus, the Smell feast. Epi. 272.
THe word Maiestas, of these two composed
Mayor and Status, argues great estate:
Then O, how vainly Ventus is disposed,
To strut and look as if he had no M^te:
When (God does know) that if his state be great,
Its in his Panch with eating others meat.
Against Vulpus his endless distinguishing. Epig. 273.
EXact Distinctions breed perspicuousnesse;
But many breed but loathed Obscurity:
This, Vulpus makes, to show his nimblenesse;
In argui^g, to distinguish endlesly:
Which if he do, but truth so to deprave,
I Will prove him without Logic but a Knave:
If this Style be to common; him I Will make
A learned Knave for true distinctions sake.
Poets gain is Fame and Famine. Epigram. 274.
THe Poets proper Ensign is the Swan
Sole Bird of Phoebus: so it well may be;
For, she does sing before her death: so, Man
(Turned Gull) called Poet, makes that melody:
Because he sings before his death and Fame,
So, perishes, through want, to get a Name!
Against the envy of Muranus. Epigram. 275.
MEagre Muranus feeds on his own Heart,
Still envying all that are of good desert:
So, he is like an Eye diseased, whose sight
Is still offended with what e're is bright.
Against gurmandizing miserable minded Fagus. Epigram. 276.
FAgus is fat, and swells more and more
As if Cram'd-Capons did but poison him:
He naught but feeds, though never feeds the poor
And like a Panch in sweat, does, sincking, swim:
His Mind is so chok'd up with Grease and blood,
That though he e're be Great he will never be good.
Against the bare Breasts of too well clothed wenches. Epigram. 277.
WHy bare ye so your Breasts, audacious dames?
Is it to give men's eyes a taste of that
You yet do hide, to augment their lustful Flames?
Or else to draw their tongues to wanton Chat?
It seems you are hot, that so low naked go,
And look for cooling at some Vent below.
No Kingdom to Content. Epigram. 278.
Will thou be rich? then thy desire decrease;
So shall thy wealth, in want, amain increase.
Spare, to spend; like thine own friend. Epigram. 279.
RVfus lived hard, to make his Heir live soft,
But his Heir lived as hardly for his Heir:
So they like Conduct-pipes conveyed often
(from pipe to pipe) great store of water fair
Reteyning none themselves; till, at long running,
By some hole in their Coat (how ever gay)
The Prince cuts off the Pipe, in Fortunes sunning,
And turns the VVater-course an other way:
Again, on the same Subject. Epigram. 286.
BOtts on these Masks and Cl^ut^ which now are set
To hyde such Fronts that for such lies excel;
Well-colour'd Gorgons made when Nature sweat
Too much to hold her Working-toole too well:
So, are but Natures shame, and Graces scorn;
Yet in Charoches bear they, and are borne.
Of Lord Volsus his ^is-v^^g his friends. Epigram. 287.
THe guilefull great Lord, Volsus, uses still
His friends like Bottles through his Court^ly skill:
For, he (o fie, what friend can him abide?)
The full draws dry, the empty casts aside.
Against golden Asses. Epi 288.
MAny men- Beasts go gilt now at all Pieces,
who are at best, but Sheep with golden-flee^es:
If that in Cholcos had been of this sort*
Jason had played the Sheep ere Shipped him for it.
Of Physicians abiding at Bathe. Epigram. 289.
LEeches, at Bath, for Wealth, not health do wait,
So, come not to the Bathe, but to the Bayte.
Of Flauia ^s looks after her fall. Epigram. 290.
FLauia looks feebly since she caught a fall:
So, looks as if She could not Do withal.
Against the wretchedness of rich-men. Epigram. 291.
THe Griffons among the Indians keep their Mines
Of Gold, yet they no use thereof do make:
So, a monied-Miser midst his plenty pines;
And Money keeps for Moneys only sake:
Kepthe a Whore as well, then Sin they would not:
For, her he would not use, and others should not.
Against Flexus his being sick of the Fashions. Epigram. 292.
FLexus, still goes in many Fashions light
Like a Chamelion that all Colors takes:
Or not vnl^ke a Creature ( Nabis hight,)
Which having many shapes, one Monster maks.
Of Rutus his indifferency in Religion. Epigram. 293.
RVtus holds all Religions; and in all
He is of none; like a still slyding Bourne
That takes all colors which therein do fall
It having none: then he will not burn but turn.
He that is without Religion, is, at least,
For his Souls sake, a fair immortal ^east.
Against Flauiae's leuity. Epi. 295.
LIght of belief, of word, and promise light
Is wanton Flauia: light in Mi^d and Will:
Light of her Body: and her Eyes (though bright)
Are light, and light to works of darkensse still:
The weeds she wears are light, as bright: then she,
(Being all so light must needs self lightness be.
Of a Trick of Youth. Epi. 296.
CArnus, calls lechery a Trick of youth:
So, he grows old, but this trick lets his grouth.
Against great Vardingales. Epig. 297.
Down with your Vardingales, Trulls out of frame
(sick of the Fashion) for, they mount too hie:
They hide your Wast: O no, they show the same;
That is; your Antic Superfluity:
The time has been, they did the heels surround;
But now they do the head; and men must lean
Upon your shoulders, from the upper Ground,
To look down for your middle, without mean:
Your Waste is shameful then, since it to hide,
Your English Bummes are still so Frenchifide.
Against promise-breaking. Epi. 298.
VEntus does promise much; yet still does break;
So all his promises are great, and weak,
Like Bubbles in the water ( round and light)
Swelling so great that they do break outright.
Against the misery of rich M^sers. Epi. 299.
VArus shuts up his Coin from all with Sparrs;
And, from himself, he locks it most of all:
For all his Thoughts (too hard^like Iron Batres)
Keep it from him, so lives on pittance small:
He ha^h not what he has; wealth makes him want,
Yet thinks he still to last, being Adamant;
If so he should, in ca^es that so excel,
He Is damned already: for he is here in hell.
O^ and against Pegus his often change of faith: Epig. 300.
PEgus is pleased his faith now thrice to turn,
Yet ne'rethelesse is hot as fire therein:
But, dares not hang; and, much less dares he burn:
No; that is to lose but, he does change to win:
But, while he sought to win so, it ensu'th,
His Tongue at Trey-trip played; so, lost his truth.
That might be Kings for wit though his be vile,
Yet for that Ierke of Wit for clapping looks:
Where he well clapped, he should be cla^t for it
In Bridewell to correct his Will and Wit:
There, since he lives by such dull Iurks a Iurke,
Of Justice hand would make the Player work*
Of a Man in Print. Epi. 313.
A Man in Print; once such a Man I saw
Who whipped but Vice in Print; and then did draw
Himself in Print, so much in Print, that he
Comes thus in Print, reform^d, in Print, to be;
While he that whipped but Vice in Print does storm,
For being a Vice in Print so much in Form.
Of a Master of Art that lay, by the instinct of Nature, with one Mistress
Barbara all night. Epi. 314.
BOssius and Barbara (his Love) one night,
Chop't Logic with their Tongues, and other things,
He pressed her to the point in Loves delight
And that unto the Issue still she brings:
So, while she argued unlike Debora,
He Sillogizd all night in Barbara.
But had the Proctors heard his Master-ship,
The Moderator should have been a whip.
Of my lying between two Queanes. Epi. 315.
Between two Drabs I lie (with much ado)
Each night; yet lie in several houses too:
They ( Starchers) neighbor me so near, that I
May well be said between them both to lie.
They will (good- Doers) let me nere, be idle;
For, with their Tongues (as sharp as is their needle)
They prick me forward to be doing still;
So my Part play they; and my Belly full
With Throes of these: dear Brid-well do thy part,
Deliver me of these, to ease my Heart.
Against Iacks Perjury, in proving his honesty. Epigram. 316.
NOw, as I am an honest Man, says Jack,
(Whose looks, and life, religiously, are black)
At eu^ry word, which wounds his faith (they say)
And is belyu'd the clean contrary way.
Yet out-talks all, to all his hearers woe;
And, by that no-oath swears, it is so, or so.
He lives by Carding; yet the State may stand
Without his labor, languor to the Land.
False to his friend; and so to God may be,
Yet as I am an honest Man (cries he)
The truth is so; Is It so John (Yes* It Is true
Thou art to God, and to thy Friend, a Jew.
Of Calpus his making much of a Little. Epigram. 317.
CAlpus, has little Latin; yet he makes,
Much of that little: for, he undertakes
To teach his Friends; yet, while to them he reads,
With Art he cheats them; so, in Art proceeds;
And, learnes them little Latin with much Art;
Which ere they learn, thus ierks the^ til they smart
So, with his little Latin much he makes;
Which is his Snare to cousin all it takes.
Against Rollus his great building for little fame. Epi. 317.
ROllus, still builds alive to keep his name:
But, L^^e and Stone keeps no immortal fame
For, they will wast; then, in that wast (ye wot)
His Fame must lie; and, so his Name must rot.
Against Don Puffes incomperable adaciousnes. Epi. 318.
LOrd! how Don Puff, with his left handed Face
Scrues himself into Action in high Place:
May men do so that better can deserve?
No, i^ they be not Scrues some holes to serve.
The Tears of Peace.
WHy do these Times complain of want in Peace?
Are Peace and Plenty our, that blessed increase
Has left us? No; they are not out, but in;
In strife While Plenty leaves us Peace in sin.
Against the worst of Lawyers. Epi. 320.
LAwyers, how is it that such Fees ye take,
not concord, (which ye should) but strife to make
Is It for that strife, not Peace, maintains your life?
Than, strive by peace to live; so, live by strife.
Of an ill Custom ^eere good Customers. Epi. 321.
THere is a thing some call the Custom House,
Which when as Tradesman has a Spider taken,
At point to break, preuents the deadly Bane,
By ways familier; so, too often in use;
With Hundreds they of others hold in chief,
They buy a Place there, to displace their grief.
Epi. 322.
SIr Volsus door is still with Suitors thronged;
His door the more oppressed; and, he more wronged:
For, if this Wit and honesty ye weigh,
Himself at every door should stay, and pray.
Of stupid Binus his preventing of time. Epigram. 323.
Since Time flies fast away, his fastest flight
Binus preuents with dreaming day and night.
Against despertate Harrius his contempt of goodness. Epi. 324.
FOole-hardy Ha^rius, when himself he hears
A Good Man called; he holds himself too good:
So to be Stild, because (belike) he fears
That Title hits not home his Manhoods mood:
Since he, to be a good man, scor^es (t'appeare)
I would he were a Saint, so hanged he were.
Of Bombus the Buffon, and his laughing Patronesses. Epigram. 325.
THe Buffon, Bombus feeds, by laughter, fat;
Yet, maks he Ladies laugh a loud thereat:
So, lives by laughter: and I laugh to see
Both him, and Them ^so both my Buffons be.
Of Luscus his great Faith, and small Performance. Epigram. 326.
LVscus, at last, has got his Wife with Child.
For, it is like him, her bribed Midwife swears:
Which he believes: but, for he is beguild,
He has his false Faith ever by the Ears.
Of Rorers, soft speaking. Epigram. 327.
SInce Duells damned were, by a Souraignes doom
The lowdest Rorers speak in eithers Ears:
Yet dare not for their Ears to Calis roame,
But, in the Streets, still end their Fraies, and Fears:
So, by the highway now, their Manboods live,
Like Theeue that steal, in hope of a Repriue.
Of Scalpus his Hairs humility. Epigram. 328
SCalpus, his Hair apparent, leaves his Crown,
As fast as, in the Air, does Thistle-downe:
But, This with Air does so; but That, with Fire,
Becomes so humble, that would else aspire.
Of Phrynas, huge-limbd Husbands Metamorphosis. Epigram. 329.
WHat! Phryna, is your Pheare become your Maid?
Make you a Woman of so huge a Man?
Sets he your Russes for Cuffes, without your aid?
O Hercules! belike then spin he can:
But, were I yours, though I (perhaps) might reele,
Yet, ere I spun, you should the Distaff feel.
Of Soar Times hard to cure. Epigram. 330.
THe Times are soar for Priests or Poets now
To speak or write: if truth they do a^ow:
Because the Times being soar, the^l ill endure
The Corasines that, soarely, them must cure.
Of Sir Lauoltas high sol'd shoes and valting in his going. Epigram. 331.
LOrd! be these Shoes or Stilts that Knight goes on
A Peacocks pace? who is it? Laualta, Sir.
What! Sir Laualto? is he such a one?
Yes; and his name does in his nature, s^irre,
For, as he stalks he strives himself to rear:
As if his steps Lauolta-paces were.
Of heavy load-^earing Birds. Epigram. 332
OF the Bird Ruc, that bears an Elephant,
Writes good Sir John, surnamed Mandeuile;
Increase my faith, dear Love; for it is too scant
To credit this; but yet, here, in this Isle,
There be some Bride-wel Birds that well will bear
(How ever ill) huge Men as Mice they were.
Of the great traveler Fagus. Epi. 333.
FAgus, Land-leaper, ali-as Grasse-hopper,
Returned is from the Pigmies (pretty fools!)
With his Hyde full of News: Nay, soft, ho there,
It cannot be it is so full of Holes:
For what with Scabs and Scars where such have bin,
It will hold naught: then no News lie therein.
Against fond at furiors Frontus, his swaggering to regaine his pawned
Apparel. Epigram. 334.
THe Brokers have fond Frontus cloths as pledges,
For Coin to keep his Corpse in sweetest sin:
And being forfeited, he them besiedges
With thundering oaths and blows his clothes to win:
But they hold hard (hard horsons) without dread;
So, Anuile like, endure the Hammer-head.
Against Spongus, a plain Farmers Bastard, that had gotten to be of a great
Lords bedchamber. Epigram 335.
SPongus, what makes you so your Sire to scorn?
Is it because he all in Frize does go,
And you in golden coats, though ouerworne;
That Is cast Apparel of your Lords, or so?
He honors you; you him in scorn forsake:
So, makes an Idol of a Golden-Asle;
While you your self thereby a Devil make.
That speaks through a head whose brow is brass:
Then spiritual whordome he commits thereby,
To honor him he made adulterously.
Against Signior Snap-haunce, the rude fooli^h Rorer. Epigram. 336.
SNap-haunce speaks quick and loud; but still amiss
White powder then were best for him; for, when
He spits his spite, but leaden stuff it is,
Which evermore annoyes the sense of Men:
Tha^ Snap-haunce, cease to snap; for thy loud sou^ds:
Do yield such noisome stuff that sense confounds.
Against Rufus the Appollo ger. Epigram. 337.
RVfus, you write Appollogies to Cloud
Your treachery with which you men delude;
That, like a Cuttle* you may so, vnuiew'd,
Abuse th'insipient plumbeus multitude:
Than since you knauishly thus Cuttleize;
I may, less lauishly, thus Inkhornize.
Against a Merchants as light as bright Wife, still wearing a great Chain of
Gold or'ethwart. Epigram. 338.
SEe you yo^'d Merchants wife, in Satin clad?
It is Lucilla, Light as Leuity.
It cannot be, her Chain must make her sad,
It is so heavy past all gravity.
Nay* more, she will Cared (that shows her houswifery)
Away her Pence, by Pound^; her Pounds, by scores
To make her Light: O then it was clean awry
To call he^ Light; for, Lightly, so be whores.
That Stile's too soul for one so Fair and Rick:
Than, better call her Fancy; or Proud-(.)
Of my Self. Epigram. 339.
A Friend of mine reproud me, since I was
Too Busy in correcting Leebery;
Saying I was too open. But, alas,
I cannot help it handsomely; for I
Must, ere I scourge it, open it (you know)
That I my ierkes the righter may bestow.
Against Iugus, his truth-swearing. Epigram. 340.
IVgus still swears that he a true Man is,
Than say so I^; for, still thou swear'st amiss,
Since thou woul'st steal our good conceits thereby,
Against our wills: so, thy true oaths do lie.
What rich men must do to gain and retain the worlds favor. Epigram. 341
A Rich man that would have the world to friend
Must either give (or at least) Spend or Lend:
If neither; either he must live alone,
Or, with too many push't, be overthrown.
Against the gallant Glossus his mis-measuring. Epigram. 342.
GLossus is gallant, yet does measure keep;
He eats and drinks in measure; so does sleep:
He measures Lands in travel; so does Seas:
In Measure he does dance, toils, takes his ease:
Yet ( Robin-Hood) metes, something^ might be left
He metes Maid^marions by the Bow, and Shaft.
Of the Vyoll. Epigram 343.
THe Violl speaks the language of the Hands;
And, by the Fingers, Sense it understands.
Yet, Fingers are the Vi^ls Fe^te: and so,
As they do^ run, the Violl still does Go.
How Maids resemble Eve. Epigram. 344
MOst Maids resemble Eve now, i^ their lives;
Who are no sooner Women but are Wives:
As Eve knew no Man (...) Fruit wrought her Woe,
So, these have Fruit (of^) ere their Pheares they know.
Against Myntha, that would have bin my Tenant for a foul Fine. Epigram. 345.
Mintha (ripe Medler) would be meddling still,
With things that most concern me, by her will
She under me would sain have lived by doing
Things in my house, for which she still was woing:
Her Lips, and Hippes, in gross, she offered me
For Fine* if so she might my Tenant be.
So, I should be her Tenant, and she mine.
For no great Rent, but for too gross a Fine:
So^t Mintha, in some others house go prancke ye;
Yours is an Ordinary; I Will none, I thank ye.
Of a man that proved a Slipper. Epigram. 34^.
FRiscus took Slippers upon trust; and then
He Slipped away; So Slippers (often) are men.
No good Wives in London. Epigram. 347.
THe Countrie's full of good-wiues; specially
The Wives of all the Clo^nes and Yeomanry:
But Tripe-wi^es, Broome-wiues, Oyster-wiues, and all*
W^e still, in London, Mistresses do call:
Then London has no good-wiues, since they bide
All in the Country, better occupide.
Against the too too common, as most shawelesse countersetting the Stamp of
Heaven (Beauty) by Painting; and the excessive bravery of Men, and Women of
these Times. Epigram. 348.
THomas Thomasius, an outlandish VVitch,
Sold Diu'ls for Dolors: Fame else lowdly lyde:
And, as they were in power, he price did pitch:
So, lived by selling Devils till he died.
A pretty Occupation ^and ^ere he.
Alive, and here to sell his VVare, he might
Gain what he would, if his cursed Diu'ls would be
Pleased to make Men and Women fair and bright
For, now men fairly play the women too;
Then, for his gain he might the Land undo:
Nay, though they painted and but bo^rrowed raime^t
Tom, for his Diu'ls, should have royal payment.
Of Raggus and his project. Epigram. 349.
RAggus, with open mouth pursues strange Proiects,
And of the State, reuiles the Eye of wit;
That, having opened it, so many Prospects
To worlds of wealth; yet, sees no benefit:
Saw it as thou do ( Ragge) that so do rave,
It saw but how to play the Fool and Knave:
For with thy sight (at best) it would perceive
It self, and others how but to deceive.
Probatumest. How Clearke Tho. his Clearkeship saved his Queen. Epigram. 350.
CLearke Thomas kept a whore at his command,
(Whom al commanded that had wealth or will)
Yet kept her from the Gallows underhand,
That under him she might be do^ng still.
Fie Tom (great Clearke) thy skill does kill thy fame
For, by thy Clergy thou have saved thy shame.
Fast and loose. Epi. 351
PAphus was married all in have,
And and now to wrack does run:
So, knitting of himself too fast,
He has himself undone.
Of Long's being the least part of himself. Epigram. 352.
ONe Long being served with process to appear,
Appeared forth with; but 'twas another where
Than where he should: and so, for his contempt,
Was taken by a writ, no place exempt:
Then, quite beside himself, came all aghast;
Showing, That was not Long that came at last.
To a blind Har: Par: Epigram. 353.
SOme neighbor Nations when their Out-lawes fly,
Hang up their pictures which should them betide,
So (^or thou Outlaw art in Poetry)
Thy Picture I trust up on Times backe-side.
For which (too like it, without grace or wit)
Thou martyrd'st me in thy Wits feeble fire:
But shall I malice? no, I pity it:
Since thou art worthy of no witty Ire:
For, thy Lines weakness all men wonder at,
That (like a Parrat) prat'st thou wot'st not what.
Eundem. A blind Harper. Epi. 353.
YEt with the Horns of thy weak pow're whose Root
G^^^s through thy bro^s, but coms not ny thy
Thou but'st at wales; but I Will say nothing to it, (brain
(Though I be Welsh) since all thou do is vain:
Thy best is but to filch from good Sir John,
Some Epigrams; whereof a Welsh is one.
Then since thy best is stol'ne from Sir John Har:
Thou art no Poet, but a blind Har: Par:
He stole some Epigrams from Sir John Har. verbati^ Of Casse and her Case.
Epigram. 354.
CAsse was in Case to draw on Suitors; which
She loved a life: yet loved none but the rich:
So, a heauy-mettel'd Boore, in C^sses Case,
Ca^r^^d her^ ^eaden Sow) from ^it and Grace.
After the fall o^ Man, of the fall of Wo-men. Epigram. 355.
NOw scarce a Wastcoteere or Chambermaid,
(Much les, much more) can go, though by the wall
But by some Friend or Usher must be staid,
W^men are now so weak, and apt to ^all:
Heaven stre^gth^ them; for many a woman grown
A Pages breath now often tilteth down.
As the (...) crows, so does the old. Epigram. 356.
YOung Taurus, like his Sire does fare and do,
And, like his Wife does bear as well as strike*
That Is done by nature; and, by nature too,
Old Taurus needs must get (this Calfe) his like.
Against lame Hipp. Epi. 357.
OLd Hip; well, let him go; he is not worth
The talking of; yet setts himself still forth
As if he were a man might wear a Robe,
Although the old Scabbe, be as poor as Iob^.
Nay, now Ilye; for, Job, though he had naught,
Yet naught he owed; but, this poor pach is thought
Much worse the^ Naught with wrangling; he is ^so)
Poorer then Job; for, Job but scabs did owe.
Against M^rnezetus, the well known Sharker, co^se^^^^ me of a Cloak. Epig.
366.
SIrrah, Marnezetus, me no more prouoak;
Go, cheat else where; with me y'haue shorn your sheep
Y'haue Clok't y'^r knavery: so, have got a Cloak,
By c^eating of your friend; well, safe it keep:
Yet, it restore to Cloak my Spleen and Me,
Or lie vncloake thy name, thy shame, and Thee.
But maugre Sp^ght thy Name and fame shall gain
A Place, and Name with Stars called great Charleswaine:
Which still I wish; and who doth't not desire,
Would they were naught as naught; or Tow in Fire.
To the no less than most grave Counselor of Counselors, Thomas Vicount
Brackley Lord Chancellor of England. Epi. 369.
You Have past the Storms of Youth and Passion too;
And now, in Calmes of Ages Hau'n remain:
Now sees your Soul most clearly what to do;
And those undo that do their Conscience strain:
In Sum, for all (that may your glory spread)
Your pain your Brain, to ease, and please your Head.
To the true President of Honor, William Earl of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain.
etc. Epig. 370.
Dear Lord, to whom I wish a world of Good;
If so; a World of Grace is understood,
Agreeing to that World of Worth in Thee
Too little Lord that great Worlds Lord to be.
Grace, Art, and Nature, still in thee do strive
Which most shall make thy praise Superlatiue;
And make thee most like Him, that all things can,
And Phillip, more than M^cedonian:
Then, ^^ll be like thos^ Two* as now thou art;
And, as thou have; so, (...) shall have my Heart.
To the Right noble, and my much honored Lord, Phillip Earl of Montgomery.
Epi. 371.
A Mother sooner can forget her Child,
Than I Thee (Lord of my best Memory)
Could I mind more, thou should be higher styled;
But, this is all I can, unless to dye
For Thee and thy most Noble House: whereof
I am an Ex^rement not yet cut off.
To the true Patterns of Noblesse and Heroical virtue, Richard Earl of
Dorset, and Sir Edward Sackuill Knight of the ^ath his most nolle Brother.
Epigram. 372.
YOu Stars that in our States Sphere shine as bright
As Suns fixed near our Zenith, daying Night:
Still on such Dayes-eyes shine (though planted low)
By Fortunes hand, as turn to such as you
To be set open, when ^hey (hid) hang down
Their heads for want of Grace to make the^ known.
I need not force the free; you shine on such,
No Stars within our Hemispheare so much:
So much for that; but this much more for you,
(Though more you cannot have then is your due)
You, for your high Worthes Rays, I Will Raise to be
Castor and Pollux both to Heaven and me.
To the Right noble Lord, Theophilus, Lord Walden. Epigram. 373.
My Cunning sooner shall my right hand leave
Than not to give where once it did receive:
But, Golden Air to give, for Golden Earth,
Is less Material, and no cause of Mirth:
Yet, Ca(...) M^rth (...) Papers do infold:
That I, in (...), do gieue thee for thy Gold:
But wh^^, in earnest I would give (with mirth)
To thee, is glory; both in Heaven, and Earth.
To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Bacon Knight. etc. Epi. 259.
THi'admired Sire was Wit and Wisdoms Source;
And thou his Son, resemblest him in those:
Thy Hand is open; close is thy Discourse:
For; much in few, thy thy Judgment does enclose.
But, when thou art disposed to set open
A Flood of Eloquence, to Wha^t all Ears
With headlong sway) unto thine v^mos^ scope,
^hen, stubborn'st Rocks of Le^s it ouerbeares:
So, thou do grace the Law, as it does Thee;
But, of all Lawyers, Thou alone for me.
To my much honored the Lord Hayes. Epigram. 375.
THou do the Court Lord too much grace,
To be forgotten in this place:
Where I desire to praise such Ones
As (worthy) are Court-Minions.
Then, this thou art (I dare auo^ch)
A Good, Great Courtier (seldom such!)
That Is honest with due Complement;
Which is most noble in e^tent:
Here, since no further Grace, has gone,
^^e put a Prick. To drive It on.
To my Noble, highly valued friend, Pupil, and Alyes Man, Sir Edward Herbert,
of Montgomery, Knight of the Bath. Epi. 376.
Since thou thy Name and Nation honor
With Worth (like Britains Crown) past price at least,
Give me leave (^east worth of thy least Alyes)
To tell the World thus much, and then it dies:
For, in this World, where Grace does live by Sin,
Can nothing live that is not dead within.
To my honorable, ingenious, worthy, friend, Sir John Constable, Knight. Ep^.
377.
Did thou but know (deer Knight) how much my heart
Desires to Stellifie thee for thine Art:
And what e're else by Worth can be possessed,
Thou would believe my Heart ^s thine, at least.
The^ take my Heart, which thus on thee is whorl'd
And love it; so, my Heart is worth a World.
To my much honored and entirely beloved Sir William Alexander Knight. Ep^. 378.
THy Pe^, which from some Angel is acquired,
With heavenly Grace to show thy Wit and skill,
So far out-shines my poor Rookes ruder Quil,
That, in it is beams mine seems a Cole vn^ir'd;
But, let them lie till they become intir'd,
Then, thine shall mine with equal glory fill;
Yet so as, known, it was so by thine attired,
That all the Glory thine may merit still:
Yet, here my lavish Pen runs over so much
With blurring inck* be blotting blacker Crimes,
That (loosly) it, the Times too near does touch;
That is; too br^adly blots these looser Times:
But, sooth to say; my Muse became thus loose
Through vice; at which she hisseth like a goose.
To my venerable friend Master Doctor Goade. Epi. 379.
THou art not l^ke, but cu*n a real Goad,
Sharp at one End (thy Head) to drive men on
(That are oppressed with sad sins heavy Load)
Where they may rest from being we^be^gon:
Then, he that will not go, when thou do prick,
Is dull, in sense; or else, an Halter-sick.
To my worthy, and beloved friend Doctor Pierce; Parson of Saint Christophers,
London. Epigram. 380.
IN this but Froth of Wit to sowse your name
Is but to soil it; so, incur your blame.
These Purgings of my Brain become not you
In any sort to See; much less^ allow.
You needs must say, my Leisure I abuse
To make these lests the Stasions of my Muse.
What will you more (dear Doctor) I confess
I am all yours, but not my Foolishness.
Yet, Garce, Art, Wit, and Worth (and all divine)
May make you (bright Sun) on this Dunghill shine
Without defiling of your spotless Rays:
Then, scowre my guilt with Birch; but, gilde my Ba^^s.
To my best beloved friend, and aliz-man, Master John Sanford. Epi. 381.
John, thou art like a Hand that changes not
His Name, or Nature; clouched, or dilated:
So, thou art One, what ever be thy Lot:
And still, by Fortune, rather chekt, than Mated: North
But, if she had but Eyes to see thy Worth,
The North should grace thee, as thou do the North
With radiant Beams,
On Learnings Streams.
In Fortunes Sphere long be his Grace and place,
That, like the Sun, exhald thy streams to grace.
To the all witty, Sir Io: Har:
SIR, you and I (but Oh I do you wrong,
To rank with you, for friends, means, wit, or art)
Are like (they say) in setting of a Song,
Tho you sing more in tune, in every Part.
But, as I can, by Nature, I do hit
Those Notes you strike, upon a iarring string:
And it is true* we have one fashioned Wit,
Which may (alike) to us displeasure bring.
But shall we cease to sing for this? Oh no,
We can no more do that, than cease to say
God save the King: and they that would not so,
Would some strait lines had trust out of the way.
But on our gamesome Numbers who does ^orce,
Their Sense, not Ours, to vex us; ill they wot
What power are in (our Pates) the wodden Horse,
To do their Names away with Wits hot-shot.
But we will L^be^l none; for it is unfit,
The world's not worth a Libell of rich Wit.
To my in^enious dear friend and Countryman Mr. ^ohn Hoskins, Councellor at
Law.
ONe County first susteind our weight; yet we
Do li^e no burden to the place, so pressed;
Bu^ Luster: else some flatter thee and me,
Yet, say they what they will* our souls know best:
And for my part, I hope that Thou, and I,
Ere we will disgrace it, we with Grace will dye.
To my worthy, ingennus, and ingenius Pupil Mr. Thomas Bond.
Under my hand I had you once; and now
Y'ate failen under but my Pen, my Plow;
Wherewith your Name I culture thus; you be
A Bond that binds, because you a^e so Free.
To my witty and worthy friend, Inigo Iohnes Esquie^, surueigher of his
Maiestie^ works.
WITS mirror, I^^g^, wherein Men see
Their Figure; which thou do to them reflect
By forming, or, to them, conformi^g ^hee:
For which thou win'st both riches and respect:
Fortune and Favor with great Art conspired,
To make thee Model out each Edisce
Ere it be squared for Court; which thee has Squird;
And may do, SIR, for many a rare Device!
Thy Place I wish not; but thy wake full Wits,
To make my Place fit me, as thine thee fits:
Then, lend me, while thou sleepst, thy pure acumen
To Knight me (old Boy) after many Ne^-men.
To my learnedly witty friend, Mr Benjamin Johnson.
THy sconse (that guards thy wits as it they guard)
Is sound, and large, yet no whit can be spard
For thy Wits throng: that Plenty makes thee scarce,
Which makes thee slow, as sure in Prose or Verse,
As say thy worst detractors; then, if thou
For all eternity, writ'st Sure and Slow,
Thy Wits, as they come thronging out of Door,
Do stick a while, to spread their praise the more.
To my darling-friend Mr. Richard Dorington.
DIcke, I am thine: then (thou have to the end,
A sore disease, that Physic will not mend:
Yet, it is no Falling-sicknes, for I Will stand
As fast to thee, as is thy Heart and Hand:
And I have reason for it; for thou art
As dear to me as is my Hand or Heart.
Then, if I do disease thee, it shall be,
As Physic does, of good, to better thee*
Since thou aforehand giu^st me Fee on Fee.
To my beloved, and most praise worthy friend, Mr. Lyte of Lytes-cary.
Since Art and Nature did agree,
To make thee Lyte of Lyte;
Thou art a Type of Christ, since he
Is very Light of Light:
Though light'st (like him) with Wit and grace,
Whose Fame (like his) fills Time and Place.
To my beloved, Mr. Robert Branthwaite.
I Love thee Robin; If I should not, I
Should give my heart the s^ab, my tongue the lie:
The Sword of sorrow still should pierce my heart,
If it should not affect thy dear desert:
In few, I know no man more worthy love
For all that may Affection Stay, or Move.
To my worthy approved dear friend Mr. Iackson, Manciple of All Souls
College in Oxford.
IF we must speak as we have found; why then,
Thou Have been to me and mine, the best of Men:
For, of all those that ever yet I proved,
Thou best deseru'st of me to be beloved.
Thine Outsides plain, but yet within thy Breast,
A Heart (I find) as brave and free does rest
As that great Caesar's, who would ever moan
The paffed day, wherein he pleasur'd none.
Thou art a Townseman, yet the Country mend'st,
and glad'st it with what there thou get'st and spend'st
For, two Months, in a time of pestilence,
There, freely cheered, I saw thy great expense.
While thou in Oxford (plagued) wast then exposed
To death: thy family and mine disposed
In safety there, where we, besides, were fed;
While thou for us did live among the dead.
Iackson's thy name; then thou art mine (al^cke
Thart hapless so) for so^e do ca^l me Jack.
But, like a Father, thou to Jack have bin;
That is, in kindness, far beyond his Kin.
Then, Iack's thy son, to love and honor thee;
And so, for fostring both, must Iack's Siluanu^
Son be.
Thus, enough Jack can not give thee reason for it,
He Will give thee Rhyme, Renown and good report.
And if that be too thyn for thy desert.
Were thou not all heart, thou should have his Heart,
Yet, for thine may be sick, when his is sound,
He gives it thee, since so to thee it is bound.
To my worthy approved friend Mistress Sisley Tyle.
THy Virtues do entice me, Tyse, to set
Thy name (for Love and Fames sake) in my Rimes
Least Time should either Them or Thee forgett,
Whose Wisdom, Woman-hood, and parts (like crimes)
Do stain most Wives, as Phoebus does the Fire;
Then, live thou in my R^me, till Time expire.
Of my Self, and my Book.
I Must confess my Muse is in the wrong,
Though rightly she does scourge what is amiss:
But being pregnant, She to lash does long,
Though her complexion quite be marred by this*
For most will say, She like a Devil looks:
Yet, let none judge, but such as can write Books.
Against Yellow, starcht bands. For a Farewell.
THese Ruffes, sick of the Ia^^^ize (black, or Yellow)
Do show their Wearers are or Deep or Shallow
In Poverty, or Wit: Then, would they were
Al black with Cuffes that Yellow Ruffes do wear:
And he whose Wife does wear them, I suppose
With Cause still fears he wears the Yellow-hose.
To my dear Mother; the City of Hereford.
THou gave me breath; and I will give thee fame
By writing, in a double Kind: thy Name
I Borrowed once to add to mine: and yet
I hold it to it still; for which the debt
Is clearest fame I Will pay thee, at long running;
Else shall my hand and head forget their cunning.
FINIS.
EPITAPHS.
On him that was said to be pulled in pieces in playing the Bear. Epitaph. 1.
HEre lies a Man; nay, who there*
Here lies a Man that did a Bear.
On an Hermaphrod^te. Epi. 2
HEre lies a Man and Woman too;
And yet wants One to make them Two.
On one Gwillim a common crier of a Town. Epitaph. 3.
HEre lies the Common Crier Gwillim;
So, cried for life, till Death die still him.
On an Harlot called Meg-Mutton of Heref: Epitaph. 4.
HEre lies Megmutton (who could live no longer
To make Death a Glutton, and true Mutton-monger.
Upon a noted common-lyer, Iack-ap Jack. Epitaph. 5.
HEre lies Iack-ap Jack; and wot ye why?
A live he still lyde; an^, dead, still must lie.
Who, in his life, lyde willingly still:
But here, in death, lies against his will.
On the Woman that was burnt in Smithfield for killing her Master, in her
anger. Epitaph. 6.
HEre good people, in the Dust,
Truly Lies Choller-adust:
Which killed, through heat; so, burned, with Dolor*
Then, here lies truly, Burned choler.
Upon one borne blind. Epi^aph. 7.
HEre lies a man that never sa^ woe
Being borne blind, to feel it so.
Upon John of all John's.
John of all John's here lies: what than?
Were all John's hon^r'd in this Man?
Yes, that they were: and, wot ye why?
Cannot you tell? in troth nor I.
On one Wood a miser, burnt by a Queen. Epi. 9.
REader, read; and, think thereon,
H^re lies Wood beneath this Stone:
Who was harder than the higher,
Yet was burnt without a fire.
On one who built himself bank^roupt, to keep the poor on work. Epi* 10.
REader smile, or else look off,
For, here lies the Peoples Scoff:
Who, that Beggars well might do,
Built himself a Beggar too.
On one that yielded hi^ Weapons in pri^at fight; the conceit whereof after
brake his heart. Epi. 11.
THis Stone conceales a Man almost,
Who, by his Manhood, Manhood lost.
On one that a Queen made to Father her Bastard, begotten by his Man. Epi. 12.
HEr^ l^^s a Man was got with Child
By a Maid that him defilde:
Who made him, when she was a Mother,
Father her Child got by another.
Upon one Church-euill a debosh'd base Whore-hunter, who dyed of the Pox. Epi.
13.
HEre lies a Church, tryumphant still in evil;
That never fought with sin the world nor Devil
But still with Flesh he changed friendly knocks;
And so, to shun the Plague, did of the Pox.
On a common Drunkard. Epi. 14.
HEre lies a Man that never saw Man;
For he never looked but in a Can.
On an English stutting-Booke-seller who learned French, to sell Books to
Frenchmen. Epi. 15.
HEre lies Sam: although a Stutter,
Yet many a word, in Print, did utter:
Yet had no Tongue at all to spare,
But one he bought to s^ll his Ware.
On Tarlton. Epi. 16.
HEre within this sullen Earth
Lies Dick-Tarlton, Lord of mirth;
Who in his Grave still, laughing, gapes
Sith all Clownes since have be^ne his Apes:
Erst he of Clownes to learn still sought;
But now they learn of him they taught
By Art far past the Principal;
The Counterfeit is, so, worth all,
On a rare Dyer of Silk. Epi. 17.
HEre lies one, who lyu'd by dying,
Yet did truly till this lying.
On a self conceited Fool. Epi. 18.
HEre lies a Man that was an Ass
Then Is he better than he was.
On one who cheated his Father. Epi. 19.
HEre lies a Man, who in a span
Of life, beyond his Father ran.
Epi. 20.
HEre John of Powles but hids his head:
For, none can say good John is dead.
On John A-Stile. Epi. 318.
IF ye be men, then stay a while,
And know here lies John A Style,
If ye know him not; why then,
Its ten to one you are honest men.
On Rauiliack who murdered Henry the fourth French-King. 22.
Here lies Rauiliack (the whole heavens under)
above the Earth, Heaven, Earth, and Hels just wonder,
Though all these 3. most justly wonder at him,
The thing procures more wonder that begat him:
For, though that thing, in Ill, past all comparing,
Yet naught could ought beget so damd and daring.
On George a Green, Pinder of Wakefield. 23.
Here does lie good George-a-Greene
Nor tasted, smelt, felt, heard, or seen:
But yet when George at Wakefield dwelt:
Many did smell, while him they felt.
On little John.
Here lies little John, not little some ween:
Yet now he is so little he cannot be seen.
O^ Billy Grime.
HEre lies Billy Gryme
Who never was storer;
But first and last Slyme,
And, ever a Rore^.
For, though dead be Will,
His Name roreth still.
On a Roaring Boy called Thing.
FIe vppo'nt* it maddes me near
A stabbing Thing should still lie here;
Yet, if now still lie he should not,
He must hang; ^or, stand he could not.
Of one Baudyman, whose name and nature were one. 27.
IF I should tell you, here does lie
A Man; perhaps you will say I lie:
But, though a Beast ye prove him can*
Yet was (at least) a Baudy-man.
Of one R. Hand that died of the Pox. 28.
NOw by this Hand I wrong him not,
Here lies a Hand that, dead, does rot:
And was to rotten ere he did,
That now he is less putrifide.
Upon a Youngster, who lay with a Maid, at the Labor in vain. 29.
WOuld you think it? I think you would not:
Here lies a youth that would but could not.
On a man borne dumb. 30.
Believe it here one dead does lie,
Who in his life, could never lie:
For he was dumb; then lie could nere,
But in his death, he still lies here.
Upon one Eleazer Death a good fellow Tailor. 31.
IF Death a Tailor be, why then
He must prick Lice, not Maids nor Men.
Deaths Epitaph. 32.
Here Death's interred, that liud by B^ead:
Then, all should live, now Death is dead.
On one Forgot a Pitman. 34.
Here lies, but what! that know I not:
Then (Reader) know, it is Forgot:
And yet if it thou do not know,
Read but That and it will show.
On a short spare man, that wore always an huge pair of Cloke-bag hose. ^5.
THat earth might dissolve the st^tches,
Here lies (raked) a pair of Breeches:
Naught could wear them since they had
Naught to wear them but a Shade.
On John an Oaks. Epitaph. 36.
HAlla* my Mates, here make a stand,
And read who lies here; understand
It Is John a Nokes the Lawiers fool;
Yet puts them still, for Law, to school.
One To: Gose a lightheaded wanton. Epitaph. 37.
HEre lies a Sot, that lived too loose;
Read soft, then, least ye wake the Goose.
On a Sot that was held honest though such cannot be so. Epitaph. 38.
WOuld ye think it? I think not;
Here does lie an honest Sot.
Then, let him lie still in his Grave,
Left this World make the Fool a Knave.
On o^e N. Po^, a dunkard who was stabbed in an Alehouse. Epitaph. 39.
REader, though it is stinking stale,
Here lies spilt a Pot of Ale:
So, he has small reckning got,
Though he were the reckning Pot.
On an idle prattler, nick^named Words. Epitaph. 40.
ALas that ever he was borne,
Here lies a Man to Nothing worm;
Yet is more than he was (I trust)
He was but Words; but, now is Dust.
On one H. Quarrel. Epit. 41.
IF ye come, come on your peril,
For here lies a mor^all Quarrel:
It is mortal, yet ye may
Find it dead without a Fray.
One one B. Holiday. Epit. 42.
AH! out, alas, and well-away,
Here lies s^ill, an Holyday*
Had it been working; then, ye know,
It could not lie still, to be so.
Yet, when Holyday shall rise,
He Will fall, then, to some exercise.
Being desired to make an Epitaph on an ill-belou'd rich miserable yong-man
whose name was Bright; and whose mothers name by her father, was Spark; he
writ. Epitaph. 45.
NOw, by this light,
Here, in the Dark,
Does light one Bright,
That was a Spark.
Four sad Epitaphs. A Epitaph on the death of the most famous Bishop; both for
good learning, and good living, Doctor Tomson Bishop of Gloucester, Epitaph. 46.
THis Tomb enwombes a Child of God, whose grace,
Wit, Art and Nature still, were so exact,
As makes his praisefil Time, and orefill Place;
Yet, in this Place his Corpse lies close compact!
Then, such a sun this Tomb does now enwombe
As no such Tom-sonne, Tomb did e're entombe!
On Master W. Woodcock, a virtuous discreet and rare Scholar. Epitaph. 47.
HEre lies a Woodcock honest, learned, and wise,
Safe from the s^ares of all his enemies:
No Woodcock, then, in Nature, but in Name:
For which not He, but Fortune was too blame.
The Authors Epitaph. 48.
LOng after All was made, I, made, was marred
^y Error of my Parents ere I erred:
For, to the World I came through their offense,
Which made me sinful, in mine Innocence.
I loved the Muses; and sought by them
Long life in this life's shadow of a Dream;
But, I am gone; and, my Remains (I guess)
Are but the Labors of my Idleness
Which, living, die: so all thereby I got
Is Fame (perhaps) which (past perhaps) Is not;
At least Is not to me; since dead I am:
And, have no sense of Air, Fames surer Name.
I loved Faire-wr^^ing; and, could Write as fair
As any that for That had got that Air.
I taught it others; but my greatest ^ee
Was fairest-fame the fowler shame for me
In Men's account; who hold all Gettings vain
That tend to Grace and Glory more than Gain.
My Heart was Manly, in a double-sence,
Kind to my Friends and apt to give offense
To my Offenders: so, Heart, Hand, and Head
Had precious Gifts, that did me little stead.
I found the World as Abel found it; since
It harmed me most that medl'd least therewith.
I found my Flesh my Household F^^; while I
The Devil found my foreign enemy:
So, Inwardly and Outwardly I found
My life still Millitant; till in this Ground
I lay entrenched: where safe I lie from fight,
Equal to Caesar in our present plight:
If odds there be; herein it now does rest,
I, being a Christian-man, must needs be best:
My soul is in his hand, that made me so;
His Glories Subject still, in Weal, or W^e.
On a vert^^ous faire-maide Mistress Eliza: Amber. Epitaph. 49.
REader stay; see who lies here*
Attacting Amber, shyning clear:
Yet Death that clearenesse cloudeth, now;
But, being bright, it shines through.
Agame.
Reader, stay; and yet, be wise;
For, here still-drawing Amber lies:
But yet, if now she draw thee to her,
Thou must die, or qui^e undo her.
On a Bank^rupt called Myte. Epitaph. 51.
REader, read ^ight,
And thou shall see,
Here lies a Myte
Not worth a Cec.
On a wicked fellow called P. Godsoll. Epita. 51.
LOrd! that men should read, or say,
Here lies God-sole turned to Clay:
Yet, since she was no soul of God,
He turned too well, when he turned Clod.
Of one Worth that died Lousy, having had a good living; but spent it
leawdly. Epit. 52.
HEre lies Worth
Of little price;
And, so forth;
The rest is Lice.
On one Elizabeth Butter a fair maid. Epitaph. 53.
HEre lies sweet Butter turned to Grass,
To make sweet Butter as it was.
On one I. Cheese, an old Leatcher. Epitaph. 53.
HEre lies old Cheese, who does not know it,
Ask but the Grubs, and they will show it.
On one P. Cock, a rich fool, who gave much money by will, to make him a fair
Tomb. Epit. 56.
HEre lies a Cock, he mist the Comb
Hardly, to have with Wise men Room:
But now he is dead, it does appear,
He Is proud of his own dunghill here.
On a common Drunkard called Man. Epitaph. 56.
CAn ye think it? if ye can,
Then here lies a Beast-like Man.
On one called Jacques. Epitaph. 57.
FIe out up on it, spue, spit, and cough;
A I^kes here lies: Mary, fough!
On one Wit, whose mother died with his birth; a contentious fellow. Epitaph.
58.
COme a long, and Nothing by:
For, Wit bought dearly, here does lie:
That Is good for nothing; then be glad,
That good for naught, may here be had.
On the Cripple, who stole the weather-cocke of Paul's. Epitaph. 59.
HEre lies the Cripple,
That stole Paules-weather-cocke,
From that high Steeple
By night, at Twelve a Clock:
If now he could fly here
(As then) past his fellows,
Yet he would lie here,
He would climb to the Gallows.
On one called Holyday a great gamester killed playing at Primero. Epitaph. 60.
HEre lies gaming Holyday,
Who wan his greatest R^st by play:
For, at Primero, in his Breast,
He got a Stab, that wan this Rest.
Upon one Denis who slu^ one in a Tennis-court about the difference of a Chase.
Epitaph. 61.
HEre lies one Denis
That plaide well at Tenis;
But as the Line he crossed,
It him so entangled,
That him it strangled:
So, his Time Set, he lost.
On one Gold, a great Dicer. Epit. 62.
HEre lies Gold, that past at Dice;
Yet be it told, to know the price:
And for it went so light away,
It shall be spent, here, Night and Day.
O^ Nobody, as he is fancied and set forth in picture. Epitaph. 63.
BOdy of me here lies Nobody.
That is* Nothing, like a Noddy:
Then, the shortest Epitaph
F^ts him best that no place has.
On a double fellow, ill composed. Epit. 64.
HEre lies one double in his Grave:
For, he was still a Fool, and Knave.
On a skiruy fellow, enriched by a Queen. Epit. 65.
HEre lies a Scab
Made by a Drab.
On a Vserer. Egitaph.
HEre still lies Ten pur Cent:
In Deaths house, and pays no rent:
Then its like he lends to Death,
On this Freehold, his dearest Breath*
On one Norman, an ill man. 66.
WIthin this Grave, here lies, alone,
Nor-man, nor Beast; but both in one.
On one Master Linder, that was burnt by a Drab: and thereof dyed. 67.
HEre lies lusty Linder:
But it is clear,
Had he not linde her,
He had not layne here.
On a most intolerable cursed Wife. 68.
IF it be true, as I hear tell,
Some affirm the Grave is Hell:
And if Hell be, then, so near,
The veriest Diuill of Hell lies here.
On one that loved Sack as his Soul. 69.
REader, bless thee, if afear'd,
The Spirit of Sack lies here interred.
On one Love a Gold-finder alias a Iakes-Farmer. 77.
IF ye can smell,
Then draw ye near:
And you will soon tell
Who lies here.
On a tall Coward. 78.
FAith sir no; it is not so:
Then who lies here you cannot know;
Yet was a Man exceeding tall,
And yet he was no man at all!
By one Shockman hanged in chains on a Hill. 79.
Here st^ll sleeps Shockman,
On this heavy Hill:
Yet ^^en Death does rock-man,
He wags, sleeping still.
On a, Ban^ero^pt that lived (till he died) long in Ludgate, often begging in the
Hole. 80.
NOne can tell who lies here
Since he never did appear:
For; he lived and did in Ward;
So, nere was seen but often heard.
To my Worthily much honored M. Richard Martin, learned in the Laws, Arts, and
Langu^ges.
MArten, the Bird, the Beast, the Man in grace;
Have all three, three peculiar dearest things:
The Bird for taking time of Time and Place:
The Beast for his rich Case* the Case of Kings;
And thou, the Man, for thy high Wit and Worth,
So, Man, Beast, Bird, A Marten thus sets forth.
To my Noble and ever best beloved Pupil, Captain Henry Maynwarring.
THough last I place thee (noble Pupil) I
Have reason for it. Will It know the Mystery?
Thou shall, next heaven, be last in mind with me
At last, when I to Heaven shall Usher Thee.
What said I? Heaven do Captains climb so hie?
Yes, thou shall do it, since thou so often did buy
Freedom for Christians; (Slaves to Turks;) and so
Thou ^bd'st thy means with grace: if sin did slow.
The conclusion.
NOw Halla, here, my merry Muse,
No longer Time and Rhyme abuse;
And since to both, thou have don scath,
This shall be thine Epitaph.
HEre lies a Muse (was made by Nine)
That drunken was with Wit, not Wine:
And yet the Bowels of her Wit
Being too full of Trash unfit.
Here, like a Fart, does let it fly,
More for hi^ ease, than honesty.
FINIS.
On Banning.
BE^ as be may; no Banning is: Oh no;
Banning's a blessing: and I Will take it so.
An excuse for Faults escapt in Printing by reason my Occasions would not
permit me to look to the Press.
WHen Printing first was borne (it seems) it had
This curse with it; That it should bear no Book
But it, with Falts, should make the Father sad,
Then Reader to the Faults vouchsafe to look:
And mend, or make them worse; all is one to me,
They be not mine; but theirs that, now, over see.

