A POETICAL RAPSODY Containing, Diverse Sonnets, Odes, Elegies, Madrigalls, and
other Poesies, both in Rhyme, and Measured Verse.

Never yet published.

The Be and Spider by a diverse power,
Suck Honey and Poison from the self same flower.
^rinted at London by V.S. for John Baily, and to be sold at his Shop in
Chancerie lane, near to the Office of the six Clerks. 1602.

To the most Noble, Honorable, and Worthy Lord, William Earl of Pembroke, Lord
Herbert of Caerdiffe, Marmion, and Saint Quintine.
GReat Earl, whose high and noble mind, is higher
And nobler, then thy noble high Degree:
Whose outward shape, though it most lovely be,
Does in fair Robes a fairer Soul attier:
Who Rich in fading Wealth, in endless Treasure
Of Virtue, Valor, Learning, richer art:
Whose present greatness, men esteem but part
Of what by line of future Hope they measure.
Thou Worthy Son, unto a peerless MOTHER,
Thou Nephew to great SIDNEY of renown,
Thou that deseru'st thy CORONET to crown
With Laurel Crown, a Crown excelling the other;
I consecrate these Rimes to thy great NAME,
Which if thou like, they seek no other fame.
The devoted Admirer of your Lordships noble virtues, FRA: DAVISON humbly
dedicates, his own, his Brothers, and Anomos Poems, both i^ his own, and
their names.

To the Reader.
BEING induced, by some private reasons, and by the instant entreaty of
special friends, to suffer some of my worthless Poems to be published, I
desired to make some written by my dear friend Anomos, and my deerer Brother,
to bear them company: Both without their consent, the latter being in the low
Country Wars, and the former utterly ignorant thereof. My friends name I
concealed, mine own, and my brothers, I willed the Printer to suppress, as
well as I had concealed the other: which he having put in, without my priuity,
we must both now undergo a sharper censure perhaps then our nameles works
should have done, and I especially. For if their Poems be liked, the praise is
due to their invention, if disliked, the blame both by them, and all men will
be derived upon me, for publishing that which they meant to suppress.

If thou think we affect fame by these kinds of writings, though I think
them no disparagement even to the best judgments, yet I answer in all our
behalfes, with the Princely Shepherd Dorus; Our hearts do seek another
estimation.

If thou condemn Poetry in general, and affirm, that it does intoxicate the
brain, and make men utterly unfit, either for more serious studies, or for any
active course of life, I only say, Iubeo te stultum esse libenter: Since
experience proves by examples of many, both dead and living, that diverse
delighted and excelling herein, being Princes or Statesmen, have governed and
counceled as wisely, being Soldiers, have commanded armies as fortunately,
being Lawyers, have pleaded as iudicially and eloquently, being Divines, have
written and taught as profoundly, and being of any other Profession, have
discharged it as sufficiently as any other men whatsoever: If liking other
kinds, thou mislike the Lyricall, because the chiefest subject thereof is
Love; I reply, that Love being virtuously intended, and worthily placed, is the
Whetstone of wit, and Spur to all generous actions: and that many excellent
spirits with great fame of wit, and no stain of judgment, have written
excellently in this kind, and specially the euer-praise worthy Sidney: So as if
thou will needs make it a fault, for mine own part, Haud timeo, si iam nequeo
defendere crimen
Cum tanto commune viro.


If any except against the mixing (both at the beginning and end of this
book) of diverse things written by great and learned Personages, with our
mean and worthles Scriblings, I utterly disclaim it, as being done by the
Printer, either to grace the forefront with Sir Ph. Sidneys, and others names,
or to make the book grow to a competent volume.

For these Poems in particular, I could aledge these excuses; that those under
the Name of Anomos, were written (as appears by diverse things to Sir Philip
Sidney living, and of him dead) almost twenty years since, when Poetry was
far from that perfection, to which it has now attained; that my Brother is
by profession a Soldier, and was not 18. years old when he writ these
Toys: that mine own were made most of them six or seven years since, at
idle times as I iourneyed up and down during my Trauails. But to leave their
works to justify themselves, or the Authors to justify their works, and to
speak of mine own; thy mislikes I contemn, thy praises (which I neither
deserve, nor expect), I esteem not, as hoping (God willing) ere long, to
regaine thy good Opinion, if lost, or more deservedly to continue it, if
already obtained, by some grauer Work. Farewell.

FRA: DAVISON.

Two Pastoralls, made by Sir Philip Si^ney, never yet published.
Upon his meeting with his two worthy Frien^^ and fellow-Poets, Sir Edward
Die^^ and Master Fulke Greuill.
JOIN Mates in mirth to me,
Grant pleasure to our meeting:
Let Pan our good God see,
How grateful is our greeting.
Join hearts and hands, so let it be,
Make but one Mind in Bodies three.
Ye Hymns, and singing skill
Of God Apolloes giving,
Be pressed our reeds to fill,
With sound of music living.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
Sweet Orpheus Harp, whose sound
The steadfast mountains moved,
Let here thy skill abound,
To join sweet friends beloved.
Join hearts and hands, etc.
(...) two and I be met,
(...) ^appy blessed Trinity;
(...) three most jointly set,
(...) firmest band of Unity.
Join hands, etc.
(...) ^elcome my two to me, E.D. F.G. P.S.
(...) number best beloved,
(...) ^ithin my heart you be
(...) friendship unremoved.
Join hands, etc.
^iue leave your flocks ^o range,
^g^t us the while be playing,
^ithin the Elmy grange,
^our flocks will not be straying.
Join hands, etc.
^ause all the mirth you can,
^^nce I am now come hither,
Who never joy, but when
^ am with you together.
Join hands, etc.
^ike Lovers do their Love,
^o joy I, in you seeing;
^et nothing me remove
from always with you being.
Join hands, etc.
And as the Turtle-Doue
To mate with whom he lives,
Such comfort, fervent love
Of you, to my heart gives.
Join hands, etc.
Now joined be our hands,
Let them be never a sunder,
But linkt in binding bands
By metamorphoz'd wonder.
So should our seuer'd bodies three
As one for ever joined be.
Sir Ph. Sidney.

Disprayse of a Courtly life.
WALKING in bright Phoebus blaze
Where with heat oppressed I was,
I got to a shady wood,
Where green leaves did newly bud.
And of grass was plenty dwelling,
Decked with pyde flowers sweetly smelling.
In this wood a man I met,
On lamenting wholly set:
Rewing change of wonted state,
Whence he was transformed late,
Once to Shepherds God retayning,
Now in servile Court remaining.
^here he wandering malecontent,
^p and down perplexed went,
^aring not to tell to me,
^^ake unto a senseless tree,
^ne among the rest electing
^hese same words, or this effecting:
^y old mates I grieve to see,
^oyde of me in field to be,
Where we once our lovely sheep,
^ouingly like friends did keep,
Often each others friendship proving,
Never striving, but in loving.
^ut may Love abiding be
^n poor shepherds base degree?
^t belongs to such alone
To whom art of Love is known:
Seely shepherds are not witting
What in art of Love is fitting.
Nay, what need the Art to those,
To whom we our love disclose?
It is to be used then,
When we do but flatter men:
Friendship true in heart assured,
Is by natures gifts procured.
Therefore shepheardes wanting skill,
Can Loves duties best fulfill:
Since they know not how to feign,
Nor with Love to cloak Disdain,
Like the wiser sort, whose learning
Hides their inward will of harming.
Well was I, while under shade
Oten Reeds me music made,
Striving with my Mates in Song,
Mixing mirth our Songs among,
Greater was that shepherds treasure,
Then this false, fine, Courtly pleasure.
Where, how many Creatures be,
So many pufft in mind I see,
Like to Iunoes birds of pride,
Scarce each other can abide,
Friends like to black Swannes appearing*
Sooner these than those in hearing.
Therefore Pan, if thou may be
Made to listen unto me,
Grant, I say (if seely man
May make treaty to god Pan)
That I, without thy denying,
^lay be still to thee relying.
Only for my two loves sake, Sir Ed. D. and M.F.^
(...) whose love I pleasure take,
^nly two do me delight
With their euer-pleasing sight,
^f all men to thee retaining,
^^ant me with those two remaining.
(...) shall I to thee always,
^ith my reeds, sound mighty praise;
^^d first Lamb that shall befall,
^arely deck thine Altar shall:
^t please thee be reflected,
^^d I from thee not rejected.
I left him in that place,
^^king pity on his case,
^arning this among the rest,
that the mean estate is best,
^^tter filled with contenting,
^^yde of wishing and repenting.
Sir Ph. Sidney.

Fiction how Cupid made a Nymph wound her self with his Arrows.
^T chaunst of late a Shepherds swain,
That went to seek a strayed sheep,
Within a thicket on the plain,
^pide a dainty Nymph asleep.
^er golden Hair ore-spread her face,
^er careless Arms abroad were cast,
^er Quiver had her Pillowes place,
^er breast lay bare to every blast.
The Shepherd stood and gazde his fill,
Naught durst he do, naught durst he say:
When Chance or else perhaps his Will,
Did guide the God of Love that way.
The crafty boy that sees her sleep,
Whom if she wakte, he durst not see,
Behind her closely seeks to creep,
Before her nap should ended be.
There come, he steals her shaftes away,
And puttes his own into their place,
Ne dares he any longer stay,
But ere she wakes, hies thence apace.
Scarce was he gone, when she awakes,
And spies the Shepherd standing by;
Her bended Bow in haste she takes,
And at the simple Swain let fly.
Forth flew the shafte, and pierst his heart,
That to the ground he fell with pain:
Yet up again forthwith he start,
And to the Nymphe he ran amain:
Amaz'de to see so strange a sight,
She shot, and shot, but all in vain,
The more his wounds, the more his might,
Love yields strength in midst of pain.
Her angry Eyes are great with tears,
She blames her hands, she blames her skill;
The bluntness of her Shaftes she fears,
And try them on her self she will.
Take heed, sweet Nymph, try not the shaft,
Each little touch will prick the heart,
Alas, thou know not Cupids craft,
Revenge is joy, the End is smart.
Yet try she will, and prick some bare,
Her Hands were glou'd, and next to hand
Was that fair Breast, that breast so rare,
That made the shepherd senseless stand.
That breast she pricked, and through that breast,
Love finds an entry to her heart:
At feeling of this new-come Guest,
Lord how the gentle Nymph does start!
She runs not now, she shootes no more,
Away the throws both shaftes and bow,
She seeks for that she shunned before,
She think the Shepherds haste too slow.
Though mountains meet not, Lovers may:
So others do, and so do they.
The God of Love sittes on a tree,
And laughes that pleasant sight to see.
DIALOGVE between two shepherds, Thenot and Piers, in praise of ASTREA, made
by the excellent Lady, the Lady Mary Countess of Pembrook at the Queens
Majesty's being at her house at Anno 15.
^hen. I Sing divine ASTREAS praise,
O Muses! help my wits to raise,
And heave my Verses higher.

Piers. Thou needst the truth but plainly tell,
Which much I doubt thou can not well,
Thou art so often a lier.

^hen. If in my Song no more I show,
Than Heaven, and Earth, and Sea do know,
Then truly I have spoken.

^iers. Suffices not no more to name,
But being no less, the like, the same,
Else laws of truth be broken.

^^en. Then say, she is so good, so fair,
With all the earth she may compare,
Not Momus self denying.

^^ers. Compare may think where likeness holds,
Naught like to her the earth enfoldes,
I looked to find you lying.

Then. ASTREA sees with Wisedoms sight,
Astrea works by Virtues might,
And jointly both do stay in her.

^iers. Nay take from them, her hand, her mind,
The one is lame, the other blind,
Shall still your lying stain her?

^hen. Soon as ASTREA shows her face,
Strait every ill auoides the place,
And every good abounds.

Piers. Nay long before her face does show,
The last does come, the first does go,
How loud this lie resoundeth!

^hen. ASTREA is our chiefest joy,
Our chiefest guarde against annoy,
Our chiefest wealth, our treasure.

Piers. Where chiefest are, three others be,
To us none else but only she;
When will thou speak in measure?

Then. ASTREA may be justly said,
A field in flowery Roabe arrayd,
In Season freshly springing.

Piers. That Spring indures but shortest time,
This never leaves Astreas clime,
Thou lie, instead of singing.

Then. As heavenly light that guides the day,
Right so does thine each lovely Ray,
That from Astrea flies.

Piers. Nay, darkness often that light enclowdes,
Astreas beams no darkness shrowdes;
How lowdly Thenot lies!

Then. ASTREA rightly term I may,
A manly Palm, a Maiden Bay,
Her verdure never dying.

Piers. Palm often is crooked, Bay is low,
She still upright, still high does grow,
Good Thenot leave thy lying.

Then. Then Piers, of friendship tell me why,
My meaning true, my words should ly,
And strive in vain to raise her.

Piers. Words from conceit do only rise,
Above conceit her honor flies;
But silence, naught can praise her.

Mary Countess of Pembroke.

A Roun-de-lay in inuerted Rimes, between the two friendly Riuals, Strephon
and Klaius, in the presence of URANIA, Mistress to them both.
Strephon. O Whither shall I turn me,
From thine eyes sight,
Whose sparkling light
With quenchles flames, present, and absent burn n
For I burn when as I view them,
And I burn when I eschew them.

Klaius. P^nce I cannot eschew them,
But that their light
Is in my sight,
^oth when I view them not, and when I view the
Ere their flames will cease to burn me,
From my self my self must turn me.

Strephon. When none are present by you,
I feel their might,
And your eyes bright
^ppeare more glorious, others being nie you.
So alone, or else compared,
Wretch I am by them ensnared.

Klaius. ^ince that I am ensnared
By your eyes bright,
And feel their might,
Whether alone they be, or else compared,
Wheresoever I am nie you,
Love I must, if I be by you.

Strephon. When you look kindly on me,
They love incite:
And spite of Spite
I love them likewise, when you frown upon me.
So, how e're your looks are framed,
By your looks I am inflamed.

Klaius. ^ince that I am inflamed,
Even by their spite;
And they incite
^oul-warming flames when they are mildly framed,
Howsoever you look upon me,
Love I must, if you look on me.

Strephon. (...) when shall I them banish,
Since against right,
Nor day nor night,
though absent from me, from me they do vanish?
So no respite Time does grant me,
But incessantly they haunt me.

Klaius. ^ince they (alas) do haunt me
Both day and night.
And wonted right
Obtained by absence, absence does not grant me:
Night and day may sooner vanish,
Then from me I can them banish.

Strephon. They, when the Day does leave me,
Lodge in my spirit;
And of their sight,
No sight by day discerned can bereave me.
So, nor Day ought else reuealeth,
Nor the Night the fame concealeth.

Klaius. Since Day, like Night concealeth
Each other sight,
And to my spirit
Concealing Darkness; them like Day reuealeth.
Time of time must quite bereave me,
Ere your looks, sweet looks, will leave me*

Walter Dauison.

STREPHONS PALINODE. Strephon, upon some unkindness conceived, having ma^^ show
to leave URANIA, and make love to anoth^^ Nymph, was at the next solemn
assembly of shepherd not only frowned upon by URANIA, but command with great
bitterness out of her presence: Whereuppo^ sorry for his offense, and desirous
to regaine her gra^^ whom he never had forsaken, but in show, upon his kne^ he
in this Song humbly craves pardon: and VRANI^ finding his true penitence, and
unwilling to loose so wo^thy a servant, receives him again into greater gra^^
and favor than before.
SVVEETE, I do not pardon crave,
Till I have,
By deserts, this fault amended:
This, I only this desire,
That your ire
May with penance be suspended.
Not my Will, but Fate did fetch
Me poor wretch,
Into this unhappy error.
Which to plague, no Tyrants mind
Pain can find,
Like my hearts selfe-guiltie terror.
^hen, O then! let that suffize;
your dear Eyes
Need not, need not more afflict me.
^or your sweet Tongue dipped in gall,
Need at all
from your presence interdict me.
unto him that Hell sustaines,
No new pains
Need be sought for his tormenting.
O my pains helles pains surpas:
Yet alas!
You are still new pains inuenting.
W^y my Love, long firm and true,
Borne to you.
^^y these tears my grief expressing.
T^y this Pipe which nights and days
Sounds your praise,
^itty me my fault confessing.
Or if I may not desire,
That their ire
^ay with penance be suspended;
^et let me full pardon crave,
When I have,
With soon death my fault amended.
VRANIAES Answer in inuerted Rimes, Staff for Staff.
SInce true penance has suspended
Fained ire,
More I Will grant then you desire.
Faults confessed are half amended,
And I have,
In this half, all that I crave.
Therefore banish now the terror,
Which you find
In your guiltless grieved mind.
For though you have made an Error,
From me wretch
First biginning it did fetch.
Never my sight I Will interdict thee
More at all.
Never speak words more dipped in gall.
Never never will I more afflict thee
With these Eyes,
What is past, shall now suffize.
Now new Joys I Will be inuenting.
Which (alas)
May thy passed woes surpas.
Too long thou have felt tormenting,
Too great pains
So great Love and Faith sustaines:
Let these Eyes (by thy confessing
worthy praise)
Never see more nights nor days.
Let my woes be past expressing,
when to you
^t cease to be kind and true.
Thus are both our States amended,
For you have
Fuller pardon then you crave,
And my fear is quite suspended,
Since mine ire
Wrought the effect I most desire.
Fra: Dauison.

I. EGLOGVE.
A Shepherd poor, Eubulus called he was,
(Poor now alas, but erst had jolly been)
^ne pleasant morn when as the Sun did pass
^he fiery horns of raging Bull between,
His little Flock into a Meade did bring,
As soon as daylight did begin to spring.
^resh was the Meade, in Aprils liuerie dight,
^eckt with green Trees, bedewd with silver Brooks,
^ut ah! all other was the shepherds plight,
^ll other were both sheep and shepherds looks.
For both did show by their dull heavy cheer,
They took no pleasure of the pleasant year.
^e weeping went, ay me that he should weep!
^hey hung their heads as they to weep would learn.
^is heavy Heart did send forth sighings deep.
^hey in their bleating voice did seem to yearne.
He lean and pale, their fleece was rough and rent:
They pinde with pain, and he with dolors spent.
^is pleasant Pipe was broke, (alas the while)
and former meriment was banished quite.
^is shepherds Crook that him vpheld ere-while,
^e erst had thrown away with great despite.
Tho leaning against a shrubbe that him sustained,
To the earth, sun, birds, trees, Echo thus he plained
Thou all-forth-bringing earth, though winter ch^
With boystrous blasts blow off thy Mantle gree^
And with his Snow and hoary Frosts do spill,
Thy Flora-pleasing flowers, and kill them cleene:
Yet soon as Spring returns again
To drive away thy Winters pain,
Thy Frost and Snow
Away do go.
Sweet Zephyres breath cold Boreas does displace,
And fruitful showers
Revive thy flowers,
And naught but Joy is seen in every place.
But ah! how long, alas, how long does last
My endless Winter without hope of Spring?
How have my sighs, my blustering sighs, defaste
The flowers and buds which erst my youth did br^
Alas the tops that did aspire,
Lie troaden now in filthy mire.
Alas! my head
Is all bespread
With too untimely snow: and eke my heart
Al sense has lost,
Through hardened frost,
Of cold Despair, that long has bred my smart.
What though Soone-rising Torrents ouerflow
With nought-regarding streams thy pleasant gree^
And with their furious force do ^ay full low,
Thy drowned flowers, how ever sweet they be^
Soon fall those ^^ouds, as soon they rose,
(For fury soon his force does lose;)
And then full eath
Apolloes breath,
^he cold, yet drying North Wind, so does warm,
That by and by
Thy Meades be dry,
and grow more fruitful by their former harm.
(...) would the tears that Torrent-like do flow
(...) down my hollow cheeks with restless force,
^ould once (O that they could once) calmer grow!
^ould like to thine, once cease their ceasles course;
Thine last not long, mine still endure:
Thine cold, and so thy wealth procure:
Hot mine are still,
And so do kill
^oth flower and root, with most unkindly dew.
What Sun or Wind
A way can find,
^he root once dead, the flowers to renew?
Thou though the scorching heat of Summer Sun,
While ill-breath'd Dog the raging Lion chaceth)
^ay peckled flower do make of color dun,
and pride of all thy greeny hair defaceth;
And in thy moysture-wanting side
Deep wounds do make, and gashes wide:
Yet as thy weate,
By Phoebus heat,
^o turn to wholesome dryness is procured.
So Phoebus heat
By south-winds weate,
Is soon assuaged, and all thy wounds recured.
Such heat as Phoebus has me almost slain.
As Phoebus heat? al^ no; far worse then his.
It is Astreas burning-hot Disdain
That parched has the root of all my blis:
That has (alas) my youth defaced,
That in my face deep wounds has placed.
Ah that no Heat
Can dry the weate
The flowing weate of my still-weeping Eyes!
Ah that no weate
Can quench the heat,
The burning heat within my Heart that lies!
Thou do, poor Earth, bear many a bitter stound
While greedy Swains forgetting former need,
With crooked plowes thy tender back do wound
With harrowes biting teeth do make thee bleed.
But earth (so may those greedy Swains
With pitteous Eye behold thy pains)
O Earth, tell me,
When thou do see,
Thy fruitful Back with golden Ears beset,
Does not that joy
Kill all annoy,
And make thee all thy former wounds forget?
And I, if once my tired Heart might gain
The Harvest fair that to my faith is due:
I once I might ASTREAS grace regaine:
^ once her heart would on my sorrows rue,
Alas, I could these plaints forgo,
And quite forget my former woe.
But (O! to speak
My Heart does break)
^^r all my service, faith, and patient mind,
A crop of grief,
Without relief,
^ crop of scorn, and of contemp^, I find.
^one as the Shepherds Star abroad does wend
Nights harbinger) to shut in bright-some Day;
and gloomy Night, on whom black clouds attend,
^oth Tirant-like through sky usurp the sway,
Thou art (poor Earth) of Sun deprived
Whose beams to thee all Joy derived:
But when Aurore
Does open her Door,
^er purple door to let in Phoebus waine,
The night gives place
Unto his race,
and then, with joy, thy Sun returns again.
(...) would my Sun would once return again!
(...) turn and drive away the infernal night,
(...) which I die, since she did first refrain
^er heavenly beams, which were mine only light
In her alone all my light shinde,
And since she shinde not, I am blind.
Alas, on all,
Her beams do fall,
Save wretched me, whom she does them deny.
And blessed day
She gives always,
To all, but me, who still in darkness lie.
In mournful darkness I alone do lie,
And wish, but scarcely hope, bright day to see,
For hoped so long, and wished so long have I,
As hopes and wishes both are gone from me.
My night has lasted fifteen years,
And yet no glimpse of day appeeres.
O do not let,
Him that has set,
His joy, his light, his life in your sweet Grace!
Be vnrelieu'd,
And quite deprived
Of your dear sight, which may this night displace
Phoebus, although with firy-hoofed steedes,
Thou daily do the steepy Welkin beat,
And from this painful task art never freed,
But daily bound to lend the world thy heat:
Though thou in fiery Chariot ride,
And burning heat thereof abide,
Yet soon as night
Does dim the light,
And hale her sable Cloak through vaulted sky,
Thy iournie's ceast,
And thou do rest,
In cooling waves of Tethis sovereignty.
Thrice happy Sun, whose pains are eas'de by night,
O hapless I, whose woes last night and day.
^y pains by day do make me wish for night,
^y woes by night do make me cry for day.
By day I turmoyle up and down,
By night in Seas of tears I drown.
O painful plight!
O wretched night,
Which never finds a morn of joyful light!
O sad decay,
O wretched day,
That never feels the ease of silent night!
^e chirping Birds, whose notes might joy my mind,
If to my mind one drop of joy could sink,)
Who erst, through Winters rage were almost pinde,
and kept through barren frost from meat or drink,
A blessed change ye now have seen,
That changed has your woeful teene.
By day you sing,
And make to ring
^he neighbor groves with Echo of your Song:
In silent night,
Full closely dight,
^ou soundly sleep the bushes green among.
^ut I, who erst (ah woeful word to say)
^nioy'd the pleasant spring of her sweet grace,
and then could sing and dance, and sport and play;
^nce her fierce anger did my Spring displace,
My nightly rest have turned to detriment,
To plaints have turned my wonted meriment
The Songs I sing
While day does spring,
Are bootlesse plaints till I can plain no more.
The rest I taste,
While night does last,
Is broken sighs, til they my heart make sore.
Thou flowret of the field that erst did fade,
And nipt with Northern cold did hang the head*
Ye Trees whose bared bows had lost their shade
Whose withered leaves by western blasts were she^
Ye gin to bud and spring again,
Winter is gone that did you strain.
But I, that late
With upright gate
Bare up my head, while happy favor lasted;
Now old am grown,
Now overthrown,
With woe, with grief, with wailing now am wasted
Your springing stalk with kindly juice does sprou^
My fainting legs do waste and fall away:
Your stretched arms are clad with leaves about,
My griefe-consumed arms do fast decay.
Ye gin again your tops lift up;
I down to earth-ward gin to stoop.
Each bow and twig
Does wax so big,
That scarce the rind is able it to hide;
I so do faint,
And pine with plaint,
That slops and Hose, and Galage wax too wide.
Echo, how well may she that makes me moan,
By thy example learn to rue my pain?
Thou hear'st my plaintes when as I wail alone,
And wailing accents answerest again.
When as my breast through grief I beat,
That woeful sound thou do repeat.
When as I sob,
And hartly throb,
A doleful sobbing sound again thou sendest:
And when I weep,
And sigh full deep,
A weepy sighing Voice again thou lendest.
But ah! how often have my sad plaints assaide
To pierce her Ears, deaf only unto me?
How often my Woes in mournful ink arraide
Have tried to make her Eyes my grief to see?
And you, my Sighs and Tears, how often
Have ye sought her hard heart to soften?
And yet her Eye,
Does still deny
For all my Woes, one bitter tear to shed.
And yet her Heart
Will not impart,
One hearty sigh, for grief her self has bred.
Nor I, alas, do wish that her fair Eyes,
Her blessed-making Eyes should shed a tear,
Nor that one sigh from her dear Breast should rise,
For all the pains, the woes, the wrongs I bear.
First let this weight oppress me still,
Ere she, through me taste any ill.
Ah if I might
But gain her sight,
And show her, e're I die, my wretched case!
O then should I
Contented die;
But ah I die, and hope not so much grace.
With that his fainting legs to shrink, begun,
And let him sink with ghastly look to ground
And there he lay as though his life were don,
Till that his Dog, seeing that woeful stound,
With pitteous howling, kissing and with scraping.
Brought him again from that sweet-sowre escaping.
Then began his Tears so swiftly for to flow,
As forced his Ey-lids for to give them way.
Then blustering sighs too boyst'rously began blow,
As his weak lips could not their fury stay.
And inward grief withal so hugely sweld,
As tears, sighs, grief had soon al words expeld.
At last, when as his tears began to cease,
And weary sighs more calmely for to blow:
As he began with words his grief to ease,
And remnant of his broken plaint to show:
He spide the sky o're-spread with nightly clouds,
So home he went, his flock and him to shrowde.
Eubulus his Emblem. VNI MIHI PERGAMA RESTANT. Francis Dauison.

III. EGLOGVE. Made long since upon the death of Sir Phillip Sidney.
Thenot. Perin. PERIN, arreed what new mischance betide,
Has raft thee of thy wonted meriment?
Fair feeds thy flock this pleasant spring beside,
Nor Love, I ween, has made thee discontent,
^ild Age and Love, to meet in one, consent.

Perin. Ah Thenot, where the Joy of heart does fail,
What marvel there, if mirth and music quail?
See how the flowrets of the field do spring,
The Purple Rose, the Lilly white as Snow;
With smell and color for an Harvest King,
May serve to make us young again, I trow:
Yet all this pride is quickly laid full low,
Soon as the root is nipt with northern cold,
What smell, or beauty, can we then behold?

Thenot. As good not hear, as heard, not understand,
My borrell brains through eld been all too dull,
Sike mister meaning nill by me be scand,
All as my Face, so wrinckled is my skull:
Then say me Perin, by thy hope of wull,
And by thine Ewes blown bags and bagpipes sound,
So not one Aneling in thy flock be found,

Perin. Ah Thenot, by thine alderliefest Less,
Or whatsoever is more dear to thee;
No Bagpipe name, let song and sollace pass,
Death has undone my flock, my pipe, and me.
Dead is the Sheeps delight, and Shepherds glee,
Broke is my Pipe, and I my self forlorn,
My Sheep unfed, their fleeces rent and torn.

Thenot. I mickle muz'de such uncouth change to see,
My flocks refuz'de to feed, yet hale they wear:
The tender Birds sat drooping on the tree,
The careless Lambs went wandering here and there:
My self unknown a part of grief did bear,
Ne wist I why, yet heavy was my heart,
Untimely Death was cause of all this smart.
Up Perin, up, advance thy mournful lays,
Sound loud thy pipe, but sound in doleful wise.

Perin. Who else, but Thenot, can the Muses raise,
And teach them sing and dance in mournful guis^
My fingers stiff, my voice does hoarsely rise.

Thenot. Ah, where is Collin, and his passing skill?
For him it sits our sorrow to fulfill.

Perin. Tway sore extremes our Collin press so near,
(Alas that such extremes should press him so)
The want of wealth, and loss of love so dear,
Scarce can he breathe from under heaps of woe,
He that bears heaven, bears no such weight I trow.

Thenot. Has he such skill in making all above,
And has no skill to get, or Wealth, or Love?

Perin. Praise is the greatest prise that Poets gain,
A simple gain that feeds them never a whit.
The wanton less for whom he bare such pain,
^ike running water loves to change and flit.
But if thee list to hear a sorry fit,
Which Cuddy could in doleful verse endite,
Blow thou thy Pipe while I the same recite.

Thenot. ^inne when thou list, all-be my skill but small,
^y forward mind shall make amends for all.

Perin. Ye Nimphs that bathe your bodies in this spring:
Your tender bodies white as driven Snow:
Ye Virgins chaste which in this Grove do sing,
Which neither grief of Love, nor Death do know:
So may your streams run clear for ay,
So may your trees give shade always.
Depart a space,
And give me place,
To wayle with grief my restless woe alone,
For fear my cries,
Constrain your eyes,
To shed forth tears, and help lament my moan.
And thou, my Muse, that whilome wont to ease,
Thy Masters mind with lays of sweet delight,
Now change those tunes, no joy my heart can please,
Gone is the day, come is the darkesome night,
Our Sun close hid in clouds does lie,
We live indeed, but living, die:
No light we see,
Yet wander we,
We wander far and near without a guide:
And all astray,
We loose our way,
For in this world n'is such a Sun beside.
Ye Shepherds Boys that lead your flocks a field,
The whilst your sheep feed safely round about,
^reake me your Pipes that pleasant sound did yield,
^^ing now no more the Songs of Collin Clout:
Lament the end of all our joy,
Lament the source of all annoy.
WILLY is dead,
That wont to lead
Our flocks and us in mirth and Shepherds glee:
Well could he sing,
Well dance, and spring;
Of all the Shepherds was none such as he.
How often has his skill in pleasant Song
Drawn all the water-nimphs from out their bowers?
How have they lain the tender grass along,
And made him Garlands gay of smelling flowers?
Phoebus himself that conquered Pan,
Striving with Willy, nothing wan.
Ne thinks I see,
The time when he
^luckt from his golden locks the Laurel crown;
And so to raise
Our Willies praise,
^edeckt his head, and softly set him down.
The learned Muses flockt to hear his skill,
and quite forgot their water, wood, and mount;
They thought his Songs were done too quickly still,
Of none but Willies Pipe they made account.
He sung; they seemd enjoy to flow:
He ceast; they seemd to weep for woe;
The Rural rout,
All round about,
^ike Bees came swarming thick, to hear him sing:
Ne could they think,
On meat or drink,
While Willies music in their ears did ring.
But now (alas) such pleasant mirth is past,
Apollo weeps, the Muses rend their hair.
No joy on earth that any time can last,
See where his breathless corpse lies on the bear.
That self same hand that reft his life,
Has turned Shepherds peace to strife.
Our joy is fled,
Our life is dead,
Our hope, our help, our glory all is gone:
Our Poets praise,
Our happy days,
And nothing left but grief, to think ther^^n.
What Thames, what Seuerne, or what western Se^
Shall give me floods of trickling tears to shed?
What comfort can my restless grief appease?
O that mine eyes were Fountains in my head!
Ah Collin! I lament thy case,
For thee remains no hope of grace.
The best relief,
Of Poets grief,
Is dead, and wraptfull cold in filthy clay,
And naught remains,
To ease our pains,
But hope of death, to rid us hence away.
Phillis, thine is the greatest grief above the rest:
Where been thy sweetest Posies feately dight,
Thy Girlonds with a true-loues Knot addressed,
And all that erst, thou Willy, did behight?
Thy labor all is lost in vain,
The grief whereof shall ay remain.
The Sun so bright,
That falls to night,
^o morrow from the East again shall rise:
But we decay,
And waste away,
Without return, alas, thy Willy dies.
^^e how the drooping Flocks refuse to feed,
^^e Rivers stream with tears above the banks,
^^e Trees do shed their leaves, to wail agreede,
^^e beasts unfed, go mourning all in ranks.
The Sun denies the Earth his light,
The Spring is killed with winters might:
The flowers spill,
The birds are still:
(...) voice of joy is heard in any place.
The Meddows green,
A change have seen,
^^d Flora hides her pale disfigured face.
^^tch now, ye shepherds boys, with waking (...),
(...) loose your time of sleep, to learn to sing.
(...) happy skill, what good is got thereby,
(...) painted praise that can no profit bring?
If Skill could move the Sisters three,
Our Willy still alive should be.
The woolfe so wood,
Amazed stood,
^^und of Willies pipe, and left his pray:
Both Pipe and Skill,
The Sisters spill,
^o, worse then any wicked Wolf are they.
O flattering hope of mortal men's delight,
^o fair in outward show, so foul within!
^he deepest streams do flow full calm to sight,
^he rau'ning Woolues do jet in Weathers skin;
We deemed our Willy ay should live,
So sweet a sound his Pipe could give:
But cruel death
Has stopped his breath:
^umbe lies his Pipe that wont so sweet to sound:
Our flocks lament
His life is spent,
and careless wander all the woods around.
^ome now, ye shepherds daughters, come no more
^o hear the Songs that Cuddy wont to sing:
^oarse is my Muse, my throat with crying, sore;
^hese woods with Echo of my grief do ring.
Your Willies life was Cuddies joy,
Your Willies death has killed the Boy:
Broke lies my Pipe,
Till Reeds be ripe
^o make a new one, but a worse, I fear:
Save year by year,
To wail my Dear.
(...) Pipe and Song I utterly forswear.

Thenot. ^^cke and welladay may shepherds cry,
Our Willy dead, our Collin killd with care:
Who shall not loathe to live, and long to die?
And will not grief our little Cuddy spare,
But must he too of sorrow have a share?
Ay, how his ruefull Verse has pricked my heart!
How feelingly has he expressed my smart!

Perin. Ah Thenot, had thou seen his sorry look,
His wringed hands, his eyes to heaven vpkest;
His tears, that streamed like water in the Brook;
His sighs, that made his Rimes seem rudely dressed,
To tears thou would have melted with the rest.
But hie we homeward, night approaches near,
And rainie clouds in southern skies appear.

A. W.

II. EGLOGVE.
Shepherd. Heard-man. COme gentle Heard-man, sit by me,
And tune thy Pipe by mine
Here underneath this Willow tree,
To shield the hot Sunshine.
Where I have made my Summer bower,
For proof of Summer beams,
And decked it up with many a flower,
Sweet seated by the streams.
Where gentle Daphnee once a day,
These flowery banks does walk,
And in her bosom bears away
The pride of many a stalk.
But leaves the humble Heart behind,
That should her Garland dight:
And she, sweet soul, the more unkind,
To set true love so light.
But, whereas others bear the Bell,
As in her favor blessed;
Her shepherd loves her as well,
As those whom she loves best.

Heard-man. ALas, poor Pastor, I find,
Thy love is lodged so high,
That on thy flock thou have no mind,
But feedst a wanton Eye.
If dainty Daphnes looks besot
Thy doting hearts desire,
Be sure, that far above thy lot,
Thy liking does aspire.
To love so sweet a Nymph as she,
And look for love again:
Is fortune fitting high degree,
Not for a Shepherds swain.
For she of lordly lads becoyd,
And sought of great estates,
Her favor scorns to be enioyde
By us poor lowly Mates.
Wherefore I warn thee to be wise,
Go with me to my walk,
Where lowly Lasses be not nice,
There like and choose thy Make.
Where are no pearls nor Gold to view,
No pride of silken sight,
^ut Petticoates of scarlet hew,
Which veil the skin snow-white.
^here truest Lasses been to get
For love and little cost:
^here sweet desire is paid his det,
And labor seldom lost.

Shepherd. NO Heardman, no, thou rau'st too loud,
Our trade so vile to hold.
My weed as great a Heart does shrowde,
As his that is clad in gold:
And take the truth that I thee tell,
This Song fair Daphnee sings,
That Cupid will be served as well,
Of Shepherds as of Kings.
For proof whereof, old books record,
That Venus Queen of Love,
Would set aside her warlike Lord,
And youthful Pastors prove.
How Paris was as well belou'de,
A simple Shepherds Boy,
As after when that he was prou'de
King Priams Son of Troy.
And therefore have I better hope,
As had those Lads of yore,
My courage takes as large a scope,
Although their haps were more.
And for thou shall not deem I jest,
And bear a mind more base;
No meaner hope shall haunt my breast,
Then dearest Daphnees grace.
My mind no other thought retains,
Mine Eye naught else admiers:
My heart no other passion strains,
Nor other hap desiers.
My Muse of nothing else entreates,
My Pipe naught else does sound,
My Veins no other seauer heates,
Such faith's in Shepherds found.

Heard-man. AH Shepherd, then I see, with grief
Thy care is past all cure,
No remedy for thy relief,
But patiently endure.
Thy wonted liberty is fled,
Fond fancy breeds thy bane,
Thy sense of folly brought a bed,
Thy wit is in the wane.
I can but sorrow for thy sake,
Since love lulles thee asleep.
And whilst out of thy dream thou wake,
God shield thy straying sheep.
Thy wretched Flock may rue and curse
This proud desire of thine,
Whose woeful state from bad to wurse
Thy careless eye will pine.
And even as they, thy self likewise
With them shall wear and waste,
To see the spring before thine eyes,
Thou thirsty can not taste.
Content thee therefore with Conceit,
Where others gain the grace,
And think thy fortune at the height,
To see but Daphnees face.
Although thy truth deserved well
Reward above the rest,
Thy haps shall be but means to tell
How other men are blessed.
So gentle Shepherd, farewell now,
Be warned by my reed,
For I see written in thy brow,
Thy Heart for love does bleed.
Yet longer with thee would I stay,
If ought would do thee good,
But nothing can the heat allay,
Where Love enflames the blood.

Shepherd. THen Heardman, since it is my lot,
and my good liking such,
Strive not to break the faithful kno^
That thinks no pain too much.
For what contents my Daphnee best
I never will despise;
So she but wish my soul good rest
When death shall close mine eyes.
Then Heard-man, farewell once again,
For now the day is fled:
So might thy cares, poor Shepherds Swain,
Fly from thy careful head.

Ignoto.

IIII. EGLOGVE. Concerning old Age. The beginning and end of this Eglogue are
wanting.
Perin. FOr when thou art not as thou wont of yore,
No cause why life should please thee any more.
Whilome I was (in course of former years,
Ere freezing Eld had coolde my youthly rage)
Of mickle worth among my Shepherds Peers.
Now for I am some-dele ystept in age,
For pleasance, strength, and beauty ginnes assuage.
Each little Heard-groom laughs my wrinkled face,
Each bonny less for Cuddy shunnes the place;
For all this woe none can we justly twight,
But hateful Eld, the foe to pleasant rest,
Which like a Thief does rob us of delight.

Wrenock. Perin, enough; few words been always best,
Needs must be borne that cannot be redrest.
Self am I as thou see in thilke estate,
The grief is eath to bear that haz a mate.
^ut sicker for to speak the truth indeed,
^hou seem to blame that blameless seems to me,
And hurtlesse Eld to sneb: (ill might he speed,
That slayes the Dog, for Wolves so wicked be)
The faults of men thou lay'st on Age I see,
For which if Eld were in it self too blame,
Then I and all my Peers should taste the same.

Perin. Wreenock, I ween thou doat'st through rusty Eld,
And think with fained words to bleare mine eye.
Thou for thy store art ever blissful held,
Thy heaps of gold nill let thee sorrow spy,
Thy Flocks full safe here under shade do lie,
Thy weanlings fat, thine ews with bladders blown:
A iollier Shepherd have we seldom known.

Wrenock. For thilke my store, great Pan yherried be;
But if for thy, mine age with joy I bear,
How falls it that thy self unlike to me,
Art vexed so with grief and bootlesse fear?
Thy store will let thee sleep on either ear:
But neither want makes Age to wisemen hard,
Nor fools by wealth from grievous pains are bard.

Perin. See not how free yond Lambkin skips and plays;
And wrigs his tail, and buts with tender head;
All for he feels the heat of youngthly days,
Which secret law of kind has inly bred?
Thilke Ewe from whom all Joy with youth is fled,
See how it hangs the head, as it would weep,
Whilome it skipt, vneathes now may it creep.

Wrenock. No fellowship has state of Beasts with man,
In them is naught but strength of lim and bone,
Which ends with age as it with age began.
But man they saine (as other Creature none)
Has uncouth fire conuayd from Heaven by one,
(His name I wist) that yields him inward light
Sike fire as Welkin shows in winter night.
Which neither Age nor Time can wear away,
Which waxes bett for use as Shepherds Crook
That ever shines brighter day by day:
Also though wrinkled seem the aged look,
Bright shines the fire that from the stars we took.
And sooth to say, thilke Ewe laments the pain,
That thilke same wanton Lamb is like sustain.

Perin. Ah Thenot, be not all thy teeth on edge,
To see youngths folk to sport in pastimes gay?
To pitch the Bar, to throw the weighty sledge,
To dance with Phillis all the holli-day,
To hunt by day, the Fox, by night, the Gray;
Sike peerless pleasures wont us for to queme,
Now lig we laid, as drowned in heavy dream.

Anomos.
Deest.

Sonnets, Odes, Elegies, and Madrigalls.
By Francis Dauison and Walter Dauison
Brethren.

SONET. I.
Dedication of these Rimes, to his first love.
IF my harsh humble style, and Rimes ill dressed,
Arrive not to your worth and beauty glorious
My Muses shoulders are with weight oppressed,
And heavenly beams are over my sight victoriou^
If these dim colors have your worth expressed
Laid by Loves hand, and not by Art laborious
Your Sun-like rays have my wits harvest blesse^
Ennabling me to make your praise notorious.
But if alas! (alas the heavens defend it,)
My lines your eyes, my love your heart displeasing
Breed hate in you, and kill my hope of easing;
Say with your self, how can the wretch amend i^
I wondrous fair, he wondrous dearly loving,
How can his thoughts but make his pen be moving
SONNET. II. That he cannot hide or dissemble his affection.
BEND my wits, and beat my weary brain,
To keep my inward grief from outward show.
Alas I cannot: now it is vain I know,
To hide a fire, whose flame appears plain.
force my will, my senses I constrain,
T'imprison in my heart my secret woe;
But musing thoghts, deep sighs, or tears that flow,
Discover what my heart hides, al in vain.
^et blame not (Dear) this undissembled passion;
For well may Love, within small limits bounded,
Be wisely maskte in a disguized fashion.
But he, whose heart, like mine, is throghly wounded,
^an never feign, no though he were assured,
that Faining might have greater grace procured.
SONNET III. Upon his absence from her.
THE fairest Eyes, (O Eyes in blackness fair!)
That ever shinde, and the most heavenly face,
The daintiest smiling, the most conquering grace
And sweetest breath that e're perfumde the air
The cherriest lips, whose kiss might well repair
A dead man's state; that speech which did displac^
All mean desiers, and all affections base,
Clogging swift H^^^^, and winging dead Despair
That snow-white breast, and al those faultles feature
Which made her seem a personage divine,
And far excelling fairest humane creatures,
Has Absence banished from my cursed Eine.
But in my Heart, as in a Mirror clear,
All these perfections to my thoughts appear.
SONNET. IIII. Upon presenting her with the speech of Grayes-Inne Mask at the
Court 1594. consisting of three parts, The Story of Proteus Transformations,
the wonders of the Adamantine Rock, and a speech to her Majesty.
WHo in these lines may better claim a part,
That sing the praises of the Britton Queen;
Then you, fair sweet, that only Soueraign been,
Of the poor Kingdom of my faithful Heart?
Or to whose view should I this speech imparte,
Where th'adama^tines rocks great power is shown:
But to your co^q'ring eyes, whose force once known
Makes even Iron hearts loath thence to part?
Or who of Proteus sundry transformations,
May better send you the new-fayned Story,
Then I, whose love vnfain'de felt no mutations,
Since to be yours I first receiu'de the glory?
Accept then of these lines, though meanly pend,
So fit for you to take, and me to send.
ELEGY. I. He renounceth his food, and former delight in Musick^, Poesy, and
Painting.
SItting at board sometimes, preparde to eat,
Ift hap my mind on these my woes to think,
Sighs fill my mouth in stead of pleasant meat,
And tears do moist my lips in lieu of drink:
But yet, nor sighs, nor tears, that ru^ amain
Can either starve my thoughts, or quench my pain
Another time with careful thoughts o're-tane,
I thought these thoughts with musicks might to chac^^
But as I began to set my notes in frame,
A sudden Passion did my song displace.
Instead of Rests, sighs from my heart did rise,
Instead of Notes, deep sobs and mournful cry
Then, when I saw, that these my thoughts increasd
And that my thoughts unto my woes gave fire,
I hopte both thoughts and woes might be release
If to the Muses I did me retire.
Whose sweet delights were wont to ease my w^
But now (alas) they could do nothing so.
For trying often (alas) yet still in vain,
To make some pleasant numbers to arise,
And beating often my dulled weary Brain,
In hope some sweet Conceit for to devise:
Out of my mouth no words but groans would come,
Out of my Pen no ink but tears would run.
Of all my old Delights yet one was left,
Painting alone to ease my mind remained;
By which, whenas I looked to be bereft
Of these heart-vexing woes that still me strained,
From forth mine eyes the blood for colors came,
And tears withal to temper so the same.
Adieu my food that wontst my taste to please,
Adieu my Songs that bred mine ears delight,
Adieu sweet Muse that often my mind did ease,
Painting, Adieu, that often refresht my sight,
Since neither taste, nor ears, nor sight, nor mind,
In your Delights can aught save sorrow find.
SONNET. V. To Pity.
WAKE Pity, wake, for thou have slept too lon
Within the Tygrish heart of that fierce fair,
Who ruins most, where most she should repair
And where she ows most right, does greatest wro^
Wake Pity, wake, O do no more prolong
Thy needeful help! but quickly hear my pray
Quickly (alas) for otherwise Despair,
By guilty death, will end my guiltless wrong.
Sweet Pity wake, and tell my cruel Sweet,
That if my death her honor might increase,
I would lay down my life at her proud feet,
And willing die, and dying, hold my peace.
Tell her I live, and living, cry for grace,
Because my death her glory would deface.
ODE. I. That only her beauty and voice please him.
I.
^Assion may my Judgment bleare,
Therefore sure I will not swear,
That others are not pleasing:
^ut I speak it to my pain,
and my life shall it maintain,
None else yields my heart easing.
II.
^adies I do think there be,
^ther some as fair as she,
(Though none have fairer features)
^ut my Turtle-like Affection,
^ince of her I made Election,
Scorns other fairest creatures.
III.
^urely I will not deny,
^ut some others reach as high
With their sweet warbling voices;
^t since her Notes charmde mine Ear,
^en the sweetest Tunes I hear,
To me seem rude harsh noyses.
MADRIGAL I. To Cupid.
LOVE, if a God thou art,
Then evermore thou must,
Be merciful and just.
I^ thou be just; O wherefore does thy Dart,
Wound mine alone, and not my Ladies Heart?
If merciful, then why
Am I to pain reserved,
Who have thee truly served:
While she that by thy power sets not a sly.
Laughs thee to scorn, and lives in libettie?
Then, if a God thou would accounted be,
Heal me like her, or else wound her like me.
MADRIGAL II. Upon his Mistress sickness, and his own health.
IN health and ease am I,
Yet, as I senseless were, it naught contents me.
You sick in pain do lie,
And (ah) your pain exceedingly torments me
Whereof, his only is the reason true,
That dead unto my self, I live in you.
MADRIGAL III. He begs a Kiss.
SORROVV seldom kills any,
Sudden Joy has murdered many.
Then (Sweet) if you would end me,
It Is a fond course with lingering grief to spend met.
For, quickly to dispatch me,
^our only way is, in your arms to catch me,
And give me a sweet Kiss:
^or such excessive and unlooked for bliss,
Would so much ouer-ioy me,
As it would strait destroy me.
MADRIGAL IIII. Upon a Kiss received.
^INCE your sweet cherry lips I kissed,
No want of food I once have mist.
(...) stomach now no meat requires:
(...) throat no drink at all desires.
(...) by your breath which then I gained,
^melion-like my life's maintained.
^en grant me (Dear) those cherries still,
^et me feed on them my fill.
^y a surfeit death I get,
^n my Tomb let this be set;
^eere lies he whom Cherries two,
^lade both to live, and life forgo.
ODE II. Upon her protesting, that now having tried his sincere affection, she
loved him.
I
LADY, you are with beauties so enriched,
Of body and of mind,
As I can hardly find,
Which of them all has most my heart bewitched.
2
Whether your skin so white, so smoothe, so tender,
Or Face so lovely fair,
Or long hart-binding hair,
Or dainty Hand, or Leg, and Foot so slender.
3
Or whether your sharp wit and lively spirit,
Where Pride can find no place;
Or your most pleasing grace,
Or speech, which does true eloquence inherit.
4
^ost lovely all, and each of them do move me,
More then words can express;
But yet I must confess,
love you most, because you please to love me.
ODE II. His restless estate.
Your Presence breeds my anguish,
Your absence makes me languish:
Your sight with woe does fill me,
And want of your sweet sight alas does kill me.
If those dear Eyes that burn me,
With mild aspect you turn me,
For life my weak heart pants:
If frovvningly, my Spirit and Lifeblood faints.
If you speak kindly to me,
Alas, kind words undo me:
Yer silence does dislike me,
And one unkind il word stark dead would strike m^
Thus Sun, nor shade does ease me,
Nor speech, nor silence please me:
Favors and frowns annoy me,
Both want and plenty equally destroy me.
ELEGY II. Or Letter in Verse.
MY dearest Sweet, if these sad lines do hap
The raging fury of the Sea to escape,
O be not you more cruel then the Seas;
Let Pity now your angry Mind appease,
So that your Hand may be their blessed Port,
From whence they may unto your Eyes resort,
And at that Throane pleading my wretched case,
May move your cruel Heart to yield me grace.
So may no Clouds of elder years, obscure
Your Sun-like Eyes, but still as bright endure,
As then they shone when with one piercing Ray,
They made my self their slave, my heart their pray:
So may no Sickness nippe those flowers sweet,
Which ever slowring on your Cheeks do meet:
Nor all-defacing Time have power to raze,
The goodly building of that heavenly Face.
Fountain of Bliss, yet wellspring of my woe,
(O would I might not justly term you so!)
Alas, your cruel dealing, and my Fate
Have now reduc'de me to that wretched state,
That I know not how I my style may frame
To thanks, or grudging, or to praise, or blame;
And where to write, I al my powers do bend,
There wot I not how to begin or end.
And now my drisling tears trill down apace,
As if the latter would the former chase,
Whereof some few on my pale Cheeks remain,
Like withered flowers, bedewd with drops of rain^
The otherr falling, in my Paper sink,
Or dropping in my Pen, increase my ink.
Which sudden Passions Cause if you would find,
A trembling fear does now possess my mind,
That you will not vouchsafe these lines to reed,
Lest they some pity in your heart might breed:
But or with angry frowns refuse to take them,
Or taking them, the fires fuel make them,
Or with those hands (made to a milder end)
These guiltless leaves all into pieces rend.
O Cruel Tyrant! (yet beloved still,)
Wherein have I deseru'de of you so ill,
That all my love you should with hate requite,
And all my pains reward with such despite?
Or if my fault be great (which I protest
Is only Love, too great to be expressed,)
What, have these Lines so harmless innocent
Deserved to feel their Masters punishment?
These Leaves are not unto my fault consenting:
And therefore ought not have the same tormenting
When you have read them, use them as you list,
For by your sight they shall be fully blist;
But till you read them, let the woes I have
This harmless Paper from your fury save.
Clear up mine eyes, and dry your selves, my Tears
And thou my Heart bannish these deadly fears;
Persuade thy self, that though her heart disdain,
Either to love thy love, or rue thy pain,
Yet her fair Eyes will not a book deny,
To this sad Story of thy Misery.
O then, my Dear, behold the Portraiture
Of him that does all kind of woes endure,
Of him whose Head is made a Hiue of woes,
Whose swarming number daily greater grows:
Of him whose Senses like a Rack are bent,
With diverse motions my poor soul to rent;
Whose Mind a Mirror is, which only shows,
The ougly Image of my present woes:
Whose Memorie's a poisoned Knife to tear
The euer-bleeding wound my Breast does bear,
(The euer-bleeding wound not to be cured,
But by those Eyes that first the same procured.)
And that poor Heart, so faithful, constant, true,
That only loves, and serves, and honors you,
Is like a feeble Ship, which torn and rent,
The Mast of Hope being broke, and tackling spent,
Reason the Pilot dead, the Stars obscured,
By which alone to sail it was enured,
No Port, no Land, no Comfort once expected,
All hope of Safety utterly neglected,
With dreadful terror tumbling up and down,
Passions uncertain, waves with hideous sound,
Does daily, hourly, minutely expect,
When either it should run, and so be wreckt
Upon Despaires sharp Rock, or be o'rethrowne,
With Storm of your Disdain so fiercely blown.
But yet, of all the woes that do torment my heart,
Of all the Torments that do daily rent my heart,
There Is none so great (although I am assured,
That even the least can not be long endured:)
As that so many weeks (nay months, nay years,
Nay tedious Ages, (for it so appears)
My trembling Heart (besides so many anguishes,)
Twixt hope and fear uncertain howerly languishes,
Whether your hands, your Eyes, your Heart of stone
Did take my lines, and read them, and bemone
With one kind word, one sigh, one pitying tear,
Th'unfained grief which for your love I bear;
Whether y'accepted that last Monument
Of my dear Love, the Book (I mean) I sent
To your dear self, when the respectlesse wind
Bare me away, leaving my heart behind.
And daigne sometimes when you the same do view,
To think on him, who always thinks on you.
Or whether you (as Oh I fear you do)
Hate both my self, and Gifts and Letters too.
I must confess, that when I do consither,
How ill, alas, how ill agree together,
So peerless beauty, to so fierce a mind,
So hard an inside to so fair a rind,
A Heart so bloody to so white a breast,
So proud disdain, with so mild looks suppressed;
And how my dear (Oh would it had been never,
Accursed word, nay would it might be ever)
How once I say, till your Heart was estranged,
(Alas how soon my day to night was changed)
You did vouchsafe my poor Eyes so much grace,
Freely to view the Riches of your face,
And did so high exalte my lowly Heart,
To call it yours, and take it in good part*,
And (which was greatest bliss) did not disdain,
For boundless love to yield some love again.
When this, I say, I call unto my mind,
And in my Heart and Soul no cause can find,
No fact, no word, whereby my Heart has merited,
Of your sweet love to be thus disinherited,
Despair it self cannot make me despair,
But that you will prove as kind, as you are fair,
And that my lines, and book, (O would twere true)
Are, though I know it not yet, receiu'de by you,
And often have your cruelty repented,
Whereby my guiltless Heart is so tormented,
And now at length in liew of passed woe,
Will pity, grace, and love, and favor shoe.
But when again my cursed Memory,
To my sad thoughts confounded diversely,
Presents the time, the tear procuring time,
That withered my young Joys before their prime;
The time when I with tedious absence tired,
With restless love, and rackt desire inspired,
Coming to find my Earthly paradise,
To glass my sight in your two heavenly Eyes,
(On which alone my Earthly Joys depended:
And wanting which, my joy and life were ended)
From your sweet Rosy lips, the springs of bliss
To draw the Nectar of a sweetest Kiss;
My greedy Ears on your sweet words to feed,
Which canded in your sweetest breath proceed,
In daintiest accents through that Currall door,
Guarded with precious Pearl, and Rubies store:
To touch your Hand so white, so moist, so soft,
And with a ravished kiss redoubled often,
Revenge with kindest spite the bloody theft,
Whereby it closely me my Heart bereft:
And of all bliss to taste the Consummation,
In your sweet, graceful, heavenly Conversation,
By whose sweet charms the souls you do inchaunt,
Of all that do your lovely presence haunt;
In stead in all these Joys I did expect,
Found naught but frowns, unkindness, and neglect.
Neglect, unkindness, frowns? nay plain contempt,
And open Hate, from no disdain exempt,
No bitter words, side looks, nor aught that might
Engreeue, increase so undeserved despite.
When this (I say) I think, and think withal,
How, nor those showers of Tears mine Eyes let fall
Nor wind of blustering Sighs with all their force,
Could move your rocky Heart once to remorce;
Can I expect that letters should find grace,
Or pity ever in your heart have place?
No no; I think, and sad Despair says for me,
You hate, disdain, and utterly abhor me.
Alas, my dear, if this you do devise,
To try the virtue of your murdering Eyes,
And in the Glass of bleeding hearts, to view
The glorious splendor of your Beauties hew,
Ah try it, try it on rebellious sprights,
That do withstand the power of sacred lights,
And make them feel (if any such be found)
How deep and curelesly your Eyes can wound.
But spare, O spare my yielding Heart, and save
Him, whose chief glory is to be your slave:
Make me, the matter of your Clemency,
And not, the subject of your Tyranny.
ODE IIII. Being deprived of her sweet looks, words, and gestures, by his
absence in Italy, he desires her to write unto him.
I.
MY only star,
Why, why are your dear Eyes,
Where all my life's peace lies,
With me at war?
Why to my Ruin tending,
Do they still lighten woe,
On him that loves you so,
That all his thoughts, in you have birth and ending?
II.
Hope of my Heart,
O wherefore do the words,
Which your sweet tongue affoordes,
No hope impart?
But cruel without measure,
To my eternal pain,
Still thunder forth Disdain,
On him whose life depends upon your pleasure.
III.
Sunshine of Joy,
Why do your Gestures, which
All Eyes and Hearts bewitch,
My bliss destroy?
And Pities sky o're-clowding
Of Hate an endless shower,
On that poor heart still power,
Which in your bosom seeks his only shrowding.
IIII.
Balm of my wound,
Why are your lines, whose sight
Should cure me with delight,
My poison found?
Which through my veins dispersing,
Does make my heart and mind,
And all my senses find,
A living death in torments past rehersing.
V.
Alas, my Fate
Has of your Eyes deprived me,
Which both killed and revived me,
And sweetened Hate;
^our sweet Voice, and sweet Graces,
Which cloathde in lovely weeds,
Your cruel words and deeds,
^re intercepted by far distant places.
VI.
But O the Anguish,
Which Presence still pretended,
^bsence has not absented,
Nor made to languish.
^o, no, t'encrease my paining,
The cause being (ah) removed,
For which the effect I loved,
^h'effect is still in greatest force remaining.
VII.
O cruel Tiger,
(...) to your hard hearts Center,
^eares, Vows, and Prayers may enter,
Desist your rigor:
and let kind lines assure me,
(Since to my deadly wound,
No salve else can be found)
that you that kill me, yet at length will cure me.
MADRIGAL V. Allusion to the Confusion of Babell.
THe wretched life I live
In my weak Senses such confusion makes,
That like th'accursed Rabble
That built the Tower of Babble,
My wit mistaketh,
And unto nothing a right name does give.
I term her my dear love, that deadly hates m^,
My cheifest Good, her that is my cheifest evil;
Her Saint and Goddess, who is a Witch, a Devil;
Her my sole Hope, that with despair amates me,
My Balm I call her, that with poison fills m^^
And her I term my life, that daily kills me.
SONNET. VI. Upon her acknowledging his Desarte, yet rejecting his Affection.
IF Love conioyn'd with worth and great desarte,
Merit like love in every noble mind:
Why then do I you still so cruel find,
To whom you do such praise of worth imparte?
And if (my Dear) you speak not from your heart,
Two heinous wrongs you do together bind:
To seek with glozing words mine eyes to blind,
And yet my Love with hateful deeds to thwarte.
To want what one deserves, engreeues his pain,
Because it takes away all selfe-accusing,
And under kindest words to mask disdain,
Is to a vexed Soul too much abusing.
^hen ift be false, such glosing words refrain,
(...) true, O then let worth his due obtain!
SONNET. VII. Her Answer, in the same Rimes.
IF your fond Love want worth and great desarte,
Then blame your self, if you me cruel find:
If worth alone move every noble mind,
Why to no worth should I my love imparte?
And if the less to grieve your wounded heart,
I seek your dazzled eyes with words to blind,
To just disfavor I great favor bind,
With deeds, and not with words your love to thwarte
The freeing of your mind from selfe-accusing,
By granting your deserts should ease your pain
And since your fault's but love, it were some abu^ sin
With bitter words t'enuenom just disdain.
Then ift be true, all glozing I refrain;
If false, why should no worth, worths due obtain
ODE V. His Farewell to his Unkind and Unconstant Mistress.
SVVEETE, if you like and love me still,
And yield me love for my good will.
And do not from your promise start,
When your fair hand gave me your heart.
If dear to you I be,
As you are dear to me.
Then yours I am, and will be ever,
Nor time, nor place my love shall sever,
But faithful still I will persevere,
Like constant marble stone,
Loving but you alone.
But if you favor more than me,
(Who love thee still, and none but thee.)
If others do the Harvest gain
That Is due to me for all my pain.
If that you love to range,
And often to choppe and change:
Then get you some newfangled Mate,
My doting Love shall turn to Hate,
Esteeming you (though too too late)
Not worth a pebble stone,
Loving not me alone.
A Prosopopoeia: Wherein his Heart speaks to his second Ladies Breast.
Dare not in my masters bosom rest,
That flaming Etna would to Ashes burn me:
^or dare I harbor in his Mistress breast,
^he frosty Clymate into ice would turn me:
So, both from her and him I do retire me,
Lest the one should freeze me, and the other fire me.
Winged with true Love, I fly to this sweet Breast,
Whose Snow, I hope, will cool but t'yce not turn me:
Where fire and snow, I trust, so tempred rest,
^s gentle heat will warm, and yet not burn me:
But (O dear Breast) from thee I Will never retire me,
Whether thou cool, or warm, or freeze, or fire me.
ODE VI. Upon her giving him back the Paper wherein the former Song was
written, as though it had been an answer thereunto.
LAdy of matchless beauty;
^hen into your sweet Bosom I delivered
(...) paper, with wan looks, and hand that quiuered
Twixt hope, fear, love, and duty;
Thought you it nothing else contained,
But written words in Ryme restraind?
O then your thought abused was,
My Heart close wrapped therein, into your Breast infuse wa^
When you that Scroule restor'de me,
With grateful words, kind grace, and smiling merrily
My breast did swell with joy, supposing verily,
You, answer did afford me.
But finding only that I writ,
I hoped to find my Heart in it:
But you my hope abused had,
And poison of Despair in stead thereof infused had
Why, why did you torment me,
With giving back my humble Rymes so hatefully
You should have kept both heart and paper gratefully;
Or both you should have sent me.
Hope you my Heart thence to remove
By scorning me, my Lines, my Love?
No, no; your hope abused is,
Too deep to be removed it in your Breast infused is
O shall I hide or tell it?
Dear with so spotless, zealous, firm Affection,
I love your Beauty, Virtue, and perfection,
As nothing can expel it.
Scorn you my Rimes, my Love despite?
Pull out my Heart, yea kill me quite
Yet will your hate abused be,
For in my very soul, your love and looks infused be.
ODE VII. Commendation of her Beauty, Stature, Behavior and Wit.
^Ome there are as fair to see too;
But by Art and not by Nature.
^me as tall and goodly be too;
^t want Beauty to their stature.
^me have gracious kind behauour,
^t are foul, or simple Creatures:
^me have wit, but want sweet favor,
^r are proud of their good features.
Only you in Court or City,
Are both fair, Tall, Kind, and Witty.
MADRIGALL VI. To her hand, upon her giving him her Glove.
O Hand of all hands living,
The softest, moistest, whitest,
^ore skild then Phoebus on a Lute in running;
^ore then Minerua, with a Needle cunning;
Then Mercury more wily,
In stealing Hearts most sliely.
Since thou, dear Hand, in theft so much delightest,
Why fall'st thou now a giving?
Ay me! thy gifts are thefts, and with strange Art,
In giving me thy Glove, thou stealst my Heart.
MADRIGALL. VII. Cupid proved a Fenser.
AH Cupid I mistook thee;
I for an Archer, and no Fenser took thee.
But as a Fenser often faines blows and thrusts,
Where he does mean no harm;
Then turns his balefull Arm,
And wounds his foe whereas he least mistrusts:
So thou with fencing Art,
Fayning to wound mine Eyes, have hit my heart.
SONNET VIII. Upon her commending (though most undeservedly) his Verses to his
first Love.
PRaise you those barren Rimes long since composed?
Which my great Love, her greater Cruelty,
My constant faith, her false Inconstancy,
My praiseles style, her o're-praisd worth disclosed.
O if I loved a scornful Dame so dearly;
If my wild years did yield so firm affection;
If her Moon-beams, short of your Suns perfection,
Taught my hoars Muse to sing (as you say) clearly
How much, how much should I love and adore you,
(Diuinest Creature) if you deigned to love me:
What beauty, fortune, time should ever move me
In these staid years to like aught else before you?
And O! how should my Muse, by you inspired,
Make Heaven and Earth resound your praise admired.
MADRIGAL VIII. He compares himself to a Candle-flie.
LIke to the seely fly,
To the dear light I fly
Of your disdainful Eyes,
But in a diverse wise.
She with the flame does play
By night alone; and I both night and day.
She to a Candle runs;
I to a light, far brighter then the Sunne's.
She near at hand is fyred;
I both near hand, and far-away retired.
She fondly thinks, nor dead, nor burnt to be,
But I my burning, and my death foresee.
MADRIGAL IX. Answer to her question, what love was.
IF I behold your Eyes,
Love is a Paradize.
But if I veiw my Heart,
It Is an infernal smart.
ODE VIII. That all other Creatures have their abiding in heaven, hell, earth,
air, water, or fire; but he in all of them.
IN Heaven the blessed Angels have their being;
In hell the Fiends appointed to damnation.
To men and beasts Earth yields firm habitation:
The winged Musicians in the Air are fleeing.
With finnes the people gliding,
Of Water have th'enioying.
In Fire (all else destroying.)
The Salamander finds a strange abiding:
But I, poor wretch, since I did first aspier,
To love your beauty, Beauties all excelling,
Have my strange diverse dwelling,
In heaven, hell, earth, water, air, and Fire.
Mine Ear, while you do sing, in Heaven remains
My mind in hell, through hope and fears contention
Earth holds my drossy wit and dull invention.
The Will food of airie sighs my life sustaineth.
To streams of tears still flowing
My weeping Eyes are turned.
My constant Heart is burned
In quenchlesse fire within my bosom glowing.
O fool, no more, no more so high aspier;
In Heaven is no beauty more excelling,
In Hell no such pride dwelling,
Nor heart so hard in earth, air, water, fire.
MADRIGAL X. Upon his time rous silence in her presence.
ARE Lovers full of fire?
How comes it then my Verses are so cold?
And how, when I am nie her,
And fit occasion wills me to be bold,
The more I burn, the more I do desire,
The less I dare requier?
Ah Love! this is thy wondrous Art,
To freeze the tongue, and fire the heart.
MADRIGAL XI. Upon her long Absence.
IF this most wretched and infernal Anguish,
Wherein so long your absence makes me languish
My vital spirits spending,
Do not work out my ending.
Nor yet your long-expected safe returning,
To heavenly joy my hellish torments turning,
With joy so ouer-fill me,
As presently it kill me;
I will conclude, hows'euer Schools deceive a man
No Joy, nor Sorrow, can of life bereave a man.
Upon seeing his Face in her Eye.
FAirest and kindest of all woman-kinde:
Since you did me the undeserved grace,
^n your fair Eye to show me my bad face,
With loan I Will pay you in the self same kind;
Look in mine Eye, and I will show to you,
The fairest face that Heavens Eye does view.
But the small worthless Glass of my dim Eye,
Scarce shows the Picture of your heavenly face,
Which yet each slightest turn does strait deface.
But could, O could you once my Heart epsy,
Your form at large you there engraved should see,
Which, nor by Time, nor Death can razed be.
MADRIGAL XII. Upon her hiding her face fom him.
GO wayling Accents, go,
With my warm tears and scalding tears attended,
To The Author of my woe,
and humbly ask her, why she is offended.
Say, Dear, why hide you so,
From him your blessed Eyes,
Where he beholdes his earthly Paradise,
Since he hides not from you
His heart, wherein Loves heaven you may view?
MADRIGAL XIII. Upon her Beauty and Inconstancy.
Whosoever longs to try,
Both Love and Jealousy,
My fair unconstant Lady let him see,
And he will soon a jealous Lover be.
Then he by proof shall know,
As I do to my woe,
How they make my poor heart at once to dwell,
^n fire and frost, in heaven and in hell.
A Dialogue between a Lovers flaming Heart, and his Ladies frozen Breast.
Heart Shut not (sweet Breast) to see me all of fire.

Breast Fly not (dear Heart) to find me al of snow.

Heart Thy snow inflames these flames of my desire.

Breast And I desire, Desiers sweet flames to know.

Heart Thy Snow n'ill hurt me.

Breast Nor thy Fire will harm me.

Heart This cold will cool me.

Breast And this heat will warm me.

Heart Take this chaste fire to that pure virgin snow*

B. Being now thus warmed, I Will n'ere seek other fire*

H Thou give more blis tha^ mortal hearts may know

Breast More bliss I take than Angels can desire.

Both together Let one grief harm us;
And let one joy fill us:
Let one love warm us;
And let one death kill us.
ELEGY. III. For what cause he obtaines not his Ladies favor.
Dear, why has my long love, and faith unfeigned,
At your fair hands no grace at all obtained?
Is It, that my ^ocke-hol'd face does beauty lack?
No: Your sweet Sex, sweet beauty praises;
Ours, wit and valor chiefly raises.
Is It, that my musk less clothes are plain and black?
No: What wise Lady loves fine noddies,
With poore-clad minds, and rich-clad bodies?
Is It, that no costly gifts mine Agents are?
No: My true Heart which I present you,
Should more than gold or pearl content you.
Is It, That my Verses want invention rare?
No: I was never skillful Poet,
I truly love, and plainly show it.
^st, That I vaunt, or am effeminate?
O scornful vices! I abhor you,
Dwell still in Court, the place fit for you.
^st, That you fear my love soon turns to hate?
No: Though disdained, I can hate never,
But loved, where once I love, love ever.
Is It, That your favors jealous Eyes suppress?
No: only Virtue neuer-sleeping,
Has your fair Minds and Bodies keeping.
Is It, That to many more I love profess?
Goddess, you have my Hearts oblation,
And no Saint else lips invocation.
No, none of these: The cause I now discover;
No woman loves a faithful worthy Lover.
A Quatrain.
IF you reward my love with love again,
My bliss, my life, my heaven I will deem you,
But if you prowdly quite it with disdain,
My curse, my death, my hell I must esteem you.
SONNET IX. To a worthy Lord (now dead) upon presenting him for a
New-yeers-gift, with Caesar's Commentaries and Cornelius Tacitus.
WOrthily, famous Lord, whose Virtues rare,
Set in the gold of neuer-stain'd Nobility,
And noble mind shining in true humility,
Make you admir'de of all that virtuous are:
^f as your Sword with envy imitates
Great Caesar's Sword in all his deeds victorious,
So your learned Pen would strive to be glorious,
And write your Acts performed in foreign States;
Or if some one with the deep wit inspired,
Of matchles Tacitus would them historifie,
The^ Caesar's works so much we should not glorify,
And Tacitus would be much less desired.
^ut till your self, or some such put them forth,
^ccept of these as Pictures of your worth.
To SAMVEL DANIEL Prince of Englist Poets. Upon his three several sorts of
Poesy, Liricall, in his Sonnets. Tragical, in Rosamond and Cleopatra.
Heroical, in his Civil Wars.

OLympiaes matchless Son, whenas he knew
How many crowns his fathers sword had gaind,
With smoking sighs, and deep-fetcht sobs did rue,
And his brave cheeks with scalding tears bedew,
(...) that kingdoms now so few remained,
^y his victorious Arm to be obtained.
So (Learned Daniel) when as thou did see,
That Spenser erst so far had spread his fame,
That he was Monark deemed of Poesy,
Thou did (I guess) even burn with Jealousy,
Lest Laurel were not left enough to frame,
A neast sufficient for thine endless Name.
But as that Pearl of Greece, soon after past
In wondrous conquests his renowned sire,
And others all, whose names by Fame are plac'te
In highest seat: So has thy Muse surpast
Spenser, and all that do with hot desire,
To the Thunder-scorning Lawrel-crown aspire
And as his Empires linked force was known,
When each of those that did his Kingdoms share,
The mighti'st Kings in might did match alone:
^o of thy skill the greatness thus is shown,
That each of those, great Poets deemed are,
Who may in no one kind with thee compare.
One sharde out Greece, another Asia held,
And fertile Egypt to a third did fall,
^ut only Alexander all did wield.
^o in soft pleasing Liricks some are skild,
In Tragic some, some in Heroical,
But thou alone art matchless in them all.
Non equidem inuideo, miror magit
Three Epitaphs upon the death of a rare Child of six years old.
1
WIts perfection, Beauties wonder,
Natures pride, the Graces treasure,
Virtues hope, his friends sole pleasure,
This small Marble Stone lies under.
Which is often moist with tears,
For such loss in such young years.
2
Lovely Boy, thou art not dead,
^ut from Earth to Heaven fled,
For base Earth was far unfit,
For thy Beauty, Grace, and Wit.
3
Thou alive on Earth sweet Boy,
Had an Angels wit, and face:
And now dead, thou do enjoy
In high Heaven an Angels place.
An Inscription for the Statue of DIDO.
O most unhappy DIDO,
^nhappy Wife, and more unhappy Widow!
^nhappy in thy Mate,
and in thy Lover most unfortunate.
(...) treason the one was rest thee,
(...) treason the other left thee.
that left thee means to fly with,
^his left thee means to die with.
^he former being dead,
^om Brothers sword thou fliest;
^e latter being fled,
^n Lovers sword thou die.
Piu meritare, che conseguire. FRA. DAVISON

SONNET. I. He demands pardon, for looking, loving, and writing.
LEt not (sweet Saint) let not these lines offend you,
Nor yet the Message that these lines imparte;
The Message my unfeigned Love does send you,
Love, which your self has planted in my heart.
For being charmed by the bewitching art
Of those inveagling graces which attend you,
Loves holy fire makes me breathe out in part,
The neuer-dying flames my breast does lend you.
Then if my Lines offend, let Love be blamed.
And if my Love displease, accuse mine Eyes,
If mine Eyes sin, their sins cause only lies
On your brite eyes, which have my heart inflamed
Since eyes, love, lines, err then by your direction;
Excuse mine Eyes, my Lines, and my Affection.
SONNET. II. Love in Justice punnishable only with like Love.
But if my Lines may not be held excused,
Nor yet my Love find favor in your Eyes,
But that your Eyes as Judges shall be used,
Even of the fault which from themselves does rise,
Yet this my humble suite do not despise,
Let me be judged as I stand accused,
If but my fault my doom do equalize,
What er'e it be, it shall not be refused.
And since my Love already is expressed,
And that I cannot stand upon denial,
I freely put my self upon my trial,
Let Justice doom me as I have confessed.
For in my Doom if Justice be regarded,
My Love with Love again shall be rewarded.
SONET. III. He calls his Ears, Eyes, and Heart as witnesses of her sweet
voice, beauty, and inward virtuous perfections.
Fair is thy face, and great thy wits perfection,
So fair alas, so hard to be expressed,
That if my tired pen should neue^ rest,
It should not blaze thy worth, but my affection.
Yet let me say, the Muses make election
Of your pure mind, there to erect their neast,
And that your face is such a flint-hard breast,
By force thereof, without force feels subjection.
Witness mine Ear, ravished when you it hears,
Witness mine Eyes ravished when you they see,
Beauty and Virtue, witness Eyes and Ears,
In you (sweet Saint) have equal soueraingntie.
But if, nor Eyes, nor Ears, can prove it true,
Witness my Heart, their's none that equals you.
SONNET. V. Praise of her Eyes, excelling all Comparisons.
I Bend my wit, but wit cannot devise,
Words fit to blaze the worth, your Eyes co^tains,
Whose nameles worth their worthles name disdains
For they in worth exceed the name of eyes.
Eyes they be not, but worlds in which these lies,
More bliss then this wide world besides co^tains;
Worlds they be not, but stars, whose influence reigns,
Over my Life and Life's felicities.
Stars they be not, but Suns, whose presence drives
Darkness from night, and does bright day impart;
Suns they be not, which outward heat deriues,
But these do inwardly inflame my heart.
Since then in Earth, nor Heaven, they equaled are,
I must confess they be beyond compare.
ODE I. His Lady to be condemned of Ignorance or Cruelty.
AS she is fair, so faithful I,
My service she, her grace I merit,
Her beauty does my Love inherit,
But Grace she does deny.
O knows she not how much I love?
Or does knowledge in her move
No small Remorce?
For the guilt thereof must lie
Upon one of these of force,
Her Ignorance, or Cruelty
As she is fair, so cruel she.
I sow true love, but reap disdaining;
Her pleasure springs from my paining,
Which Pitties source should be.
Too well she knows how much I love,
Yet does knowledge in her move,
No small remorce.
Then the guilt thereof must lie
Upon this a lone of force,
Her undeserved Cruelty.
As she is fair, so were she kind:
Or being cruel, could I waver,
Soon should I, either win her fauer,
Or a new Mistress find.
But neither out alas may be,
Scorn in her, and love in me,
So fixed are.
Yet in whom most blame does lie
Judge she may, if she compare
My love unto her Cruelty.
SONNET VI. Contention of Love and Reason for his Heart.
REason and Love lately at strife, contended,
Whose Right it was to have my minds protection,
Reason on his side, Natures will pretended,
Loves Title was, my Mistress rare perfection.
Of power to end this strife, each makes election,
Reasons pretense discoursiue thoughts defended;
But love soon brought those thoghts into subjection
By Beauties troops, which on my saint depended.
Yet, since to rule the mind was Reasons duty,
On this Condition it by love was rendered,
That endless Praise by Reason should be tendered,
As a due Tribute to her conquering Beauty.
Reason was pleased withal, and to loves Royalty,
He pledg'de my Heart, as Hostage for his Loyalty.
SONNET IIII. That she has greater power over his happiness and life, then
either Fortune, Fate, or Stars.
LEt Fate, my Fortune, and my Stars conspire,
Io^ntly to pour on me their worst disgrace;
So I be graeious in your heavenly Face,
I wey not Fates, nor Stars, nor Fortunes ire.
It Is not the influence of Heavens Fire,
Has power to make me blessed in my Race,
Nor in my happiness has Fortune place,
Nor yet can Fate my poor life's date expyre.
It Is your fair Eyes (my Stars) all bliss do give,
It Is your disdain (my Fate) has power to kill,
It Is you (my Fortune) make me happy live,
Though Fortune, Fate, and Stars conspyre mine ill.
Then (blessed Saint) into your favor take me,
^ortune, nor Fate, nor Stars can wretched make me.
SONNET. VII. Of his Ladies weeping.
WHat need I say, how it does wound my breast,
By fate to be thus banished from thine Eyes,
Since your own Tears with me do Sympathize,
Pleading with slow departure there to rest?
For when with floods of tears they were oppressed,
Over those Iuory banks they did not rise,
Till others envying their felicities,
Did press the^ forth, that they might there be blessed.
Some of which, Tears pressed forth by violence,
Your lips with greedy kissing strait did drink:
And other some unwilling to part thence,
Inamourd on your cheeks in them did sincke.
And some which from your Face were forced away,
In sign of Love did on your Garments stay.
SONNET. VIII. He paints out his Torments.
SWeet, to my cursed life some favor show,
Or let me not (accursed) in life remain,
Let not my Senses sense of life retain,
Since sense does only yield me sense of woe.
For now mine Eyes only your frowns do know;
Mine Eeares hear nothing else but your disdain,
My lips taste naught but tears: and smell is pain,
Banished your lips, where Indian Odours grow.
And my devoted Heart your Beauties slave,
Feels naught but scorn, oppression, and distress,
Made even of wretchedness the wretched Cave,
Nay, too too wretched for vilde wretchedness.
For even sad sighs, as loathing there to rest,
Struggle for passage from my Greefe-swolne breast.
ODE II. A dialogue between him and his Heart.
AT her fair hands how have I grace entreated,
With prayers often repeated,
Yet still my love is thwarted:
Heart let her go, for she will not be conuarted.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
She is most fair, though she be marble hearted.
How often have my sighs declar'de mine anguish?
Wherein I daily languish,
Yet does she still procure it:
Heart let her go, for I can not endure it.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
She gave the wound, and she alone must cure it.
The trickling tears that down my cheeks have flowed,
My love have often showed;
Yet still unkind I prove her:
Heart, let her go, for naught I do can move her.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no no, no.
Though me she hate, I can not choose but love her.
But shall I still a true affection owe her,
Which prayers, sighs, tears do show her;
And shall she still disdain me?
Heart, let her go, if they no grace can gain me.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no, no.
She made me hers, and hers she will retain me
But if the Love that has, and still does burn me,
No love at length return me,
Out of my thoughts I Will set her:
Heart, let her go, oh heart, I pray thee let her.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no, no:
Fixed in the heart, how can the heart forget her.
But if I weep and sigh, and often wail me,
Till tears, sighs, prayers fail me,
Shall yet my Love persevere?
Heart, let her go, if she will right thee never.
Say, shall she go?
Oh no, no, no, no*, no
Tears, sighs, prayers fail, but true love lasts eue^
SONNET. IX. His Sighs and Tears are bootlesse.
I Have entreated, and I have complained,
I have disprays'd, and praise I like wise gave,
All means to win her Grace I tried have,
And still I love, and still I am disdained.
So long I have my Tongue and Pen constrained,
To praise, dispraise, complain, and pity crave,
That now, nor Tongue, nor Pen, to me her slave
Remains, whereby her Grace may be obtained.
Yet you (my Sighs) may purchase me relief,
And ye (my Tears) her rocky heart may move;
Therefore my sighs sigh in her ears my grief,
And in her Heart my Tears imprint my Love.
But cease vain sighs, cease cease ye fruitles tears,
Tears cannot pierce her Heart, nor sighs her Ears.
SONNET. X. Her Beauty makes him love, even in despair.
WOunded with Grief, I weep, and sigh, and plain,
Yet neither plaints, nor sighs, nor tears do good;
But all in vain I strive against the flood,
Gaining but grief for grief, and pain for pain.
Yet though in vain my tears my cheeks distain;
Leaving engraven Sorrow where they stood;
And though my sighs consuming up my blood,
For Love deserved, reap undeserved Disdain:
And though in vain I know I beg remorce
At your remorcelesse heart, more hard then steel;
Yet, such (alas) such is your Beauties force,
Charming my Sense, that though this h^ll I feel,
Though neither plaints, nor sighs, nor tears ca^ move you,
Yet must I still persist ever to love you.
SONNET XI. Why her Lips yield him no words of Comfort.
Often do I plain, and she my plants does reed
Which in black colors do paint forth my, woe
So that of force she must my sorrow know;
And know, for her disdain my heart does bleed.
And knowledge must of Force some pity breed,
Which makes me hope, she will some favor show
And from her sugared lips cause comfort flow
Into mine Ears, my heart with joy to feed.
Yet though she reads, and reading knows my grief,
And knowledge moves her pity my distress,
Yet do her lips, sweet lips, yield no relief.
Much do I muse, but find no cause but this,
That in her lips, her heavenly lips that bliss them,
Her words loath thence to part, stay there to kiss the^.
SONNET. XII. Comparison of his Heart to a Tempest-beaten Ship.
LIke a Sea-tossed Bark with tackling spent,
And Stars obscured his watery iornies guide
By loud tempestuous winds and raging tide,
From wave to wave with dreadful fury sent,
Fares my poor Heart; my Hart-strings being rent,
And quite disabled your fierce wrath to bide,
Since your fair eyes my Stars themselves do hide
Clouding their light in frowns and discontent.
For from your frowns do spring my sighs and tears
Tears flow like seas, and sighs like winds do bloe
Whose joined rage most violently bears
My Tempest-beaten heart from woe to woe.
And if your Eyes shine not that I may shun it,
On Rock, despair, my sighs, and tears will run it
ELEGY. To his Lady, who had vowel Virginity.
EVEN as my hand my Pen on Paper lays,
My trembling hand my Pen from Paper stays,
^est that thine eyes which shining made me love you
Should frowning on my suit, bid cease to move you,
So that I fare like one at his wits end,
Hoping to gain, and fearing to offend.
What pleases Hope, the same Despair mislikes,
What hope sets down, those lines despair outstrikes,
So that my nursing-murthering Pen affords,
A Grave and Cradle to my newborn words.
But whilst like clouds tosst up and down the air,
(...) racked hang twixt Hope and sad Despair,
Despair is beaten vanquished from the field,
And unto conquering Hope my Heart does yield.
For when mine eyes impartially are fixed,
On thy Rose cheeks with Lillies intermixed,
And on thy forehead like a cloud of snow,
From under which thine eyes like Suns do show,
And all those parts which curiously do meet,
Twixt thy large-spreading hair and pretty feet,
Yet looking on them all, discern no one,
That owes not homage unto Cupids Throne;
Then Chastity (me thinks) no claim should lay
To this fair Realm, under Loves Scepters sway.
For only to the Queen of amorous pleasure
Belongs thy Beauties tributary treasure;
Treasure, which does more than those riches please
For which men plow long furrows in the Seas.)
If you were wrinckled old, or Natures scorn,
Or time your beauties colors had out-worne;
Or were you mewed up from gazing eyes,
Like to a cloystred Nun, which living, dies:
Then might you wait on Chastities pale Queen,
Not being fair, or being fair, not seen.
But you are fair, so passing passing fair,
That love I must, though loving I despair,
For when I saw your eyes (O cursed bliss!)
Whose light I would not laue, nor yet would miss,
(For it is their light alone by which I live,
And yet their sight alone my deaths wound give.)
Looking upon your heart-entangling look,
I like a heedelesse Bird was snar'de and took.
It lies not in our will to hate or love,
For Natures influence our will does move.
And love of Beauty Nature has innated,
In Hearts of men when first they were created.
For even as Rivers to the Ocean run,
Returning back, from whence they first begun:
Or as the Sky about the Earth does wheel,
Or giddy air like to a Drunkard reele,
So with the course of Nature does agree,
That Eyes which Beauties Adamant do see,
Should on Affections line trembling remain,
True-subiect-like eying their Sovereign.
If of mine Eyes you also could bereave me,
As you already of my heart deceive me,
Or could shut up my ravished ears, through which
You likewise did m'inchaunted Heart bewitch,
Or had in Absence both these illes combinde;
(For by your Absence I am deaf and blind,
And, neither Ears, nor Eyes in aught delight,
But in your charming speech, and gracious sight)
To root out Love all means you can invent,
Were all but labor lost, and time ill spent,
For as the sparks being spent, which fire procure,
The fire does brightly-burning still endure:
Though Absence so your sparkling Eyes remove,
My Heart still burns in endless flames of Love.
Then strive not against the stream, to none effect,
But let due Love yield Love a due respect.
Nor seek to ruin what your self begun,
Or loose a Knot that cannot be undone.
But unto Cupids bent conform your will,
For will you, nill you, I must love you sti^l.
But if your Will did swim with Reasons tide,
Or followed Natures neuer-erring guide,
It cannot choose but bring you unto this,
To tender that which by you gotten is.
Why were you fair to be besought of many,
If you live chaste, not to be won of any?
For if that Nature love to Beauty offers,
And Beauty shun the love that Nature proffer's
Then, either unjust Beauty is too blame,
With scorn to quench a lawful kindled flame,
Or else unlawfully if love we must,
And be vnlou'de, then Nature is unjust.
Unjustly then Nature has hearts created,
There to love most, where most their love is hated,
And flattering them with a faire-seeming ill,
To poison them with Beauties sugared Pill.
Think you that Beauties admirable worth
Was to no end, or idle end brought forth?
No, no; from Nature never deed did pass,
But it by wisdoms hand subscribed was.
But you in vain are fair, if fair, not viewed,
Or being seen, men's hearts be not subdewed,
Or making each man's heart your Beauties thrall
You be enjoyed of no one at all.
For as the Lions strength to seize his pray,
And fearful Hares light foot to run away,
Are as an idle Talent but abused,
And fruitless had, if had, they be not used,
So you in vain have Beauties bonds to show,
By which, men's Eyes engaged Hearts do owe,
If Time shall cancel them before you gain
Th'indebted Tribute to your Beauties reign.
But if (these Reasons being vainly spent)
You fight it out to the last Argument;
Tell me but how one Body can enclose,
As loving friends two deadly hating foes.
But when as Contraries are mixed together,
The color made, does differ much from either.
Whilst mutually at strife they do impeach
The gloss and luster proper unto each.
So, where one body jointly does inuest
An Angels face, and cruel Tygres breast,
There dies both Allegiance and Command,
For self-deuided kingdoms cannot stand.
But as a Child that knows not what is what,
Now craves this, and now affects that,
And having, weyes not that which he requires,
But is vnpleasde, even in his pleased desires:
Chaste Beauty so, both will, and will not have,
The self-same thing it childishly does crave:
And wanton-like, now Love, now Hate affects,
And Love, or Hate obtained as fast neglects.
So (like the Webb Penelope did weaue,
Which made by day, she did at night vnreaue)
Fruitless Affections endless threede is spunne,
At one self instant twisted, and undone.
Nor yet is this chaste Beauties greatest ill,
For where it speaks fair, it there does kill.
A Marble heart under an amorous look,
Is of a flattering bait the murdering hook:
For from a Ladies shining-frowning Eyes,
Deaths sable Darte, and Cupids Arrow flies.
Since then, from Chastity and Beauty spring,
Such muddy streams, where each does reign as king;
Let Tyrant Chastities usurped Throane,
Be made the seat of Beauties grace alone;
And let your Beauty be with this suffiz'd,
That my hearts City is by it surpised:
Raze not my Heart, nor to your Beauty raise,
Blood-guilded Trophies of your Beauties praise;
For wisest Conquerors do Towns desire,
On honorable terms and not with fire.
SONNET. XIII. That he cannot leave to love, though commanded.
HOw can my Love in equity be blamed,
Still to importune though it never obtain;
Since though her face and voice will me refrain,
Yet by her Voice and Face I am inflamed?
For when (alas) her face with frowns is framed,
To kill my Love, but to revive my pain;
And when her voice commands, but all in vain,
That love both leave to be, and to be named.
Her Siren voice does such enchantment move,
And though she frown, even frowns so lovely make her.
That I of force am forced still to love;
Since then I must, and yet can not forsake her,
My fruitles prayers shall cease in vain to move her,
But my devoted Heart never cease to move her.
SONNET. XIIII. He desires leave to write of his Love.
MVst my devoted Heart desist to love her?
No, love I may, but I may not confess it.
What harder thing than love, and yet depresse it?
Love most concealed, does most it self discover.
Had I no pen to show that I approve her,
Were I tongue-tide that I might not address it,
In Plaints and Prayr'es unfeigned to express it,
Yet could I not my deep affection cover.
Had I no pen, my very tears would show it,
Which write my true affection in my face.
Were I tong-tide, my sighs would make her know it,
Which witness that I grieve at my disgrace.
Since then, though silent, I my love discover,
O let my pen have leave to say, I love her!
Quid pluma leuius? Puluis. Quid puluere? Ventus.
Quid vento? Mulier. Quid muliere? Nihil.
Translated thus; DVst is lighter than a Feather,
And the Wind more light than eather.
But a Woman's fickle mind,
More than Feather, Dust, or Wind.


W. D.

SONETS, ODES, ELEGIES and other POESIES.
Splendidis longum valedico nugis.

ANOMOS.

III. Sonnets for a Proeme to the Poems following. That Love only made him a
Poet, and that all sorts of Verses, both in Rhyme and Measure, agree with his
Lady.
SONNET I.
SOme men, they say, are Poets borne by kind,
And suck that science from their mothers breast:
An easy Art that comes with so great rest,
And happy men to so good hap assignde.
In some, desire of praise enflames the mind,
To clime with pain Parnassus double crest:
Some, hope of rich Rewards has so possessed,
That Gold, in Castall Sands they seek to find.
Me, neither Nature has a Poet made,
Nor love of Glory mou'de to learn the trade,
Nor thirst of Gold persuaded for to write;
For Natures graces are too fine for me,
Praise like the Peacockes pride her self to see,
Desire of Gain the basest minds delight.
SONNET. II.
WHat moved me then? say Love, for thou can tell;
Of thee I learned this skill, if skill I have:
Thou know the Muse, whose help I alwais crave
Is none of those that on Parnassus dwell.
My Muse is such as does them all excel,
They all to her alone their cunning gave,
To sing, to dance, to play, to make so brave;
Thrice threefold Graces her alone befell.
From her do flow the streams that water me,
Hers is the praise, if I a Poet be;
Her only look both will and skill does give.
What marvel then if I those laws refuse,
Which other Poets in their making use,
Since by her looks I write, by which I live?
SONNET. III.
THus am I free from laws that other bind,
Who diverse verse to diverse matter frame;
All kind of Styles do serve my Ladies name,
What they in all the world, in her I find.
The lofty Verse does show her noble mind,
By which she quenches Loves enraged flame,
Sweet Liricks sing her heavenly beauties fame,
The tender Elege speaks her pity kind.
In mournful Tragic Verse for her I die,
In Comicke she reuiues me with her eye,
All serve my Goddess both for mirth and moan,
Each look she casts does breed both peace and strife,
Each word she speaks does cause both death and life,
Out of my self I live in her alone.
ODE I. Where his Lady keeps his heart.
Sweet Love, mine only treasure
For service long unfeigned,
Wherein I naught have gained,
Vouchsafe this little pleasure,
To tell me in what part,
My Lady keeps my Heart.
If in her hair so slender,
Like golden nets untwined,
Which fire and art have fined,
Her thrall my heart I render,
For ever to abide
With locks so dainty tide.
If in her Eyes she bind it,
Wherein that fire was framed,
By which it is inflamed,
I dare not look to find it;
I only wish it sight,
To see that pleasant light.
But if her Breast have dained
With kindness to receive it,
I am content to leave it,
Though death thereby were gained;
Then Lady take your own,
That lives for you alone.
To her Eyes.
Feign would I learn of thee thou murdering Eye,
Whether thy glance be fire, or else a dart:
For with thy look in flames thou make me fry,
And with the same thou strik'st me to the heart.
Pierst with thy looks I burn in fire,
And yet those looks I still desire.
The fly that buzzeth round about the flame
Knows not (poor Soul) she gets her death thereby,
I see my death, and seeing, seek the same,
And seeking, find, and finding, choose to die.
That when thy looks my life have slain,
Thy looks may give me life again.
Turn then to me those sparkling Eyes of thine,
And with their fiery glances pierce my heart.
Quench not my light, lest I in darkness pine,
Strike deep and spare not, pleasant is the smart.
So by thy looks my life be spilt,
Kill me as often as thou will.
ODE. II. The more favor he obtaines, the more he desires.
AS soon may water wipe me dry,
And fire my heat allay,
As you with favor of your eye,
Make hot desire decay:
The more I have,
The more I crave;
The more I crave, the more desire,
As piles of wood increase the fire.
The senseless stone that from on hie
Descends to Earth below,
With greater haste it self does plie,
The less it has to go:
So feels desire
Increase of fire,
That still with greater force does burn,
Till all into it self it turn.
The greater favor you bestow,
The sweeter my delight;
And by delight Desire does grow,
And growing gathers might.
The less remains,
The more my pains,
To see my self so near the brinke,
And yet my fill I cannot drink.
Love the only price of Love.
THe fairest Pearls that Northern Seas do breed,
For precious stones from Eastern coasts are sold.
Naught yields the earth that from exchange is freed,
Gold valews all, and all things value Gold.
Where goodness wants an equal change to make,
There greatness serves, or number place does take.
No mortal thing can bear so hie a price,
But that with mortal thing it may be bought.
The corn of Sicill buies the western spice,
French wine of us, of them our cloth is sought.
No pearls, no gold, no stones, no corn, no spice,
No cloth, no wine, for love can pay the price.
What thing is love, which naught can counteruaile?
Naught save it self, even such a thing is Love.
All worldly wealth in worth as far does fail,
As lowest earth does yield to heaven above.
Divine is Love, and scorneth worldly pelf,
And can be bought with nothing, but with self.
Such is the price my loving heart would pay,
Such is the pay thy Love does claim as due.
Thy due is Love, which I (poor I) assay,
In vain assay to quite with friendship true:
True is my love, and true shall ever be,
And truest love is far too base for thee.
Love but thy self, and love thy self alone,
For save thy self, none can thy love requite:
All mine thou have, but all as good as none,
My small desert must take a lower flight.
Yet if thou will vouchsafe my heart such blis,
Accept it for thy Prisner at it is.
His Heart arraigned of Theft, and acquitted.
MY Heart was found within my Ladies Breast,
Close coucht for fear that no man might him see,
On whom suspect did serve a straight Arrest,
And Felon-like he must arraigned be.
What could he mean so closely there to stay,
But by deceit to steal her heart away?
The Bench was set, the Prisoner forth was brought,
My Mistress self chief Judge to hear the cause;
Th'Enditeme^t read, by which his blood was sought,
That he (poor heart) by stealth had broke the laws:
His Plea was such as each man might descry,
For grace and ruth were read in either Eye.
Yet forced to speak, his farther Plea was this,
That sore pursude by me that sought his blood,
Because so often his presence I did mis,
Whilst, as he said, he labored for my good:
He, void of help to have his harms redrest,
Took Sanctuary within her sacred breast.
The gentle Judge that saw his true intent.
And that his cause did touch her honor near,
Since he from me to her for succor went;
That ruth may reign, where rigor did appear,
Gave sentence thus; that if he there would bide,
That place was made the guiltles heart to hide.
MADRIGAL. I.
THine Eyes so bright
Bereft my sight,
When first I viewed thy face.
So now my light
Is turned to night,
I stray from place to place.
Then guide me of thy kindness,
So shall I bless my blindness.
PHALEVCIAKS. I.
TIme nor place did I want, what held me tongtide?
What Charms, what magical abused Altars?
Wherefore wished I so often that hour unhappy,
When with freedom I might recount my torments,
And plead for remedy by true lamenting?
Dumb, nay dead in a trance I stood amazed,
When those looks I beheld that late I longed for;
No speech, no memory, no life remained,
Now speech prateth apace, my grief bewraying,
Now ^ootlesse memory my plaints remembers,
Now life moves again, but al auailes not.
Speech, life, and memory die altogether,
With speech, life, memory, Love only dies not.
Deadly Sweetness.
SWeet thoghts, the food on which I feeding sterue
Sweet tears, the drink that more augme^ts my thirst
Sweet eyes, the stars by which my course does swerue
Sweet hope, my death, which wast my life at first.
Sweet thoughts, sweet tears, sweet hope, sweet eyes,
How chance that death in sweetness lies?
MADRIGAL II. Verbal Love.
IF Love be made of words, as woods of Trees,
Who more beloved then I?
If love be hot where true desire does freeze,
Who more then she does fry?
Are droanes that make no honey counted Bees?
Is running water dry?
Is that a gainefull trade that has no fees,
He live that dead does lie?
What else but blind is he that nothing sees,
But deaf that hears no cry?
Such is her vowed love to me,
Yet must I think it true to be.
Ladies eyes, serve Cupid both for Darts and Fire.
Often have I mused the cause to find,
Why Love in Ladies eyes does dwell.
(...) thought, because himself was blind,
He looked that they should guide him well.
And sure his hope but seldom fails,
For Love by Ladies eyes preuailes.
But Time, at last, has taught me wit,
Although I bought my wit full dear,
For by her Eyes my heart is hit,
Deep is the wound though none appear,
Their glauncing beams as darts he throws,
And sure he has no shaftes but those.
I musde to see their eyes so bright,
And little thought they had been fire;
I gazde upon them with delight,
But that delight has bred desire;
What better place can Love require,
Than that where grow both shafts and fire?
Loves Contrarieties.
I Smile sometimes amids my greatest grief,
Not for Delight, for that long since is fled,
Despair did shut the Gate against Relief,
When Love, at first, of death the sentence read.
But yet I smile sometimes in midst of pain,
To think what toys do toss my troubled head.
How most I wish, that most I should tefraine,
And seek the thing that least I long to find,
And find the wound by which my heart is slain,
Yet want both skill and will to ease my mind.
Against my will I burn with free consent,
I live in pain, and in my pain delight,
I cry for death, yet am to live content,
I hate the day, yet never wish for night;
I freeze for cold, and yet refrain the fire;
I long to see, and yet I shun her sight,
I scalde in Sun, and yet no shade desire,
I live by death, and yet I wish to die,
I feel no hurt, and yet for help enquire,
I die by life, and yet my life defy.
Heu, cogor voti nescius esse mei.
ODE III.
DEsire and Hope have moved my mind,
To seek for that I cannot find,
Assured faith in woman-kinde,
And love with love rewarded;
Self-love, all but himself disdaines,
Suspect as chiefest virtue reigns,
Desire of change unchanged remains,
So light is Love regarded.
True friendship is a naked name,
That idle brains in pastime frame,
Extremes are always worthy blame,
Enough is common kindness.
What floods of tears do Lovers spend?
What sighs from out their hearts they send?
How many, may, and will not mend?
Love is a wilful blindness.
What is the Love they so desire?
Like love for love, and equal fire;
Good loving worms, which love require,
And know not when they have it.
Is Love in words? fair words may feign.
Is Love in looks? sweet looks are vain;
Both these in common kindness reign,
Yet few or none so crave it.
Thou would be lou'de, and that of one,
For vice? thou may seek love of none:
For virtue? why of her alone?
I say so more, speak you that know the truth,
If so great love be aught but heat of youth?
MADRIGAL III.
SHe only is the pride of Natures skill:
In none, but her, al Graces friendly meet.
^n all, save her, may Cupid have his will,
By none, but her, is Fancy under feet.
Most strange of all, her praise is in her want,
Her Heart that should be flesh, is Adamant.
Laudo quod lugeo.
SMoothe are thy looks, so is the deepest stream:
Soft are thy lips, so is the swallowing Sand.
Fair is thy sight, but like unto a dream;
Sweet is thy promise, but it will not stand.
Smooth, soft, fair, sweet, to the^ that lightly tuch,
Rough, hard, foul, sour to them that take too much.
Thy looks so smoothe have drawn away my sight.
Who would have thought that hooks could so be hid?
Thy lips so soft have fretted my delight,
Before I once suspected what they did.
Thy face so fair has burnt me with desire,
Thy words so sweet were bellows for the fire.
And yet I love the looks that made me blind,
And like to kiss the lips that fret my life,
In heat of fire an ease of heat I find,
And greatest peace in midst of greatest strife.
That if my choice were now to make again,
I would not have this joy without this pain.
PHALEVCIACKS II.
HOw, or where have I lost my self? unhappy!
Dead, nor live am I neither, and yet am both.
Through despair am I dead, by hope revived,
Weeping wake I the night from eve to morning,
Sighing waste I the day from morn to evening.
Tears are drink to my thirst, by tears I thirst more
Sighs are meat that I eat, I hunger eating,
Might I, O that I might refrain my feeding,
Soon would ease to my heart by death be purchased
Life and light do I lack, when I behold not
Those bright beams of her Eyes, Apollo darkning;
Life and light do I loose when I behold them,
All as Snow by the Sun resolved to water.
Death and life I receive her Eyes beholding;
Death and life I refuze not in beholding,
So that, dead or alive I may behold them.
L'ENVOY in ryming Phaleuciacks.
Muse not, Lady, to read so strange a Meeter;
Strange grief, strange remedy for ease requires
When sweet Joy did abound, I writ the sweeter,
Now that wears away, my Muse retireth:
In you lies it alone to cure my sadness,
And therewith to revive my heart with gladness
SONNET. IIII.
WRongde by Desire I yielded to disdain,
Who called revenge to work my spite thereby.
Rash was Revenge and swear desire should die.
No price nor prayer his pardon might obtain.
Down to my Heart in rage he hastes amain,
And stops each passage lest Desire should fly:
Within my Ears disdainful words did lie,
Proud looks did keep mine Eyes with scornful train.
Desire that erst but flickred in my breast,
And wanton-like now pricked, now gave me rest,
For fear of death sunk deeper in my heart.
There reigns he now, and there will reign alone,
Desire is jealous, and gives part to none,
Nor he from me, nor I from him can start.
That he is unchangeable.
The love of change has cha^g'd the world throwout
And naught is counted good, but what is strange;
New things wax old, old new, all turn about,
And all things change except the love of change.
Yet feel I not this love of change in me,
But as I am, so will I always be.
For who can change that likes his former choice,
Who better wish, that knows he has the best?
How can the heart in things unknown rejoice,
If joy well tried can bring no certain rest?
My choice is made, change he that list for me,
Such as I am, such will I always be.
Who ever changed, and not confessed his want?
And who confessed his want, and not his woe?
Then change who list, thy woe shall not be scant,
Within thy self thou feedst thy mortal foe.
Change calls for change, no end, no ease for thee,
Then, as I am, so will I always be.
Mine eyes confess they have their wished sight,
(...) heart affirms it feels the love it sought.
^^ne inward thoughts are fed with true delight,
Which full consent of constant joy has wrought.
And full Content desiers no Change to see,
Then, as I am, so will I always be.
R^st then (my Heart) and keep thine old delight,
Which like the Phoenix waxes young each day:
Each hour presents new pleasure to my sight,
More cause of joy increases every way.
True love with age does daily cleerer see,
Then, as I am, so will I always be.
What gained fair Cresside by her faithless change,
But loss of fame, of beauty, health, and life?
Mark Iasons hap, that ever lou'de to range,
That lost his children, and his princely wife.
Then Change farewell, thou art no Mate for me,
But, as I am, so will I always be.
Iamais aulire.

To his Eyes.
Unhappy Eyes, the causers of my pain,
That to my foe betrayed my strongest hold,
Wherein, he like a Tyrant now does reign,
And boasts of winning that which treason sold.
Too late you call for help of me in vain,
Whom Love has bound in chains of massy gold;
The tears you shed increase my hot desire,
As water on the Smithie kindles fire.
The sighs that from my Heart ascend,
Like wind disperse the flame throughout my breast,
No part is left to harbor quiet rest,
I burn in fire and do not spend;
Like him, whose growing maw,
The vulture still does gnaw.
ODE IIII. Upon visiting his Lady by Moonlight.
THe night say all, was made for rest,
And so say I, but not for all:
To them the darkest nights are best,
Which give them leave asleep to fall:
But I that seek my rest by light,
Hate sleep, and praise the cleerest night.
Bright was the Moon, as bright as day,
And Venus glistred in the West,
Whose light did lead the ready way,
That brought me to my wished rest:
Then each of them encreast their light,
While I inioy'd her heavenly sight.
Say, gentle Dames, what moved your mind
To shine so bright above your wont?
Would Phoebe fair Endimion find?
Would Venus see Adonis hunt?
No no, you feared by her sight,
To loose the praise of Beauty bright.
At last, for shame you shrunk away,
And thought to reaue the world of light:
Then shone my Dame with brighter ray,
Then that which comes from Phoebus sight:
None other light but hers I praise,
Whose nights are cleerer then the days.
Upon her Absence.
The summer Sun that scalds the ground with heat,
And burns the Grass, and dries the Rivers source,
With milder beams, the farthest earth does beat,
When through the frozen Got he runs his course.
The fire that burns what ever comes to hand,
Does hardly heat that farthest off does stand.
Not so, the heat that sets my heart on fire,
By distance, slakes, and lets me cool again:
But still, the farther off, the more desire,
The absent fire does burn with hotter pain.
My Ladies presence burnt me with desire,
Her absence turns me into flaming fire.
Whosoever has seen the flame that burns bright,
By outward cold in narrow room suppressed,
Increase in heat and rage with greater might,
May guess what force of fire torments my breast:
So run the swelling streams with double force,
Where locks or piles are set to stay their course.
For when my heart perceived her parting near,
By whose sweet sight he lives that else should die,
It cloasde it self, to keep those beams so clear,
Which from her look had pierst it through the Eye.
The fiery beams which would break out so feign,
By seeking vent, increase my burning pain.
But if my Dear return alive, and found,
That these mine eyes may see her beauty bright,
My Heart shall spread with joy that shall abound,
And open wide, receiving cleerer light.
She shall recover that which I possess,
And I thereby enjoy no whit the less.
ODE V. Petition to have her leave to die.
WHen will the fountain of my Tears be dry?
When will my sighs be spent?
When will Desire agree to let me die?
When will thy heart relent?
It is not for my life I plead,
Since death the way to rest does lead,
But stay for thy consent,
Lest thou be discontent.
For if my self without thy leave I kill,
My Ghost will never rest:
So has it sworn to work thine only will,
And holds that ever best.
For since it only lives by thee,
Good reason thou the ruler be:
Then give me leave to die,
And show thy power thereby.
THe frozen Snake oppressed with heaped snow,
By struggling hard gets out her tender head:
and spies far off from where she lies below,
The winter Sun that from the North is fled:
But all in vain she looks upon the light,
Where heat is wanting to restore her might.
What does it help a wretch in prison pent,
^ong time with biting hunger ouer-prest;
^o see without or smell within the sent,
^f dainty fare for others tables dressed?
Yet Snake and prisoner both behold the thing,
The which (but not with sight) might comfort bring.
^ch is my state, or worse, if worse may be,
^y heart oppressed with heavy frost of care,
^ebar'd of that which is most dear to me,
^ld up with cold, and pinde with evil fare:
And yet I see the thing might yield relief,
And yet the sight does breed my greater girefe.
Thisbe saw her lover through the wall,
^^d saw thereby, she wanted that she saw:
^^d so I see, and seeing want withal,
^^d wanting so, unto my drath I draw:
and so my death were twenty times my friend,
^f with this Verse my hated life might end.
ODE VI.
IE my decay be your increase,
If my distress be your delight,
If war in me procure your peace,
If wrong to me, to you be right,
I would decay, distress, war, wrong,
Might end the life that ends so long.
Yet, if by my decay you grow,
When I am spent your growth is past:
If from my grief your Joy do flow,
When my grief ends, your Joy flies fast:
Then for your sake, though to my pain,
I strive to live, to die full feign.
For if I die, my war must cease;
Then can I suffer wrong no more:
My war once done, farewell your peace,
My wrong, your right does still restore:
Thus, for your right I suffer wrong,
And for your peace, my war prolong.
But since no thing can long endure,
That sometime has not needful rest,
What can my life your joy assure,
If still I wail with grief oppressed?
The strongest stomach faints at last,
For want of ease and due repast.
My restless sighs break out so fast,
That time to breathe they quite deny:
Mine Eyes so many tears have cast,
That now the springs themselves are dry:
Then grant some little ease from pain,
Until the springs be full again.
The Giant whom the Vulture gnawes,
Until his heart be grown, has peace:
And Sisyphus by hellish laws,
Whilste that the stone rowles down, does cease:
But all in vain I strive for rest,
Which breeds more sorrow in my breast.
Let my Decay be your increase,
Let my distress be your delight:
Let war in me procure your peace,
Let wrong in me to you be right;
That by my Grief your Joy may live,
Vouchsafe some little rest to give.
ODE VII.
CLose your lids, unhappy Eyes,
From the sight of such a change:
^oue has learned to despise,
^elfe-conceit has made him strange:
Inward now his sight he turns,
With himself in love he burns.
If abroad he beauty spy,
As by chance he looks abroad,
Or it is wrought by his eye,
Or forc'de out by Painters fraud.
Save himself none fair he deemeth,
That himself too much esteems.
^oy disdain has kindness place,
Kindness forc'de to hide his head:
True Desire is counted base,
Hope with hope is hardly fed:
Love is thought a fury needless,
He that has it, shall die speedlesse.
Then mine eyes, why gaze you so?
Beauty scorns the Tears you shed;
Death you seek to end my woe,
O that you of death were sped!
But with Love has death conspired,
To kill none whom Love have fired.
Cupid at length I spy thy crafty wile,
Though for a time thou did me sore beguile,
When first thy shaft did wound my tender heart,
^t touched me light, me thought I felt some pain;
Some little prick at first did make me smart,
But yet that grief was quickly gone again.
^ull small account I made of such a sore,
As now does ranckle inward more and more.
So poison first the sinews lightly strains,
Then straies, and after spreads through all the veins,
No otherwise, then he, that pricked with thorn,
Starts at the first, and feels no other grief,
As one whose heart so little hurt did scorn,
And deigned not to seek despised relief:
At last, when rest does after travail come,
That little prick the joint with pain does numme.
What may I think the cause of this thy craft,
That at the first thou stick'st not deep thy shaft?
If at the first I had thy stroke espi'de,
(Alas I thought thou would not dally so)
To keep my self all ways I would have tried,
At least, I think I might have cured my woe:
Yet, truth to say, I did suspect no less,
And knew it too, at least, I so did guess.
I saw, and yet would willingly be blind.
I felt the sting, yet flatt'red still my mind,
And now too late I know my former guilt,
And seek in vain to heal my curelesse sore;
My life, I doubt, my health I know is spilt,
A just reward for dallying so before:
For I that would not when I might have ease,
No marvel though I cannot when I please.
Clipeum post vulnera.
A Paraphrasticall translation of Petrarkes Sonnet, beginning, S' Amor non e,
che dunque e quel ch'io sento.
IF Love be nothing but an idle name,
A vain devise of foolish Poets skill:
A fained fire, deuoyd of smoke and flame;
Then what is that which me tormenteth still?
If such a thing as Love indeed there be,
What kind of thing, or which, or where is he?
If it be good, how causes it such pain?
How does it breed such grief within my breast?
If naught, how chance the grief that I sustain,
Does seem so sweet amidst my great unrest?
For sure me thinks it is a wondrous thing,
That so great pain should so great pleasure bring.
If with my will amidst these flames I fry,
Whence come thee tears? how chance I thus complain?
If force perforce I bear this misery,
What help these Tears that cannot ease my pain?
How can this fancy bear such sway in me,
But if my self consent, that so it be?
And if my self consent, that so it be,
Unjust I am thus to complain and cry;
To look that other men should succor me,
^ince by my fault I feel such misery:
Who will not help himself when well he can,
Deserves small help of any other man.
Thus am I tossed upon the troublous Seas,
By sundry winds, whose blastes blow sundry ways:
And every blast still driving where it please,
Brings hope and fear to end my lingering days:
The Steers-man gone, sail, helm, and tackle lost,
How can I hope to gain the wished Coast?
Wisdom and folly is the lucklesse freight,
My ship therewith ballast unequally:
Wisdom too light, folly of too great weight,
My Bark and I, through them, in ieopardie:
Thus, in the midst of this perplexity,
I wish for death, and yet am loath to die.
Fair is thy face, and that thou know too well,
Hard is thy Heart, and that thou will not know:
Thou hear'st and smil'st, when I thy praises tell,
But stopst thine Ears when I my greef would show:
Yet thou ghin vain, needs must I speak,
Or else my swelling Heart would break.
And when I speak, my breath does blow the fire,
With which my burning Heart consumes away:
I call upon thy name and help require,
Thy dearest Name which does me still betray:
For grace, sweet Grace thy name does sound,
Yet ah! in thee no grace is found.
Alas, to what part shall I then appeal?
Thy face so fair disdaines to look on me:
Thy tongue commands my heart his grief conceal,
Thy nimble feet from me do always flee:
Thine Eyes cast fire to burn my heart,
And thou reioycest in my smart.
Then, since thou see the life I lead in pain,
And that for thee I suffer all this grief,
O let my Heart this small request obtain,
That thou agree it pine without relief!
I ask not Love for my good will,
But leave, that I may love thee still.
Quid minus optari per mea vota potest.
ODE. VIII.
Disdain that so does fill me,
Has surely sworn to kill me,
And I must die:
Desire that still does burn me,
To life again will turn me
And live must I.
O kill me then disdain!
That I may live again.
Thy looks are life unto me,
And yet those looks undo me,
O death and life!
Thy smile some rest does show me,
Thy frown with war overthrow me,
O peace and strife!
Nor, life nor death is either,
Then give me both, or neither.
Life only cannot please me,
Death only cannot ease me,
Change is delight.
I live that death may kill me,
I die that life may fill me,
Both day and night.
If once Despair decay,
Desire will wear away.
An Inuectiue against Love.
ALL is not Gold that shines bright in show,
Nor every flower so good, as fair, to sight,
The deepest streams, above do calmest flow,
And strongest Poisons often the taste delight,
The pleasant bait does hide the harmeful hook*
And false deceit can lend a friendly look.
Love is the gold whose outward hew does pass,
Whose first beginnings goodly promise make,
Of pleasures fair and fresh as Summers grass,
Which neither Sun can parch, nor wind can shake
But when the Mould should in the fire be tried,
The Gold is gone, the dr^sse does still abide.
Beauty, the flower so fresh, so fair, so gay,
So sweet to smell, so soft to touch and taste,
As seems it should endure, by right, for ay,
And never be with any storm defaste:
But when the baleful Southern wind does blow,
Gone is the glory which it erst did show.
Love is the stream, whose waves so calmely flow,
As might entice men's minds to wade therein:
Love is the poison mixed with sugar so,
As might by outward sweetness liking win.
But as the deep o'reflowing stops thy breath,
So poison once received brings certain death.
Love is the bait, whose taste the fish deceaues,
And makes them swallow down the choking hook:
Love is the face whose fairenes judgment reaues,
And makes thee trust a false and fained look:
But as the hook, the foolish fish does kill,
So flattering looks, the Lovers life do spill.
Vsque ade^ dulce puella malum est.
Upon an Heroical Poem which he had begun (in Imitation of Virgil,) of the
first Inhabiting this famous I Will by Brute, and the Troyans.
MY wanton Muse that whilome wont to sing,
Fair Beauties praise and Venus sweet delight,
Of late had changed the tenor of her string,
To higher tunes then serve for Cupids fight:
Shril Trumpets sound, sharp Swords and Lance strong
War, blood, and death, were matter of her song
The God of Love by chance had heard thereof,
That I was proved a Rebel to his Crown,
Fit words for War, quoth he, with angry skoff,
A likely man to write of Marses frown:
Well are they sped whose praises he shall write,
Whose wanton Pen can naught but Love indit
This said, he whiskt his parti-coulor'd wings,
And down to earth he comes more swift the^ thog
Then to my heart in angry haste he flings,
To see what change these news of wars had wroght
He pries, and looks, he ransacks every vain,
Yet finds he naught, save love, and Lovers pain
Then I that now perceived his needles fear,
With heavy smile began to plead my cause:
In vain (quoth I) this endless grief I bear,
In vain I strive to keep thy grievous Laws,
If after proof so often trusty found,
Unjust Suspect condemn me as unsound.
Is this the guerdon of my faithful heart?
Is this the hope on which my life is staide?
Is this the ease of neuer-ceasing smart?
Is this the price that for my pains is paid?
Yet better serve fierce Mars in bloody field,
Where death, or conquest, end or joy does yield.
Long have I served: what is my pay but pain?
Often have I sude: what gain I but delay?
My faithful love is quited with disdain,
My grief a game, my pen is made a play:
Yea, Love that does in other favor find,
In me is counted madness out of kind.
And last of all, but grievous most of all,
Thy self, sweet Love, has killed me with suspect;
Could Love believe, that I from Love would fall?
^s war of force to make me Love neglect?
No, Cupid knows, my mind is faster set,
Then that by war I should my Love forget.
My Muse indeed to War enclines her mind,
The famous Acts of worthy Brute to write:
To whom the Gods this Islands rule assignde,
Which long he soughtby seas through Neptunes spite
With such conceits my busy head does swel,
But in my heart naught else but Love does dwell.
And in this war thy part is not the least,
Here shall my Muse Brutes noble Love declare:
Here shall thou see the double Love increast,
Of fairest Twins that ever Lady bare:
Let Mars triumph in Armor shining bright,
His conquered Arms shall be thy triumphs light.
As he the world, so thou shall him subdue,
And I thy glory through the world will ring:
So be my pains, thou will vouchsafe to rue,
And kill despair: With that he whisk't his wing,
And bade me write, and promised wished rest,
But sore I hope false hope will be the best.
Upon his Ladies buying strings for her Lute.
IN happy time the wished Fair is come,
To fit thy Lute with strings of every kind:
Great pity it is, so sweet a Lute be dumme,
That so can please the Ear, and ease the mind:
Go take thy choice, and choose the very best,
And use them so, that head and heart find rest.
Rest thou in joy, and let me wail alone,
My pleasant days have taken their last farewell:
My Hart-strings Sorrow struck so long with moan,
That at the last they all in pieces fell:
And now they lie in pieces brook so small,
That scarce they serve to make me frets withal.
And yet they serve and bind my heart fo strait,
That frets indeed they serve to fret it out:
No force for that, in hope thereof I wait,
That death may rid me both of hope and doubt:
But death, alas, draws backward all too long,
And I each day feel now increase of wrong.
Care will not let him live, nor Hope let him die.
MY heavy Heart which Grief and hope torment,
Beats all in vain against my weary breast:
As if it thought with force to make a vent,
That Death might enter to procure my rest:
But, foolish heart, thy pains are lost, I see,
For death and life both fly and follow thee.
When weight of care would press me down with pain,
That I might sinck to depth of death below:
Hope lends me wings, and lifts me up again,
To strive for life, and live in greater woe:
So fares the boat, which winds drive to the shore,
And Tide drives backward where it was before.
Thus neither Hope will let me die with Care,
Nor Care consent that Hope assure my life:
I seek for life, death does his stroke prepare,
I come to death, and life renewes my strife:
All as the shadow follow them that fly,
And flies from them that after it do hie.
What is my hope? that hope will fail at last,
And grief get strength to work his will on me:
Either the Wax with which hopes wings are fast,
By scalding sighs mine Eyes shall melted see:
Or else my Tears shall wett the feathers so,
That I shall fall and drown in waves of woe.
Cupids Marriage with Dissimulation.
A Newfound match is made of late,
Blind Cupid needs will change his wife;
Newfangled Love does Psyche hate,
With whom so long he led his life.
Dessembling, she
The Bride must be,
To please his wanton eye.
Psyche laments
That Love repents,
His choice without cause why.
Cycheron sounds with music strange,
Unknown unto the Virgins nine:
From flat to sharp the Tune does range,
Too base, because it is too fine.
See how the Bride
Puffed up with pride,
Can mince it passing well,
She trips on toe,
Full fair to show,
Within does poison dwell.
Now wanton Love at last is sped,
Dissembling is his only Joy,
^are Truth from Venus Court is fled,
Dissembling pleasures hides annoy.
It were in vain
To talk of pain,
The wedding yet does last,
But pain is near,
And will appear,
With a dissembling cast.
Despair and hope are joined in one,
And pain with pleasure linked sure:
Not one of these can come alone,
No certain hope, no pleasure pure.
Thus sour and sweet
In love do meet,
Dissembling likes it so,
Of sweet small store,
Of sour the more,
Love is a pleasant woe.
Amor and mellis and fellis,
ODE. X. Dispraise of Love, and Lovers follies.
^F Love be life, I long to die,
Live they that list for me:
and he that gains the most thereby,
A fool, at least, shall be.
But he that feels the sorest fits,
Scapes with no less than loss of wits;
An happy life they gain,
Which Love do entertain.
In day by fained looks they live,
By lying dreams in night.
Each frown a deadly wound does give,
Each smile a false delight.
Ift hap their Lady pleasant seem,
It is for others love they deem,
If void she seem of joy,
Disdain does make her coy.
Such is the peace that Lovers find,
Such is the life they lead.
Blown here and there with every wind,
Like flowers in the Meade.
Now war, now peace, then war again,
Desire, Despair, Delight, Disdain,
Though dead in midst of life,
In peace, and yet at strife.
In amore haec insunt mala.
THe golden Sun that brings the day,
And lends men light to see withal,
In vain does cast his beams away,
Where they are blind on whom they fall.
There is no force in all his light,
To give the Mole a perfect sight.
But thou, my Sun, more bright then he*
That shines at noone in Summer tide,
Have given me light and power to see,
With perfect skill my sight to guide.
Till now I liu'de as blind as Mole,
That hides her head in earthly hole.
I heard the praise of beauties grace,
Yet deemed it naught but Poets skill.
I gaz'de on many a lovely face,
Yet found I none to bind my will.
Which made me think, that beauty bright,
Was nothing else but red and white.
But now thy beams have cleared my sight,
I blush to think I was so blind.
Thy flaming Eyes afford me light,
That Beauties blaze each where I find:
And yet these Dames that shine so bright,
Are but the shadow of thy light.
ODE XI. To his Muse.
REst, good my Muse, and give me leave to rest,
We strive in vain.
Conceal thy skill within thy sacred breast,
Though to thy pain.
The honor great which Poets wont to have,
With worthy deeds is buried deeepe in grave,
Each man will hide his name,
Thereby to hide his shame,
And silence is the praise their virtues crave.
To praise, is flattery, malice to dispraise,
Hard is the choice.
What cause is left for thee, my Muse, to raise
Thy heavenly voice?
Delight thy self on sweet Parnassus hill,
And for a better time reserve thy skill,
There let thy silver sound,
From Cyrrha wood rebound,
And all the vale with learned Music fill.
Then shall those fools that now prefer each Rhyme
Before thy skill,
With hand and foot in vain assay to clime
Thy sacred hill.
There shall thou sit and skorne them with disdain,
To see their fruitles labor all in vain;
But they shall fret with spite,
To see thy glory bright,
And know themselves thereto cannot attain.
MIne eyes have spent their tears, and now are dry,
My weary hand will guide my pen no more.
My voice is hoarse, and can no longer cry,
My head has left no new complaints in store.
My heart is ouerburdned so with pain,
That sense of grief does none therein remain.
The tears you see distilling from mine eyes,
My gentle Muse does shed for this my grief.
The plaints you hear are her incessant cries,
By which she calls in vain for some relief.
She never parted since my grief begun,
In her I live, she dead, my life were done.
Then (loving Muse) depart, and let me die,
Some brauer Youth will sue to thee for grace,
That may advance thy glory to the sky,
And make thee scorn blind Fortunes frowning face.
My heart and head that did thee entertain,
Desire and Fortune with despite have slain.
My Lady dares not lodge thee in her breast,
For fear, unawares she let in Love with thee.
For well she thinks some part in thee must rest,
Of that which so possessed each part of me.
Then (good my Muse) fly back to heaven again
And let me die, to end this endless pain.
Break heavy heart, and rid me of this pain,
This pain that still increases day by day:
By day with sighs I spend my self in vain,
In vain by night with tears I waste away:
Away I waste with tears by night in vain,
Tears, sighs, by night, by day increase this pain.
Mine Eyes no Eyes, but fountains of my tears,
My tears no tears, but floods to moist my heart:
My heart no heart, but harbor of my fears,
My fears no fears, but feelings of my smart:
My smart, my fears, my heart, my tears, mine eyes
Are blind, dryde, spent, past, wasted with my cries.
And yet mine Eyes, though blind, see cause of grief:
And yet my tears, though dride, run down amain:
And yet my heart, though spent, attends relief,
And yet my fears, though past, increase my pain:
And yet I live, and living, feel more smart,
And smarting, cry in vain, break heavy heart.
WHere wit is ouer-rulde by will,
And will is led by fond desire:
There Reason were as good be still,
As speaking, kindle greater fire:
For where desire does bear the sway,
The heart must rule, the head obey.
What boots the cunning Pilots skill,
To tell which way to shape their course:
When he that steers will have his will,
And drive them where he list perforce:
So Reason shows the truth in vain,
Where fond desire as King does reign.
TWixt heat and cold, twixt death and life,
I freeze and burn, I live and die:
Which jointly work in me such strife,
(...) live in death, in cold I fry,
Nor hot, nor cold, nor live, nor dead,
Neither, and both, this life I lead.
first, burning heat sets all one fire,
Whereby I seem in flames to fry:
Then cold despair kills hot desire,
That drenched deep, in death I lie:
Heat drives out cold, and keeps my life,
Cold quenches heat, no end of strife.
The less I hope to have my will,
The more I feel desire increase.
And as desire increases still,
Despair to quench it does not cease:
So live I as the Lamp, whose light,
Often comes, often goes, now dim, now bright.
A living death.
IF means be none to end my restless ear,
If needs I must orewhelm'd with sorrow lie.
What better way this sorrow to declare,
Then, that I dying live, and cannot die.
If naught but loss I reap in stead of gain,
If lasting pain do every day increase;
To thee (good Death) alas, I must complain,
Thou art of force to make my sorrow cease.
If thou, because I thee refusde sometime,
Now shut thine ears, and my request deny,
Still must I love, and wail in woeful Rhyme,
That dying still I am, and cannot die.
Spiro, non viuo.
YE walls that shut me up from sight of men,
Inclosde wherein, alive I buried lie.
And thou, sometime my bed, but now my den,
Where, smothred up the light of Sun, I fly.
O shut your selves, each chinke and creuis strain,
That none but you may hear me thus complain.
My hollow cries that beat thy stony side,
Vouchsafe to beat, but beat them back again,
That when my grief has speech to me denide,
Mine ears may hear the witness of my pain.
As for my Tears, whose streams must ever last
My silent cowch shall drink them up as fast.
Hopeless desire soon withers and dies.
THough naked Trees seem dead to sight,
When winter wind does keenely blow,
^et if the root maintain her right,
^he Spring their hidden life will show.
But if the root be dead and dry,
No marvel though the branches die.
While Hope did live within my breast,
^o winter storm could kill desire.
^ut now disdain has hope oppressed,
^ead is the root, dead is the spire.
Hope was the root, the spire was Love,
No sap beneath, no life above.
and as we see the rootelesse stock
^^taine some sap, and spring a while,
^et quickly prove a lifelesse block,
^^cause the root does life beguile;
So lives Desire which Hope has left,
As twylight shines when Sun is reft.
ODE XII. To his Heart.
NAy, nay, thou striu'st in vain, my Heart,
To mend thy miss.
Thou have deserved to bear this smart,
And worse then this.
That would thy self debase,
To serve in such a place.
Thou thoughtst thy self too long at rest,
Such was thy Pride.
Needs must thou seek a nobler breast,
Wherein to bide.
Say now, what have thou found?
In fetters thou art bound.
What has thy faithful service won,
But high disdain?
Broke is the threede thy fancy spunne,
Thy labor vain.
Fallen art thou now with pain,
And can not rise again.
And can thou look for help of me
In this distress?
(...) must confess I pity thee,
And can no less.
But bear a while thy pain,
For fear thou fall again.
^earne by thy hurt to shun the fire,
Play not with all:
When clyming thoughts high things aspyre,
They seek their fall.
Thou ween'st naught shone but gold,
So wast thou blind and bold.
^et lie not still for this disgrace,
But mount again:
^o that thou know the wished place
Be worth thy pain.
Then, though thou fall and die,
Yet never fear to fly.
PHALEVCIACKS. II.
Wisdom warns me to shun that once I sought for
And in time to retire my hasty footsteps:
Wisdom sent from above, not earthly wisdom,
No such thoughts can arise from earthly wisdom.
Long, too long have I slept in ease uneasy,
On falce worldly relief my trust reposing;
Health and wealth in a boat, no stern nor ankor,
(Bold and blind that I was) to Sea be taking:
Scarce from shore had I lancht, when all about me,
Waves like hills did arise, till help from heaven,
Brought my Ship to the Port of late repentance.
O nauis, referent in mare te noui
Fluctus. --
ODE XIII.
NOw have I learned with much a do at last,
By true disdain to kill desire:
This was the mark at which I shot so fast,
Unto this height I did aspire:
Proud Love, now do thy worst, and spare not,
^or thee and all thy shafts I care not.
What have thou left wherewith to move my mind,
What life to quicken dead Desire?
(...) count thy words and oaths as light as wind,
I feel no heat in all thy fire.
So change thy bow and get a stronger,
So break thy shafts and buy thee longer.
^n vain thou bait'st thy hook with beauties blaze,
In vain thy wanton Eyes allure.
These are but toys for them that love to gaze,
I know what harm thy looks procure:
^ome strange conceit must be devised,
Or thou and all thy skill despised.
Scilicet asserui iam me, fugique catenas.
Being scorned, and disdained, he inueighs against his Lady.
SInce just disdain began to rise,
And cry revenge for spiteful wrong:
What erst I praisde, I now despise,
And think my Love was all too long.
I tread in dirt that scornful pride,
Which in thy looks I have descride:
Thy beauty is a painted skin,
For fools to see their faces in.
Thine Eyes that some as Stars esteem,
From whence themselves, they say, take light,
Like to thee foolish fire I deem,
That leads men to their death by night.
Thy words and oaths are light as wind,
And yet far lighter is thy mind:
Thy friendship is a broken reed,
That fails thy friends in greatest need.
Vitijs patientia victa est.
ODE XIIII. The Tomb of dead Desire.
WHen Venus saw Desire must die,
Whom high disdain
Had justly slain
For killing Truth with scornful Eye;
The Earth she leaves, and gets her to the sky,
Her golden hair she tears,
Black weeds of woe she wears;
For help unto her father does she cry,
Who biddes her stay a space,
And hope for better grace.
To save his life she has no skill,
Whom should she pray,
What do or say,
But weep for wanting of her will?
Mean time, Desire has taken his last farewell;
And in a Meddow fair,
To which the Nymphs repair,
His breathles Corpse is laid with worms to dwell;
So Glory does decay,
When Death takes life away.
When Morning Star had chafde the night,
The Queen of Love
Looked from above,
To see the Grave of her delight:
And as with heedfull Eye she viewd the place,
She spide a flower unknown,
That on his grave was grown,
^n stead of learned Verse his Tomb to grace.
If you the Name require,
Hearts-ease from dead Desire.
An Altar and Sacrifice to Disdain, for freeing him from love.
My Muse by thee restored to life,
To thee Disdain, this Altar reares,
Whereon she offers causlesse strife,
Self-spending sighs, and bootlesse tears
Long Suits in vain,
Hate for Good will:
Still-dying pain,
Yet living still.
Selfe-louing pride,
Looks coyly strange,
Will Reasons guide,
Desire of change.
And last of all,
Blind Fancies fire;
False Beauties thrall,
That binds desire.
All these I offer to Disdain,
By whom I live from fancy free.
With vow, that if I love again,
My life the sacrifice shall be.


Vicimus and dominum pedibus calcamus amorem. ANOMOS.
Certain other Poems upon diverse Subjects, by the same Author.
Three Odes translated out of Anacreon, the Greek Lyrick Poet.
ODE I.
OF Atreus Sons feign would I write,
And feign of Cadmus would I sing:
My Lute is set on Loves delight,
And only Love sounds every string.
Of late my Lute I alt'red quite,
Both frets and strings for tunes above,
I sung of fierce Alcides might,
My Lute would sound no tune but Love,
Wherefore ye worthles all farewell,
No tune but Love my Lute can tell.
ODE II.
THe Bull by nature has his horns,
The Horse his hooues to daunt their foes,
The light-foot Hare the hunter scorns,
The Lions teeth his strength disclose.
The Fish, by swimming, scapes the we will,
The Bird, by slight, the fowlers net.
With wisdom Man is armed as steel,
Poor women none of these can get.
What have they then? fair Beauties grace,
A two-edged Sword, a trusty Shield,
No force resists a lovely face,
Both fire and sword to Beauty yielde.
ODE. III.
OF late, what time the Bear turned round
At midnight in her woonted way,
and men of all sorts slept full sound,
^'re come with labor of the day.
The God of Love came to my door,
and took the ring and knocked it hard.
^ho's there, quoth I, that knocks so sore,
^ou break my sleep, my dreams are marde?
A little boy forsooth, quoth he,
Dung-wet with rain this Moonelesse night;
With that me thought it pitied me,
I open the door, and candle light.
And straight a little boy I spide,
A winged Boy with shaftes and bow,
I took him to the fire side,
And set him down to warm him so.
His little hands in mine I strain,
To rub and warm them therewithal:
Out of his locks I crush the rain,
From which the drops apace down fall.
At last, when he was waxen warm,
Now let me try my bow, quoth he,
I fear my string has caught some harm,
And wet, will prove too slack for me.
He said, and bent his bow, and shot,
And wightly hit me in the heart;
The wound was sore and raging hot,
The heat like fury rekes my smart.
Mine host, quoth he, my string is well,
And laugh't, so that he leapt again:
Look to your wound for fear it swell,
Your heart may hap to feel the pain.
Anacreons second Ode, otherwise.
NAture in her work does give,
To each thing that by her does live:
A proper gift whereby she may,
Prevent in time her own decay.
The Bull a horn, the horse a hoof,
The light-foote hare to run aloof:
The Lions strength who may resist,
The birds aloft, fly where they list.
The fish swimmes safe in waters deep,
The silly worm at least can creep:
What is to come, men can forecast,
And learn more wit, by that is past:
The woman's gift what might it be,
The same for which the Ladies three,
Pallas, Juno, Venus straue,
When each desired it to have.
T. S.
Anacreons third Ode, otherwise.
Cupid abroad, was lated in the night,
His Wings were wett, with ranging in the rain,
Harbor he sought, to me he took his flight,
To dry his plumes, I heard the Boy complain.
I opte the door, and granted his desire,
I rose my self, and made the Wag a fire.
Prying more narrow by the fires flame,
I spide his Quiver hanging at his back:
Doubting the Boy might my misfortune frame,
I would have gone for fear of further wrack.
But what I feared, did me poor wretch betide,
For forth he drew an Arrow from his side.
He pierst the quick, and I began to start,
A pleasing wound, but that it was too high:
His shaft procurde a sharp, yet sugared smart,
Away he flew, for now his wings were dry;
But left the Arrow sticking in my Breast,
That sore I grieve, I welcomed such a Guest.
R. G.
THe lowest Trees have tops, the Ante her gall,
The fly her spleen, the little sparks their heat:
The slender hairs cast shadows, though but small,
And Bees have stings, although they be not great:
Seas have their sourse, and so have shallow springs,
And love is love, in Beggars, as in Kings.
Where rivers smoothest run, deep are the foords,
The Dial stirs, yet none perceiues it move:
The firmest faith is in the fewest words,
The Turtles cannot sing, and yet they love:
True Hearts have eyes, and ears, no tongs to speak,
They hear, and see, and sigh, and then they break.
Incerto.
An Answer to the first Staff, that Love is unlike in Beggars and in Kings.
COmpare the Bramble with the Cedar tree,
The Pismyres anger which the Lions rage:
What is the Buzzing fly where Eagles be?
drop the spark, no seas can Aetna swage.
Small is the heat in Beggars breasts that springs,
But flaming fire consumes the hearts of Kings.
who shrouds himself where slender hairs cast shade?
But mighty Oaks may scorn the Summer Sun:
Small cure will serve, where Bees the wou^d have made
But Dragons poison through each part does run:
Light is the love that Beggars bosom stings,
Deep is the wound that Cupid makes in Kings.
Small channels serve, where shallow springs do slide,
And little help will turn or stay their course:
The highest banks scarce hold the swelling tide,
Which ouer-throwes all stops with raging force:
The baser sort scarce wett them in the springs,
Which ouer-whelme the heads of mighty kings.
What though in both the heart be set of Love?
The self same ground both corn and cockle breeds
Fast by the Bryer, the Pine Tree mounts above,
One kind of grass, the Jade, and Iennet feeds:
So from the heart, by secret virtue springs,
Unlike desire in Beggars and in Kings.
ANOMOS

A Song, in praise of a Beggars life.
BRight shines the Sun, play Beggars play,
Here Is scraps enough to serve to day.
What noise of Vials is so sweet,
As when our merry clappers ring?
What mirth does want where Beggars meet?
A Beggars life is for a King.
Eat, drink, and play, sleep when we list,
Go where we will, so stocks be mist.
Bright shines, etc.
The world is ours, and ours alone,
For we alone have world at will,
We purchase not, all is our own,
Both fields and streets we Beggars fill.
Nor care to get, nor fear to keep,
Did ever break a Beggars sleep.
Bright shines, etc.
A hundred head of black and white,
Upon our downs securely feed,
^f any dare his master bite,
He dies therefore as sure as Creed.
Thus Beggars Lord it as they please,
And none but Beggars live at ease.
Bright shines the Sun, etc.
Upon beginning without making an end.
Begin, and half is done, yet half undone remains,
Begin that half, and al is done, and thou art easd of pains
The second half is all, when half thereof is dun,
The other half is al again, new work must be begun
Thus he that still begins, does nothing but by halues,
And things half done, as good undone, half oxen are but calves.
An Epigram to Sir Phillip Sydney in Elegicall Verse, Translated out of
Iodelle, the French Poet.
^ambridge, worthy Philip, by this verse builds thee an Altar,
Against time and tempest, strong to abide for ever,
That praise of verses no length of time can abollish,
Which Greece and Italy purchased endless honor.
then pursuing their steps like glory to purchase,
Will make thy memory famous in after ages,
And in these measured verses thy glory be sounded,
So be thy holy favor, help to my holy fury.
HEXAMETERS, Upon the neuer-enough praised Sir Phillip Sidney.
WHat can I now suspect? or, what can I fear any longer?
Often did I fear, often hope, whilst life in Sidney remained.
Of nothing can I now despair, for naught can I hope for;
This good is in misery, when great extreamitie grieves us,
That neither hope of good, nor fear of worse can affright us.
And can I then complain, when no complaint can avail me?
How can I seem to be discontent, or what can I weep for?
He lives eternal, with endless Glory bedecked:
Yea still on earth he lives, and still shall live by the Muses.
An other upon the same.
WHat strange adventure? what now unlooked for arrival,
Has drawn the Muses from sweet Booetia mountains,
To choose our country, to seek in London abiding?
Are fair Castalian streams dride? stands Cyrrha no longer?
Or love the Muses, like wantons, often to be changing?
Scarce can I that suppose, scarce think I those to be Muses.
No sound of melody, no voice but drery lamenting.
Yet well I wot too well, Muses most dolefully weeping.
See where Melpomene sits hid for a shame in a corner.
Hear ye the careful sighs, fetched from the depth of her entrails?
There weeps Calliope, there sometimes lusty Thaleia.
Ay me! alas, now know I the cause, now seek I no further,
Here lies their glory, their hope, their only rejoicing.
Dead lies worthy Philip, the care and praise of Apollo,
Dead lies his carcass, but fame shall live to the worlds end.
Others upon the same.
WHom can I first accuse? whose fault account I the greatest?
Where kept the Muses, what countries haunted Apollo?
Where loytred bloody Mars? where lingered worthy Minerua?
What could three Sisters do more then nine in a combat?
Was force of no force? was fair entreatie refused?
Where is the Music, that sometimes moved Alecto?
That gaind Eurydice, that left Proserpina weeping;
Choose whether of the two you list, your skill to be nothing,
Or your most faithful servants unkindly rewarded.
And thou that braggest of skillful surgery knowledge,
That can of Simples discern the quality secret,
And give fit plasters, for wounds that seem to be curelesse,
Whereto auailes thy skill? that can not Sidney recover,
And could thou whilome prevail with destiny fatal:
For King Admetus against course of natural order,
And can do nothing to save so faithful a servant?
As for Mars well I wot, cold frost of Thracia kingdom,
Has killed all kindness, no ruth of him can be looked for:
And dainty Pallas disdained for-sooth to be present,
Envy perhaps: nay grief as I guess, was cause of her absence.
Only we poor wretches, whom gods and Muses abandon,
Lament thy timelesse decay with sorrowful outcries,
But yet if hap some Muse, would add new grace to my verses,
Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Denmark, Persia, Turkey,
India where Phoebus climes from the sea to the skie-ward,
India where Phoebus declines from the sky to the Sea-ward,
Tartary, Pole, Lettow, Muscouy, Bohemia, Norway,
All coasts where rising or falling Phoebus appears,
Should hear, and wonder to hear thy glory resounded:
Armenian Tigres enraged for theft of a youngling,
Princely Lions roaring, for want of prey to be starued,
Fierce Bears, and grunting wild Boares, upon Arcady mountains,
Should stand astonished, forgetting natural offspring,
Forgetting hunger, forgetting slaughter appointed.
As when Calliopes dear son, sweet harmony singing,
Unto the true consent of his Harpe-strings tuned in order,
Drew from their places wild beasts and trees by the music.
Swift-flowing Hebrus stayed all his streams in a wonder,
As if chill coldenes frorne had them down to the bottom,
But for I wot too well my slender skill to be nothing,
Here will I quite forswear both Verse and Muse in an anger,
Lest hap my rudeness disgrace thy glory by praising.
Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori.
To Time.
Eternal time, that wastest without waste,
That art, and art not, die, and live still:
Most slow of al, and yet of greatest haste,
Both ill, and good, and neither good, nor ill.
How can I justly praise thee, or dispraise?
Dark are thy nights, but bright and clear thy days.
Both free and scarce, thou give and take again,
Thy womb that all does breed, is Tomb to all:
What so by thee has life, by thee is slain,
From thee do all things rise, by thee they fall.
Constant, inconstant, moving, standing still,
Was, is, shall be, do thee both breed and kill.
I loose thee, while I seek to find thee out,
The farther off, the more I follow thee;
The faster hold, the greater cause of doubt,
Was, is, I know, but shall, I cannot see.
All things by thee are measur'de, thou by none,
All are in thee, thou in thy self alone.
A Meditation upon the frailty of this Life.
O Trifling toys that toss the brains,
While loathsome life does last!
O wished wealth, O sugared joys,
O life when death is past:
Who loathes exchange of loss with gain?
Yet loath we death as hell.
What woeful wight would wish his woe?
Yet wish we here to dwell.
O fancy frail that feeds on earth,
And stays on slippery joys:
O noble mind, O happy man,
That can contemn such toys.
Such toys as neither perfect are,
And can not long endure,
Our greatest skill, our sweetest joy,
Uncertain and unsure:
or life is short and learning long,
All pleasure mixed with woe;
^icknes and sleep steal time unseen,
And joys do come and go.
Thus learning is but learned by halfes,
And joy enjoyed no while,
that serves to show thee what thou want.
This helps thee to beguile.
But after death is perfect skill,
And joy without decay,
Whe^n sin is gone that blindes our eyes,
And steals our joys away:
No crowing cock shall raise us up,
To spend the day in vain,
No weary labor shall us drive
To go to bed again.
But for we feel not we want,
Nor know not what we have,
We love to keep the bodies life,
We loathe the Soul to save.
A Dialogue between the Soul and the Body. Soul.
^Yme, poor Soul, whom bound in sinful chains
This wretched body keeps against my will!
^dy Aye me poor Body, whom for all my pains,
This froward soul causlesse condemns still.
Causles? whenas thou striu'st to sin each day?

^ule Causles: whenas I strive thee to obey.

^ule Thou art the means, by which I fall to sin,

^dy Thou art the cause that set'st this means awork

^ule No part of thee that has not faulty bin:

^ule I show the poison that in thee does lurk.

^ule I shall be pure when so I part from thee:
So were I now, but that thou stainest me.

Sapphicks. Upon the Passion of Christ.
HAtred eternal, furious revenging,
Merciless raging, bloody persecuting,
Slanderous speeches, odious reuilings,
Causeless abhorring;
Impious scoffings by the very Abiects,
Dangerous threatening by the Priests anointed,
Death full of torment in a shameful order,
Christ did abide here.
He that in glory was above the Angels,
Changed his glory for an earthly Carcass,
Yielded his glory to a sinful outcast,
Glory refusing.
Me that in bondage many sins retained,
He for his goodness, for his only goodness,
Brought from hell torments to the joys of heaven,
Not to be numbered.
Dead in offenses, by his aid revived,
Quickened in spirit, by the grace he yields,
Sound then his praises, to the worlds amasement,
Thankfully singing.
ANOMOS

DIVERSE POEMS OF SUNDRY AUTHORS
A Hymn in praise of Music.
Praise, Pleasure, Profit, is that threefold b^
Which tiesme^s minds more fast the^ Guard
Each one some draws, al three none can w^
Of force conioyn'd, Conquest is hardly got.
Then Music may of hearts a Monarke be,
Wherein Praise, Pleasure, Profit, so agree.
Praiseworthy Music is, for God it prayseth,
And pleasant, for brute beasts therein delight:
Great profit from it slowes, for why it raises
The mind overwhelmed with rude passions might.
When against reason passions fond rebel,
Music does that confirm, and these expel.
If Music did not merit endless praise,
Would heavenly Spheres delight in silver round?
If joyous pleasure were not in sweet lays,
Would they in Court and Country so a^ound?
And profitable needs we must that call,
Which pleasure linkt with praise does bring to al
Heroicke minds with praises most incited,
Seek praise in Music, and therein excel:
God, man, beasts, birds, with Music are delighte
And pleasant it is, which pleases all so well.
No greater profit is then self content
And this with Music bring, and care
When Antique Poets Musicks praises tell,
They say it beasts did please, and stones did move:
To prove more dull then stones, then beasts more fell,
Those men, which pleasing Music did not Love.
They feigned, it Cities built, and States defended,
To show the profit great on it depended.
Sweet birds (poor men's Musicians) never slake
To sing sweet Musicks praises day and night:
The dying Swans in Music pleasure take,
To show, that it the dying can delight;
In sickness, health, peace, war, we do it need,
Which proves, sweet Musicks profit does exceed.
But I, by niggard praising, do disprayse
Prayse-worthy Music in my worthles Ryme:
Ne can the pleasing profit of sweet lays,
Any save learned Muses well define.
Yet all by these rude lines may clearly see,
Praise, Pleasure, Profit, in sweet Music be.
I. D.

Ten Sonnets, to Philomel.
SONNET I. Upon Loves entering by his Ears.
Often did I hear, our Eyes the passage were,
By which Love entered to avail our hearts;
Therefore I guarded them, and void of fear
Neglected the defense of other parts.
Love knowing this, the usual way forsook;
And seeking, found a by-way by mine Ear:
At which he entering, my Heart prisoner took,
And unto thee sweet Philomel did bear.
Yet let my heart, thy heart to pity move,
Whose pain is great, although small fault appear
First it lies bound in fettering chains of Love,
Then each day it is rackt with hope and fear.
And with loves flames it is evermore consumed,
Only, because to love thee it presumed.
SONNET. II.
O Why did Fame my Heart to Love betray,
By telling my Deares virtue and perfection?
Why did my Traitor Ears to it convey,
That Syren-song cause of my Hearts infection,
Had I been deaf, or Fame her gifts concealed,
Then had my Heart been free from hopeles Love:
Or were my state likewise by it revealed,
Well might it Philomel to pity move.
The^ should she kno how love does make me la^guish,
Distracting me twixt hope and dreadful fear:
Then should she kno my care, my plants, and anguish
All which for her dear sake I meekely bear.
Yea I could quietly deaths pains abide,
So that she knew that for her sake I did.
SONNET III. Of his own, and his Mistress sickness at one time.
Sickness entending my Love to betray,
Before I should sight of my Dear obtain:
Did his pale colors in my face display,
Lest that my Favor might her favor gain.
Yet not content herewith, like means it wrought,
My Philomels bright beauty to deface:
And Natures glory to disgrace it sought,
That by conceived Love it might displace.
But my firm Love could this assault well bear,
Which Virtue had not beauty for his ground:
And yet bright beams of beauty did appear,
Through sickness vail, which made my love abou^d
If sick (thought I) her beauty so excel,
How matchless would it be if she were well
SONNET IIII. Another of her Sickness, and Recovery.
PAle Death himself did Love my Philomel,
When he her Virtues and rare beutie saw:
Therefore he sickness sent, which should expel,
His Rival life, and my Decre to him draw.
But her bright beauty dazeled so his Eyes,
That his dart life did miss, though her it hitt:
Yet not therewith content, new means he tries,
To bring her unto Death, and make life flitt.
But Nature soon perceiving, that he meant
To spoil her only Phoenix, her chief pride:
Assembled all her force, and did prevent
The greatest mischief that could her betide.
So both our lives and loves Nature defended,
For had she did, my love and life had ended.
SONNET V. Allusion to Theseus voyage to Crete, against the Minotaure.
MY Love is sailed, against dislike to fight,
Which, like vild monster, threatens his decay
The ship is Hope, which by Desires great migh
Is swiftly borne toward the wished Bay:
The company which with my Love does fare,
(Though met in one) is a dissenting crew;
They are Joy, Grief, and never sleeping Care
And doubt, which never believes good news for tr^
Black fear the Flag is, which my ship does bear,
Which (Dear) take down, if my Love victor b^
And let white Comfort in his place appear,
When Love victoriously returns to me,
Lest I from rock Despair come tumbling down
And in a Sea of Tears be forced to drown.
SONNET. VI. Upon her looking secretly out of a window as he passed by.
ONce did my Philomel reflect on me
Her Crystal pointed Eyes as I passt by,
Thinking not to be seen, yet would me see;
But soon my hungry Eyes their food did spy.
^as, my Dear, could thou suppose, that face
Which needs not envy Phoebus cheifest pride,
Could secret be, although in secret place,
And that transpara^t glass such beams could hide?
^ut if I had been blind, yet Loves hot flame
Kindled in my poor heart by thy bright Eye,
Did plainly show when it so near thee came,
By more the usual heat, then cause was nie:
So though thou hidden were, my heart and eye
Did turn to thee by mutual Sympathy.
SONNET. VII.
WHen time nor place would let me often view
Natures chief Mirror, and my sole delight;
Her lively Picture in my, heart I drew,
That I might it behold both day and night,
But she, like Phillips Son, scorning that I
Should portray her wanting Apelles Art,
Commanded Love (who naught dare her deny
To burn the Picture which was in my Heart.
The more Love burned the more her picture shined
The more it shin'de, the more my heart did burnd
So what to hurt her picture was assigned,
To my Hearts ruin and decay did turn.
Love could not burn the Saint, it was divine,
And therefore fired my heart, the Saints poor shrine
SONNET. VIII.
WHen as the Sun eclipsed is, some say,
It thunder, lightning, rain, and wind portende^
And not unlike but such things happen may,
Since like effects my Sun eclipsed sends.
Witness my throat made hoars with thundering cry
And heart with loves hot flashing lightnings fire
Witness the showers which still fall from mine eye
And breast with sighs like stormy winds near riue^
Shine then once again, sweet Sun on me,
And with thy beams dissolve clouds of despair
Whereof these raging Meteors framed be,
In my poor heart by absence of my fair,
So shall thou prove thy Beams, thy heat, thy ligh^
To match the Sun in glory, grace, and might.
SONNET. IX. Upon sending her a Gold Ring, with this Posie Pure, and Endless.
IF you would know the Love which you I bear,
Compare it with the Ring, which your fair hand
Shall make more precious, when you shall it wear;
So my Loves Nature you shall understand
Is it of metal pure? so you shall prove
My Love, which never disloyal thought did stain,
Has it no end? so endless is my Love,
Unless you it destroy with your disdain.
Does it the purer wax the more it is tried?
So does my Love: yet herein they dissent,
That whereas Gold the more it is purified,
By waxing less, does show some part is spent,
My Love does wax more pure by you more trying,
And yet increases in the purifying.
SONNET X.
MY Cruel Dear having captiu'de my heart,
And bound it fast in Chains of restles Lou^
Requires it out of bondage to depart,
Yet is she sure from her it cannot move.
Draw back (said she) your hopeless love from m^
Your worth requires a more worthy place:
Unto your suit though I cannot agree,
Full many will it lovingly embrace.
It may be so (my Dear) but as the Sun
When it appears does make the stars to vanish:
So when your self into my thoughts do run,
All others quite out of my Heart you bannish.
The beams of your Perfections shine so bright,
That straightway they dispell all others light.
Melophilus

A Hymn in Praise of Neptune.
OF Neptunes Empire let us sing,
At whose command the waves obey:
To whom the Rivers tribute pay,
Down the high mountains sliding.
To whom the skaly Nation yields
Homage for the Cristall fields
Wherein they dwell;
And every Sea-god paies a Iem,
Yearly out of his watery Cell,
To deck great Neptunes Diadem.
The Trytons dancing in a ring,
Before his Palace gates, do make
The water with the Echoes quake,
Like the great Thunder sounding:
The Sea-Nymphes chaunt their Accents shrill,
And the Sirens taught to kill
With their sweet voice;
Make every ecchoing Rock reply,
Unto their gentle murmuring noise,
The praise of Neptunes Empery.
Th. Campton.
This Hymn was sung by Amphitryte Thametis, a^^ other Sea-Nimphes in
Grayes-Inne Mark, at t^^ Court. 1564.



Of his Mistresses Face.
ANd would you see my Mistres face?
It is a flowery garden-place:
Where knots of beauty have such grace,
That al is work, and no where space.
It is a sweet delicious Morn,
Where day is breeding, never borne:
It is a Meadow yet unshorn,
Which thousand flowers do adorn.
It is the Heavens bright reflexe,
Weak eyes to dazzle and to vex:
It is th'Idaea of her sex,
Envy of whom does world perplex.
It is a face of death that smiles,
Pleasing, though it kill the whiles:
Where death and love in pretty wiles,
Each other mutually beguiles.
It is fair Beauties freshest youth,
It is the feigned Eliziums truth:
The spring that wintred Hearts renu'th,
And this is that my Soul pursu'th.
Th. Campion.

Upon his Palenesse.
BLame not my Cheeks, though pale with love the^ be
The kindly heat into my heart is flowne:
To cheerish it that is dismayed by thee,
Who art so cruel and unsteadfast grown.
For Nature called for by distressed hearts,
Neglects, and quite forsakes the outward parts.
But they whose cheeks with careless blood are staind
Nurse not one spark of Love with their hearts:
And when they woo, they speak with passion fain^
For their fat love lies in their outward parts.
But in their breasts where love his court should hold
Poor Cupid sits, and blows his nails for cold.
Th. Campion.

Of Corinnaes singing.
WHen to her Lute Corinna sings,
Her voice reuiues the leaden strings,
And does in highest notes appear,
As any challenged Echo clear.
But when she does of mourning speak,
Even with her sighs the strings do break.
And as her Lute does live or die,
Led by her passions, so must I:
For when of pleasure she does sing,
My thoughts enjoy a sudden spring:
But if she do of sorrow speak,
Even from my heart the strings do break.
Th: Campion.

A Dialogue betwixt the Lover and his Lady.
LAdy, my flame still burning,
And my consuming anguish,
Does grow so great, that life I feel to languish,
Then let your Heart be moved,
To end my grief and yours, so long time proved.
And quench the heat that my chief part so fireth,
Yielding the fruit that faithful love requires.
Her Answer.
Sweet Lord, your flame still burning,
And your consuming anguish,
Cannot be more than mine, in which I languish,
No more your Heart is moved,
To end my grief and yours so long time proved.
But if I yield, and so your love decreaseth,
Then I my Lover loose, and your love cease.
Ignoto.

An Elegy.
O Faithles World, and thy most faithles part,
A Woman's Heart:
The true Shop of variety, where sittes,
Nothing but fittes,
And feauers of Desire, and pangs of Love,
Which toys remove.
Why was she borne to please, or I to trust
Words writ in dust?
Suffering her eyes to govern my Despair,
My pain for Air,
And fruit of time rewarded with untruth,
The food of youth.
Untrue she was, ytt I belieue'd her eyes,
Instructed spies,
Till I was taught; that Love was but a School
To breed a fool.
Or sought she more then Triumphs of denial,
To see a trial.
How far her Smiles commanded my weakness?
Yield and confess:
Excuse not now thy folly, nor her Nature;
Blush and endure
As Well thy shame; as passions that were vain,
And think thy gain,
To know that Love, lodged in a Woman's Breast
Is but a Ghest.
H. W.

Conceit begotten by the eyes,
Is quickly borne, and quickly dies:
For while it seeks our hearts to have,
Mean while there Reason makes his grave:
For many things the eyes approve,
Which yet the heart does seldom love.
For as the seeds in spring time sown,
Die in the ground ere they be grown,
Such is conceit, whose rooting fails,
As child that in the cradle quails,
Or else within the Mothers womb,
Has his beginning, and his tomb.
Affection follows Fortunes wheels;
And soon is shaken from her heels;
^or following beauty or estate,
Her liking still is turned to hate.
^or all affections have their change,
And fancy only loves to range.
Desire himself runs out of breath,
And getting, does but gain his death:
Desire, nor reason has, nor rest.
And blind does sildome choose the best,
Desire attained is not desire,
^ut as the finders of the fire.
As ships in ports desired are drowned,
As fruit once ripe, then falls to ground,
As flies that seek for flames, are brought
To cinders by the flames they sought:
So fond Desire when it attaines,
The life expires, the woe remains.
And yet some Poets feign would prove,
Affection to be perfect love,
And that Desire is of that kind,
No less a passion of the mind.
As if wild beasts and men did seek,
To like, to love, to choose alike.
W. R.

MADRIGAL.
FAustina has the fairer face,
And Phillida the fairer grace,
Both have mine eye enritched.
This sings full sweetly with her voice,
Her fingers make as sweet a noise,
Both have mine ear bewitched.
Aim! since Fates have so provided,
My heart (alas) must be divided.
To his Ladies Garden, being absent far from her.
GArden more then Eden blessed
Art thou, thus to have thy bowers,
Freed from Winter, and still dressed.
With her faces Heau'n-set flowers.
Happy too are these thy Allies,
Where her fair feet deigne to tred,
Which departing Earths low Valleys,
Shall the Milky way be led.
Thy Trees whose Arms he embraced,
and whose fruit her lids did kis,
^n whose virtuous mind well placed
^he rare Tree of knowledge is.
^appy are: So thy Birds be,
Whom she learnes to sing by Art,
Who in heavenly harmony
With the Angels bears a part.
^appy, blessed, and fortunate,
^owers, Allies Trees, and Burds,
^^t my most unhappy stare,
^^r surmounts all reach of words.
T. Sp.

Upon his Ladies Sickness of the Small Pockes.
CRuel and impartial Sickness,
Sword of that Arch-Monarke Death,
That subdues all strength by weakness,
Whom all Kings pay tribute breath.
Are not these thy steps I tracke,
An the pure snow of her face,
When thou did attempt to sack
Her lives fortress and it raze?
Th'Heauenly Honny thou did suck,
From her Rose Cheeks might suffize;
Why then did thou mar and pluck
Those dear flowers of rarest prize?
Mean thou thy Lord to present
With those rich spoils and adorn,
Leaving me them to lament,
And in Inkes black tears thus mourn?
No: I Will in my Bosom wear them,
And close lock them in my heart:
Thence, nor time, nor death, shall bear them
Till I from my self do part.
Th. Sp.

A Reporting Sonnet.
Her Face, her Tongue, her Wit, so fair, so sweet, so sharp,
First bent, then drew, now hitt, mine Eye, mine Ear, my Heart:
Mine Eye, mine Ear, my Heart, to like, to learn, to love,
Her face, her tongue, her wit, does lead, does teach, does move.
Her face, her tongue, her wit, with beams, with sound, with Art,
Does blind, does charm, does rule, mine Eye, mine Ear, my Heart:
Mine Eye, mine ear, my heart, with life, with hope, with skill,
Her face, her tongue, her wit, does feed, does feast, does fill.
O face, O tongue, O wit, with frowns, with checks, with smart,
Wring not, vex not, wound not, mine Eye, mine ear, my heart,
This Eye, this ear, this Heart, shall joy, shall bind, shall swear,
Your face, your tongue, your wit, to serve, to love, to fear.
SONNET.
ONly (sweet love) afforde me but thy heart,
Then close thine eyes within their iuory cover
That they to me no beam of light impart,
Although they shine on all thy other lovers.
As for thy lip of ruby, cheeks of rose,
Though I have kissed them often with sweet Content
^^^n content that sweet content to lose,
If thy sweet will will bar me, I assent.
Let me not touch thy hand, but through thy glove,
Nor let it be the pledge of kindness more;
Keep all thy beauties to thy self, sweet love,
I ask not such bold favors as before.
I beg but this, afforde me but thy heart,
^or then I know thou will the rest impart.
ODE.
ABsence, hear thou my Protestation,
Against thy strength,
Distance, and length;
Do what thou can for alteration.
For hearts of truest mettle,
Absence does join, and Time does settle.
Who loves a Mistress of such quality,
He soon has found
Affections ground
Beyond time, place, and all mortality.
To hearts that cannot vary,
Absence is present, Time does tarry.
My Senses want their outward motions,
Which now within
Reason does win,
Redoubled in her secret notions:
Like rich men that takes pleasure,
In hiding, more then handling Treasure.
By Absence, this good means I gain,
That I can catch her,
Where none can watch her,
In some close corner of my brain,
There I embrace and kiss her,
And so I both enjoy and miss her.
Love is the link, the knot, the band of unity,
And all that love, do love with their beloved to be:
Love only did decree,
To change his kind in me.
For though I loved with all the powers of my mind,
And though my restles thoughts, their rest in her did find:
Yet are my hopes declinde,
Since she is most unkind.
For since her beuties sun my fruitles hope did breed
By absence from that sun, I hoped to sterue that weed
Though absence did indeed
My hopes not sterue, but feed.
For when I shift my place, like to the stricken dear,
I cannot shift the shaft, which in my side I bear:
Ay me it rests there
The cause is not elsewhere.
So have I seen the sick to turn and turn again,
^s if that outward change, could ease his inward pain
But still alas in vain,
The fit does still remain.
Yet goodness is the spring from whence this ill does grow,
For goodness causde the love, which great respect did owe:
Respect true love did show,
True love thus wrought my woe.
Ignoto.

SONNET.
BEst pleased she is, when Love is most expressed,
And sometime says that love should be requite^
Yet is she grieved my love should now be righte^
When that my faith has proved what I protest.
Am I beloved whose heart is thus oppressed?
Or dear to her, and not in her delighted:
I live to see the Sun, yet still benighted,
By her despair is blam'de, and hope suppressed.
She still denies, yet still her heart consents,
She grants me all, but that which I desire;
She fuel sends, but bids me leave the fire,
She lets me die, and yet my death lamenteth.
O foolish Love, by reason of thy blindness,
I die for want of Love, yet killed with kindness.
SONNET.
WHen a weak Child is sick, and out of quiet,
And for his tenderness can not sustain
Physic of equal strength unto his pain,
Physicians to the Nurse prescribe a Diet.
I am sick, and in my sickness weak,
And through my weakness dead; if I but take
The pleasantest receipt that Art can make,
Or if I hear but my Physician speak.
^ah (fair God of Physic) it may be,
But Physic to my Nurse would me recover;
She whom I love with beauty nurseth me,
But with a bitter mixture kills her Lover.
I assure my self, I should not die,
he were purged of her cruelty.
SONNET.
WEre I as base as is the lowly plain,
And you (my Love,) as high as heaven above,
Yet should the thoughts of me your humble swain,
Ascend to Heaven, in honor of my Love.
Were I as hight as Heaven above the plain,
And you (my Love) as humble and as low
As are the deepest bottoms of the Main,
Wherso'ere you were, with you my Love should go
Were you the Earth (dear Love) and I the skies,
My love should shine on you like to the Sun,
And look upon you with ten thousand Eyes,
Till heaven wax't blind, and til the world were dun
Whereso'ere I am, below, or else above you,
Whereso'ere you are, my heart shall truly love you
I. S.

A MADRIGAL.
MY Love in her Attire does show her wit,
It does so well become her:
For every season she has dressings fit,
For Winter, Spring, and Summer.
No Beauty she does miss,
When all her Robes are on:
But Beauties self she is,
When all her Robes are gone.
A MADRIGAL.
WHen I to you complain,
Of all the woe and pain,
Which you make me endure without release:
You answer naught again,
But, Bear and hold your peace.
Deer I will bear, and hold my peace, if you,
Will hold your peace, and bear what I shall do.
SONNET.
THe Poets feign that when the world began,
Both sexes in one body did remain;
Till Jove (offended with this double man)
Causd Vulcan to divide him into twain.
In this division, he the heart did sever,
But cunningly he did indent the heart,
That if there were a reuniting ever,
Each part might know which was his counterpa^^
See then (dear love) th'Indenture of my heart,
And read the Cou'nants writ with holy fire:
See (if your heart be not the counterpart,
Of my true hearts indented chaste desire.)
And, if it be, so may it ever be,
Two hearts in one, twixt you my Love and me.
I. S.

An Inuectiue against Women.
ARe women fair? I wondrous fair to see to,
Are women sweet? Yea passing sweet they be to;
Most fair and sweet to them that inlie love them,
Chaste and discreet to all, save those that prove them.
^re women wise? Not wise, but they be witty,
^re women witty? Yea, the more the pity:
^hey are so witty, and in wit so wily,
that, be you never so wise, they will beguile ye.
^re women footes? Not fools, but fondlings many,
an women fond be faithful unto any?
^hen snow-white swans do turn to color sable,
^hen women fond will be both firm and stable.
^re women Saints? No Saints, nor yet no Devils,
^re women good? Not good, but needful evils.
Angel-like, that Devils I do not doubt them;
needful ills, that few can live without them.
^^e women proud? I passing proud, and praise them,
^^e women kind? I wondrous kind, and please them:
^^r so imperious, no man can endure them;
^^r so kinde-hearted, any may procure them.
Ignoto.

An Elegy in Trimeter Iambickes.
Unhappy Verse! the witness of my unhappy state,
Make thy self fluttring wings of thy fast flying thought
And fly forth unto my Love, wheresoever she be.
Whether lying restless in heavy bed, or else
Sitting so cheerelesse at the cheerful board, or else
Playing alone careless on her heavenly Virginalls.
If in Bed, tell her that mine eyes can take no rest:
If at Board, tell her that my mouth can taste no food:
If at her Virginalls, tell her I can hear no mirth.
Asked why, say waking Love suffers no sleep:
Say that raging Love does appall the weak stomak:
Say that lamenting Love marreth the musical.
Tell her, that her plesures were wont to lul me asleep
Tell her, that her beauty was wont to feed mine eyes:
Tell her, that her sweet tongue was wont to make me mirth
Now do I nightly waste, wanting my kindly rest:
Now do I daily starve, wanting my lively food:
Now do I always die, wanting my timely mirth.
And if I waste, who will bewail my heavy chance?
And if I starve, who will record my cursed end?
And if I die, who will say, this was Immerito?
Edmund Spencer.
SONNET
MIne eye with all the deadly sins is fraught,
1. First proud, since it presumed to look so hie:
a watchman being made, stood gazing by,
2. and idle, took no heed till I was caught:
And envious, bears envy that by thought
should in his absence be to her so nie:
to kill my heart, mine eye let in her eye,
4. and so consent gave to a murder wrought:
5. And covetous, it never would remove
from her fair hair, gold so does please his sight
6. unchaste, a bawd between my heart and love
7. a glutton eye, with tears drunk every night.
These sins procured have a Goddess ire:
Wherefore my heart is damnd in Loves sweet fire
H. C.

SONNET. To two most Honorable and Virtuous Ladies, sisters.
Ye Sister-Muses, do not ye repine,
That I two Sisters do with nine compare,
Since each of these is far more truly rare,
Then the whole Troop of all the heavenly nine.
But if ye ask me which is more divine,
I answer, Like to their twinne-eies they are,
Of which, each is more bright than brightest starr
Yet neither does more bright than other shine.
Sisters of spotless fame, of whom alone
Malicious tongues take pleasure to speak well,
How should I you commend, since either one
All things in heaven and earth so far excel?
The only praise I can you give, is this,
That One of you like to the Other is.
H. C.

Of Cynthia.
The Ancient Readers or Heavens Book,
Which with curious eye did look
Into Natures story;
All things under Cynthia took
To be transitory.
This the learned only knew,
But now all men find it true,
Cynthia is descended;
With bright beams, and heavenly hew,
And lesser stars attended.
Lands and Seas she rules below,
Where things change, and ebb, and flow,
Spring, wax old, and perish;
Only Time which all does mow,
Her alone does cherish.
Times young hours attend her still,
And her Eyes and Cheeks do fill,
With fresh youth and beauty:
All her lovers old do grow,
But their hearts, they do not so
In their Love and duty.
This Song was sung before her sacred Majesty at show on horseback, wherewith
the right Honorabl^ the Earl of Cumberland presented her Highness^ on May day
last. Finis.

