A FUNERAL SERMON PREACHED THE XXVI. DAY OF NOVEMBER IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD
M. D. LXXVI. IN THE PARISH CHVRCH OF CAERMERTHYN, BY THE REVERENDE FATHER in
God, Richard by the permission of God, Bishop of Saint Dauys, at the burial.

OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE WALTER EARL OF ESSEX AND EWE, EARL MARSHALL OF
IRELANDE, VISCOUNT HEREforde and Bourgcher, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourgcher
and Louein, of the most Noble order of the Garter Knight.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

Anno Domi. 1577.

HONI SOYT QVY MAL Y PENSE
blazon or coat of arms

To the right Honorable, my very good L. Robert Earl of Essex and Ewe,
Viscount of Hereforde, and Bourgchier, Lord ferrers of Chartley, Bourgchier
and Louayne, her Majesty's Ward. etc.
MY Lord, your absence lately from the Funeralles of my L. your Father, was
lamented by such in Wales as would gladly have beheld the lively Image of him
in you: and if the tenderness of your years (unmeet for so tedious and so
unseasonable traueyle) had not by necessity disappoynted their hope, then
should the lamentable speech of the grave and reverent Father, the Bishop of
S. Dauies (expressed with abundaunce of dolor and tears) have left in you a
deep impression of grief for the intolerable loss of so Honorable a parent:
But it may be judged that God has turned your absence to your more benefit.
Since, the importunacie of such as love and honor you, and who covet to have
your Fathers virtues discende with his inheritance, has obtained the
publishing of that learned Sermon: wherein your L. may at good leisure view in
the just report of his life and death the pattern and form of true Nobility.

The Heroical description that the Bishop makes of Nobility, comparing it to
a mountain from which four famous ryuers must issue, (the Mountain true
Religion, the rivers, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperaunce) is a rule
to you* first to follow your Father in truth of Religion, then to be as he was,
wise, just, valiant, and temperate. The natural and unforced courtesy and
affability that was in your Father, and that excellent mixture of disposition
and aptness, both for war and peace, does promise to the world a singular
perfection in you hereafter. For, as your Grandfather (who dyed in his young
years) did make show of much more Honor then was in the Noble Viscount his
Father: And this our Earl by famous actions did altogether eclips the virtuous
hope conceived of your Grandfather: so considering that God in nature
continues as it were the race by outward show of good parts in you, and that
you have more advantage of education, both by the place where you live, and by
the Honor and wisdom of your patrones then your Grandfather or father had,
we cannot but hope of a further degree of excellency in you to ouershine the
goodness both of your Father and Grandfather. Some people there be that can
hardly discern between honor and profit, that do over much think of the
disadvantage offered you by the Earl your Father, in diminishing some part of
his patrimony in his forrayne Services, and will wish you perhaps with a
contrary course to deserve more of your heir, and worse of the world: But
as I wish in you a liberal frugalitie under this rule and protestation, that
nothing can be profitable that is not honest: so to deserve well (as your
Father did) of your Sovereign and country in matters appertayning to her
Majesty's obedience, rather throw the helue after the hatchet, and leave your
ruynes to be repaired by your Prince, then any thing to degenerate from
Honorable liberality. And as in attempting great things, it is good to be
circumspect, and with judgment wisely to foresee the end before you begin:
so having entered into any Honorable attempt that may be justly grounded upon
reason, follow the same with such invincible constancy in all extremities as
your Father did, for so shall you justly deserve like testimony as her
Majesty gave to him in her gracious letters: namelye, that he was a rare
Jewel of her Realm, and an ornament of her Nobility

True Religion and wisdom (upon whom Justice depends) do proceed from
God by grace, and therefore by invocation, prayer and study to be obtained:
but the other virtues as Fortitude, temperaunce, courtesy, affability,
liberality and constancy, be peculiar to your house, discending by nature,
and graffed as it were in your principles, so that to degenerate into the
loathsome contraries of these, and in stead of habit of virtue, to disguyse
your self with vice, shall be harder to you and more impossible for the
contrariety of your nature, then to attain in good things to the perfection
of excellency. And to the end that you may know what you are by birth and
blood, and that you should not by ignorance or lack of knowledge of your
self, do any thing unworthy the Noble houses from whence you are descended: a
welwiller of yours has joined to this Sermon (amongs other Epitaphes
containing your Fathers due praises) his stately descent in well digested
Latin verses: not to puff you up with any swelling vaniteis, but to give you
a reason how you bear your Armor and Badges of Honor, and to remember you
what error you enter into, if you should blemish the virtues of your Noble
Ancestors, or to do any thing (as I said) unworthy your birth and calling.

Lastly, my L. have always before your eyes the fear of God, and the Counsel
of the Earl your Father at his death: namely, that you should ever be
mindful of the moment of time, assigned both to your Father and Grandfather,
the eldest having attained but to six and thirty years, to the end that
upon consideration of the short course of life that you in nature are to look
for, you might so employ your tender years in virtuous studies and exercises,
as you might in the prime of your youth become a man well accomplished to serve
her Majesty and your Country, as well in war as peace: whereunto he
commanded you to bend all your endeavors, and with those conditions heaped
his blessings upon you. I pray therefore that God will increase those
condicionall blessings, and the causes of them in you, to the end that her
Majesty may think of you hereafter as of a true servant and humble subject,
one of the pillars of her estate, her Majesty's kinsman by many alliances, and
the son of a most Noble Father.

Your L. at commandment E. W.

genealogical diagram

EPitaphium genealogicum in obitum illustrissimi Gualteri Comitis Essexiae and
Euiae and Comitis Mareschalli regni Hiberniae Vicecomitis Hereford, and
Bourgcher, Domini Ferrers de Chartley Bourgcher and Louein, and praenobilis
ordinis Garterij militis, qui obijt Dublinij 21. Sept. 1576. Aetatis suae 36.
Sepulti apud Maridunum 26. Nouembris.
SI quisquam claret veterum splendore parentum,
Aut famam meritus morum probitate perennem,
Profiteatur in hijs nomen Essexius heroes:
Qui, praeclara virum gestat monumenta tot, vnus,
Quot raro licuit multis gestamina far,
Qui intrepide ob patriam tot mill pericula passus
Quot raro poterint vlla Aulica corpora far.
Quod genus and proauos si no^ queat ordine cunctos,
Non tamen haec nullos praesens tibi pagina dicet.
1. Thomae.
1. Agnes.
GValtero D'eureux, Crophulli nupserat haeres
Qui gener atque socer, miles generosus vterque
Filia, proneptis, Thomae Ioannis neptis aneptis, 1. Iohe^s. Crophul abauus.

Quatuor is duxit natarum vnam Theobaldi, 1. Theobaldu^. D. V.
Io. D. V

Quem verdon dominu^, vt patrem, coluisset Auu^que 1. D. Verdon.

Johannes auus ille fuit, cui iungitur haeres
Gilberti comitis vlton, Dominique methaeae,
Altera Galfrido Geniuillo sort locata:
Gilbertus Duxit Bigodi natam Iesabellam 1. Marescalli.

Radulphi, gnati Comites a mart Rogeri, 1. Will.
Comes.

Et Bigodo gnatam marshal Penbrochius vnam 1. Strongbow. Comitis

Connubio iunxit, gener Arcipotentis Ogaei
Quem sibi Saturnum sensisset Hibernia, solemn
Anglia, mercurium Normannia, Gallia martem,
At Comes Arcipotens vxorem duxerat Euam
Gnatam Macmurghi. Lincestrae regis Hiberni
Hos illi Affines connubia Prima tulerunt.
blazon or coat of arms D'eureux: Crophul: verdon: lacius bis, longus and ensis:
Ebroicus: Bigodus: Marschal, gener Arcipotentis:
Macmurgh: Merburius: Connubia prima recludunt.
Hic iacet Henricus de ferraijs Comes, huius
Ecclesiae fundator Imago, nomine cuius
Anno milleno domini quater atque viceno
Tutburiaeque nono domus est fundata patrono.
D'eureux.
ASt quarto Gualtero Agnes Chartleia nupsit. 1. Will. Domi.

Filia magnanimi ferrers qui Sanguinis ortum
Retulit ad Comites ferrers, quos Derbia iactat
Derbius ille Comes ferrers gener est Peuerelli,
Filius atque nepos Comitum fuit ille Roberti
Henrici Comitis gnati, quos tutbura tellus,
Et mureualla Domus multos coluere per Annos.
HVius enim gnato Comiti, coniungitur Agnes
Inclita Ranulphi Cestri soror atque Coheres,
Cuius progenitor Ranulphus condidit arces
Ingentes, quarum penetrant fastigia nubes,
Bistonis harum vna est, Chartlea sed altera fertur.
Derbius atque Comes Guilielmus filius huius
Rogeri Quincy gener est, herede marita,
Rogerusque Comes Wintonius Alianoram
Duxit honorati gnatam galawaris Alani, Com. Winton.

Hic Baro praepollens gnatus de stirpc Sairi,
Et Margueritae, Comitis Leircestris amatae
Roberti gnatae, Cui Petronilla subire
Se dedit, Hinklaeae lux, here is, gloria, gentis.
Altera sic coniunx, tales coniunxit in vnum:
blazon or coat of arms Bis Peuerella vides Comitis post bina ferectis,
Meschinus, Boghanus, lupus, astant: ordine Quincy,
Coniunxit Blanchmains, Hinkle: Galawaris Alanus,
Huntingdon Scotum, cum Crowland atque Siuardo,
Cestria qui triplicat: Muchgros, Birmingamus, and Roch
Camber Hibernus, erant Domini gestamina ferrers.
blazon or coat of arms 1. Ceciliam.
POstea, Johannes D'eureux Bourgchere creata^,
Henricoru^ Essex Comitum, neptem atque sororem;
Quas autem genuit soboles, quos deinde nepotes
Posterius dicam, seriem ne seindere Cogar. 1. Ceciliae.

Bourgcherus ast abauus Guilielmus, duxerat ipse
Haeredem dominus domini, que nata Loueini est, 1. eusdem nominis.

Wilhelmus natum genuit sibi (...) altrum
Quem vice adorabant Comite^, Bourgchera colendu^
Quem Comitem Euensem cognouit Gallia fortem,
Iste ducis gener est Gloucestrae nomine Wodstock:
Cui socer est Bohunus, titulis ditionis onustus,
Na^ Co. Ha^ptonae, Comes est Herefordis and Essex,
Brechiniae dominus, breuiter, stabilire Britannos 1. Constabular.

Munus habet, Quartoque Henrico filia nupsit
Altera quo proprio and generum splendore beatus.
QVinetia^ proauu^ (...), na^ nominis huius
Milonis gnatam Comitisque Herefordis habebat 1. Consta.

Filius Humfridus Comiti gener and polimarchus,
Qui pater Humfridi Comitis probitate relucens,
Henricusque Comes Essex est filius huius,
Et pater alterius Humfridi Herefordis and Essex.
Sextus and Humfridus Duplex Comes Elysabetha^
Edwardi primi duxit de Semine natam:
Johannes Duplici gaudet ditione Parentis
Humfridus titulis, frater contentus Auorum,
Wilhelmi cernens Hamptonae fratris honoris,
Humfridus triplici Comitum splendore Beatus
Filius, quem retuli socerum Regisque Ducisque:
Dum pergo Antrorsum, quaeda^ quae digna relat
(Transiliu^ viuat ergo gradum) reuocabo Parumpe Vicecomitem.

Wilhelmum Bourgcher, cuius fit mentio supra
Progenies numerosa beauit coniugis Annae, Do. Fitzwaren.

Est qua prognati sunt Henricus Guilielmus Arch. Cant.
Do. ^ernes.

Thomas Johannes sic and Alianora Ducissa
Omnes illustres and honoribus Amplificati
Henricus Comes est, natam duxitque Richardi 1. Cantabrigiae.

Vrbis Grantanae Comitis, genuitque puellum
Qui postquam creuit, togam sumpsitque virilem,
Woduili gener est, Quarti Affinisque Edouardi
Et pater Henrici, Comitem quem predicat Essex
Coeciliaeque parens quam supra Diximus esse
Sponsum Iohannis D'eureux, dominique ferertis*
Quorum est Gualterus quo gens herefordia Iacta
Illi coniugio fuit Associata Maria,
Thomae and Ceciliae Graiorum filia Dorcet
Atque ab eis miles Prestans virtute Richardus
Cui Thori consors Dorotheia gnata Georgi,
Quem studiosa canum colit vrbs venatica dicta,
Illis Gualterus satus est Iunonia proles,
Aureolus Partus matris, Patriae decus ingens,
Quo non exultat moderante Herefordia sola, 1. Essex.

Aut trinobantum, titulo Probitatis honorem
Plebs referens: strenuum validu^ue Britannia sola
Sensit, in aduersos Boreales, dum been gessit:
Tota sed heroem cognouit mart feroci 1. Tierowen.

Eugeniae tellus Hibernica bella probantem.
Regia cum proprijs expendens, Bella per Annos.
Dura gerit binos, and multa pericula te tans,
Vltoniae fines vultu dextraque quieti
Perficit, hinc Comitis donatur nomine belli:
Nec tamen is potuit gladio sinire labores:
Mors nemini parcens Dublinia funera fletu
Trans mare transuexit, maridunica sydera volue^s, 1. 36. Annis.

Clotho colum tenuit post septem lustra per Annu^,
Quinque dies Lachesis post haec sua fila trahebat,
Terque dies septem septeno mense, videns heu
Atropos, eximij fulgentia lumina clausit:
Quatuor ast pueris illustria stamina spondent.
In tribus regnis titulos gestabat honoris,
Nam comitem Euensem cognouit Gallia fortem.
Aureus heroem demonstrat circulus Essex.
Ob bello vires Comes est is martis Hibernus.
Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem,
(Armipotens Gualtere) dedit probitasque laborem
Perpetuamque labor vitam, sic vita salutem.
blazon or coat of armsBourgcherus: Louein: VVodstock: Bohuni tria: Meilo,
Newmarch: Ludgarshul: Saius: tunc magnaque villa:
Bruz iterans milona, noui mercatus and arma:
Bina Bruer retulit, rivers, osbern: duo Marshal,
Strongbow, Marmurghum: subsunt Badlesmerus vduil.
Finis.
R. B.

(...)
Latin.
NAtus in excelsis Mariduni moenibus vtsum
Moenia sic capiunt me Maridune tua.
Nempe meum corpus, capis o Maridune benigna
Quod Mars nonfregitmors violauit atrox.
Qui mentem in corpus fudit rex summus olympi
Is mentem tulit in coerula templa poli.
H. B.

(...).
(...).
1. In mortem Comitis Essexiae sepulti apud Maridunum.
QVod flumen lachrimis satis est, quo funera fletu
Faxit, quo fremitu terra Britanna gemat:
Quod cessit fatis heroes Essexius, heroes
Altitonans in quem fuderat omne decus?
Nobilis in primis animoque and corpore clarus,
Terribilis bello, suauis amicitia.
Militibus largus, nec munificentior alter
Fidum habuit charumque hostis ad arma vocans
O quam flebiliter mortem plorauit Ie^rne:
Fata viri Cambri, fata putant patriae.
Cum nascebatur Maridunus gestijt, at nunc
Heu funus, moestos cogit inire modos.
H. Br.

ECce sub hoc tumulo situs est celeberrimus Heroes
Qui cecidit, patrij spesque decusque soli:
Fama, ingens: annis iuuenis: fortissimus, armis:
Nobilitate potens: relligione pius
Terra Britanna parens, and testis Hibernia lethi,
Tristia fata gemunt: fortia facta canunt.
Facta togae, belliue magis, praestantia mirer?
Optima, pace domi: maxima, Mart foris
Mors fera corpus habet: Coelo, Comes inclite, viuis:
Vita, dicata deo: mors, noua vita, data est.
I. Re.

LOeta hunc Caermerdun peperit nunc moesta sepulchro
Condit, and a tumulo tristia signa manent.
Heroice in terris vixit, nunc vita perennis:
Discite sic proceres viuere, sicque mori.
Lo. Guin.

TEr comes, ac comitis vice bis, ter stemma Baronis,
Bis miles, splendour, vrbis and orbis erat.
R. Br.

HIc nomen liberis, Decus Anglis, ossa Britannis
Et mentem superis, heu gemitusque suis.
R. R.

SIt modus in lachrimis, finemque appone dolori
Tu triplici triplex insula cincta mari.
Incusare deum, fixumque reprendere fatum
Desine, cum videas numina posse mori.
Io. Wall.

MArcello statuam Siculi festumque dedere,
Non huic cum statua nos tria festa demus.
Denique vos Angli, vos Cambri, vos and Hiberni
Tristia tam clari, funera flete viri.
R. M.

SOl nouus exortus Wallis, sua lumina passim
fudit, at ecclipsin induxit hibernica luna.
R. Wr.

CAmbria me prolem luget, dolet Anglia lumen,
Gallia me procerem, me deflet Hibernia martem.
Idem.

GVisced Ie^rthon y dei, tromtrist yur colled y Cymbri:
Oir i marwolaeth troi lloger oll ir aith.
R. Br.

Y Blanet bell o wenwyn,
a barodh gas eb-rwydh gwyn,
Bwrw yma r. will. briw mawr oedh,
briw in henwaed brenhinoedh:
Dan i gras dwin or Jesus,
un Iarih oedh in euro lhu:
O bv ymric rhod lawnglod lys,
irr lhv n hen Iarlh on hynys:
Och, na bv which wyneb wr,
Iarlh Essex, ir lhv oesswr:
Iarlh Gualther lhin brenhinoedh,
Iarlh, a charw, lhu uwch Icirlh oedh:
Iarlh cariad eurlhew keraint,
Essex ac ew bro braint:
Earlh Marschial grwndwal y gras,
ar y Werthon er vrdhas:
Vicont a phen phrwyth Henphorth,
rhad uer a Bourgscher hid north:
Phres Arglwidh Pherrers eurglain,
o Schartle, kv iawnlhe kain:
Ior lew a maint charlemaign,
lewfaeth Bourgscher a Lofaen:
A Marchoc a grym mewchiwn,
or gardas aur, gwr dwys iawn:
A mab Sir Richard mwy oedh,
D'ewreux, dros tir a Dyfroedh:
Un a aned in vniawn,
o henwaed York, hynodiawn:
Mae Lloegr ai rruwl dan nuwl nos,
ae Dvgiaid owaed agos:
Marw un oi Ieirll mawr way n hwy,
marqies waedd, merkiais adwy:
Mae am Iarll aedd llawnfaedd llu,
Deu fab oi gorf i dyfy:
Ior gwiw gwyn aer gogoned,
un Iarll kryf ymlaen Ieirll kred:
Robart Bar Awchwart Brochwel
Iarll a mab Iarlh am y Bell:
A Guallter dull at aur da,
Hector Ieuank o Troia:
Mac dwy Arglwiddes Iessin,
ar ddwys lwk o vrddas lin:
Penelope gruddie gras,
Purwycheidd maur parch addas:
A Dorothe wyneb dirion,
lliwgar himp drich lloegr yw hon:
Bar draw amgylch bv yr drom gad,
Bywyd tossed and byw i tad:
Bv i Georg Dewreux vrddassol,
Briw a vich a brawyni ol:
Bv ar: blaidborav blin,
Brawd Iarll o briod eurwin:
Bwriad gwanar dayarol,
bed a wnawn bidd yni ol:
Bethyw gwladtlawd heb Swaden,
heb pont, heb ganllaw, heb pen:
Pethllesc hawdd i goresgyn,
O Syrr duw, ore saer din:
Lle roedd diedd llariaidd o des,
i gannv kymru gynnes:
Nos rrew aeth ynessa i rrain,
nos brad i ynys Brudain:
Llef aroes val llif yr ia,
llvndain ail trvain troia:
Llef diluw, llef i deulu,
llef bhlin in ghaer merddun fu:
Newl du a droes ar lluoedd,
newl ar lled in ol Iarll oedd:
O gau pethpen llveddwyr,
glan walch govad galonne i wyr:
Holl Franc, ai gwir fyfyr fodd,
ai hafnau oll ai hofnodd:
Yroedd i ofn wlad oer ddyfnwyllt,
droy galon Ywerddon wyllt:
Iarlh ai law oedd ganllaw gwyr,
ymoliant un or milwyr:
Llaw Kymry n blaeno lluoedd,
a llaw a grim holl lloegr oedd:
Da ir ynys wedi r vnawr,
ai lwk wedi, dwyn i lawr:
Fwrw yngod heb verw angall,
Fur ar lled o mor ir llall:
Am i dduw gwyn mor syn saeth,
Ddwyn yr Iarlh ddawn ore vr llaeth:
Braw sydd in Pen blywyd lles,
Bron hynod in Brenhines:
I fraich Arthur dew furoedd,
Ai nerth gida^r Coron oedd:
Duw ai roes grym ennoes gwraidd,
y Dewraf Iarll awduriaidd:
Duw wyn ai rad ym rodd,
Dwissoc ai dewissodd:
Ni ddwis duw ddewisswr
Y faith in Iarll fyth in vvr.
Terinin. H. Llyn.

Cambrie maintenant son trescher nourrison
L'armoye, l'Angliterre sa lumiere perdue,
La France de despit creue de son fleuron,
Irlande de son Mars, O grand desconuenue.
N. P.

Here follows the Funeral Sermon, made by the Reverend Father in God, the
Bishop of S. Dauys, at the Buryall of the right Honorable the Earl of
Essex. etc.
Audiui vocem de coelo dicentem. etc.
I heard a voice from heaven, saying, write: Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord, forthwith: even so says the spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. Apoc. 14. chap. verse. 13.
Dearly beloved in our Savior Christ, this I Ecclesi. 3. 1.
find written in the Book of the Preacher. Omnia tempus habent. etc. To all
things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven: a time to be borne, and a time to die: a time to plant, and a time to
pluck up that which is planted: and so forth of other kind of times, as in
the third chapter of the same Book is further set out. By reason of this
variety, alteration and change of times variable, diverse and sundry be the
affairs, and business of the children of men for their time upon earth. By
the law of creation, redemption, and confirmation, we are bound to do and
perform all our affairs and business, to the praise and glory of God, and
therefore Paul the Apostle says: Whether you 1. Cor. 10. 31
eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God. But such
is the blindness and corruption of our nature, that we of our selves are
never able to satisfy our bounden required duty. Herein God therefore of his
great mercy has in the holy Scripture provided Lanternes to our feet, and
light Psalm. 119. 105.
to our steps, which if we attend unto, shall deliver us from ignorance,
and guide us in the right way. So that the Scripture is as it were a
Storehouse, appointed for us to repair unto, and from thence to fetch out
counsel, instruction and direction, that in all our doings God may be
glorified, and we our selves in God edified. I therefore considering the
business we have now in hand, and the cause of our assemblye at this time,
that is, the burial of this Noble man, have repaired to the Scripture, and
from thence have chosen out the piece of Scripture I have read unto you, out of
the xiiij. chapter of the Apocalips. In the which after we have weyed, opened,
and considered it, we shall find cause to extol and magnify the holy name of
the Lord, and shall also for our parts receive sundry christian lessons, and
diverse godly instructions.

First, we are to call to remembrance some part of the Argument of this Book
of the Apocalips, and some matters therein Revel. 1. 1.
contained, whereupon this our text does depend: part of the Argument of this
Book is a declaration, and a foreknowledge opened by our Savior Jesus Christ,
in a vision to s. John the Apostle and Evangelist, of the variable state of the
kingdom of Christ in this world, the prosperity and cruelty of the kingdom
of Antichrist, the success and entertainment of the Gospel of Christ, the
persecutions which the Professors of the same should sustain of Antichrist
and his ministers. And amongst other Revelations, in the xiij. Chapter mention
is made of a horrible Beast, that s. John sees rise out of the bottom of the
Sea, having seven heads and ten horns, to the which it was given to make
war against the Saints, and prevail against them. After that he sees an
other Beast coming out of the earth, having two horns like to the Lammes, but
spoke like the Dragon, and had power to do all things that the first Beast
could do. By the former Beast is understood the Empire of Rome, which
unreasonably and beastly persecuted the Christians in the primitive Church.
Daniell the Dan. 7. 23.
Prophet in the vij. Chapter does term the Empire a Beast. And s. Jerome
expounding that place of Daniell, says: by the Beast he means the Empire of
Rome: by the second Beast is understood the Popedom in cruelty and shedding
of blood, nothing inferior to the former Beast, as Adrian Bishop of Rome
testified, saying. Nos succedimus Romulo in effutione sanguinis: Illiricus
inter Test. veritet. page 387.
and non Petro in predicatione verbi. We, says he, succeed Romulus in
shedding of blood: and not Peter in preaching of the word. The instruments of
the cruel persecution of Christians, do appear unto s. John in the form and
figure of monstrous noisome beasts, partly because the Saints of God shall
have at their hands, no more pity, compassion, or civil order showed, then
if they fell to ye danger of Leopards, Lions, Woolfes, or Bears* Malefactors
and transgressors of laws, whatsoever their offense is, though it were
treason, shall have law observed, shall hold up their hand, and speak for
themselves, and shall find some orderly dealing: but the Professors of Gods
word under those cruel beasts, shall be tormented, butchered, torn, and
slain without law, mercy, compassion, or any humanity.

The histories of the old time, and the experience of these our days, are
foorthcomming to bear witness of this truth. Now least the Saints for fear
of these horrible beasts should forsake the profession of the Gospel, and
take upon them the mark of the Beast in their forheades, and so enter to doubt
that if they should lose this life, there were no reward foorthcomming for
constant Martyrdom, nor no other life but this to be looked for. Amongst other
matters of consolation revealed to s. John, he is here by a voice from heaven
commanded to write: Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, and so Reave.
14. 1^
forth. In these words the Saints of God may find a sufficient consolacion,
and cause of good courage to enter the combat with the cruel beasts, being
hereby assured that there is a reward ordained of God for his Saints in
Heaven, and that there remains a life of everlasting bliss, after the time
of this troublesome world. And therefore the less cause to fear the
fierceness of the beasts, whose power reaches no further then this temporal
transitory life. Our text we have in hand, we will divide into three parts:
The first, is of the assurance and authority of the doctrine herein
comprehended. The second, the doctrine it self that s. John is commanded to
write. The third, is a declaration of the same by circumstances, of these
parts, or so many of these as convenient time will serve, we will by the help
of God speak and deal with. But first let us pray. etc.

Here the Prayer was made
Audiui vocem de coelo dicentem. etc.
I heard a voice from Heaven, saying: write. etc.
HEre S. John seems to allude to the manner commonly received amongst all
people, which is, to commit to writing such knowledge of profitable and
necessary matters as are found out to be certain, undoubted and sure, and so
to transmit the same to the posterity. The credit and authority of matters
found out and committed to writing, depend much upon the first authors, as
the authority of the Laws of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians Plutarch. in
Laconicis.
depended upon the credit of Solon, and Lycurgus the authors of the same. The
author of this doctrine that s. John is commanded to write, is God himself,
for he says, I heard a voice from heaven, and further joins thereto, even so
says the spirit. This is therefore the voice of the son of God our Lord
Jesus Christ, for it is his voice that s. John in the beginning Revel. 1. 8.
of the Reuelacion heard, as the voice of a trumpet, saying: I am a and o, the
first and the last, that thou see write in a book, and send to the seven
churches Revel. 1. 12.
in Asia. It is he that s. John saw sitting, between the seven golden
Candlestickes like to the son of man. Christ while as yet he was conversant
John 16. 13.
with his disciples, promised to do all things, to teach and to speak in the
Church by the spirit, and here now the spirit teaches and confirms this
doctrine, for in the text follows, even so says the spirit. Thus we have
certainty and assurance, that the words which are here mentioned, be the
words of Jesus Christ, and that this is a celestial oracle which is lawful
for no man to doubt of. Christ from heaven does minister the words. S. John
the Apostle and Evangelist at the commandment of Christ does write the same,
and so transmitteth them to us and to the posterity for ever. If Charters or
letters written by the Chauncelours or Secretaries of Kings and Princes carry
with them great credit: how much more justly does this celestial Charter,
dictated by the son of God, and written by the Disciple beloved of Christ
John the Apostle and Evangelist, deserve credit and authority.

In the time of Papistrie and blindness, men reposed great affiaunce and trust
in writings and pardons that came from Rome, wherein they imagined they
received forgiveness of sins, Apoena, and a culpa, and therefore used at the
time of death to take order that all such pardons should be cast into the
grave with the corpse. Such writings be commonly called Bulls of Rome, they
well deserved so to be called, for Bulla in the latintonge signifies a bubble,
or foam that rises on the water wherein is no substance, but though it swell
and make a show of some thing, yet in deed it is void and empty, so that
with the touch of a straw or the least blast of wind, it breaks, vanishes
away, and is become nothing. Such assuredly were all these deceytfull pardons,
which if time did serve, I could easily by authority of gods word declare
and prove. But now blessed is our time, if we can consider it, the time of
light and knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, wherein men are taught to repose
their affiaunce and trust, not in the Bulls that come from Rome, but in this
autenticall Charter that came from Heaven, not void and empty as the popish
Bulls, but full fraughted and replenished with everlasting treasures and
eternal consolacion and comfort. The Romish deceitful ware could not begotten
without money, but this heavenly Jewel is offered freely without recompense or
payment.

Come says Esaias the Prophet in the.lv. chap. All you Esaias. 55. 1.
that thirst to the waters, and you that have no silver, come buy, and eat,
come I say, buy wine and milk without silver and without money: thus much for
the first part, concerning the certayntie and assurance of the doctrine
contained in the second part, which is this: Blessed are the dead which dye
in the Lord.

Here we have three matters to consider of: first, what is blessedness? or
what is it to be blessed? the second, what admonition we may gather out of
these words? thirdly, who dye in the Lord? for the first. The whole world
(which as s. John says, lies in 1. John. 5. 19.
wickedness) seeks to be made blessed by worldly goods, riches and
possessions, as the infinite traueyle of men by sea and by land by perilles and
dangers, the oppression, extorcion, theft, contentions in law, the insatiable
covetousness, and ambition that reigns in the world, does testify and
manifestly prove. But all these are frustrated and deceived of their purpose,
for we find by experience that true which saint Paul says: Nihil intulimus.
etc. we brought nothing into 1. Tim. 6. 7.
the world, neither shall we carry any thing out. We find also daily performed in
effect before our eyes, in the weithy and great rich men of this world, that
which Christ in the twelfth of Luke reports to have been Luke. 12. 17.
said to the man that rejoiced and solaced himself in the exceeding abundance
and increase of corn that had happened unto him one year, that is, O fool
this night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee, and then whose shall
those things be that thou have provided. The children of Israel in ye wilderness
were fed with Manna, they were commanded daily to gather it in the field by
measure, every man according to his eating, and whatsoever was reserved till
morning, contrary to Exodus 16. 20*
Moses commandment stancke, and became full of worms: we are the children of
Israel, this world is the wilderness, Manna is the riches and goods of this
world, whatsoever thereof is gathered and horeded up contrary to gods
commandment, more then will serve every man's turn to live in his degree and
calling, stincketh before God, and breeds a worm of disquietnesse of
conscience, whereby a man shall hardly dispose himself to dye in the Lord, and
so to be blessed. And therefore says Ecclesiasticus. O death, how bitter
Eccle. 41. 1.
is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his possessions?
Notable is the sentence and conclusion of Solomon concerning this matter. After
he Ecclesi. 2.
had gathered to him silver and gold, and the chief treasures of Kings and
provinces, and had furnished himself withal kind of worldly pleasures, so
that he exceeded all that ever was before him, he concludes, saying: And I
looked on all the works mine hand had wrought, and behold, all is vanity
and vexacion of the spirit, and there is no profit under the sun: we see now
that earthly and bodily matters be they never so precious, can not make a man
blessed in deed. It must therefore consist in Heavenly and spiritual matters.
It can then be nothing else, but the joy of the life to come in the kingdom of
Heaven, in the which we shall see God as he is, and shall have the full and
Revel. 21. 3* and 22. 4.
perfect fruition of his blessed presence, and live in him with all the Saints
forever, and shall possess joys that cannot be explicated with mortal
tongues, as it is written: the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither
1. Cor. 2. 9.
has ascended into the heart of man, that which God has prepared for them
that love him. This celestial joy the children of God do taste of in this
world, in that they apprehend by faith remission of sins, and quietness of
conscience in the blood and passion of Christ. Howbeit this celestial joy in
this world, is but expert in part till the soul be delivered out of the
reach of flesh and blood. I have determined to speak of diverse matters
within the compass of this sermon, and some of them such, that I would be sorry
for lack of time to be driven to cut them of, and therefore of this matter
here I make an end. I will now return to the text again.

Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord. Out of these words we may justly
reason, that some dye but not in the Lord, and that like as they that dye in
the Lord, are blessed, as inheritours of everlasting life: so are they that dye
not in the Lordcursed, as heirs of everlasting damnation. Hereby are we
admonished that it is the part of a good Christian in his life time, to take
thought and care, and to provide by the assistaunce of Gods grace, that he may
dye in the Lord, and that it is a desperate part to be careless in what state
the hour of death shall take a man in. The manner of wise men in this world,
when they have any serious and earnest affairs to perform, is by some
exercise aforehaude to make themselves expert and ready against the time they
come to earnest doings, as S. Paul noted. Every man that proves masteries
abstayneth 1. Cor. 9. 25.
from all things, and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown. How much
more ought a true Christian with meditacion and exercise aforehande, make
himself expert and ready against the time he shall take this earnest voyage in
hand, which is, the way of all flesh to obtain an incorruptible crown, and
to be made blessed for ever?

To this providence, premeditacion and care, Christ our savior does move, and
stir us by the storye of the wicked steward, which his Lord called to a
reconing Luke. 16. 1.
and yet in one point commended, for that he was provident and careful how to
live after he should be removed out of his office. In this Story, applied to
a spiritual sense, Christ makes us all stewards, and that at time convenient
we shall be called to a reconing, and shall be sure to hear this voice Read
rationem villicationis tuae, render an account of thy Stewardship. Seeing then
that our Savior Christ used this Story, and the holy Ghost provided the same
to be left in writing, to the end to admonish and to provoke us to take care,
and to learn aforehande to dye in the Lord, that we may live in the world to
come, it is a Story worthy to be noted: we will therefore tarry the longer
upon it, and consider three points concerning the same. First, who be they that
are to make a reconing: then how many kinds of reconing is to be made: and last
of all what officers or messengers has God ordained to call men to this
reconing. For the first, all manner and condition of men being the workmanship
of gods hands endued with reasonable soul and enriched with his gifts and
blessings, are to render an account: for every man in some respect is a
steward of Gods riches, and a bailey of Gods husbandry, and therefore have more
or less to answer for: some five Talentes: some two Talentes: and some Mat.
25. 15.
one Talent.

And therefore s. Paul says, Omnes nos manifestare 2. Cor. 5. 10.
oportet ante tribunal Christi. etc. Al we must appear before the tribunal
seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to his dooinges:
notwithstanding there is diversity of the manners and kinds of reconings that
are to be made. One kind is common to all men, for the end of all men's, being
for the time in the world, is to honor God by observation of his laws and
commandments, and therefore all in a generality are to answer concerning
their obedience to Gods law and his holy Word, concerning their faith in the
son of God, and what life they have led in this world. All shall hear that
which Christ speaks of. Come you blessed of my father, possess the king-dome
Mat. 25. 34.
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. I was a hungered and you
gave me to eat, I was a thyrst and you gave me to drink, and so forth of
the other works of charity there mentioned. Or else being set on the left
hand, they shall here, Depart from me you cursed to everlasting fire which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. I was a hungered and you gave me no
meat: I was a thirst and you gave me no drink, and so forth of the reast
there rehearsed. An other kind of reconing is peculiare and proper to such as
God has called to be Rulers, Governors and officers in the common wealth, as
Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Bishops, Judges, Justices, and such like officers.

Here is a place offered to speak of the distinct and several reconings that
every of these and the like in their degrees shall make, but that can not be
performed in such time as is meet for me to occupy now in this audience. I
will only note some part of the reconing that Rulers, Magistrates, Justices
and officers shall make, which Solomon in the sixth chapter of the book of
Wisdom sets out, thus much in effect. Wisd. 6. 2.
First, he puts them in remembrance of a matter commonly forgotten amongst
great men, that is, that the rule is given them of God, and that their
authority is from the most high. Whereupon follows that they should apply
their authority to set out his glory and honor, who placed them in so high a
ro^ome, and who also will try their works and search out their purposes.
Secondly, he accuses the^ that where they were put in trust, and made officers
in the commonwealth, they have not judged rightly, meaning between party and
party, but dealt parcially and corruptly, against law and conscience: and
tells further that in their offices and high callings, they walked not after
the will of God, according to the trust reposed in them. Lastly, he admonishes
them that it will go hard with them in the time of reconing, saying: that a
hard judgment shall they have that bear rule, and the mighty shall be
mightily punished.

Here we may see what woeful case they be in that never think of any reconing
to be made how they behaved themselves in their authority. And what shall
become of them that in their doings will never consider what the will of God
is? but contrary unreasonably walk after the pleasures and riches of this
world, apply all their power to further and continue the kingdom of
Antichrist, defend papisterie, supersticion and Idolatry, pilgrimages to
Wells and blind Chappelles, procure the wardens of churches in time of
visitacion to perjury, to conceal images, Mat. 23. 13.
roode loftes and aulters. This is lamentable, that Gods chosen officers in
this blessed time of light and knowledge of the gospel of Christ, will neither
enter themselves to the kingdom of Heaven, nor suffer the^ that would, for as
the ruler of the city is, so be the inhabitance of the same. Here would I wish
that the Justices of peace with us in Wales should receive admonishion and
learning, although I speak generally of them, yet I know that some of them
walk uprightly, and more after the will of God, then others do. They have to
consider that they by the disposition of God are men chosen, and pycked out
from among their brethren, for that they are thought and taken to be of courage
and fortitude, to minister justice rightly without respect of person, men
having the fear of God before their eyes, true dealing men, and such as
abhor covetousness. Solomon speaks of them amongst Wisd. 6. 4.
others, that God will try their works, and search out their devises, what
shall be their answer therefore in the time of reconing. For then shall
appear, and cannot be hyd, that commonly all that they did in their office,
was in respect of persons, to pleasure the great man least he should find a
hole in their coats. Then shall their acts in their office testify that they
were void of all religion and fear of God, so far beside conscience and
equity, as if they believed there were neither God to reward well doings, nor
Devil to execute punishment for evil deeds. Then shall appear, that when a
cause was brought Amos. 6. 12.
before them, they have justified the wicked, and condemned the just, and so
turned judgment to wormwood, as Amos the Prophet speaks. Then shall appear
that they have altogether applied their authority and office to pyll and poll
the country, and to beggar their poor neighbors to perform that which Esaias
the Prophet says: Rapina pauperu^ in domibus vestris, Esaias. 3. 14.
you dress your houses with the goods of the poor. Then shall appear that
whereas by reason of their offices they should have been Patres patrie, Fathers
of the country, they became spoylers of the country. And where the part of
fathers is to provide for their children, they contrarywyse against order of
nature, forced the children, that is, the country, to provide for them and
their houses. How think you what is it to commit authority to such men? is
it any better then to commit a sword to a mad man's hand. Would to God the
manners and conditions of all Justices of the peace, and Shyrifs in Wales, were
so well known to her Majesty and her Highness Counsel, as they be in the
country amongst their neighbors, that both good and badde, might receive
their deserved praise, reward and commendacion. And though perhaps they may
escape this my wish, yet shall they not escape the judgment sent of God, but
shall be sure there to make their account in manner as I have declared. The third
point concerning this reconing is to understande what officers or messengers
God has ordained to sommon, call, and bring men to a reconing. We find many
and diverse officers appointed of God for that purpose, the preaching of Gods
law is one, Per legem enim agnitio peccati, by the law, is the knowledge Romans
3. 20.
of sin. This messenger fetched king David out of the den of security, and
ignorance of his estate 2. Sam. 12. 1.
betwixt him and God, after he had committed adultery, with Vrias wife, and
had slain Vrias with the of the children of Ammon. Nathan the Prophet doing
this message, tells the king a pitious story of a rich man that had many
sheep of his own, and yet to cheer a guest that was come to him, fetched
away a poor man's sheep that had no more in the world but that: the king
hearing of that wicked unconscionable dealing, gives sentence of death against
that rich man. Nathan replyeth that he himself was that rich man, which
against law, equity or honesty, had killed Vrias and fetched away his wife.
Now king David by this messenger is brought before the judgment seat of God,
and having nothing to answer, submits himself to Gods mercy, saying,
peccaui, I have sinned. This message though it seemed bitter at the beginning,
yet was it wholesome, sweet, and comfortable in the end. For by this means king
David recouereth the favor of God and forgiveness of his sin. Here we may
note that it is more profitable for kings, princes and great men, to have one
Nathan or Michea about them, then twenty deceyuing Zedechia, which Achab the
king of Israel to his pain liked so well of. The law of nature which the finger
of God has engraued in the conscience of every man, is an other messenger
ordained to cite men to appear before the tribunal seat of God, to render an
account when Nathan is excluded out 1. King. 22.
the doors, and can have no access, nor be heard: then serves this officer,
which pursues the wicked dooer, though he be his own master: so hard, that
though the crime be hid from the knowledge of all men: yet shall he never be
able to deliver himself out of the hands of this messenger, except he fly to
the tower of repentance, and bath himself in the fountain of Christ's blood.
This officer being but himself alone shall lay such violent hands upon the
wicked offender, as if there were a thousand pursuers. Conscientia enim mill
testium instar, for conscience serves in steed of a thousand witnesses.
There were learned of the heathen, that noted this wonderful work of God.
And therefore one says: Prima vltio haec est, quodse iudice nemo nocens
absoluitur. Improba quamuis gratia fallacis praetoris vicerit vrnam. This is
one vengeance to begin withal, that no male factour can escape the
condemnation of his own judgment, although unlawful favor corrupt the
sentence of the false Judge. There were, that endeavored and determined with
themselves to expel all fear of God setting on a brazen impudent face, making
no diversity betwixt beastly cruelty in shedding blood, and humane
compassion, pity or mercy, betwixt honestye and dishonestye, betwixt
goodness commended, and wickedness dispraysed: But, such were never able to
avoid the pursuit and check of this messenger. Caius Caligula the fourth
Emperor of Rome, who was wont to wish that all Rome had but one neck, that
he might strike of their heads at one stroke, exceeded in contempt of God,
humanity and honesty: In cruelty a fierce unreasonable beast, and swinish in
all filthy volupteousnesse: And yet when any token of Gods power, or wrath
did appear, if it were but a thunder, no man more desperately quaked, nor more
miserably trembled for fear of the deserved vengeance of God. King Richard
the third, after he had caused his two innocent Nephews to be murdered, and
brought himself to the Regal seat, never enjoyed quietness of mind all the
days of his life: for this messenger so chased him, that sometimes in the
night season, he used to start up out of bed, imagining he was besette with
enemies. They that do use to read stories, sacred or profane, find examples
enough of the acts and force of this messenger doing his office. There be
other messengers, which in comparison of these we have spoken of, may be called
extraordinary, and yet sent and appointed of God to do the same message, as
the other ordinarily do. Of this sort are tribulation, adversity, sickness,
war, famine, plague, signs and tokens in the Sun, and the Moon, strange
sightes in the Element, Earthquakes, and such like prodigious matters. The
loss of friends, the loss of a good Prince, governor or Magistrate: for
like as God makes the Ipocrite to reign for the sins of Job. 34. 3^.
the people, so God takes away a good Magistrate for the same cause. Is it not
therefore time for us to look to our selves, and to consider our state betwixt
us and God: for all these messengers for the most part have been with us of
late days. Within these few years the famine was so great in all these
countries of Wales, that many thousands dyed for lack of sustenaunce, we have
been visited with the plague, we had an Earthquake, strange sightes have
been seen in the air: And now last of all, behold the heavy hand of God
for our sins, upon all the whole country, in the death of this Noble man,
which is not only a messenger of Gods wrath toward this town and country
(wherein he was borne:) but also in very deed a great loss to the whole
realm. And although this country who shall miss so Noble and so worthy a
Ruler and Magistrate, that bore them so great affection, so ready to benefit
all, and hurt none, and for the high calling he was of, so able to pleasure and
to do good: Although I say this country, by the death of this Noble Earl, is
most earnestly, and effectually cited to appear before the Lord, and to fall to
a reconing: yet do I believe that the Queens Majesty her highness Counsel,
and all the Nobility of the realm, may hereby receive admonition, and cause
of further circumspection, and aduigilancie. For such valiant and courageous
Noble men are the bulwarks and walls of defense of the whole realm. They say
the realm is walled about because it is enuironned with the sea: but I hold
rather with their judgments, that make the side litie and true hearts of the
subjects, and especially of such of the Nobility that have made themselves by
Gods especial grace, expert to govern and rule under her Majesty, as well in
war as peace, the strong towers of defense, both of her Majesty and her
highness realm: this Noble Earl was one of these number: For I believe there
is no Prince in the world, that had a more faithful Noble subject, then her
Majesty had of him in his time. And for the notable valiantness, experience,
and virtues that were in him, I am persuaded that her Majesty, if he had
lived, might have used his service to be a terror to all enemies, foreign or
domestical. And now that I may speak somewhat, of his great Nobility, his
excellent, virtuous, and worthy qualities: First I think I may say this much
in a generality, that it was easy for a man of any judgment, that should
behold his countenance and behavior, to find in him Nobility, Majesty, and
Honor, planted by the especial gift of God, even from his Mothers womb. When
I consider the nature of Nobility with the causes efficient, and Comparison of
true Nobility.
final, It seems unto me that Nobility may be compared unto a river, or a
flood, which in the original issues out of four principal Wells, and all
the four rise out of the compass of one hill. The Wells of nobility are
Prudence, Fortitude, Justice, and Temperaunce: the hill whence they spring, is
the fear of God, or true religion.

Although this worthy Earl by progeny was of noble blood, whose auncetours
were of great Honor, which of it self, if a man degenerate not to far from
his forefathers, deserves honorable acceptance in this world: yet was he
not therewith satisfied as it may appear by his study and traueyle in his life
time: for he seemed to be of that judgment that Alphonsus king of Aragon, of
whom we read in stories was of. When a certain man took in hand to set out
the land and praise of his Nobility, he stood much in recital, Panor. lib.
20. de rebus gestis Alphonsi.
that he was a King, a kings son, a kings Nephew, a kings brother, and
such like tytles. The king interrupting his tale answered, that he never
esteemed much of that kind of glory: and that it was the praise and
commendacion of his auncetours, who by virtue and woorthye qualities had
deserved such high callinges, and honor and not of him: And that his praise
stood not in that which might fall unto him by testament, but in the imitacion
and perfourming of the noble acts, prowess, and valiantness of his
forefathers. This Noble Earl likewise, not answered to his expectacion, in
that he was a Noble man by blood, and inheritance, gave himself whollye all
the days of his life to purchase and win the Nobility, that springs
immediately from the very original fountains of the same, as partly I will
put you in remembrance of. We will begin with Prudence, which may be thus
defined.

Prudence, is a power or faculty of the mind given Prudence.
of God, whereby man is made wise, provident and circumspect, and whereby man
attayneth knowledge, cunning, and expertnesse in all matters that the children
of men have to deal with in this world.

This Noble Earl was of great wisdom, deep judgment, grave consideratyon,
and so blessed with understanding, experience, and manifold virtues, and
gifts of God, that he was right worthy to serve her Majesty in princely and
weighty affairs, both in war and peace. He was of such prudent and excellent
discretion, that he had a special grace to entertayne all states of men,
superior, equal, and inferior, with such comeliness and decency, that for
civility, humanity, manners, and honorable behavior, he was a pattern, and
an example for Nobility to imitate, and to follow. In his youth he bestowed
not the time in vanity, idleness or voluptuousness, but in atchieuing and
winning of such sciences, properties and virtues, which might beautify, and
increase his Nobility, and prevailed therein so effectually, that he became
excellent in all kind of knowledge, and qualities, meet, commendable, or
necessary for a man of honor, concerning divine matters. I have in my time
conferred with his Lordshippe, and therefore can say somewhat therein: and
amongst others, one thing is notable, which in conference I received at his
mouth. He affirmed this in effect that there was nothing in the world, that
could blemish and abase the Heroical nature of Nobility so much, as to have
the eyes of understanding so closed and shut up, that a man in honor,
should not be able to discern betwixt true religion, and the Hypocritical
false religion: betwixt the right worshipping of God, and Idolatry: betwixt the
traditions of men, and Gods word, but remain subject to lies, and
supersticion, and to call badde good, and good badde: and concluded that to be
free from this seruill state, was a necessary point of true Nobility. He
therefore in his time had diligently traueyled in the Scriptures, and so
furnished himself with principles of christian Religion, that he was able
readilye to discern Sermons, and disputacions, and to find out who had
verity on their side: and also probably to speak with authority of scripture
in matters of controversy. His understanding by the especial work of the holy
Ghost, was so illuminate that he claue and drew to true Christian religion, as
the adamant stone cleaves and draws to steel. His Lordship therefore
furthered and favored all Preachers of Gods word, so that whosoever will
judge of the success of Christ's religion by humane reason, must confess that
the Gospel has lost a mighty Protector, and an earnest defender. But God in
setting out of his word, uses to work beside the expectacion of man, and
behind the reach of reason. I have yet further to speak of his Lordship,
that I believe there be very few Noble men in England, more ready and expert
in Chronicles, Hystories, Genealogies, and Petigrues of Noble men, and noble
houses, not only within the Realm, but also in foreign realms, then this
Noble Earl was in his time. He excelled in descrying and blasing of Arms, and
in all skill pertaining thereto: and to be short, his understanding and
capacity, was so lively and effectual, that it reached to all kind of
matters, that a perfect Noble man shall have to deal withal in this world.

Fortitude, is an other fountain from whence Nobility Fortitude.
springs, of Cicero in tusculanis quaestionibus thus defined. Est affectio
animi qua grauia patiendo legibus obtemperatur. It is an affection of the
mind, whereby to satisfy the laws: a man is content to suffer hardness, he
means man's laws, and not Gods law. It seems therefore that it may be thus
more evidently and fully defined. Fortitude is an affection of the mind,
whereby a man is made hardy, and courageous to suffer difficulties and
dangers, avoiding on the one side rashness, and expelling on the other side
fear, to perform that which Gods law and honesty prescribes and
commands. Although by this definition we find, that the effect of fortitude
rests much in banishing of fear of bodily hurtes: yet does it agree very
well with the fear of God. Ietro therefore counselling Moses to choose men to
govern under him, says, Prospice viros fortes, timentis Deum. Seek out
Exodus 18. 21.
men endued with fortitude, fearing God. etc. Whereby we perceive, that
Fortitude and the fear of God vary not, but are linked together. Deep was
the floude of Nobility that this valiant Earl had fetched out of this
fountain. For in this together with the Well of Prudence, he found that
excellent knowledge of Cheualrie, the cunning to lead an army, to guide and
to rule soldiers, that experience of stratagemes, and warrelyke policies,
that notable magnanimity and invincible courage, whereby he endured and
overcame so many dangers and perils, for the which he is renowned in England
and Ireland, and shall never be forgotten. He was by nature the son of Mars,
and by practicing feats of war, and exercise aforehande, he had made himself
in manner a perfect Warrior, before that ever he came to the wars. And was for
prowess, magnanimity and high courage, to be compared to the old Romayne
Captains, that be so much in stories commended. This Fortitude is no less
necessary for Nobility in time of peace, then in time of war. For it
belongs unto them to minister justice betwixt party and party, without
respect of parsons, which can not be performed without the assistaunce of this
virtue: I have good cause to think of this Noble Earl, that there was no
subject in England, that could fear or corrupt him from executing of
justice. He was to the proud and arrogant a lion, and to the meek and humble
a lamb, neither is there any contrariety in this, for true Nobility
discerns a due and convenient time and place to use both the one and the
other.

Justice, is the third Well of Nobility. It is a constant Justice.
and a perpetual will to give every man his own. This is a divine virtue,
precious, and commendable in all men, and especially in the Nobility, who by
reason of authority, may do injury without remedy for the same. We see by
experience that great is the number of them that would oppress, if they had
authority: We see also the injuries that are done daily by them that have
color of authority, be it never so simple. But examine the life of this Earl
who will, and I believe there is no man living that can justly complain of any
oppression or wrong done by him. I once in my time heard him not a little
offended with one of his men that was complained upon: saying, that his
servant could do him no greater dishonor, then by pretense of his
authority to do any poor man wrong. Iobe in the time of his authority and
wealth, was commended to be a just, and a righteous man. And in the explication
of part of that justice, Job has these words: Job. 29. 15.
Fui oculus caeco, vice pedum claudo. etc. I was the eyes to the blind, and I
was the feet to the lame, I was a Father to the poor, and when I knew not the
cause I sought it out diligently, I brake the chawes of the unrighteous man,
and plucked the pray out of his teeth. Here we find that whosoever will do
justice, must not only do no wrong, but must also with all his might, succor
and comfort the helpless and oppressed. In this part of justice there was
never Noble man more forward then this good Earl. He was the comfortable
refuge, of all such as were in adversity, or oppressed by power.

Of Tytus Vespatianus Emperor of Rome, we read, that he answered one of his
friends, admonishing him to hold his hands, and not to make his liberality
and gentilnesse common to all men: saying, that it Suetonius.
becomes not a prince to let any man part from him with a heavy heart. This
worthy Earl was of like mind, for he was so full of humanity and compassion,
that he would be loath to let any distressed part from him, without some
comfort and ease. In so much that in him, if ever in any man this Adage. Homo
homini Deus, A man God to man, was as truly performed: as in Tyrants the
contrary Adage, that is, Homo homini lupus: A man a Woolfe to man. We read in
Chronicles of Emperors, Kings and Noble men, which for their bountifulness,
gentilnesse, affability and goodness, deserved some Honorable addition to
their names: as amongst the Emperors Antoninus pius, Antony the virtuous:
amongst the British Kings, Elidorus pius, Elyder the godly: and amongst
Noble men. In the time of king Richard the second, Sir Thomas Montacute the
good Earl of Salesburie: and in the time of king Henry the sixth, Sir Thomas
Beuchampe the good Earl of VVarwike. This Noble Earl for the very like
qualities has truly deserved to be called the good Earl, the virtuous Earl,
and the valiant Earl of Essex.

Temperaunce, is the fountain of Nobility: It is Temperaunce.
a virtue whereby a man observes a moderacion, and a reasonable mean in the
use of all things pertaining to body and mind: It is the mother of all other
virtues, without which, the reast are blemished, and disgraced. In the Dutche
Chronicles that tell of the lives of Emperors, the first quality that is
noted, is Temperate, or not temperate, as an argument of the reast of his life
and doings. For he is thought unworthy to rule others, that can not rule
himself.

This Noble Earl, had a special grace, and an excellent gift of God in
observation of this virtue, whither you respect diet, or the suppression of all
vicious affections. I have diverse times noted in him, when understanding was
brought unto him, of some thrasonicall contumelious words, spoken by some
glorious inferior adversary against him, he would never be stirred to any
perturbation of mind thereby, but with grave wisdom and magnanimity
contemn it and smile, deriding the vanity and waywardnes of that cankered
stomach, that vomited such sour rotten infection: for he did effectually
consider that it became no better a noble heart to take in and receive
wranglings, brawlings, chasings, and anger: then it is tonuenient to dawbe a
golden pillar with mire and clay. Solomon was of that mind, and therefore
says: Be not thou hasty to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of
fools. I Ecclesi. 7. 9.
have had occasion by that I noted in his Lordship to call to remembrance, this
saying of Christ. A good man of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
good Luke 6. 45.
things. And the evil man of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth
evil things: For though occasion were ministered, yet should you never hear
him utter any opprobrious words, no not against his adversary, so pure and
immaculate did he study to preserve the Nobility of his mind. There be some
that count themselves worthy honor and estimation, when they tear God in
pieces with chafing and horrible oaths, which this Noble Earl detested and
abhorred, as a matter not only indecent, but also repugnant to the nature of
true Nobility, attributing due reverence to the name of the Lord, and thereby
proouing the fountaynes of his Nobility to spring out of the hill of the fear
of God. But what was his religion? what faith God had blessed him with? what
godly disposition he was of, and how abundantly God had enriched him with his
holy spirit? his confession of his faith, his speeches, nay rather his sermons
in his sickness before his death shall testify for ever. For I received by
the relation of such as are worthy credit, and were present about him,
although not all, yet many of his learned godly sayings at that time.
Concerning his salvation, he reposed his affiaunce and sure trust in the
blood of Jesus Christ. He forgave all the world, and by invincible faith
apprehended, laid hold, and imbrased remission of his sins, in the merits
of the sacrifice of Christ's body offered upon the cross for the sins of
the world. Trentals, Masses, Diriges, Pardons, and such other papisticall
trifles he utterly contemned, as wicked and blasphemous against the death and
passion of Christ. He fared like the children of Israel in the wilderness,
which when they were Numb. 21. 9.
stinged with Serpents even to death: yet when they looked up to the brazen
Serpent they were made whole, safe, and sound. So this Noble Earl grieved
with the remembrance of his former unthankful life (as he judged)
immediately directed the eyes of his mind to the death and passion of Christ,
and forthwith felt such health of soul, that he was replenished with joy in
the holy Ghost, and all his delight was in meditacion of the joy of the world
to come, and the fruition of the presence of God for ever: In so much that five
or six days before he dyed, he showed himself more like an Angel from
heaven, then a man compassed with flesh and blood. My Lord the Archbyshoppe of
Dublin, (as I was informed) could move him in no question or article
pertaining to salvation, that he was not ready in, and learnedly, and godly
resolved: yea, and made such aunsweres in all things, that my Lord of Dublin
had them in great admiration, and affirmed that his speeches at that time
should serve him for sermous as long as he lived. How truly he relinquished
the vanity of this world, and how effectually he thyrsted after the joy of
the life to come, his godly admonitions ministered unto such as visited him, and
his heavenly lessons and exhortacions to his servants, shall testify for ever:
for they were such that his servant report they shall never forget, and such
as they shall be the better for whiles they live. Thus have I briefly, and
partly declared unto you, both the life and death of this worthy Magistrate, to
the end we should consider how seriously God does call us to a reconing by
the loss of such a good Magistrate.

Now a word or two to show who be they that dye in the Lord, and then an
end. They principally are said to dye in the Lord, which suffer death under
the beast, for confession of Christ's religion, for they properly dye in the
Lords cause. Such are the Martirs, as well of the primitive church under the
cruel Emperors, as the martyrs of all ages sithence under Antichrist of Rome.
They also dye in the Lord, which though they dye not by ye cruelty of the
beast, yet they dye in the faith of Jesus Christ, and are therefore blessed. Of
this number was this godly Earl as I have before declared. Wherefore I will
conclude and direct my speech for two or three words to this good Earl. O
noble Earl of Essex, in thy time the Pearl of Nobility: the myrrour of
Virtue and worthy qualities: the child of Chyualrie: the beautiful flower of
England: the precious Jewel and comfort of Wales: the trusty stay of
Ireland: Thy life was most Honorable: thy worthiness incomparable: thy death
precious in the sight of God, for thou dyedst in the Lord a right inheritour of
the everlasting kingdom of heaven. Wherefore by authority of the heavenly
oracle that S. John was commanded to write, thou art to be pronounced blessed
for ever. Our sins has shortened thy life, so that we could enjoy the same
no longer. Thou have notwithstanding bequeathed thy body to be buried amongst
us here in Wales. Of very duty therefore O Noble Earl, thy Tomb shall be
with us in reverence, estimation and honor, the fame and name of thy
Nobility, valiantness, virtue and worthiness, shall never be forgotten, but
shall live and be kept with us in memory from generation to generation while
the world stands. Dear beloved audience, because the time is spent, here
will I abruptly make an end, and neither deal with the third part of my first
division, nor make recapitulacion of any matter I have spoken of. Only let us
pray that God of his mercy grant us grace to consider his holy will and
pleasure, declared unto us by so many messengers, and especially by this
message that we now receive in the death of this noble Magistrate. And that we
may learn to dye in the Lord as he has done, and that together with him and
all the elect of God, we may participate a joyful resurrection in the world to
come, through our Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be laud, honor, and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.

