SIR MARTIN Mar-People, his Collar of Esses.

Workmanly wrought by Master Simon Sooth-saier, Coldsmith of London.

And offered to sale upon great necessity, by John Dauies.



Imprinted at London, by Richard Ihones. 1590.

Sir Martin Mar-People his Collar of Esses.
WHat can be said? when so much said
can naught preualle with men?
What signs, what threats, what words, what works,
from sage Experience pen,
Are extant in these dismal days, to alter man's amiss?
But yet (ah woe to us therefore) no Reformation is
Of sinful life: the less our praise, the greater our perdition.
The more our woe, the less our weal, the nearer our destruction:
For Time brings ought to naught we see, and naught in time's amended:
Our God, our prince (our cause of peace) from time to time's offended.
Our Peace (I say) procures our Pride, our Pride our Lust inflameth,
Our peace, our pride and lawless lust, our graceless lives defameth:
Our Plenty springing from our Peace, is spent in sports uncleanly,
Such sports unclean in Christians are most odious and unseemly.
Now Vice does vaunt, that Virtues brightness she has quite obscured,
The brightest beauty Virtue had, now Vice has clean devoured,
O wicked age, O doting dates, wherein such illes are found,
Wherein such cares, wherein such woes, wherein such vice abound:
O graceless world, how far thou art, from that of yore thou wast,
When kingly Saturn reigned, but now, that golden world is past:
Thy beauty's blemished with reproach, from whence thy shame proceed,
From good to ill, from ill to worse, now art thou fallen indeed.
What shroud may serve to hide thy shame, what volumes can contain
The brief'st description of thy faults, which does thy favor stain:
The wisest wits are found too weak, the cunningst Clearks want skill.
Particularly to express the sins, in thee abounding still.
Such irreligious minds in men, such hollow hearts in many:
Such Ianus-faced fauning friends, small trust is found in any:
Such deep deceit in countenance coucht, such treason hid in trust,
Such filthy fraud in friendly speech, such dealings most unjust:
Such murtherous mischiefs, rigorous rapes in savage wise performed
Such little care of conscience now, such periuries suborned:
Such brothell, baudrie, bugrie, and inhumaine shape to be,
Such monstrous brutish beastliness, a wonder it is to see,
Such huge oppression of the poor, where pity should abound,
Such discord in oppinions now, the simple soul to wound,
Such restless iarring all for ieasts, and things of no account,
Such seeking for pre-eminence, by others fall to mount:
Such posting after peevish praise, that soon will fade and perish,
Such small regard of Orphans poor, which God commands to cherish,
Such prowling still for private gain, such hunting after wealth,
Such little heed of souls disease, such care of bodies health.
Such raging madness in the minds of frantic fools a number,
Such brainsicke brawling among the bad, which do the good encomber
Such partial judgments in the Judge, for whom the Judge do favor,
Such justice, Judge, and judgments too, does of injustice savor.
Such wringing of the laws awrie, for Lady Lucars love,
Such huge exactions from the poor, which to their pain they prove.
Such ravenous robbing by the way, such picking in the City,
Such desperate moodes in graceless men, bereft of christian pity:
Such laughing at each others loss, such grief at others gain,
Such persecuting silly souls, such pleasure in their pain.
Such emulation among the rich, such strife amongst the poor,
Such small relief to such as hunger drives from door to door.
Such discontents in all estates, such cl^ming for promotion,
Such great hypocrisy in zeal, to God such small devotion.
Such swearing by the precious parts of him, whose painful passion
Such pardon purthac'd as preserues, the faithful from damnation.
Such preaching never in any age was used, as now it is,
Such teaching former times did lack, and yet is all amiss.
Such arguing of the force of faith, whilst works are left undone,
Such blessed words, such cursed works, cannot accord in one,
Such superfinenesse in each sex, the outward part t'adorne,
Such robes as should the soul array, to rotten rags are worn.
Such beastly minds in bodies brave, such craft in clownish graie,
Such clownish crafts full hardly spied, til trial it bewraie.
Such fauning mates that flattery use, such has the world in price,
Such are embraced, whose witching words, can ytching ears entice.
Such treasons practiced against the Prince, by subjects most unkind,
Such herds of bloody Homicides, that are to blood inclinde:
Such hauock made, since wilful Will has uncontrolled reigned,
Such heaps of harms increasing still, since Will has will maintained.
Such matchless Machiuilian mates, with such the world does swarm,
Such skill they have to smile when they intend the greatest harm.
Such protestations in pretense of friendly favors ever,
Such solemn vows of friendships deeds, yet are performed never,
Such Saints in show, such devils in deed, near lived on earth I ween:
Such clusters of Camelions, I think was never seen:
Such feeds upon the simple sort, for such they lie in wait,
Such suckes the marrow of their bones, in whom is no deceit.
Such, yea, such still lurking lies, t'intrap the honest mind,
Such sees with Argus hundred eyes,, and yet they seem most blind*
Such witty wiles we have to wrap our souls in Satan's web,
Such great ungraciousness does flow, and goodness still does eb.
Such outward paintings to amend the works of God and Nature:
Such sinful sleightes deuisde there are, to grace the form and stature.
Such trash (I say) offends our God, such toys he nill endure,
Such pride his plagues and v^ngeance just, against us does procure:
Such foul immodest filth of ours, his heavenly eyes offends,
Such paintings are the lines of lust, that unto lewdness tends:
Such filthy fairness spots the soul with foul abominations,
Such fair ones that such filth do use, have cause to fear damnation.
Such care to keep such faults unspied, from worlds uncertain sight,
Such pro^nnesse to offend our God, whose judgments still are right.
Such boldness in our ciuiuill broiles, such dread in Trueths defense,
Such cowardice in Conscience cause, such fear of man's offense.
Such coldness in the service which to God is only due,
Such hot desire of change therein, though woorser do ensue:
Such great contempt of Magistrates, whose power we reverence should,
Such rash rebellions in our realms, such mischiefs manifold,
Such glory in-terrestiall trash, such trash our glory is,
Such glory's vain, vainglory such, will bar our souls from bliss,
Such carking still for cankered coin, such little care of honesty,
Such sucking blood, such cutting throats, such practizing of villainy*
Such bragging of our beastliness, such boasting of our sin,
Such glutting of our greedy guts, such mire we wallow in.
Such thyrsting after fell Revenge, for every trifling wrong,
Such frailty cannot escape vnscourg'd, though God it suffer long.
Such cloking of our faults with fees, such blinding of Authorty,
Such gifts bestowde where need is none, such little love and charity*
Such liberal feasting of the Fat, and famishing the Lean,
Such lifting up the Foul aloft, and pulling down the Clean.
Such carping at the time of such, as Time has Traitors made,
Such putting on the golden sheath upon the leaden blade.
Such careful furthering of the rich, such crossing of the poor,
Such wresting from the widow, and such pulling from her store.
Such wicked matches daily made, from whence much mischief spring,
Such running hedlong to the Devil for every trifling thing.
Such winking at the faults of some, such plaguing others guilt,
Such riotous spending, and such spoils, such wealth by wantons spilt:
Such hunting of the whorish crew, such haunting of their houses,
Such great disorder every where, such heaps of huge abuses.
Such raising rents, such doubling fines, such slender hospitality,
Such costly fare, yet nothing spare, for men in great calamity.
Such lending out for lawless lone, such great oppression used,
Such statute-Merchants now requyr'd, nay, such are often refused*
Such cracking credits, which of yore was carefully kept inviolate,
Such rechlesnesse in that respect with men of great estate,
Such wailing of poor wightes oppressed, such cries of men in misery*
Such small regard of their distress that pine in extreme poverty.
Such lothing of the low estate, such hating of the hie,
Such puffing pride in mounting minds, such pleasing of the eye:
Such ranckour rusting in the mind, such minds of vile condition,
Such frowardness in every man, such hateful disposition.
Such great extortion in each town, such polling in each city,
Such deep dissem^^^ng in the Court, such cogging in the country.
Such spite and gal^^ bytternesse extended to our brother,
Such burning hearts within our breasts, such enuieng one another:
Such quelling of the quiet man, such questions daily rising,
Such factions, and such busy brains, contentions still devising.
Such standring of the innocent, such vexing of the virtuous,
Such wronging of the wel-dispos'd, such favoring the vicious:
Such disagreement in the words and deeds of every man,
Such cursed contrariety, the Lord of hosts does ban:
Such wicked Wolves, like Lambs attyr'd, of such the world is full,
Such from the bones of silly sheep, the flesh and fleece do pull:
Such crafty Crocadils that weeps, til they their pray have caught,
with such the earth's replenisht now, with such the world is fraught.
Such baudy books abounding now for sinful delectation,
Such printed are under pretense of honest recreation.
Such wicked works will work their woe, that in such works delight,
Such pleasant poisons slaies the souls, and suffocates the sprite.
Such volumes vile such venom have, as soon corrupts the readers,
Such readers commonly are such, as unto vice are leaders.
Such idle drones are such I say, that lives by others toil,
Such puffes their panch by others pains, such spends by others spoil.
Such caitiffes in the common wealth, like Cankers seem to be,
Such Cankers breed in it such cares, as ruth it is to see.
Such hanging up, and yet such store of such do still abound.
Such executions every where, yet still such feends are found:
Such Burglaries perfourm'd with blood, like butchers merciless,
Such vild Herodian cruelty, no tongue can well express.
Such cutthroat caruing all for coin, to clothe and cram the carcass,
Such pinching for to spare our pence, t'inlarge our lands by purchase:
Such scowring of the surging seas for things of no avail,
Such desperate dangers vndertane, for fancies which do fail:
Such doting on our dainty Dames, such pains to show them pleasure,
Such moan we make, if once they mourn, if glad? Glad out of measure.
Such feeding of their humors vain, such fighting for their favor,
Such large expenses for their love, such dread of their disfavor.
Such is the care, the cursed care of such as Christians seem,
Such seeming Christians with such cares, their Christ do not esteem.
Such brazen faced boldness now is in beauties dainty die,
Such wanton looks enticing lust, from her lascivious eye.
Such tricks, such toies, such sportes, such joys the God of heaven offends,
Such vild licencious lusts of ours, our souls to Satan sends.
Such delicacie, such delights, such devilish daintiness,
Such filthy foul enormities were hatched in hell (I guess)
Such several sins of sundry sort, such sorts of sinners vile,
The sea, the earth, the fire and air, they al with sin defile.
Too weak I find my memory to mention every sin,
The numbers are so infinite which now we wallow in.
But Zeuxes drew a veil on that, he wanted skill to express,
So I for want of skill herein, am forced to do no less;
And leave untouched such cursed crimes, as Christians blot with blame,
For which they do right well deserve the shrowding sheet of shame.
Then let us consider the estate of wretched mortal life,
What cares and crosses, plagues and pains, what woes and storms of strife
Attends thereon: that wel's the man which soonest is from hence,
For while we live, we living die in sin and foul offense:
Our days (as holy David says) in length are but a span,
Our time is like a blast of wind, soon come, and quickly gone.
The great revenues we possess, our wealth, our friends and all,
We must forsake (though nere so loath) when pleases God to call,
Yet such is the condition of this vale of vain delights,
It so bewitcheth all our thoughts, and rauisheth our sprights.
Whilst here we are, that little thought we have of heaven or hell,
But feed our veins, like Epicures, whilst we on earth do dwell.
This world is such a Siren sweet, enchanting with her voice,
Her lays and warbling Lullabies, our sleeping souls rejoice,
Her pleasures rocks us fast on sleep, in cradle of security,
Whilst Satan lurks in shape unseen, to take his opportunity.
O wayward, wicked, wanton world, O gaping gulf of grief,
O sink of sin, O sea of shame, of miseries the chief.
O cursed Caos, so confusde with heaps of hateful sin,
O Laborinth most intricate, for turnings out and in.
Thy painted shows are shadows vain, which vanish with the Sun,
Thy greatest glory shall decay, when mortal life is done.
Who trusts a broken staff, we see, do fall ere they be ware,
Who sowes his seed in mischiefs mould, shall reap the crop of care.
What mean we then so much to make, of such uncertain trash,
Which at unawares, when least we ween, will leave us in the lash?
All these and thousands more such illes, which in this world we find,
Are motives which should move us al, an other world to mind.
That world where the triumphant Church from such extremes is free,
Where God in matchless glory reigns, there should we long to be.
Where holy ones with heavenly hymmes, do laud his blessed name,
Where Halleluiahes sweet are sung, in honor of the same:
Where that which Paul could not express, the same do there abound,
Where sweet of sweets, where bliss of bliss, where joy of ioies are found.
Yea, there, ah there, if once we were, then should we happy be,
Til there we find this happiness, unhappy still are we.
Then let us leave this wretched world, and cleave unto the Lord,
And turn from all our wicked ways, in thought, in deed and word:
That God from us may turn his plagues, which we deserved have,
That whilst we live, we so do live, that he our souls may save.
That when our lives give place to death, then death may swallowed be
Of life again, in heaven to dwell with God in persons three:
In endless glory there to rest, and that it so befall,
My heart, my mind, my tongue and lips do pray: Amen say all.
FINIS

