THE I WILL OF GVLS.

As it has been often played in the black Friars, by the Children of the
Revels.

Written by John Day.

Imprinted at London, and are to be sold by John Hodgets in Paul's Churchyard.
1606.

The I Will of Gulls.
. Enter severally 3. Gentlemen, as to see a play. 1 HOw now gallants, what is it?
what is it?


2 The I Will of Gulls.


3 The I Will of Gulls, what should that be?


2 A play by the name, but come shals quarter our selves?


1 If some had had the wit to do so in time, they might ha saude the hangman a
labor. But come boy, furnish us with stools.


Enter Prologue. Prol. Pardon me sir, my office is to speak a Prologue, not to
provide you stools.


1 And you were the Epilogue to sir-


2 Fie be not inciuill: do hear youth, prithee what is he that discouerd your
new found Land, the I Will of Gulls? what is he?


Prol. A mere stranger sir.


3 A stranger? the better welcome: comes he Eastward, Westward, or
Northward hoe?


Prol. None of the three ways I assure you.


1 Prithee where is he?


Prol. Not on his knees in a corner, to Apollo praying that his play may hold
in a good hand at Passadge, not on the stage amongst gallants, preparing a
bespoke Plaudite; but close in his study writing hard, to get him a handsome
suite against Summer.


2 And where sits his friends? has he not a prepared company of gallants, to
aplaud his jests, and grace out his play.


Prol. None I protest: Do Poets use to bespeake their Auditory.


2 The best in grace do, and but for that, some that I know, had never had
their grace in Poetry till this day.


Prol. Then must our Author look for a certain disgrace, for he is altogether
unfurnished of such a friendly audience.


1 Then he must lay his trial upon God and good wits. But why does he call his
play The I Will of Gulls, it begets much expectation.


Prol. Not out of any dogged disposition, not that it figures a(...) certain
state, or private government: far be that supposition (...) the thought of
any indifferent Auditor: and the argument being a little string or Riuolet,
drawn from the full streine of the right worthy Gentleman, Sir Phillip Sydneys
well known Archadea, confirms it: only a Duke to make trial of certain
experiments, retyres with his retinue into a Namelesse desert. Now as well for
fashion sake, as that all those which have to do in that desert, are guld in
the reach of their hopes, therefore he calls it, (and as he presumes, not
improperlie) The I Will of Gulls.


1 Out a question he has promised thee some fee, thou pleadest so hard for
him, but and he be a right Poet he will never perform it. But what method
observes he in his play, is it any thing Critical? Are Lawyers fees, and
Citizens wives laid open in it: I love to hear vice anotomizd, and abuse let
blood in the master vain, is there any great man's life charactred int?


Pro. None I protest sir, only in the person of Dametas he expresses to the
life the monstrous and deformed shape of vice, as well to beget a lothing of
abuse, as that his villainy may give the greater luster to the virtuous
dispositions of true-borne gentilitie.


1 All that's nothing to me, and there be not Wormwood water and Copperes int,
I Will not like it, should Apollo write it, and Rosius himself act it.


2 Fie upon thee, thou art too too Critical: is there any good baudry int,
jests of an ell deep, and a fathom broad, good cuckolding, may a couple of
young-setters up learn to do well int? Give me a scene of venery, that will
make a men's spirrits stand on their typtoes, and die his blood in a deep
scarlet, like your Ouids Ars Amandi, there flows the true Springhead of
Poetry, and the very Crystal fount of Parnassus.


Prol. Chaste ears would never endure it sir.


2 Chaste ears, now deafenes light upon em, what should chaste ears do at a
play.


3 It Is strange now, I am of neither a both your opinions, I like neither
railing nor baudry: no, give me a stately pend history, as thus, The rugged
winds, with rude and ragged ruffes. etc.


2 Fie vpont, mere Fustian; I had rather hear two good baudie jests, then a
whole play of such teare-cat thunderclaps.


Prol. Alas Gentlemen, how is it possible to content you? you will (...) railing,
and inuectiues, which our Author neither dares, nor affects: you baudy and
scurrill jests, which neither becomes his modesty to write, nor the ear of a
generous Auditory to hear: you must ha swelling comparisons, an^ bumbast
Epithites, which are as fit for the body of a C^^^edie, as Hercules shoe for
the foot of a Pygmey: yet all these we must have, and all in one play; or it is
already condemnd to the hell of eternal disgrace.


1 Look toot, if there be not gall int, it shall not pass.


2 If it be not baudie, it is impossible to pass.


3 If it be both Critical and baudy, if it be not high written, both your Poet
and the house to, loose a friend of me.


Prol. Nay I beseech you sir, if you be his friend, stand so to him still, for
he has too many enemies already, in whose judgments, he and his labors stand
excommunicate, as though unworthy to present themselves in this assembly.


1 Enemies, nays foot then there is some hope in's play, for Envy never works
but against desert and merit. If he be envied there is some worth in him, and
I Will see out his play for that only.


2 Faith and I Will see an act or two out, but I tell you aforehand I cannot see
it out.


3 Not see it out? your reason.


2 Fore God I lay in bed till past three a clock, slept out my dinner, and my
stomach will toule to supper before five, therefore you must pardon me.


Prol. Either see it all or none; for it is grown into a custom at plays, if
any one rise (especially of any fashionable sort) about what serious business
soever, the rest thinking it in dislike of the play, tho he never thinks it,
cry mew, by Jesus vilde; and leave the poor hartlesse children to speak their
Epilogue to the empty seats.


3 Why do think thy audience like a flock of sheep, that one cannot leap
over a hedge, but all the rest will follow, they ha more of reason in them then
so.


2 Well, I Will sit out the play, and be but to avoid that sheepish imputation,
but see it be baudy, or by this light I and all my friends will hiss.


Prol. You should not deal gentleman-like with us else.


Prologue. The misery that waits upon the pen
Of the best Writers, judge it gentlemen,
Let them express the very soul of wit,
And want Opinions voice to countnance it,
It Is like the idle buzzing of a fly,
Heard, not regarded: wretched Poetry:
If a write mirth, it is Rybaldry, and mean,
Scornd of chaste ears. If he compose a Scene
Of high writ Poesy, fitting a true stage,
It Is counted fustian: If portick rage
Strike at abuse, or open the vain of sin,
He is straight informed against for libelling.
Neither quick mirth, inuectiue, nor high state,
Can content all: such is the boundless hate
Of a confused Audience: Then we
That scarcely know the rules of Poesy
Cannot escape check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wise will smile to hear the impartial hiss.
We neither brag, nor tremble, faint nor entreat,
Our merrits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bad me boldly speak,
His play shall pass, let Envy swell and break,
Detraction he scorns, honors the best,
Ta^ti for hate; thus low to all the rest.

Exit. Actus primi. scena prima.
Enter Basilius, Gynetia, Hipolita, Violetta, Lord attendants. Basil: Welcome
gallants, welcome honored bloods; the reason that we have vncloth'd us of our
princely government in Arcadia, and have to do with this private retirement
here in this defart I Will, you shall find in that shedule, only thus much for
public satisfaction: It Is not strange to you, that the choicest treasure
Nature endowed us with, is mind up in the veins of my two daughters: how
much their quiet, and the smothe stream of our government in Arcadia, was
troubled by the impetuous concourse of unruly suitors, is familiar with your
knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in my absence appointed my
brother, and undertook this private retirement.


Gy. Why my lord, are you so covetous of your daughters beauties, that their
perfections shall be a means to hinder their preferment?


Basi. Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls of our
age, and to see them well set in honorable and wel-befitting

Marriage, is our wishes happiness.
To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert I Will,
(The stage where I Will perform this lovers prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their hearts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreathe of their conquest.

Hip. A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.


Viol. What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?


Basil. To that intent our Island is fenc't in
By sea and Land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defense, which like great men
Do ouer-looke Archadea: over which,
We have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more then we are willing to discover.

Hip. Well then sister, I see we must to hap-hazard for husbands.


Viol. God send me one with a good face and I care not.


Hip. Love and be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his forhead,
like Time.


Viol. Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his forehead, a
country-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake
such a peremptory challenge against all co^mers, considering you have been so
long troubled with an Ague.


Basil. An ague? what ague?


Hip. Why your quotidian, Dametas the Court surfeit, he that dwells in your
eye, like a disease in your blood.


Viol. And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it would never
digest such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall and garbidge of gentry; fie
upon him, he becomes the great chamber worse then a Gentleman-usher with wry
legs.


Hip. He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court wore.


Viol. Had he not been of my fathers own making, I should ha condemnd his
tailor for an exceeding botcher.


Basil. If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjects, express
it in your obedience, we know Dametas loves us.


Vilet. As Captains and Courtiers do old widows, for profit and preferment.


Basil. In sign whereof we make him.


Hip. Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him up already.


Viol. The very making of him up, has stood you in more then the whole our
sides worth.


Basil. In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express our love, and
to give the world public note of his loyalty, we create him your Guardian.


Viol. How father, my Guardian.


Basil. I mynion, yours.


Viol. Do you hear father, bid him bespeake Spectacles, for my fingers have
vowed to have a blind match with his eyes.


Basil. Well said Haggart, I Will make your proud heart stoop to the lure of
obedience. But come, by this time our challenge is published, and our gallants
wits sweating in the field of Invention, and it behoues us not to rest
unexercised.

So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.

Exeunt. Enter two Captains. 1 Cap. Now Captain Observation, times bawd,
thou that have kept the Ages door, whilst vp-start baseness crept into the
bed of greatness, what do thou think of this change?


2 Cap. That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to examine his
actions.


1 Cap. That's no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly be better instructed
why the Duke broke up his Court in Archadea, and removed it into this Island?


2 Cap. I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general mmour is, that
out of the freenes of his spirit, he has sent a challenge to all his neighbor
Princes, that who soever (within a twelve month) can defeat him of his
daughters, shall with their loves, enjoy his dukedom, the garland proposde for
the victors.


1 Cap. Your words throw sense into me, and that's the cause the Island is so
surely guarded with watch-towers, over which our selu^^ and other Captains
have the charge.


2 Cap And to the end, that not affection, but desert may prove victor, are
the two Ladies so narrowly obserud, the one never out a the eye of her Father,
the other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Dukes chief director.


1 Cap. If inquisitiveness be not too bold a guest, what do you think of
Dametas.


2 Cap. As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.


1 Cap. Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to
make him up.


2 Cap. How did he first stumble on the Princes favor?


1 Cap. As some do upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth says,
the Prince having one day lost his way, wandering in the woods found this
Dametas, affected his discourse, took him along to the Court, and like great
men in love with their own doings, countenanct his defects, gave him offices,
titles, and all the additions that g^e to the making up of a man worshipful.


2 Cap. I cannot but commend the Duke for raising him, nor yet praise him, that
he proportions not his carriage aunswerable to his fortunes.


1 Cap. Your thoughts and mine are twynnes in that: but I hear the warning
bell, some strangers are arrived.


2 Cap. Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Dametas, whose custom is
to spet and hem, whilst his scribe Mayor takes they^ Examinations.


Exeunt. Enter Dametas and Manasses. Dame. Manasses, how do like my play at
Tennys?


Manas. You play well Sir, but you loose still.


Dame. Pollecie Manasses, policy, for when any man vpbraides me with my
gettings at Court, I may swear truly I have lost more then I have got byte.


Manas By the Tennis court I think you have.


Dam. If by any Court, it is enough to save mine oath.
But what do our spruce witted gallants say of my bounty.

Ma. Faith sir according to the proportion of it, little or nothing they say
it is a banckrout, and dares not show his head.


Dame. Then let em leave resting at me, though it please the Duke for some few
good parts that he sees in me, to make me his familiar, I scorn to be
public, or every Courtiers companion: but who comes here?

Enter the two Captains, with Aminter and Iulio two Princes, attyred one like
a poor souldior, the other like a poor scholar. The Captains of the
watch-towers? what news with you.


1 Cap. A couple of peticioners, ant like your worship.


Dam. Had I best take their peticions Manasses?


Ma. O in any case, though you never peruse em, it is the only course in
request.


Dam. Fellows, deliver your peticions to my scribe Mayor, and do hear, put
em up Manasses, they may be wrongs to us.


Manas. And they be, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have put up for your
worship.


put up their papers. 1 Cap. That fellows pocket is like a Taylers hell, it
eats up part of every man's due: it is an Executioner, and makes away more
innocent petitions in one year, then a red-headed hang man cuts ropes in an
age.


Dam. Now, what are you sir?


Amin. A poor soldier ant like your worship.


Da. Poor soldiers do not like my worship, they are bad members.


Manas. Then if they had a woman to their Judge, they should be sure to be cut
off, for they cannot endure badde members in a Commonwealth.


Dam. What are you?


Iuiso. A poor scholar, ant like your worship.


Dam. Poor scholars do not like our worship neither, they rail against rich
Cormorants, they are bad members to.


Manas. Cut them off both sir, and make the Land an Eunuch.


Dam. I Will take order with em I warrant thee, and I may have my will, I Will ha
neither poor scholar nor soldior about the Court.


1 Cap. The next way to make it the I Will of fools.


Dam. What Is he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know you to whom you
speak?


1 Cap. Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.


Dam. But I remember well enough I warrant you, I command you, in my name and
the Dukes, to attend your guard, and you regard me no more then a careless
Lawyer does an undone clyant, but I Will inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.


2 Cap. Command your slaves sir, we are gentlemen.


Dam. Why so I hope are we sir, and of the best and last edition, of the Dukes
own making.


1 Cap. Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge us of these passengers?


Dam. You are dischargd, about your business.


1 Cap. Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right, And true borne
Eagles stoop to this base kyte.


Exeunt. Dam. What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, I Will have
more officers, and one shall be to keep scholars and soldiers out of the
Court, for they dare not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good
clothes. But gods me Manasses, go tell the Duke I must speak with him.


Manas. Presently sir, I Will go fetch the head to give the foot a posset: and my
master had wit to his villainy, he would make an excellent dish for the
hangman.


Exit. Amin. Right worshipful.


Dam. I sir, I know my place is worshipful, I tell thee knave I could hang
thee by my pattent, if it were granted once, I Will tell thee how it runs, It
allows me 24 knaves, 6 Kinghts, 10 fools, 13 fellons, and 14 traitors by the
year, take em how, why, when, and where I please.


Iulio. I do not think the Duke will ever grant it.


Dam. Why not grant it? why should you think he will not grant it. Such another
word and I Will send you to Limbo instanthe.


Amin. We thank you good Dametas.


discover themselves. Iulio. I hope you will take reasonable bail for our
forth-comming.


Am. The case is alterd with you since you came out of Archadea.


Dam. My honorable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my self and the best ability
of my power, lies at your service.


Amin. You see how confidentlie we presume upon your Letters promise, in
furthering us to attain the lovers prize.


Dam. The Dukes daughters are your own, and in a word thus shall you attain
em, some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the
Duke and both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon some sudden occasion
divide the train* and having singled out the two Does, I hope you have wit
enough to strike.


Amin. To strike, how mean you.


Dametas. As headsmen do, of with their maiden-heads, or if the Duke offer
resistance, of with his crown to.


Iulio. That were violence, and clean opposite to the intent of the challenge.


Dam. Come ye are shallow, to it vi et armis, to it, I Will be your second, think
of the crown, ha my Letters trauaild for you, my wit wrought for you, and my
invention sweat for you, to possess you of your loves, and seat you in the
Dukedom, and come you now with it is violence, and against the intent of the
challenge, I am ashamd to hear you.


Iulio. Nay Dametas, and your resolution be so forward, ours shall ouer-take
you, we doubted least the preferments your Lord has heapt upon you, had
smotherd your affection to us ward.


Amin. That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the
hunt.


Dam. Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then.


Iul. We ha your meaning.


Dam. Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new disguise, as at
our next meeting I Will inform you. Adieu, I shall think long till I see you
again.


Exit. Amin. As a Lawyer does for his clyant for a second see. Heeres no Judas?


Iulio. Yes, and a damnd one to, for he would betray and sell his Master.


Amin. It Is common in such base fellows, such Court-spyders, that weaue their
webbes of flattery in the ears of greatness, if they can once entangle them
in their quaint treachery, they poysen em straight.


Iulio. They are like unnecessary worms, who^ the son of greatness creates of
the gross and slimie multitude, as soon as they recover strength, they eat
into the credit of true borne gentry, undermine and work out the true
nobility, to inroote and establish themselves.


Am. And in the end, like Esops starved snake, having lapt the sweet milk of
greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends, they turn their
stings of envy into their preseruers bosom.


Iul. The example lives in this Dametas, who notwithstanding the Duke has
raisd him to that height that he looks equal with himself, yet for the base
hope of incertaine government, he offers him to sale, but let his treason live
to the last minute.


Amin. For my part I Will make that use of him that Physicians do of poison, use
as much of him as serves for mine honest intent, and cast down the rest, as
unfit for any necessary employment.


Iulio. Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence either to
the Duke, or his daughters.


Amin. And let our discourse go so smoothly apparrelled, that it move not the
patience of the most tender ear.


Iulio. About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.

Exeunt. Enter Lisander like an Amazon. Lisan. Archadea, thou heaven, within
whose sphere
The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms
Fair Violetta, fayrer then the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name
Do play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous Churl,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Has made this desert I Will th'vnwilling chest
In which he locks her. But the fair advantage
Of this large challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break open
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.

Enter Dametas, and Manasses. Manas. This way she went sir, this way.


Dam. But I say this way, I would thou should know, we old Courtiers can
hunt a Cony, and put her to the squeake, and make her cry out like a young
married wife of the first night.


Manas. For more help, as some of them have done,
But there she is.

Dam. I Will upon her presently, do hear me firra, thou vessall of infirmity,
woman, and by thy outside little better then one of the wicked, come hither
and show thy self before us, show thy self before Dametas.


Lisan. Dametas, Lisander then dissemble,
For he is the man must work thy entrance.

Dam. What art thou, speak.


Lisan. My mother is the Queen of Amasons,
My self a virgin, married unto Arms
And bold archieuements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Autioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the inconstant winds
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.

Dame. And what is your business now you are landed?


Lisan. My business is private with the Duke.


Dam. The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.


Lisan. I beseech you sir.


Dam. It Is no beseeching matter I assure you.


Manas. No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could beseech with the
tongue of Angels, it is to no purpose with him.


Lisan. It Is strange, I have heard thy master is a very good man where he takes.


Manas. True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore
look for no kindness from him.


Lisan. Good, and do thou take after thy master?


Ma. No madam, I take commonly before my master, for where he takes, he takes
all, and leaves nothing for me to take.


Lisan. Oh, I feel your meaning.


Ma. Let my master have some feeling of yours, and heel preset your suit.


Lisa. It Is not the Dukes pleasure Peticioners should buy their access.


Ma. Als one, it is my masters pleasure, and usual fashion.


Lisan. And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Dametas, my late
shipwreck as you see, has made a defeat both of my friends and treasure,
notwithstanding, Fortune has reserved me one Jewel, which if I might request
your worship in love to accept, and be a means to work my admittance to the
Duke, I should become a true detter to your love.


Dame. Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that takes brybes, yet
pressed by your importunity, and that you tender it in love, least I might seem
too nice to withstand a Ladies favor, I Will wear it for your sake, and if the
Duke be not too busily imployd, work your access.


Lisan. So doing, you shall perform the office of a dere-bought friend.


Exit Dametas. Manas. How quickly the tyde's turnde, but do you hear Madam,
tho I take neither before nor after my Master, yet take my counsel, and do
not trust my master: If you have a suit to the Duke keep it to your self,
for if you trust my master with it, heel prefer it for you, but heel begd
for himself.


Lisan. That's plain coosnage.


Ma Fie no, it is cunning in him, marry twould be though little better then
coosnage in a country gentleman: but he returns.


Enter Dametas again. Dam. Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the
Duke for your admittance.


Lisan. And have you wrought it?


Dam. I have, marry you must think I bestowd much labor int.


Lisan. Tmay be you did.


Da. Tmay be you did: and look a seance like a Pothecaries wife pounding
Colliquintida, have my brains sweat for this.


Lisan. Why the Jewel is right Dametas, had I but an Ass that would sweat me
such pearl.


Dame. An Asle? and sweat such pearl, I Will bar her admittance, here take your
Jewel, the Duke will allow no admittance, and I will keep you back.


Lisan. Keep me back, thou could do no more and I were a poor man's
peticioner.


Dame. And I Will do so much being a rich peticioner.


Lisan. You cannot sir. You Court spaniell, you unnecessary mushrump, that in
one night art sprung out of the root of greatness, I have bought my admittance,
and I Will hate in dspetto del fato.


Da. I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks, there is no
good to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will ye follow.


Lisan. With all my heart sir, I Will be the blind man and poor peticioner, and
thou shall play the Court spaniell with the silver bell, and I cad me into the
Presence.


Dam. Court spaniell? mum: I Will bosom what I think,
Old Gibs not blind, I see although I wink.

Exeunt. Finis Actus primi.
Enter Demetrias a Prince, attyred like a wood-man, with him his Page. Deem.
Boy, how do like me in this attire?


Page. As the audience do a bad play, scuruely.


Them. Is it not strange a prince should be thus metamorphosed?


Page Not so strange as the metamorphosis of Ajax and like your grace.


Them. Grace you Aggot: have not forgot that yet?


Page No, and yet it is a wonder I ha not, grace being so fildome used, I Am sure
they say none at some Ordenaries, for at sitting down they cannot intend it for
hunger, and at rising up, they are either drunk, or have such mind a dice,
they never remembe^^, my Lord then.


Deem. No more Lord, sir.


Page Indeed there are many already, but is not this strange, that rich men
should forsake their titles? master then.


Deem. Your will sir.


Page You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your friend Lisander,
and yet you cannot find him.


Them. True sir.


Page I ha seen much gold lying upon Lombards stalls, and could never finger
penny of it.


Deem. Very well.


Page Nay, it was not well sir.


Them. What conclude you then?


Page That you were best sit down, and see what you ha got by your journey.


Dam. I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.


Page That's nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven it self, when he
looks but out at the prison-gate, I Will stand root, a man were as good be
hanged, so a meet a handsome hangman, and a strong rope, as be in love.


Deem. Your reason for that.


Page Mary this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, and love the beginning.
Nay further, I think a Lo^d cannot be saved, for he is of all religions.


Them. Your proof for that.


Page This; he thinks with the Atheist there is no GOD but his Mistress, with the
Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the papist no purgatory but her frowns,
and with the family of love, hold it lawful to lie with her, though she be
another man's wife.


Them. So sir, what follows?


Page Serving men sir, the Master goes in before his wife, and the seruingman
follows his master.


Deem. Syrra forbear, I must meditate.


Page As the Usurer before he parts with money, meditate upon the assurance.


Enter Lisander privately, and ouer-heares them. Lisan. I^ Violettaes presence
ha not quenched
The memory of all things but herself,
I should be more familiar with that fate.

shroud and observe. Them. I have left my country to seek out my friend.


Lisan. And I my country and my friend for love.


Them: And in the search of him have lost my self
In the strange Region of a woman's eye.

Lisan: In love, and in Archadea.


Them: As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise, her face differs as far
From others, as a glo worm from a star.
She is a princess that my soul affects.

Page. And rich.


Them: Half heir unto this Dukedom.


Page And she were whole heir to the four morrall Virtues, twere nothing:
when shall I see the time that men will love for virtue, or a rich h^yre marry
a poor wench without a portion, never I think.


Them. Had not my friend Lisander.


Lisan. What of me?


Them: L(...)nt in Thrace.


Lisan: We had never met in love,
His sillables betray him. I arrest you.

Dam: At whose suit.


Page Not at his Taylers in any case, for there is no greater stitch to a younger
brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of appariell when it is worn out.


Them: Lisander or his ghost.


Lisan. Demetrius,
Or some illusiue tenant in his shape.

Them: Unkind, why did thou leave my company?


Lisan: For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven,
For love: but why is Demetrius thus disguisd?

Page For that which would make a lackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a
tail.


Deem: Peace rogue.


Lisan: Why wagge, is thy master in love?


Page Faith sir he has entered his action in Cupids court, and means to
proceed in the suit it should seem.


Deem: Why did not take my counsel in thy choice?


Lisan: Because I feared a chiding, for doubting thine honorable thoughts would
not have consented to my effeminate attempts, I stole this secret course, and
manner of disguise, as best helping to access, which it has begot, now what
access will bring forth, I commit to unborn Industry.


Deem: It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance of our loves,
hinders the passage of our hopes.


Lisan: Indeed that's not the least hinderance, yet the Duke himself, and my
quaint disguise has removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a
woman, but has allowd me for my loves companion.


Them. Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access to my love,
as when I was in Thrate.


Lisan: Dametas is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our wits must fish
for him.


Them: Will the Cods head byte?


Lisan: Like an old Usurer at a young heirs inhe^^tance, and I h'ate ready
hookt for him: and he ere he comes, my plot is to preferr^ thee to his service.


Enter Dametas. Them: Prithee do, and I Will serve him in his right kind.


Lisan: Dametas, my love is yours.


Dame: Which madam I am as proud of


Manas. As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fashion.


Li: To be round I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman


Da: To me sweet blossom, tho I be somewhat strict in mine office, I cannot be
stony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?


Them: Peticion.


Manas: Your only way to move a (...) by: Humbly complaining to your good
worship, O it is most pathetick, and indeed without money, can do just nothing
with authority.


Dam: Come hither stripling whose son were thou?


Them: I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew^ my father.


Dame: Did not know thy father?


Manas. A common fault, his betters forget themselves when they grow rich, then
blame not him to forget his father.


Dam: What was his name?


Them: If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menalchas, who on his
deathbed made me his heir, with this charge, to seek your worships service,
and gave me this gold as a remembrance to purchase your favor.


Dam: Gold him?


Ma: Now does my Master long more to finger that gold, then a young girl
married to an old man, does to run her husband? ashore at Cuckolds haven.


Dame: Well, I could do for this fatherless youth.


Ma: As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him of his portion, and
then turn him out of doors a begging.


Dam: But for I have the guardian ship of the Prince, I dare do nothing without
the consent of the Duke.


Lisan: Come come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.


Dam: Well then I woe not, but it is for your sake I assure you.


Man. Meaning the gold.


Dam: What shall I call thy name?


Them: Dorus ant like your worship.


Da. Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your Master, and love
your self: be sure to get under me, and you shall loose nothing in my service.
Madam, the Duke and Duchess expect you at the hunt, and await your coming at
Dianaes oak.


Lisan: I Will attend them presently, be a good servant Dorus.


Dame. Twill be his own another day Madam.


Lisan. In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.


Dametas My service does attend you,


Ma. As the Purseuant does the prisoner for a double fee.


Exit. Them: Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vassalage.

Exit. Enter Aminter and Iulio, attyred like Satyrs. Amin: Now and Dametas be
the mettle he was stamped for, a right villain.


Iulio And he be not, hang him.


Am: Nay he deserves hanging to if he be: but will you trust him?


Iul. Yes as far as I see him, and he that trusts him further my trust is he
will be deceiud.


Amin: Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true to no man.


Iul. Yes for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most.


Amin: That's not for love.


Iul: Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this age. This is the
place his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.


Enter Dametas like a Huntsman. Dam: Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon
the loombe of perfection, and in this quech of lashes Aminter and Iulio.

See and see not, all mum, you know your que,
The games your own, if you can hunt it true.

Enter the Duke Basilius. Basil. Dametas, were thine ears ever at a more
musical banquet? how the hounds mouths like bells are tuned one under another
like a slothfulnes, the speed of the cry out-ran my sense of hearing.


Dam. Cross over the Forest to Dianas oak my liege, and there your grace
advantagde by the height of the ground, shall not only at pleasure hear, but
be eye-witnes of their musical contention.


Bas. Thanks good Dametas, be thy directions our wives conuoy.


Enter Gynetia, Violetta, and Hippolita. Gyn. Where is his highness Dametas?


Dam: At Adonis bower Madam, where he expects your presence to see the fleshing
of a couple of Spartane hounds, in the wasting blood of the spent Dear.


Gyne. Thanks good Dametas, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet,
should they not bring em to that kingly sport.


Dame. Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath* which must be laid
out in the purchase of the game. I have provided you this stand, from whence
your eyes may be commanders of the sport: such sport as you little dream of.


Viol: We are your loves detters kind Dametas.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Syluane comoners, to see what taskes
Our covetous Forresters impose upon them,
Who not content with impost of their breath,
(Poor hearts,) pursue them smiling to their death.

Dame: It Was the end of their creation Madam.


Hip. So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannise on harmless beasts,
But Forresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors.
And to claspe up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and clothe them with their skins,
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to die.

Dam: You are too tender-harted to be a good huntswoman lady.


Viol: And some of you too hard-harted, but leaving this discourse of hunting,
have all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, spent the vigor of their wits,
that not one dares venture.


Hip. For our loves sister, you may see the properer women, the worse luck.


Dam: Tush you shall have suitors, fear not madam.


Hip. No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.


Viol. Then I Will fear of purpose, because I would have em come.


Dam. And they do not, they are notable cowards.


Hip. Then let em keep away still, for I have vowed my maidenhead shall never
do homage to the bed of a coward.


Dame: Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this discourse, till
I step up to the top of the hill, and make discovery of the game,


Viol: Let your return be speedy good Dametas.


Dam: I Will put on wings and fly.


Exit. Viol: Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good riddance.


Amin: So, he has put em fair to the stand, lets issue and surprise them,


Iulio: Be resolute and sudden.


Aminter and Iulio, issue out and bear them away. Viol: Murder, treason,
reskue, help.


Enter first Dametas, and then the Duke. Dam: Yes much reskewe, much help,
much Dametas: why so, this lest was drawn home close to the head, it cannot
choose but cleave the very white of our hopes, the Dukes wit ^to thy tackle good
wit, some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is run a ground.


Basil. Tell me Dametas, was not the Dear a prodigal, did he not spend his
breath freely amongst us?


Dam. And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the hounds like
politicians nosd out the game?


Ba True: and coming to the loss Melampus, but where are our daughters?


Da. Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horce
cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time to.


Ba. Certain Dametas, but where are our daughters man?


Da. Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of sweet water,
and ground Iuie.


Cry within, treason, murder, reskew, help. Ba. What cry of treasons that
Dametas?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, I Will have unto their reskue.

Da. And my sword vn-imployd? allegiance: says nay to that my Liege, I am for
the adventure my self, if they be surprisd (I am a mad man) your grace shall
hear more: If not ((...) the more sorry) your grace shall hear more to: make
peace with your thoughts till my return, and doubt not their recovery.


Enter the Duches with her daughters, Dametrius, Lisander. etc. Gyn. Speak,
where is the Duke?


Basi. Here my Genitia.
What mean these weapons, are our daughters safe?

Viol. As a thief in a (...)ill father, we thank our redeemers.


Dam. The more my grief, were you surprisd then madam?


Hip. Yes says Dametas.


Da. And how sweet Ladies, and how were you reskewd?


Gyne. Being surprisd, this gallant Amason
Pressed to their reskew, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defense,
Wonder would ha bereft you of all sense.
She raisde her sword with such a manly grace,
As had nor her mild sexe-contrould my thoughts,
I could have fallen in love with her high worth.

Lisan. You over price us madam, not our dese^^
But the weak spi(...) of our opposites.
Gave leister to the di(...)nes of our worth.

Basil. It please your modesty to lesson it.
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodmans that?

Dame: My follower my Liege.


Basil: What ere he be, he has deserved our love.
Fellow be near us, and for this desert,
Performd against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy master we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.

Hip. Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain, I ha got me a
servant by the match: wot serve me fellow?


Them. In the best I can.
In heart your fellow, though in show your man.

Hip. I Will try your du^ious service: I command,
Your knee to kiss the ground, your lip my hand.

Dame. Pardon me Madam.


Hippol. Heeres hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.

Basil: Truce to this ayrie war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closset then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin air, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then so the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase o^ louelier sport's begun.

Exeunt. Them: If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.

Exit. Dame. Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies reskewd, and the Princes like
crauens beat out of the game-place, my invention must turn trauailer for more
stratagems^ what and I should discover their plot to the Duke, attach em for
traitors, and beg their lands for my labor; though they be my friends, twere
a pretty parcel of policy.

All things are lawful that do profit bring,
A wise-mans bow goes with a twofold string.

Enter Lisander, and Demetrius. Lisan. Did ever two princes meet such strange
changes in their loves? now we have wrought our admittance, and in a manner got
em into our possessions, ou^ hopes like false fires having brought us within
^en, vanish, and leave us out of all comfort.


Them: That the duke should doat upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpose,
but that the duchess should be enamourd on thee for a man, is prepostrous.


Lasan. Whether my (...) sh^wne in the reskue of the Ladies, or the ardent
glances her daughters beauty steals from mine eyes, give her thoughts
encouragement, I know not, but her hopes stand confident I am a man, and for
that cause am I bard from access.


Them: I way thy co(...)rances by mine own, for tho by the Dukes allowance I am
her privileged attendant, yet such is the deuilishnes of Dametas, that I
cannot joy so much access as to confer with her.


Page I can compare my lord and his friend to nothing in the world so fitly as
to a couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one up, despair
plunges the other down, whilst I like a Harl^kene in an Italian comedy, stand
making faces at both their follies.


Lisan: Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so monstrous, lets cast
our inventions in a new mold, and having so firm a foundation as this disguise
to build upon, lets draw the model, and raise the whole frame of our attempts
anew.


Them: Indeed, lovers should be conditiond like tyrants, who having the aim of
a crown in (...) violently over all lets that intervent their course, and so
must we.


Lisan And so will we, my resolutions already bent, and if I shoot not, the
next level I take, (...) I beseech thee break thy bow about mine ears, and
strike the horns in my forhead, for married men to hang their caps on.


Them: I have met a means (...) my purpose already: Mopsa Dametas only
daughter, is (...) in love with me, and to her I Will feign extreme ardor of
affection, and make her the shadow under which I Will court the true substance of
my divine Hippolita.


Lisan. About it then, I Will sweat my invention to death but I Will overtake thee;
but here comes one of my (...). I must hear his importunity, for no
reasonable denial will brush him of.


Enter the Duke. Basil. Zehnane.


Lisan. My Liege.


Basil. My thoughts come like a sail before the wind, swollen big with news and
thine ears the midwife must deliver me of this burden, my Duchess is sick,
heart sick for thee Zelmane.


Lisan. For me, why my Lord, I am no Rosasolis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover
sick folks.


Basi. Shall I be short with thee? My Lady's in love with thee.


Lisan. With me my Lord.


Basil. With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers, her very
looks write Sonnets in thy co^mendations, she carues thee at board, and
cannot sleep for dreaming on thee in bed, she is turned sunne-riser, haunts
private walks, and like a disgrast Courtier, studies the Art of melancholy.


Lisan. Now alas good Lady.


Basil. Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather lets bend our endeavors
to entangle her more. To see the kindness of Fortune, who fearing we should be
acquainted with sollitude in this our 12 month retirement, has begot a
domestical merriment, and made our own thoughts actors int, and as bad a Poet
as I am, I Will ha one scene int of mine own invention.


Lisan. Dametas will storm at that, for he cannot endure Poetry should be
countnanst: but how is it my Liege?


Basil. It Is ready plotted already, and that the Duchess may not find thee
unprovided when she comes to court thee


Lisan. Court me, court a woman my Liege.


Basil. Why that's the very happiness of the jest, but in any case confess
thy self a man.


Lisan. A man my liege, I ha no color fort.


Basil. Tush I Will furnish thee, say thou art some Prince, no matter who, and
have to do with this disguise of purpose to court my daughter Violetta,


Li. Is this scene of your own inuenting my liege?


Ba. Mine own in faith, and to confirmt the rather, use more often and private
conference with my daughter, interchange discourse and amorous dalliance, oh
twill set my Duchess affections a flre, to think her riuald by her daughter,
and give us smooth passage to our love.


Li. How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liege, do but you work
my admittance to your daughter, and I Will bestow all the art I am worth in
courting her, and see, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comedy, she has entered
the Duchess just at her que, shadow your self in your Arc, and leave me to
give her entertainment.


Basil. Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.


Lisan. I Will warrant you, I Will play the Prince with much art.


Enter the Duchess. Duchess. This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamourd tread,
The deprest flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.

Basil. Absolute Poet, Penelope was a ballet-maker to her.


Dute. Oh do not fli^ my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you runaway
I Will tie a chain about your wast for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.

Lis. Fie madam, this courtesy is more then needs*


Dut. Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind then senseless elements,
Thou never walkst, but the enamourd air
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind does with his velvet wing
Fan the thin air upon thy sweatie cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.

Lisan. Shield this vain breath, beat at some ladies ear.


Dut. But you are none, you are not, come you are not,
Your valor, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.

Ba. There Is a lover of a right temper, she will outface the name of her sex
instantly.


Lis. Well madam, since your observation has discouerd me, upon promise of
your secrecy I confess my self a man.


Basi. Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.


Dut. I knew my judgment could not be deceiud,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a woman's eye.

Basi. Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next.


Lisan. But madam, now I am known to you, what further request you.


Dut. Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embracements, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long line sick.

Basil. Thank you good wife, nay and a Duchess long to give her husbands the
horning, let it never grieve butchers to do homage at Cuekolds haven.


Lisan. Well madam, to give content to your affections, and in a strong hope
you will mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but fit time and
opportunity, and master your desires.


Basi. And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.


Dut. Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss I seal thee mine.


Lis. And I confirmt with this.


Basi. Rare, rare, rare, she is his sealed and deliuerd in the presence of her
husband.


D. Now least my husband should suspect our love,


Ba. Now, what shadow for that now.


Du. Hear a good jest, persuade him thou art a woman.


Lis. That's not to do now madam, for he as confidently belieues and ardently
courts me for a woman, as you for a man.


Du. Good, excellent, maintain that humor still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we weomen use,
Be mild and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.

Basil. Excellent virtues in a woman.


Du. I prithee do, twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous hauiour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks.
And shoot em into thine, but the chief sports this
To see an old man with a young man kiss.

Exit Dut. Basi. To see an old Duchess a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs the scenes all comicall,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit,

Lis. To take me for a man.


Basi. And arm herself
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But sooth her humor, the revenge sheede throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.

Exit. Lis. Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like
bugles follows the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools, God
forbid, not they: but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits, laughing at
this division of their wits.


Enter Violetta and Hippolita. Hip. Wot te believe me sister, I never eat a
cherry, but it puts me in mind of a husband, it kisses my lips with such a
harmless prettines.


Vil. Now in good deed lo I love em a life to, I think I shall never ha my
belly full on em.


Hip. Of what, not of husbands Violetta.


Vio. No, of cherries Hipolita, but take heed of em, they be a ver^e filling
meat, and dangerous things for us maids I can tell you, we may surfeit after
em presently.


Hip. Surfeit after what, a husband?


Vio. I and after cherries to Hippolita.


Hip. I warrant you sister, an old lady in Lacedemon taught me a preservative
against that.


Vio. For the love of cherries what.


Hip. Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she, be sure
to crack a stone said she.


Viol. Then let me alone, I Will crack a couple a stones betwixt every cherry,
rather then surfeit on em.


Hip. You must take heed you crack not too many to, for you may surfeit of the
stone as well as of the cherry.


Vi. Nay and they be such dangerous things, I have done with em.


Hip. So have I to for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of
servile liberty that we live in here in Archadea?


Vil. For all the world as Englishmen keep their fellons, and Italians their
wines, we never stir abroad without our Iaylors.


Hip. And for what cause forsooth, only to keep us from marriage.


Vil. Sure it is either some high content, or extreme discommoditie, that our
father debarrs us of it.


Hip. By this stone me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the
difference betwixt a maid and a wife.


Viol. Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the knowledge ont
last night I can tell you.


Hip. O that I had been with thee I might ha been so to: for love of marriage
how?


Vio. Why thus: as I lay slumbering in my bed,
No creature with me but my maydenhead:

Hip. Is that a creature?


Viol. Some maintain it is.
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss:
Others whose speech seem near akin to truth
Say it is a passion, bred ith heat of youth,
Some callt a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition,
But in the allowd opinion of most,
It Is never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as maids do use,
Me thought I dreampt, as maids can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought it was too much wrong
A pretty maid should lie alone so long:
With that a gallant comes, gallants can do
Much with young maids,

Hip. And with old women to.


Vio. He couted me once, and again, and thrice,
It Is virtue to say nay, to be too nice
Agrees not with my humor, yet some say,
We maids wish things, to which we answer nay,
Breefely me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could a wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we greed,
Twere strange if earnest suitors should not speed.

Hip. In what agreed you?


Viol. In our wedding ring,
Time, place, and hour, indeed in every thing:
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each hour an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till it was night.
At dinner time me thought I sweld with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spoke loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, there is something in a man
That wives love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.

Hip. Would I had dreampt I might ha done so to.


Viol. My bed-mate turned, and as he would ha spoke
I swe^t with fear, and in that fear I woke,
But seeing my kind bedfellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I wakt so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.

Hip. O twould ha vexed a saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.

Vio. And so did mine to I warrant you, nay tho I be but a little pot, I shall
be as soon hot as another.


Hip. You should not be my sister else.


Vio. Nor my mothers daughter neither.


Hip. And in good earnest we are not fatherd much amiss.


Viol. Are you aui^d of that, and in faith tell me, what think you of your
servant Dorus.


Hip. As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the sun in a cloud, or a welthy
diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world, he wears the worst
side outward, and is much better then he seems: but what think you of your
manly Amazon.


Vio. Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmanes humor would afford
project for a pretty Court comedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I
fear she is, my mother doares upon her for a man, and as I wish he were, and
that with such an ardor of affection, that I could find in my heart to turn my
mother out of the company, and play the lovers part my self.


Hip. How ever man or woman, the jest holds current in one.


Vio. I know not what knauish motion has had to do with my thought, but my
mind tells me that your servant Dorus and my Amazon, are other then they seem:
and here he comes.


Enter first Lisander, then Miso, Mopsa, Demetrius. Miso. Why how now madam,
Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your fathers charge.


Lisan. Pardon Mistress Miso, it was my doing and the Dukes.


Miso But the Duchess w^l like neither the Dukes doings nor yours neither in
this case I can tell you. The Duke stays your coming and yet the duchess is
very desirous ont, my husbands is in the next Arbor to man you. For you Lady,
my presence be your privilege.


Li. Miso should be either a hangman or a Herald, for she never comes amongst
us, but she quarters our company and arms.


De. Excellent beauty, and therefore more excellent, because situate in so
fair a creature.


Mops. You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me think you love
me, how say you mother does he.


Mi. Mary let him chose daughter, when I was as thou art.


Hip. You were as she is, but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my servant Dorus
bears a months mind to you, be not so straight laced to him. Mop. Straight
laced, sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I Dorus, no in soth, I go wide
open wensday, I never lace my self but on sondaies, and that for fear I should
burst with eating of plum porridge. Hip. I mean let fall some comfortable
looks on your suter.


Mop. sgod mend me I Will let fall or take up any thing I have to do him good.


Hip. Why that's kindly said, and Dorus your love is very ambitious, to climb
so hie as the beautiful Mopsa.


Mop. O are you avisd of that, twold make a horse break his bridle to hear
how the youth of the village will commend me, oh the pretty little pincking
nyes of Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopsa says another, and
then do I bridle my head like a malt-horse thus, set mine arms a kembo thus,
wrethe my neck and my body thus, wink with one eye thus, and spread my
peacocks tail as broad as the proudest minx of em all.


Hip. These extraordinary graces must not want admiration, but where is your
mother.


Miso. Speak softly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foisting hound.


Mop. Godsme, my mothers stealing of a nap.


Hip. Nay, she cannot be said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes herself
would discover her theft: but Dorus since your fortunes are poor, you should
study to enoble your deserts, and beget effects worthy to court and win your
Ladies acceptance.


Them. Less madam, I choose no better moderater then your self, betwixt me and
my unworthy services, suppose your self tho but a Cucko compard with this
sweet singing Nitingale, should be sued to by a prince like me, I mean like me
in love, for love in princes and pesants admits comparison: suppose Demetrius
should in like disguise court you as I do, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I do, for
Mopsa, kneel to you thus, as I do, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I
do, to Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsaes,
suppose he should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure you he were
Demetrius, as I do this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son of Menalchas, could
your disdain stand out like Mopsaes?


Hip. What a kenes necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust me Mopsa
your servant speaks well, and if he can prove himself the man he speaks of,
and my wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no reason to think scorn of him.


Mop. Why what should I do madam, my mother tells me I must not say as I think.


Hip. I am no counselor, but should Demetrius in like disguise court me, thus
would I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss, and thus argue:
think not Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could so muffle thee, but that
the sun of valor shind through them long since, and in regard of thy serviceable
duty in concealing, and vnpre^ented policy in thus making known thy love, sort
but out fit opportunity, and in despite of all gardians strict observance, go
where thou will, the worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita, this would I vow,
and this will I perform.


De. And were I Demetrius and you Hippolita, I would deciue Dametas, outreach
Miso, forswear Mopsa, and forsake Archadea to share the fortunes of divine
Hippolita.


Mop. And what should I do then?


Them. I do but speak in the person of Demetrius, and under Hippolita shadow
what I intend to the rare, and never enough wondered at Mopsa, the black swan of
beauty, and madg-howled of admiration.


Mop. Do not you flout me Dorus, and you do not, provide a priest and I Will marry
you, and my father and mother shall never know one.


De. Manasses is the man.


Mop. And I Will be the woman, who so ever say nay toote, little dreams my mother
of what we have done.


De. Tmay be she did, for she sighed and grond much in her sleep.


Mop. It Is well she was so quiet, for she eat pease poridge to breakfast, and
they will make me break wind in my sleep like a horse, and see as the devil will
hate she wakes, and here comes my father, no words and ye love me.


Enter Dametas. Dam. Why god a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the
servant of Dametas, and I Will prefer thee fort.


Hip. You were worse then the devil else, for they say he helps his servants,
then you may do little and you cannot help yours.


Da. Will you break your jests against the bars of you chamber window, and
clear the green, the duke is coming to bowls, and I would not for half
mine office you should be a rub in the way of his patience: Daughter and Wife,
conduct her to the Lodge. Exit. And Dorus. make you haste about your business.


Demet. I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly plast?
You will condemn me for my too much haste.

Exeunt. Damet. Why so: this it is to be in authority: Inferior persons, I and
the Princes themselves, fly from my presence, like the chirping Birds from
the sight of the Faulcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blows away
inferior Officers (the Court rubbish) out of my way, and gives me a smooth
passage: I am the morning star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of
the Sun: indeed I am never out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.


Enter Duke, Duchess, Lisander, Violet. Duke. Does our match hold.


Dutch. Yes, whose part will you take.


Duk. Zelmanes.


Dutch. Soft, that match is yet to make.


Viol. Lets cast a choice, the nearest two take one.


Lis. My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.


Viol. Come, here is a good.


Lis. Well, betterd.


Dutch. Best of all.


Lis. The Duke and I.


Duk. The weakest go to the wall.


Viol. I Will lead.


Lis. I Will follow.


Viol. We have both one mind.


Lis. In what?


Viol. In leaving the old folk behind.


Duk. Well iested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hate.

Dutch. Your last Boule come?


Viol. By the faith a me, well led,


Lis. Would I might lead you,


Viol. Whither?


Lis. To my bed.


Viol. I am sure you would not?


Lis. By this air I would.


Viol. I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.


Lis. I Would love you sweet.


Viol. Sour, so I heard you say.


Lis. Accept it then.


Viol. Of what acquaintance pray?


Lis. Of loves, and mine.


Duke. Daughter, your bowl winnes one.


Viol. None of my Maidenhead Father, I am gone,
The Amason has won one.

Lis. Yield to that.


Viol. The cast I do.


Lis. Your self?


Viol. Nay scrape out that.


Dutch. Whose is it yet?


Lis. The Dukes: play smooth and fine,
The smallest help that is, will make your mine.

Viol. Me yours?


Lis. Your mine, for tho the cast I loose,
I ha won your love.

Viol. Much: in my the other hoose.


Dutch. Come, the last market this cast is worth all the rest.


Viol. The leader as the follower.


Lis. Badd's the best,
I win her for ten crowns, and there they be.

Viol. I take your lay.


Lis. A match twixt you and me.


Dutch. I Will be your half.


Duk. That were unkindly done.


Viol. Pardon me mother, I Will bear all or none.


Lis. I ha won you Madam.


Viol. Me?


Lis. I mean your bet.


Viol. Then take your winnings, i will not die in debt.


Lis. Madam believe me, I am as I protest, a Prince, my name Lisander.


Viol. Look to the Dukes standing Madam.


Dutch. So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.


Lis. Thus clouded as you see, for your love, my soul speaks in my tongue: I
appointed this match at bowls a purpose to acquaint you with it.


Viol. Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here Is one would steal a piece of flesh to night.

Lis. Dear Madam.


Viol. No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can express
with your tongue, and as far as my mothers jealousy would give me leave,
answered it with kind looks: your bias stands wrong mother.


Dutch. Why? It stands toward Zelmanes.


Viol. Has it stood so long?


Dutch. All the game through.


Viol. Then all your game's bold wrong: furnish you with necessaries befitting
an escape, and my will shall be as ready to take wing, as yours; put in a cast
now mother, or the game is gone indeed.


Dutch. Whose is the throw?


Viol. Ours, till the last bowl came.
But that has wont'em clear, both cast and game.

Lis. Our winnings come, a kiss and bate the rest.


Dutch. What do you kiss in earnest or in jest?


Viol. In earnest in good truth.


Duk. Troth, kindly sed,
Take heed you kiss not out your maidenhead.

Viol. In jest?


Duk. In earnest.


Viol. It Is the fashion,
Much in request among our Nation.

Duk. To kiss away their maidenheads?


Viol. Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures are nea're fairly drawn,
Until the maidenhead be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers sed,
And so will daughters do when Mams be dead.

Duke. What? pawn their maidenhead?


Viol. Yes, and loose'em too.


Dutch. And you will maintain that fashion?


Viol. Signeor Noe.


Music of Bells etc. Duk. Lay by this homebred mirth, and prepare your ears
to entertain strangers.


Viol. Stranger? why Father, Strangers are as welcome to me, as mine own
Countrymen; if they bring good manners, and civil humanity in their company:
otherwise, they are like foul weather, come before they be sent for.


Enter Dametas, Manasses, Iulio, Amyntas. Viol. Dometas, nay then we shall have
news enough; for he never comes into the Presence, but he brings a whole sack
full of (...)es: of news I should say.


Duke. Welcome Dametas: what officious fellow is that?


Dam. A pure welwiller of your Majesty's, and a follower of mine.


Viol. O it is Manasses; and he could make Arms as well as he mars Legs, he
would grow in great request for Heraldrie: What Is your news?


Manas. These Lacedaemonians, Subjects to your Majesty, having a Messadge to
deliver to your Majesty's instruments of hearing, commonly eclipt, ears.


Viol. How? Has any one here, clipped ears?


Manas. Sweet Femenine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with the Sissars
of attention, as I say, these Lacedaemonians have chosen me their tongue.


Viol. Of a long tongue thou speakst very little.


Mana. That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.


Duk. What greuances oppress them? briefly speak.


Ami. Merchandise (my Ledge) through the avarice of purchasing Officers, is
rackt with such unmerciful Impost, that the very name of Traffic grows
odious even to the professor.


Iulio. Towns so oppressed for want of wonted and natural liberty, as that the
native Inhabitants seem Slaves, and the Forrayners free Denizens.


Amin. Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser can be said to be
placed in his Office, he is again by his covetous Patron displac't.


Iulio. Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great men's followers, not
only, not punished, but in a manner countenaunced and aplauded.


Amin. Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole body of the
Commonwealth runs clean against the byas of true and pristine government.


Iulio. And your honorable Brother, like a Shipp toste upon the violent
billows of this Insurrection, by us intreates your Majesty's Letters of speedy
reformation, for fear the whole kingdom suffer inevitable shipwreck.


Duk. Which after short deliberation with our Counsel, your self shall
return. Dametas, reward their trauayles with 200. Crowns: in the mean time,
let them taste the best entertainment of our Court.

Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Dukes frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewar^ed.

A(...)i. Manasses, see the fellows entertaind; I must attend of the Duke.


Man. Boy, see the fellows entertaind? I must wait of my lord.


Boy. Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.


Ami. So, here is Peticioners attendance right; good words, and short commons:
But it is not their entertainment we come for. I made a simple shift to get
entertainment into the Court,


Juli. Well Cupid, pray for our lives, for and we were gone, I know not where
thou would have two such statesmen again.


Ami. His Commonwealth could not stand without us: and that his Mother knows
well enough: and he sends no better success then we had at our hunting, he
looses a friend of me.


Juli. It Will not sink in my thought yet, but that old mustie slave Dametas
playde the slave with us.


Ami. Would I could prove it once: but since we are again admitted our
Realm, shall we be idle? somewhat we will do, though they will give us but small
thanks for our labor.


Iuli. The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved, but we will
change a thrust or two with his intent for'em.


Ami. It Would put the poor Wenches out of conceit with themselves, and there
should not be some contending for'em.


Jui. We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim deceiues not.


Amin. We are I faith: Invention could not weaue,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.

Exeunt. Enter Lisander and Demetrius. Demet. Come, pass off this groueling
imitation; a Lovers thoughts must be ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning
the bace air where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of
Invention, and ouerpeere al hindrances:

The Ladies themselves are willing.

Lis. Ready to imbark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.


Demet. Let me alone to work it then. But here comes my Boy.


Enter Page. Boy. It Were more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man:
but men and war were worn out of fashion both in a So^mer.


Lisan. I am of thy belief in that, Boy.


Boy. Would my Lord were so to, Sir.


Them. Suppose I were Sir what then?


Boy. I should (as many vpstartes have done) prove rich: for I believe you
would make me your heir.


Demet. Is that part of your belief?


Boy. A principal point Sir.


Them. Renounce it then, for I believe you will never besaud by it.


Boy. I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and
some Ladies, were never of Gods making.


Lisa. Of whose then, wagge?


Boy. I Will tell you: the Minters quoine Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds make
Nnights, and Knights stamp Ladies.


Deem. And what do Ladies?


Boy. They live not idly neither; they make some Knights, and mar many
Gentlemen.


Lisa. Ladies are good worke-women too, then?


Boy. Far better then any Tailor: they will make you an end of a suite,
especially a Court suite, when all the Tailors in a Country know not how to
set a stitch in it.


Them. I am of the belief you are a Knave, Sir.


Boy. I had no says, should I say you were not.


Lisa. Well, what, a Knave?


Boy. In a Knaves belief Sir.


Them. Because in yours?


Boy. Do you say it, and I Will swere't, my Lord.


Them. No more Boy, I am weary of your iestes.


Boy. That coufirmes'em to be good Sir.


Them. Your reason for that, Sir?


Boy. Because travelers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.


Them. Goodly ones in deed: but leaving this highway of circumstaunce; I sent
you for Manasses.


Boy. The learned Scribe attendes you.


Enter Manasses. Them. Will you fall off, Sir?


Boy. Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.


Exit. Lisa. Welcome Manassas: I have present employment for thee, in which I
must borrow


Man. Pardon me Madame, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without
security and pawnes.


Lisa. It Is not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.


Man. Good counsel is worth good money, Madame.


Lisa. Thou shall be well considered; there is twenty Crowns in earnest.


Man. Nay Madame, this hand's like a fellow, it takes every thing in jest; if
you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and
jest, if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed,
and put me in trust to execute it.


Lisa. Take It, in a word this honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madame
Mopsa, are man and wife.


Man. Man, an woman perhaps; but not man and wife: for though most women have a
will to be Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady have not wit to be a
wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I do in this?


Lisa. O very much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation,
the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Mariadge, is yet unperformed, and
hearing that you have taken orders.


Man. That I have: I have taken order for the making away of a hundred
Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in in the mind of you now,
these two Beagles, Dorus and Mops^, have run themselves breathless in the
chase of love, you would ha me couple'm up in the leases of Matrimony.


Lisa. You are in the right.


Manass. And you in the wrong, I Will keep your jest, but in any case take back
again your earnest: i will not purchase my Lords displeasure with your gold.


Lisan. Thy Lord shall never know it.


Man. Oh sir! though my M. has but bad eyes, he has exceeding long ears: and
though a Forrayner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wish any
to jest with a Courtiers steeld Sword; it is seldom drawn but it draws blood.


Lis. Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance thee: be not
an Ass, make use of thy time: thy Masters service is no heritage; the world
knows he gettes under the Duke, thou art a fool, and thou will loose under
him: there is a hundred Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain
curtsey with aleagence for a bribe.


Mana. Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give me a Kingdom,


Lisan. What then?


Man. I should ha more ground then half the Kings in Christendom: here is my
hand, I Will do it: my M. is my M. and I love him; but my gold's my God, and I
honor it: I Will do it; the time and place?


Lisa. Soon in the evening at Adonis Chapel. Art resolute?


Ma. As your Adamant: think you it was fear made me keep out? no it was hope
of these flattering sweet lipt drabs, I fear to marry my Ladies daughter? no
nor to go to bed with her neither. Why, I have counterfaited his hand and
seal. He has been content with me, to come nearer to him, at his
entertainment of the last Ambassador, when he was heat with drinking of
healthes. As I led him to his Chamber, I nimde his Chain, and drew his Purse,
and next morning persuaded him he lost it in the great Chamber at the Revels.
He puts me in trust with his whole estate: he buys Manners, I purchase Farms:
he buildes houses, I pluck down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the
Commons: he beggars the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.


Lis. These are notable knauish courses. What breeding have had?


Man. Very good breeding Sir: My great Graundfather was a Rat-catcher, my
Grandsier a Hangman, my Father a Promooter, and my self an Informer.


Lisa. Thou were a Knave by inheritance.


Man. And by education too: but Bawdie Informations growing stale, I gave up my
cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit for a Gown, and of Manasses a
penurious Informer, I turned Coppie, and became Manasses, a most, precise, and
illiterate expositor.


Demet. Were you a Reader then?


Man. And a Writer too Bullie; I set some of my Parishioners Wives such
Coppies, as their Husbands might cast their cappes at it, but could never come
near.


Lis. But and you used such a high and eleuate style, your auditories low and
humble understandings should never crall ouer't.


Man. Tush I could fashion the body, of my discourse fit to the ear of my
auditorre: for to cast Eloquence amongst a company of Stinctards, is all one
as if a man should scatter Pearl amongst the hoggish animals ecliped Swine: no
I had paraphrasticall admonitions of all sorts; Some against covetous
Landlordes, and that would I squirt awongst beggarly Tennants: Some against
Usurers, and that would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst prodigal
Banqeoutes: Some against the pride of the Court, and that honies the ear of
the Citizen: Some against the fraud of the City, and that is Cake and Cheese
to the Country: Some against Protestants, and that is plumpes the lasie
Catholic against Papist and Protestant, and that fattens the rank witted
Puritand, against Papist, Puritand, and Protestant; and that tickles the ear
of the luxur ous Atheist.


Lisa. Why you never light upon any Atheistes, do you?


Man. Oh very many.


Lisan. In the Country perhaps, and the out-skirtes of the city?


Man. In the very boosome of the City: and by your leave, here and there one
in the Court too: But we fi^t 'em all; for in deed we wandering Lights, have
(as other tradesmen have) Commodities of all sorts, and prises.


Lis. How do they come by them?


Man. As many do by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke be aware of 'em.


Lisa. Some buy'em at Booke-sellers stalles; but the best they bespeake of
Poets.


Lisa. Me thinks Poets of all men, should not edify, they are so envious.


Man. One to another, to no body else: a proud Poet is for all the world like
a Puncke in request, covetous of many Cliantes, when she has more then she
can handsomely play off: You shall have some Poet (Apolloes Vicar, especially)
write you a comicall, Pastoral, Tragical, Musical history in prose, will
make the auditors eyes run a water like so many waterspouts: I had one of
them my self, and your ears be in case, I Will give you a taste on it; his
argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost sheep: and thus it is.


Lis. Prithee be brief?


Man. Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake, the best men in the
parish, for commonly they sleep the beginning, because they love not
division: but to the lost Sheep. Beloud, you must imagine this Sheep was a
Sheep, a lost Sheep; a Sheep out a the way: but my dear flock and loving
Sheep, whom like a careful Shepherd, I have gathered together with the
whistle or pipe, as it were of mine eloquence, into this sold of peaceful
Community; Do not you stray do not you fly out, do not you wander, do not
you loose your selves; but like kind Sheep, and valiant Rams: I speak to you
the better part and head of my flock. As I say, you shall see the valiant
Rams turn all their horns together, and appose themselves against the
Woolfe, the hungry Woolfe, the gredie Woolfe, the Lams-deuowring Woolfe, the
Woolfe of all Woolfes, to defend their Eawes and young ones. Durst you say all
your heads together, and with the horns of your Manhood defend your
families, your own wives, and your neighbors children: Was not this stinging
geere?


Lis. A good Sheepish admonition.


Man. The fitter for my Audience: while you live, have a ear to fit your
Audience.


Lis. Thou speak like a Christian: prithee what Religion art of?


Man. How many souer I make use of, I Will answer with Piauano Orllotto the
Italian: I profess the Dukes only.


Demet. What Is his reason for that?


Man. A very sound reason: for says he, I came Raw into the world, and I
would not willingly go roasted out, so close up the stomach of your Discourse
with that dry answer, and euey man about his business.


Lis. You Will be mindful of to morrow-night.


Man As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the Quarter day.


Them. Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace
of my brain; and I must fashion it Instantly, for fear it burst the heat.
Give my conceit way, for here comes one must help to proportion it.


Exit Lisan. Enter Dametas. Damet. How now Demetrius, what wind has blown up
this storm of melancholy, thy countenance was not wont to be thus cloudie?
Whence proceeds this sudden alteration?


Them. From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-stard nativity should
continue thus opposite.


Dam. Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what is the matter? speak.


Them. I Will acquaint your Honor: I hope no other ear ouerheares us, Under
Dianaes Oak I found an inscription upon a stone, which told me, that wealth
Aristomeres sometimes brought into Archa lea, had there under hid a massy
sum of treasure.


Dam. Under Dianaes Oak? Dorus shall have my daughter Mopsa: no more words
on it, and thou love me Dorus: smother thy golden hops a day or two; thou
shall have Mopsa, but I Will have all the Gold, then marie my daughter to some
great man, though he be poor, it is the fashion: I Will be Nobly allied what ere
it cost me: shall be my Son in law Dorus: have an eye to the Princess, fall
close to my daughter Mopsa,

Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, do kiss her; thou shall pay sweetly fort:
I can gull you, know what fair words can do,
I Am an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.

Exit. Them. So, so; how violently he deuowers his bane, and steals himself
into the order of Gullerie: me thinks I see how betwixt hope and fear he
sweates in his practice, and like a foolish dreamer, castes how to lay out his
wealth before it comes in. So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife;
and as the Devil would ha're, here she comes.


Enter Miso. Miso. Dorus, how now Dorus' What time a day is it with you?


Dor. What time a day so'ert be with me, it is sleeping time with my Lord, I Am
sure of that.


Mis. Sleeping time Dorus, what do thou mean by that?


Dor. Nay nothing: he is troubld with a kind of malady called Iusurectio carnis.


Miso. How, a dish of Creuices? nay and that be the worst, good enough: I am
glad a falls to Fish, for he was given to Flesh a late too too bad.


Dor. Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.


Miso. I hold my Ladyship to some strumpet.


Dor. Life, a ielosie; I think you are a Witch, it was so indeed.


Miso. Nay I thought as much: he was wont to kiss me, and do all kindness a
man could do, till he came to the Court; and now he will not lie with me
forsooth: and why? it is the Court fashion. He will not love me, and why? it is
the Court fashion. I must not come near him at his down lying, nor his
vprising, ctc. And this be the Court fashion, would I were an honest woman of
the Country again, be Courtiers who list. I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in tears,
he has not done by me, as a Husband should do.


Dor. It Is nothing to me, I cannot do withal Madam, would I could.


Mis. Yes marie may thou Dorus; thou may, and shall do withal too and thou will: but as thou look to enjoy my daughter Mopsa, acquaint me with the
old Foxes starting hole.


Dor. That Is past my cunning: the old Fox has more holes then one, to hide's
head in: But not to go long about the bush with you.


Mis. No good Dorus, I do not love a man should go long about my bush: What is
she for a woman?


Dor. I know not what she is for a woman; marie I fear she is little better
then a Whore for your Husband: hark in your ear; she is Manasses wife.


Miso. Manasses wife? marie fire Master gunner; a Putitane turned Puncke: Gods
my precious. I Will slit her nose, as I am a Lady will I: is she the party you
wot on?


Dor. Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.


Mis. I Will spoil their sport, sadle my Mule there, have an eye to the
princess: shall ha my daughter and be but to spite him withal, faith Fox i will
ha you out of your hole, or i will fire you out.


Dor. Nay that will do no good, but for your own good Madam, take heed you
do not scold.


Mise. Why may not a Lady scold Dorus?


Dor. Scold, O in no case, twill mar a Ladies beauty clean, and make her
look as hard favored at any ordinary woman.


Mis. Godamercie for that Dorus, I Will not loose my beauty for twenty on'em:
saddle my Mule, bring me my chopping knife, I Will gold the lecherous Goat, and
mince his Trull, as small as herbs to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is it?


Dor. No this is tolerable.


Mis. Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray God her feeling
be good, for as I am a Lady, I Will not leave her an ele to see withal, and yet
I will not scold neither.


Exit. Dor. Oh take heed of that at any hand, So, so, so: now it begins to
quicken me thinks, I see already how she runs atilt at the Wenches eyes: calls
the maid Baud, the woman Whore, and her husband Lecher: and when all comes to
all, like an Irish Wolf, she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and
her Ass to their wildgoose chase: now to my sweet heart Mopsa, for she is all
the blocks last in my eye to slumble on: and God bless my wits, for the fool
haunts me.


Enter Mopsa. Mops. Dorus, where is my Father Dorus?


Dor. Your Father, Oh my dear Mopsa?


Mop. Nay now you flout me?


Dor. Flout you? oh the fair heavens, but this it is for a man to cast away
himself in violence of passion and extremity of sighs on a piece of beauty,
that cares not for him, but it is the tricks on you all.


Mop. Tricks, no as god mend me, and I should not have a husband till I got
him with tricks, I should lead apes in hell: but faith tell me, do thou love
me Dorus?


Dor. Do I love you quoth ye, It cuts my very heart strings, do I love you?
why it is the only mark my Inqeuors she or at.


Mop. If thou do not hit the mark, then you are a very bungler: but where is
my Father?


Dor. Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of purpose, and
appointed Manasses to meet us this evening at Adonis Chapel in the Amasons
apparel, to marry us: I think this are signs I love you.


Mop. I but you jest, I doubt you will not marry me.


Dor. Will you mere me there?


Mop. As I am a Virgin I will.


Dor, And come with an intent to marry me?


Mop. As I hope to be a wife I will.


Dor. You must take heed you keep our purpose close,


Mop. As I did the loss of my Maydenhead.


Dor. Why have you lost it then?


Mop. Many a dear day ago, yet I told Nobody on it but my Mother and our
Horsekeeper, and they say I am nere the worse maid for that, and I can keep my
own counsel, as I hope I shall; but will you meet me soon?


Dor. Just in the midway, as Tilters do.


Mop. I Will go before and stay, but do not deceive me, and you do, I Will show my
Fathers Horsekeeper all as God mend me.


Dor. So tria sequntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fools,
and by there absence have won a free accesle to an escape.
If my Lisanders hope prove like to this,
This night shall Crown us Monarchers of our bl^^^e.

Exit. Enter Duke and Lisander. Duke. No more of these delays sweet Madam,
your love has broken day often with my expectance, I dare give it trust no
longer.


Lisa. I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to maintain
longer flight, I cast my self down breathless at your loves mercy: yet I
beseech your Majesty, let not your eager desires, practice any present
violence upon my yielding chastity: it was only possession of my love you had
in chase, which with conuenent time and place purchased, I put your grace in
full possession of.


Duk. Although thy Breath be never but Musical, yet it never taught the string
of true happiness till now: and to approve thy heart sets hand to thy word,
appoint the time.


Lisa. Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood, and ashamd to
consent to the betraying of my modesty) meet me at Adonis bower, where i will
make tender of subdued chastetie to your high Majesty, as my first and most
victoriuos conqueror.


Duke. By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those Joys, thy presence shall bring
to enrich me with, i will meet thee, and make thee Queen over the most submisse
Captive that ever love took prisoner.


Lisa. If you deceive me.


Duke. Not except warm life,
Deceive my voice of their innatiue heat.
Then have slow time, exchange thy leaden sleete,
For Hormes wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmanes eyes.

Exit. Lisa. So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmanes answerable
to your expectation.
Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a lubilee: my teeming hope:
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have Christened, opportunity.
Unto whose shrine in honor of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice,
Love grant Demetrius, meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.

Enter Julio and Aminter Iulio. Only our disguises hold firm, but all other
attempts meet untimely deaths, even in their cradles.


Amin. What and we should acquaint the Ladies with our intents.


Julio. Twould argue a kind of cowardice in out wits, that ha such suspectles
admittance to there presence, as this disguise has purchased us, we should not
have that ability of inuenture to entangle'em in their own security.


Amint. Well howsoever, we must not dwell long determining for the liberty of
stay with Dametas, who out of his covetous disposition in detaining our reward,
allowed us the eldest day of our licent abode at Court, is run out.


Juli. It Is very true, and for my part, I Will rather go home with a private
repulse, then managing any unlikely attempt, become sufferer under a public
disgrace.


Ami That's my very thought, yet that our second ariuall be not altogether
empty of imploiment, lets practice something upon Dametas, and acquaint the
world with his coward baseness; in which, he not only detracts from his masters
bounty, but look how as Conduit head or master-spring that is poisoned, does
his best, to enfect the whole body of the court, with the leprosy of his
covetousness.


Juli. There Is no action of his begetting can be said to be truly honorable.


Ami. How can they when there Father's a mungrell, the Duke out of his
honorable bounty commanded him to reward our travails with 200. Crowns:
and now after two months attendance, and enforst delays: In which time an
ordenarie petitioner might have spent the vasew of the reward, he packes us off
with 50. Crowns, his excuse being that his master has forgot us, and what he
does, is of his own bounty, as if the Moon should brag she gave the world
light, when all the luster she has, comes from the heat of the Sun.


Juli. Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would grow to such
height, as the Dukes authority should ha much trouble to prune them.


Ami. To prevent which, his majesty shall have private note of it, knew we in
whose trust to conduct it.


Iuli. It Is an Office very few dare undertake, he is so riueted to the Dukes
good opinion.


Amt. Lies there no jar twixt none of the Nobility and him, what say you
Zelmanes?


Juli. The gallant, Amason: you could not ha cast your choice fitter, for her
honorable mind maintains deadly feud against his bace proceedinges: and here
she comes, attended by Dametas servant, lets wait on opportunity.


Enter Lisander and Demetrius. De. Lisander.


Lis. Demetrius.


Iulo. Lisander and Demetrius, stand close, of my life we are come to the birth
of some notable knavery.


Amt. How blows the winds of our hopes?


Lisand. Fair to the point of our expectlicion, I have made away the Duke and
the Dutch.


Them. How made away them? poysond them.


Lis. with a confection of love, which I have so tempred with fair promices, as
their minds are in loves heaven already: Videlicet in Adonis bower, where this
evening I have given em my word to meet em; but I have so cast it, that
Manasses shall meet em in my steed.


Them. It Will be a rare scean of mirth, to hear what costly discourse the i will
bestow upon the fool in thy outside.


Iulio. Do you hear that.


Ilipo. yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.


Lisa. I have cleard the way to Violetta, but what order have thou taken, with
thy burbolts: Dameta, Myso, and amorous Mopso.


Damet. shot em away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it that in the
end they shall all meet at Adonis chapel.


Lisan. This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.


Iulio. My hopes should want of thyer will, and it do not.


Lisand. Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how shall convey our
lover out of the Island.


Them. I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy this time
have cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Kalader and Philinax, as
we may pass without suspicion.


Lisan. But how for transportation.


De. I am furnished of that to, you remember the two Lacedemou intelligencers


Ilip. Now what of us.


Iulio. Hold my life, we shall be put in this scean of gullery.


Lisan. Oh in any case.


Them. For the love of Cupid do, iniquiris past, lets take our entrance, and
pass over the stage like mu^es, to furnish out a show.


Lisan. And see occasion like a kind wench presents em in the very instant my
honest friends welcome, have you not your dispatch with a letter to Lacedemon.


Amt. Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your Ladyship, and
know what service your honor will command.


Lisan. you have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit business of much
import unto your trust, and to prevent much circumstances take my word, you are
not ignorant of the Kings general challenge.


Iulio. About his daughters.


Lis. you understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind which is to
convey the 2, ladies whom we in these disguises have won to Lacedemon,


Amt. were we but confirmd of your of estates.


Lis. well give your sufficient assurance of that and the princesses themselves
shall confirm it.


Iulio, we crave no better madam, but shall we not ha yours honors company.


Lisa. No: having brought them abord, we will make return to the Duke, to let
him understand we stole not our prizes but won them manfully at the point of
wit.


Amt. A noble resolution.


Iulio. His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest the more
applausable, where shall we receive the Ladies.


Them. Be that our care, but on your lives be heedful of your safe ties.


Amt, More then of our own my lord,


Them. Enough whilst you attend we will to the Duke, and play all guls or none.


Iulio. All Guls indeed since you had follies whip,
No guls, to all guls, fools love fellowship.

Exeunt. Enter miso and Mop. miso. Look well to mine Ass there, lord how I
sweat with anger; this sames the house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me
count my hurts, and see how I shall be reuengd: it shall be so, i will have em both
carted, and manasses shall go before like a whifler and make way with his horns,
where be these whores: open the door, where be these pan ders: O that I were not
a lady: I could scold like a butter-whore,


Ent, wife. whose there a gods name, lord for his mercy is the woman mad.


miso: yes I thank ye fort: horn mad, where is your companion whetes the old
leacherous goat my husband, open the door I say.


wife. Jesus for thy mercy sake madam, what do I want.


Miso. what do I want, the chief implement a woman should have I want that as a
woman cannot be without, I mean my husband, I want.


wife, your husband, I saw him not as I am an honest woman.


mi. not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arrant whore you
did, you must have your Creuishes with a pox cannot City Maunchet and fresh
cod-serue your turn, but you must have Court cake-bread and Creuishes with a
vengeance, but come give me my husband, or i will have him out of the flesh on
thee, and yet I will not scold neither.


wife Pray Madam ha patience: what should your husband do here


mis. That which he should do at home with his wife, and he were worth his
ears.


wife, Lady I protest I do not know him,


miso. Not know him thou lie in every vain ith heart thou lie, thou know
him, and as Adam knew Eve thou know him, he has been as inward with thee,
as ever he was with me, he has by his own confession he has, and thou deniest
it, thou lie in thy throat like a Puritanicall whore as thou art, O that I
were a butter-whore for an hour I might scold alittle.


wife Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you


mis. Men bring tales to me, I defy thee in thy guts, I defy thee, men bring
tales to me, thou take me to be one of thine own church do: they are no
honest men that bring tales to thee and ha wives of their own, and my husbands
one of them, go thy ways now.


wife. I beseech you madam do but hear me.


mis, Hear thee, I have heard too much of thee, too too much too much, where is
my husband, bring forth my husband, i will teach him to put a difference betwixt
Joan and my lady I hold him ten pound ont, and yet I will not scold neither,
and I had bin an old hag past tea ming as his whore is a puritan, it had bid
somewhat, but being a woman of Gods making, and a lady of his own, and wearing
mine own hair which is much in a lady of my standing I can tell you, to use me
thus, flesh and blood cannot induer^, let me come in, open the door let me come
in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a lady that I might scold a
little.


Exeunt Enter Kalander and philanax Demet, boy. Boy. So so, so, take your
places, for the same bald pated oak is the stage, where ye shall see the part
of a doting fool performd by an old man and a young wench,

Do worshipful Dametas,
The same man,
Has he no fellow acters in his most lamentable, commical, historical,
tragical, musical, pastoriall.

Boy None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself, marry then he
has Signer Mattocke, a very sharp sastyricall humotist, and Mounser le spade,
but he goes somewhat more bluntly to his business, yet heel serve for mutes,
and as good as the best to furnish out the stage.


Kal, But dares Dorus being but Dametus servant so abuse his mad master thus
grosely.


Boy O Lord Sir, their ha ben serving men have done their Masters far
greater abuse, yet had their wives conceald it, their ears should never have
bin acquainted with it.


Phi. Is that a fashion in request.


Boy Altogether I Will assure you, but obedience Gentleman the sean begins.


Enter Damet as with mattocke and spade kal. Pray God it be good he stays so
long,
Ridiculous enough, and good enough.

Dame. So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.


Ka. What countreimen is his Ass he speaks so familiarly to him.


Boy Ath City breed, marry he picks up his living ath burs and nettles that
grow about the Court gate.


Dam. be in readiness good mattocke, play thy part sweet spade, let me see
Dianaes oak? I held Dianaes oak divine, true pure gold honest, Dorus, fortunate
Dametas.


Ka. An excellent come dyan, what life he puts into his part.


Da. So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very gravel
savors of treasure, this sames the bed chamber of my Lady Pecunia, and see,
see some of her golden hairs, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold,
honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, softly, softly, not to fast, let me not
devour my content too greedily least like a cormorant I take a surfeit ont.


Phil. Oh take heed of that master in any case.


da. Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by computation
have some three millions of them, I some three or four millions, how shall I
employ em to make the most profit of em.


da. That would be known indeed.


da. I Will put out one million to use, after the rate af seven score to the
hundredth: and yet I wnot, no fie, for then you will ha my humor brought ath
stage for a vserer; to prevent with scandalous report, i will put it into my
Scribe-maiors hand, and he shall deal for me.


Kal: There Is is a simple cloak to cover his villainy.


Phil: It Is a very short one,: and passing slite to hide his knauerie.


boy. it cannot chose but be seen through,


dam: An other Milion i will lay to bestow in Offices. I will have wealth or i will
rake it out ath kennels else, chimnies ha smoakt for already, and now i will
deal upon sea-cole and salt, now, now, now, it comes, sweet gold, honest
Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how, how, shall I adore thee, O let me
do the homage of my knees: now now, for the tongue of a Poet, tho I hate
poetry worse then any of the seven deadly sins, I could wish my self a
Poet for some hour, to write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistres; and
see the very bed wherein her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice


boy. happy Dametas, now like an oreioid lover, let me open the sheets of my
heavenly mistress, with reverence, so with humble reverence, and like a
blushing lover that puts out the light ere he presumes to touch the bed of his
love so let me darken the candles of my body, mine eyes, and first bless my
hands with touching, next enrich mine ears with hearing, and lastly make
happy my eyes with with seeing, and let them convey the joy downinto the
bosom of my thoughts, by degrees, softly by degrees.


Phi: Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation


dam: be not offended sweet mistress that I presume to touch.


phil: a fools head of your own,


Kal: Has a bin at any cost of all this invoke for a coxcomb and a bell.


phil: beshrow my judgment but he desetues it,


boy: And his desert were near so much, he could but bear away the bell, and
so you say he does:


da: A coxcombe and a bell, oh indignity: damnable ok^, vile and evil accuest
Dorus, unfortunate Dametas, Diana I tell thee thou art no honest gods to use a
Gentleman thus. What here a writing, your help good spectacles, lend me your
help good spectacles, some comfortable news good spectacles:

Who has his hire has well his labors plast,
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou have.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall loose his wits and likely find himself,
Then think thy pains rewarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues
Adonis bower shall tell the news,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry,
But though I can do em no futther disgrace, my fatal curse,
a Wronged gentleman's fatal curse dwell ever upon them, Diana
Here me, and let my words find gracious acceptance.

Kal. Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a ston upon you


Da. Rancor, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all portastors.
May their intents tho pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted falts and capital trespasses,
O may their lives and labourd industry,
Though worthy of Apolloes plaud it be
The cleerest thought in loyalty excelling
Be by some Dor presented for libelling,
when they have writ a seeine in which their brains,
Have dropped there dearest sweets, and their swollen veins,
Emptied their Cundits of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In sted of plaudities their chiefest blisses
Let their deserts be crowned with mewes and hisses:
Behind each post and at the gallery corners,
Sit empty guls, slight fools and false informers,
Let some slye Fox out of discreations embers,
Term them the lands unnecessary members,
And like the dear when they have spent their breath,
to make kings sport let them betorne to death,
Even by their friends, twold set my thoughts a twanging
Might I but see one of them go to hanging.

1 Capt. A passing strange curse and no question he has traueld far for some of
the rimes,


2 Cap. He must travail further that finds any reason int,


1 Cap. No matter for reason theirs rhyme enough and that be good.


2 Cap. Some: of it is no better then it should be, or my judgment deceiues me.


1 Cap. Sure he had some reason to make this rhyme, and a man could pick it out,


2 Cap, rather then i will be counted inquisitiue, mine ears shall content
themselves with the rimes only, and leave the reason to the scanning of poets
whom it more nearly concerns.


1 Cap, But where is the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth shrunk in
the wetting?


2 cap: tware a rare jest now if whilst the boy kept us here in expectation of
Dametas gullery his M: had made an escape with the duks daughters,


1 cap: that or some knavery else upon my life, I had the boy in shroud
suspision at the first.


2 cap. And this his sudden and stolen departure, confirms it current


2 cap: then we are sped, for in suspisions face,

I see some subtle stratagem in chase.

Enter miso and Maenasses wife? Wife: Will your lordship believe me now: nay
and I sait your worship may swert, tho I have but a (poor as to say) hole of
mine own I hope the spirits have more denomination over me, then to make it a
common slaughter house of carnallity where every jack may command flesh for
his money,


miso: No more words sweet woman I confess I was in the wrong, there is not
the hole the Fox hides his head in: and therefore for the love of womanhood
conceal mine errors, for howsoever I complaind it is thy forhed aks, thy temples
ha the terrible blow as the say, thy husband is a bad man.


wife, my husband:


miso: I, I, good woman thy husband: he is as I say a fleshly member and I fear
he has overcome the foolish thing my daughter.


Wife your daughter i will slit her nose by this light and she were ten ladies,
it was not for nothing my husband said he should meet her this enening at Adonis
chapel, but and I come to the godspeed ont, i will tell em ont soundly?


miso: I do good woman tell em ont, and spare not but in any case do not scold.


Wife: Why may not a gentlewoman scold in a good case:


miso: I know not what a gentlewoman do in a good case, but a lady must not in
any case:


Wife: tho I may not scold I may tell em roundly ont I hope,


miso: that may you do law,


Wife: and i will not be mealely mouthd I warrant em, will you bear me company to
the chapel maddam?


miso. withal my heart mistress, what Dorus has given me, i will give my friend,
no fool to company.


Exeunt. Actus quinti, scena prima.
Enter the duke at adonis bouer Farewell bright sun thou lightner of all eyes
thou falst to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub were tramels of thy hair,
But these are wier, for none but kings to wear,
And my rude tongue striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad art seman does disgrace her worth,
but heeres the place, upon this crystal stream:
Where Citherea did vnyoake her teame
Of silver doves, to interchange a kiss
With young Adones shall I meet my bliss:
The gentle minits crowned with crystal flowers,
Loosing there youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight, the bashful moon
that since her dalliance with Endimior,
Durst never walk by day is under sail,
In steed of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding brook and every bushy tree
Being tipped with silver were her livery,
And the dim night to grace our amorous wars,
Has stuck nine spheres full of immortal stars,
Insted of pearls the way on which she treads
Is strawd with Crystal deu and silver beads.
Enter Duchess. She comes, her feet makes music with the ground,
And the chaste air is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasure breast, her ielous cie
Enuyes the heaven of my felicity.
Dut. Zelmane, or my husband life or hate.


K. What makes old Autum out a bed so late,
that snow should go a woeing to the sun
When one ^arme kiss works her confusion.

Dut. I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husbands thoughts, seeing my love,
Elect this walk, has brought him after him.

K. She dogs her fure, and she to shake her off Has taine some other walk I Will
place mine ear in distance of her will.


Dut. Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath, twold be a second
iubile of mirth.


Da. Here comes my love.


Enter Manasses like Lisander. Dut. your love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My sun appears.

Da. Fie your love speaks to loud,
Your suns eclipst, your date upon a cloud.

Dut. See how his arms like precious phoenix wings,
Spread to embrace me.

Da. Now the Cucko sings,
Those amorous arms do make a golden space
To hug a Duke.

Dut. But i will fill up the place.


Da. Those fingers tipped with curious porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchless imagery,
Like amorous twins all of one mother nursed,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.

Dut. should touch me first: their strife is undertook,
To twine a young bay not a far stooping oak.

Da. Young bay, stale lest, that a dry saplesse rind
should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind,
Were he but gone now.

Dut: Were the Duke away,
My hope, had got the better of the day.

Man: This is Adonis chapel, I wonder they come not, tho I bear a little
learning about me, and a few good clothes, I would not wisham to make Balams
ass a me: for though many fools take no felicity but in wearing good clothes
(tho they be none of their own) I have a further reach in me.


Da: I could ban my stars.


Dut: I curse my fate.


Da: That cross me thus.


Dut: Make me unfortunate.


Da: Alas good lady, how her pretty feet labor to find me.


dut: that my hopes should meet such black events.


da: O would the trindly night darken her self.


Dut. Would the Moon lose her light,
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.

Duke But night is purblind
To make a Duke a slave.

Dut. To make a Duchess
wrestle with amorous passions.

Duk, life a spleen
Could my rough breath like a tempestious wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see:
Or use those eyes it has to pleasure me.

Dut. Or use those eyes it has to pleasure me.


man. Who would ha thought the cold had been so good a musition: how it
plays upon my chappes, and makes my teeth skippe up and down my mouth like a
company of virginal Iackes, but I find small music in it, and Mopsa should
come now I could do her little good, yet and she were here, she and I would
have about at cob-nut or at cheri-pit or somewhat to keep our selves from
idleness, tho she be but a fool, the bables good enough to make sport with all
in the dark and that very word has started her.


Enter Mop. Mop, whose there Manasses.


man, yes Mopsa.


mop. plain


Mop. I might be madam Mopsa in your mouth, goodman etc. whers Dorus.


man, why because he will not be said to make too much have to a bad bargain,
he is not come yet,


mop, not come, a pescod on him, but als one I thought at first he would make
but a fool on me.


man, would you have him mend Gods wormanship?


mop, But chose him, since he has buld me with an vrchin, i will go fetch Raph
our horskeeper, let him that got the calfe keep the cow in a knaves name and he
will, ha you your book here.


man, no matter wench, I can dote well enough without book,


mop. Nay and ye can dote well enough your self, I care for neither of them
both, but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says my mother, a thing
once well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and down,


Dut, Whose with my Lord the Duke, it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.

Dut, It Is not the Duchess sure, no it is amarous Jove,
that seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her, Jove if there be
A powerful Phoebus God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphnes rape,
to win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as your selves have worn, that when your fame
is sung by poets, they may cote my name,

Dut, Sure it is my daughter,


Duk, Daughter: how her eye
Cuts out new forms, new shapes of jealousy:

Dut. As sure as death it is she, for see they stand
like amarous twins, intwisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
I Will not indurst impatience grow strong,
And tho a prince, tell him he does thee wrong.

duk Do preethe do, this sweetens all the rest,
But here would be the elixar of the jest,
if whilst we kept each other at a baie,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.

Enter dametas. dam. villainous poetry, unchristian like poetry, I am cozend of
my gold by poetry, robbed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool by
poetry vilanous Oak, accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas: whose there my
daughter and with Zelmane? a wel-willer to Dorus, a favorite to poetry, and
therefore enemy to Dametas, come hither mop so, a thy fathers blessing come not
near her: what Mopsa.


mop. yes, whose there? Dorus.


dam. Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, did not see Hippolita,


mop. no by my troth not I? Did ye not see Dorus.


dam. Pox of dorus I am undone madam and thou telst me not of Hipolita,


mo, Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tell me news of Dorus


da, I had rather see ten doruses hanged then lose Hippolita,


mo, I had rather see ten fathers damd then lose my sweet dorus,


da, I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.


Mop: I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.


Dut: What Is here, I shall run mad for Hipolita.


duke: And I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus, I hold my life we have
some comedy in hand, we shall have a full scene, for here comes more actors.


Enter Mopso and Manasses wife. Wife Assures I am a sinner to God madam, that
sames he.


muso What with a brace of wenches, I faith old brocke, have I taken you in the
manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone? is this your court custom with
a wanion, lend me thy knife, tho I had neither house, nor land to give em, i will
bestow a whores make betwixt you and yet I will not scold neither.


mep: What a gudyere aile you mother, are you frampall, know you not your own
daughter.


miso. Mopsa, O insufferable wrong, make thine own natural child thy bawd,


duke Heeres an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by


miso. What mistres Amason, ha you such a cocking spirit, honest Women cannot
keep their husbands at home for you: it is not for nothing now I see, that the
Duchess looks yellow on you, but i will tear that painted whores face of yours
(by this light) and yet I will not scold neither.


man Madam,


miso: i will mad you with a vengeance.


The duke and duchess step both forth and restrain her. dut, Touch not the
prince.


duke On your alleagance forbear, what means this outrage, cannot our private
walks be privileged from your wild contentious.


dut: how fares the prince.


duk: How cheares my good Zelmane?


man: Zelmane, no Gods my judge my liege, I am Manasses, miserable Manasses,
your husbands scribe-ma^or madam.


dut: Manasses.


duk: A fool.


mis. My man.


wife And my dear head, alas sweet love, what make thou here.


m, Mary work for the hangman, and the Duke be not the more merciful.


duke There Is some deceit in this, Dametas, where is Hippolita?


dam: I, I, there is some knavery in this: Mopso where is Hippolita?


mis: doubtless there is some villainy in this, Mepso whers Hipolita?


mep: There Is no plain dealing in this, Manasses where is Dorus?


Gry: Answer directly, where is Hippolita?


dam: Alas madam I know not, whilst I almost melted my self with digging of
gold in Dianaes oak, I left her in my wives charge


wife And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband and his wife in
the manner, I left Hipolita in my daughters chamber


man: and whilst I came to Adonis chapel to be tossed in my marriage blankets
with Dorus, I left my little dog pearl plucking dazies:


duke Who sent you to Diannes oak to dig gold?


Gry: who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?


wife: dorus.


duke who sent you to Adonis chapel.


mep: dorus:


duke And who turned you into this shape:


Man: They that I fear have made guls of us all, Zelmane, and dorus:


duke: we are all simply gulde, and see where the Sun scarce halfeready,
skippes from his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery:


Enter Lisander and demetrius. them: Come where is this lusty wit-maister.


Lisa: the keeper of this loue-lottery,


them: This gallant luventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the Lake,
displaies against al comers.


Lisan. May a couple of plain witted princes have a sight of your prizes:


them: Where be these Ladies ha? ha your wits had such a skirmishing that the
two maids have lost their heads in the conflict.


dut; Heads, I and bodies to my Lord, and all at one shot, and which is worse
our wits are so scatered with the terible blow that to be plain we are scarce
our own men again.


them: then you have had some knock^ng,


mun: so it appears by the story my Lord:


lisan: How say y^u my lady, what Oule sings out of that Iuy bush


them: was your (...) knighted in this last action:


man: I am (...)ch a fool, I love my lord, I am no knight, I am Manasses, they
made a plain fool.


Dam: the only were, for the gaurded fool is out of request: but faith my
liege how did your opposites behave themselves, did they win the Wenches fair
at the point?


Du. At the very push of invention, and went off clear untouched,


Lisa: And could you draw no blood of their wits:


Du. Not a drop.


Lisa. Nor demetrius neither, nor Manasses?


Du: Neither, to our own disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of their
stratagem deserves applause, and I held it a credit to rest captive to such
valiant conquerors?


Lisan: Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.


Da: It merrits comisseration madam and my liege, not to detract from our
worth: your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.


Du. Ware you the men?


Lisan: No he was the man, mary I was the woman in the moon, that made you
walk all this last night like the man in the mist, I could say somewhat to you
to Madam as for demetrius and his man let them stand like fools as they are.


Du. Can it be possible.


Da. No, no, we are guls, Innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are ours
we have won em away to dargison.


Lisa: Come we have won the conquest, and that's sufficient.


Da. You are a manasses it is not sufficient: aha not Hercules for iole, Jove,
for Danue, Apollo for daphene, pan for Si^ne, nay the whole pack of their
piperly godheads could a dischargd a stratagem with more spirit of al merit, an
ambling nag and a down a down we have borne her away to dargison.


Enter Iulio and Hippolita. dut. It Was the most rarest, diuinest,
Metaphisicalst, piece of invention, that, what say you my liege.


Du: I give your deserts their full merit you have gotten equality


iulio: All the wenches gave you:


Da. Alas what spirits under the moon could have detainder but know that her
cherry red lip, a down, a down.


Hip: Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.


iulio: Your merit stood of the upper staire of admiration.


Them: Why thou have a pretty relish of wit, now that can see the broad ey of
my desert at a little hole of demonstration.


iulo. your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own phrase)
Metaphysicall piece of service, but you had some help int questionles,


Hip: I do not think but the ladies had some hand int:


da, A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very little
finger.


iuli, I thought as much by the making of the jest.


Hip, I cannot detract from the ladies worth, for I knowem for excellent work
women,


dam, work women fit to make tailors men.


Hip. I by my faith do I, nay your best tailors are arrant botchers to em, you
shall have a lady make an end of a suit, a court suit, especially when all the
tailors in a country know not how to set a stich int.


dorus, Some ordinary suit perhaps.


Hip: your best court suits that are, are finished by ladies, I have known a
suit my self lien a making and maring 3, 4, and five year together and then a
lady has despacht it in a month with a wet finger, such a finger might the
ladies have in your plot.


de, never wet a finger by this sun.


iuli. Then she helped you with one dry jest or other, but and we may be so
bold: faith where are the ladies?


da. sure enogh I warrant you, some fools now would have kept em hear and
have been guld on em again, and laughed at age, but to prevent all danger, we
have shipped em home for Lacedemon,


iulio: to Lacedemon, your sun of wit shines but dimly in that methinkes, to
whose charge have you trusted em?


Lisan: to them we durst, nay you must think we are no fools,


iu. Fools: nay deep wit, and policy forbid.


Da, We had no sooner their surprisall, but we had disguise ready, a ship
ready, a couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedemons intelligencers:


iuli. durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty caskets:


da: durst, our health, our lives: why they were my tenants, nay you must
think we sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.


hip: If in any thing your wits deserve the babble it is in that,


iuli: none but fools would have committed such inestimable peers to a couple of
strangers:


hip: And in a ship to,


iu: And under sail to.


dut: And unfurnished of friends to.


du: And without shipping to follow em to.


iu. you were no fools in any thing but that, and in that not to flatter, you
express the true shape of folly and merely merit the name of fools.


da. What will you say now when these fellows surrender us our loves?


Aunt We Will discharge you and set their names down for gulls in your stead.


De: you know the proverb when the sky falls we shall have larks.


Lisan: And when you can bring proof that we are cosend of our Wenches we will
be the woodcocks.


Iulio: Why then we have once springed a couple of woodcockes.


Enter Violletta and Hippolita. Aunt: Do you know these? Who are the fools
now?


deem: Violletta.


Lisand: My Hippolita:


dam: What a strange change is here:


Hippo: yes faith gallants you have very strange carding and you knew al, but I
hope you will offer up your cards and yield the set lost.


dam: Guls:


Lisan: And abusd i will loose my life before I loose my honor,


dam. Honor, and life before i will loose my love:


Draw Du: Nay gentlemen we bar all violence, the liberty of our challenge was
to all alike equally free, and since these by fair play have won em, it stands
with our honor to see them peaceably possessed of em, then surely take em, for
though you wear the breeches give us leave to stand a little:


Hippo: why father is it not time that we were sped
It Is a great charge to keep a maidenhead,
Loose it we must and to prevent il course,
Better to giuet then have it stolen perforce,
if you be pleased let envy do her worst
Spit out her poison or containt and burst?
Welcome to all, to all a kind god night,
They trewly live, that live in scorn of spite.

FINIS.
In B. the last page, for Lord, read love cannot be saved.


