CHRISTOPHER ANGEL, a Grecian, who tasted of many stripes and torments
inflicted by the Turks for the faith which he had in Christ Jesus.

AC: OX
blazon of Oxford University

AT OXFORD Printed by John Lichfeild, and William Wrench, Printers to the
famous University. 1617.

TO THE MOST RENOWNED AND resplendent, most wise, and judicious, most learned
and loving Patrons of the Greek tongue: most gracious supporters of the
decayed estate of all distressed Grecians and strangers. Fathers and Brethren
in Christ, Governors and Heads of the two famous and flourishing Universities
of this Island in general, and more in particular to all heads of Colleges
therein, and whatsoever students under their protection, and to all Divines,
Physicians, and Lawyers: Furthermore to all that bear authority in the ample
and well governed Cities: In general to the industrious and studious among
the Commonaltie within the confines of the ever honored and admired England,
prosperity here, and glory hereafter.
HEretofore gray-eyed Minerva spoke and prophesied in Athens, by the mouths of
learned Grecians: but now and long before this time I see her singing in
Brittany by the mouths of most wise English men, and crowning the sons of
England with all kinds of diverse colored garlands.

Concerning me, if any man shall inquire what might be the cause, and for what
reason I came into this famous Island, and have traveled so far as this most
illustrious and renowned University of Oxford, may it please him to hear the
cause, (God himself will witness it to be true according to this ensuing
discourse). Because the devil perceived that his time was but short, therefore
he came into the earth full of wrath and was moved against the Church of God, as
a raging and angry lion; according to that which S. John says in the
Revelation, the 12. Chap. and the 22 verse, and as the Prophet David speaks
in the 80 Psalm and the 13. verse, The wild bore out of the wood has
destroyed it, and the wild beasts of the field have eaten it: and again in the
83 Psalm, verse 5. and 6. They have consulted together in heart, and have made
a leage against thee: The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismalites, etc. Right so
the Greek Church at this time suffers, being destitute of all perfection and
knowledge: the cause of this evil is, the great Turk, that is the king of the
Turks does desire, and is willing to have peace with all that are under him:
but some of his Magistrates are very wicked and proud, and by those the Greek
Church does suffer much misery: for this reason, neither can there be any
school, neither any Master desiring to teach scholars can remain in one
place. Even as I suffered and know: who have tasted of many kinds of misery:
now the cause of this my misery was this: I in my youth desired much to better
my understanding and my learning, remembering that saying of Christ; search the
Scriptures, and in them thou shall find everlasting life: and that of S. Paul
to Timothy, In that thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation. And that of Solomon; where the Lord
says in that thou as kest wisdom only and nothing else, I will give thee
wisdom and riches therewithal, and a kingdom greater then all the kingdoms
of the earth: And that of David in the Ps. 119. In thy laws did I meditate;
yet by reason of the defect of teachers I traveled through many places in
Greece that I might supply that want; profiting in some places more, in some
less: At length I came to Athens, and studied there; now the Captain of that
place, was an Hagarene, and a deadly enemy to all Christians which dwelt at
Athens: besides this he was very covetous and cruel; unjust and did much wrong
to the Athenians; by reason whereof the Athenians went to the great Turk three
several times, and complained of the injuries which he had offered them:
whereupon the great Turk sent certain noble men to hang him; but by reason of
his riches and nobility they could not accomplish that they were sent for.
The Captain upon these complaints was greivously offended with the Athenians:
and farther to satisfy his own greedy desires he oppressed many strangers:
amongst the rest seeing me also, who was a stranger and unknown of all:
immediately he lays hands upon me, diligently examined me concerning the name
of the governor of my native Country: I answered that it was now almost
twenty years since I left my country for study and learning sake; and that I
had not as yet returned to my country, and therefore knew not the name of the
governor thereof. Then he answered me, if you know not your governor, you
must go to prison, whether when I came, they clapped a pair of bolts upon my
legs; not long after the governor called many of the Turks, who derive their
beginning from Mahomet, and then he took me out of prison, and brought me
before them, and said unto the^ behold a Spanish traitor. They all cried out,
it is true as you say, he is a traitorous Spaniard, as we know by his beard, for
it is long and picked, and black, and his clothes are of a spanish red (for I
did wear apparel of red color, such as the chief of the greek Monks use
also) and some of the Christians standing by, made answer for me to the Turks,
that this was the usual apparel of the better sort of the Greek Monks: but
the Turks withstood that, saying, that the Monks habits were made of courser
cloth, but mine was of finer, and therefore a spanish garment: this they said,
not that the cloth was indeed finer then that of other Monks, but that the
might unjustly pick a quarrel and bring some accusation, whereby they might
punish me. After this they began to entice me saying; our Easter is near at
hand, and if thou will deny thy Christ, we promise thee (and that we may not
deceive thee as concerning our promise, we swear) that if thou will become a
Turk, thou shall greatly honor our feast day, and for this we will make thee
a Centurion, besides other great honors which wait upon thee. Now it is the
manner of the Turks when they swear, not to falsify their words and thrice in
this manner they temped me: but I denied them always, telling them, that my
care was not for honors, but that I desired rather to die in the same
religion, for which my father and mother died also. Then one of the governors
came, and plucking me by the beard, and the hair of the head, buffeted me,
saying, why, seeing I turned Turk, may not thou also? (for before time he
had been a Christian) I answered him that I cared not what he had done, I
allow not of it. Then he threw me on the ground, and trampled upon my head
before all the congregation of Turks, and Christians. And afterward they shut
me up in close ward, meaning after a few hours to bring me out again to
punishment, that for fear of stripes I might turn Turk. And certain
christian slaves belonging to the Captain, who were of the western Church,
came to me saying: now is the time that thou shall be scourged to death
unless thou turn, and they besought me saying, it is better to die then turn
Turk. I answered, God forbid, that I should deny Christ the true God, I will
first die an hundred times in one day before I deny my Savior Christ. Then my
conscience said to me in private: But can I then endure torments even unto
death? then my reason answered, Christ was a man, and yet he suffered on the
Cross to death, and that not for himself, but others. But then I reasoned
again, Christ was both God and man, therefore he could withstand the terrors
of death: but I am a fleshly man, and perchance I cannot undergo the cruel
pangs of death: but my conscience solved all this doubt, in that the Martyrs
were fleshly men, and sinners, yet by the grace of God were strengthened to die,
therefore by the same grace shall I be sustained. And in this cogitation I was
much comforted, and prevailed in spirit, and wholly gave my self over to suffer
death: and they lead me straight ways to the place of execution, and bound me
hand, and foot in manner of a cross upon the earth, as appears by this figure.



Since here I have no witnesses, that for the present may testify the truth of
these my sufferings, therefore I call the eternal father, and God of all, both
witness and judge in this manner: The eternal God punish me in this world and
in that to come, if I have not thus suffered from the Turks unjustly, for my
faith in Christ, as is under written. For they laid on the earth thick pieces
of timber like the beams of a house, and to them they bound me, and then they
began to beat me with scourges, as appears in the figure. Two men dipping
their rods in salt water began to scourge me, and when the one was lifting up
his hand, the other was ready to strike, so that I could take no rest, and my
pain was most grievous: and so they continued beating me, saying, turn Turk,
and we will free thee: but I answered them, in no case, until they made me
half dead: then they rested a while, saying, he is surely very constant, and
will not deny his religion: but we will tell him that we will let him go if
he will say that the Athenian Merchants which are in Venice, sent him to
betray Athens to the Spaniards: and then they began to beat me on the feet,
saying: confess that the Athenians which traffic in Venice, sent thee to
betray Athens to the Spaniards, and we will let thee go: Now the Turks would
have me bear false witness against the Athenians, that thereby they might
take them, and slay them for the hatred which was between the governor, and
the Athenians. I said nothing to this, and till this time I understood what the
Turks said, but from this moment, that is, from that time, in which they said
twice or thrice to me, confess that the Athenians sent thee to betray Athens,
I answered nothing, I understood nothing, I was perfectly dead, and so remained
for the space of an hour, and again after an hour, by the grace of God I
revived. Then the Turks took all my substance, my books I mean, and riches,
and I was much in debt, till by the request of many noble men I was freed from
prison. And after a week, they counseled among themselves to take me, and in
one hour to kill me, or make me turn Turk by whipping, and other torments:
But this laying wait was made known to all the Christians, both men and women
in Athens, and to me also. Then I fled from Athens, and wandering abroad, found
expert Merchants, which knew well both England and many other places: and I
inquired diligently of them where I might find wise men, with whom I might
keep my religion, and not loose my learning: they told me, in England you may
have both, for the English men love the Grecians, and their learning, and it is
a monarchy, where are found many very honest, wise, and liberal men: but in
Germany, France, and Italy, they have continually civil wars. Therefore I
came in a straight course to England, and came through Flanders to Yarmouth in
England, where by good fortune I met with the Bishop of that Diocese, who
examined me diligently, and found the testimonies, which I brought from our
Bishops, and Clergy of Peloponnesus, and other places. And he with the rest of
the ministry bestowed money on me according to their faculties, and sent me
with letters to Cambridge, (for he himself was a Cambridge man) and the
Doctors of Cambridge received me kindly, and frankly, and I spent there almost
one whole year, as the testimony of Cambridge can witness. Then I fell
sick, that I could scarce breath: and the Physicians and Doctors counseled me
to go to Oxford, because (said they) the air of Oxford is far better, the^
that of Cambridge. And so I came to this famous University of Oxford: and now
I live here studious these many years. And first I thank God, who sent me to
such honest, and learned men, and secondly your Worship, who are my most kind
benefactor, and to all other my most kind benefactors, and to all good and
charitable men; and I beseech God both day and night, that he will restore an
hundred fold to you in this life, and in the life to come a crown in
corruptible, to you I say, and all other good men for their great goodness and
liberality. Amen.

An Epistle in commendations of England and the Inhabitants thereof.
I am conscious to my self of mine own unworthiness, having not so much as a
taste of that learning, which might make me bold to present my lines before so
worthy men: yet because (as a wise man has it) necessity drives a man to many
a shift; I am therefore thus set on work. Our Savior Christ both God and man;
as God does require spiritual honor from the souls of men, to wit,
goodness, love, carfulness to perform good things, alms deeds, and the
like; according to that of the Prophet David: let every spirit praise the Lord:
and as S. Paul commands, glorify God in your body, and in your spirit for
they are Gods. Now as man our Lord requires such honor, as was due unto that
person in him. For so it appears in that question of his unto the Leper; who
often that were cleansed, alone returned to render our Savior thanks. Are
there not ten cleansed but where are those nine? surely as a wise man speaks,
he must needs be of a very ungrateful disposition, who in matters of kindness
can suddenly become forgetful. For my own part if there be any such, who for
benefits received, shall not return special acknowledgement always unto his
friends, let him bear that foul note of ingratitude, with disgrace and
infamy amongst men. I my self for some years have been nursed in this
delicious and blisfull English I Will: should I not ever acknowledge this with all
thankfulness both to this country, and specially to your most reverend
dignity, and to your self my kind Master and Benefactor? I might justly be
accounted one of those. Therefore that I may not seem ungrateful for such
great benefits, as much as in me lies, I will send forth this speech, and so I
begin.

O fair like man, thou most fertile and pleasant country of England, which
art the head of the world, endued with those two fair eyes, the two
Universities, which rainest down most plentifully milk, and honey. I call thee
faire-like man, and the head beautified with two pleasant eyes, because
heretofore thou did send forth two horns of the holy church of Christ. The
first is Constantine the great, that second light of the world who freed such
as were held in captivity for the confession of Christ, who driued away the
mist of Idolatry who was equal even with the Apostles, and first triumphed
over the enemies of Christ. The second horn is holy Helen, who found out that
life-bearing cross, the weapons of all true Christians, the most holy mother
of the world. But now, and long since thou have bin beautified with two
resplendent eyes in that thou co^tainest the two famous Universities. For I call
the two Universities the two resplendent eyes, even most renowned, and most
beautiful Oxford, with her sister the like renowned Cambridge. And if it be
lawful to compare the world to a man's body (for a man, according to
Aristotle, is a little world) surely I must account England the head of this
body: for it is even so divided by the sea from the other parts of the world as
a man's head from his body by the neck. Thou art also the place of refuge, even
the haven of comfort to poor Grecians oppressed with the tyranny of the
Turks: as David says in the 83. Psalm. against the arc of the covenant, the
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismalites have set themselves etc. Thou bring
forth most wise men, yea most valiant and heroical captains, (as heretofore
Grecia did) yea and those lovers of the Greeks, and partakers of their former
virtues. Now the reason of this I will tell you. We read in the histories of
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, that Constantine the great, and his holy mother
Helen were Brytanes, the offspring and flowers of Britain: and when
Constantine the great, ruled over the Grecians, as also the whole world, then
his kinsfolk came out of Brytaine to Constantinople and lived in the presence
of Constantine, and likewise the Grecians were sent into England from
Constantine, and so the Grecians and English were mingled in blood. And for
this cause the English love the Grecians, and their learning, and are beloved
of them more then any other nation. And they partake one of another in many
things beside: For the English nation have excelled in wisdom, and all
heroical virtues, as the Grecians of old did. And they do diligently, and
with great understanding search out the truth (as says Paul, beware least any
make a prey of you through philosophy, and vain deceit) as the Grecians also
heretofore are accounted to have done: and they are also given to hospitality,
and pity of poor strangers, as were the Grecians (as S. Paul says to the
Thessalonians concerning brotherly love I need not speak: for you are taught
this from above:) and they will also die for their religion, but never turn
from their true worship of God to any other, as also the Grecians: yea I my
self was once dead through the cruel scourging of the Turks for the faith of
Christ, and I never denied Christ the true God.

All hail therefore, O most worthy England: for thou art a Virgin, which was
never brought into thraldom by any king, although thou have been sometime
humbled, yet thou wast never captivated: and as thou art a Virgin, so the
mother also of many wise men, yea valiant captains, and heroicke warriers.
Thus much be spoken of England, which of no other can so truly be verified

FINIS.



