THE SEAMANS SECRETS,

Divided into 2. parts, wherein is taught the three kinds of Sailing,
Horizontall, Peradoxall, and sailing upon a great Circle: also an Horizontall
Tide Table for the easy finding of the ebbing and flowing of the Tides, with a
Regiment newly calculated for the finding of the Declination of the Sun, and
many other most necessary rules and Instruments, not heretofore set forth by
any.

Newly published by John Dauis of Sandrudge, near Dartmouth, in the County of
Deuon. Gent.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vinetree, and are these to be sold, 1595.

To the right honorable Lord Charles Haward, Baron of Effingham, Knight of the
noble order of the Garter, Liuetenant of her Majesty's Counties of Sussex and
Surrey. Constable of her Majesty's Honor and Castle of Winsor, Lord high
Admiral of England, Ireland, and Wales, and of the Dominions and Isles of the
same, of the Town of Callis and marches thereof, Normandy, Gascony, and
Geynes, Captain general of her Majesty's Seas and Navy royal, and one of
her Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel. John Dauis wishes increase of
honor and perfect felicity.
RIght Honorable and my especial good Lord, as by the instinct of nature all
men are desirous of knowledge, and take pleasure in the varieties of
understanding, so it is likewise ingraffed by the same benefit of nature, in
the hearts of true nobility, not only to excel the vulgar sort, but also to
cherrish, support, and countenance all such as shall in due course prosecute
their vocation: and as such practices either speculatiue or mecanicall, shall
receive sauourable place in the honorable opinion of nobility, by so much the
more shall the practiser be esteemed: which is the cause that at this time
imboldneth me, to present unto your most honorable favor this small treatise
of Navigations, being a brief collection of such practices as in my several
voyages I have from experience collected Among which in my three several
attempts for the discovery of the Northwest passage, thereby to find a short
and nauigable course unto the rich and famous Countries of Cathayo, China,
Pegu, the Isles of Molucan and Phillipina, that thereby to the great and
inestimable benefit of our Country, there might be a rich and plentiful
trade procured between us and the said nations in short time to be performed,
and with great safety in regard of the course: which action and discovery (by
means of that honorable Counselor Sir Frauncis Walsingham Knight, principal
Secretary to her Majesty) was with good resolution accepted by the Merchants
of London but in the decay of his honorable life, the attempt was likewise
quailed: but howsoever men's minds alter, yet undoubtedly there is a passage
nauigable, and easy to be performed by that course (whenever it shall
please God to reveal the same) by invincible reasons, and sufficient
experience to be proved: and although before I entered into that discovery, I
was sufficiently persuaded of the certainty thereof, by historical relation
substantially confirmed, whereof to the adventures I made sufficient proof,
but especially to my worshipful good friend Master William Sanderson, the
only Merchant, that to his great charges with most constant travail did
labor for the finishing thereof: yet I thank God that of late it has been
my very good chance to receive better assurance then ever before of the
certainty of that passage, and such was my vehement desire for the
perfourmance thereof, that thereby I was only induced to go with M. Candishe
in his second attempt for the South Seas, upon his constant promise unto me,
that when we came to the Callifornia, I should there have his Pinnice with my
own Barck (which for that purpose went with me to my great charges) to search
that North west discovery upon those back parts of America, but God has
otherwise disposed our purposes in his divine Judgments, for M. Candishe being
half way through the straights of Magilane, and impatient of the tempestious
furiousnes of that place, having all his Ships and company with him, returned
for Brasill, by the authority of his command, when with a leading wind we
might have passed the same, and returning more then 80. leages toward Brasill,
my self being in his Ship named the Desire, without Boat, Oars, Sails,
Cables, cordage, victuals, or health of my company sufficient for that
attempt, was separated in a frette of weather, and forced to seek the nex
short for my relief, and recovering a harborow by us named Port Desire, being
in the lati. of 48. degrees. did there repair my most miserable wantes, and there
staying four months in most lamentable distress, did again conclude with my
company to give an other attempt to pass the straights, as my best mean to
gain relief. And three times I was in the South Seas, but still by furious
weather forced back again: yet notwithstanding all this my labor to perform
the voyage for his profit, and to save my self, (for I did adventure and my
good friends for my sake 1100. pounds in the action.) M. Candishe was content
to account me to be the author of his overthrow, and to write with his dying
hand that I ran from him, when as his own Ship was returned many months
before me,

I am bold to make this relation unto your Lordship, only to satisfy your
Honor of my conversation, for were I faulty of so foul a crime, I were
worthy of ten thousand torments, in presuming to present this Treatise to
your honorable Lordship, and now referring my cause to your Lordships
consideration, I will again return to my purpose.

In those Northwest voyages where Navigations must be executed in most exquite
sort, in those attempts I was enforced to search all possible means required
in sailing, by which occasion I have gathered together this brief treatise,
which with my self I do dedicate to your most honorable protection, being
desirous if it lay in my power, to do far greater matter in your Lordships
service, hoping of your honorable pardon, because it is only done to show my
dutiful affection, and not for any singularity that the work contains, For
I think there be many hundreds in England that can in a far greater measure
and more excellent method express the noble art of Navigations, and I am
fully persuaded that our Country is not inferior to any for men of rare
knowledge, singular application, and exquisite execution of the Arts
Mathematick, for what Strangers may be compared with M. Thomas Digges Esquire,
our Countryman the great master of Archmastrie, and for Thericall speculations
and most cunning calculation M. Dee and M. Thomas Heriotts are hardly to be
matched: and for the mecanicall practices drawnefrom the Arts Mathematick, our
Country does yield men of principal excellency, as M. Emery Mulleneux for
the exquisite making of Globus bodies, and M. Nicholas Hellyar for the
singularity of portrature has the praise of Europe, M. Baker for his skill
and surpassing grounded knowledge for the building of Ships aduantageable to
all purpose, has not in any nation his equal.

And now that I may return to the painful Seaman, it is not unknown to all
nations of the earth, that the English goes before all others in the practices
of sailing, as appears by the excellent discovery of Sir Franncis Drake, in
his passage through the straights of Magilane, which being then so rawly
known, he could not have passed, unless he had been a man of great practice
and rare resolution: so much I may boldly say, because I have seen and tasted
the frowardnes of the place, with the great vnlikelyhoode of any passage to be
that way.

I might here repeat the most valiant and excellent attemps of Sir Hugh
Willougbie, Sir John Hawkins, Sir Humfry Gilbert, and your Lordships servant M.
George Raymond, with diverse others that have given most resolute attempts in
the practices of Navigations, as well for the discovery as other execution,
whereby good proof is made, that not only in the skill of Navigations, but
also in the mecanicall execution of the practices of sailing, we are not to be
matched by any nation of the earth.

And since Navigations is the mean whereby Countries are discovered, and
comunitie drawn between nation and nation, the word of God published to the
blessed recovery of the foreign of castes from whom it has pleased his
divine Majesty as yet to detain the brightness of his glory: and that by
navigations commonweals through mutual trade are not only sustained, but
mightily enriched by whole hard adventures such excellent benefits are
achieved, for by his exceeding great hazzards the form of the earth, the
quantities of Countries, the diversity of nations, and the natures of Zones,
Climats, countries and people, are apparently made known unto us: Besides, the
great benefits mutually interchanged between nations, of such fruits,
commodities, and artificial practices wherewith God has blessed each
particular Country, coast, and nation, according to the nature and situation
of the place.

For what has made the Spaniard to be so great a Monarch, the Commander of
both Indias, to abound in wealth and all natures benefits, but only the
painful industry of his Subjects by Navigations: their former trade was only
figs, Orenges, and Oil, but now through Navigations it is brought to be gold,
silver, pearls, silks, and spice, by long and painful trade recovered.
Which great benefits only by her Majesty's loving clemency and merciful
favor he does possess: for if her highness and her most honorable Lords would
but regard the small distance between her dominions and those famous rich
kingdoms, the easines of the passage being once discovered, (the Northwest I
mean) with the full sufficiency of her highness Subjects to effect the same,
there could then be no do doubt but her stately seat of London should be the
storehouse of Europe, and a nursse to all nations, in yielding all Indian
commodities in a far better condition, and at a more easy rate then now
brought unto us, exchanging commodities of our own store, with a plentiful
return at the first hand, which now by many exchanges are brought unto us.

Then should the Spaniard again return to his old trade, and our sacred
Sovereign be seated the Commander of the earth: which trade and most
fortunate discovery, we above all nations ought most principally to regard,
because of the singularity and inviolable force of our Shipping, which is not
only the commanding fortress of our Country, but also the dread of our
adversary, and glory of our nation: wherein we do in no sort flatter our
selves* for it was made apparent to all nations of the earth, by the late most
famous conquest that her Majesty had against the huge supposed invincible
fleet of the Spaniard, being by her Navy under the command of your Lordship
who there in person and in place of her Majesty, to your eternal glorious
same did disgrace their glory, and confound their force, and manifest their
weakness by their dastardly flight, through Gods providence and your Lordships
stately resolution.

Then since Navigations is a matter of so great moment, I suppose that every man
is bound in duty to give his best furtherance thereunto: among whom as the
most unmeet of all, yet wishing all good to the painful traveler, I have
published this short treatise, naming it the Seamans Secrets, because by
certain questions demanded and answered, I have not omitted any thing that
appertains to the secret of Navigations, whereby if there may grow any
increase of knowledge or ease in practice, it is the thing which I cheefely
desire.

To manifest the necessary conclusions of Navigations in brief and short
terms is my only intent, and therefore I omit to declare the causes of
terms and diffinition of artificial words, as matters superfluous to my
purpose, neither have I laid down the cunning conclusions apt for Scholars
to practice upon the shore, but only those things that are needfullye required
in a sufficient Seaman: beseeching your honorable Lordship to pardon my
boldness, and with your favorable countenance to regard my dutiful
affection, I most humblye commit your good Lordship to the mercies of God, who
long preserve your health with continual increase of honor.

From Sandrudge by Darthmouth the 20. of August 1594.

Your Lordships in all dutiful service to command, John Dauis.

Imperial The first mouable Cristalin The firmament Saturnus Jupiter Mars Sol
Venus Mercurius Luna



THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SEAMANS SECRETS.
What is Navigations?
Navigations is that excellent Art which demonstrateth by infallible
conclusion, how a sufficient Ship may be conducted the shortest good way from
place to place, by Corse and trauers.

What are those infallible conclusions?
Navigations consists of three parts, which being well understood and
practiced, are conclusions infallible, whereby the skillful Pilote is void of
all doubt to effett the thing purposed. Of which, the first is Horizontall
Navigations, which manifests all the varieties of the Ships motion, within the
Horizontall plain superficies, where every line drawn is supposed a parallel.

The second is a peradoxall or Cosmographicall Navigations, which demonstrateth
the true motion of the Ship upon any course assigned in longitude, latitude and
distance, either particular or general, and is the skillful gathering together
of many Horizontall Corses, into one infallible and true motion peradoxall.

The third is great Circle Navigations, which teaches how upon a great Circle
drawn between any 2. places assigned, (being the only shortest way between
place and place) the Ship may be conducted, and is performed by the skillful
application of Horizontall and peradoxall Navigations.

What is a Corse?
A Corse is that peradoxall line which passes between place and place,
according to the true Horizontall position of the Magnet, upon which line the
Ship prosecuting her motion, shall be conducted between the said places.

What is a Trauers?
A Trauers is the variety or alteration of the Ships motion upon the shift of
winds, within any Horizontall plain superficies, by the good collection of
which Trauerses, the ships uniforme motion or Corse is given.

What Instruments are necessary for the execution of this excellent skill?
THe Instruments necessary for a skillful Seaman, are a Sea Compass, a Cross
staff, a Quadrant, an Astrolabie, a Chart, an instrument magneticall for the
finding of the variation of the Compass, an Horizontall plain Sphere, a
Globe, and a paradoxall Compass. By which instruments all conclusions and
infallible demonstrations, Hidrographicall, Geographicall, and Cosmographicall,
are without controlement of error to be performed: but the Sea Compass,
Chart, and Cross staff, are instruments sufficient for the seamans use: the
Astrolabie and Quadrant being instruments very uncertain for Sea observations.

What is the Sea Compass?
THe Sea Compass is a principal instrument in Navigations, representing and
distnguishing the Horizon, so that the Compass may conveniently be named, an
Artificial Horizon, because by it are manifested all the limits and
distinctions of the Horizon required, to the perfect use of Navigations, which
distinctions are the 32. points of the Compass, whereby the Horizon is divided
into 32. equal parts, and every of those points has his proper name, as in
the figure following appears. Also every point of the Compass does contain
degrees, minutes, seconds, and thirds, etc. Which degrees are called degrees of
Azumuth, whereof there are in every point 11. so that the whole Compass of
Horizon contains 360. degrees of Azumuth, for if you multiply 11. degrees,
the degrees that each point contains, by 32. the points of the Compass, it
yields 360. the degrees of the Compass. And of minutes each point contains
45. being. of an hour, so that the whole Compass is hereby divided into 24,
hours, by which account there are in an hour 15. degrees, so that every
degree contains 4. minutes of time, for an hour consisting of 60. minutes,
has for his fifteenth part 4. minutes of time, and in every minute there is
60. seconds, and every second contains 60. thirds, either in degrees applied
to time, or degrees applied to measure: so that the general content of the
Compass is, 32. points, 360. degrees, and 24. hours, with their minutes,
seconds, and thirds.

What is the use of the 32. points of the Compass?
THe use of the 32. points of the Compass, is to direct the skilful Pilote by
Horizontall trauers, how he may conclude the corse or peradoxall motion of his
Ship, thereby with the greater expedition to recover the place desired, because
they divide the Horizon into such limits as are most apt for Navigations, they
do also distinguish the winds by their proper names, for the wind receives
his name by the part of the Horizon from whence he blows.

What is the use of the 360. degrees of Azumuth?
BY the degrees of Azumuth is known the quantity of the rising and setting of
the Sun, Moon and Stars, whereby is known the length of the days and
nights in all climates, and at all times, they also show a most precise
Horizontall distiuction of the motion of the Sun, Moon and Stars, whereby
the certainty of time is measured, and the variation of the Compass, with the
Poles height is ingeuiously known at all times and in all places, by help of
the Globe.

How is the hour of the day known by the Compass?
IT has been an ancient custom among Mariners to divide the Compass into 24.
equal parts or hours, by which they have used to distinguish time, supposing
an East Sun to be 6. of the clock, a Southeast Sun 9. of the clock, and a
South Sun 12. of the clock: etc. as in the figure following shall plainly
appear. But this account is very absurd, for with us in England (the Sun
having his greatest North declination,) it is somewhat past 7. of the clock, at
an East Sun, and at a Southeast Sun it is past 10. of the clock: also when
the Sun is in the Equinoctial, the Sun is half the day East, and half
the day West, to all those that be under the same, so that the Sun then and
to those people uses but 2. points of the Compass, to perform the motion
of 12. hours: therefore the distinctions of time may not well be given by the
Compass, unless the Sun be upon the Meridian, or that you be far toward
the North, in such places where the Suns Horizontall motion is very oblique,
for there the hour may be given by the Compass, without any great error, but
elsewhere it cannot. Therefore those that travail must either use the Globe,
or an Equinoctial dial, by whom time may be most certainly measured, if there
be good consideration of the variation of the needle by which the Equinoctial
dial is directed, for this is a general thing to be regarded as well in the
compass, as in any dials or other instrument or conclusion whatsoever wherein
the use of the needle is required, that unless there be good regard unto the
variation of the same, there can no good conclusion follow of any such
practices.



What is the next necessary thing to be learned?
Having perfectly learned the Compass, the next necessary thing for a Seaman
to know, is the alteration or shifting of tides, that thereby he may with the
greater safety bring his Ship into any barred Port, Haven, Creek, or other
place, where tides are to be regarded. And this difference of tides in the
alteration of flowing and reflowing, is by long experience found to be governed
by the Moons motion, for in such proportion of time as the Moon does separate
her self from the Sun, by the swiftnes of her natural motion: in the like
proportion of time does one tide differ from another, therefore ta understand
this difference of the Moons motion, is the only mean whereby the time of
tides is most precisely known.

Of the Moons motion.
YOu must understand the Moon has two kind of motions, a natural motion,
and a violent motion, her violent motion is from the east toward the West,
caused by the violent swiftnes of the diurnall motion of primum mobile, in
which motion the Moon is carried about the earth in 24. hours and 50. minutes
nerest one day with another, for although the diurnall period of the first
mouer the performed in 24. hours, yet because the Moon every day in her
slowest natural motion moves 12, degrees, therefore she is not carried about
the earth, until that her motion be also carried about, which is in 24. hours
and 50. minutes nerest.

Her natural motion is from the West toward the East, contrary to the motion
of the first mouer, wherein the Moon has 3. differences of moving, a swift
motion, a mean motion, and a slow motion all which is perfourmes by the
divine ordinance of the Creator, in 27. days and 8. hours nerest, through all
the degrees of the Zodiac.

Her slow motion is in the point of Auge or apogeo, being then farthest
distant from the earth, and then she moves in every day 12. degrees.

Her swift motion is in the oposite of age or perigeo, being then nerest unto
the earth, at which time she moves 14. degrees, with some small difference of
minutes in every 24. hours.

Between those 2. points is her mean motions, and then she moves 13. degrees
nerest, all which differences are caused by the excontricitie of her Orb
wherein she moves, and are only performed in the Zodiac, but the Sea men for
their better ease in the knowledge of tides, have applied this the Moons
motion, to the points, degrees, and minutes of the Compass, whereby they have
framed it to be an Horizontall motion, which since by long practice is found to
be a rule of such certainty, as that the error thereof brings no danger to
the expert Seaman, therefore it is not amiss to follow their practiced
precepts therein.

In every 29. days 12. hours 44. minutes, one with another through the year,
the Sun and Moon are in conjunction, and therefore that is the quantity of
time between change and change, for although the Moon in 27. days and 8
hours perfourming her natural motion, does return to the same minute of the
Zodiac from whence she departed, yet being so returned, she does not find the
Sun in that part of the Ecliptic where she left him, for the Sun in his
natural motion moving every day one degree toward the East, is moved so far
from the place where the Moon left him, as that the Moon cannot overtake the
Sun to come in conjunction with him, until she have performed the motion of
2. days, 4. hours, and 44. minutes nerest, more then her natural revolution,
and that is the cause wherefore there are 29. days, 12. hours, 44 minutes,
between change and change, one with another through the whole year: but the
Seaman accompteth the Moons motion, to be uniform in all places of the Zodiac
alike limiting her general separation from the Sun, to be such as is her
slowest natural motion, which is 12. degrees, or 48. minutes of time, in every
24. hours.

By which account there are 30. days reconed between change and change, being
11, hours, 16, minutes, more then in truth there is: but because this
difference breeds but small error in their account of tides, therefore to
alter practiced rules where there is no urgent cause, were a matter frivolous,
which considered, I think it not amiss that we proceed therein by the same
method that commonly is exercised.

Allowing the Moon in every 24. hours to depart from the Sun 12 degrees,
or 48. minutes of time, and in this separation the Moon moves from the Sun
Eastwards, until she be at the full, for between the change and the full, it
is called the Moons separation from the Sun: for after the full she does
apply toward the Sun, so that between the full and the change it is called
the Moons application to the Sun, in which time of application she is to the
Westward of the Sun, as in her separation she is to the Eastward, or I may
say in the Seamans phraise, all the time of her application she is before the
Sun, and in the time of her separation she is abaft the Sun.

Then if the Moon do move 48. minutes of time in 24. hours, it follows
that she does move 24. minutes in 12. hours, and in 6. hours she moves 12.
minutes, therefore every hour she moves 2. minutes, and such as is the
difference of her motion, such is the alteration of tides, and therefore every
tide differs from the other 12. minutes, because there is 6. hours between
tide and tide, and in every hour the course of flowing or reflowing alters
2. minutes, whereby it appears that in 24. hours the four tides of flowing
and reflowing do differ 48. minutes of time.

And since the whole knowledge of this difference or alteration of tides, as
also the quantity of the Moons separation and application to and from the
Sun, depends upon the knowledge of the Moons age, it is therefore necessary
that next you learn how the Sun may be known.

For the perfourmance whereof there are 2* numbers especially required, named
the Prime and the Epact, for by the prime the epact is found, and by help of
the Epact the Moons age is known.

Of the prime or Golden number.
THe Prime is the space of 19* years, in which time ye moon performs all
the varieties of her motion with the sun, and at the end of 19. years
begins the same revolution again, therefore the Prime never exceeds the
number of 19. and this prime does always begin in January, and thus the prime
is found: unto the year of the Lord wherein you desire to know the prime add
1. then divide that number by 19. and the remaining number which comes not
into the quotient is the prime. Example, in the year of our Lord 1590. I
desire to know the prime, therefore I add I. unto that year, and then it is
1591. which I divide by 19. and it yields in the quotient 83. and there
remains 14. upon the division, which comes not into the quotient, which 14.
is the prime in the year of our Lord 1590. 1590 1 1591
1 74 1591 199 (83 1527 1 5


Of the Epact.
THe Epact is a number proceeding from the overplus of the solar and lunar
year, which number never exceeds 30. because the Moons age never exceeds
30. for the finding whereof this number only serves: and thus the Epact is
known, which Epact does always begin in March, multiplye the prime by II.
(being the nerest difference between the solar and lunar year) divide the
product by 30. and the remainer is the epact. Example, in the year of our Lord
1590. I would know the Eqact, first I seek the prime of that year, and find
it to be 14. I therefore multiply 14. by 11. and that yields 154. which being
divided by 30. it gives in the quotient 5. and there remains 4. upon the
division, which 4. is the Epact in the year 1590. which beginning in March,
does continue until the next March of the year 1591. 14 11 14 17 154
15 (4 130 (5 50


Of the solar and lunar year.
THe solar year or the Suns year consists of 12. months, being 365. days,
and about 6. hours, the lunar year of ye Moons year contains 32. Moons,
and every Moon has 29. days, 12. hours, 44. minutes nerest, which amount
unto 354. days, 5 hours, 28. minutes, the content of the Lunar year, which
being subtracted from 365 days, 6. hours, there rests 11. days and 32
minutes, the difference between the said years, from which difference the
Epact comes.

BY this Table the prime and Epact may for ever be found, for when the years
be expired, you may begin again and continue it for ever at yaur pleasure.



The first circle contains the years of our Lord, the second the prime, and
the third and inner circle shows the Epact: under every year you shall find
his prime and Epact, the prime begins in January, and the Epact in March.

How to find the Moons age.
FIrst consider the day of the month wherein you seek the Moons age, then
note how many months there are between the said month and March, including
both months, unto those numbers add the Epact of that year, that is, you
must add into one sum the day of the month, between March and your month,
reckoning both months and the Epact, all which numbers joined together, if
they exceed not 30. is the moons age, if they be more then 30. cast away 30*
as often as you can, and the remainer is the Moons age, if it be just 30. it
is then new Moon, if 7. it is the first quarter day, if 15. it is full Moon,
if 22. it is then the last quarter day, and thus the Moons age is found for
ever.

And now being able for all times either past, present or to come, to give the
Moons age, I think it good by a few questions convenient for the Seamans
practice, to make you understand the necessary use thereof.

For the account of Tides.
WHen you desire to know the time of full Sea in any place, at all such seasons
as occasion shall require, you must first learn what moon makes a full Sea
in the same place, that is, upon what point of the Compass the Moon is, when
it is full Sea at the said place, you must also know what hour is appropriated
to that point of the Compass, as before is showed: for upon the change day it
will always be full Sea in that place, at the same instant of time, by which
considerations you must thus proceed for the search of tides.

Multiply the Moons age by 4. divide the product by 5. and to the quotient
add the hour which makes full Sea in that place upon the change day, if it
exceed 12. cast away 12. as often as you may, and then the hour of full Sea
remains, and for every 1. that rests upon your division, allow 12. minutes
to be added to the hours, for 2. 24. minutes, for 3. 36* and for 4. 48.
minutes, for more then 4. will never remain, and thus you may know your tides
to a minute. Example, the Moon being twelve days old, I desire to know the
time of full Sea at London: first it is found by experience, that a Southwest
and Northeast Moon make full sea at London, next, I consider that 3. of the
clock is the hour appropriated to that point of the Compass, whith number I
keep in memory, then I multiply the Moons age, being 12. by 4. and that
yields 48. which being divided by 5. it gives in the quotient 9. and three
remains, I add the quotient 9. to the hour 3. and it makes 12. hours, and
for the remaining number 3. I also add 36. minutes, so that I find when the
Moon is 12. days old, it is 12. of the clock. and 36. minutes past, at the
instant of full Sea at London: by this order you may at all places and times
know the certainty of your tides at your pleasure.

But those that are not practiced in Arithmetic may account their tides in
this sort, knowing how many days old the Moon is, he must place the Moon
upon that point of the Compass which makes full Sea at the place desired, and
then reckoning from that point with the sun according to the diurnal motion,
must account so many points, and so many times 3. minutes as the Moon is days
old, that is for every day one point and 3. minutes, and there finding the Sun,
he must consider what is the hour allowed to that point where he finds the
Sun, for that is the hour of full Sea. As for Example, the moon being 12,
days old, I desire to know the hour of full Sea of London, now finding by
former experience, that a Southwest Moon makes full Sea at London, I
therefore place the Moon upon the point Southwest, then I account from the
point Southwest 12, points, reckoning with the Sun according to the diurnall
motion, Southwest and by west for the first point, West Southwest for the
second, West by South for the third, West for the fourth point, and so forth
until I come to North, which is 12. points from Southwest, and because the
Moon moves 3. minutes more then a point in every day, I therefore add three
times twelve, which make 36. minutes unto the point North, at which place I
find the Sun to be, and knowing that twelve of the clock is appropriated to
the point North, I may therefore boldly say that at twelve of the clock 36.
minutes past, it is full Sea at London. when the Moon is twelve days old,
which 36. minutes are added, because the Moon has moved 36. minutes more then
twelve points in those twelve days, which is one point and 3. minutes for
every day, as before.

Here follows a very necessary Instrument for the knowledge of the Tides,
named an Horizontall tide Table.

Of this Instrument and his parts.
THis necessary instrument for the young practicing Seamans use, name^ an
Horizontall tide table, whereby he may shift his Sun and Moon (as they term
it) and know the times of his tides with ease and very certainly, besides the
answering of many pleasant and necessary questions used amongst Mariners) I
have contrived into this method, only for the benefit of such young
practisers in Hauigation.

The first part of this instrument is a Sea Compass, divided into 32. points
or equal parts, the innermost circle of which Compass is divided into 24.
hours, and every of those into 4. quarters, each quarter being 15. minutes,
and against every point of the Compass those places are laid down, in which
places it is full Sea when the Moon comes upon the same point, so that
whatsoever is required as touching time, or the points of the Compass, is
there to be known.

The next moveable circle upon this Compass, is limited to the Sun, upon
whose index the Sun is laid down, which circle is divided into 30 equal
parts or days, signifying the 30, days between change and change, according
to the Seamans account, so that whatsoever is demanded as touching the age of
the Moon, is upon the circle to be known.

The uppermost moveable circle is applied to the Moon, upon whose index the
Moon is laid down, which is to be placed either to the points and parts of
the Compass, or to the time of her age, as the question requires: which
considered, the use of this instrument is largely manifested, by these
questions with their answers following.

How to know the hour of the night by the Moon, being upon any point of the
Compass, by this instrument.
I. Q. The Moon 10. days old, I demand what it is a clock, when she is
East Northeast.

1. A. In this question the Moons age and the point of the Compass is given,
thereby to know the hour, I therefore place the index of the Moon upon the
point East Northeast, there keeping the same not to be moved, then because the
Moon is 10. days old, I move the index of the Sun until I bring ye tenth
day of the Moons age unto the index of the Moon, and there I look by the Index
of the Sun and find upon the Compass that it is twelve of the clock at
noone and 30. minutes past, when the Moon is upon the point East Northeast,
being 10. days old,

2. Q. The Moon being twelve days old, I demand at what hour she wile upon
the point S. S.?:

2. A. In this question the point of the oampas of Moons age is given, as in
the first, therefore I place the index of the Moon upon the point S. E. C. and
there holding it without moving, I turn the index of the Snnne, until the
twelfth day of the moons age come to the index of the moon, and then the
index of the Sun shows me upon the Horizon the hour 8. therefore I say
that 8. of the clock at night the moon was then upon the point South Southeast.

And thus you may at al times know the hour of the night by the Moon, upon any
point of the Compass, so that Moons age be also had.

How by this Instrument, you know at all times upon what point of the Compass
the Moon is.
I. Q. When the Moon is 10. days old, upon what point of the Compass will
she he, at 9, of the clock in the morning.?

1. A. In this question the hour of the day and the Moons age is given,
thereby to find upon what point of the Compass she is at the same time. I
therefore place the Index of the Sun upon the Compass, at the hour 9. of
the clock in the morning, being upon the point Southeast, then I turn the
Index of the Moon, until I bring it to the tenth day of her age, and then I
see upon the Compass that the Moon is North and by east, and 15. minutes to
the Eastwards, at 9. of the clock when she is 10. days old.

2. Q. When the Moon is 20, days old, upon what point of the Compass will she
be at 2. of the clock in the after noone?

2. A. I place the Index of the Sun upon the hour 2. noted in the compass,
there holding the same without moving, then I turn the Index of the Moon,
until I bring it unto the twentieth day of her age, and there I see upon the
Compass that the is Northeast and by north, and 15. minutes to the Northward,
at 2. of the clock in the afternoon, when she is 20. days old.

To find the Moons age by this instrument.
1. Q. When the Moon is North at 7. of the clock in the forenoone, how old
is she:

1. A. In this question the point of the Compass and the hour is given for
the finding of the Moons age: therefore I set the Index of the Sun upon the
hour 7. in the forenoone, there holding it without moving, then I bring the
Index of the Moon to the point North, and then upon the circle containing the
days of the Moons age, I see the Moon is 8. days and about 18. hours old,
when she is North at 7. of the clock in the forenoone.

2. Q. When the Sun is East, and the Moon Southwest, how old is the Moon?

2. A. In this question the points of the Compass are only given for the
finding of the Moons age, therefore I set the Index of the Sun upon the
point East, there holding him stedie, then I put the Index of the Moon upon
the point Southwest, and there I see that moon is 18. days and 18 hours
old, when the Sun is East, and the Southwest.

After this order by the variety of these few questions, you may frame unto
your self many other pleasant and necessary questions, which are very easily
answered by this Instrument: and entering into the reasons of their answers,
you may very readily by a little practice, be able by memory to answer all
such questions with ease.

How to know the times of your tides by this instrument.
I. Q. When the Moon is 12. days old, I desire to know the time of full Sea
at London.

1. A. To answer this question, I first look through all the points of the
Compass of my instrument I find where London is written, for when the Moon
comes upon that point of the Compass, it will then be full Sea at London:
therefore I place the index of the Moon upon the same point, whith I find to
be Southwest or Northeast, there holding the index not to be moved, then I
turn the index of the Sun until I bring the twelfth day of the Moons age
to the Index of the Moon, and then the index of the Sun shows me that at
12. of the clock 36. minutes past, it is full Sea at London, the Moon being
12. days old.

2. Q. The Moon being 21. days old, at what time is it full Sea at Dartmouth?

2. A. I find upon my instrument, that Dartmouth is noted upon the points East
and West, whereby I know that when the Moon is East or West it is always full
Sea at Dartmouth: therefore I place the Index of the Moon upon the point
East, and there holding it without moving, I turn the Index of the Sun
until I bring the 21. day of the Moons age unto the Index of the Moon, and
then the Index of the Sun shows me upon the Compass, that at 10. of the
clock and 48. minutes past, it is full Sea at Dartmouth, when the Moon is 21.
days old, and not only at Dartmouth, but my instrument shows me that the
same instant it is also full Sea at Exmouth, Weymouth, Plymouth, Mounts bay, at
Lynne, and at Homber: and thus with great facility the time of flowings and
reflowings is most precisely known.

And now that there may be a final end of the vs^s and effects of the
Compass, it is convenient that I make known unto you, how many leages*, shall
be sailed upon every particular point of the Compass, for the raising or
laying of the degrees of latitude, and in the distance sailing how far you
shall he separated from the Meridian from whence the said courses are begun,
for as every point of the Compass has his certain limited distance for the
degrees of the Poles elevation, so they do likewise lead from longitude to
longtitude, every point according to his ratable limits, which distances of
leages are without alteration, keeping one and the same proportion in every
particular Horizon of any latitude, but the degrees of Longitude answerable to
such distances, do differ in every altitude, according to the nature of of the
perallell, as hereafter shall be more plainly manifested. And now know, that in
sailing North and South, you depart not from your Meridian, and in every 20.
leages sailing you raise a degree; Nor and by east raises a degree in sailing
20. leages and one mile, and leads from the Meridian 4. leages: Nor noreast
raises a degree in saying 21. leages and two miles, leads from the Meridian
8. leages and one mile: Noreast by norht raises a degree in sailing 24.
leages, and leads from the Meridian 13. leages and a mile: Noreast raises a
degree in sailing 28. leages and a mile, and leads from the Meridian 20.
leages: Noreast by east raises a degree in saling 36 leages, and leads from
the Meridian 30. leages. East noreast rayseth a degree in sailing 52. leages
and mile, and leads from the meridian 48. leages and 2 mile: East and by
north raises a degree in sailing 102. leages and a mile, and leads from the
Meridian 100. leages and 2, mile: East and West do not raise or lay the Pole,
but keeps still in the same perallell: the like allowance is to be given to
every quarter of the Compass, as is laid down upon this Northeast quarter.

Leages separated from the Meridian in raising a degree.



Q. I perceive that degrees are to great purpose in Navigations, What is a
degree?
An. IT is most true, that degrees are of very great employment in Navigations,
and a degree is the 360. part of a circle, how big or little so ever the the
practices Gubernautick, so yt there be degrees of longitude, degrees of
latitude, degree of Azumuth, degrees of altitude, degrees applied to measure,
and degrees applied to time.

A degree of longitude is the 360. part of the Equinoctial.

A degree of latitude is the 360. part of the Meridian.

A degree of Azumuth is the 360. part of the vertical circle, or the 90.
parts of the distance between the Zenith and the Horizon.

Every degree applied to measure, does contain 60. minutes, and every minute
60. seconds, and every second 60. thirds, etc, and every degree of a great
circle so applied, contains 20. leages, which is 60. mile, so that every
minute stands for a mile in the account of measure, and a mile is limited to
be 1000. paces, every pace 5. foot, every foot 12. inches, and every inch 3.
barley corns dry and round, after our English account, which for the use of
navigations is the only best of all other: so by these rates of measure you may
prove that a degree is 20 leages or 60. miles, a minute is a mile or 5000.
feet, a second is 83. feet, and a third is 16. inches: and thus much of
degrees and their parts applied to measure.

Of degrees applied to time, there are 15. contained in every hour, so that
every degree of time stands in the accompe of time for 4. minutes, for an
hour consisting of 60. minutes of time, has for his fifteenth part 4.
minutes, so that a degree being the fifteenth part of an hour, contains 4.
minutes of time, so that 15. degrees or 60. minutes make an hour, 24. hours
make a natural day, and 365. days 6. hours, are contained in a year, and
thus much as touching time, and degrees applied to time.

What is the use degrees?
The use degrees is to measure distances between place and place, to find
altitudes, latitudes, and longtitudes, to describe countries, to distinguish
courses, to find the variation of the Compass, to measure time, to find the
places and motions af all relesticall bodies, as the Sun, Moon, Planets and
Stars: to conclude, by degrees have been performed all mathematical
observations whatsoever, whose use is infinite.

What is the Poles altitude, and how may it be known?
ALtitude is the distance, height, or mounting of one thing above another, so
that the altitude of the pole, is the distance, height, or mounting of the pole
from the horizon, and is defined to be that portion of the meridian, which is
contained between the Pole and the Horison, which altitude or elevation is to
be found either by the Sun, or by the fixed Stars, with the help of pour
Cross staff, Duadrant, or Astrolabie, but the cross is the only best
instrument for the Sea man's use.

And in the observation of this altitude there are 5. things especially to be
regarded: the first is, that you know the meridionall distance between your
Zenith and the Sun of Starresa, which by your Cross staff or Astrolabye is
given: the second, that the declinaiton be truly known at the time of pour
observation. And the other three are, that you consider whether your Zenith be
beweene the Equinoctial and the sun or Stars, or whether the Equinoctial
be between your Zenith and them, or whether they be between your Zenith and
the Equator, for there is a several order of working upon each of these three
differences.

Latitude you must also know, that so much as the Pole is above the Horizon, so
much is the Zenith from the Equinoctial, and this distance between the Zenith
and the Equator is called latitude or widenes. and is that portion of the
Meridian which is included between your Zenith and the Equator, for it is
general rule for ever, that so much as the Pole is above the Horizon, so much
the Zenith is from the upon Equinoctial, so that in this sense altitude and
latitude is all one thing, the one having relation to that part of the
Meridian contained between the pole and the Horizon, and the other to that
part of the Meridian which is contained between the Zenith and the
Equinoctial.

You must further understand, that between the Zenith the Horizon it is a
quarter of a great circle, containing 90. degrees, so that knowing how much the
sun or any Star is from the Horizon, if you take that distance from 90. the
remainer is the distance between the said body and the Zenith: as for example,
if the Sun be 40, degrees 37. minutes from the Horizon, I sub^tract 40. degrees.
37. min. from 90. and there remains 49. degrees. 23. min. which is the distance
between my Zenith and the Sun, etc. Those instruments that begin the account
of their degrees at the Zenith concluding 90. in the Horizon, are of most case
for the finding of the latitude by the Sun or fixed Stars, because they
give the distance between the Zenith and the body observed, without further
trouble, and that is the number which you must have, and for which you do
search in your observation: all which things considered, you must in this sort
proceed for the finding of the Poles height or altitude.

By the Sun or fixed Stars being between your Zenith and the Equinoctial
the latitude is thus found, in what part of the world soever you be.
FIrst place the Cross staff to your eye, in such good sort as that there
may grow no error by the disorderly using thereof, for unless the Center of
your staff and the center of your sight do join together in your
observation, it will be erroneous whatsoever you conclude thereby: your staff
so ordered, then move the transuersary upon your staff to and fro as occasion
requires, until at one and the same instant you may see by the upper edge of
your transuersary half the body of the Sun or Stars, and that lower edge
or end thereof do likewise touch the Horizon, at that place where it seems
that the Sky and seas are joined, having especial regard in this your
observation, that you hold the transuersary as directly upright as possibly
you may, and you must begin this observation somewhat before the Sun or Stars
be at South, and continue the same so long as you perceive that they rise: for
when they are at the highest then are they upon the Meridian. and then you have
the meridionall altitude which you seek, at which time they will be due South
from you, if your Compass be good and without variation, and then does the
transuersary them upon the staff the degrees and minutes that the said body in
from your Zenith, if the degrees of your instrument be numbered from the Zenith
toward the Horizon: or else it shows the distance between the said body and
the Horizon, if the degrees of your instrument be numbered from the Horizon,
concluding 90. in the Zenith as commonly Cross staves are marked, which is
not the easiest way: but if your staff be accounted from the Horizen, then
substract the degrees of your observation from 90. and the remainer shows the
distance between your Zenith and the Sun or Stares, which is the number you
must know: unto that number so known by your instrument, add the declination
of the body by which you do observe, whether it he the Sun or any star, and
that which comes by the addition of those 2. numbers together, is the poles
height, or the latitude of the place wherein you are: as for Example. In the
year of our Lord 1593. the 3. day of March, the Sun being then between my
Zenith and the Equinoctial, I observed the Suns Meridionall altitude from
the Horizon to be 72. degrees. and 20. min. but because I must know the distance of
the Sun from my Zenith, I therefore substract 72. degrees. 20. min. from 90. degrees.
and there remains 17. degrees. 40. min. the distance of the Sun from my zenith,
to that distance I add the Suns declination for that day, which by my
Regiment I find to be ^. degrees of South declination, and it ameunteth unto
20. degrees. 40. min. so much is the South pole above the Horizon, and so much is
my Zenith south from the Equinoctial, because the Sun having South
declination, and being between me and Equinoctial, therefore of necessity
the Antartick pole must be above my Horison.

89 -- 60 -- the distance between the Zenith and the Horizon. 72 -- 20 -- the
Suns altitude. 17 -- 40 -- the Suns did. from ye Zen. 3 -- 00 -- Suns
declination. 20 -- 40 -- Poles height.
When the Equinoctial is between your Zenith and the Sun or Stars, the
latitude is thus found in all places.
BY your instrument as before is taught, you must seek the meridionall distance
of the Sun or Stars from your Zenith, which being known, substract the
declination of the Sun or Stars from the said distance, and the remaining
number is the poles height or latitude which you seek: Example.

The 20. of October 1593. I fitnde by my instrument that the Sun is 60 degrees. 45.
min. from the Zenith at noone, being then upon the Meridian, the Equator being
then between my Zenith and the Sun, I also find by my Regiment that at that
time the Sun had 13. degrees. 47. min. of South declination, because the
Equinoctial is between me and the Sun, therefore I substract the Suns
declination from the observed distance, and there rests 46 degrees. 58. min.
latitude desired, and because the Sun has South declination, and the
Equinoctial being between me and the Sun, therefore, I may conclude, that the
pole Artick is 46. degrees. 58. min. above my Horizon, or that my Zenith is so much
toward the North from the Equator.

g m 59 -- 15 -- the Suns distance. 13 -- 47 -- the declination. 46 -- 58 --
the latitude.
When your Zenith is between the Sun or Stars and the Equinoctial, the
Latitude is thus found.
BY your instrument as in the first example is showed, you must observe the
Meridionall distance of the Sun or Stars from your Zenith, you must also by
your Regiment or other tables, search to know the declination of that body
which you observe, then substract the observed distance from pour Zenith out of
the declination, and the remaining number is the latitude desired: Example, The
Sun having 20. degrees. of North declination, and being upon the Meridian is 5.
degrees. 9. min. from my Zenith, I therefore substract 5. degrees. 9. min. from 20.
degrees. and there rests 14. degrees. 51. min the latitude desired: and because the
Sun has North declination, my Zenith being between the Sun and the
Equinoctial, therefore, I conclude that the North Pole is 14. degrees. 51. min.
above my Horizon.

g m 19 -- 60 -- the Suns distance from my Zenith. 5 -- 09 -- the declination.
14 -- 51 -- the Poles height.
How shall I know the true order of placing the Cross sffe to mine eye, to
anoide error in my observation?
TO find the true placing of the staff at your eye thereby to amend the
parallar or false shadow of your sight, do thus: take a staff having two
crosses, a long cross which ends in 30. degrees, and a short cross which
begins at 30. degrees. where the long cross ends, put the long cross upon
his 30. degrees. and there make him fast, then put the short cross like wise upon
his 30. de. there fasten him without moving, then set the end of your stasse to
your eye, moving it from place to place about your eye, until at one instant
you may see the ends of both crosses, which when you find, remember that place
and the standing of your body, for so must your staff be placed, and your body
ordered in all your observations.



Are these all the rules that appertain to the finding of the Poles height?
THose that travel far toward the North under whose Horizon the Sun
sets not, shall some time have occasion to seek the latitude by the Sun
when the Sun is North from them, the pole being then between the Sun and
their Zenith. When such observations are made, you must by your instrument
seek the Suns height from the Horizon, substract that height from his
declination, and the remaining number shows how far the Equinoctial is under
the Horizon upon the point North, for so much is the oposite part of the
Equator above the Horizon upon the point South, substract that Meridionall
altitude of the Equinoctial from 90. and the remaining number is the poles
height desired. Example.

The Sun having 22. degrees of North declination, his altitude from the
Horizon is observed to be 3. degrees 15. minutes, therefore substracting 3.
degrees. 15. min. from 22. degrees, there rests 18. degrees. 45. min. which is the
distance of the Equinoctial from the Horizon, which being taken from 90. there
rests 71. degrees 15. min, the poles elevation desired.

g m 22 -- 60 -- the Suns declination. 31 -- 15 -- the Suns altitude. 18 --
45 -- the altitude of the equinoctial. gm -- -- -- 89 -- 60 -- ye did.
between Zen. and Dori* 18 -- 45 -- altitude of the Equator. -- -- -- 71 -- 15
-- the altitude of the pole.
But you must know that the declination found in your Regiment, is not the
declination which in this case you must use: for the regiment shows the Suns
declination upon the Meridian or South point, in the place for whose Meridian
the same was calculated, and not otherwise: therefore it is necessary to know
the Suns declination at all times, and upon every point of the Compass: for I
have been constrained in my Northwest voyages, being within the frozen zone,
to search the latitude by the Sun, at such times as I could see the Sun, upon
what point of the Compass soever, by reason of the great fogges and mistes
that those Northern parts are subject unto: and there is consideration also to
be had upon every difference of longitude for the Suns declination, as I have
by my experience found at my being in the straights of Magilane, where I have
found the suns declination to differ from my regiment calculated for London, by
so much as the Sun declineth in 5. hours, for so much is the difference
between the meridian of London, and the Meridian of Cape froward, being in the
midst of the said straights.

How may this declination be found for all times, and upon all points of the
Compass?
FIrst consider whether the Sun be coming toward the Equinoctial, or going
from him, that being known, consider the time wherein you seek the
declination, then look for the Suns declination in your regiment for that
day, and also look his declination for the next day, substract the lesser out
of the greater, and the remainer is the whole declination which the Sun
declineth in 24. hours, or in his moving throughu all the points of the
Compass, for which number you may by the rule of proportion find his
declination upon every point of the compass, as for every hour of the day, as
by these examples may appear. Example, In the year 1593. the 20. of March, I
desire to know the Suns declination when he is upon the North part of the
Meridian of London, I seek the Suns declination for that day, and find it to
be 3. degrees. 41. min. the Sunn then going from the Equator, I also search his
declination for the next day being the 21. of March, and find it to be 4 de.
3. min I then substract 3. degrees. 41. min. from 4. de. 3. min. and there rests
22 min. so much the Sun does decline 24. hours, or in going through all the
points of the Compass. Then I say by the rule of proportion, if 24. hours
give 22. min of declination, what will 12. hours give, etc. I multiplye and
divide, and find it to be 11. min. the Suns declination in 12. hours motion
to be added to the declination of the 20. day, being the Suns going from the
Equator, or for the points of the Compass I may say, if 32. points give 22.
min. of declination, what will 16. points give, which is the distance between
South and North: I multiply and divide as the rule of proportion requires, and
find that 16. points give 11. min. the Suns declination, in moving through 16,
points of the Compass, which is to be added to the declinanation of the 20.
day, because the Sun goes from the equator, so I conclude the declination to
be 3. degrees. 52. min. the Sun being North the 20. of March.

ho. m. ho. 24 -- 22 -- 12 -- 11 12 -- 44 22 -- 264 ^
ho. m. po. m. 32 -- 22 -- 16 -- 11 16 -- 132 22 -- 352 ^
Being West from the Meridian of London 19 degrees of longitude, I desire to
know the Suns declination when the Sun is upon the Meridian the 20. of March
1593. I must here consider that 90. degrees. of longtitude make 6. hours of time,
for every hour contains 15, degrees. whereby I know that when the Sun is South
at London he is but East from me, for when it is 12 of the clock at London, it
is but 6. of the clock in the morning with me, and when it is 12. of the
clock with me, it is then 6. of the clock in the after noone at London:
therefore I must seek for the declination of the Sun at 6. of the clock in
the afternoon, and that is the meridionall declination which I must use, being
90. degrees. West from London, which to do, the last example does sufficiently
teach you, whereby you may easily gather the perfect notice of whatsoever is
requisite in any of these kind of observations, if you read with the eye of
reason, and labor to understand with judgment that which you read.

There is another way most excellent for the finding of the Suns declination at
all times, that is to search by the Ephimerides the Suns true place in the
Ecliptic for any time proposed whatsoever, and then by the tables of Sinus the
declination is thus known. Multiply the Sinus of the Suns longtitude from the
Equinoctial points of Aries or Libra, to which soever he is nearest, by the
Sinus of the Suns greatest declination, and divide the product by the whole
Sinus, and the arc of the quotient is the declination dlsircl but because
Seamen are not acquainted with such calculations, I therefore omit to speak
further thereof, since this plain way before taught is sufficient for their
purpose.

A necessary Instrument for the better understanding of such things as are
required to the finding of the Poles Elevation.



The use of this Instrument.
BY this instrument you may sufficiently understand, the reasons of whatsoever
is before spoken for the finding of the Poles elevation, or the latitude of
your being: into the consideration whereof, because the young practiser may the
better enter, I think it not amiss by a few examples to express the necessary
use thereof.

1. Q. The Sun having 7. degrees of North declination, and the pole Artick
being 45. degrees above the Horizon, I demand what will be the Suns
meridionall distance from my Zenith:

1. A. First I turn the Horizon until I bring the North Pole to be 45.
degrees above the same, there holding the Horizon not to be moved, I then bring
the thnd that is fastened to the Center of the instrument, 7. degrees from the
Equinoctial toward the North, because the Sun has so much North declination,
and the third does show me upon the vertical circle, that the sun is 38.
degrees from my Zenith.

2. Q. The pole artick being 50 degrees. above the Horizon, and the Suns distance
30. degrees. from the Zenith, I demand what is the Suns declination?

2. A. As in the first question I place the North pole 50. degrees above the
Horizon, there holding the Horizon not to be moved, then I bring the third to
the 30. degree upon the vertical circle, because the Sun is 30. Degrees from
my Zenith, and then the third she weth upon the Meridian between the tropic
of Cancer and the Equinoctial, that the Sun has 20 degrees of North
declination.

3. Q. The Sun having 10. degrees. of South declination, being upon the Meridian,
is 53. degrees. from my Zenith, I demand what is the poles height:

3. A. In the first question the Poles height and the Suns declination are
given, fore finding of the Suns meridionall distance from the Zenith. In the
second the Poles height is given, and the Suns meridionall distance from the
Zenith, thereby to find the Suns declination. And in this question the Suns
declination and meridionall distance is given, for the finding of the Poles
height. I therefore bring the third fastened in the center of the instrument 10.
degrees South from the Equator, between the Equinoctial and the tropic of
Capricorn, there holding the third not to be moved, I then turn the Horizon
until I bring the 53, degree of the vertical circle under the third, and then
the Horizon she weth me, that the North pole is 43. degrees above the same.

4. Q. The Sunhauing 12. degrees of south declination, and being upon the
Meridian South from me, is 30. degrees above the Horizon, I demand how far
the Sun is from my zenith, how much the Equinoctial is above the Horizon, and
what is the Poles height?

4. A. First I bring the third to the place of the Suns declination as
before, there holding it not to be moved, then I turn the Horizon until I
bring it to be 30 degrees. under the third, and then the third shows me that the
Sun is 60. degrees. from my zenith, and the Horizon she weth that the Equinoctial
is 42 degrees. above the same, and that the North pole is also elevated 48. degrees.
above the horizon. Although these questions are so very easy and plain, as
that they may readily be answered by memory, yet because the reasons how they
are answered may the better appear, is the cause wherefore they are demanded
and in this sort answered, only for the benefit of such as are not altogether
expert in these practices, that thereby they might like wise frame unto
themselves questions of other variety, and so gather thereby the more
sufficient judgment in this part of Navigations.

What is the Zenith?
THe Zenith is that prick or point in ye heavens which is directly over your
head, from whence a line falling perpendicularly, will touch the place of your
being, and so pass by ye center of the sphere, and this line may be called the
Axis of the Horizon, and the Zenith the Pole of the same being 90. degrees.

The use of the Regiment.
FOrasmuch as the Poles height cannot be observed by the Sun, unless the
Suns true declination be known, I have therefore carefully calculated these
Tables or Regiment, out of Stadius Ephimerides, for the years 1593. 94. 95.
and 1596. which will serve until the year 1612. without further correction:
and because there may grow no error by mistaking the years, I have over
every month written the year of the Lord, in which the declination of the
same month is to be used, therefore when in any year and month you seek the
Suns declination, first look for the month, and there you shall find 4 of
those months, which are the months between the Leap years, then look over
each of those months, until you find the year of the Lord wherein you seek
the declination, and directly under that year is the month wherein you must
seek the Suns declination. Example, 1595. the tenth day of February I would
know the Suns declination, first I seek out February, and over the third
month I see the year 1595. therefore that is my month, against the tenth day
of which month I find that the sun has 11. degrees 10 minutes of south
declination, and after the like manner you must do in all the rest as occasion
requires.

January.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 Year of the Lord
1597 1598 1599 1600 1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612
D. G. M. D. G. M. D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 21 50 1 21 52 1 22 56 1 21 57 2 21 40 2
21 43 2 22 9 2 21 48 3 21 30 3 21 33 3 21 36 3 21 38 4 21 20 4 21 23 4 21 26 4
21 28 5 21 9 5 21 16 5 21 15 5 21 17 6 20 58 6 21 1 6 21 4 6 21 7 7 20 47 7 20
50 7 20 53 7 20 55 8 20 35 8 20 38 8 20 41 8 20 44 9 20 22 9 20 26 9 20 29 9 20
32 10 20 9 10 20 1^ 10 20 16 10 20 20 11 19 56 11 20 0 11 20 3 11 20 6 12 19 43
12 19 47 12 19 50 12 19 53 13 19 29 13 19 33 13 19 36 13 19 39 14 19 14 14 19
19 14 19 22 14 19 25 15 19 0 15 19 4 15 19 8 15 19 11 16 18 45 16 18 49 16 18
53 16 18 56 17 18 29 17 18 34 17 18 38 17 18 41 18 18 14 18 18 19 18 18 22 18
18 26 19 17 58 19 18 3 19 18 7 19 18 11 20 17 42 20 17 46 20 17 50 20 17 54 21
17 25 21 17 30 21 17 34 21 17 38 22 17 8 22 17 13 22 17 17 22 17 21 23 16 51 23
16 56 23 17 0 23 17 4 24 16 32 24 16 38 24 16 43 24 16 47 25 16 16 25 16 21 25
16 25 25 16 29 26 15 57 26 16 3 26 16 7 26 16 12 27 15 39 27 15 45 27 15 49 27
15 54 28 15 21 28 15 26 28 15 30 28 15 35 29 15 2 29 15 7 29 15 12 29 15 23 30
14 43 30 14 48 30 14 53 30 14 58 31 14 24 31 14 29 31 14 34 31 14 39

February.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 14 4 1 14 9 1 14 14 1 14 19 2 13 44 2 13 50 2 13 54 2 14 0
3 13 24 3 13 29 3 1^ 35 3 13 40 4 13 4 4 13 9 4 13 15 4 13 20 5 12 44 5 12 49 5
12 54 5 13 0 6 12 23 6 12 28 6 12 34 6 12 39 7 12 2 7 12 7 7 12 13 7 12 18 8 11
41 8 11 46 8 11 52 8 11 58 9 11 20 9 11 25 9 11 31 9 11 37 10 10 58 10 11 4 10
11 10 10 11 15 11 10 37 11 10 43 11 10 48 11 10 54 12 10 15 12 10 21 12 10 26
12 10 33 13 9 53 13 9 59 13 10 5 13 10 11 14 9 31 14 9 37 14 9 43 14 9 49 15 9
9 15 9 15 15 9 21 15 9 27 16 8 47 16 8 53 16 8 59 16 9 5 17 8 25 17 8 30 17 8
36 17 8 43 18 8 2 18 8 7 18 8 13 18 8 20 19 7 36 19 7 45 19 7 51 19 7 58 20 7
16 20 7 22 20 7 28 20 7 35 21 6 53 21 6 59 21 7 5 21 7 12 22 6 30 22 6 36 22 6
42 22 6 49 23 6 7 23 6 13 23 6 19 23 6 26 24 5 44 24 5 50 24 5 56 24 6 4 25 5
21 25 5 27 25 5 32 25 5 40 26 4 58 26 5 3 26 5 9 26 5 17 27 4 34 27 4 40 27 4
46 27 4 54 28 4 10 28 4 17 28 4 22 28 4 30 29 4 7

March.
First, Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 3 47 1 3 53 1 3 59 1 3 43 2 3 24 2 3 29 2 3 35 2 3 19 3 3 0
3 3 6 3 3 12 3 2 56 4 2 36 4 2 42 4 2 48 4 2 32 5 2 13 5 2 18 5 2 25 5 2 9 6 1
49 6 1 55 6 2 1 6 1 45 7 1 25 7 1 31 7 1 37 7 1 22 8 1 2 8 1 11 8 1 14 8 0 59 9
0 39 9 0 47 9 0 50 9 0 34 10 0 15 10 0 ^0 10 0 26 10 0 11 11 0 8 11 0 3 11 0 3
11 0 12 12 0 32 12 0 27 12 0 21 12 0 36 13 0 56 13 0 51 13 0 44 13 0 59 14 1 19
14 1 14 14 1 8 14 1 23 15 1 43 15 1 37 15 1 31 15 1 46 16 2 6 16 2 1 16 1 55 16
2 10 17 2 30 17 2 24 17 2 18 17 2 33 18 2 54 18 2 48 18 2 41 18 2 56 19 3 17 19
3 11 19 3 5 19 3 20 20 3 41 20 3 34 20 3 28 20 3 4^ 21 4 3 21 3 57 21 3 ^^ 21 4
6 22 4 27 22 4 21 22 4 ^^ 22 4 29 23 4 50 23 4 44 23 4 38 23 4 52 24 5 13 24 5
7 24 5 1 24 5 15 25 5 36 25 5 30 25 5 24 25 5 38 26 5 59 26 5 52 26 5 47 26 6 1
27 6 21 27 6 15 27 6 10 27 6 23 28 6 44 28 6 38 28 6 32 28 6 46 29 7 6 29 7 1
29 6 55 29 7 8 30 7 29 30 7 23 30 7 18 30 7 30 31 7 51 31 7 46 31 7 40 31 7 52

April.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 8 13 1 8 8 1 8 10 1 8 15 2 8 35 2 8 30 2 8 25 2 8 37 3 8 57
3 8 52 3 8 47 3 8 58 4 9 19 4 9 14 4 9 9 4 9 19 5 9 41 5 9 36 5 9 30 5 9 41 6
10 2 6 9 57 6 9 52 6 10 2 7 10 23 7 10 18 7 10 13 7 10 23 8 10 44 8 10 40 8 10
34 8 10 44 9 11 5 9 11 1 9 10 55 9 11 5 10 11 25 10 11 21 10 11 16 10 11 25 11
11 45 11 11 42 11 11 36 11 11 46 12 12 6 12 12 2 12 11 56 12 12 6 13 12 26 13
12 22 13 12 16 13 12 26 14 12 46 14 12 45 14 12 36 14 12 46 15 13 6 15 13 3 15
12 56 15 13 5 16 13 25 16 13 23 16 13 16 16 13 25 17 13 44 17 13 42 17 13 35 17
13 44 18 14 4 18 14 1 18 13 55 18 14 3 19 14 22 19 14 20 19 14 14 19 14 22 20
14 41 20 14 38 20 14 32 20 14 40 21 14 59 21 14 58 21 14 51 21 14 59 22 15 17
22 15 15 22 15 9 22 15 17 23 15 35 23 15 33 23 15 27 23 15 35 24 15 53 24 15 50
24 15 45 24 15 52 25 16 10 25 16 8 25 16 2 25 16 9 26 16 27 26 16 25 26 26 19
26 16 27 27 16 44 27 16 42 27 16 36 27 16 4^ 28 17 1 28 16 58 28 16 53 28 17 0
29 17 17 29 17 14 29 17 9 29 17 16 30 17 33 30 17 30 30 17 26 30 17 32

May.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 17 49 1 17 45 1 17 41 1 17 48 2 17 57 2 18 1 2 17 57 2 18 3
3 18 12 3 18 16 3 18 12 3 18 18 4 18 27 4 18 31 4 18 27 4 18 33 5 18 41 5 18 45
5 18 45 5 18 48 6 18 56 6 19 0 6 18 56 6 19 2 7 19 9 7 19 13 7 19 10 7 19 16 8
19 23 8 19 27 8 19 23 8 19 29 9 19 36 9 19 40 9 19 38 9 19 42 10 19 49 10 19 53
10 19 50 10 19 56 11 20 2 11 20 6 11 20 3 11 20 8 12 20 14 12 20 17 12 20 15 12
20 20 13 20 26 13 20 30 13 20 27 13 20 32 14 20 38 14 20 41 14 20 39 14 20 43
15 20 49 15 20 53 15 20 50 15 20 54 16 21 0 16 21 4 16 21 1 16 21 5 17 21 10 17
21 14 16 21 11 17 21 16 18 21 20 18 21 24 18 21 22 18 21 26 19 21 30 19 21 34
19 21 2 19 21 35 20 21 59 20 21 43 20 21 41 20 21 45 21 21 49 21 21 ^2 21 21 50
21 21 54 22 21 ^7 22 22 0 22 21 ^9 22 22 2 23 22 6 23 22 8 23 22 7 23 22 10 24
22 14 24 22 16 24 22 15 24 22 18 25 22 21 25 22 24 25 22 22 25 22 25 26 22 28
26 22 21 26 22 0 26 22 3^ 27 22 35 27 22 ^7 27 22 36 27 22 ^9 28 22 41 28 22 4^
28 22 ^2 28 22 45 29 22 4^ 29 22 49 29 22 ^8 29 22 ^^ 30 22 52 30 22 54 30 22
53 30 22 ^6 31 22 57 31 23 0 31 22 ^^ 31 23 1

June
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 2^ ^ 1 23 4 1 23 3 1 23 6 2 23 9 2 23 8 2 23 7 2 23 10 3 23
13 3 23 12 3 23 11 3 23 13 4 23 16 4 23 16 4 23 15 4 23 17 5 23 19 5 23 19 5 23
18 5 23 20 6 23 22 6 23 21 6 23 21 6 23 22 7 23 24 7 23 23 7 23 23 7 23 24 8 23
26 8 23 25 8 23 25 8 23 26 9 23 27 9 23 26 9 23 26 9 23 27 10 23 28 10 23 27 10
23 27 10 23 28 11 23 28 11 23 28 11 23 28 11 23 28 12 23 28 12 23 28 12 23 28
12 23 28 13 23 28 13 23 28 13 23 28 13 23 28 14 23 27 14 23 27 14 23 27 14 23
26 15 23 26 15 23 26 15 23 26 15 23 25 16 23 24 16 23 25 16 23 25 16 23 23 17
23 22 17 23 23 17 23 23 17 23 21 18 23 19 18 23 20 18 23 21 18 23 18 19 23 16
19 23 17 19 23 18 19 23 15 20 23 13 20 23 14 20 23 15 20 23 12 21 23 9 21 23 10
21 23 11 21 23 8 22 23 5 22 23 6 22 23 7 22 23 4 23 23 1 23 23 2 23 23 4 23 22
^ 24 22 56 24 22 57 24 22 58 24 22 54 25 22 51 25 22 52 25 22 ^3 25 22 49 26 22
45 26 22 46 26 22 48 26 22 43 27 22 38 27 22 40 27 22 41 27 22 3^ 28 22 32 28
22 34 28 22 35 28 22 30 29 22 25 29 22 27 29 22 26 29 22 23 30 22 18 30 22 20
30 22 21 30 22 15

July.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 22 10 1 22 12 1 22 21 1 22 12 2 22 2 2 22 4 2 22 6 2 22 4 3
21 54 3 21 56 3 21 58 3 21 56 4 21 45 4 21 47 4 21 49 4 21 47 5 21 35 5 21 38 5
21 40 5 21 38 6 21 26 6 21 28 6 21 ^^ 6 21 28 7 21 16 7 21 19 7 21 21 7 21 19 8
21 6 8 21 6 8 21 11 8 21 2 9 20 55 9 20 58 9 21 0 9 20 52 10 20 44 10 20 47 10
20 49 10 20 40 11 20 33 11 20 36 11 20 38 11 20 29 12 20 21 12 20 24 12 20 26
12 20 17 13 20 9 13 20 12 13 20 14 ^3 20 5 14 19 57 14 20 0 14 20 6 14 19 52 15
19 44 15 19 47 15 19 49 15 19 4 16 19 31 16 19 34 16 19 36 16 19 27 17 19 17 17
19 20 17 19 23 17 19 13 18 19 4 18 19 7 18 19 10 18 18 59 19 18 42 19 18 53 19
18 56 19 18 45 20 18 35 20 18 38 20 18 43 20 18 31 21 18 21 21 18 24 21 18 28
21 18 16 22 18 6 22 18 9 22 18 13 22 18 1 23 17 51 23 17 54 23 17 58 23 17 47
24 17 35 24 17 38 24 17 42 24 17 30 25 17 19 25 17 23 25 17 26 25 17 14 26 17 3
26 17 6 26 17 11 26 16 58 27 16 47 27 16 50 27 16 55 27 16 42 28 16 30 28 16 33
28 16 38 28 16 25 29 16 13 29 16 17 29 16 21 29 16 8 30 15 56 30 16 0 30 16 4
30 15 51 31 15 39 31 15 42 31 15 47 31 15 33

August.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 15 21 1 15 25 1 15 30 1 15 15 2 15 3 2 15 7 2 15 12 2 14 57
3 14 45 3 14 49 3 14 54 3 14 39 4 14 27 4 14 31 4 14 36 4 14 20 5 14 8 5 14 12
5 14 18 5 14 2 6 13 49 6 13 53 6 13 59 6 13 43 7 13 ^0 7 13 34 7 13 40 7 13 24
8 13 9 8 13 15 8 13 2 8 13 5 9 12 51 9 12 56 9 13 2 9 12 4^ 10 12 31 10 12 36
10 12 42 10 12 25 11 12 12 11 12 16 11 12 23 11 12 5 12 11 52 12 11 56 12 12 ^
12 11 41 13 11 32 13 11 36 13 11 42 13 11 25 14 11 11 14 11 16 14 11 22 14 11 4
15 10 51 15 10 59 15 11 2 15 10 44 16 10 ^0 16 10 35 16 10 41 16 10 23 17 10 9
17 10 14 17 10 20 17 10 2 18 9 48 18 9 53 18 9 59 18 9 41 19 9 27 19 9 31 19 9
39 19 9 19 20 9 5 20 9 10 20 9 16 20 8 58 21 8 44 21 8 49 21 8 55 21 8 35 22 8
22 22 8 27 22 8 33 22 8 15 23 8 0 23 8 ^ 23 8 11 23 7 53 24 7 38 24 7 43 24 7
50 24 7 31 25 7 16 25 7 21 25 7 28 25 7 9 26 6 53 26 6 ^9 26 7 5 26 6 47 27 6
31 2^ 6 36 27 6 43 27 6 25 2^ 6 9 28 6 14 28 6 20 28 6 1 29 5 46 29 5 51 29 5
57 29 5 39 30 5 23 30 5 29 30 5 31 30 5 16 31 5 0 31 5 6 31 5 12 31 4 53

September.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 4 38 1 4 42 1 4 49 1 4 43 2 4 14 2 4 20 2 4 26 2 4 20 3 3
51 3 3 56 3 4 3 3 3 57 4 3 28 4 3 33 4 3 39 4 3 34 5 3 5 5 3 10 5 3 16 5 3 12 6
2 37 6 2 47 6 2 53 6 2 47 7 2 18 7 2 23 7 2 29 7 2 24 8 1 55 8 2 0 8 2 6 8 2 1
9 1 31 9 1 37 9 1 43 9 1 37 10 1 8 10 1 13 10 1 19 10 1 14 11 0 45 11 ^ 49 11 0
56 11 0 51 12 0 21 12 0 ^6 12 0 32 12 0 27 13 0 2 13 0 3^ 13 0 9 13 0 3 14 0 25
14 0 21 14 0 15 14 0 20 15 0 48 15 0 44 15 0 38 15 0 43 16 1 12 16 1 8 16 1 2
16 1 7 17 1 35 17 1 31 17 1 25 17 1 30 18 1 58 18 1 55 18 1 48 18 1 54 19 2 22
19 2 18 19 2 12 19 2 17 20 2 45 20 2 45 20 2 35 20 2 41 21 3 9 21 3 5 21 2 59
21 3 4 22 3 32 22 3 28 22 3 22 22 3 27 23 3 55 23 3 51 23 3 45 23 3 50 24 4 18
24 4 15 24 4 9 24 4 14 25 4 41 25 4 38 25 4 32 25 4 37 26 5 4 26 5 1 26 4 55 26
5 0 27 5 27 27 5 23 27 5 18 27 5 23 28 5 51 28 5 46 28 5 41 28 5 46 29 6 14 29
6 9 29 6 4 29 6 8 30 6 36 30 6 32 30 6 26 30 6 31

October.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 7 0 1 6 54 1 6 48 1 6 53 2 7 22 2 7 17 2 7 11 2 7 16 3 7 44
3 7 39 3 7 33 3 7 38 4 8 7 4 8 1 4 7 55 4 8 1 5 8 29 5 8 24 5 8 18 5 8 23 6 8
51 6 8 46 6 8 40 6 8 45 7 9 13 7 9 8 7 9 2 7 9 7 8 9 36 8 9 30 8 9 24 8 9 30 9
9 58 9 9 52 9 9 42 9 9 52 10 10 19 10 10 13 10 10 8 10 10 13 11 10 41 11 10 35
11 10 39 11 10 35 12 11 2 12 11 0 12 10 51 12 10 56 13 11 23 13 11 18 13 11 12
13 11 17 14 11 45 14 11 39 14 11 33 14 11 39 15 12 5 15 12 0 15 11 54 15 11 59
16 12 26 16 12 21 16 12 15 16 12 20 17 12 47 17 12 41 17 12 36 17 12 41 18 13 7
18 13 1 18 12 56 18 13 1 19 13 27 19 13 22 19 13 17 19 13 21 20 13 47 20 13 41
20 13 36 20 13 41 21 14 6 21 14 1 21 13 56 21 14 1 22 14 26 22 14 21 22 14 16
22 14 17 23 14 45 23 14 40 23 14 ^5 23 14 39 24 15 4 24 14 59 24 14 54 24 14 58
25 15 23 25 15 17 25 15 13 25 15 17 26 15 41 26 15 36 26 15 31 26 15 35 27 15
59 27 15 54 27 15 50 27 15 54 28 16 17 28 16 12 28 16 8 28 16 12 29 16 35 29 16
30 29 16 25 29 16 29 30 16 52 30 16 47 30 16 43 30 16 47 31 17 9 31 17 4 31 17
0 31 17 4

November.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M* 1 17 26 1 17 21 1 17 17 1 17 36 2 17 42 2 17 38 2 17 33 2 17
53 3 17 58 3 17 54 3 17 49 3 18 9 4 18 14 4 18 9 4 18 6 4 18 25 5 18 29 5 18 25
5 18 22 5 18 41 6 18 44 6 18 40 6 18 37 6 18 55 7 18 59 7 18 55 7 18 52 7 19 10
8 19 14 8 19 10 8 19 6 8 19 24 9 19 26 9 19 24 9 19 21 9 19 38 10 19 42 10 19
36 10 19 35 10 19 52 11 19 45 11 19 52 11 19 48 11 20 5 12 20 8 12 20 5 12 20 7
12 20 18 13 20 21 13 20 18 13 20 14 13 20 30 14 20 34 14 20 30 14 20 27 14 20
43 15 20 46 15 20 42 15 20 39 15 20 54 16 20 57 16 20 54 16 20 51 16 21 6 17 21
8 17 21 5 17 21 3 17 21 17 18 21 19 18 21 16 18 21 14 18 21 27 19 21 29 19 21
27 19 21 24 19 21 37 20 21 39 20 21 37 20 21 35 20 21 47 21 21 49 21 21 47 21
21 44 21 21 56 22 21 58 22 21 56 22 21 54 22 22 5 23 22 7 23 22 5 23 22 3 23 22
14 24 22 15 24 22 21 24 22 11 24 22 21 25 22 23 25 22 14 25 22 19 25 22 29 26
22 31 26 22 29 26 22 27 26 22 36 27 22 38 27 22 37 27 22 34 27 22 43 28 22 44
28 22 43 28 22 41 28 22 49 29 22 50 29 22 49 29 22 47 29 22 55 30 22 56 30 22
54 30 22 53 30 23 0

December.
First. Second. Third. Fourth. 1 2 3 4 1593 1594 1595 1596 1597 1598 1599 1600
1601 1602 1603 1604 1605 1606 1607 1608 1609 1610 1611 1612 D. G. M. D. G. M.
D. G. M. D. G. M. 1 23 1 1 23 0 1 22 58 1 23 5 2 23 6 2 23 5 2 23 4 2 23 10 3
23 10 3 23 9 3 23 8 3 23 14 4 23 14 4 23 13 4 23 12 4 23 17 5 23 17 5 23 17 5
23 16 5 23 20 6 23 20 6 23 20 6 23 9 6 23 22 7 23 23 7 23 22 7 23 22 7 23 25 8
23 25 8 23 25 8 23 24 8 23 26 9 23 26 9 23 26 9 23 26 9 23 27 10 23 27 10 23 27
10 23 27 10 23 28 11 23 28 11 23 28 11 23 28 11 23 28 12 23 28 12 23 28 12 23
28 12 23 28 13 23 28 13 23 28 13 23 28 13 23 27 14 23 27 14 23 27 14 23 27 14
23 26 15 23 26 15 23 26 15 23 26 15 23 24 16 23 24 16 23 24 16 23 25 16 23 21
17 23 21 17 23 22 17 23 23 17 23 18 18 23 19 18 23 20 18 23 20 18 23 15 19 23
16 19 23 17 19 23 17 19 23 12 20 23 12 20 23 13 20 23 14 20 23 8 21 23 8 21 23
7 21 23 10 21 23 6 22 23 ^ 22 23 4 22 23 5 22 22 57 23 22 58 23 22 59 23 23 1
23 22 52 24 22 52 24 22 54 24 22 56 24 22 46 25 22 47 25 22 48 25 22 50 25 22
40 26 22 40 26 22 42 26 22 43 26 22 33 27 22 36 27 22 35 27 22 37 27 22 25 28
22 30 28 22 28 28 22 30 28 22 18 29 22 22 29 22 20 29 22 22 29 22 9 30 22 14 30
22 12 30 22 14 30 22 0 31 22 6 31 22 4 31 22 6 31 21 52

What is the Sea Chart?
THe Sea Chart is a special instrument for the Seamans use, whereby the
hidrographicall description of the Occean Seas, with the answerable
geopraphicall limits of the earth, are supposed to be in such sort given, as
that the longitudes and latitudes of all places, with the true distance and
course between place and place might thereby be truly known. But because
there is no proportionable agreement between a Globus superficies and a plain
superficies, therefore a Chart does not express that certainty of the
premises which is thereby pretended to be given, for things are best described
upon bodies agreeable to their own form. And whereas in the true nature of
the Sphere there can be no perallelles described but the East and West courses
only, the rest of the courses being concurued lines, ascendent toward the
Poles, the Meridians all concurring and joining together in the Poles,
notwithstanding in the Sea Chart all those courses are described as perallells,
without any diversity, alteration, or distinction to the contrary, whereby the
instrument is apparently faulty: yet it cannot be denied but Charts for short
courses are to very good purpose for the Pilots use, and in long courses, be
the distance never so far, if the Pilote return by the same course, whereby
in the first he prosecuted his voyage, his Chart will be without error, as an
instrument of very great commodity: but if he return by any other way, then
by that which he went forth, the imperfections of the Chart will then appear
to be very great, especially if the voyage be long, or that the same be in the
North parts of the world, the farther toward the North, the more imperfect:
therefore there is no instrument answerable to the Globe or peradoxall Chart,
for all courses and climats whatsoever, by whom all desired truth is most
plentifully manifested, as shall hereafter at large be declared: but for the
costing of any shore or country, or for short voyages, there is no instrument
more convenient for the Seamans use, then the well described Sea Chart.

What is the use of the sea Chart?
BY the directions of the sea chart, the skilful Pilote conuaieth his ship from
place to place, by such courses as by the chart are made known unto him,
together with the help of his Compass or Cross staff as before is showed,
for the Cross staff, the Compass and Chart, are so necessarily joined
together, as that the one may not well be without the other, in the execution
of the practices of Navigations: for as the Chart shows the courses, so does
the compass direct the same, and the Cross staff by every perticutar
observed latitude does confirm the truth of such caurses, and also gives the
certain distance that the Ship has sailed upon the same.

And in the use or understanding of the Sea Chart there are five things
cheefely to be regarded.

The first is, that the Countries or geographie of the Chart be known, with
every Cape, Promontery, Port, Haven, Bay, Sands, Rocks, and dangers therein
contained.

Secondly, that the lines drawn upon the Chart, with their several properties
be likewise understood.

Thirdly, that the latitudes of such places as are within the Chart be also
known, as by the Chart they are expressed.

Fourthly, that you be able to measure the distances between place and place
upon the Chart.

And fifthly, the Seaman must be able by his Chart to know the true courses
between any les, contenents, or Capes whatsoever, for by these five
diversities, the Chart is to be used in the skill of Navigations.

How is the latitude of places known by the Chart?
THe latitude is thus found by the Chart, upon the place whose latitude you
desire to know, set one foot of your compasses, then stretch the other foot to
the next East and West line (for that line is your director) keeping that foot
still upon the same line, move your hand and Compasses East or West as occasion
requires, until you bring the Compasses to the graduated Meridian, and there
that foot of the Compasses which stood upon the place whose latitude you
would know, does show the latitude of the same place.

How is the course between place and place known?
WHen there are two places assigned, the course between which you desire to
know, set one foot of your Compasses upon one of the places, then by
discretion consider the lines that lead toward the other place, stretching the
other foot of the Compasses to one of those lines, and to that part of the
line which is nearest to you, keeping that foot still upon the same line, move
your hand and Compasses toward the other place, and see whether the other foot
of the Compasses that stood upon the first place, do by this direction touch
the second place, which if it do, then that line whereupon you kept the one
foot of your Compasses, is the course between those places: but if it touch
not the place, you must by discretion search until you find a line, whereupon
keeping the one foot of the Compasses, will lead the other foot directly from
the one place to the other, for that is the course between those two places.

How is the distance of places found upon the Chart?
IF the places be not far asunder, stretch a pair of Compasses between
them, setting the one foot of the compasses upon one of the places, and the
other upon the other place, then not altering the compasses, set them upon the
graduated Meridian of your Chart, and allowing 20. leags for every degree that
is contained between the 2. feet of your Compasses, the distance desired is
thereby known: if between the places there be 5. degrees, then they are 100.
leages asunder, etc. But if the distance between the places be so great, as
that the compasses cannot reach between them, then take out 5. degrees with
your compasses which is 100. leages, and therewith you may measure the distance
as practice will teach you. There is also in every Chart a scale of leages
laid down, whereby you may measure distances, as commonly is used.

How does the Pilote order these matters, thereby to conduct his Ship from
place to place?
THe Pilote in the execution of this part of Navigations, does with careful
regard consider three especial things, whereupon the full practices are
grounded.

1 Of which the first is, the good observation of his latitude which how it may
be known is before sufficiently expressed. 2 The second is a careful regard
unto his steredge, with very diligent examination of the truth of his Compass,
that it be without variation or other impediments. 3 And the third is a
careful consideration of the number of leags that the Ship saileth in every
hour or watch, to the nearest estimation that possibly he can give, for any
two of these three practices being truly given, the third is thereby likewise
known.
As by the Corse and height the distance is manifested, by the distance and
Corse the height is known: by the height and distance the Corse is given, of
which 3. things the Pilote has only his height in certainty: the corse is
somewhat doubtful, and the distance is but barely supposed, notwithstanding
from his altitude and corse he concludes the truth of his practice, proceeding
in this sort.

First he considers in what latitude the place stands from whence he
shapeth his Corse, which for an example shall be the Lyzart standing in 50.
degrees of septentrionall latitude, then directing his corse S. w. saileth 3.
or 4. days or longer in such thick weather, as that he is not able to make any
obseraution of the Poles altitude, in which time he omitteth not to keep an
account how many leages the ship has sailed upon that corse as near as he can
guess, which number of leages in this example shall be 100. according to his
iuugement: then having convenient weather, he observes in what latititude he
is, and finds himself to be in 47. degrees, now with his compasses he takes
the distance of 100. leages, which is the quantity of the Ships run by his
supposition, and then setting one foot of the compasses upon the Lizart, which
is the place from whence he began his corse, and directly S. W. from the same
he sets the other point of the compasses, by the direction of another pair
of compasses, in such sorce as corses are found, and there he makes a prick
for the place of his ships being, according to his reconing and Corse.

And now searching whether it do agree with his height, (for the height,
corse, and distance, must all agree together) he finds that his prick
stands in 46. degrees, 29. minutes, but it should stand in 47. degrees, to
agree with his observation. Therefore perceiving that he has given the ship
too much way, he brings his corse and observed altitude to agree, and then
he sees that his ship has sailed but 85. leages, and there he lays down a
prick for the true place of his ships being, according to his corse and
latitude, for so by his corse and height he finds the truth of his distance,
and reproves his supposed account to be 15. leags too much: and after this
sort he proceeds from place to place, until he ariue unto his desired port:
which is a conclusion infallible if there be no other impediments, (whereof
there has not been good consideration had) which may breed error, for from
such negligence there may arise many inconveniences.

What may those impediments be?
BY experience at the Sea we find many impediments that so disturb the
expected conclusion of our practices, as that they agree not with the true
positions of art. For, first it is a matter not common to have the wind so
beneficial, as that a ship may sail thereby, between any two assigned places
upon the direct corse, but that by the contrariety of winds, she may be
constrained to trauers upon all the points of the Compass, (the nature whereof
I have before sufficiently expressed.

Secondly, although the wind may in some sort favor, yet the ship may have
such a leward condition, as that she may make her way 2. or 3. points from her
caping.

Thirdly, the steredge may be so disorderly handled, as that thereby the Pylote
may be abused.

And lastly, the compass may be so varied, as that the Pylote may likewise
thereby be drawn into error, of all which things and many more, as the nature
of his sailing, whether before the wind, quartering, or by a bowling, or
whether with lofty or low sails, with the benefits or hindrances of the sea,
tydegates, streams, and forced set thereof, etc. Of all which things I say,
the skillful Pylote must have careful consideration, which are better learned
by practice then taught by pen: for it is not possible that any man can be a
good and sufficient pylote or skilful Seaman, but bypainefull and diligent
practice, with the assistance of art, whereby the famous Pylote may be esteemed
worthy of his profession, as a member meet for the common weal.

And now having sufficiently showed you the ordering of your Chart for the
execution of the skill of Navigations, and being also desirous that you should
effectually understand the full nature and use of the same. I think it good by
a few questions to give you an occasion to exercise your self in the perfect
accomplishment of such conclusions as are by this excellent and commodious
instrument to be performed.

Necessary questions for the better understanding of the commodious use of the
Chart.
1 Q. If I sail 70. leages upon the Southwest corse, I demand how many
degrees I shall lay or depresse the Pole?

A. The difference of the latitude will be 2. degrees, 30. minutes.

2 Q. If in sailing West Norwest I raise the Pole 3. degrees, 30. minutes, I
demand how many leages I have sailed?

A. The distance sailed, is 180. leages.

3 Q. If in sailing 108. leages between West and Nor, I raise the Pole 3.
degrees, I demand upon what corse I have sailed, and how far I am from the
Meridian from whence I began that corse?

A. The corse sailed is N. w. b. W. and the distance from the Meridian is 90.
leages.

4 Q. If in sailing 154. leages I be 80. leages West from the Meridian from
whence I began my corse, I demand upon what point of the compass I have
sailed, and how much I have raised the Pole?

A. The corse is N w, b. N. and the Pole is raised 6. degrees.

5 Q. If I sail N w. until I be 50. leags from the Meridian where I began my
Corse, I demand how many leages I have sailed, and how much the Pole is raised?

A. The distance sailed is 71. leages, and the Pole is raised 2. degrees, 30.
minutes.

6 Q. If in sailing W. N. W. I do in 30. hours raise 2. degrees, how many
degrees should I have raised the Pole, if the same motion had been North and
by West?

A. You should have raised 5. degrees?

7 Q. A Ship sailing toward the West, for ettery 80. leages that she sayleth
in her Corse, she departs from the Meridian from whence she began the same
Corse 45. leags, I demand upon what point of the Compass, and how many leages
she has sailed, in raising the Pole 5. degrees:

A. She has sailed Northwest by North 120. leages.

8 Q. A Pylote sailing toward the West 100. leages, has forgotten his Corse,
yet thus much he knows, that if he had sailed upon such a Corse, as that in
160. leages sailing he should have raised the Pole 3. degrees, he should then
have been twice as far from the Meridian as now he is, and should also have
been degree further to the Northwards then now he is. I would now know what
Corse he has sailed, how many leages, and how far he is separated from the
Meridian from whence he began the said Corse.

A. She has sailed 88. leages Northwest bywest, and is 73. leages from the
Meridian nerest.

9 Q. Two Ships departing from one place, the one in sailing 145. leags toward
the West, has raised the Pole 4. degrees, and the other has raised the Pole
7. degrees, and is 95. leages West from the Meridian of the place from whence
he began his corse, I demand by what corse the said ship has sailed, how
far they be asunder, and by what corse they may meet?

A. The first ship has sailed Northwest by west, the second has sailed
Northwest bynorth, 170 leages, they are asunder 65. leags, and the corse
between them is North northeast, and South southwest.

10 Q. Two ships sailing from one place, the one is sailing 180. leages, is to
the Eastwarde of the Meridian where he began his corse 150. leages, I demand
upon what corse and how many leages the other ship shall sail, to bring
himself 50. leages N. b. W. from the first ship?

A. The first ship has sailed N. e. b. e. and has raised the Pole 5. degrees,
the second ship must sail Northeast bynorth 237 leages.

ALthough it may seem (to some that be very expert in Navigations) that these
questions are needless, and without use, being so plain as not deserving in
this sort to be published, notwithstanding that their opinion, I do in
friendly courtesy advise all young practisers of this excellent art of sailing,
that they do not only by their Charts prove the truth of these answered
questions, but also endeavor themselves to propound diverse other sorts of
questions, and in seeking their answers, to enter into the reason thereof: for
by such exercise, the young beginner shall understand the substantial grounds of
his Chart, and grow perfect therein: for whose ease and furderance only, I
have at this present published this brief treatise of Navigations, knowing that
the expert Pylote is not unfurnished of these principles, but every little
help does greatly further in every beginning: and therefore for the further
benefit of the practiser, I have hereunto annexed a particular Sea Chart of
our Channel, commonly called the Sleue, by which all that is before spoken as
touching the use of the Chart, may be practiced, wherein the depths of the
Channel are truly laid down: being an instrument most commodious and
necessary for all such as seek the Chanel coming out of the occean Sea, much
of it is from my own practice, the rest from Pylotes of very good
sufficiency: I have found great certainty by the use of this Chart, for by
the altitude and deapth I have not at no time missed the true notice of my
Ships being, which (through Gods merciful favor) by my land falls I have
always found to be without error, therefore have it not in light regard, for
it will give you great evidence, and is worthy to be kept as a special iuell
for the Seamans use, be he never so expert.

And thus having sufficiently expressed all the practices appertaining to the
skill of horizontal Navigations, which kind of sailing is now of the greatest
sort only practiced, I think it good for your better memory briefly to report
that which before is spoken as touching this kind of Navigations, and withal
it will not be a miss to show you after what sort I have been accustomed to
keep my accomptes in my practices of sailing, which you shall find to be very
sure, plain and easy: whereby you may at all times examine what is past, and
so reform the corses laid down upon the Chart, if by chance there should
any error be committed. And so concluding this part of Navigations, will in
the next treatise make known unto you the use of the Globe, such uses I mean
as the Seaman may practice in his voyages, and that are most necessary for his
knowledge.

A Table showing the order how the Seaman may keep his accounts, whereby he
may at all times distinctly examine his former practices, for in every 24.
hours, which is from noone to noone, he does not only lay down his
latitude, with the corse and leages, but also how the wind has blown in the
same time.

The first Colume is the months and days of the same, the second is the
observed altitude* the third is the Horizontall corse or motion of the Ship,
the fourth the number of leages that the Ship has sailed, the fifth is a space
wherein must be noted, by what wind those things have been performed: and
the next great space is to lay down any brief discourse for your memory.

Anno. 1593.
Months and days of the month. Latitude. G. M. Corse. Leages Wind The 23. of
March, cape S. Augustine in Brasill, being 16. leags east from me, I began this
account. March. 24 7 30 N. N. E. 25 East. 25 5 44 N. b. E, norly 36 E. b. N.
Compass varied 9. degrees. the South point w estward. 26 4 1 N. b. N. 35 E. b. N.
Compass vried 8. degrees. the South point westward, 27 2 49 N. 24 E. b. N. 28 1 31
N. esterly. 26 E. b. N. 29 1 4 N. N. W. 9 N. E. Compassse varied 6. degrees. 40. ^.
the South point westward. April. 31 0 0 N. b. W. 21 E. N. E. Observation, the
Pole artick above the Horizon. 4 0 39 N. W. b. N. 15 N. E. 7 1 53 N. N. W. 28
N. E. 9 3 5 N. W. b. N. 30 N. E. b. E. 10 4 5 N. w. b. N. 22 N. E. 11 4 45 N.
W. 18 N. E. b. N. 12 5 16 N. W. 14 N. E. b. N. 13 6 11 N. W. b. N. 23 N. E. 14
7 16 N. W. b. N. 24 N. E. Compass varied 7. degrees. the north point eastwards.

A brief repetition of that which is before spoken.
THere are 3. kinds of Navigations, Horizontall, Paradoxall, and sailing upon a
great Circle, performed by Corse and trauers.

A Corse is the paradoxall line, which is described by the Ships motion upon
any point of Compass.

A Trauers is the variety of the Ships motion upon every alteration of Corses.

The Compass is an artificial Horizon, by which Corses and Trauerses are
directed, and contains 32. points, and every point contains 11. degrees,
or 45. minutes, being of an hour.

By such quantity of time as the Moon seperateth her self from the Sun, by
the like rate of time every tide does one differ from another.

In every hour the tide alters two minutes, in every flud twelve minutes,
and in every ebb twelve minutes, and in every day 48. minutes, because that so
is the Moons separation from the Sun: for the Moon does separate her self
from the Sun, in every day one point and 3. minutes, between the change and
the full she is to the Eastwardes of the Sun, and then is her separation, at
which time she is before the Sun in respect of her natural motion, but in
regard of her violent motion, she is then behind or abast the Sun.

Between the full and the change, she is to the Westward of the Sun,
applying toward the Sun, and then is her application, at which time she is
behind ar abast the Sun, in respect of her natural motion, but in
consideration of her violent motion, she is then befare the Sun.

She has a violent motion, a natural motion, a slow, swift, and mean motion.

In every 27. days and 8. hours she perfourmeth her natural motion through
the Zodiac.

Between change and change there is twenty nine days, twelve hours, forty
four minutes nerest.

The solar year consists of 12. months, and the lunar year of 12. Moons.

The Moons age is found by the Epact.

All instruments used in Navigations, of what shape or form soever they be, are
described or demonstrated upon a Circle, or some portion of a Circle, and
therefore are of the nature of a Circle.

A degree is the 360. part of a Circle, how big or little soever the Circle
be.

A degree is applied after 6. several sorts, to the Equator, to the Meridian,
to the Horizon, to the vertical Circle, to measure, and to time.

Altitude is the distance, height, or mounting of one thing above another.

The Poles altitude is the distance between the Pole and the Horizon, or that
portion of the Meridian which is contained between the Pole and the Horizon.

The altitude of the Sun above the Horizon, is that portion of the circle of
Azumuth, which is contained between the Horizon and the Sun.

Latitude is that arc of the meridian which is contained between the
parallel of any place and the Equator, or that part of the Meridian which is
included between the Zenith and the Equinoctial.

Longitude is that portion of the Equator contained between the Meridian of S.
Mihels, one of the Isles of the Assones, and the Meridian of the place whose
longitude is desired: the reason why the account of longitude does begin at
this I Will, is, because that there the Compass has no variety, for the
Meridian of this I Will passes by the Poles of the world and the Poles of the
Magnet, being a Meridian proper to both Poles.

The longitude between place and place, is the portion of the Equator which is
contained between the Meridians of the same places.

Declination is the distance of the Sun, Moon and Stars, from the
Equinoctial, or that portion of the Meridian which passes by the Center of
any celestial body, and is contained between the same center and the
Equinoctial.

Hidrographie is the description of the occean Sea, with all Isles, bancks,
rocks and sands therein contained, whose limits extend to the geographicall
borders of the earth, the perfect notice whereof is the cheifest thing required
in a sufficient Pylote, in his excellent practice of sailing.

Geographie is the description of the earth only, whereby the terrestrial
form in his due situation is given, whose distinction is by mountains,
rivers, valleys, cities, and places of fame, without regard of the Circles,
Clymates, or Zones.

Cosmographie is the description of the heavens, with all that is contained
within the circute thereof, but to the purpose of navigations, we must
understand Cosmographie to be the universal description of the terrestrial
Globe, distinguished by all such circles, by which the distinction of the
celestial Sphere is understood to be given, with every Country, Coast, Sea,
Harborow, or other place, seated in their true longitude, latitude, Zone, and
Clyme.

The Chart is a special instrument in Navigations, pretending the
Cosmographicall description of the terrestrial Globe, by all such lines,
circles, corses and divisions as are required to the most exquisite skill of
navigations.

The end of the First Book.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS TREATISE OF NAVIGATION.

WHEREIN IS TAVGHT, THE nature and most necessary use of the Globe, with the
Circles, Zones, Climates, and other distinctions to the perfect use of Sailing.

By which most excellent Instrument is performed, all that is needfully
required to the full perfection of all the three kinds of Navigations.





THE SECOND BOOK OF THE SEAMANS SECRETS.
What is the Sphere?
THe Sphere is a solid body, contained under one superficies, in the midst
whereof there is a point or prick, which is the Center of the Sphere, from
whence all right lines drawn to the circumference, are equal the one to the
other, whereby it is to be understood, that the center of the Sphere is so
euenly placed in his midst, as yt it has like distance from all parts of the
Circumference. And forasmuch as the Sphere is an instrument demonstrating nnto
us the nniuersall ingine of the world, we must therefore understand this Center
to be this terrestrial Globe, wherein we have our being, which compared to the
celestial Globe or heavenly circumference does bear property, as ye center to
his circle: which earthly globe by the divine mighty workmanship of God, does
admirably hang upon his center, being of equal distance from all parts of the
circumference.

What are the distinctions of the Sphere?
THe Sphere is distinguished by ten circles, whereof six are great circles,
and 4. are lesser circles: whereof there are only 8. described upon the body
of the Globe, limiting the Zones and motion of the Planets, as the
Equinoctial, the Ecliptic, the Equinoctial Colure, the Solsiticial Colure,
the Tropic of Cancer, the Tropic of Capricorn, the Artick Polar Circle, and
the Antartick Polar Circle. The Horizon and Meridian are not described upon the
body of the Globe, but artificially annexed thereunto for the better perfection
of his use.

Which are the great circles, and which the lesser?
THe Equator, the Ecliptic, the 2. Colures, the Meridian and the Horizon are
great circles, because they divide the sphere into 2. equal parts. The 2.
Tropicks, the 2. Polar circles, are lesser circles, because they divide the
Sphere into 2. unequal parts.

What is the Equator or Equinoctial?
THe Equinoctial is a great circle dividing ye Sphere into 2. equal parts,
leaving the one half toward the North, and the other half toward the
South, and is equally distant from both the Poles of the world 90. degrees,
placed euenly between them, and described upon them, this line crosses the
Horizon in the true points of East and West, and has always his own half
above the Horizon, unless it be under either of the Poles, for there the Equator
is in the Horizon: it crosses the Meridian at right Spherick angles, and it
also crosses the Ecliptic line in the first minute of Aries and Libra,
dividing the Ecliptic and Horizon, and is also by them divided into two equal
parts. This line is also divided into 360. equal parts or degrees, which are
the degrees of Longitude, beginning the account in the point of Aries,
reckoning twoards the East, concluding the number 360. in the place where the
first account began: viz, where the Equator does intersecte the Ecliptic in
the first minute of Aries, under which Meridian S. Mihels one of the yles, of
the assores is to be placed in the geographicall description of the
terrestrial Globe.

What is the use of the Equator?
THe use of the Equinoctial, is to know the declination of the Sun, Moon
and Stars, whereby the latitude of places is given, for that portion of the
Meridian which is contained between the Equator and the Center of the Sun,
Moon or Stars, is their declination: also by the Equinoctial is known the
Longitude of places, for a quarter of a great Circle being drawn from the
Pole, to the place whose Longitude is desired, and so continued to the
Equinoctial, that degree and minute in which the quarter circle does touch
the Equator, is the Longitude of the same place, or if you bring any place
(that is described upon the Globe) whose Longitude you would know, under the
Meridian of the Globe, that degree of the Equinoctial that is then likewise
directly under the Meridian is the Longitude desired. When the sun comes
upon the Equator, then the Days and nights are of one length through the whole
world: and then the Sun rises upon the true point of East, and sets upon
the true point of West, and not else at any time. This circle being fixed in the
firmament, is moved with the first mouer in every hour 15, degrees, by which
account in 24. hours his motion is performed. And here note, that the degrees
of the Equinoctial have a double application, the one to time, and the other
to mesure: in respect of time 15. degrees make an hour, so that every degree
contains but 4, minutes of time, but when his degrees have relation to
measure, then every degree contains 60. minutes, being 20 leags, so that
every minute stands for a mile after our English account.

But this allowance of 20. leags to every degree of the Equinoctial, in
sailing, or measuring of distances upon the East and West Corses, is only
when you are under the same, because the Equinoctial being a perallell, is
likewise a great circle, and every degree of a great circle is truly accounted
for 20. leages, or 60. miles.

But in the rest of the perallells where either of the Poles are elevated above
ye Horizon, if there you sail or measure upon the Corses east or west, there
are not 20. Leags to be allowed to every degree, because such perallelles are
lesser circles, therefore they have the fewer number of leags to every degree:
so that the further you depart from the Equator, the lesser are the
perallelles, and the lesser that any perallell is, the lesser are his degrees,
because every circle contains 360. degrees, and as the circles and degrees
are diminished in their quantity, in like sort the distance answerable to
such degrees, must abate, as their circles do decrease. And further know, that
the Equator, is the beginning of all terrestrial Latitude, and declination of
the celestial bodies.

What is the Ecliptic?
THe Ecliptic line is greate^ circle, dividing the sphere into 2. equal
parts, by crossing the Equator in oblique sort dividing him, and being divided
by him into 2. equal parts, bending from the Equator toward the North and
South 23. degrees, and 28. minutes, being in the first minute of Cancer and
Capricorn, there determining the Tropicall limits, this line likewise deuideth
the Zodiac, by longitude into 2, equal parts, and is divided together with
the Zodiac, into 12. equal portions called signs, and every of these signs is
divided upon the Ecliptic into 30. equal parts, or degrees, so that this
line is divided into 360. degrees, upon which line the center of the Sun does
continually move: this circle is described upon his proper poles, named the
Pole of the Zodiac, being in all his parts 90. degrees from either of them.

The Zodiac is a circle contrary to all the other, for they are mathematical
lines, consisting only of length, without breadth or thicknes: but the Zodiac
has latitude or breadth 12. degrees, whose limits are 6. degrees, of either
side of the Ecliptic, wherein the Sun, Moon and Planets perform their
motions and reuolutions, the center of the Sun only keeping upon the
Ecliptic, but the other Planets have sometime North latitude, and sometime
South latitude. And here you must understand, that the latitude of the Planets
or Stars, is that portion of the eclipticall meridian which is contained
between the center of the Planet or Star and the Ecliptic line, and their
longitude is that portion of the line Ecliptic, which is contained between
the the said meridian and the eclipticall meridian that passes by the poles
of the Zodiac and the first minute of Aries.

The 12. deuisions or signs of the Zodiac are these, Aries, Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer Leo, Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagitari Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces: and
these are their characters that stand by them.

The 7. Planets that keep within the limits of the Zodiac are these, Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna: Saturn perfourmes his course through
all the degrees of the Zodiac, once in every 30. years: Jupiter in 12. years,
Mars in 2. years, the Sun in 365. days and 6. hours being one year, Venus
and as the Sun, and the Moon performs her course in 27. days and about 8.
hours, through all the degrees of the Zodiac.

And note that this natural motion of the Planets in the Zodiac, is from the
West toward the East, the diurnall motion is violent, caused by the first
mouer, or primum mobile, who in every 24. hours does perform his circular
motion from the East to the West, carrying with him all other inferior bodies
whatsoever.

What is the use of the Zodiac?
BY the Zodiac and Ecliptic is known the longitude and Latitude of any
Celestial body, either Planets or fired Stars, for a quarter of a great
circle drawn from the pole of the Zodiac to the center of any Planet or Star,
and so continued until it touch the Ecliptic, that degree and minute where
the said quarter circle touches the Ecliptic, is the longitude of the said
body, which is to be accounted from the first minute of Aries, for the
longitude of Aries is the portion of the Ecliptic line, which is contained
between the eclipticall meridian passing by the poles of the Zodiac, and the
first minute of Aries, and the eclipticall meridian which passes by the poles
of the Zodiac and the center of any Planet or Star.

When the Planets are upon the North side of the Ecliptic, they have North
latitude, and being South from the Ecliptic, they have South latitude.

Also the motions of the Planets, the time of any Eclipse, and the Suns
declination by his place in the Ecliptic, are known by this circle, whose use
is very ample and to great purpose, for all Astronomicall considerations.

What are the Colures?
THe Solsticiall Colure is a great circle passing by the Poles of the world,
and the poles of the Zodiac, and the Solsticial points or first minute of and,
cutting the Equinoctial at right spherick angles, in his 90. and in his 270.
degrees.

The Equinoctial Color is likewise a great circle passing by the poles of
the world, and the equinoctial point of and, and crosses the equator in his
first and 180. degrees, and those Colors do intersect each the other in the
poles of the world to right spherick angles.

What is the use of these Colures?
Their use is to distinguish the 4. principal seasons of the year, Spring,
Summer, Autumme, and winter, dividing the Equator and Ecliptic into 4. equal
parts: also that arc of the Solsticiall Colure which is included between the
first minute of and the Equinoctial, is the Suns greatest declination toward
the North, the like arc being between the tropicall point of and the Equator,
is the Suns greatest South declination, being in these our days 23 degrees,
28. minutes.

What is the tropic of Cancer?
The Tropic of is one of the lesser circles dividing the sphere into two
unequal parts, and is described upon the pole Artick, a perallell to the
Equator 23. degrees 28 minutes from him, being the farthest lymit of the
Ecliptic bending toward the North, to which when the Sun comes, the days
are then longest to all those that inhabit in the North parts of the world,
and shortest to the Southern inhabitants: between this circle and the Equator
are included the 6. Septentrional signs,,,,,,, in which signs during the time
that the Sun abides, being from the 11. of March, to the 13. of September,
he has much declination, and then is the spring and Summer to all such as
inhabit in the North parts of the World, and Autumme and Winter to the
inhabitants of the South parts of the World: this circle does touch the
Ecliptic in the first minute of, where the Sun begins his return toward
the South, whereupon it took the name Tropic, which signifies conversion or
return, by which point of the Ecliptic, the diurnall motion describes this
Circle.

What is the tropic of Capricorn?
THe Tropic of, is one of the lesser circles dividing the sphere into 2.
unequal parts, and is described upon the pole Antartick, a perallell to the
Equinoctial 23. degrees 28 minutes from him, being the farthest bending of the
Ecliptic toward the South, to which when the Sun comes, the days are
then longest to al those that inhabit in the South parts of the world, and
shortest to the Northern inhabitants: between this circle and the Equator are
included the 6. Southern signs,,,,,,, in which signs during the time that the
Sun abides, being from the 13 of September to the 11. of March, he has
South declination, and then is the Spring and Summer to all such as inhabit in
the South parts of the world: and Autumme and Winter, to all the inhabitants
in the North parts of the world: this circle touches the Ecliptic in the
first minute of, by which point the diurnall motion describes this perallell.

What is the use of the Tropicks?
BY the Tropicks the Suns declination is known, as also the tropicks by the
Suns farthest motion toward the North and South, for so much as the
Tropicks are distant from the Equator, so much is the suns greatest
declination: and such as is the Suns greatest declining, such is the distance
between the Tropicks and the Equator they are also the limits of the burning
Zone, seperating the burning and temperate zones. For between the two Tropicks
is contained the burning Zone.

What is the Artick polar Circle?
THe Artick Polar Circle is one of the lesser circles, dividing the sphere into
two unequal parts, and described upon the Pole Artick in perallell, to the
Tropic of, having such distance from the Pole as the Tropic has from the
Equator, being 23. degrees 28. minutes, upon which circle the Artick pole of the
Zodiac is placed, which being fixed in the firmament, by the virtue of the
first mouer is carried about with the heavens, by which motion this circle is
described.

What is the Antartick polar Circle?
THe Antartick polar circle is opposite to the Artick, and perallell to the
Tropic of, being in all respect of such distance and description, from and
about the pole Antartick, as the Artick polar circle is about the Pole Artick.

What is the use of the Artick and Antartick polar Circles?
THe use of these 2. polar Circles, is to show the distance of the poles of the
Zodiac, from the poles of the World, for so much as the Solsticiall points are
distant from the Equator, so much are the poles of the Zodiac from the poles of
the World: these circles do also divide and limit the temperate and frozen
zones, for between the Tropic of and the Artick Polar circle is contained the
Northern temperate zone, and between the Artick polar circle and the Pole
artick, that is, within the Artick polar circle is contained the Northern
frozen zone. Also between the Tropic of and the Antartick polar circle, is
contained the Southern temperate zone, and within the said polar circle is
included the Antartick frozen zone, and chese are all the circles that are
described upon the body of the Globe.

What is the Meridian?
THe Meridian is a great circle passing by the Poles of the World, and by your
zenyth, dividing the Horison into 2. equal parts, in the points North and
South, it also deuideth the sphere with all the perallell circles therein
contained, into 2. equal parts, crossing them at right spherick angles. And
this Meridian is not fixed in the firmament as the rest of the circles are, for
if it were, then should it be moved with the first mouer as the rest are, but
it is not so: therefore the Meridian is manifested upon the Globe, by a circle
or ring of copper fastened unto the Globe, upon the 2. Poles, so that the Globe
moves round upon his 2. Poles within the Meridian: this Meridian is graduated
in every of his quarters into 90. degrees, by which his use is performed: and
note that one Meridian may have many Horyzons, yet every Horizon has but one
Meridian, yet in every sencible difference of distance you shall enter into a
change of Horizons, for there be as many Horizons as there be sencible
differences of distance, and there be as many Meridians as there be sencible
differences of distance, so that the difference be not upon the points North or
South, but this copper Meridian annexed to the Globe, is to be applied to all
differences and distances whatso. ever, as amply as if the number were infinite.

What is the use of the Meridian?
THe use of the Meridian is to know the highest ascending of the Sun, Moon
or Stars from the Horizon, for when they be upon the Meridian, then are they
farthest from the Horizon, and then is the most convenient time to take the
altitude of the Sun or Stars, thereby to find the Poles elevation.

By the Meridian of your Globe is known the latitude and longitude of any
place upon the Globe contained, for if you bring any place under the Meridian,
the degrees of the Meridian do show the latitude of the same, and that, degree
of the Equator which the Meridian does cross is the longitude, etc.

What is the Horizon?
THe Horizon is a great circle dividing the heavens into 2. equal parts the
one half being above the horizon is always in sight, the other half is not
seen being under the Horizon, and therefore is called the finitor or lymit of
our sight, for where the heavens and feas seem to join together, that is the
Horizon: the Horizon is not fixed in the firmament, and yet is a fixed circle
constant to his proper latitude, but because in the Globe one and the same
Horizon may perform whatsoever is required to all eleuations, the Horizon is
so artificially annexed to the Globe, that by the motion of the Meridian, in
the same there faulteth nothing in his use: and the Horizon is in all respects
distinguished, as is the sea Compass. There are two kinds of Horizons, a
right Horizon, and an oblique Horizon: when the Poles are in the Horizon, then
is it a right Horizon, for then the Equator does cut the Horizon to right
angles, making a right Sphere and a right Horizon, an oblique Horizon is where
either of the Poles are elevated above the same, for then the Equator does cut
the Horizon to unlike angles, making an oblique Sphere, and an oblique Horizon,
and although the Horizons be diverse and many in number, for every sencible
difference of distance has his proper Horizon, yet is the Horizon of the Globe
so conveniently annexed thereunto, as that by the moving of the Meridian in the
Horizon, and by the Globes motion in the Meridian, both the Horizon, and
Meridian are to be applied as proper to all places whatsoever: and note that
the place where you are, is always the center of the plain superficial
Horyson.

What is the use of the Horizon?
THe Horizon is the beginning of all altitude, for whatsoever is above the
Horyzon, is said to have altitude more or less, and by the horizon such
altitudes are given with help of the cross staff, for placing the cross
staff at your eye, if by the one end of the transuersary you see the Horyzon,
and by the other end (at the same instant) you see the body observed, then does
the transuersary show upon the staff the altitude desired, by the Horizon the
nauigable courses from place to place are like wise known, as also the
quantity of the rising and setting of the Sun, moon and Stars: whereby is
known the length of the days and nights in all climats and at all seasons: by
the Horyzon is known upon what degree of Azumuth, the Sun, Moon or Stars
are, when they may be seen, in what part of the Heaven soever, whereby the
variation of the Compass is found, and the Poles altitude may at all seasons
be given.

Are these all the circles appertaining to the Globe?
There are other Circles which are fixed and do properly appertain to every
particular Horizon, as Azumuths, Almicantans, the Artick, and Antartick circles.

What are circles of Azumuth?
CIrcles of Azumuths, or vertical circles, are quarters of great circles,
concurring together in the Zenith, as the Meridians do in the Pole, and are
extended from the Zenith to every degree of the Horizon, etc. And because they
cannot be conveniently described upon the Globe to be applied to all Horizons,
therefore upon the Meridian of the Globe there is a piece of copper
artificially placed, to be removed to any degree of the Meridian at pleasure,
which piece of copper represents the zenith, and must always be placed so
many degrees from the Equator, as the Pole is elevated from the Horizon: and
unto this zenith there is joined a quarter of a great circle called Quarta
altitudo, the end whereof does continually touch the Horyzon, and is so joined
to the zenith, as that it may be moved round upon the Horizon, and to every
part thereof at your pleasure: this Quarta altitudo is divided into 90
degrees, being the distinction of all altitude, and begins the account from
the Horizon, which is the beginning of altitude, and concludes 90, degrees in
the zenith, being the end and extreme lymite of all altitude.

What are Almicantans?
ALmicantans or circles of altitude, are parallel circles to the Horizon, and
are described upon the zenith, as the perallells to the equator, are described
upon the Poles, of which circles there are 90. answerable to the distinctions
of the Quarta altitudo, which are the degrees contained between the Horizon
and zenith, these circles cannot be described upon the Globe, to be applied to
every Horizon, but they are distinguished by the circular motion of the Quarta
altitudo, fox if I desire to see the almicantar circle of 10. degrees, by
moving the Quarta altitudo round about the Horizon, the zenith degree of their
quarter circle, does show the Almicanter desired, in what elevation soever.

What is the use of these two Circles?
THe quarta altitudo perfourmeth the use of both, by the quart^^ altitude and
Horizon the courses from place to place are known according to the true
horizontall position, as hereafter shall plainly appear: it also shows the
degree of Azumuth, and observed altitude of any celestial body, in what
latitude soever: by the Quarta altitudo and Horizon, you may describe a
peradoxall Compass upon the Globe, the Poles length is at all times thereby to
be known, and the variation of the Compass is thereby likewise given, as
hereafter in the practice you shall be taught.

What are the Artick and Antartick circles?
EVery Horizon has his proper Artick or Antartick circle, those Horizons that
have the Pole Artick elevated above them, have their proper Artick circle, and
those that have the South pole elevated, have their proper Antartick circle,
the quantity of which circle is according to the Poles elevation, for if the
Pole be much elevated, then is the Artick circle great, for the Poles altitude
is the semidiamiter of this circle, if the Pole be in the Zenith, then half
the Heavens is the Artick circle.

What is the use of this circle?
IF the Sun, Moon, or any Stars be within this circle, they are never
carried under the Horizon during the time of their abode therein, whereupon it
comes to pass that such as travail far toward the North, have the Sun
in continual view, and those that inhabit under the Pole (if any so do) the
Sun is in continual sight for six months together, because the six
Septentrionall signs are within their Artick circle, the Equator being in the
Horizon etc.

There is another small circle, which is called Ciclus horarius, or the hour
circle, to be annexed to the Meridian of the Globe, for the perfection of his
use, this circle must be divided into 24. equal parts or hours, and those
again into such parts as you please for the better distinction of time: this
circle must be fastened to the meridian, so that the hours 12. must stand
directly upon the edge of the meridian, and the Pole must be the center of
this circle, upon which Pole there must be fastened an Index to move
proportionably, as the sphere (upon any occasion)shall be moved.

There is also an half circle, called the Circle of position, which since it
serves to no great purpose for Navigations I here omit, and thus is the Globe
fully finished for the perfection of this use.

What are the Poles of the world?
THere are two Poles (...) the North or artick Pole, and the South or antartick
Pole, which Poles are two moveable pricks fixed in the firmament, whereupon the
sphere is moved by virtue of the first mouer, and are the limits of the Axis of
the world, as also the extreme term or band of all declination, being 90.
degrees from all parts of the Equator.

By the raising of the Pole from the Horizon, is known the perallell or
latitude of our being, it also gives the quantity of the Artick circle, and
the obliquitie of the sphere.

What is the axis of the world?
THe Axis of the world is a right line passing by the center of the sphere,
and limited in the circumference, about the which the Sphere moves, and is
therefore called the Axis of the Sphere, and as all lines comensurable are
limited between two points or pricks, so is the Axis of the world, and those
two limiting pricks are called the Poles of the world.

What are the Poles of the Zodiac?
THe zodiac has likewise two Poles, Artick and Antartick, being two pricks
fixed in the firmament, limiting the Axis of the zodiac, and are distant from
the Poles of the world 23. degrees, 28. minutes, which Poles by the motion of
the sphere do describe the Polar circles, perfourming their motion about the
Poles of the world in every 24. hours, by virtue of the first mouer, upon
these poles the Ecliptic and zodiac is described: also a quarter of a great
circle graduated into 90 degrees, being fastened to either of these Poles and
brought to the center of any Star, shows by that graduation the latitude of
the same Star, and where the quarter retire circle touches the Ecliptic,
that is likewise his longitude, also the 7. Planets do perform their natural
reuolutions upon these Poles, whose motion is from the West toward the East,
coutrary to the motion of the first mouer.

What is the Axis of the Zodiac.
THe Axis of the zodiac, is a right line passing by the center of the sphere,
and limited in the circumference, whose limiting points are the Poles of the
zodiac, and this Axis is moved with the Sphere as are his Poles.

What are the Poles of the Horizon?
THere are two Poles of the Horizon, which are the limits of his perpendicular
dimetient, being equidistant 90. degrees from all parts of the Horizon, and are
the extreme limits of all altitude, that Pole which is in the upper Hemisphere
is called the zenith, and his opposite pole is called Nadir, they are extended
to the firmament but not fixed in it, for they move never, but remain always
stable to show proper Horizon, which could not be if they were fixed in the
firmament, for then should they be moved with the firmament as the rest are, by
the help of these Poles is found the Azumuth and Almicanter of any celestial
body, for a quarter circle divided into 90. degrees, and fixed to the zenith as
is the Quarta altitudo, being moved to any celestial body, does by those
degrees show the almicanter or altitude of the same body from the Horizon, and
that part of the Horizon which the quarter circle teaches, is the azumuth of
the same body, always provided that the zenith stand auswerable to the Poles
elevation, that is, so many degrees from the Equator, as the Pole is from the
Horizon.



How many Zones are there?
THere are 5. zones, 2. temperate zones, 2. frozen zones, and one burning zone,
the burning zone lies between the two Tropicks, whose latitude is 46. degrees,
56. minutes, which zone by ancient Geographiers is reported to be not
habitable, by reason of the great heat which there they supposed to be, through
the perpendicularitie of the Sun beams, whose perpetual motion is within
the said zone, but we find in our travels, contrary to their report, that it
is not only habitable, but very populous, containing many famous and mighty
nations, and yields in great plentye the most purest things that by natures
benefits the earth may procreate: twice I have sailed through this zone, which
I found in no sort to be offenciue, but rather comfortable unto nature, the
extremetie of whose heat is not furious but tolerable, whose greatest force
lasts but 6. hours, that is, from 9. of the clock in the morning, unto 3.
in the afternoon, the rest of the day and night is most pleasing and
delightful: therefore they did nature wrong in their rash report.

Of the frozen Zones.
THe frozen zones are contained within the polar circles, the Artick frozen
zone within the Artick polar circle, and the antarttck frozen zone within the
Antartick Polar circle, which are also reported not to be habitable, by reason
of the great extremetie of cold, supposed to be in those parts, because of the
Suns far distance from those zones. but in these our days we find by
experience, that the ancient Geographiers had not the due consideration of the
nature of these zones, for three times I have been within the Artick frozen
zone, where I have found the air very temperate, yea and many times in calm
wether marvelous hot: I have felt the Sun beams of as forcible action
within the frozen zone in calmes near unto the shore, as I have at any time
found within the burning zone. this zone is also inhabited with people of good
stature, shape, and tractable conditions, with whom I have conuersed and not
found them rudly barberous, as I have found the Caniballs which are in the
straights of Magilane, and Southern parts of America: In the frozen zone I
discovered a coast which I named desolation at the first view thereof,
supposing but by the loathsome shape to be waste and desolate, but when I came
to an Ancker within the harbors thereof, the people presently came unto me
without fear, offering such poor things as they had to exchange for iron
nails and such like: but the Canibals of America fly the presence of men,
showing themselves in nothing to differ from brute beasts: thus by experience
it is most manifest that those zones which have been esteemed desolate and
waste, are habitable, inhabited and fruitful. If any man be persuaded to the
contrary of this truth, he shall do himself wrong in having so base an
imagination of the excellency of Gods creation, as to think that God creating
the world for man's use, and the same being divided but into 5. parts, 3. of
those parts should be to no purpose: but (...) let this saying therefore of
the Prophet Esaias be your full satisfaction, to confirm that which by
experience I have truly spoken: For thus says the Lord that created heaven,
God himself that framed the earth and made it, he that prepared it, he
created it not in vain, he framed it to be inhabited, etc. Esai 45, 18.

Of the temperate zones.
THe temperate Artick zone is included between the tropic of and the Artick
Polar circle, whose latitude or breadth is 42, degrees, 2. miuntes, within the
which we have our habitation.

THe temperate Antartick zone is limited by the tropic of and the Aatartick
Polar circle, and has breadth or latitude 42, degrees, 2, minutes.



What is a Climate?
A Climate is the space or difference upon the upper face of the earth,
included between two perallells, wherein the day is sensibly lengthened or
shortened half an hour, for as you travail from the Equator toward the Artick
Pole, the Sun having North declination, the days do grow Ionger and longer,
until at last the Sun not setting under the Horizon, you shall have
continual day, and every space or distance that alters the day half on
hour, is called a Climate: these Climates take their names from such famous
places as are within the said Climates, of which there are 9. as by their
distinctions may appear.

1. The first passing through Meroe, begins in the latitude 12. de. 45. m.
and ends in 20. d. 30. m. whose breadth is 7. d. 45. m.

2. The second passing through Syene, begiuneth in the latitude of 20. de. 30.
m. and ends in 27. d. 30. m. whose breadth is 7. d.

3. The third passing through Alexandria, begins in the la. of 27. d. 30. m
and ends in 33. d. 40. m. whose breadth is 6. d. 10. m.

4. The fourth passing by Rhodes, begins in the la. of 33. d. 40. m. and
ends in 39, d. whose breadth is 5. d. 20. m.

5. The fifth passing by Rome, begins in the la. of 39. d and ends in 43.
d. 30. m. whose breadth is 4. d. 30. m.

6. The sixth passing by Boristhines, begins in 43. d. 30. m. and ends in
47. d. 15. m. whose breadth is 3. d. 45. m.

7. The seventh passing by the Rhiphaan mountains, begins in 47, d. 15. m.
and ends in 50. d. 20. m. whose breadth is 3. d. 5. m.

8. The eight passing by Meotis or London, begins in 50. d. 20. m. and
ends in 53. d. 10. m. whose breadth is 2. d. 50. m.

9. The ninth passing by Denmark, takes his beginning in the latitude of 53.
d. 10. m. and ends in the latitude of 55. d. 30. m. and has in breadth 2. d.
20. m.

If you desire to know how many leagues every Climate is in breadth, allow for
every degree 20. leagues, or 60. miles, and for every minute a mile, so is the
distance given.

Thus have I manifested unto you all the divisions and particularities of the
Spheres distinction.



What is the use of the Globe?
THe use of the Globe is of so great ease, certainty and pleasure, as that the
commendations thereof cannot sufficiently be expressed, for of all instruments
it is the most rare and excellent, whose conclusions are infallible, giving the
true line, angle, and circular motion of any Corse or trauers that may in
Navigations happen, whereby the longitude and latitude is most precisely known,
and the certainty of distance very plainelye manifested, according to the true
nature thereof: it gives the variation of the Compass, and the hour or time
of the day at all seasons, and in all places. And by the Globe the Poles height
may at all instants and upon every point or azumuth, of the Horizon, by the
Suns altitude taken, be most precisely known, by the certainty of whose
excellent use, the skillful Pilot shall receive great content in his pleasing
practice gubernautick.

How are distances measured upon the Globe?
When there are 2 places assigned the distance, between which you desire to
know, with a pair of circular compasses you must do it in this sort: set one
foot of the Compasses upon one of the places, and the other foot upon the
other place, the Compasses so stretched forth bring unto the Equator, and as
many degrees as may be contained between those two points of the Compass,
allowing 20. leages for every degree as the distance disired: or if the places
be of such distance, as that you cannot with your Compasses reach them, then
take with the Compasses 5. degrees of the Equator, which is 100. leages, or 10.
degrees for 200. leages, and so measure how often the distance is contained
between the said places, if any part of a degree does remain, for half a
degree allow 10. leages, for a quarter 5. leages, etc. but if you desire a most
exquisite precisenes in measuring to the minute, second and third, then do
thus. When your Compasses does fall upon any part of a degree, note the
distance between the end of that degree and the point of the Compasses, then
with a pair of convenient compasses take the distance, then measure the same
60. times upon the Equator, (beginning at some certain place) then consider
how many degrees are contained within the measure, and allow every degree to be
a minute or mile, so are the leages and miles known, if any perallell of a
degree remain upon this measure of minutes, do as at the first, measuring the
same 60. times upon the Equator, the degrees comprehended within ye measure,
are seconds; if any parcel of a degree remain upon these seconds, do as in
the first, and the degrees contamed in this measure are thirds, and so you may
proceed infinitely.

How may the Globe be rectified answerable to the true position of the heavens,
for any place, City, or promontery?
THe place being known for the which you would rectify the Glode, do thus:
bring the place under the Meridian, and there consider the latitude thereof:
and as many degrees as that place is from the Equator, so many degrees you must
eleuate the Pole from the Horizon, then bring the zenith directly over the same
place, and so is your Globe rectified for the execution of any practice: and
without this ordering of the Globe, there is no conclusion to be executed by
the same.

How is the longitude and latitude of places known by the Globe?
BY turning the Globe within the Meridian, you must bring the Promontery, Bay,
Harborow, City, or other place, (whose latitude and longitude you seek)
precisely under the Meridian, there holding the Globe stedy, the degree of the
Meridian that is directly over the said place, shows the latitude thereof,
and that degree of the Equinoctial which is directly under the Meridian, is
the longitude of the same place.

How is the Corse found between place and place?
TWo places being assigned, the Corse between which you desire to know, first
seek the latitude of one of these places, and rectify the Globe answerable
unto the same, as before is taught, then bring that place directly under the
Meridian and Zenith, if both places be under your Meridian, they then Iye North
and South, if not, then bring the Quarta altitudo to the other place, and note
upon what part of the Horizon the end of the same touches, for that is the
precise Horizontall Corse between the said places, but this you must consider,
that the Horizontall Corse is not the nauigable corse, unless the places be of
small distance, for if any place hare Northeast from me, or East from me, or
upon any other point, North or South excepted, and be distant 500. leages, if I
sail upon the Horizontall Corse, I shall never ariue unto the same place.

How then shall the Pylote sail by the Globe? if the matter be so doubtful?
THe shilfull Pylote that uses this excellent instrument, does first consider
the place from whence he shapeth his corse, and rectifieth the Globe answerable
to the same, then bringing the place directly under the Meridian and Zenith,
there holding the Globe stedie, brings the Quarta altitudo to the place for
which he is bound, the end whereof shows upon the Horizon the true
Horizontall Corse, upon which Corse he sayleth 20. or 30. leages, and there
makes a note or prick by the edge of his Quarta altitudo, according to the
true distance proved by Corse, reconing an altitude as in the use of a Chart:
then he brings that prick or note under the Meridian, and there considers
the true latitude of his being, he then rectifieth the Globe answerable to the
same prick, and keeping the same under the Zenith, does again turn the
Quarta altitudo to the place for which he is bound, the end whereof shows upon
the Horizon the Horizontall Corse, then sailing as at the first he makes a
note or prick as before. and thus prosecuting his Corse, shall ariue unto his
desired place: but in this practice he shall plainly prove that his
Horizontall Corse will differ greatly, and that by his sailing in this sort,
he shall by his notes and pricks describe the true nauigable and nearest Corses
between the said places: The like method is to be observed upon any trauers
or forced course whatsoever: and therefore the Pylote must take care, that
although the wind be never so favorable, yet he must not prosecute any
Horizontall Corse (North and South only excepted.)

Therefore I say, the Pylote must take special care to consider the distance
of places, whether the Horizotall Corse will lead him between the said
places: for if places be more then 45. degrees asunder, the Horizontall Corse
is not the mean to find those places, unless they lie Nouth and South: for
the Horizoutall course between any 2. places, is a portion of a great circle,
which being of large distance, must be performed by great circle navigations,
and not by Horizontall Corses: for the collection of many Horizontall Corses
being knit together, do perform a peradoxall motion, altogether differing
from a great circle, as for an example: being at Cape verde, there is a place
distant from me 80. degrees, upon the point Northwest, unto which place I
desire to sail, I therefore bring Cape verde under the Meridian of my Globe,
there considering the latitude of the Cape, I raise the Pole answerable to the
same, and place the Zenith directlye over the Cape, then turning the Quarta
altitudo to the point Northwest upon the Horizon, all such places as the said
Quarta altitudo then touches, do hear due Northwest from me: now prosecuting
this Corse by the direction of my Compass, the first day I sail 20 leages,
therefore I make a mark by the edge of the Quarta altitudn, 20. leages from
the Zevith, then bringing that mark lnder the Meridian, I rectify the Globe
answerable to the latitude thereof, the next day I sail other 20. leages upon
the same point, and make a mark as at the first, I bring that mark likewise
under the Meridian, and rectify the Globe as before, and by this method
prosecuting the Corse NW, I shall describe a peradoxall line, which will lead
me to the North of the place unto which I would sail, the farther the
distance, the greater the difference: by this order you may describe peradoxall
lines, upon all the points of the Compass, but this is to be regarded, that
your differences be as small as you may, and that none of them exceed 20.
leags, fox by the smallest distinctions, is performed the greatest certainty.
And by the description of these lines, you may Very manifestly understand the
differences of Horizontall peradoxall and great circle Navigations.

And this may snffise for the sailing use of the Globe, convenient for the
seamans purpose.

What is great Circle navigations?
GReat Circle navigations is the cheifest of all the 3. kinds of sailing, in
whom all the other are contained, and by them this kind of sailing is
performed, continuing a Corse by the shortest distance between places, not
limited to any one Corse, either horizontall or peradorall, but by it those
corses are ordered to the full perfection of this rare practice, whose
benefits in long voyages are to great purpose, ordering and disposing all
horizontall trauerses to a perfect conclusion: for there are many changes of
horizontall and peradoxall Corses in the execution of this practice, so that
upon the shifting of a wind, when that it may seem that you are forced to an
inconvenient Corse by the skill of great Circle sailing, that Corse shall be
found the shortest and only proper motion to perform your voyage. And also
when with favorable winds the Pylote shall shape a Corse by his Chart or
Compass peradoxall, as the best mean to attain his port, he shall by this
kind of saying find a better and shorter Corse, and by sufficient
demonstration prove the same, so that without this knowledge I see not how
Corses may be ordered to their best advantage: therefore since by it the
perfection of sailing is largely understood, and the errors likewise most
substancially controled, it may of right challenge the cheifest place among the
practices Gubernautick. The perticularities whereof if I should by an orderly
method labor to express, it would be a discourse over large for this place,
and as I think troublesome if the premises be not well understood: therefore
I will now ouerpasse it, until a time more convenient and of better leisure.

Of peradoxall Navigations.
PEradoxall Navigations, demonstrateth the true motion of the Ship upon any
Corse assigned, in his true nature by longitude, latitude and distance, giving
the full lymit or determination of the same, by which motion lines are
described neither circular nor straight, but concurued or winding lines should
be described by plain horizontall motion: for the full perfection of which
practice I purpose (if God permit) to publish a peradoxal Chart with all
convenient speed, and so will discover by the same at large, all the practices
of peradoxall and great Circle navigations, for upon the peradoxall Chart it
will best serve the Sea-mans purpose, being an instrument portable, of easy
stowage and small practice, perfourming the practices of Navigations as largely
and as beneficially as the Globe in all respects: and all these practices of
sailing before, mentioned, may in a general name be aptly called Navigations
Geometrical, because it wholly consists of Geometrical demonstratiue
conclusions.

But there is another knowledge of Navigations, which so far excels all
that is before spoken, or that has hitherto been vulgarly practiced, as the
substance his shadow, or as the light surpasses the thick obscured darkness:
and this sweet skill of sailing may well be called Navigations arithmaticall,
because it wholly consists of Calculations, comprehended within the lymit of
numbers, destingnishing Corses not only upon the points of the Compass, but
upon every degree of the Horizon, and gives the distance of any trauers for
the particular elevation of minutes, yea, and less parts assure your self:
it gives longitudes and latitudes to the minute second and third: in so great
certainty, as that by no other means the like can be performed: in so great
certainty, as that by no other means the like can be performed: it teaches
the nature of Angles and Triangles, as well Sphericall as plain superficial
and solid Comensurations, the effect of lines straight, circular, and
peradoxall, the quantities and proportions of perallells, the nature of
Horizons, with every particular distinction of any alteration whatsoever, that
may in Navigations be required, to a most wonderful precise certainty: for
there can nothing be required, to a most wonderful precise certainty: for
there can nothing be required, that by this heavenly hermonye of numbers shall
not be most copiouslye manifested to the Seamans admiration and great coutent:
the orderlye practice whereof to the best of my poor capacity I purpose to
make known, if I may perceive my pains already taken, to be received in good
part, which I distrust not but all honest minded Seamen, and Pylots of
reputation will gratefully embrace, only in regard of my friendly good will
toward them, for it is not in respect of my pains, but of my love, that I
would receive favorable courtesy.

How may the Poles height be known by the Globe?
THere are diverse ways to find the Poles height by the Globe, as well from the
Meridian as upon the same, but since before I have sufficiently taught how by
the Suns Meridian altitude, the Poles height may be found, I will therefore
in this place speak no further thereof, but for the other kinds it may be
known as follows.

How by the Suns rising or setting, the Poles height may be known.
BY your Compass of variation, or some magneticall instrument, observe at the
sun rising, upon what degree of the Horizon the center touches, according to
the true horizontall position of the Magnet, all variation dulye considered,
that being known, search in the tables of the Ephimerides, for the Suns
place in the Ecliptic, at the time of your observation, then bring that place
or degree of the Ecliptic wherein you find the Sun to be, to the Horizon,
and move that Meridian of the Globe as occasion requires, until that observed
degree of the Horizon and the Suns place in the Ecliptic do justly touch
together, for then is the Pole in his due Elevation, as by the intersection of
the Horizon and Meridian may appear, in like sort you may find the Poles
altitude, by any known fixed Star in the Horizon.

To find the poles height by the Sun, upon any point of the Compass.
BY the Compass of variation, rectified to the true horizontall position,
observe the Sun until he come to any point thereof at your pleasure, and at
the same instant take the suns height from the Horizon, then bring the Quarta
altitudo to that point of the Compass upon the Horizon of the Globe where you
observed the Sun to be, there holding the Quarta altitudo stedye, move the
Globe until you bring the degree of the Ecliptitk (wherein the Sun is at the
time of your observation) unto the edge of the Quarta altitudo, if it fall upon
that degree of altitude as was the Suns observed height, then does the Pole
stand to his true Elevation, but if it agree not, you must eleuate or depresse
the Pole as occasion requires, rectifying the Zenith answerable thereunto. And
again make trial as at the first, bringing the place of the Sun to the
Quarta altitudo, and setting the same upon the observed point of the Compass,
until it agree in all respects with your observation, and then the Meridian
shows in his intersection with the Horizon, the Elevation of the Pole from
the Horizon.

To find the Poles height by any given Azumuth by the Sun being above the
Horizon.
BY your magneticall instrument, or Compass of variation observe the azumuth of
the Sun at any time in the forenoone, or afternoon, the nearer the Sun is to
the Horizon, the better shall be your observation, and at the same instant take
the height of ye Sun from the Horizon, keep these 2. numbers in memory, and
note that the Azumuth be observed according to the true position of the
Horizon, by having good regard to the variation of ye compass, then bring the
Quarta altitudo to the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, and set that degree
of the Suns place in the Ecliptic upon the observed degree of altitude by
the graduation of the Quarta altitudo, and if the end thereof at the same
instant do fall right upon the observed degree of Azumuth, then is the Pole in
his due Elevation: if not, then raise or lay the Pole as occasion requires,
always regarding that you place the Zenith answerable to the Poles altitude,
and then again bring the Suns place to his altitude upon the Quarta
altitudo, and look again whether the end thereof do touch the observed
degree of Azumuth upon the Horizon, if not, you must prosecute this order,
until at one instant the place of the Sun be upon his true almicanter, by
the edge of the Quarta altitudo, and that the end of the quarta altitudo do
also touch the observed degree of Azumuth upon the Horizon, for then is the
Pole in his true elevation, as by the Meridian and Horizon will appear.

To find the Poles height by the Sun, by any two given azumuths and
altitudes, not regarding the true horizontal position or nedles variations.
BEcause there may great errors be committed in the former observations unless
the Compass be perfectly well rectified, so as it may respect the true parts
or distinctions of the Horizon, it is not amiss to inform you how without
regard of variation, the Poles height may be found.

Therefore by your Magneticall instrument or Compass of variation observe the
Suns azumuth, without regard of the true horizontall position, and at the
same instant observe also his altitude from the Horizon, keep those two
numbers in memory. then after the Sun has moved a point or two points of the
Compass more less at your discretion, observe again his azumuth and altitude
as the first, then consider the arc of the Horizon through which the Sun
has moved between these two observations, for by the 2. observations of the
Suns altitude, and by the degrees of Azumuth through which the Sun has
moved, the Poles height is thus known: First set the Globe to the elevation of
the place wherein you are as near as you can guess, and bring the Zenith to
the like latitude from the Equator, as the Poles elevation is from the Horizon,
then bring the Quarta altitudo to the place of the Sun upon the Ecliptic,
for the time of your observation, there place the Sun upon the first observed
altitude by the degrees of the quarta altitudo, and note the degree of the
Horizon which the Quarta altitudo then touches: this done, bring the Suns
place to the second observed altitude, by moving the Quarta altitudo and the
Globe until the degree of the Suns place in the Ecliptic and the degree of
his altitude upon the Quarta altitudo do meet. Then again consider the
degree of the horizon which the end of the Quarta altitudo touches, and note
the Arc of the Horizon contained between your 2. observations, of how many
degrees it consists, if it agree with the observations made by your
Magneticall instrument, then does the Pole stand in his true altitude, if not
you must either raise or depresse the Pole, and again prosecute the former
practice, until you find such azumuths and altitudes upon the Globe, as you
found by your Magneticall observations, for then the Pole does stand in his
true altitude, and then does also appear the true azumuth of both your
observations, which if it agree not with your Compass, then is your compass
varied, and may hereby be corrected, so that this does not only give the
Poles height, but also the true horizontall position without error.

To find the Poles height by taking the Suns altitude above the Horizon, so
that the precise time of any such observation be known.
IF you desire at any time of the day to know the Poles height, as at 8, 9, or
10. of the clock, etc. mark diligently the time of your observation, at what
instant you do observe the Suns altitude from the Horizon, the time and
altitude thus known, bring that place of the Ecliptik wherein the Sun is at
the time of your observation directly under the Meridian, there holding the
Globe stedye, bring the Index of the Ciclus horarius to the hour of 12, or
noone, then move the Globe until the Index come to the hour of your
observation, there hold the Globe stedy, then bring the quarta altitudo to the
place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, if it agree with your observed altitude,
then does the Pole stand in his true elevation, if not, move the Meridian by
raising or depressing ye pole as occasion requires, until you bring the
altitude and the hour to agree, and then you have the Poles height, and by the
end of the quarta altitudo does also appear the degree of azumuth, whereupon the
Sun was at the time of your observation, and note that in raising or
depressing the Pole of the Globe, you must also place the Zenith so far from
the Equinoctial, as the Pole is from the Horizon, for this is a general rule,
that so much as the Pole is elevated from the Horizon, so much is the latitude
of the Zenith from the Equator, therefore you must always bring the Zenith and
altitude to agree, whenever you alter the Elevation be it never so little.

To find the Poles height by any two observations of the Suns altitude, not
regarding the hour of the day, or any horizontall position of the Magnet, so
that you know the distance of time between the said observations.
ALthough there be some difficulty in giving the true time of any observations
at the Sea, by reason of the alteration of Horizons, and of the needles
variation, yet it is a matter most easy by a good hour Glass, half hour
Glass, and minute Glass, to measure the distance of time between any two
observed altitudes, you may therefore upon that ground find the Poles height
with great facility at any time, by the Sun or any fixed Star, in this
sort.

Consider in what place of the Ecliptic the Sun is at the time of your
observation, bring that place to the Meridian, there with a black lead by
moving the Globe describe a perallell to the Equator, answerable to the Suns
diurnall motion and declination for the same instant, then if between your
observations there be an hour, two hours, more or less at your pleasure, as
by your running glasses may be known, you must allow for every hour 15. d.
of the Equator, for so much ascends every hour, and for every 4. minutes one
degree, and for every minute 1/4 of a degree, then knowing by this order how
many degrees the Sun is moved between your 2. observations, you must upon
the perallell which you draw make 2. notes, so many degrees asunder as the
Sun has moved between your observations, which may be done in this sort:
bring the place wherein the Sun is under the Meridian, and mark what degree
of the Equator is then under the Meridian, the Globe so standing upon your
perallell close by the Meridian, make the first note or mark, then turn the
Globe, and reckon the degrees of the Equator that pass under the Meridian,
until so many be past as was your observation, there again hold the Globe
stedie, and upon your perallell close by the Meridian, make your second note or
mark, then knowing the Suns altitude at both the observations, you must
bring the Quarta altitudo to the first note made upon your perallell, there
holding the globe stedie, the Quarta altitudo and mark agreeing in altitude,
bring the quarta altitudo to the second note, if that do also agree with your
former observed altitude, then does the Globe stand in his true Elevation: if
not, you must eleuate or depresse the Pole by discretion, until you bring the
two observed altitudes of the Sun, to agree with the two marks which you
made upon your described perallell, and then is the Pole at his true elevation:
and what is spoken of the Sun, the like may be done by any known fixed
Star. I hold this conclusion to be very necessary, pleasant, and easy for
the Seamans purpose.

To find the true place of the Sun in the Ecliptic at all times.
BEcause it is most necessarily required in the former practices, that the
Suns true place in the Ecliptic be at all times known, I think it not
amiss to inform you how the same may be done.

The cheifest and most certain mean to know the same, is by the tables of the
Ephemerides, but those tables wanting, the Seaman may in this sort do it: by
the Regiment seek out the declination of the Sun, that being known, bring
the Zenith upon the Meridian, so many degrees and minutes from the Equator as
is the Suns declination, then move the Globe until some degree of the
Ecliptic do come directly under the point of the Zenith, for that is the
Suns place: you must further consider, whether it be between March and Inn,
for then you must find the degree in that quarter of the Ecliptic, contained
between and: if it be between June and September, you must find the degree
in that quarter of the ecliptic contained between and, etc. of the rest.

It may also be known upon the Horizon of the Globe by a Calender Circle that
is there described, in this sort: first search the day of your month wherein
you desire to know the Suns declination, and directly against the same degree
which stands for that day, does also stand the degree of the Zodiac wherein
the Sun is at the same time, in a circle representing the Zodiac, and
described upon the Horizon.

But if it be Leap year, you must not take the precise day of the month
wherein you seek the Suns place, but the next day following, and against
that day seek the declination.

To find the Poles height by any two known fixed Stars.
WHen you see any 2. fixed Stars which you know to be both at one instant in
the Horizon, upon your Globe search for those Stars, and bring one of them
to touch the Horizon of the Globe, if the other do not likewise touch the
Horizon, you must raise or depresse the Pole by discreet moving of the
Meridian, until you bring both those Stars to be at one instant in the
Horizon, for then the Globe does stand to his true elevation.

To find the Poles height by any two known fixed Stars, an other way.
WHen you see any fixed Star that you know to be in the Horizon, you must
presentlye take the height of some other Star, that you likewise know, before
the first be risen from the Horizon, then upon your Globe search for the Star
that you observed in the horizon, bring that star to ye horizon of the Globe,
there holding the Globe stedy, bring the quarta altitudo to the other Star,
whose altitude you observed, if it agree upon the Quarta altitudo with the
observed altitude, then the Globe does stand to his true elevation, if not, you
must by discretion raise or lay the Pole until you find the one Star in the
Horizon, and the other upon his true observed altitude, for then the Pole does
stand to his true elevation.

To find the Poles height at all times by any 2. known fixed Stars.
WIth your cross staff take the distance of any 2. stars from your Zenith,
which must be done with as much expedition as may be, their distances so know,
with a pair of Compasses measure so many degrees upon the Equator, as is the
distance of the first observed Star, with an other pair of Compasses do the
like for the second observed Star, upon the first Star set one point of the
Compasses that took his distance, and upon the second Star set likewise one
foot of the Compasses that took his distance, bring the other 2. feet of the
Compasses to meet together, there make a mark, for that is the perallell
wherein you be, and that mark is the Zenith, bring it to the Meridian by moving
the Globe, and there will appear the latitude desired, for so many degrees and
minutes as that mark is from the Equator, so much is the Pole elevated above
the Horizon. This conclusion the Seaman ought to have in good esteem.

To know the precise hour at all times, by the Sun.
FOr the finding of the hour of the day by the Globe, it is necessary that the
Poles height be first known, therefore set the Pole to his true elevation, and
the Zenith to his answerable latitude, then bring the place of the Sun in the
Ecliptic under the Meridian, there holding the Globe stedy, place the Index of
the Ciclus horarius upon 12. of the clock or Noone, your Globe thus ordered,
then with your cross staff take the Suns height from the Horizon, that
being known, you must bring the place of the Sun to the Quarta altitudo, by
moving the Globe and Quarta altitudo until the place of the Sun do agree
with the observed altitude, there holding the Globe that he move not, the Index
does show upon the Ciclus horarius, the true hour desired.

To find the hour of the night by any known fixed star.
SEt the Globe to his true altitude, and the Zenith to his answerable latitude,
you must also place the Index of the Ciclus horarius upon the hour of 12. or
noone, by bringing the Suns place under the Meridian, etc. as before you did
by the Sun, then take the height of any known fixed Star, bring that
Star to the Quarta altitudo, by moving the Globe and Quarta altitudo until
the Star come to his true observed altitude, there holding the Globe stedie,
the Index does show upon the Ciclus horarius the true time of your observation.

To know the length of the days and nights, at all times, and in all places.
THe place and time being given wherein you desire to know the length of the
day or night, first set the Globe to his true altitude for the place, then
search the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, for the time wherein you seek
the days length, bring that place of the Sun under the Meridian, there
holding the Globe that he move not, place the Index of the Ciclus horarius upon
the hour of 12. or noone, then turn the Globe until you bring the place of
Sun to touch the East part of the horizon, there holding the Globe, you shall
see by the Index of the cyclus horarius, the true time of the Suns rising,
then bring the place of the Sun to the West part of the Horizon, and you
shall there see the true time of the Suns setting, whereby the length of the
day day and night does most plainly appear. And this may suffice for the use
of the Globe, necessary for the Seamans purpose

I might here recite the triple rising and setting of the Sarres, Cosmice,
Acronyce, and Heliace, the ascentions right and oblique, the dawning and
twylight, hours equal and unequal ordenary and planetary, days natural and
artificial, the triple rising of the Sun Equinoctial and Solsticiall,
Circles of position with their use and nature, the horoscope and domifying
distinctions of the heavens, the planets, their motions, retrogradiations, and
excontricitie of their orbs, herologie, and many other most pleasant
conclusions: but because they do in no sort appertain to the Seamans use, ^ I
therefore omit them, as matters more troublesome then profit able for him,
expecting from some learned Mathematician a work of worthy esteem, wherein
these and many other excellent conclusions shall by running demonstration be
made known unto us.

Of the Cross staff and his demonstration.
THe Cross staff is an artificial quadrant, geometrically proiected into
that form as an instrument of greatest ease and exactest use in Navigations, by
which in any natural disturbance of wether (the Sun or Stars appeering)
the Poles height may be known, when the Astrolabie or quadrant are not to be
used. Conueying the use of the quadrant from the beam of the Sun to the
beam of the eye, for whereas by the quadrant the Sun beam perceiving the
Dioptra shows his height, so by the Cross staff the beam of the eye
conveyed to the Sun or Star, does likewise give their height. The
demonstration whereof is thus.

Make a plain square consisting of 4. right angles, as is the square, I. o. h.
n. the angle I. shall be assigned the Center of the quadrant, where placing one
foot of your Compasses, stretch the other foot to the angle n. and therewith
describe a quarter of a circle, as is the arc o. d. n. then from the center I.
to his opposite angle h. draw a right line, by which line the quadrant o. d.
n. is divided into 2. equal parts, in the point d. divide the arc d. n. into
90. equal parts, drawing from the center I. lines through every of those
divisions touching in the line n. h. as by this figure appears: then consider
the length of your transuersary, and take half thereof laying it upon the line
I. o. in the point S. from that point S. draw a perallell to the line I. o. as
is the line S. Y. and as that line does intersect the divisions of she half
quadrant, so shall be the degrees of the cross staff, and note that the sides
of the sqare, mnst be as long as the staff that is to be graduated.



Because the staff should be of unreasonable length to contain more then 60.
degrees, the rfore to keep him in due form for the ease of his use, and that
the complement of 90. degrees should be contained upon the staff, the other
30. are artificially proiected upon the transitersary, as by this demonstration
appears, and in this sort consider the length of your staff from that point
S, to the last intersection which ends in 30. degrees, lay down the length
upon the line I. h. at the point v. from that point draw a right line cutting
the line I. h. to right angles, as is the line v. a. being just the length of
half the transuersary: then divide the arc o. d. into 45. equal parts,
accompting from the point d. to te point o. then from the angle I. draw right
lines to the first 15. of those parts, and as those lines do cut the line v.
a. so must the transuersary be graduated on both his parts, whereunto banes
being framed, your staff is finished to your use.

THere is a staff of another proiection, which I find by practice to be an
instrument of very great ease, and certainty at the Sea, the Sun not being
more then 45. degrees above the Horizon, whose use is contrary to the other
before demonstrated, for by this staff the beam of the Sun shadowing upon
the transuersary, does thereby give the height most preciselye, not regarding
how to place the Center of the staff to the eye, for the correction of the
parrallax of the fight, and without looking upon the Sun, whose demonstration
is thus.

Draw 2. right lines, cutting each other at right angles, as do the lines d. v
and d. s. upon the angle d. describe a quarter circle, as is the arc v. s.
divide that quadrant into 2. equal parts by the line d. n. cutting the
quadrant in the point h. divide the arc s. h. into 45. equal parts or
degrees, drawing lines from the center d. to every of those divisions, then
from the point I. being the third part of the line d. s. upon the center d.
describe an ark of a circle, as is the arc I. o. which is for the transuersary
of this staff, and and the line d. s. is for the staff, then from the point
o. where the upper end of the transursary touches the line d. n. draw a
perallell to the line d. s. as is the line o. y. and as that line does cut the
lines drawn from the center d. so must the staff d. s. by graduated, laying
it upon the line o. y. putting that part of the staff where the point I.
touches, upon the point o. and then from the point I. lay down the degrees,
as are the intersections upon the line o. y. and so is the staff graduated.



The transuersary at the point i. must have an artificial hole made for the
staff to run in, as other slaves have, also there must be a plate of brass
with a soccat to be set to the center of the staff, as is the figure a. in the
midst whereof there must be a slitte, through which the sight must be conveyed
to the Horizon, and this plate must receive the shadow of the transuersary,
and so the staff is finished.

How is the use of this staff?
THe use of this staff is altogether contrary to the other, for the center of
this staff where the brass plate is fastened, must be turned to that part of
the Horizon which is from the Sun, and with your back toward the Sun, by
the lower edge of the half cross, and through the slitte of the plate you
must direct your sight only to the Horizon, and then moving the transuersary
as occasion requires, until the shadow of your upper edge of the transuersary
do fall directly upon the said slitte or long hole, and also at the same
instant you see the Horizon through the slitte, and then the transuersary
shows the height desired.



FInding by practice the eccellencye of the Cross staff above all other
instruments to satisfy the Seamans expectation, and also knowing that those
instruments whose degrees are of largest capacity, are instruments of most
certainty. I have very carefully labored to search a good and demonstrable
mean how a Cross staff might be proiected, not only to contain large
degrees, but also to avoid the uncertainty of the sight, by disorderlye
placing of the staff to the eye, which demonstration I have found, and have
had the instrument in practice, as well under the Sun, as in our climates:
but because it has a large demonstration with manifold uses, I here omit to
manifest the same, purposing to write a particular treatise thereof,
notwithstanding his form and use, by picture I have thought good to express.

THis staff is a yard long, having 2. half, crosses, the one circular, the
other straight, the longest not 14. inches, yet this staff does contain the
whole 90. degrees, the shortest degree being an inch and 3/4 long, wherein the
minutes are perticularly and very sensibly laid down, by which staff not
regarding the parallar of your fight, nor looking upon the Sun, but only
upon the Horizon, the Suns height is most precisely known, as well and as
easily in the Zenith, as in any other part of the Heaven. Then which instrument
(in my opinion) the Seaman shall not find any so good, and in all Clymates of
so great certainty, the invention and demonstration whereof, I may boldly
challenge to appertain unto my self be (as portion of the talent which God has
bestowed upon me) I hope without abuse or offense to any.



Of the Quadrant.
A Quadrant is the fourth part of a circle, containing 90 degrees, and
represents the distance between the Horizon and Zenith, being an excellent
instrument upon the shore, to perform any Astconomicall observations, but for
a Seaman it is to no purpose: and although there may be very much written of
the commodious and excellent uses of the Quadrant, yet not being an apt
instrument for Sea observations, it shall be from my purpose to write further
thereof, and therefore the only laying down of his form may at this present
suffice.



Of the Astrolabie.
AN Astrolabie is the representation of a great circle, containing four
quadrants, or 360. degrees, which instrument has been in long use among
Seamen, and is an excellent instrument being rightly understoode and ordered,
but since the vnlgare Astrolabie with his use is to every Seaman sufficiently
known, it should be vain labor for me to lay down his use and
demonstration: therefore by his form it shall suffice to express him.



THere has been great pains taken by many for the enlarging of the degrees
contained in an Astrolabie, among which there is a proiection to conueye the
degrees of a quadrant into the concauery of a Astrolabie, whereby those degrees
shall be double, to any other Astrolabie of the same quantity, so that the Sun
beam pearcing a hole made in the side of the Astrolabie, is thereby carried to
the degrees noted, in the opposite concaue part, as by his form may appear.

Also my self laboring in the same matter, have found a mean whereby an Ark
of quadrant whose side is 10. foot, may be conveyed into an Astrolabie of 10.
inches diameter, whose dioptra shall cut his lymbe to right angles, and shall
perform the complement of 90 degrees, as amply and as effectually as by the
quadrant it may in any sort be done.

Whose demonstration, together with the demonstration of my Staff, A purpose
God willing, at large to manifest. But there can be no invention that can
establish the certainty of the use of either Quadrant or Astrolabie at the
Sea, for unless it be in very smoothe water, there can be no certainty of any
observation by those instruments, whereby the Seaman may rest assured of the
la. which he seeks, but the observations made by the cross staff, are
without all distrust of error, and therefore no instrument may compare with the
excellency of the cross staff for the Seamans use.



FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson. 1595.


