EPIGRAMMES and ELEGIES.

By I. D. and C. M.

At Middleborugh.

Epigrammata prima.
Ad Musam,
Fly merry Muse unto that merry town,
where thou may plays, revels, and triumphs see
The house of fame, and Theater of renown,
Where all good wits and spirits love to be.
Fall in between their hands, that love and praise thee
and be to them a laughter and a jest:
but as for them which scorning shall approve thee,
Disdain their wits, and think thine own the best.
But if thou find any so gross and dull,
That think I do to private Taxing lean:
Bid him go hang, for he is but a gull,
And knows not what an Epigramme does mean.
Which Taxes under a particular name,
A general vice which merits public blame.
Of a Gull^ 2
Often in my laughing rimes, I name a gull,
But this new term will many questions bread^
Therefore at first I will express at full,
Who is a true and perfect gull indeed.
A gull is he, who fears a velvet gown,
and when a wench is brave, dares not speak to her:
A gull is he which trauerseth the town,
and is for marriage known a common wooer.
A gull is he, which while he prowdlie wears,
a silver hilted Rapier by his side:
Indures the lies, and knockes about the ears,
Whilst in his sheath, his sleeping sword does bide.
A gull is he which wears good hansome clothes,
And stands in presence stroaking up his hair:
and filles up his vnper^ect speech with oaths.
but speaks not one wise word throughout the year
But to define a gull in terms precise,
A gull is he which semes, and is not wise.
In Faustum 7
Faustus not lord, nor knight, nor wise, nor old,
To every place about the town does ride,
He rides into the fields, Plays to behold,
He rides to take boat at the water side,
He rides to Powles, he rides to th'ordinarie,
He rides unto the house of bawderie too.
Thither his horse so often does him carry,
That shortly he will quite forget to go.
In Katum 1
Kate being pleased, wished that her pleasure could,
Endure as long as a buste ierkin would.
Content thee Kate, although thy pleasure wastes,
Thy pleasures place like a buffe ierkin lasts:
For no buste ierkin has bin oftener worn,
Nor has more scrapings or more dressings born.
In Librum 9
Liber does vaunt how chastely he has liude,
Since he has bin in town 7 years and more,
For that he swears he has four only swiude,
A maid, a wife, a widow and a whore:
Then Liber thou have swiude all women kind,
For a ^ift ^ort I know thou can not find.
In Medonem 10
Great Captain Medon wears a chain of gold,
which at five hundred crowns is valued;
For that it was his graundsires chain^ of old,
when great king Henry Bulleigne conquered.
and wear it Medon, for it may ensue,
that thou by virtue of this Massy ehaine,
a stronger town th^n Bulloigne may subdue,
If wise men's sawes be not reputed vain.
For what said Phillip king of Macedon?
There is no Castle so well fortifid,
But if an Ass laden with gold comes on,
The guarde will stoop, and gates fly open wide.
In Gellam 10
Gella, if thou do love thy self, take heed,
lest thou my rimes, unto thy lover read,
For straight thou grinst, and then thy lover reeth,
Thy canker-eaten gums, and rotten teeth.
In Quintum 12
Quintus his wit infused into his brain,
Mislikes the place, and fled into his feet,
and the^e it wanders up and down the streets,
Dabled in the dirt, and soaked in the rain.
Doubtless his wit intendes not to aspire,
Which leaves his head to travel in the mire.
In Seuerum 13
The puritan Seuerus often does read,
this text that does pronounce vain speech a sin,
That thing defiles a man that does proceed
From out the mouth, not that which enters in.
Hence is it, that we seldom hear him swear,
and therexsof like a Pharisie he vaunts,
but he deuoures more Capons in a year,
Then would suffice a hundredth protestants.
And sooth those sectaries are gluttons all,
As well the threed-bare Cobbler as the knight,
For those poor slaves which have not where withal
Feed on the rich, til they devour them quite.
And so like Pharoes kine, they eat up clean,
Those that be fat, yet still themselves be lean.
In Leucam 14
Leuca in presence once a fart did let,
Some laughed a little, she forsook the place:
and mad with shame, did eke her glove forget,
which she returnde to fetch with bashful grace:
And when she would have said, my glove,
My fart (quoth she) which did more laughter move.
In Macrum 15
Thou can not speak yet Macer, for to speak,
is to distinguish soundes significant,
Thou with harsh noise the air do rudely break,
But what thou vtterest common sense dnth want:
Half English words, with fustian terms among
Much like the burden of a Northern song.
In Faustum 16
That youth says Faustus, has a Lion seen,
Who from a Dycing house comes monielesse,
but when he lost his hair, where had he been^,
I doubt me had seen a Lioness.
In Cosmum 17
Cosmus has more discoursing in his head,
then love, when Pallas issued from his brain,
and still he strives to be delivered,
Of all his thoughts at once, but al in vain.
For as we see at all the play house doors,
when ended is the play. the dance, and song:
A thousand townsemen, gentlemen, and whores,
Porters and seruing-men together throng,
so thoughts of drinking, thriuing, wenching, war,
And borrowing money, raging in his mind,
To issue all at once so forward are,
As none at all can perfect passage find.
In Flaccum 18
The false knave Flaccus once a bribe I gave,
The more fool I to bribe so false a knave,
but he gave back my bribe, the more fool he,
That for my folly, did not cosen me.
In Cineam 19
Thou dogged Cineas hated like a dog,
For still thou grumblest like a Mastie dogger
comparst thy self to nothing but a dog,
Thou say thou art as weary as a dog.
As angry, sick, and hungry as a dog,
As dull and melancholy as a dog:
As lazy, sleepie, and as idle as a dog.
But why do thou compare thee to a dog?
In that, for which all men despise a dog,
I will compare thee better to a dog.
Thou art as fair and comely as a dog,
Thou art as true and honest as a dog,
Thou art as kind and liberal as a dog,
Thou art as wi^e and valiant as a dog.
But Cineas, I have often heard thee tell,
Thou art as like thy father as may be,
It Is like enough, and faith I like it well,
But I am glad thou art not like to me.
In Gerontem 20
Geron mouldie memory corrects,
Old Holinshed our famous chronicler,
With morrall rules, and policy collects,
Out of all actions done thiese fourscore year.
accounts the time of every old event,
not from Christ's birth, nor from the Princes ^aigne,
But from some other famous accident,
Which in men's general notise does remain.
The siege of Bulloigne, and the plaguie sweat,
The going to saint Quintines and new haven.
The rising in the North, The frost so great.
That cart-wheele prints on Thames face were seen,
The fall of money, and burning of Paul's steeple,
The blasing star and Spaniardes overthrow:
By thiese events, notorious to the people,
He measures times, and things forepast does show.
But most of all, he chiefly reckons by,
A private chance, the death of his curft wife:
This is to him the dearest memory,
And th'happiest accident of all his life.
In Marcum 21
When Marcus comes from Mins, he still does swear
By, come a seven, that all is loft and gone,
Bu^ that's not true, for he has lost his hair
Only for that, he came too much at one.
In Ciprium 22
The fine youth Ciprius is more tierse and neat,
Then the new garden of the old Temple is,
And still the newest fashion he does get,
And with the time does chaung from that to this,
He wears a hat now of the flat crown-block,
The treble ruffes, long cloak, and doublet french:
He takes Tobacco, and does wear a lock,
And wastes more time in d^essing then a Wench.
Yet this newfangled youth, made for these tims,
Does above al, praise old Gascoines rimes.
In Cineam 23.
When Cineas comes amongst his friends in morning
He sliely looks who first his cap does move:
Him he salutes, the rest so grimly scorning,
As if for ever they had lost his love.
I knowing how it does the humor sit,
Of this fond gull to be saluted first:
catch at my cap, but move it not a whit:
Which perceiving he seems for spite to burst.
But cineas, why expect you more of me,
Then I of you? I am as good a man,
And better too by many a quallitie
For vault, and dance, and fence and rhyme I can,
You keep a whore at your own charg men tell me.
Indeed friend (cineas) therein you excel me.
In Gallum 24
Gallus has bin this Summer time in Friesland,
And now returned he speaks such warlike words
As if I could their English understand,
I fear me they would cut my Throat like swords
He talks of counterscarfes and casomates,
Of parapets, of curteneys and Pallizadois,
Of flankers, Rauelings, gabions he prates,
And of false brayes, and sallies and scaladose:
But to require such gulling terms as these,
With words of my profession I reply:
I tell of foorching, vouchers, and counterpleas,
Of Wi^hernams, essoynes, and champartie.
so neither of us understanding either,
We part as wise as when we came together.
In Decium 25
Audacious Painters have nine worthies made,
But Poet Decius more audacious far,
Making his mistres march with men of war,
With title of tenth worthlie does her lade,
Me thinks that gul did use his terms as fit,
which termde his love a Giant for her wit.
In Gellam 26
If gellas beauty be examined
she has a dull dead eye, a saddle nose,
An ill shapte face, with morpheu ouerspread,
and rotten Teeth which she in laughing shows.
Briefly she is the filthyest wench in Town,
of all that do the art of whooring use:
But when she has put on her satin gown,
Her out lawne apron, and her veluert shoes.
Her green silk stockings, and her peticoate,
Of Taffa^ie, with golden frindge a-rounde:
And is withal perfumed with ciuet hot,
which does her valiant stinking breath confound
Yet she with these addicions is no mo^e,
Then a sweet, filthy, fine ill favored whore.
In Sillam 27
Silla is often challenged to the field,
To answer like a gentleman his foes,
but when does he his only answer yield,
That he has livings and fair lands to lose.
Silla, if none but beggars valiant were,
The king of spain would put us all in fear.
In Sillam 28
Who dares affirm that Silla dare not fight?
when I dare swear he dares adventure more,
Then the most brave, most all da^ing wight:
That ever arms with resollucion bore.
He that da^e touch the most unwholesome whore,
That ever was retirde into the spittle:
and da^es court wenches standing at a door,
The portion of his wit being passing little.
He that dares give his dearest friends offenses,
which other valiant fools do fear to do:
and when a fever does confound his senses,
dare eat raw biefe, and drink strong wine thereto.
He that dares take Tobacco on the stage,
dares man a whore at noonday through the street
dares dance in Powles, and in this formal age,
dares say and do what ever is unmeet.
Whom fea^e of shame could never yet asfright,
Who dares affirm that Silla dares not fight?
In Haywodum 29
Haywood which in Epigrams did excel,
Is now put down since my light muse arose:
As buckets are put down into a well,
Or as a schoole-boy puts down his hose.
In Dacum 30
Amongst the Poets Dacus numbered is,
Yet could he never make an english rhyme,
but some prose speeches I have heard of his,
which have bin spoken many a dundreth time.
The man that keeps the Eliphant has one,
wherein he tells the wonders of the beast.
An other Banks pronounced long a go,
when he his curtalls qualities expressed:
He first taught him that keeps the monuments,
At Westminster his formal tale to say.
And also him with Puppets represents,
and also him which with the Ape does play
Though all his poetrre be like to this,
Amongst the Poets numbered is.
In Priscum 31
VVhhen Priscus raisde from low to high estate^
Rode through the street in pompous iollitie,
Caius his poor famillier friend of late,
be-spake him thus, Sir now you know not me:
It Is likely friend (quoth Priscus) to be so,
For at this time my self I do not know.
In Brunum 32
Brunus which thinks him self a faite sweet youth
is Thirty nine years of age at least:
Yet was he never to confess the truth,
but a dry starueling when he was at best.
T^is gull was sick to show his night cap fine,
and his wrought Pillow ouerspred with lawne:
but has bin well since his griefs cause has line,
At Trollups by saint Clements church in pawn.
In Francum 33
When Francus comes to sollace with his whore
He sends for rods and strips himself stark naked:
For his lust sleeps, and will not rise before,
by whipping of the wench it be awaked.
I envy him not, but wish he had the power,
To make my self his wench but one half hour
In Castorem 34
Of speaking well, why do we learn the skill,
Hoping thereby honor and wealth to gain.
Since railing Castor does by speaking ill,
Oppinion of much wit, and gold obtain.
In Septimum 35
Septimus lives, and is like Garlic seen,
for though his head be white, his blade is green.
This old mad coult deserves a Martires praise,
For he was burned in Queen Mary's days.
Of Tobacco 36
Homer of Moly, and Nepenthe sings,
Moly the Gods most sovereign herb divine.
Nepenthe Hekens drink with gladness brings,
hearts g^iefe expells, and does the wits refine.
but this our age an other world ha^h found,
from whence an herb of heavenly power is brought,
Moly is not so sovereign for a wound,
nor has Nepenthe so great wonders wrought.
It is Tobacco, whose sweet substanciall fume,
The hellish torment of the Teeth does ease
By drawing down, and drying up the rume,
The mother and the nurs of each disease.
it is Tobacco which does cold expel,
and cleeres the obstructions of the a^teries,
and surfets threatening death digesteth well,
decocting all the stomachs crudities.
It is Tobacco which has power to clarify,
The clowdie mistes before dim eyes appea^ing,
It is Tobacco which has power to rarefie,
The thick gross humor which does stop the hearing,
The wasting Hectic and the quartaine fever,
which does of Physic make a mocke^ie:
The gowt it cures, and helps il breaths for ever,
Whether the cause in Teeth or stomach be.
And though ill breaths, were by it but confounded
Yet that Medicine it does far excel,
Which by sir Thomas Moore has bin propounded.
For this is thought a gentleman-like smell,
O that I were one of thiese mountie banks,
which praise their oils, and pouders which they sell
my customers would give me coin with thanks.
I for this ware, forsoo^h a Tale would tell,
Yet would I use none of these terms before,
I would hut say, that it the pox will cure:
This were enough, without discoursing more,
All our brave gallants in the town t'alure,
In Crassum 37
Crassus his lies are not pernicious lies,
But pleasant fictions, hurtful unto none:
But to himself, for no man counts him wise,
To tell for truth, that which for false is known.
he swears that Caunt is threescore miles about,
and that the bridge at Pa^is on the Seine,
is of such thicknes, length and breadth, throghout
that sixscore arches can it scarce sustain.
He swears he saw so great a dead man's scull,
At Canterbury digde out of the ground:
That would contain of wheat, three bushels full
And that in Kent, are twenty yeomen found,
Of which the poorest every year dispendes,
Five thousand pound these and v. thousand more,
So often he has recited to his friends,
that now himself, persuades himself it is so:
But why does Crassus tell his lies so rife,
Of bridges, Towns, and things that have no life.
He is a lawyer, and does well epsy,
That for such lies an action will not lie.
In philonem 38
Philo the lawyer and the fortune teller,
The schoolemaister, the midwife and the bawd,
The conjurer, the buyer and the seller,
Of painting which with breathing will be thawde.
does practice Physic, and his credit grows,
as does the ballade-singers auditorie.
which has at Temple bar his standing chose,
and to the vnlgar sings an alehouse story.
First stands a Porter, then an Oyster wife,
Does stint her cry, and stay her steps to hear him,
Then comes a cutpurfe ready with a Knife,
and then a country. Client passes near him,
There sta^ds the Cunstable, there sta^ds the whore.
And harkning to the song mark not each other.
There by the Serieant stands the debtor poor,
and does no mo^e mistrust him then his brother:
Thus Orpheus ^o such hearers gives Music,
And Philo to such Patients gives physic.
In Fuscum 39
Fuscus is free, and has the world at will,
Yet in the cour^e of li^e that he does lead:
he is like a ho^^e which turning round a mill,
does always in the self same circle tread:
First he does rise at X. and at eleven
He go^s to Gilles, where he does eat till one,
Then sees he a play till six, and sups at seven,
and after supper, straight to bed is gone.
and there til ten next day he does remain,
and then he dines, then sees a commedie:
and then he suppes, and goes to bed again,
Thus round he runs without va^ietie:
Save that sometimes he comes not to the play,
But falls into a whore house by the way.
In Afrum 40
The smell feast after, Travails to the Burse
Twice every day the flying news to hear,
which when he has no money in his purse,
To rich men's Tables he does often be are:
He tells how Gronigen is taken in,
by the brave conduct of illustrious Vere:
and how the spainish forces Breast would win,
but that they do Victorious Norris fear.
No sooner is a ship at Sea Surprisde,
but straight he learnes the news and does disclose it,
fair written in a scrowle he has the names,
of all the widows which the plague has made.
and persons, Times and places, still he frames,
To every Tale, the better to persuade:
We call him Fame, for that the wide-mouth slave,
will eat as fast as he will utter lies
For Fame is said an hundredth mouths to have,
And he eats more then would five score suffice.
In paulum 41
By lawful mart, and by unlawful stealth,
Paul's in spite of envy fortunate:
De^ues out of the Oceans so much wealth,
as he may well maintain a Lords estate.
But on the land a little gulf there is,
wherein he drowneth all the wealth of his.
In Licum 42
Lycus which lately is to Venice gone,
shall if he do return, gain 3 for one:
But x to one, his knowledge and his wit,
vvil not be bettered or increasde a whit.
In Publium 43
Publius student at the common law,
often leaves his books, and for his recreation:
To Paris garden does himself Withdravve,
Where he is ravished with such delectation
as down amongst the Bears and dogs he goes,
were whilst he skipping cries To head, To head.
His Satin doublet and his velvet hose,
Are all with spittle from above be-spread.
When he is like a Fathers country hall,
stinking with dogs, and muted al with hawks,
and ^ightly too on him this filth does fall,
Which for such fil^hie spo^s ^is books ^orsake,
Leaving old P^oyden, Dier and Brook alone,
To see old Harry Hunkes and Saca^son.
In Sillam 44
When I this proposition had defended,
A covvarde cannot be an honest man,
T^ou Silla seem foorthvvith to be offended:
And ^oldes the cont^arie and svveres he can.
But when I ^el thee that he will forsake
his dearest friend, in peril of his life,
Thou then art changde and say thou did mistake,
and so we end our argument and strife.
Yet I think often, and think I think a right,
Thy argument argues thou will not fight.
In Dacum 45
Dacus with some good cellour and pretense,
Terms his loves beauty silent eloquence:
For she does lay more colors on her face,
Then ever Tullie used hig speech to grace.
In Marcum 46
Why do thou Marcus in thy misery,
Rai^e and blaspheme, and call the heavens vn-kinde,
The heavens draw no Kindness unto thee,
Thou have the heavens so little in thy mind
for in thy life thou never use prayer,
But at p^imero, to encounter fair.
Meditations of a Gull. 47
See yonder melancholy gentleman,
Which hoode-winked wi^h his ha^, alone does sit,
T ^inke what he thinks and tell me if you can,
What great affairs troubles his little wit.
he thinks not of the war twixt F^ance and spain
Whether it be for Europs good o^ ill,
Nor whether the Empie can it self maintain
Against the Turkish power encroching still.
Nor what g^ea^ Town in all the ne^her lands,
The sta^es determine to besiege this spring
Nor how the scottish po^licie now stands,
Nor what becomes of ths I^sh mu^ining.
But he does seriously bethink him whether
Of the guld people he be more esteemde,
For his long cloak, or his great black Feather,
By which each gull is now a gallant deemde.
Or of a Journey he deliberates,
To Pa^^s garden cocke-pit or the play:
Or how to steal a dog he medi^ates,
Or what he he shall unto his mist^is say:
Yet with these Thoughts he thinks himself most fi^
To be of Counsel with a King for wit.
Ad Musam 48.
Peace idle muse,, have done, for it is time,
Since lousy Ponticus ensues my fame,
And swears the better sort are much to blame
To make me so well known for ill rhyme
Yet Banks his horse is better known then he,
so are the Cammels and the western hog,
And so is Lepidus hie p^inted dog.
why does not Ponticus their fames envy.
Besides this muse of mine, and the black fether.
grew both together fresh in estimation,
and both grown stale, were cast away together:
What fame is this that scarce lasts out a fashion.
Only this last in credit does remain,
That from henceforth, each bastard castforth rhyme
which does but savor of a Libel vain.
shall call me father, and be thought my crime,
so dull and with so little sense endude,
is my gross headed judge the multitude.
FINIS.
I, D.
IGNOTO.
I Love thee not for sacred chaststie,
who loves fot that? nor for thy sprightly wit:
I love thee not for thy sweet modesty,
Which makes thee in perfections throane to sit.
I love thee not for thy inchaunting eye,
Thy beauty rauishing perfection:
I love thee not for unchaste luxu^ie,
Nor for thy bodies fair proportion.
I love thee not for that my soul does dance,
And leap with pleasure when those lips of thine:
give Musical and g^acefull utterance,
To some (by thee made happy) poe^s line.
I love thee not for voice or slender small,
But will thou know wherefore-faire sweet for all.
Faith (wench) I cannot court thy sprightly eyes,
with the base Vial placed between my Thig^es
I cannot lispe, nor to some Fiddle sing,
Nor run upon a high strecht Minikin.
I cannot whine in puling Elegies,
Intombing Cupid with sad obsequies.
I am not fashioned for these amorous times,
To count thy beutie with lascivious rimes.
I cannot dally, caper, dance and sing,
Oyling my saint with supple sonneting.
I cannot cross my arms, or sigh ay me,
Ay me Forlorn egregious Fopperie.
I cannot busse thy fill, play with thy hair,
Swearing by love, Thou art most debonaire.
not I by Cock, but shall tell rhee roundly,
hark in thine ear, zounds I can () thee sou^dly.
Sweet wench I love thee, yet I will not sue,
Or show my love as muskie Courtiers do,
I Will not carouie a health to honor thee,
In this same bez^ing drunken courtesy.
and when als quafde, eat up my bowsing glass.
In glory that I am thy servile ass.
nor will I wear a rotten burbon lock.
as some sworn pesant to a female smock.
well featurde less, Thou know I love the dear
Yet for thy sake I will not bore mine ear.
To hang thy durtie silken shootires there.
nor for thy love will I once gnash a brick,
Or some pied collou^s in my bonnet stiche.
bu^ by the chaps of hell to do thee good,
I Will freely spend my Thrice decocted blood.
FINIS.
CERTAIN OF OVIDS ELEGIES.

By C Marlow,

At Middleborugh

Amorum lib. 1. Elegia 1.
Quemadmodum a Cupidine, pro bell. amoris scribere coactus sit.
WE which were Ouids five books, now are three
For these before the rest prefers he;
If reading five thou plainst of tediousness,
Two taine away the labor will be less:
With muse vpreard I mean to sing of ames,
Choosing a subject fit for fierce alarmes
Both verses were a like till love (men say)
Began to smile and take one foot away
Rash boy, who gave thee power to change a line?
We are the Muses prophets, none of thine.
That if thy Mother take Dianas bow?
Shall Dian fan when love begins to glowe.
In woodie groves is it meet that Ceres reign,
And quiver bearing Dian till the plain:
Whole set the fair treste son in battle ray,
While Mars does take the Aonion harp to play,
Great are thy kingdom^ over strong and large,
Ambitious Imp, why seekst thou further charge?
Are al things thine? the Muses tempe thine?
then scarce can Phoebus say, this harp is mine.
When in this work, first verse I trod a-loft.
I slackt my muse, and made my number soft.
I have no Mistres, nor no fauorit,
Being fittest matter for a wanton wit.
thus I complainde, but love vn-lockt his quiver,
Took out the shaft, ordainde my heart to shiuer.
and bent his sinewy bow upon his knee,
Saying, Poet heeres a work beseeming thee.
Oh woe is me, he never shootes but hits,
I burn, love in my idle bosom sits.
Let my first verse be six, my last five feet,
Farewell stern war, for blunter poets meet,
Elegian muse, that warblest amorous lays,
Gyrt my shine browe, with seabanke myrtle praise.
C Marlowe
Amorum. Lib 1. Elegia 3
Ad amicam.
I ask but right let her that co^ght me late,
Either love, or cause that I may hate.
I crave too much, would she but let me love her
love knows with such like praie^s I daily move her
Accept him that will serve thee al his youth,
Accept him that will love thee with spotles truth.
If lofty titles cannot cause me to be ^hine.
that am descended but of Knightly line.
Soon may you plow the little lands I have,
I gladly grant my parents given, to save
Appollo, Bacchus, and the Muses may,
and Cupid who has marked me for thy pray,
My spotless life, which but to gods give place,
Naked simplicity, and modest grace.
I love but one, and her I love change never,
If men have faith, i will live with thee for ever.
The years that fatal destenie shall give,
i will live with thee, and die, or thou shall g^ieue.
Be thou the the happy subject of my books
That I may write things worthy thy fair looks.
By verses horned Io got her name,
and she to whom in shape of Bull love came.
And she that on a fainde Bull swam to land,
griping his false ^ornes with her virgin hand.
So likewise we will through the world be rung,
And with my name shall thine be always sung.
Amorum. lib. 1. Elegia. 5.
Corinnae concubjtus.
IN Summers heat, and mid-time of the day.
To rest my limbs, upon a bed I lay.
One window shut, the other open stood,
Which gave such light, as twincles in a wood,
like twilight glimps at setting of the sun
O^ night being past, and yet not day begun.
Such light to shamefast maidens must be shown,
Where they may sport, and seem to be vn-knowne.
Then came Co^inna in a long loose gown,
Her white neck hid with trells hanging down,
Resembling fair Semiramis going to bed,
Or Layis of a thousand lovers spread.
I snatched her gown being thin, the harm was small,
Yet striude she to be covered there-withall.
And striving thus as one that would be cast,
betrayde her self, and yielded at the last.
Stark naked as she stood before mine eye,
Not one wen in here body could I spy.
What arms and shoulders did I touch and see,
How apt her breasts were to be pressed by me.
How smooth a belly, under her waste saw I,
How large a leg, and what a lusty thigh.
To leave the rest, all pleased me passing well,
I clingde her fair white body, down she fell.
Judge you the rest, being tyrde she bade me Kiss,
Jove send me more such after-noones as this.
C Marlow
Amorum lib. 3 Elegia 13.
ad amicam si pecatura est, vt occulte peccet.
SEeing thou art fair, I bar not thy false playing,
But let not me poor soul wit of thy straying.
Nor do I give thee counsel to live chaste,
But that thou would dissemble when it is past.
she has not trod awry that does deny it,
such as confess have lost their good names by it.
What madness is it to tell night-sports by day,
Or hidden secrets openly to bewray,
The strumpet with the stranger will not do,
before the room be clea^e, and door put too.
Will you make shipwreck of your honest name^
and let the world be witness of the same.
Be more aduisde, walk as a pu^i^ane,
and I shall think you chaste do what you can.
slip still, only deny it when it is done,
and before people immodest speeches shun,
The bed is for lascivious toying smeete,
There use all toys, and tread shame under feet,
When you are up and dressed, be sage and grave,
and in the bed ^ide all ^he faul^s you have
Be not a shamed to strippe you being there,
and mingle thighs, mine ever yours to bear,
There in your rosy lips my tongue intombe,
Practice a thousand sports when there you come.
Forbear no wanton words you there would speak,
And with your pastime let the bedsted creake.
But with your robes, put on an honest face,
And blush and seem as you were full of grace.
Deceive all, let me err, and think I am right,
and like a wittal, think thee void of slight.
Why see I lines? so often receiude and given,
This bed, and that by tumbling made uneven.
Like one start up, your hair tossed and displast.
And with a wantons tooth, your neck new raste.
Grant this, that what you do I may not see
If you wey not il speeches, yet wey me:
My ^oule fleetes when I think what you have done,
and through every vein does cold blood run
Then thee whom I must love I hate in vain,
and would be dead, but dying with thee remain,
I Will not sift much, but hold thee soon excused,
Say but thou were injuriously accused.
though while the deeds be doing you be took,
and I see when you open the 2 leaude book.
Swear I was blind, yield not if you be wise,
and I will trust your words more then mine eyes.
From him that yeeldes, the garland is quickly got,
teach but your tongue to say, I did it not,
and being justified by two words think,
The cause acquites you not, but I that wink.
C Marlow:
Amorum lib. 2. Elegia 15.
Ad inuidos, quod fama Poetarum sit perennis.
Envy, why carpest thou my time is spent so ill?
And terms our works fruits of an idle quill,
Or that unlike the line from whence I come,
Wars dustie honors are refused being young,
Nor that I study not the bravvling laws,
Nor set my voice to sale in every cause.
Thy scope is mortal, mine eternal fame,
That all the world might ever chau^t my name,
Homer shall live while Tenedos stands and I Would,
Or to the sea swift Symois shall slide.
Ascreus lines, while grapes with new wine svvel,
Or men with crooked sickles corn down fell,
For ever lasts high Sophocles proud vain:
With sun and moon Eratus shall remain.
While bondmen cheat, fathers hoord, bavvds hoorish
And strumpets flatter, shall Menander flourish.
Rude En^ius, and Plautus full of wit,
Are both in Fames eternal legend writ.
What age of Varroes name shall not be told,
And Iasons Argos, and the fleece of gold,
Lofty Lucresius shall live that hour,
That Nature shall dissolve this earthly bovvre.
Eneas war, and Titerius shall be read,
While Rome of all the con^uering world is head.
Till Cupids bow, and fiery shafts be broken.
Thy verses sweet Tibullus shall be spoken.
And Gallus shall be known from East to West,
So shall Licorus whom he loved best.
Therefore when Flint and Iron wear away.
Verse is immortal and shall decay.
Let kings give place to verse and Kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold bearing Tagus flows.
Let base conceited wits admire vilde things,
Fair Phoebus lead me to the Muses springs.
About my head be quiuering Myrtle wound.
and in sad lovers heads let me be found.
The living not the dead can envy bite,
For after dearh all men receive their right.
Then though death rocks my bones in funeral fire,
I Will live, and as he pulls me down, mount higher.
Amorum. lib. 1. Elegia. 13.
Ad auroram ne properet.
NOw on the sea from her old love comes she.
That draws the day from heavens cold axletree.
Aurora whither slidest thou down again,
And by^des from Memnon yearly shall be slain.
Now in her tender arms I svveetlie bide,
If ever, now vvellies she by my side,
The air is cold, and sleep is sweetest now,
And birds send forth shril notes from every bovv.
Whither runst thou, that men and Women love not
Hold in thy rosy horses that they move not.
Ere thou rise stars teach seamen where to sail,
But when thou come, they of their course^ fail.
Poor trauailers though tired, rise at thy sight,
The painful Hind by thee to filled is sent,
Slow Oxen early in the yoke are pent.
Thou cousnest boys of sleep, and do betray them.
To Pedants that with cruel lashes pay them.
Thou make the surtie to the lawyer run,
That with one word has nigh himself undone,
The lawyer and the Client both do hate thy view,
Both whom thou raysest up to toil anew.
By thy means Women of their rest are barde,
Thou see their laboring hands to spin and Card.
This could I bear, but that the Wench should rise,
Who can endure, save him with whom none lies?
How often wished I night would not give thee place,
Nor morning stars shun thy vprising face.
How often, that either vvinde would break thy coch
Or steeds might fall, forced with thik clouds aproch
vvhither go thou hateful nymph? Me^non the elfe.
Received his cole-black color from thy self.
Say that thy love with Cephalus were not known
Then think thou thy loose life is not shovvne.
Would Tithon might but talk of thee a while,
Not one in hea^uen should be more base and Vile.
Thou leau'st his bed, because he is faint through age,
And early mountest thy hateful carriage:
But had thou in thine arms some Caephalus,
Then would thou cry, stay night and run not thus.
Punnish ye me, because years make him vvaine,
I did not bid thee wed an aged svvaine.
The Moon sleeps, and Endimion every day,
Thou art as fair as she, then kiss and play.
Jove that thou should not have but vvait his leisure
Made two nights one to finish up his pleasure.
I chide no more, she blushed, and therefore heard me,
Yet lingered not the day, but morning scarde me:
Amorum. lib. 2 Elegia 4,
Quod amet mulieres, Cuiuscunque form sint.
I Mean not to defend the scapes of any,
Or justify my vices being many,
For I confess, if that might merit favor
Here I display my lewd and loose behavior,
I loath, yet after that I loath I run:
Oh, how the burden irkes, that we should shun.
I cannot rule my self but where love please,
And driven like a ship upon rough seas,
No one face likes me best* al faces move,
A hundred reasons makes me ever Love.
If any eye me with a modest Look,
I blush, and by that blushful glass am took
And she that's coy I like, for being no clovvn,
Me thinks she should be quick when she is down.
Though her sour Looks a sabines brovv rese^ble,
I think she will do, but deeply can dissemble
If she be Learned, then for her skill I crave her,
If not, because she is simple I would have her,
Before Calimecus one preferres me far,
Seeing she likes my books, why should we jar?
Another railes at me, and that I write,
Yet would I be with her, if that I might
Trips she, it likes me well, plods she, what than?
She would be nimbler Lying with a man.
And when one sweetly sings, then straight I long,
To quauer on her lips even in her song,
Or if one touch the lute with art and cunning.
Who would not love those nimble hands for their swift running.
And she I like that with a majesty,
Foldes up her arms, and makes low courtesy,
To leave myself, that am in love withal,
Some one of these might make the chastest fall,
If she be tall, she is like an amazon,
And therefore fills the bed she lies upon:
If short. she lies the rounder to speak troth,
Both short and long please me, for I love both:
If her white neck be shadowed with black hair,
Why so was Ledas, yet was Leda fair.
Yellow trest is she, then on the morn think I,
My love alludes to every history:
A young wench pleases, and an old is good,
This for her looks, that for her woman-hoode,
Nay what is she, that any Roman loves,
But my ambitious ranging mind approues?
Amorum. Lib. 2 Elegia 10
Ad Grecinum quod eodem tempore duas amet.
GRecinus (well I wot) thou toldst me once.
I could not be in love with two at once.
By thee deceived, by thee surprisde am I.
For now I love two women equally:
both are well favored, both rich in array,
Which is the louliest it is hard to say:
This seems the fairest, so does that to me,
This does please me most, and so does she,
Even as a boat, tossed by contrary wind,
So with this love and that wauers my mind,
Venus why doublest thou my endless smart?
Was not one wench enough to grieve my heart?
Why addst thou stars to heaven, leaves to green woods
And to the deep vast sea fsesh water floods?
Yet this is better far then lie alone,
let such as be mine enemies have none,
Yea, let my foes sleep in an empty bed,
And in the mids their bodies largely spread:
But may soft love rowse up my drowsy eyes.
And fom my mistress bosom let me rise:
Let one wench cloy me with sweet loves delight
If one can doote, if not, two every night,
Though I am slender, I have store of pich,
Nor want I strength, but weight to press her with:
Pleasure ads fuel to my lustful fire,
I pay them home with that they most desire:
Often have I spent the night in wantonness,
And in the morn been lively nerethelesse,
He Is happy who loves mutual skirmish slayes,
And to the Gods for that death Ovid prays,
Let soldier chase his enemies amayne,
And with his blood eternal honor gain,
Let merchants seek wealth with perjured lips,
And being wrackt, carowse the sea tired by their ships
But when I dye, would I might droope with doing,
And in the mids thereof, let my soul going,
That at my funerals some may weeping cry,
Even as he led his life, so did he die.
Amorum lib. 3. Elegia 6.
Quod ab amica receptus cum ea coire non potuit conqueritur.
EIther she was foul, or her attire was bad,
Or she was not the vve^ch I wished to have had,
Idly I lay with her, as if I louede her not,
And like a burden grieved the bed that moved not
Though both of us performd our true intent,
Yet could I not cast ancor where I meant,
She on my neck her Iuorie arms did throw.
That were as white as is the Scithian snow.
And egarly she kissed me with her tongue.
And under mine, her vvanton thigh she flong,
Yea, and she soothde me up, and calde me sir
And used all speech that might provoke and stir,
Yet like as if cold hemlock I had drunk,
It mocked me, hung down the head and sunk.
Like a dull Cipher, or rude block I lay,
Or shad, Or body was lo? who can say,
What will my age do? age I cannot shun,
Seeing in my prime, my force is spent and done,
I blush, and being youthful, hot, and lusty,
I prove neither youth nor man, but old and rustie,
Pure Rose she, like a Nun to sacrifice,
Or one that with her tender brother lies,
Yet boorded I the golden Chietvvise.
And Libas and the white cheek'de Pith o thrice.
Corinna craude it in a summers night,
And nine svveet bouts had we before day light,
What vvast my lims through some Thesalia charms
May spells and droughs do silly souls such harms?
With virgin wax has some imbast my joints,
Had pierst my Liver which sharp needle points,
Charms change corn to grass and make it die,
By charms are running springs and fou^ntaines dry
By charms Mast drops from oaks from vines grapes fall
And fruit from trees, when there is no vvind at al.
Why might not then my sinevves be inchaunted,
And I grow faint, as with some spirit haunted.
To this and shame, shame to perform it quaild me,
And was the second cause why rigor failde me:
My idle thoughts delighted her no more,
Then did the robe or garment which she wore,
Yet might her touch make youthful pilius she,
And Tithon liuelier then his years require,
Even her I had, and she had me in vain,
What mighr I crave more if I ask again
I think the great gods grieved they had bestovvd,
This benefit, which levvdlie I forslovvde:
I wished to be restored in, and in I got me,
To kiss, I kiss. to lie with her she let me.
Why was I blessed? why made king? and refusde it,
Ch^if-like had I not gold, and could not use it?
So in a ^p^ing thriues he that told so much,
And looks upon the fruits he cannot touch,
Has any Rose so from a fresh young maid,
As she might straight have gone to church and praid.
Well, I believe she kissed not as she should,
Nor used the slight nor cunning which she could
Huge Oaks, hard Adam^^s might she have moved
and with svveet words, cause deaf rocks to have loved
Worthy she was to move both gods and men
But neither was I man, ne lived then,
Can deaf years take delit, when Phemius sings,
Or Thama^is in cu^ious painted things.
What svveet thought is there but I had the same,
And one gave Place still as an other came.
Yet notvvithstanding, like one dead it lay,
Drouping more then a rose pulled yesterday:
Now when he should not ier, he bolts vp-right,
And craves his task, and seeks to be at fight,
Lie down with shame, and see thou stir no more,
Seeing now thou would deceive me as before:
Thou cousendst me, by thee surprisde am I,
And bide great hurt with endless infamy.
Nay more, the Wench did not disdain a whit.
To take it in her hand and play with it.
But when she savv it would by no means stand,
but still dropped down regarding not her hand
Why mok'st thou me she cried, or being ill,
Who bade thee lie down here against thy will?
Either tha'rt vvitcht with blood of frogs new dead
Or iaded camst thou from some others bed.
With that her loose govvne on from me she cast her
In skipping out her naked feet much graced her,
And lest her Maid should know of this disgrace,
To cover it, spilt water in the place.
Amorum Lib. 1 Elegia 2.
Quod primo amore coreptus, in triumphum duci se a Cupidine Patiatur.
WHat makes my bed seem hard seeing it is so soft?
Or why slips down the Couerlet so often?
Although the nigh^s belong, I sleep not tho,
My sid^s a^e sore with tumbling to and fro.
Were love the cause, it is like I should descry him
Or lies he close, and shootes where none can spy him.
T'vvas so he strok me with a tender dart,
It Is cruel love tu^moyles my captive heart.
yielding or striving do we give him might,
Lets yield, a bu^den easly borne is light.
I savv a brandisht sire increase in stre^g^h,
which being not shakt, I savv it die at length.
young oxen newly yokt are beaten more,
Then Oxen which have drawn the plovv before:
and rough iades mouths with stuburn bits are torn
But managde horses heads are lighlly borne.
Unwilling lovers, love does more torment,
Then such as in their bondage feel content.
Lo I confess, I am thy captive I,
And hold my conquered hands for thee to tie.
What need it thou war, I sue to thee for grace
With arms to conquer armles men is base,
Yoke Venus Doves, pur M^^tle on thy hair,
Vuscan vvil gius thee Cha^^o^s rich and fair:
The people thee applauding thou shall stand
Guiding the harmles Pigeons with hand.
Young men and Women, shall thou lead as thral
So will thy triumphs seem magnifical,
I lately cought, vvil have a new made Wound,
And captive like be manacled and bound,
Good meaning shame, and such as seek loves vvrack
Shall follovv thee, their hands tide at their back.
Thee al shall fear and worship as a king
Io. triump^ing shall thy people sing.
Smooth speeches, f^are and rage shall by thee ride,
Which troops have alvva^es bin on Cupides side:
thou wi^h these soldiers co^querst gods and men.
take these away where is thy honor then?
Thy mother shall from heaven applaud this shovv,
And on their faces, heaps of Roses strovv.
With beutie of thy vvings, thy fair hair gilded
Ride golden love in Chariots richly builded.
Unless I err, full many shall thou qurne,
And give words infinite at every turn.
In spite of thee, forth vvil thy Arrows fly,
A scorching flame burns all the standers by.
So having co^querd Inde, was Bacchushevv,
Thee Po^pous birds and him two Tigers drew,
Then seeing I grace thy show in follovving thee.
Forbear to hurt thy self in spoiling me-
Behold thy kinsmans Cesars prosperous hands,
Who (...)thee conquered with his conquering hands.
FINIS.

