VVONDERFVLL strange sightes seen in the Element, over the City of London
and other places, on Monday being the second day of September: beginning
between eight and nine of the clock at night, increasing and continuing till
after midnight: most strange and fearful to the beholders.

Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handy work.

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert VValdegraue, dwelling without Temple-barre, near
unto Sommerset-house.

The Call of England.
AS nothing can move or stir man more effectually, unto the feeling of his
own sins, then the law of God, thundered out, and threatened against the
conscience of his iniquity: so, nothing can draw him, more forcibly unto
repentance, then the sencible sight and feeling, of fearful and mighty
plagues, heavenly threatninges, and strange and prodigious wonders, drawn by
the efficient cause (God) from the operations of earthy, ayrie, watery, and
heavenly supernal Elements. As on Monday, being the second of September, Anno
1583. was seen very strange sights in the air, beginning betwixt the hours of
eight and nine at night. And so increasing and continuing till after midnight,
but chiefly betwixt eleven and twelve was seen maruailous strange, rare,
miraculous, and wonderful permouements, ad and regrediacions, with
constellations of the air, and watery elements, which were sometime dark,
sometime red, sometime fiery, and bloody colloured, with streams like sharp
spears, shooting straight upward, and meeting together, (as it were) in a
round point, with flashes, much brightness, many streams, and strange and
unwonted colors of the rainebow. As also with the color of the fire of
Brimstone, and seeming as it were burning with fierye flashes and smoke.
Strange, and fearful no doubt to the beholders, as though the gallant frame,
of all the radient sky and elements, had been even then about to be set on
fire. All which threats and often preachings from Heaven, by Fire, does yet
once again call our disobedience, unto speedy obedience, and amendment of
life. I therefore, as one that beheld the same, although of all others, the
most unfittest to report it, have here in writing, published the very truth,
and sight, as it then appeared and was manifestly seen, (over our horrizon at
London) and no doubt of many others. To the end that none might be ignorant, of
that last warning, which appeared, to call us unto repentance. Before the Lord
God (whose mercies, are always as great, as him self) do bring any notable
overthrow, or destruction upon any nation, kingdom, or people, he first of
all gives them warning, to the end, that if they repent not, yet they might
be found, inexcusable, as having no cause, to plead ignorance. Thus he dealt
toward the Sodomites, to whom, before he destroyed them. (With fire and
brimstone from heaven) he sent three Angels to Abraham, to give them warning,
who prayed for them. And before he destroyed the old world, Genesis 18.
by the diluge of water, he sent them Noah, who preached by the preparing of an
Arc, an hundredth and twenty years, so that every stroke of his hammers, might
have been a sufficient sermon, to warn them, of the coming of the waters:
before the dearth came upon Egypt, Genesis 6.
the Lord sent Joseph, to provide barnes, and store, for old father Jacob, and
his family, as it appears, in the 45. chapter of Gene.

When the heart of Pharaoh, could be mollified, toward the Egyptians, by none
other means then by the Lords punishments, The Lord sent ten merueilous
notable plagues, and wonders upon Pharaoh, and al his host, yea, from the
hiest that sits on themperiall seat, to the lowest, that grindeth in myll,
or slandeth behind the door, and made his stout stomach, somewhat to
stoop. The Lord has forwarned us a great while, and yet does not cease, so
to do still, first by his Law, then by his gospel, thirdly by the benefits,
that we have continually received of him, fourthly by his creatures, and
miraculous tokens, strange monsters, blazing commets, unwonted enundations of
waters, strange fishes, perrillous wars, earthquakings, and last of all,
firye constellations, as now also lately appeared, and is here before more
plainly specified. Observing in all points (touching the declaration of that
strange sight, which I saw) the truth, so near as I can. Requesting, the
gentle readers, to pardon me, as one unlearned, and willing to submit my
faltings, always to the censure, judgment, and discretion of the learned,
whom I reverence. Requesting al, to bear in mind, the holy words of S. Peter in
his second epistle, and third Chapter, which are spoke to this purpose. First,
that there shall come in the latter dais mockers, walking after their own
lusts, And saying, where is the promise of his coming? For ever since, the
old fathers fell asleep, al things have continued still alike from the
beginning and creation of the world. For this they know, (how be it are
wilfully ignorant of it) how that the heavens were of old, and the earth
consisting of the water, and the water by the word of God. By the which the
world that then was (as I have said before) perished, being over run with
Water. But the heavens, and the earth which be now, are kept in store, by his
word, and reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and the pardition
of ungodly men. And therefore be not ignorant of this, that one day is with
the Lord, as a thousand years, and a thousand years, as one day. And that ye
Lord is not slack in coming, as some men count slacknesse, but is patient to
us ward, (forasmuch) as he would have no man lost, but received all, unto
repentance. Nevertheless, whether ye repent, or continue still in your sins,
yet the day of the Lord shall come, as a thief in the night, in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt, with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein, shall be utterly
burned. Seeing then, that al these things shall perish, what manner of persons
ought ye to be, in all manner of holy conversation and Godliness. Looking for,
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, by whom, the heavens shall
perish with fire, and the elements shall melte with feruente heat. Wherefore
good Christians and beeloued brethren, seeing that you do now look for such
things, which undoubtedly shall come to pass, be diligent, that ye may be
found of the Lord in peace, without spot, and undefiled. Wherefore seeing ye
be warned, (and that before hand by diverse and sundry preadmonitions) to take
heed. Take heed and beware, least ye fall away (through the error of the wicked)
from your own stedfastnes. But grow ye in grace, and in the knowledge of our
only Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and forever.
Amen.

Farewell in the Lord, Thomas Day.

THE CALL OF England, which sets out our great sin and iniquities, Gods
long sufferaunce, his sundry kinds of callings, our slacknesse in coming, our
incredulity in believing, and our just destruction.
NO comfort, solace, nor no joy,
can lodge within my breast,
Because thou do me still annoy,
with thy unquiet rest.
Repent England, and turn with speed,
whilst God does daily call,
For he does send, and bid thee mend,
before thy dreadful fall.
Dear England thou, do daily grieve
and vex me every way,
To see my works and prove my deeds,
what I can do, or say.
Repent England, etc.
Full twenty years and four thou have
at large, heard out my cry,
And still by word, I say repent
by waters, earth, and sky.
Repent england, etc.
And as upon Jerusalem,
I did both weep and wail,
So does my loving preachers cry,
but nothing can prevail,
Repent england, etc.
Thou think not upon my call,
my voice thou do note hare,
My preachers meek, my word most sweet
to save, thou do not fear.
repent england, etc.
Neglecting still, thou do fulfill
all wickedness and sin,
And have delight, both day and night
to fit, and dwell therein.
repent england, etc.
What sins in Noy, his time were found,
or else in Sodomes store,
That does not now in thee abound,
a thousand times, and more.
repent england, etc.
Is not thy whooredome, and thy pride,
thy usury, and gain,
Thy weight, and measure unjust tryde,
still lodged in thy brain.
repent england, etc.
No care to get, so that thou have,
thy pining purse to fill,
Who be undone, although thereby
thy brothers blood thou spil.
repent england, etc.
Lo England now, what means else,
thy rents which tripled be,
In such a rate, that none but thou
or thine, can dwell with thee.
repent England, etc.
And is it all, nay leases great,
yea Fines and Incomes bare
Up such a price, that non that's wise,
but thee and thine does fear.
repent England, etc.
Why dealest thou so (O England)
with thine anointed king,
Who fills thy store, and empts thy store
again, of every thing.
repent england, etc.
But avarice (that bagg) stirs up,
thy Tygred natures kind,
To wring and wrest the poor, to fill
thine discontented mind.
repent england, etc.
Thus carelessly, thou do contemn
the poor, whom thou should feed,
And to the rich thou make feasts
with fare thou do exceed.
repent england, etc.
Esteeming more thy gluttony,
thy pride, and idle life,
Then care, and conscience of the poor,
to end their law and strife,
repent england, etc.
Yet God does send his Jonas still,
thee England to call,
While there is time, if thou will hear,
and fear, from sin to fall.
repent england, etc.
If not, his judgment is most swift,
remember Easter past,
how on the wednesday, he did shake
this earth, and all things fast.
repent england, etc.
Both Castles, towns, and Towers strong,
and Mountains every where,
The ground most firm, and al thereon
did shake, and quake for fear.
repent england, etc.
If then his wrath be found so fearce,
as senseless things makes nymble,
Shall it not make the stoutest hearts,
of understanding tremble?
repent england, etc.
Yes, yes, O england think not so,
but that thou shall be found,
And as amazed gydsicke man,
fall flat with death to ground.
repent england, etc.
While thou have time, therefore repent,
and call to God for grace,
That he from wrath may yet relent,
and al thy sins deface.
repent england, etc.
Unto thee which his judgments call,
and cause thee to decline,
And thitherward appoint thy path,
as by a squared line.
repent england, etc.
Repent I say, and soeke his face,
whilst it is to be found,
In this same special time of grace,
here living on the ground.
repent england, etc.
And dare thou not protract the time,
to dally any more,
Because the judge with judgment comes,
and stands at the door.
and says repent, etc.
With wonders strange and monsters fell,
and blazing stars by past,
Does still Prognosticate and tell,
of judgment at the last.
repent england, etc.
What sickness new, with plagues are sent,
what floods do ouerflow,
In every place, what wars are bent
to tell us it is so.
repent england, etc.
And euerything in their degree,
as nature has assignde,
The tide, the time, and winters be,
unnatural by kind.
repent england, etc.
What warninges has been often sent
to thee, by flashing streams
Of fire, which bids thee to repent
and wake, out of thy dreams.
repent england, etc.
The clouds, likewise infixt with blood,
and Brimstome fire, like smoken,
With colors strange, not often like seen,
a day of dome betoken.
repent england, etc.
As late (alack) on Monday last,
who so abroad did range,
Betwixt the hours of leven and twelve,
might see it very strange.
repent england, etc.
On all the parts of heavenly sky.
was tokens to remember,
The latter coming of the Lord,
the second of September.
repent therefore O england, etc.
Therefore while thou haste time and space,
and whiles he calls thee still,
Come unto him, turn not thy face,
obey unto his will.
repent england, etc.
And thou shall have, that he has bought,
and purchased for thee free,
The kingdom of eternal rest,
for thy reward and fee.
repent england, etc.
Lord send us al those heavenly joys,
with thee for to remain,
And us defend from satan's noyes,
and everlasting pain.
repent england, etc.
God save our queen Elizabeth,
and stablish still her reign,
In health, and wealth, and happy peace,
thy Gospel to maintain.
Repent (O England) then with speed,
and turn from satan's thrall.
Both man and wife, amend your life,
and Christ will save you all.
FINIS.

