ALEKTOP. The Cock. Containing the first part, of the most excellent, and
My-theologicall History, of the valorous Squire Alector; Son to the Renowned
Prince Macrobius Franc-Gal; and to the Peerless Princess Priscaraxe, Queen
of high Tartary.

Though long at length.

depiction of a cock A TRIBVLATIONE.


Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, and are to be sold by Edward White,
dwelling by the little North-doore of S. Paul's at the sign of the Gun. 1590.

Amici cuiusdam Carmina in laudem operis.
ADfuit antiquis facundia maxima linguae,
Hic decus eloquij; carminis alter habet.
Tullius, Jtaliam summa dulcedine mulsit;
O Rhetor dulci suauiter ore fluens.
Mantua, Virgilium iactat, qui carmine dulci
Pascua descripsit: and Phrigis arma viri.
Hammondum iactet, celebratque Britania nostrum;
Cni, lepor in multa non minor art latens.
Jnsequitur casusque virum; seuosque dolores;
Permare, per terras, deliciasque diuum.
Dumque sit eloquij, priscorum Laurea prima
Fas erit Hammondo, proxima quaeque dare.
Nec satis hoc Hammonde, tibi? laus su^ma secundis?
Proximus a primo, quisquis secundus erit.
Non tu falsa quidem metuas conuitia vulgi,
Doctis nec satis est, posse placere viris.
Mome malign vale; vigeat, relegatur, ametur;
Jngenuijque decus, saecula nulla tegent.
A. S.

Ia: Smith in praise of Alector.
FIerce Hercules resign thy wonted fame;
Brave Hector, here yield up thy high renown;
Achillis stay, and throw thine Armor down;
For preux Alector, now must bear the name
Of valor, courage, prowes: when all is done:
It Is he alone, that has the garland won.
Stoop Pyrrhus then, and Caesar strike thy sail;
Base Tamburlane retire, and sound retrait:
Not all thy bold attempts, and conquests great.
May with Alectors valor countervaile.
For courage, prowes, and deeds of cheualree
None may the garland were, but only he.
A Dizain in praise of the Book.
OF great exploits, of mighty feats of arms;
Of Heavens, of hell, of doom, and dismal fates:
Of bold attempts, of murders, hurts, and harms;
Of monsters rare, of machiuillian mates;
Of wretched spite, of over mortal hates;
Of devilish drugs, of Philtres, and of charms;
Of countries strange, and of their brutish states;
In brief, who list to read of loves alarmes?
Let him draw nere, this book at large imparts;
Their several kinds, their ends, and their deserts.
Ia: Thornburghe. Gent.

The first part, of the most excellent and My-theologicall History, of the
valorous Knight Alector, Son of Macrobius Franc-Gal, and of the Queen
Priscaraxe, etc.
Of the taking of Alector in the chamber of the fair Damsel Noemia Gratian,
his invasion and merucilous defense, of her slaughter in his arms, with her
taking, accusation, and imprisonment, and of her sepulcher and Epitaph. CAP. I.
The occasion of this slaughter appears more plainly in the 3. Cap.
THE Pauement of white Marble in the lower court of the Palace of the Gratian
Lords, and Citizens of Orb, had changed the snowie hew into sanguilent red,
by the effusion of human blood; and was covered in many places with dead
bodies lying round about the valerous Alector; as the grass abated by the
Mower: some being slain out right, and others yet drawing breath, and yielding
up the Ghost. On the other side, the court was all replenished with harnessed
men, enforcing themselves either to take a live, or else to slay the gentle
Squire: who being taken one morning by the over late waking out of a sweet and
golden sleep, in the chamber of the faier Noemia Gratian, and perceiving the
door to be broken upon him, (more for sauegard of the honor of his
Mistress, than for fear,) was lept down out of a window into the lower
court, clothed only for haste in his shirt, with a coat of arms of Say,
with a Iassarin of cloth of Gold, and silk purple, with a chain of gold, and
a red hat on his head: the residue being bare and naked, saving with a great
and large brazen shield; bearing upon green sinople, a Cock of gold eleuant,
armed and spurred with gueles; and with a fair, rich, and most excellent
sword, whose refulgent splendor died in boiling blood, was so terrible to his
assaillants by the example of the most hardy already ^laine, that they durst
not come nere him. For his sword was of so fine and hard metal, cutting and
peircing like fire, and in an arm so mighty, that there was no so good armor
which seemed not of siluered paper or brittle glass, or that was able to
defend their bodies from being cut in pieces, if they came within his right
stroke. Wherefore they seeing that by the approach and touch of this
redoubtable sword, the certain and present death to be at hand, no man durst
come nere him, but standing far off with fearful cryings, they cast at him
stones and bullets of lead, darted Iauelings, shot arrows, and thrust at him
with long pikes, especially the two brothers Gratians germans to the fair
Noemia (who taking impatiently and unworthy the defame and dishonor which
they imagined to be done to their Sister, and that by a stranger whom they had
so honorably received, and so graciously entertained into their house and
family, and desiring to revenge the domestical outrage, and death of their
third young brother, whom they saw lying slain upon the pauement by his
overmuch hardines) assailed vigorouslie above the rest, this young Squire with
great pushes of shaking pikes and boisterous lances, so right and rudely,
that they molested Alector more than any of the others, as in deed it touched
them most nere. But he with his good sword and by the nimblenes and agilitie
of his body, turned away their blows so readily, and abated them so
desperately that in little space he had cut a sunder six pikes as though they
had been kixes, and disweaponed the two brethren three times. From other blows
coming far off as stones, darts, and arrows, they wear not so surely
sent, but by the legeritie of the Squire, at whom they could have no just
aim, they still failed: and those which came right, he received them upon his
impenetrable shield, which was of such assurance, that it made him hardy and
without fear, that carried it. Notwistanding in such peril a great advantage
happened to him. For in the midst of the Court, there was a great pillar of
marble seven foot high, made in triangle wise, and the sides railed in with
hemiticles, making three half rounded meetings. Upon this treangled stone in
honor of the surname of the Gratian family was erected, the statues of the
three Graces, called the Charites, in shape of three naked virgins, holding one
another by the hand in dansing wise, with their visages turned: the one
forthright, the other sideling, and the third right behind. Between two
angles of this stone, in one of the rondles, was Alector backed, and retired in
such sort that he could not be taken neither strooken behind, by reason of
the largeness and thicknes of the stone, and hardly on either side, by reason
of he two angles which came out of the Hemicicle, which defended him: in so
much he had not to defend himself against his Enemies, but only before: which
he did so bravely, and with so youthful courage and with so hot and boiling a
blood, that he neither thought of nor feared the peril, being emboulded with
the virtue of the shield which he carried, ravished from the Trophe, against
the spirit of hardines. See the whole process of this in the 19. Cap.
Withal which forces being garnished, he enstalled himself (in the midds of
his crying enemies, far more fearing, than approaching nere him,) like a wild
Bore grounded and set in the wood against an infinite company of dogs,
earnestly, but far off baying, yalping, houling and crying: amongst whom,
if any one begle over young and foeble presumes to assail him in his fury and
heat, incontinent with his crooked and furious tusks he sets his gutts
into the wind, and his life into the air, giving example and fear to all the
rest; whose nature is that the one being hurt the others run away. Even so
were they in great multitudes about Alector, crying, threatening, and dispiting
him: but not over passing the bodies of them, who lay slain before them.
Nevertheless the number still increasing, he found himself so charged with
stones, bullets, and bars of wood, with shafts, arrows, and darts: that if the
Goddess of health her self would have salued him, she could not. And
therewithal issewed out of the palace a young maid of singular beauty, and
of more sovereign grace (and this was the fair Noemia Gratian, sister
german to the three brothers Gratians, the one slain, and the other two
fighting for revenge, children of the wiseman Euander Gratian, and of the noble
Lady Agathagine, the chief and ancient house of the Orbitains.) This young
maid, who in truth was the Mistress of Alector, seeing her most dear friend,
in the midst of his mortal enemies brought to that stall of bucherie, and so
many staves and arrows, flying upon him, that hardly she could see him under
his shield, (more replenished with arrows, then the back of a hedgehog with
bristells) could no longer stay her self, but moved by a furious rage of love;
setting a side all virginicall shame, al maidenly fear, and al honor of her
noble blood, exceeding the pastianimitie of her feminine kind, with more than
a manlike heart, ran through the mortal weapons of her brothers and parents
assaylants, unto her friend the defendor of his own life, and the honor of
them both. She being vncorfed with her hairs hanging down fair like Phoebus
beams, with her visage sad and bedewed with tears, nevertheless replenished
with hardness and grave constancy, her fair body being more white then the
statues of the Graces of Alablaster, which were there set up; and illuminated
amids the white, with a natural and viue incarnat; covered only with her
petticote unlaced, and cast over with a light cloak of white damask put her
self between the two parties, turning toward her friends and their adherents
with a hardy and boldened voice, she began her speech as follows.

"My dear brethren and you my Parents and friends, I beseech you cease your
shooting, stay your strokes, and listen a while to me. The assault which you
make here upon this fair, young, valiant, and virtuous Gentleman (whom you
know not) is either for the love of me your Sister and kinswoman, or else for
hate and revenge of him, your offender as you suppose. It is either for the
one, or the other, or else for both, by reason of a certain sinister suspicion
(which ought rather to be taken up and concealed, than notoriously discovered.)
If it be for the love of me, I beseech you for my sake to pardon Alector his
life, honor, and liberty; to whom (as you your selves can tell) I owe both
life, liberty, and honor: whereby he being once dead it is impossible for me
to live: besides this in doing him wrong, with the vile vice of ingratitude
contrary to your nature and the surname of your house, you shall violate the
holy right of hospitality, killing your guest in your own house, whom
heartelie and worthily you have thereinto received, and entertained. And if
the violence which you do him, is to revenge any fore-fault or offense of
youth, either of his or mine: you ought rather to conceal than reveal it? If
you require vengeance for it, take it of me which am cause of the evil (if
any evil be) and upon my body and heart (for his virtue) vowed unto him: to
whom I shall be a pauoys and bulwark of defense, that willingly spared not
himself for me: yea and am as ready and willing to receive for him your shot
and mortal blows, as new I go to cover and embrace him."

This spoken: the faier and gracious Noemia with body and arms cast herself
upon the worthy Squire Alector, embracing him straightly, kissing him
tenderly and hanging about his neck most lovingly, their faces and breasts
joined together (which both of them had naked) and covering al her body against
the force of his assailants. Which thing her brethren and parents perceiving,
and having understood both her prayer and protestation, together natural
pity and parentage moving them, began already to retire and lay aside their
arms; when a wretch and cursed springall (who long time had pursewed the love
of Noemia, and could never come to one only smiling look,) turning his sweet
into sower, and his love and desire into disdain and dispite, with the great
cherishing which he saw her show to Alector; purposed to slay them both at
once: wherefore seeing his opportunity he let fly an arrowe fethered with light
inconstancy, and hedded with a head of cruel anger, tempored with the venym of
jealousy, thinking to dispatch them both at one instant: but the cursed arrowe
lighting in the right side of Noemia passed through her body, whereby of a
soddaine her beautiful flesh, smock, and cloak of white damask, changed their
snowie hew into a vermillion color, and the Damsel feeling her inward
deadly wound, pirtifullie cried out: " Alas I am wounded to the death for you
my friend Alector: brief has been the pleasure of our loves; and sad the
departure. The flower of my beauty and youth is as soon vaded again, as the
morning rose, plucked up and withered at night: But the death is so much less
grievous unto me, in that I am slain by saving you from that mortal stroke;
and in that I die between your arms (my dear friend) leaving to you
therefore the revenge." At these words her speech failed her, and her eyes
closing, she inclined her mouth upon the face of Alector: who thinking to ease
her, pulled out the wicked arrowe, but with drawing it out, her life with her
blood departed: and this (not long before) so fair and gracious a creature
fell down dead at the feet of her friend Alector, so sad and so enraged with
fuerie of so villainous a shot, that forgetting himself, and the present peril
wherein he was, by ardant desire of revenge: and to recounter the murdering
shooter and slayer of his Noemia, came out of his fort, throwing himself like
a wounded Lion through the midst of the multitude, breaking the preace, beating
down all before him, and with his strong "shield repulsing all that he met,
furiously cried out: Traitorous Archer, murderer of Maidens, where art thou?
Why presentest thou not thy self before me? Thou leaud coward and traitor, to
the end I may accompany the most unworthy of death that ever lived, or that I
may fill my self of revenge with the cleerest of thy blood? Cruel Tiger;
lurking Serpent, coward and wicked Crocadile, that without offense have given
death to the liueliest virtue, and after fliest away like a waspe leaving her
venomous sting behind her, dare thou present thy self unto me?" So went
Alector crying and furiously threatening, striking, and abating down of men,
that no man how hardy soever he were, durst stand against him, unless he meant
to be slain. But whiles, through desperate rage he laid so about him at
randon, striking upon those whom were before him, and taking no regard to
those who followed him, soddainely he found himself assailed with six
puissant men, who by maine force took from him his shield, and so consequently
one part of his hardines: and albeit he made much resistance to the great
hurt of his enemies, yet nevertheless the multitude so oppressed and over
charged him that his sword fell out of his hand, the which one of the brothers
Gratians took up with the shield. So was Alector taken and led by force of
people to the Potentate, governor of the town and chief Justice called
Diocles who seeing this fair young man of such a liberal countenance to be
accused by so many voices speaking against him, the one accusing him of Rape,
another of Treason, another of fornication, and others of many murders. To all
which accusations he answered nothing, neither demanded any thing but the
death, to accompany his most dear and woeful Noemia,) would not give
judgment headlong, but doing the duty of a Potentate (like a most wise man)
knowing all these people to be passionated, the one party with fury and
appetite of revenge, and the other with desperation, grief, sorrow, envy,
and contempt of life: advised himself to let both parties cool until the
next morning, when by their cold blood they might return to reason and their
right sense, whereupon adressing his speech unto the tumultuous people, and
chiefly to the two brothers complainants, he spoke in this manner: " Lords
Gratians, to morrow the parties being heard, I will show you right. Mean while
return your selves in peace, and I will keep the offender in sure custody."
This said, they all retired themselves evil content enough. Alector was then
committed to the keeping and custody of the Captain Palatine, and the others
departed to go bury their dead, amongst whom the foresaid fair Noemia was
found slain, and buried with great lamentation of her brothers according to
the use of the country, even in the same place where she was slain, hard
under the foresaid pillar of the graces, for the excellent gifts of spirit
and body that in her life time beyond fortune they had ennobled her withal,
and in the stone was engraven this Epitaph. Lo here Noemia fair, that constant
Maid does lie
before these Graces who bewail her want of breath:
That (for Alectors sake, her steadfast faith to try)
has felt the stroke of love; and dint of cruel death.


Of the accusation and process against Alector, and of his defense. CAP. 2.
THE next day the Lord Diocles Potentate and chief Justice of Orb, sitting
upon the Tribunal seat in the great Basilicq, caused to appear and come
before him the Gratian Lords complaina^ts, and the Squire Alector defendant, to
understand and judge of the commotion and slaughter happened by their cause; in
the assistance of all the Maiestrates, Orders, and Estates of the City of Orb
and of the greater part of the people there assembled and gathered together by
reason of the case so new, strange, and of so terrible example. The two
brothers Gratians clothed in long garments of mourning color, with visages
sad and withered, either for very sorrow, or else by artificial cunning of
some sulphurian smoke, For oftentimes an Hegers mournful cheer,
Through fained show does prove a laughter mere.
with shaven beardes; hairs rent and torn; implored Justice against Alector
being there present, a stranger, a spy, a foyler of maidenly beds, a violator
of hospitality, a raptor of virginity, a thief, and breaker up of noble
houses, a troubler of public peace, and a bloody murderer. Declaring that
at the persuasion of their late deceassed sister Noemia Gratian, a gracious
maiden (more peradventure than was expedient for him) upon the recite of
certain valiant feats of Arms (unknowing whether they were truly or falsely
given out) they had received him into their house, always held noble of all
antiquity, and esteemed a house of honor. This fained and masqued Gentleman,
who under color of a certain courtlike civility, wherein he seemed to have
been trained up, and by the allurement of a certain beautiful youth, in him by
ye gifts of nature shining: had corrupted the good nurture and manners of
their sister, being a simple and young maiden, and the best esteemed of this
age, and had tempted her honesty, even unto the entering into her priute
chamber at unlawful hours in the night, abiding there the whole night alone
with her (whereby may be judged ye rest): where, after that by revelation of
some domestical and faithful servants he was discovered, by breaking up the
doors, he (by fraction of the hospital lodging villainously violated and
polluted) was leapt down through a window into the lower court, where again
he has committed many murders, as well upon the domestical servants, friends,
and familiers, come to their succor, as of their proper parents and alies; yea
and that he had wickedly and cursedly slain the youngest of the brothers
Gratians: and for that cause their so amiable sister, by rage of furious love
had so lost her senses, that she was come miserably to be slain in his arms;
neither was it known by whom, unless by himself, who by holding her
embraced, had slain her, as it is very likely. And thereupon demanded justice
to be given them, as well for the private interest of the persons of their
brother, sister, parents, friends, and domestical servants, as also for
public example of other such like disturbers of their public peace, stirers
of civil discord, and corupters of good manners. Concluding him to be worthy
of the most ignominious death that could be adjudged.

The most wise and just Potentate Diocles having in great and attentive silence
heard and understood the action and complaint of the brothers Gratians, only
with his left ear, and having always held his right ear stopped with the
palm of his left hand, upon which he had still his head inclmed, following the
example of the adder, and subtle serpent, who fearing the enchanted words of
the charmer stops her ear against the ground: even so did this most wise
judge, who had closed his right ear with his left hand under color of resting
his head, to the end he might reserve it to hear the other party. And for
that cause turned himself on the other side, holding his left ear leaning
upon his right hand, and opening the other to hear the defendant: who, clothed
in his apparel which was brought unto him (except his arms) with an assured
and liberal countenance and with a seemly face and upright body, (which
already privily had gotten him the favor of all) with hardy speech he began
his defense in this manner.

Equitable and just Potentate, I know not if the order of worldly things
confound themselves, and preposterously reuerse and turn to a contrary
disorder: when before your honor, I see my self innocent, and having received
miurie, (for which cause to me belonged the complaint) am nevertheless
arrested and criminally accused, by those who have outraged me: and who in my
behalf have violated the holy right of hospitality: enforcing themselves (as
much as in them lay) to have murdered me in their own house, whereto they had
invited me to lodge; and thereupo^ had slain me, if uist God, my right, my
good sword, and mine impenetrable shield had not saved me. They have called
me unknown stranger, for the which (that I may make my self known to the
whole company) I give you to understand that I am Alector, borne of noble
blood, son of the most renowned prince Franck-Gal, called the old Knight of
the swimming and flying horse, sufficiently known through out all the world,
and of my Lady Priscaraxe, Queen of Tartary: so that I am a noble man, and not
an unknown stranger as they term me, but a worldling and a Citizen of the
world, and a Squire, wandering to seek who may give me the order of Rnight
heed, and to find adventures in all places, without counting my self a
stranger in any noble house which is open to honest men: as they would be taken
for and esteemed, in causing themselves to be called the Gratians; who for
token of graciousnes, have addressed the statues of the three Graces in the
entry of their lodging, toward whom at the perilous assault which was made
upon me thinking to save my self, as with signs and tokens of Graces and
inviolable franchise, I found such grace, that I have there received more than
three hundred handie strokes, and many more of shot and stones; yea far more
favorable were the hard stones susteyning and holding up the insensible
Charites of Alablaster to me, than those men who call themselves Gratians,
having both sense and reason. For they fought with me to the death, and these
defended me and saved my life: wherefore I say, that the Gratians and their
consorts are more hard and ungracious, than the statues of the Graces in
Marble, that by their cruel impiety (themselves violated and polluted,) have
caused the innocent blood of their (...) sister to be shed, and cruelly
immolated and sacrificed between mine arms before the images of their
Charites; who (in detestation and horror of so abominable a sacrifice,) seem
to turn their faces from seeing such an excecrable forfeit, as the murder of
their fourth sister, the most gracious Noemia, before their Divinity; and
under the safegarde and liberty of their worshipful and inviolable images,
traitcrously transpeirced with a cursed arrowe; let she from far by a
rascal, coward, wicked, and traitorous archer, whom (if I might know) I
would neither pardon quick nor dead. And in this most evidently appears, the
calumnious insimulation of mine accusers, who intending to say upon me the
murder of their most gracious Noemia, slame between mine arms with anarrowe:
whereas I my self had none other offensive weapons, than mine only sword,
wherewithal I would rather have transpeirced mine own heart, than to have
offended or harmed her. Protesting before you, yt for no other occasion, but
only in hope to revenge mine own Noemia, I do here either defend my cause or
life, and not for pleasure or desire that I have longer to live in this world,
desiring rather to be with her, or where she is, than here to languish after
her being dead: but before I dye, cruelly to take revenge upon the traitorous
murderer, with the same shaft that he pierced her noble heart, to the end I
may carry her agreeable news of revenge into the other world. But in that
they accuse me to have bin taken locked within the chamber of Noemia their
sister, and that by breaking and manner of scaling I was lept down into the
lower court by the window. In this I was never taken, nor in doubt to be
taken: for being lodged in their house (the which for a certain pleasure to
them done, in all and by all they had left unto me, with all the goods that
were therein) I did not esteem the chamber of Noemia to be interdicted me,
wherein oftentimes I entered openly and not as a thief or wicked person to
bezell her substance or honor, or to violate her body: but as a Gentleman, to
whom no Lady or Gentlewoman of honor ought to refuse honest company, unless
that as a villain he had purchased the same with villainy; the which shall
not be found in me: who never held speech nor did act which should displease
her, neither had any dishonorable scandal nor sinister suspicion come thereof,
if they themselves had not procured to defame their sister, and to sinde
occasion to deprive her of her dowry by their insatiable covetousness. For the
which it is sufficient to be coniectured that they have caused her to be
stain in this tumult, by a traitorous shot of an unknown man of their side,
who cannot be found. But if I see him I shall know him well enough. As
touching the breaking up of any thing, not I, but they themselves did it,
breaking violently the chamber door, by proud disdain to knock thereat, or
familiar calling to open it, and (as I believe) to rob and steal mine arms
from me which are so fair and good, as in the end afterward like thieves
they did; which nevertheless as vet I challenge of them and desire they may be
sequestered and put into your custody (O Lord Diocles) until the end of
judgment, wherein if I he adjudged to dye, neither my Lord and Father
Frank-Gall, nor the hardy spirit of the black Knight Gallchalt, shall suffer
peaceably to enjoy. If I leaped down at the window into the lower court, it
was not for conscience of any evil deed; which hitherto I have not committed,
upon the proof of arms with the sword and shield (for as yet I am not
Knight) against the two brothers and all others who dare presume to charge me
with villainy: neither yet by flying or fear of their assault, for I never had
doubt of them, as full well I have given them since to vuderstand: but only by
descending without ladder or fraction, with my hand set upon the window
easelie going down, to give way and place to their furious insolence and
threatening cries, and for shunning of committing any act of hostility in a
house of hospitality: and also because I would not give any dishonorable
suspicion to their sister, whose honor if I had not had in more recommendation
than they (who have brought it in question) without leaving the place, I had
well defended their entry, and have sent them with their parents like
insensible fools. But having these two respects, I thought better to stake my
force and hardines, and to give place to their fury, than to fight with mine
hosts, and give scandal to their sister. And if I had found no impeachment in
the court, no drop of blood had been shed by me in their house. But you know (O
just Diocles) that it is permitted, yea and necessary by the righteous law of
nature, to repulse force by force, and violence by violence. Wherefore
perceiving my self ercluded from all way of flying combat, and finding my
self environed with a mighty company of armed men who had sworue either my
death or captivity (who am free and son of free and liberal condition) and
assailing me on every side without mercy or grace, I retired my self
toward the azile and sacred statues of the Charites and Graces, thinking there
to find grace, franchise and safety. Wherefore, if in defending my body,
some over rash persons have feign under my trenching sword, I say that it is
not I that have stain them, for I never had will thereto, and the just law
does not judge but voluntary deeds: as for these, they themselves like
furious wild Bores have rashly come to be stain, and therefore of their
own voluntary death I plead my self innocent. To conclude, whereas they
charge me with violence and Rape, committed on the person of their sister: I
answer it is so far from truth, as contrariwise their sister Noemia being
by the terrible and savage Centaure ravished, and without hope of recovery
from being ever lost, I by valiance against violence have brought her home safe
and sound; and so restored her to her brothers. Whereby if it were so that I
had subtracted her to me, and appropriated her person to my will, yet have I
no taken, but that which ought to be mine by good conquest and right of war,
for that they lost her with ill keeping, and I got here again from the
monsterous Centaure, and therefore she should be mine by universal right of
people. And thus concluding, for mine absolution, I crave full deliverance, and
restitution of mine arms. Or otherwise, if I be found guilty of death (which
shall less grieve me after the death of my most dear Noemia) most instantly
I beseech you (O Lord Diocles, and all you the assistants) that you will cause
that murthcring archer to be sought and found out, that so traitorously has
stain the innocent Noemia, and after that you have condemned him to cruel
death (as reason and Justice require) to put him into my hands, that I may
execute and take vengeance upon him, to the end my soul after her departure
out of this body may carry agreeable news to the spirit of Noemia, in
witness of the constant love, that in her life and after her death I have borne
her. And for faithful proof of my words spoken and alleged in my defense:
let the domestical servants even unto the torture, be examined and asked, who
kept her company when she was ravished by the Centaure, and by me delivered
out of his hands. Likewise let Arcana her familiar chamber maid, be examined,
who to all her deeds and secrets was most privy.

The defense of Alector heard and understood (which seemed not unreasonable)
the thoughts of the whole assistance by close favor, accorded to his absolution
and deliverance. But the just Judge Diocles who believed not easily in simple
words, by the advice of the Counsel; caused Tharsides and Calestan (domestical
servants in the house of the Gratians) to be sent for, who had been in the
company and conduct of Noemia, and present at her rauishment: likewise Arcana
her secret damsel was sent for, who appearing before the Potentate Diocles,
were adjured in the name and by the faith which they ought to Sovereign Jove,
to tell truth of all that they knew and had seen between Alector and
Noemia, with threaten of death if they dissimuled any thing, or if they
concealed or disguised the truth of the matter as it was. These poor servile
persons so adjured, began to look one upon another without speaking word,
either of them fearing in himself to utter or conceal the thing, whereof they
might be coargued by the other; until Tharsides first took and addressed his
speech to the Potentate, in this manner.

A Narration of the Rauishment of Noemia carried away by the savage Centaure;
of her recovery by Alector; the beginning of their secret love in the den: and
the continnuance thereof till her death. CAP. 3.
MY Lord Diocles and most just Potentate, in whose presence the most assured
tremble, for reverence of thy severe judgment, which receives neither favor,
flatery, nor lying, I protest puerly and entierly to utter that which I know
without conceal or dissimulation. There are two months already past or there
abouts, that my Lady Noemia deceased (whose Soul rest in peace) was sent for
by my Lady Callirhoa her cosen, to her castle of the Greene-head, to
accompany, and pass the time with her certain days, whiles my Lord Spathas
her husband was gone twelve iournies from thence toward an Augur, being an
ancient Hermit of a most strait life, and a Divine man, resident about the
horned rock, to inquire, and know of this holy man, of certain ordinary and
almost daily prays and slaughters which were done in his lands and woods; of
persons and beasts either stain, ravished, or incurably lost, without knowing
by whom, or whether it were a Devil, a savage beast, or a man that committed
these outrages. For the bodies of those who were found stain, were stricken and
pierced with arrows, headed with the venomous teeth of Dragons, or else marked
and stricken with round blows without wound, which gave suspicion that they
were shot or stricken down by the hand of a man. But when any man followed them
who were ravished, there could none other trace be found but the footing of a
horse so soon vanished into the thickness of the wood, that those who
pursewed them oftentimes found themselves lost. And for that cause my Lord
Spathas was gone toward this divine Augur to understand and hear some
certain advice of him. In the mean while my Lady Noemia sent for by her
Cosen Callirhoa with the leave of her Parents, and three brethren who had the
charge and sovereign recommendation of her after the death of her parents,
went to the Greene-head accompained with Calestan and me; of her hastard
brother called Floridas and this her waighting maid Arcana: and there we
tarried three weeks with joyful cheer until the return of my Lord
Spathas; who brought no other answer from the wise wan, but this obscure
problem, afterward by him found, but over veritable. The cruellrauisher is
neither Man no Beast;
Who of the snowie Hind shall shortly make conquest,
By killing of the Leopard, that sought her to defend,
And chasing of two Hearts, who durst him not attend.
But there shall come a twice borne child, whose worthieforce
Shall her redeem, and stay this monster sanz remorce.
And for his fact receive that flower as a prize:
Whereof shall shortly'nsewe abundant plaints and cries.
My Lord Spathas for that time understood not this obscure answer,
nevertheless he could get none other: whereupon he returned as evil advised
as he went, albeit he kept this aenigme still in mind. Who interpreting the
worst, and fearing least the evil should fall upon his house, or upon those
who were there in, specially on his fair Cousin Noemia (which he coniectured
to be the snowie Hind) on the next morning (in an evil hour) sent us toward
Orb. For in passing by the wood of Hazards, as we rode cheerefullie one
morning under the shadow of the great leaued trees, giving ear to ye
melodious tunes of the chirping birds, we heard a great brute like the
trampling of a drove of beasts approaching us. And suddenly we perceived a
most horrible monster of greatness, grosenes, and enormious hideur, who unto
the lower part of his belly had an human shape, rather Giantous than natural,
with a great hoarie head, brusking up like the brussels of a wild Bore, with a
visage fierce, and looks fear full, his mouth opened, discovering his great
teeth, his body and arms full of veins covered with clear hair, not much
unlike the silk made of a fleese. And the rest of his body in the form of a
great red horse, exceeding the common bigness of other horses, running,
flinging, and leaping upon four horse legs strong and light, right toward us,
carrying a great massy Club hanging at his girdle made of a green and crooked
branch of hasell with his leaves, and a number of arrows at his side, and a
bow in his hand, wherewithal he let fly an arrowe, and stew the horse of
Floridas, who feeling his horse to fall under him, readily set foot on ground,
and hand to his weapon to defend his fair sister Noemia (whom he loved most
decrely) against this horrible monstrous Centaure, running forth right to
ravish her. Wherefore Floridas postposing his life to the health of his sister,
came only to him with his sword. But the Centaure gnaying with dispitefull
laughter drew out his gross mare, and gave him such a heavy stroke upon the
reins, that he broosed all his bones, and then trod him with his horsely
feet till he brake his heart: Seeing this, we fled, abandoning my Lady
Noemia, whom far of (turning our selves) we saw ravished by the Centaure;
who having mounted her up behind him, was entered into the thick wood. And
after her, her Damsel Arcana running on foot with her hair about her eyes:
for the Mule whereon she was mounted, being afraid of the Centaure (as a Mule
is a fantastical and vmbragious beast) had thrown down his charge, and by
maine running, returned to the Castle of Greene-head from whence we were
departed. Whereupon after we had lost the sight of my Lady Noemia; we came
flying toward Orb to declare unto her friends this sorrowful news. And as
for other things I know none, but that the next day after at night we saw
her arrive, safe and sound, whom we supposed to have been utterly lost; in the
company and conduct of a right fair Squire, whom you may behold here
present. Who ever since has remained in the house of the Lords Gratians,
behauing himself most graciously toward all, and most lovingly with my Lady
Noemia; like a young Gentleman with a fair Gentlewoman. If there be any other
thing I know, let Arcana be asked, who ought to know more: for as touching my
attestation Calestan can bear me witness.

Then arose Calestan affirming ye deed to be so, adjoining therewithal that in
flying, the Prophecy of the wise man came to his memory to be verified. For
this monstrous Hippocentaure was neither man nor beast, but of doubble stature,
rauishing and murdering: as for the snowie Hind conquered, it was Noemia, the
Leopard (who is a beast, bastard to the Lion and the Pardatide) was Floridas
the bastard stain; the two Hearts did fly, being them two servants Tharsides
and Calestan, who through fear had abandoned their dame by flight. But of the
rest of the problem, he protested to understand nothing, as one not knowing
the consequent effects; whereof Arcana may be asked: Arcana then at the
commandment of the Judge arose, and protesting by her faith to report the
truth upon pain of her life began as follows.

All that which Tharsides and Calestan have related is according to truth and
verity (my Lord Diocles): after whose flight and my Mules, I being on foot,
knew not what better to do than by extreme dolor, which brought my
desperation of life, to run after my Lady Noemia, whom my soul could not
abandane: in following the trace of the Centaure by an unknown way which I
saw him hold, in crying and lamenting so high, that all the wood rang, and the
only Echo filled mine ears, who with me seemed to bewail the misfortune of
my Lady Noemia. At my hautie cries and clamors in the wood, I met with a right
fair, young and brave Esquire (which was Alector whom you see present before
you) mounted upon a goodly Courser, who seeing me so to run half out of my
wits, demanded the cause of my dolor; which when he had understood, he
required me to conduct him to the place where I had seen this monster, saying
that he would deliver my Lady or else there die the death. I comforted with
this promise, in so much that I seemed to be as light as a hind, ran before
toward the thick of the wood, whereinto I saw this monstrous Centaure enter,
and the Squire followed me a gallop: until at length we perceived the
Centaure having discharged his pray, and training her by force into the hollow
of a high Rock, environed with xv. great Oaks right thick and leauie. Alector
seeing him, cried from far: leave that Maiden thou byformed monster and
address thy self to me, who will chasten thee for thine outrage. The
Hippocentaure hearing and seeing him come with bridle losed and the sword in
his hand, let fly at him an arrowe wherewithal he had peirced him through if
he had not been covered with his impenetrable shield. Wherefore fearing least
his horse should be slain, set foot on ground, and adressed himself to the
monster with merueilous hardines: whereat the Centaure being aghast, babled
against him certain barbarous and savage speeches of ^urious threatening, and
gave him such a weighty blow with his Club, that made Alector (who received
it upon his shield) to bow, his knee: but hastily getting up again, he
restored it him so fiercely with a blow of his sword, so rudely set upon his
human ha^h, which was his horsely shoulder that he discovered his sinews
with great dolor and effusion of blood: wherewith the monster cast forth a
cry so hidious that all the wood rang of it, and the wild beasts for fear
ran to hide themselves; and after that lift up his massy Club, and let drive a
lurdie blow sufficient to fell an Elephant. But Alector both light and nimble,
easily shunned his great stroke which fell in vain, and so rudely, that the
Centaure therewithal had his arm and hand astonned, so as with great pain
could he lift up his massy Club any more. The which Alector perceiving, with
his good sword cut off one of his hands hard by the joint, which fell to the
ground with his massy Club, which cauled the Centaure to cast forth a more
horrible cry than before: and seeing himself disarmed and dismembered, with
the fear which he had of the shining sword of Alector, turned his hinder
horsely parts, yerking out such strokes that the air seemed to sparkle with
fire. But the valiant Esquire prompt and quick to turn himself, shunning
always the blows; or else bearing off with his shield the furious yerkes of
his heels, stroke him overthwart in his yerkings with such a cutting blow,
that notwithstanding the hardness of his skin, and bruskled hairs, he cut a
sunder the sinews of his legs even to the discovery of his bones; which as
yet were whole. Which the Centaure dolefullie feeling, turned again his face,
and with great ire lept upon Alector, thinking to have beaten him down with
his forefeete. But the gentle Squire seeing so fair a mark, forgot not
himself, but with a thrust into his horsely breast pierced unto his human
heart. And so this byformed monster being stricken to death, fell down to the
earth with all his four feet, tumbling in his black blood, and giving up his
last cry, not altogether in human voice, nor altogether in horsly gneyng,
but mixed with both, like a man gnaying, or like a horse brutally speaking,
until such time as he was clean dead: and at that instant the Heavens began
so to power with Lightning, Thunder, and great Raines (which as I think were
the Devils carrying away the soul of this monster) that necessity constrained
my Lady Noemia and me, at the persuasion and assurance of Alector to retire
our selves into the hollow of the Rock which was the habitation of the
Centaure, where we entered in not without great fear, aghast at the merueilous
combat, and of the hardines and prowess of the valiant Squire who comforted
and assured us right humainely. And there within we found much Venison, and
diverse fruits of the wood, which we used that night for the present
necessity. And whiles they were eating, my Lady Noemia (in whose heart love
had already taken place by regard and admiration of the beautic, hardines,
prowess and graciousnes of this young Esquire, whom she beheld with great
admiration by the light of a most marvelous scabberd of his sword which he
carried, so clear in the night and in an obscure place, that it gave so much
light as a flaming brand;) demanded him, what good adventure had brought him
so happily for her deliverance? My fair Lady said Alector (who on his part
was no less attaint with the grace and beauty of Noemia, than she of his) I
know not well by what way I am come hither, more to my happiness than your
own: but this I am certain, that either by some Hyperborian wind, or
spirit, I have been since one month past, ravished upon the Septentrionall
Seas from the top of the wings of Durat Hippopotame the great swimming and
flying horse of my Father Franck-Gall, and carried by him over Lands and Seas
by many iournies, to the great discomfort and sorrow of my said Father, whom
I know searches me throughout the World, until at length this windy
spirit reposed me in a fair Garden of a Castle not far from hence: where a
young Damsel like you (but not so fair, and somewhat more aged) found me,
and understanding my name, mounted me on horseback, upon that condition that
I should follow you virto this wood, and give you aid if you needed the same.
For an old Witch the same morning had told her, that if you were not recovered
by Alector, you would be utterly lost. And that the first man which she found
called bv my name, she should without delay send after you. Now thus it is,
that I was no sooner reposed in the Garden, but the Spirit who had carried me
about so far, at his departure seemed to say to me after a whispering manner
in my left ear, entering into my brains these words following. Alector rise,
and go to save the snowie Hind
From monsters hands, then trudge Franck-Gall thy sire to find;
Who does thee seck, on lofty seas, ytost with many a wind.
And thereupon entered into the Garden a right godly Lady, fair, young and of
great grace, but notwithstanding sorrowful, and lamenting her own Cosen
Noemia, lately departed from the Castle of Greene-head, (for so was the place
named from whence I came) for the words which the old witch had told her. This
young dame thinking her self to be alone and vnproudied, finding me in the
garden which was closed on every side with high walls beyond the compass of
a ladder, was not a little abashed: but after assuring her self demanded of
me, who had let me in? What I was? And what I would have. And I answered, I
could not tell, Alector, a horse. She hearing this name of Alector, without
demanding me other thing, led me into ye Esquurie and gave me leave to choose
ye horse which pleased me best, upon the foresaid conditions. The which most
agreeably accepted, I chose this fair apple gray which you see, (now had he
because of the tempest put his horse under covert amongst the trees, which
Noemia and I incontinently knew to be the horse of my Lord Spathas. And we
understood that she who sent him after us, was my Lady Callirhoa of the
castle of Greene-head.) Continuing than his purpose, I chose (quoth he) this
fair apple gray who presently was sadled and bridled for me, and whiles that
he was making ready, the Lady of the Castle advertised me of a certain
monster. Thus being mounted, with leave taken of the Lady; I promised to
accomplish her commandment. And upon this horse ever since from that place,
(for my former iournies I could neiter mark norknow, no more than the way
which the bird makes in the air, the serpent on the ground, or the ship on
the sea) yea on this horse have I been brought hither without finding any man
by the way, or creature of whom I might ask news of you, which I desired to
know: but only that I met a little mule fearful and unbridled, which fled
through the wood right toward the castle, who notwithstanding at the sight of
my horse stayed a little and asked him (as I think) in the Caballistic
language some news of you. But the fantastical mule in his mulike speech
answered Hynha (I know not what it is) and suddenly departed, running with
bridle abated toward the Eastle from whence I was come: which gave me
suspicion that some trouble was happened unto you, and for that cause I hasted,
until by the cry of your Gentlewoman I turned the bridle, and by her having
understood your trouble, came presently to your succor, to accomplish my
promise, where I have done mine endeavor as you your self have seen.

You have done so much (quoth my Lady Noemia, who always had her eyes
fastened upon him in speaking) you have done so much and so valiently (O noble
Squire, deliverer of a ravished maiden) that I shall find my self eternally
bound to you: yea I my self, my brothers, and al their Gratian family,
confessing for this first and over little gratuitie toward you, that I have
neither in nor without me, a thing worthy and sufficient to recompense your
merit. What is your name, Madame (quoth Alector)? My name (quoth she) is
Noemia. Noemia, (quoth he) whosoever has given you this name, has not failed
conveniently and well to call you: for truly Noemia is as much to say, as
fair: and most fair are you, yea and more gracious. And for that you allege
not to have sufficient to recompense the pleasure and service which I have
done: not for this (which I confess to be little or nothing in respect of your
dignity) but for all the services and honors which I desire and pretend to do
for you in time to come, and for the great and unspeakable love which I bear
toward you, I require you Lady Noemia, and demand in recompense, a little of
that which abounds in you, that is of grace, virtue, mutual and irreuocable
love. For, to be loved, and eke to love,
The Gods you sent from Heaven above.
And this is the recompense which I desire, the which I pray you not to refuse,
unless you will see my blood mingled with the blood of this Centaure: whereof
perhaps you may afterward have so much sorrow for the less of so loy all a
friend, as presently you have joy of the slaughter of your rouishing enemy.

The Lady Noemia as yet young and simple, and one who never had heard so much
of love, at the words of this fair young Squire, sound her self clean
changed, moved, and chafed with the hears which she had never before felt;
and with trembling words answered him thus; My fair friend, albeit hither too I
have never felt nor known what love should be, whereof so much speech
proceeds: nevertheless now (I know not by what new transmutation) I feel
my self so changed, in flamed, and affectioned toward you, (I know not
whether it be that which we call Love or no) that I cannot will but what you
will: nor have pleasure or contentment in other but you; yea, as though I were
wholly transformed into you: whereby I esteem it the least duty which I can
or would do for you, to love you who love me, and has saved my life. Wherefore
with all my heart I grant you my love, wherein none other shall have place
during my life: yours I am by good right, and by your conquest; my body and my
life is in your power, and mine honor in your hands: which like a noble and
frank Gentleman (as you are) I beseech you to save.

Alector so joyful as might be, thanked her right affertuouslie, laying on her
kisses upon kisses, passing from the mouth to the heart, and (as the common
saying is, Fire goes into the oven through the mouth) enflaming more and more
the sparkles of this secret fire, laid together by pleasant touching with the
hand, lightened with the wind of gracious sighings, and frm time to time
renewed and sprinkled with the water of tears, distilling from their two
hearts, linked in the press of love. In such sort, that by contemplation of
that sweetness, (to tell the truth of that which I have sworn) it caused the
water stand in mine eyes, and through sorrow of being alone, I laid me down to
sleep upon a bed of leaves until the morning.

And therefore, as I would not know any thing of that which passed between
them, so do I know nothing: but that in my sleep (I know not whether I
dreamed or not) me thought I heard certain sweet complaints of my Lady,
entermixt with joy; where upon willing to arise and to go toward her, she
commanded me to sleep and take my rest: which willingly I did till the next
morning, that the Sun was alreadi high, and shined into the Cave; and at that
instant rising, I beheld this couple of fair young persons, which the Sun
discovered, lying face to face, and half embraced upon a great bed of moss,
which was (as I suppose) the Centaures bed. And as I beheld with great
pleasure my Lady Noemia, how she had gotten a new and higher color than
her natural whiteness, by her morning sleep. The horse who had no more
meat, began to gnay very loud, so that Alector lept up, and girded him with
his sword and shield, which were near him: and my Lady Noemia arose also, who
beholding me, became all read and shamefast, for having (as I think) slept so
long.

Then Alector, after that he had given her the Good morrow, with a gracious
accolade and amorous kiss, mounted upon his horse, setting her before him, as
light as a young Goat, and I mounted behind him upon the strong gray nagge,
on whom these three young bodies full of youthful courage, weighed no more than
one only man: and so we returned toward the way to Orb, where by the way
we found the dead body of Floridas, which we mounted upon the branches of
a tree, to the end the Wolves and other savage beasts should not devour it,
and his gelting feeding with the hackney of my Lady: upon whom she mounted,
and I on the gelding of Floridas, and so returned we to Orb into the
Gratians house, where we sound the whele householde all troubled and vexed
with sorrow, for the death of Floridas and for the loss of my Lady Noemia:
whom they accounted for certain lost, and my self with her which was the
lesser damage. Whereupon they seeing us return whole and sound, at the first
they were abashed, but their abashment was soon turned into joy and
gratulation, chiefly toward Alector of whom they had by me understood the
noblesse, valor, prowess, and honesty, the desperate rescue of their sister,
and the slaughter of the monstrous Centaure. Whereof to be more certain they
sent to fetch the body of Floridas their bastard brother, to the end he might
be honorably buried (as afterward they did) and the body of the Centaure to
have proof of mysaying, as also for pleasure of the sight and vengeance. The
which byformed body was brought in a chariot with four wheels and four
horses, so great, so monstrous, and so to be wondered at, that the beasts of
the wood durst not approach, and the men of the town scarce behold. The which
monster after they had made show thereof to all the people wondering thereat,
they caused it to be fleed, and the skin to be stuffed with many sweet and
dry herbs, and set it with the foresaid massy Club upon one of the gates of
the house, where it seems to be yet alive, and to defend the entry, with
looks so hidious and threatening, that as yet may be seen: to the great honor
and praise of the vanquisher that has destroyed such a Devil, the which is
Alector here present: to whom the brothers Gratians in acknowledge of benefit
done to their sister, offered and abandoned their house and all that was
therein: which Alector accepted most agreeably for the love of my Lady Noemia,
whom he loved right te^derlie, and whom oftentimes he came to visit, cherish,
and make honest love, without villainy, dishonor, or passing (to my knowledge)
the girdle. If there be any other forfeit, either true, or by false accusation
intended, whereby so much evil has preoceeded, I protest to know no more
than that which I have already spoken. And therewithal she hild her peace.

Consultation upon the criminal process of Alector. The commandment of the
Oracle by the Archter. The slaughter of the Prophet Calliste, which was cause
of the devouring Serpent in the Theater. Capital sentence prenounced upon
Alector, that he should be delivered to the Serpent. CAP. 4.
DIocles after he had paused a while upon all these foresaid things, alleged,
and approved, retired himself into the Counsel chamber, with the principal
of the bench, where the matter was diversely discoursed, some co^senting to the
absolution of Alector, as one that was not conninced of any other crime than of
amorous youth, and of worthy act in defense of his body: others, chiefly the
old men, and such as had daughters mariageable in their houses; and to whom
as much hong in their eye, said that it was an evil example against good
manners, and a great presumption of domestical rape, deserving (at the least)
punishment, if they did but proceed according to his own confession. And were
it but the homicide of so many men stain by contumace rebellion of not obaying
to Justice, he was culpable of death. But other unwilling to condemn him to
death, gave sentence that he should be chastened with some ignominious and
corporal pain, with banishment. And as these diverse opinions were in question
and the Judge Diocles waying the one with the other, behold one of the Ministers
of the temple, Deacon to the Archier, that is to say to the chief Priest and
Prince of the Priests of Jove his temple, the great and foueraigne God of Orb,
came from the said Archier named in his proper name Croniel; to speak secretly
to the Potentate Diocles. Which done he suddenly departed: for it is not
permitted to such holy men, to assist in capital judgment. The Deacon being
departed, Diocles spoke to those of the Bench, and said; My Lords, the Archier
of the Temple of Jove, the holy man Croniel has sent me word presently, that
he by revelation which is come to him this last night in watching and praying
in the Temple for the prosperous estate of our Common wealth, was commanded by
an Angel of Sovereign Jove, to advertise and defend us from giving capital
sentence upon this young stranger, other than that which is ordained by Jove
himself; that is, to put him into the Threatre of the Sands, only with his
shield, sword, and an arrow without a bow, to fight with the great Serpent of
the Sands, so to make proof of his innocence if he vanquish, or to suffer
pain for his offense if he be overcome. This divine sentence was allowed of
all, yea of the most rigorous, who thought he should never escape the force,
teeth, and venim of the Serpent, and so should he give pleasure to the people,
and spare one of their own men: the most just hoping nevertheless, that he
who had discomfited the biformed Centaure would deal well enough with the
Serpent, and so deliver the Theater and Town of a cruel beast, and inward
enemy.

Now is it to be understood that certain years before the Archier Croniel,
there was in the Temple another Archier called Calliste, a man of great virtue,
holy, and a Prophet; who in the festival days when the people assembled
themselves at the spectacles in the Theater or at the Sands, he would come into
the mids of the people, and openly and eagerly reprove them of their usual
vices, and prophecy unto them, that of the just blood shed, the earth should
bring forth a terrible and cruel revenger, who should devour their entrails,
until such time as the twice borne child coming from toward the Pol-Artick,
delivered them thereof. Thus did this holy man go erving through the Theater
and the Sand, so as he hindered the plays, comedies, spectacles, and other
public pastimes: insomuch that one day, the people provoked by commotion and
populous fury, with casting of stones chased him under a gutter or sink of
the Theater, and therein stoned him, leaving his body in the filth: which
notwithstanding the next day (after the populous fury passed) was drawn out
by the Ministers of the Temple, and honorably buried in the entry of the
Gutter where he was stain, in a sepulcher of black marble highly crected,
with his Prophecy written therein: which stopped up the mouth of the gutter.
Nevertheless, it hid not so close the murder of this holy man, but within one
year and a day after, an horrible revenge of that fact publicly appeared:
for as the people in great multitudes were assembled to behold the dancing of
an Elephant, behold from between the gutter stones and the sepulcher, issued
out a most horrible serpent, who flying upon the people, with his tail and
throat destroyed a great number, the residue with terrible fear running out
of the Theater: which thing every 3. day he used to execute on the people,
who by no engine or humane force could find remedy, yea he would spoil them
in their houses: until at length they were advised every week to give him 2.
capital offenders, whom presently he would carry into the gutter, and hold
himself therewith content. Then understood the people that the Prophecte of
the Archier Calliste was pattly fulsilled, but not wholly at an end.

Two dairs after the process of Alector, was the time to give the Serpent his
proye: wherefore the great Potentate Diocles coming out of the Counsel and
the Benchers standing about him, and he himself set in the justice seat, and
Alector being presented unto him, thus pronounced sentence; The present
appointed cause in the criminal accusation of the Gratians against Alector,
"being obscure and doubtful as well on the one part, as the other, to the
judgment of men, is now by heavenly Oracle sent to the divine judgment who
shall condemn his fault by death or show his innocence up victory; at the
proof of combat against the Auenger Serpent of the Theater in the plain of
the Sands, only with his sword, shield, and an arrowe without a bow."
Whereunto we will send him within three days at the furthess. This sentence
pronounced, was right well allowed and received of all the assistance (who
demanded not the death of this young Esquire, but bore him secret favor, in
hope of some merueilous adventure of the combat, as it came after to pass) as
also of the two parties. For the Gratians thought verily that their offender
should incontinently be swallowed up of the most horrible Serpent, who only
with his venomous breath did slaie those who approached him. Alector on the
other side trusting in his hardines, legeritie; and promise, demanded nothing
but that the third day were come, and enquired after if his sword and shield
were safe? To whom it was answered, that he should not care, but that they
should be delivered him the day of the Combat. Wherewithal he wonderfully
rejoiced, and thanked the Potentate of his clemency, to the great abashment of
all the people, who meruelled to see him so assured in such a mortal and
present peril. And so by commandment he was carried back to the lodging of
the Captain Palatine to be kept in his guarde, where without ceasing he
lamented his Lady Noemia, speaking to her as though she had been present, and
promising her revenge. And in this his great complaint which every night from
three hours to three hours he awaked, he would cry out with a loud veice
O Noemia, O Noemia, O Noemia! and reclayming incessantly the Sun to advance
the day and time of his Combat against the Serpent, whereof his care was so
small, as the thought was great how to find out the murdering Arther of his
Noemia; so remained he there for that time. During the which, the sovereign
and most just Judge Diocles caused diligent and secret inquiry to be made to
know who it was, which in that tumult shot the arrowe, wherewith the fair,
gracious, and virtuous Noemia was so accursedlie slain: wherewith, all in
general were sad and sorrowful. For in the death of this noble Maiden, was
buried the flower of beauty, and grace of all the Maidens of the City of
Orb: for the which cause she was deplored, bewailed and lameueet in common
dueil, all the people with one voice crying vengeance and penal justice of the
murderer. But for all the diligent inquiry that could be made, nothing could
be found, saving a light presumption and suspicion of a young springall called
Coracton, who had sometime greatly wooed her, and of her had gotten naught but
a conquest of refusal, for the vicious nature which abounded in him: but this
presumption was not sufficient, chiefly because at her burying, this gallant
mourned above all the rest: msomuch that with force of tears, he washed away
all suspicion. The Judge perceiving he could find no other thing, went
himself in person, (before she was permitted to be buried) to see the body
of the fair Noemia, lying (before the pillar of the 3. Charites) with such
grace (albeit dead) that she seemed sweetly to sleep, more whiter than her
snowie garments purplesied in blood: wherewithal he himself (being a most
severe man) was moved to tears, and commanded the bloody arrowe to be
delivered him, the which after he had beheld it, lift it up aloft, demanding
if no man knew it: but no answer would be given. And lifting up his eyes, he
beheld the Charites of alabastre, and saw that from their slonie eyes distilled
abundance of tears, lamenting the death of their fourth sister: which he
showed unto the people, who of such a miracle began to weep, and cry
vengeance for the fact. And amongst these enterprises, Diocles advised between
the hands of two Charites a little scroll, rolled up, the which he secretly
took without the knowledge of any man, and after he had read it, he closed it
in his hand with the arrowe, and retired to his lodging, giving leave to bury
the dead body, which in open mourning was enterred before the statues of the
3. Graces, with the enscription of the Epitaph, as has been before declared.
And the sepulcher was covered with flowers and perfumes, strowed by the people
in lamentation of the fair Noemia.

The revelation by night to Croniel Archier. The arrival of Franc-Gal. The
foretelling of the black Bird The mortal perrill of the Archier by a
Lioness, slain by Franc-Gall. The reincountrie and assembly of the Archier
and Franc-Gall, with their deplorations. CAP. 5.
THE evening of that self same day, the Archier Croniel being in the Temple
at his nosturnall meditations, as every night before he was accustomed to do:
he received a certain inward intelligence, that the next day after noone he
should go toward the sea side, by keeping the way of the sepulcher of
Thanais, and that hard by he should find a man who should save his life, him
he should bring and lodge in his house, and of him should he learn much.
Croniel the next morning after sacrifice and dinner, took his bow and quiver,
to pass the time at shooting and chasing of beasts and birds in the field:
(for seldom or never went he to the plays at the Theater, by the occasion of
his predecessor) and taking with him same vinualls and a little wine (if so he
should noode it) and so set forwards on the way toward the sea by the way of
Portune, to seek out the beasts and birds of the field.

Now the same morning was arrived at the next Port the magnanimous Prince
Franc-Gal Dysir Macrobe, and his men upon a great Hippopotame, being a huge and
merueilous sea horse, swimming and Hying upon the waters and floods, with the
feet of Polype and wings called Durar. This Franc-Gall through seas and lands
went seeking his son Alector, who on the Septentrion seas was ravished and
carried from him by a horrible wind, The whole process hereof is showen in the
21 Cap
he knew not whether, and (by fortune having taken land at the next haven) with
his only page, held the high way to the great City of Orb, where appeared to
him a black bird, like a raven, but somewhat of lesser body, with beacke and
clees red; who flying before him from tree to tree seemed to sing in humane
voice these words following. Come with me, come, come, come,
thou shall go to the Sands:
Where thou shall find thy Son,
come with me, come, come, come.
For I a Prophet am
whom thou no more shall see,
Come with me, come, come, come,
thou shall go to the Sands.


Franc-Gall hearkening to her and taking her song for an Augurie, followed her
always until she was flowen very far of, and reposed her self upon a high
tree attending him. But the Archier Croniel who was under the tree, seeing the
foul at a fair advantage, bent his bow, thinking to let fly an artowe to
have killed her: but as he was taking his mark with eager leuelling, behold a
Lioness issued out of an old ruined cave which was hard by (where she
nourished her young) and fair and softly came stealing to assail the poor
Archier, who gave no been at all saving to his aforesaid mark: and therewithal
had strangled and carried him to her young, had not Franc-Gal (who was not sarre
off) presently advanced himself to the succeur of the poor Archier with his
sword in his hand, and the shield of azure with the Senue of gold in
readiness. The Beast hearing the brute of the sounding harness (for Franc-Gal
was armed) and the great noise which he made in crying, turned fiercely
against him, and cast her mighty paws upon his shield, with such a force that
she plucked it out of his hand: but Franc-Gal so puissant as a Giant, gave her
overthwart the sides such a stroke with his sword, that he cut her body in two
pieces; wherewithal the beast dying gave out such an horrible cry that two of
her whelps (so young that scarce they could creep) issued out of the ruined
cave, crying after their Dam. Franc-Gal seeing them said that of an evil beast
no young ought to be left, and for that cause flewe them both, and in terror of
others (after the manner of Aphricke) hung them up by the tails upon a tree,
with the moities of the body of their Dam, to the great astonishing of the
Archier: who being relieved out of the sudden fear which he had by reason of
the Beasts claws, greatly meruailed of this ready, sudden, and unlooked
for help and succor, and of the valiauncie of this fair old man: for the
which he thanked him right heartelie, knowing for a certain, that it was he
which by the nighthe reuclation was showed him, should save his life. And for
that cause demanded him, what good fortune had brought him so happily to his
rescue from the death, and what he sought in those Countries? (for by his
personage, arms and habit, he knew him to be a stranger) and promising him all
aid and succor, in any thing wherein be might serve him.

I am come hither (quoth Franc-Gal) by following the augurie of a Bird,
prognosticating to me, that she would conduct me to the Sands at Orb: but
thou, by seeking to kill her, have caused me to lose her; not regarding or
taking heed thy self of the fierce and savage beast which was behind ready
to devour thee, whiles thou soughtest to eutrap and slay my guide: which may
be an example, that oftentimes he which is a murderer in will, is murdered
himself in deed, the taker taken, and the ender brought to an end.

It is truth (quoth the Archier) and I acknowledge it, and I confess that
without thy succor I had been dead: for the which most heartelie I thank
thee; and in recompense of chasing away thy Bird which conducted thee, I
promise thee by the faith of an honest man, to lead thee whether thou would
go, and to aid thee in what I may, tell me only whether thou meanest to
go. I pretend (quoth Franc-Gall) to go to the Sands at Orb, there to find
my fair and young son Alector, being well brought up, and a valiant Squire:
whom the wind ravished and transported from me being upon the Septentrion
seas, whom I shall never see again, (alas) as the song of this auguring Bird
has presaged me. Notwithstanding without him, I neither can nor will live any
longer; and therewithal Franc-Gall cast out great sighs from the bottom of
his heart) for with him he has carried away my soul and life, as I have
foreseen in my dream in Scythia upon the Lions skins. O fair child! O
marvelous infant! fatallie engendered, twice borne, supernaturallie nourished,
grown up before the time, wise before age, strong above nature, hardy beyond
humanity, adtienturouslie fortuned, feared of the wicked, beloved of the good,
yea of spirits: who by iealouzie (as I think) have ravished and carried thee
I know not whether. Must I for so small and brief a time of enjoying the
presence of thine amiable person, so long suffer the absence of thee, that
after my long and tedious peregrination heretofore spent, I must now again
trauerse the world to seek thee, in fear and doubt whether ever to find thee?
And at this word, the bloody tears departing from the depth of his heart
enterrupted his speech, insomuch that he remained a little space in silence,
and afterward to begin his doleful speech again in this manner, turning
himself to the Archier. And therefore my friend Archier, I tell thee this,
that I have lost a Son called Alector, engendered of Priscaraxe Queen of
Tartarie, one of the wisest and fairest Dames vnderthe Heavens of the Moon;
whom I love, and desire to see again, (for I have not seen her in more than
eight years) neither is it lawful for me to return (by reason of an oath
which I have taken before her) without bringing her son made Knight, either
by my hand, or by the hand of some other. For the accomplishing whereof I have
already assayed, but always failed, yea and have found my self impotent and
forlorn of my members and tongue in going about it: the cause thereof I cannot
imagine, unless the Fates have ordained that his Knighthood shall he given
him by some other hand and not by mine, the sovereign grant it may be of a
better.

God grant it (quoth the Archier) but what are these Fates and Destinies
whereof thou speak? are they any puissances of Fortune? (which is nothing
as I think) No, no (quoth Franc-Gall) I call the infaileable and immutable
ordinances of sovereign God that rules al with his providence, Fates. It is
right well spoken, and most worthelie understood (quoth the Archier) and so
thou see it is not the will ordained by the Sovereign that he shall be made
Knight by thy hand, it is to be understood, that it is reserved for a better,
without contrarying or being angry therewith.

No more do I quoth Franc-Gall, neither am I sorrowful, but for that I cannot
find my Son Ale^ without whom I cannot return to the Queen Priscaraxe his
mother, neither can he without me by sworn promise, which I doubt me can
never be accomplished of either of us, as my heart gives me; remembering the
presages, oracies, visions and dreams, which have given me such significating.
And hereupon, with grievous sighing he held his peace. Which caused the
Archier to imagine, that the fair Esquier, which he understood was condemned
to fight with the Serpent of the Sands, might well he the Son, which this
fair old man went searchng and sorrowing for: and therefore he said unto him;
Thou strange man consolate thy spirit, for I hope to show thee to morrow him
whom thou demandest. Then Franc-Gall reviving out of his deep thought, cast out
a great sigh saying; And shall I then find Alector carried away by the winds,
which can not be followed? Yea: but I shall never see him again, for which I
must die and end my peregrination, rendering the fire, the light, and vigor of
my life, to him of whom I have received it, by a termination of life which is
called death, most terrible and fearful of all things: the which is near and
imminent to me, as I see and perceive in my self. For to every man is given
diuinelie to foresee that which is to come, thieflie when he approaches to the
end of his life, when the spirit is more nigh himself, and less wrapped in
terrestrial things, whereby he sees and understands more cleetelie and
purelie: for such is the will of the divine providence, to the end man be not
taken unprovided, and die beastly.

Art thou then God quoth the Archier, to know the things which are to come?
God I am not quoth he, but man, to whom God has given long life, experience,
science of the stars, interpretation of auguries, and knowledge of my nigh
end, as the divine Fates have ordemed, my spirit prognosticated, the oracles
foreshowen me, and the Prophecies foretold me. What other thing did the dream
of my heart carried away by the flying Basitisque presage me? the oracle of the
marinall man Proteus, foretelling my departure without return? the vision of
the wicked crow at Tangut? of the stockdoue? of the crane? and of the vultur?
the raven resting upon my head? the mortal threatening of the spirit of
Gallehault, and the song of this lost black bird? Now see I well then my fatal
hour to be instane, and that I must away: let us therefore, O Archier my
friend, be going; and conduct me according to thy promise, to the Sands of
Orb, where I shall find my life, my death, or both. And so they put
themselves upon the way, the page of Franc-Gall following them. And in going,
the Archier, who (by signs and conjectures, but chiefly by the nightly
revelation, and diuiue commanundement to come and find this stranger,
preserver of his life) knew well the next day to show him the fair Squire,
combattor of the Serpent, and to present him for his son, that he might know
more cokens of the matter, thus began his speech.

The devise of the two old men Croniel and Franc-Gall, held upon the way
going toward the City of Orb. CAP. 6.
O Stranger my friend, quoth the Archier, thou speak so obscurelie, and thy
talk so entermingled with destomachall sobbes, deep sighs, and sudden
mutations, with confusion and mingling together of Prophecies, Fates, Oracles,
and Miracles, that I cannot well understand the discourse of thy far and
vagrant peregrination searching thy son whom thou call Alector, carried
away (if it be credible) by the winds: unless thou bring forth the beginning
and first causes of this adventure, when, and in what place, and how thou have
lost thy Son, what he is, and what thou art, of what Nation and quality; for
to my judgment thou seem not to be a man of servile or base condition, but
rather a frank and liberal Gentleman, as full well thou have given me to
understand at our first meeting: wherefore I beseech thee of courtesy disdain
not to reckon unto me thy fortune, and thy dear Son Alectors, from the
beginning to the end, clearly and patiently without confusion or interruption
of complaints. That quoth Franc-Gall, can I not well do my friend Archier;
for, as from the aier moved by tempest troublesome winds do blow, great
showers of rain fall, and thunder claps issue; even so from a tormented heart
can naught proceed but sobbes, naught distill but tears, naught descend but
weepings and waylings. Moreover the time lets me, yea and the desire also
which I have of going to the place whereof the bird sang, will not permit me to
do it, upon whose tune nevertheless I know not what to coitiecture it is so
ambiguous, and seems so conerarie in it self.

And for this cause, quoth the Archicr, ought thou less to ^efer the
narration to me of thy facts, affairs, and adventures, whereof I hope to give
thee some good counsel and comfort after I shall well understand them. And for
that the way to the Sands (whereto thou pretendest to go) is not so short as
peradventure it seems to be, but long enough from hence (as I may tell thee)
for us specially who are already old and heavy by age, or rather destitute
of the lively fir^ which heretofore has sustained us quick and nimble, who
now go gravely and heauely: the length of the time and way will suffice thee
to reckon, and me to give care to thy former fortunes: whereof (as God love me)
I have dolor and compassion with thee: for being a man I esteem no humane
thing, but that it may touch me. I heartely thank thee of thine humanity
quoth Franc-Gall, but by how much thy compassion should be consolatorie unto me,
by so much should the commemoration thereof be ^oiefull: and therefore it is
better for me with science to keep my profound dolor in my transpierced
heart; than by uttering my misaduentures to renew my former griefs. No no,
quoth the Archier, thou must not do so, but to the concrarie solace thy beauie
heart, by revealing thy grief to him, who without feeling it will lighten thee
of the one haife, yea peradventure of the whole. And therefore discharge thy
body of thy harness and mantle, by giving it to thy page, and thy heart of thy
passions by communicating of them to me (being a stranger, yet notwithstanding
a man): and so shall thou do thy self pleasure, and accomplish my desire; and
thou eke by accompting it, and I by the hearing thereof, shall abridge and
shorten the length of our way, and forget our weariness: for as the common
proverb goes, In travel, talk without reproach,
Is better than a tottering coach.


Ha old companion quoth Franc-Gal, I feel that already to be true in me which
thou have said: for thy human speeches do inuit me to ease my heart, in
vomiting the remembrance of my diverse adventures, as well good as evil, with
my present deliberations, and the sweet conceits of my hope to come, which
among other things do promise comfort and counsel of thee. And therefore now
will I take as great solace and pleasure to discover to thee my fortunes, as
thou have had curious desire to enquire them of me: hearken therefore as we
go leasurely, and thou shall hear meruailes. Begin then peaceably, quoth the
Archier, and I will willingly give attentive heed thereunto.

Then Franc-Gal put off his purple mantle whose cape was of cloth of gold
enriched with a great and celestial Saphir, and took off from his neck his
shield carrying upon Azure a Son of gold, and his helmet from his head,
whereof only before he had but lifted up the visor, giving it all to his page
who followed him, being a young and lusty man called Oplophor. And so remained
Franc-Gall, only in his single corslet, great and straight, his body being of
a fair and upright stature, exceeding the common form of men, and lifting up
a head already half balde what with age and bearing of his helmet, his hairs
white and his heard siluered, long, and wreathed like the streams of a swift
brook, his visage fair, and being open, full of redoubtable serenitie, with a
gracious dignity, admirable to all the beholders, chiefly to the old
Archier, who seeing him openly, esteemed in his heart never among mortal men
to have seen a more fair creapure; saving that the serenctie of his face was
somewhat troubled with a cloud of inward grief, yielding forth gross tears,
which distilled down his white beard: which thing the Archier apperceiuing,
said unto him after this manner; Noble Lord, for so thy apparaunce does
declare, leave I beseech thee these lamentations to women and children, and to
soft and effeminated men, and reckon constantly to us thine adventures: for
unto a man of such a personage, as I see thou art, armor is more seemly than
tears. Thou say truth quoth Franc-Gall, and speak like a wise man, and of
a high affair: and for that cause will I suppress my passions, and in
proceeding on our way, account unto thee mine actions; and therefore give ear.
That will I do (quoth the old Archier) saving (under thy correction) I will
now and then make some short and interlocutorious demands upon such points,
wherein I shall perceive a more plainer intelligence, to be better than a
simple narration. Right willingly, quoth Franc-Gall, for by that means I
shall have leisure to breath in my going and speaking; and our talk shall be
more gracious being altered, than continued; and the matter better remembered and
understood. And therefore I pray thee fear not to enteriect incidences, and
break my talk, where thou shall see thy self not fully satisfied. And now
behold, I begin my history.

A narration of the ancient Tower of the three fatal Sisters, and of their
old Mother Lady Anange. CAP. 7.
THere is in the World a certain long way, (...), and little frequented, by
reason of the sharp, blind, and hard keeping thereof: the which way
notwithstanding leads to the most ancient Temple of the Sovereign. And by
which, the renowned King Perseforest took (...) of the architecture of that
p^relesse Temple, dedicated to sovereign Jehovah, which he erected and
edificated in the diabolical forest of Darmant, to these and extermine the
wicked spirits, who at that time kept their habitation in those solitary
forests; and to give address to wandering Knights, who in those pathlesse woods
^pentsearching strange adventures. At the ^ie of which way, leading toward
the foresaid sovereign Temple, was a most ancient round Tower, builded before
the memory of man: whose foundations were (...) deeply hidden, even unto the
bottomless pitts, and there under a most horrible Barathre or prison of
accursed and wicked creatures. But the top thereof was so highly elevated, that
it seemed to exceed the heavens, and whereunto no earthly eye (were it ever so
sharp) could ever attain: only three fair and ample stages might be
perceived, garnished with great and mighty porches, engraven and figured with
infinite images, and shadowed with diverse and sundry colors, mettalls, and
precious stones of exceeding splendour: and for the rest vnprohibited to all
people, with open gates and clear windows. Within these three Stages were
dwelling three Fates, Sisters germans, and daughters to a high, puissant and
ancient Lady called Anange, resident (as it is said, and held for certain)
on the highest top of that Tower. (...) her in the first Stage, her wor^ her
(...) and first fatal Sister called Cleronome, was (...). (...) Stage another
fatal Sister (...) Zodore (...) and in the last and lowest (...) the (...)
fatal Sister, who had to her proper name Termame (...). Thus were these three
fatal Sisters germans (...), resident with their train in the three pa^s
(...) ^ent Tower, so well contrived and near together, that ^selie they might
enter the one into the other: but (...) all ruled their ancient mother Anange.

Upon this point, the old Archier began to reply in this sort: It is a
common proverb (quoth he) that a good lier must have a good memory, least by
forgetting his first talk he contrary himself in his last. Wherefore (...)
take heed that in the beginning of thy process, the be not found by thy
forgetfulness a liar, which (...) I can hardly bear withal. Remember (...)
thou toldest me that the foundations of the Tower ^of thou speak, are so
low as the obscure depths, where the eye of mortal man never penetrateth, and
that the top thereof by his immensall height, does (...) the (...) of our
human sight: how then comes it to pass, that the depth of this Tower and
the things there (...) are known amongst men? and how is it evident that on
the top thereof the ancient Lady whom the call Anange, mother to the three
sisters inhabiting in the foresaid three palaces is there resident, seeing thou
have said the excell^ude of the Tower is not to be comprehended with the eye
of man? whereby it feemeth, that either thou do guess thereof by imagination;
or else that thou know it by reuealation.

Therein thou failest not (quoth Franc-Gall) for partly I have known it by
clear and true reuealation by a Calodaimon very familiar with me, who
assisteth me in all things, and oftentimes rauisheth my spirit out of my body,
carrying it into far and strange places, and showing me merueilous things,
which no man can tell unless he had been there present: whereof (being returned
again to my self) I have good remembrance, and I have reported that which
afterward has been found veritable. And thereby it happened, that one day
being at the foot of this Tower, contemplating the marvelous workmanship
thereof, and reasoning with my self that according to the exceeding height of
it, belonged necessarily a foundation of terrible depth: whiles I was overcome
with this consideration, behold from a part of Heaven came flying toward me a
white feathered Bird, with her beak and legs so red as fair coral, her eyes
of the color of fire, flaming in show like two precious carbuncles: who in
kissing wise came and put her beak into my mouth, wherewith by an occult
virtue she drew my spirit unto her, leaving my body in the mean time gasping
and panting much like to one in a trance. And so having elevated my spirit
unto the lower Region of the aier, not by flight upwards, but as it were
turning and going round about all the climates of the world (like those who by
often winding clime the rude and high mountains) until it was eleuate right
toward the North over an Island called Ireland, where suddenly this Bird left
me, and let me fall shooting like a tempest into this Isle, in a great hole
or well right deep: where in the midst of the darkness, by a little
glittering of a sulphurian light, I perceived the depth of this round Tower,
abased even from the superficialitie of the earth unto the point centrique or
centure of the same: and below a Barathre or eternal prison, where by the
infernal obscurity I could see nothing but darkness dispearsed upon the face
of the depths: but well might I hear horrible cries, and fearful hurlings
mingled with plaints and groans like to men tormented, and furious enraged
beasts fighting amongst themselves, throwing and biting one another in extreme
rage. Whereupon through great fear I leaped out afright so rudely, that I
mounted out into the clear light: where the forenamed white bird (which in
truth was my Calodaimon) came and took me, demanding me saying; Franc-Gal
have thou seen that which thou desire? Yea, yea, quoth I, and heard fearful
cries which caused me to retire: but I knew not what it should be, unless it
be the eternal prison of the wicked Giants Triphon and Briaro, with their
accomplices and followers, who were not afraid to set themselves against the
Sovereign: upon whom (being cast down and desolated) the mountains and
great rocks, which are the foundations of the ancient Tower which thou did
behold, have been thrown: the which oftentimes they shake and cause to tremble
by the impatience of intolerable pains, in shaking sometimes the foundations
by the abundance of water cast and thrown out by their conduct, and other
whiles by the impetuositie of the winds coming from their despitefull
sighings: and sometime by the violence of the fire coming out of their throat,
and by the inflamed vapor of forceable ire and outrageous wrath. Nevertheless
for all their forces they shall never bring it to ruin, nor cast it down,
neither shall they be discharged or come out of this tenebrous prison, unless
the infinite bounty of the vanquisher surmount the obstinate malice of the
vanquished, who neither hope nor desire it, but obstinately please themselves
with their pains, as the cursed serpents feed themselves with their own
venime: and therefore let us leave them in their eternal miseries. In saying
thus, he carried me up so high, that having the elements and planets under my
feet, I found my self above the Tower, wherein I beheld in great sublimitie
upon the pomell of the top thereof this old Lady, which my Calodaimon told
me was Anange mother of the three Sisters: and having intentiuely considered
her estate and puissance, in a moment I descended into my body, and being
come to my self, I remembered well the marvelous things that I had seen, and
such as I have accounted to thee in truth.

That which thou have accounted quoth the Archier, is wonderful, yet
nevertheless seeming true and credible in mine opinion: for me very same or
the like not long since has been heard of in this Region, by a marvelous and
supernatural adventure.

What is that I pray thee, quoth Franc-Gall? that I I pass no (...) in my
narration, before I have understood of thee the example serving for the
confirmation of my speech; which will cause thee more easily to give credit to
the rest. Therefore I beseech thee to tell it me, and I will give thee good
audience.

I am ^ght well content, quoth the Archier, so that the whiles thou remember
the point where thou leauest, of the old Lady Anange sitting upon the pomell
of the Tower: and therefore now take thy rest a while, and I by manner of
interlecutorie respiration will reckon to thee a thing convenient to the
narration of thy ectasticall vision and rauishment of thy spirit to the depth
and top of the Tower.

Of the love of Mammon toward the saire Lady Thanais, of her ensircement,
poisoning, and death. CAP. 8.
IN the prime of my youth, (about 470. years passed) I being of the age of
knowledge, as it were 49. years; there came into these parts an unknown man,
ill shaped and black like to an Ethiopian, nevertheless very rich in
silver, gold, precious stones, and other mettalls, and for the rest, of a
great and subtle spirit, and exceeding well learned in every science far
above all other that he met. This man having taken his dwelling in the City of
Orb, (whereto we are now going) and there (by reason of the store of money
that he possessed, and for that the Town (by means of the Sea near adjacent,
and of the rivers, ports and passages thereto adjoining) is very commodious for
a place of merchandise) he held and hoar the state of a merchant and Banquer.
Of what merchandise quoth Franc-Gall, made he his traffic? He was said the
Archier, a temporal merchant: for he sold for time by count and measure. So
this temporal Merchant called Mammon, holding a famous Banque in Orb, became
amorous of a right fair and most renowned Maiden, of one of the richest and
noblest houses in the City, which Maiden was called Thanais. This fair Mammon
being thus taken with the love of Thanais, began to court her evil
fauouredlie enough, and more imperiously than graciously, by vanting of
himself, ostentation of his great riches and cunning, and with dispraysing and
blaming of all others, chiefly of the virtuous: besides that, he sought to
allure her by rich gifts and presents, of gold, of gemmes, rings and jewels,
(although by nature he was very covetous) but above all with most fair and
ample promises. But the Maiden, to whom these proud brauados were
intolerable, and who had perhaps lodged her heart in some higher place,
rejected all his presents, refused his offers, shunned his encountrie, and
would give no ear to his proud words; as one whom she hated as much as he
desired her, both for his improbous and ungracious behavior, and for his
displeasant gesture. Whereupon, being advertised by one of her Morian slaves,
that she was accustomed every morning so soon as she rose, to go half
unclothed with her hair hanging down, to take the air in the garden, to
refresh and wash her self and visage, in the siluered streams of the
fountain, which ranue through the same: he (for a certain peer of money, and
promise of redemption out of bondage, and setting at liberty of this her
Morian slave) was by her let in to the garden; where he hid himself in a
thick Arbor till the morning, that his desired Thanais should come: who
according to her accustomed manner failed not. Then he from his embushment
seeing this fair young creature coming, covered with a single peticote of
light satin, and abating the deawe with her bare feet whiter than Alabaster,
her fair arms (naked and beautefied with lively whitenes) being discovered:
her breasts (borne out with two apples of yuorie, or pappes of the same
color) lying open; her head lightly trussed up with a fair and white
kerchiefe of fine linen, behind the which one might behold her golden hairs,
whereof one part untrussed hong down over her neck and shoulders, and another
part frisseled and curled descended wauing over her clear eyes, like two
pieces of silver newly forged, which being somewhat aggrauated with overmuch
sleep, and seeming as yet never stricken with love, made them have the greater
grace. Mammon out of his embushment perceiving such divine humanity, with
pain should he desist or defer his joys from running to embrace her:
notwithstanding love which in his first mouements is never without fear,
defended him, and withheld him, till such time as Thanais without espying him
was arrived at the fountain: where (as she was beholding in the reuerberant
clearenesse of the Water, the flower of her fair youth, making her self
ready to wash her eyes, hands, and vermilion lips) suddenly behold Mammon
(coming out of his den) threw himself unawares upon her with opened arms,
speaking to her as amorously as he could, and presented unto her with humble
suits, and affectuous requests, both his goods and person; adjoining to his
prayers, threatenings and outrages: in such sort that seeing her obstinate
refusal, her turning away of her visage, and her repulsing of him away with
her arms, with a furious heat which inflamed him, he assaied to force her,
and to ravish her of that by violence, which otherwise he could not obtain by
love, hope of promises, nor fear of threate nings. The silly Marden trembling
with fear, seeing her body and honor in danger by the assault of this
furious man, cast forth a loud cry, calling to her aid two brothers which
she had, young and brave men, inhabiting next to the garden: who understanding
the fearful voice of their well-beloved Sister, suddenly went forth in arms,
with a company of servants well provided. Whom Mammon seeing coming toward
him with terrible fury, knew right well, that it was not very sure for him to
remain there. Whereupon mortal fear so adjoined lvinges to his light
heels, that by a lively course he leaped over the wall, and saved himself by
swiftness, and escaped the hands of her brethren seekers of revenge: who
having lost the rauisher, took their woeful Sister, and consolating her with
assurance, led her into the chamber, to revive her afrighted spirits.

Mammon thus escaped from their hands, found himself merueilously confounded
and troubled with the obstinate refusal and proud disdain (as he thought) of
his well-beloved Thanais: whereby nevertheless his ardant love was nothing at
all cooled or diminished, but contrariwise, more enflamed and augmented. For
even as a Cannon shot striking against a rock or hard wall, by reason of so
sharp encountrie, receives new strength of impetuous retire: even so the
furious courage of Mammon having encountered so sharp refusal of fair
Thanais, and so sore a chase of her brothers, chafed himself more abundantly
with despiteful anger, and the fury of his love or rather of rage, received
more vehement force, by the offense of so rude a ripulfe. Whereupon there
remaining no more mean or hope of obtaining his desire; he took him to his
wicked arts whereof he was a sovereign Master, and purposed to make her love
him by force and against nature, by the virtue of a Philtre or loving poison,
which he composed in an apple of Venus, commonly called a love apple, or an
apple of folly, made with the blood of a wagtayle, and other drugs fit for
that purpose, odorated with many hot spices, sweetened in sugar three times
baked, and enchanted with three words which he knew to be proper to the
making of the same: in such sort, that he made an apple of confiture, right
sweet to the smell, and right good to the taste, but most dangerous to the
body and heart, as the issue showed. This being done, he practiced with the
Moriau slave for money, promising her affranchment and deliverance out of
boudage, if she would and could find the means to make her Lady Thanais in
some collation to eat this apple, having such virtue, that whosoever presented
it, should be in favor and grace of the receiver thereof, and yield to the
giver great advantage. The Morian slave being covetous, and giving over much
belief to his fair words and flattering promises, and presuming alredie of
her liberty and franchise, which above all other things she most esteemed and
desired, withal, of the good will of her mistress; right willingly took both
the money, and the apple, which was put in a vessel of Crystal, promising
him that she would minister it to her Mistress, with the first opportunity;
which thing she delayed not to bring to pass. For the self same day that
Thanais was so overtaken, and put to such distress by Mammon (as it has bin
said) she remained so moved and altered, that in the Eueuing at her going to
bed, her heart began to fail her: for the aid whereof, her Slave presented
her with this confected apple, which she found very delicious to the taste,
insomuch that her spirits revived again: and after she had drunk a little
wine, suddenly she fell into a profound sleep, yet nevertheless being
troubled with dreams and terrible santasies, which she witnessed by the
turnings of her face, disorderly moving of her limbs, and profound sighs
intermingled from time to time with cries, in such sort, that when she awaked,
she was found to have lost her senses, transported of her spirits, and become
altogether foolish. Finally, after long torment of body and mind, by reason of
the inflammation of that villainous apple, the poor and miserable Thanais died,
her body remaining after her death so horrible and hideous to behold, that
they made no greater have than to go bury her, and to carry her to a
sepulcher in the end of a field, apperteining to their fathers house,
adjoining to the high way where we now are, and very near to this place, for
as I think, behold the sepulcher which already begins to appear unto us,
wherein Thanais with her Morian slave were buried. Who in remorce of conscience
of this her wicked ministry, went and hanged her self, having beheld the
heavy adventure of her traitorous service, and well knowing she could not
escape the hands of the two brethren, who would revenge the death of their
sister upon her. Behold what she got by the promise of Mammon, showing in
effect that the reward of sin is death. Thus were chese two bodies buried in
this sepulcher which thou see before us, which we may go to see, and there
repose our selves a while and take breath. In saying whereof, these two old
men approached to a sepulcher of Maible, which was at the end of a field on
the left hand of the high way. For the custom at that time was to build their
sepulchers every man in his proper ground, along by the high way side, to the
end that travelers in arresting and reposing themselves upon the stone, might
be occupied in reading their Epitaphs: which these two old men did, turning
toward the Tomb. And the good Archier laid down his bow and quiver upon the
stone with a bottle full of wine, whereof he drank first out of a silver
goblet which he had about him, and after presented it to Franc-Gal, who
received it with a good will, and drank to him again. These two old men being
thus reposed upon the lower steps of the sepulcher, made their coliation with
a morsel of white bread, and the wing of a roasted and spiced Pheasant, which
the Archier had slain the day before, and brought with him in a fair napkin
for his refection in the fields, as ordinarily he was accustomed to do in going
to the chase: and so they drank either of them once. And afterward whiles the
Squire made an end of emptying the bottle, they mounted the steps of the
sepulcher to see if they could behold some Epitaph, where they found in a stone
of flourishing Porphire variable of colors and waued like the streams of a
swift River, which was upon the Tomb, a black knight of brown Marble
engraven, bearing a gilded shield, holding by the mane a fair white mare of
snowie Alabaster, enforcing himself to mount upon her; but the mare by her
figure showed her self so rebellious in flinging that he could not, wherefore
through anger he thrust her through the body with his flaming sword, out of
which wound in stead of bowels issued a Serpent, and at the feet thereof was
set a Mowle engraven in Jeate.

Franc-Gal was much abashed at this figure, and said that it was notably made
according to the history before mentioned: for the stone of green and waued
Porphirie represented the garden and fountain: the black Knight with the
gilded shield signified the foul and rich Mammon: the white Mare figured the
fair Thanais: the Mowle was a token of the Morian slave: the holding of of the
Mare by the main, and assaying to mount upon her, signified the forcement
which Mammon would have done in the garden: the kicking of the white Mare
represented the refusal of Thanais: the stroke of the burning sword, was the
poisoning apple, and the wound her death; but of the Serpent which issued
therout, he could not conjecture what it betokened, until the Archier
enterpreted the same afterward, as you shall hear.

Having thus contemplated the figures upon the sepulcher, they might perceive
below upon the stone of Porphirie four verses engraven: whereof the first two
were written in ancient letters of black color, and the two last in red
letters of a sanguine color, which seemed to them later and fresher written
than the first, as in truth they were according to the adventure which
followed, and the four verses of the Epitaph were these. Here lies Thanais who
late has slain
Love, death, and eake the Negro vain.
Mammon who causde her death by force,
Shall gender life in her dead corse.


At these two last verses Franc-Gal was much abashed, and demanded of the
Archier, if he knew their signification? Yea (quoth he) and I will tell it thee
presently. Sit down if it please thee, and at thine ease give ear to the
residue of my History.

Of the generation and birth of the fatal Infant of leasing. CAP. 9.
THese two old men being reposed on the banks of the sepulcher, the old
Archier began the continuance of his tale in this wise. After that the two
bodies of Thanais and her Morian slave, were entombed, and the ceremonies,
according to the custom of the Country, in doleful manner accomplished, each
one retired to rest. Only Mammon remained in a terrible unquietness, not
finding rest either of soul or body: for the furies of remorce, repentance,
disdain, wrath, wayling, despite, impossible desire, and rage of unbridled
love, shook continually before the eyes of his fantastical understanding,
their burning and bloody torches: in such sort, that his vehement passions
would neither suffer him to sleep or rest, especially the love of the deceased
Thanais, which by so much more was enflamed in him, as the hope of ever
obtaining his desire was furthest from him. So as when he would settle himself
to sleep, the figure of Thanais seemed to present it self before him in such
beauty and grace as he had seen her in the garden. And as lovers forge
dreams according to their sensual appetites, and disordinate desires, he
suddeinly imagined, and fully persuaded with himself, that Thanais was not
dead, but by force of the Philtre, only fallen into a Lechargie and swowue: and
that by going to the place where she lay entombed, he might yet enjoy that
without let or hindrance, which he so long had desired. Upon this, sleep
overcame him, and a Phantasine in the the likeness of Thanais disformed, pale,
and deadly, seemed to appear unto him, saying; Mammon thou sleep, and I
suffer in attending thee: why comst thou not to the place where I am, to take
without danger, that which once thou would with so great peril ravish from
me. Upon this his dog barked and Calyph his Page fearfully began to cry:
and he himself wakening, demanded what he ayled? For that (quoth the page) I
have seen a flying serpent issue from behind the curtain of your bed, and
departing hereout by the lover hole of the chimney. Mammon hearing this talk,
and conferring this vision with his dream, found himself so disturbed, that
through the impatience of love he arose, and taking with him for sole companion
his only page as yet very fearful, in the beginning of the night, came to
the place where we now are, mounted up to the sepulcher, and (with his help)
removed the stone from the monument (for at that time these figures were yet
vnplaced) and causing his page to keep the watch, least any one should come
and descrie them, he entered into the sepulcher, where (in the perfourming of
his detestable assignment) he employed a great part of the silent night, whose
obscurity and darkness seemed to him sufficient to cover and cloak his
villainy. Which being done, he might hear the voice of some wicked spirit
speaking through the carrion carcass of the Morian slave, uttering these
speeches following; Mammon thou have begotten a child. Return therefore to
this place, and at this instant hour, within two and twenty days to receive
the fruit of thy seed, whereof fail not: for if thou do, our Prince shall
not fail to fetch thee by his Legionaries to thy great evil and torment. How
can this be (quoth Mammon) that within three weeks the child should be grown
to perfect birth, whereto nine months are requisite or at least seven? An
evil weed (quoth the sprite) comes forth sooner than a good herb,
besides that thou must understand, that when nature feels her self to fail
and tend to corruption, then she forces her self the more, and aduaunceth
more faster to generation. And for that the Matirce of this dead body must die
shortly, it hasteneth it self to bring forth the fruit of thy seed before
the due time, which thou must come to receive within three times feauen days,
at the hour appointed: wherefore fail not; and now get thee hence, for thou
have no more to do here. This said, the voice ceased, and Mammon sore afraid
issued out of the sepulcher, whereupon with the aid of his Page Calyph he laid
the stone, and returned to his lodging, accompting these things to his man, who
was privy to all his dealings, especially of this his love toward the deceased
Thanais, and with him consulted whether he should obey the Morisquine spirit,
and return again thither within three weeks, or no: which thing after some
deliberation taken, was concluded. And the two and twentieth day after, at the
same nightly hour, they came to the place and removed the stone from the
monument; whereinto Mammon entered, and by the variable shining of a blew
sulphurian fire, which sparkled between the heads of the dead bodies, he might
perceive an Infant newly borne, laid at the feet of Thanais, upon the end of
the winding sheet, between two women of terrible aspect, and of diverse
forms; for the one had a visage pleasant and laughing, but blistered with
diverse colors like the work of a rich jewel enameled, and yet nevertheless
delectable to behold: and she like a Fatallesse (as she was) predestined the
child in this sort; Thou child Desalethes, (for so thou shall be named, in
being borne without term, and nourished without milk) I foretell thee, that
thou shall be the greatest liar of this world, a simuler and dissembler in
words and deeds, in all false works and speeches under apparaunce and color
of amiable verity, and clean contrary in covert thought to that which thou
shall speak in open words; even as thy external members are fair, and thy
interuall foul and filthy. (As in truth this child named Desalethes was, his
face, neck, hands, and all that outwardly appeared, being very white, fair,
gracious to the eye, pleasant, and alluring, holding the form and beauty of
the mother: but the rest of his body and members which were hidden, were swart
and filthy, according to the deformity and obscurity of his father.) After
that this first Fatallesse had thus sinisterly presaged upon this byformed
Brat, the second Fatallesse who was of visage more sad, severe, and of color
pale, (but white and cleanly) thus propounded his destime; Like as you (my
sister Calendre) have cast your sort upon this child, that he shall live so
long as he continues in his lying; even so I do destine him, that he shall
die for telling the truth, and that so soon as he shall have spoken it. So be
it Sister Clarence (quoth Calendre) in giving their hands right and left the
one to the other, and so comoyned they laid them upon the head of the child,
who at that instant arose, as it were of the age of fourteen years,
furiously-crying; Mammon, thou honest man, thou shall leave me here rather
buried than borne. No, no, my dear son (quoth Mammon) that will I not truly:
and therewith embraced him; and the two Fairesses suddenly vanished away, with
the sulphurian fire, which turned to a most stinking smoke: and at that very
instant issued out of the body of the Moore, the horrible voice of a wicked
spirit, thundering out these words. That which is thine take thou away,
And in this place no longer stay.


At this commandment, Mammon remembering well what he had heard and understood
of the Destinies of his Son Desalethes, took him by the hand, and went out
of the Monument together, whereon by the help of Calyph they laid the stone
again. Which was no sooner laid, but a thunder clap and lightning fell from
Heaven upon the plate of Porphirie, with the statues of black Marble, of
Alabaster, and Ieate, in figure of a black Knight, a young Mare, and of a
Mowle, even as we have now seen them. And forthwith were found engraven these
two last verses in bloody letters, beneath the verses which the two Brothers
of Thanais had first set up, written simply in old black letters: which two
verses last engraued, (as it is shought with the devils clawe) as also the
statues fallen out of the aier, are without either plaster or souldring so
firmly affixed to the Porphirie, that it is impossible to remove them. All
thost who afterward saw and read them have remained meruailously astonished,
and could not conjecture nor understand what they should signify, until such
time as the whole matter was discovered by Calyph the Page of Mammon, and that
by this adventure.

Of the first institution of Desalethes under Doctor Pseudomanthanon, of the
arts which he insigned him, and how his disciple profited: what payment he
gave his Master, and in what manner he practiced his science. CAP. 10.
MAmmon and his son Desalethes being come out of the sepulcher, the father
coueted the naked child with his cloak, and so took their way homeward with
Calyph who followed them giving care to their talk: amongst the which Mammon
by the way asked his son Desalethes if he had seen the two fatal sisters
Calandre and Clarence and understood their presages upon him? Desalethes very
simply answered no. But already he lied according to his natural property.
For he both saw the two Sisters, and understood their talk yea vetter than
Mammon, as one that was between them. The father hearing his young son
answer so simply, with a white visage, fair, sweet, and amiable, and
esteeming that he said truth (which was nothing less) reckoned to him the
presages that he should not die, but for telling the truth, whose contrary is
lying: and therefore for the conservation of his durable life (like a most
wicked man as he was) he exhorted him to set all faith and truth aside; and
to settle himself continually to speak and practice lyings, frauds and
disloyal insidelitie: whereto the simple babe answered, he knew not how to
lie, neither could he do it. But therein he lied so egregiously and filthily,
that the air therewith was infected, as if it had been with the breath of a
Basilisque: for he could no more lie, than the Basilisque kill, the Wolf
devour, the water drown, and the fire burn, whose primitive beginnings were
for that intent. In such sort, that when he spoke most simply, he then most of
all lied. Yet his father being deceived in his false and dissembling
simplicity, believed him, and being come to his lodging, incontinently he
apparelled him in brave and sumptuous array (which he could do very well,
being one of the richest in the City of Orb) and decked him in clothes of
gold, silver, and and silk of all kind of colors (except white and red) but
specially of changeable colors, and of all several sorts of silks, mettalls,
and clothes of tissue, embroderie and others, and of all the diverse cuts and
variable fashions, which could newly be found throughout all the Nations of the
world.

Desalethes thus apparelled with such rich and brave habites, and for every
day a new change, which covered his black laydnesse, and set out the fair and
white parts of his visage, neck, breast and hands, he seemed so fair a
child, so pleasant and gracious to all, that ever ie one took of him great
pleasure. Wherefore his father Mammon seeing him so desirable, loved him
greatly, and fearing the sort which he had understood, (which was to dye for
saying the truth) and believing (that which in lying he had told him) that he
knew not how to lie: gave him in charge to be taught to a right excellent
Master, who of that Art made profession, not publicly, but privily, and
secretly; neither read he but by night. This good Doctor was called
Pseudomanthanon, most skillful in the Arts of his profession, which were
Magic, Cabalicke, Thalmud, hypocxisie, brotherie, idolatry, judicial
Astrology, Sophistry, Poesy, Alchymie, Emperie, Medicastrie, legerdemaine,
subtlety, pillerie, banquerie, usury, interesterie, change, barterie,
beggerie, falsifying of weights and measures, forgerie, hap-lourderie, reuerie,
and carrionly gingembrie, poisoning, cousning, dicing, brawling, mockery,
bawderie, bitcherie, flattery, policy, blabberie, menterie, diuilishnesse and
damnerie; with such other sciences and practices coloring and destroying
verity. Of all which, this cunning Doctor Pseudomanthanon was sovereign Lord,
and a nightly ensigner: from whose school (as the soldiers issued out of the
belly of the Troyan horse) infinice numbers of cunning men chiefly of the
Greeks, as Lucian, Homere, and as it were all the Poets; except Lucan, Lucre^,
Columel, Caton, Theognis, Phocylides, Arat, and some others, who were banished.
From thence are likewise sprung the pleasant volumes of Lancelot of the Lake,
of Tristram, Perseforest, Amadis of Gaul, Palmerin, and such like: but chiefly
from thence is proceeded the first coppie of the Alcoran in the Arabian
language, afterward translated into Latin. To this right cunning Doctor, was
this fine disciple Desalethes delivered to be taught all these good arts of
falsitie and menterie; who in very little time so studied, and in so short
time advanced himself in the science and practice of these arts of lying,
that he passed and surmounted his Master: and deceived him often times in his
own deceit; specially in the payment for his teaching: for having agreed with
him on this condition, that he should pay him one talent valued at 500. crowns,
in the reward of his teaching, in the first cause that by menterie or finenesse
he should win in turning right with slight: the accord being written and
signed, it fortuned that Pseudomanthanon seeing his scholar Desalethes to have
well profited in his arts, demanded of him his promised salarie: but
Desalethes denied it him, telling him flatly, that he ought him nothing.
Whereupon Pseudomanthanon called him before a Judge where he appeared. And the
Master after he had made his demand, and showen the accord of the bargain,
thus propounded his reason cutting on both sides in this wise; O fool, and
evil advised Scholar, do thou not know, that necessarily thou shall be
condemned to pay me, whether thou winnest this matter, or no. For if thou win
it, it cannot be but by fine policy, and wresting the law, whereby thou must
needs pay me according to our accord and writing, which is such that at the
first cause by thee craftily gotten, thou should pay me a talent: but to the
contrary, if thou do lose, thou shall be condemned to pay me by execution of
the Judges sentence; and so can thou not escape to pay me. To this, the well
learned scholar by a crooked pearcing, and contrary reason, answered in this
form; O good Master, and subtle Doctor, saving thine honor: thou take not
this argument by the right end: but contrariwise as it seems to me, I ought
necessarily to be absolved of thy demand, whether I win this matter or lose
it. For if I win it, I shall be quit by the absolute sentence of the Judge: and
if that I lose it, I ought to pay thee nothing, according to the accord set
down in thy writing: where it is agreed, that I should not pay thee until the
first matter that I should get by fine deceit: wherefore not winning this
first, if I be condemned, the condition of the bargain being not come, the
bargain is nothing, and I shall owe thee naught. And thus (O absurd Master) I
cannot fail to escape thy pursuit.

The Judge hearing such alterations by contraries and indissoluable
Antistrophes, and not knowing what judgment to give, sent them both for an
hundred years and one before Rhadamant the infernal Judge, the whole Bench
crying after them in execration of their knauerie, this sentence afterward
most renowned: Of an evil Crow a naughty egg, of an evil Master a worse
Disciple. Behold how Desalethes began to practice the Science which he had
learned under his good tutor Pseudomanthanon, and (which is worse) using it in
all ways he could, entermedling in great affairs with many people, but
specially with the wicked, forsaken, incurious, careless, evil advised,
youthful and dishonest persons, with light believers, and strangers of far
Countries, and with the dead (who can neither bite nor reprehend); such were
his people for whom he stretched his netts, counterfetting the devout
hypocrite, judging another hardly, and impudently justifying himself, never
swearing but when he had a gainful occasion to periure, wherewithal easily he
made an end of pleading and bridling the Mule. Likewise in buying without
payment, selling for ready money and nothing delivering, receiving without
acquittaunce, borrowing without rendering, retaining the imposts, or (if force
constrained him) rendering them diminished, having great weight and long measure
to buy, but sinall and short to make sale by, forging wills, and serving for
all and by all as witnesses and pawnes: a singular workman to semble and
dissemble, to counterfeit all letters and signets, to raze cleanly and subscribe
properly, to blanch parchment, and to renew an antique seal, to make a new
obligation with notarie and witnesses already deceased, of an old and
prescript instrument: never handling butter without greasy hands, taking
weighty gold and good money, and rendering it light, rebased and feeble, or
else false, clipped, chiseled and changed money for it: mingling diverse accounts
together, and having many papers of unreasonable reason: opening all letters
which came to his hands, to see if any thing were in them that could hurt or
do him good, and sealing them again with the like signet, (after themanner of
Alexander the false viuine) or holding and cancelling them if it were
expedient: spreading brutes abroad of an vncercertaine author, sowing darnell
and wicked suspicion amongst friends by secret detraction, and false reports:
but above all things a seller of Thurim smoakes. For the residue, the best
child in the world, a pleasant liar, a gracious flatterer, an assured boaster,
well languaged, well spoken, and a most courteous Curtizan, and for that cause
welcome to all company: bringing his deceiptfull words and deeds so finely
about like a Mercuriall Ulysses that it was always to his profit and vantage,
and without leaving any thing wherein he might be discovered or overtaken in.
Saving that an ancient man called Cron, who always inuisibly followed him pace
by pace, and observed al his deeds and sayings, after he had long time endured
them, he finally discovered and stirred against him innumerable people whom he
had all deceived and desrauded one by another. These by conference had together
knew and discovered the hidden lies, falsenesse, and wickedness, whereby they
had been by him abused, deceived and defrauded: some accused him, and others
brought witness against him with the aid of old Cron, who revealed the
greatest part of his most secret, hidden, and shameful villainies, which he
least hoped should ever have come to light. Whereof being attaint and convinced
(albeit no torture nor torments could make him confess or acknowledge it) he
was notwithstanding declared a public enemy, and condemned to loose his
head, and that all his goods should be confiscate to the Prince of Orb. His
Master Pseudomanthanon feeling the wind thereof, suddenly vanished, and gained
with his heels, taking his flight from thence, and hiding himself in diverse
secret places, whereas yet he makes profession of his clandestinall
lectures. As for his father Mammon he was banished and sent back into Turquy,
and passing through Italy and Venice, and remaining there a while, left behind
him some of his seed, whereof afterward sprung up many children of his
generation, as Vliespiegle the inuenter of subtilties, the gentle knight
Imbauld of Solier, and such like exquisite workmen. After that the capital
sentence was pronounced upon Desalethes he was delivered into the hands of the
executioner, who led him to the place of Justice, showing by the way so small
repentance of his wickedness, that he said with loud voice, he had not mericed a
common death, but rather a public enterteinment of him and his in the
pallaice of the City, and a statue of gold upon a Marble pillar in the common
place, for his great virtues and good deeds: doubting not but that after his
death they would deifie him, and put him in the catalogue of worthy and
heroycall men, in the heaven of Mercury, with the Duke Ulysses and Autolie,
and that there should be composed a new Odyssee of his high and worthy
praises. But on the contrary, all the world, yea those of his own faction
reclaymed against him in execration, crying with aloud voice, Take him away,
take him away, kill, kill the wicked man. Nevertheless he marched bravely to
Must-dy, (for so was the scarfoll of red and black Marble in the market place
called, where the offenders do play their last prize) walking with a lofty
gate, and a visage so constant and joyful, as though oue had led him to a
wedding, or some joyful feast, and that because he held himself certain of
his sort and destiny, and that he had as yet never failed to lie; whereby he
assured himself not to die, and therefore the fear of death made him neither
tremble, nor look pale. With this assurance he marched and mounted up into the
place of punishment, and when he was upon the scarfoll Must-dy, the executioner
would have bound and blinded him: No, no (quoth he in lying according to his
natural disposition) I will never run away, have thou no fear, for I have
enough for us both. In saying thus, he kneeled down before the Marble stone,
and whiles the Executioner prepared his sharp cutting sword, he turned his
view openly to all the people: to whom (that he might make his last lie) he
said with a loud voice, Farewell ye people of Orb, I go now to die. This
said, he inclined his body, and the hangman who had already prepared his
sword, in auayling it, with a rude stroke cut off his head.

Of the flying head, and abymed body, with their return, and revelations of
the things by them seen, of their death and burial, and of the reclosed
depth. CAP. 11.
HIs sort then deceived him (quoth Franc-Gall) when his head was stroke of, for
thereby fails all miracles. No, no (quoth the Archier) but contrariwise
thereby came great wonders: for after the stroke given, no blood issued either
out of body or head: but presently no sooner tha^ the sword was withdrawn,
the body without head rose upon his feet, and leaped down on the ground
amongst all the assistants and beholders, sore abashed to see a headless body
to run: the which impetuously passing through the prease (who gave way and
retired themselves at the strange spectacle of so monstrous a hideur) until it
came to an obscure dungeon and profound goulph, which a little before happened
by reason of a terrible earthquake, and had swallowed up the great tower of the
clock and watch of the city into such a profound depth, that no cord with the
sound of a plummet could find the bottom thereof; whereinto this headless
body cast it self. And at the same instaunt, the head (stricken off abone the
neck) sprung up from the scarfold three or four times, always mounting
higher and higher: and in this order mounting, the carthalages and gristles of
the ears sprung out with sharp pinnes, in such sort that they became wings
without feathers like a fimdermouse, flying and carrying up the head into the
aier so high, that right soon the sight thereof was lost; the whole multitude
of people remaining so much astonished, as the marvel thereof merited: some
looking into the deep pit (where they could see nothing) and others lifting
up their eyes into the air, to see when the head should fall from the heavens.
But after they had long mused on the one and the other, they might hear a
sound like a wind vehemently coming from far, and the voice of a spirit
therewithal, saying; You men of Orb, tarry not for the quick departed from
hence to view the height of heaven, and depth of earth; but retire your
selves, and return again hither three days hence about this hour, so il all
you see the end of that you look for. This said, suddenly a great thunderclap
brake out of an obscure cloud, and after that, a mighty shower; which caused
every one to retire to his house, attending the third day after according to
the premonition of the unknown voice. At which day and hour a far greater
number of people assembled thither than before of all kinds of ages, attending
some miraculous sigue, which failed not to happen. For as they were beholding
some up into the air, and others into the bottomless gulf, behold out of the
same they might perceive the headless body coming out, and mounting upon the
foresaid scarfold, there kneeled down before the stone, and the veins (where
the head was cut off) opened, and began to shed forth blood: whereof the body
took part in his hand, and with his finger writ upon the stone certain
verses, which afterward were read. And at the same instant they might perceive
from the height of the aier, the flying head to descend with membrane and
serpentine wings, diminishing by little and little until they came again into
their natural form of man's ears, and rested on the pillar upon an iron pike,
where the heads of the executed were accustomed to be set. Thus as every one
was attentively beholding these mysteries with great silence, the head with a
trembling, hollow, and deadly voice (nevertheless incelligible) pronounced
these verses following; The Pallaices and Sisters three aloft in haughty tower
I late have seen, and beldameke that there has built her bowr.
Above the which consists a place, whereas those blessed wights
Remain, who have in faith and troth taken their chief delights:
But I as one deserving not so high for to aspire,
(Because deceit and lying both have been my whole desire)
Am judged to the depth. For why, as yet I never told
The truth till now: yet against my will it is you may be bold.
For I must die, and desprate death you know (and I may wail)
Must needs descend beneath the tower. Lo thus my speech does fail.


This said, the head in hideous tourning shutting the teeth, and closing the
eyes, suddenly waxed pale and died: and the body by and by stretching forth
it self with pulling in the veins fell down flat dead upon the plain of the
red and black Marble. Then was accomplished which was presaged by the two
fatal Sisters Calendre and Clarence at the birth of this child Desalethes.
These verses pronounced, were heard and understood of all the assistance, set
down in writing or retained by heart of many, specially of me, who keep them
yet in memory in such sort as I have recited them. Hereupon was the public
Clerk commanded to mount up to the scarfold of Must-dy, and look on the
Marble stone, what marks, signs, or letters the dead body had made with his
finger and blood. The Clearke going up, found upon the white Marble a bloody
writing of ten verses, saying thus (as he pronounced them with a loud voice. I
have both taste and touched (by tombling over deep)
The pangs of endless pains: which being thick and steep
Below the Tower round, have their foundation fast.
Whereas those wicked wights in prison strong arecast
Who nein word ne deed have taken ought delight
But have the sacred truth repugnd with all their might.
And for so much as I have used all my life,
To sow the seed of lies, of discord, wrath and strife,
By judgment it is decreed, and unto you be it known,
That corpse and head forthwith into that gulf be thrown.


This writing thus pronounced and understood, all the Assistants were of the
advice that this sentence should be put in effect, albeit that they remained
very hashfull of these nouels never before understood of them, either of the
round Tower, of the three Sisters, of the old Dame, or of the obscure and
deep prison, whereof we understand not as yet the substance. Notwithstanding
the executioner being sent for, and commanded by the Magistrate, took the dead
and hideous head, and drew the body with an iron hook unto the deep pit,
whereof before we have spoken, and threw them both therein: from the depth
whereof was presently heard a fearful and lamentable cry, as it were of
innumerable persons greenously wayling and desperately howling. And thereupon
this depth closed in such firmness, that there remained no appearance either of
Tower, trembling, or opening of earth; only there appeared all plain above
the earth: and no brute was any more heard, but every one by reason of the
astonishment remained in pleasant silence: and the Sun began most brightfully
to display his beams, and thereafter ensued a right fair clear and
beautiful day, which before had been darkened with thick mystes, black
clouds, and rainie weather.

Behold the History, wherein I have made thee a very long, and peraduencure
envious digression (quoth the Archier to Franc-Gal) which has only been to
confirm thy saying very likely to be true, and by the vearses aforesaid
agreeing with thy rehearsal, to confirm the talk which thou have begun, of
the immensall Tower, of the three Stages, of the three fatal Sisters, of their
ancient mother Anange, resident in the highest thereof, and of the low and
black Prisons under the foundation of the same. Which talk as thou have
begun, I pray thee go on forwards, and make an end thereof if it please thee.
For I have great desire to hear thy discourse to the end, to see if thereby I
might understand the substance of the vearses, which I have recited to thee,
which me seems to be very much agreeing with thy forerehearsed narration.

I am content quoth Franc-Gall, but let us rise and ^olowe on our way, and in
going I will make an end of the residue thereof, to render thee part of the
pleasure which I have received of thine, which has seemed neither long nor
wearisome, but rather most delectable, for the meruailes which thou have
recited therein, which are very conformable unto my discourse, whereby I hope
they shall be more lightened and expounded: wherefore let us rise and be going.

So these two wise men arose, and (forgetting not their arms, baggage, bow,
quiver, bottle, cup, and napkin, after they had once again regarded the
miraculous statues upon the Tomb, and wished rest to the spirits of the
bodies there lying) left the sepulcher, and betook them to their former way,
and first talk, Franc-Gall thus continuing the same.

Of the ancient Lady Anange, of her great authority and puissance: of the
offices of the three fatal Sisters Cleronome, Zodore, and Termaine, and of the
cierges which they administer to the Pilgrims coming to the Sovereign
Temple. CAP. 12.
IN the top of which great round tower was a comble in the fashion of a round
lantern, so clear as the bright day, with windows on every side, in such
sort, that it had prospect every way: and there within was resident a great
Lady, right ancient, and of most redoubted authority, having sovereign
puissance upon all that is below her, and casting her view over all: whereby
only accordingly as she stretched forth, or retired, raised or abased her
aspect of universal conduct) she advanced or arrested, drew up or put down
both men and all humane affairs submitted to her: without hindrance of any,
who can by no means resist her, neither she contrariwise do otherwise than
she does: and for that cause she is called Anange, because of necessity al
things must be as she has ordained, and not otherwise: not that she does any
thing with force, violence or extortion either to nature or reason, but because
all things are governed by her only regard, and reduced to the final and right
point of her eternal ordinance; from which she suffers nothing to divert,
but incontinently causes it ineuitably to return. So great is the authority
and puisance of this ancient Lady Anange: and so did I see her in the highest
of the Tower, when the white bird, as I told you before) drew my spirit from
me with a kiss, and elevated the same unto the height thereof. This ancient
Lady has three fatal daughters, named (as it has been showed) Cleronome,
Zodore and Termaine, resident below their mother in three inferior stages of
the Tower; nevertheless both near and passable the one to the other, and
there it was their duty to receive the Pilgrims which would ascend up to the
sovereign Temple, whereunto the way was very difficile by reason of the
obscure paths, very hard to be kept without conduct, and light going before.
For which cause these three fatal Sisters were there constituted in that
office to furnish the Pilgrims travelers with cierges, as well to lighten them
in the way wherein they are to walk, as also to offer their oblations to God
in the sovereign Temple. And they gave and distributed them not after one
fashion, but after diverse sorts, even as by fortune, or rather by secret
ordinance they came to their hands: some being great and long, some less, and
others very small. The first fatal Sister resident in the inferior Stage,
gave to every one his cierge, the second lightened them, and the third finally
put them out, either before or after they were offered up. Now these fatal
cierges were like the Brand of Meleager, and in them consisted the life and
death of those who received them: and they carried them with such
determination, that so long as they burned and gave light, the person carrying
them lived; and incontinently so soon as by the office of Termaine they were
put out, at the same instant ended the corporal life of those who carried
them. For by the ordinance of Anange, it was necessary that once they should
be extinguished, either by default, or violence; to the end that in offering
them, their savor might ascend to God, who was worshipped in the ancient
Temple, to be received or rejected good or evil, according to the matter
whereof they were made, and according as they had been used and handled
honestly and purely, or foiled, broken, or polluted filthelie and
villainouslie. And none, or very few were offered at the sacrifice during
their lively light, but necessarily they must be by the three fatal Sisters
extinguished, either in default of matter, or violent accident. And yet
nevertheless, after they were once lightened, they remained in the arbitriall
conduct, enterteinment, and government of those who had them in their keeping,
with express defense of putting them out, but constantly and clearly to carry
them, until such time as Termaine had put her hand thereto. Notwithstanding
some either by envious disdain, desperation, or other evil affection would
put them out before the time, and spitefully cast them to the ground together
with their bodies dying; others would cut and break them in pieces of despite.
Some thinking to make them burn more clearly than their substance and wyke
would permit, did trouble, snofe, reuerse, trauerse and blow them, in such
sort that in a while they consumed them, so as they endured but a short space.
Some others going about to stuff, annoint, and grease them with old oils,
and other fat liquours, thinking to make them last longer, and adioyne to their
first making (being a thing impossible) have clean contrary to their opinion
euflamed more abundantly, and consumed more hastily, rendering moreover a smoke
of most filthy savor: but contrariwise others there were, who held and carried
their fair cierges in a constant rightnes highly elevated, whereby they
rendered light more apparent and longer shining, as well to themselves, as to
those who went before and followed them. Others also adjoined thereunto Balm,
Myrrh, incense, and other aromaticall gummes, serving not only to their
shining, but also causing them to leave a most good and gracious smell after
their putting out, and sacred offering in the Temple, where by the Sacrist
Termaine they were extinguished, and gathered together. Howbeit all of them
came not to the term of receiving in the end of their peregrination, and
offering of their cierges by the third fatal Sister Termaine: but the greatest
part failed by the way, either by reason that the matter of the light was of so
small durance, as being of pitch, rosell, or terpentine; or for being too
little, or over small of substance; or by reason their wyke over gross in
respect of the wax, or for that oftentimes they were violently put out by
casualties happening by the way: specially by the blustering of winds, by hurts
and embushments of evil encountrie, by raynes, waters, tempests, and other
like accidents, which put out the lights, and so consequently kill those who
carry them: because they were fatalized as has been showed before: whereby it
comes to pass, that the greatest part of the Pilgrims perish by the way,
and never arrive at the third station of the fatal Sister Termaine, noryet to
the Temple to offer and present the sanour of their cierges.

Thus were these three sisters resident in three lodgings within this great
Tower, furnishing to the Pilgrims the cierges of their conduct, way and life,
which the first and highest presented them, the second and lower lightened, and
the third and last put out and offered in the Temple. But as the Poet divinely
sings; By fatal sort all things do fall to ruin and decay:
From ill to worse, and at the last consume and wear away.
Even so commonly it falls out, that the first munistcences are larger and
more liberal than those which follow; as all natural things are best at the
first. So comes it to pass that the cierges which have been first presented,
have been fairer, longer, and greater, better fashioned, and of better wax,
and so consequently of longer indurance and cleerer light. Likewise the first
men who received them, were found more greater and stronger (like Giants as
they were) to carry and eleuate them: yea and more wise and apt to conduct and
mainetaine them, as those who knew well that their life and death depended
thereupon: which they would neither dispraise, despite, nor have in sorrow,
but esteemed, honored, and kept them right dearly, as the gift and grant of
the great King of all kings, in whose honor they would render it again to him
in his Temple in offer of their last voyage, and to the termination of the last
fatal Sister Termaine, to whom all in a manner happily arrived without any
mal-encounter, trouble, or hurt.

Of the Macrobians, their virtue and great age, of the long lift of Franc-Gal,
and causes thereof. CAP. 13.
BUt amongst all those great light bearers, the most prudent and most advised
of spirit, and the most strong and durable of body, have showed themselves to
be the blood of the Macrobians; who were children of a good, sage, rich, and
noble laborer called Kamat, and of a virtuous and excellent Lady and singular
good Huswife, called Madame Sophroisne: who accompanied not themselves with
rascals, but on the contrary esteemed it great honor and noblesse to employ
body, members, and spirit to all honest and fruitful labor and excerior
exercise of the body, and interior and temperate moderation of the mind. And
thereby have sprung of their bloods, most mighty Kings, Princes, and valiant
Knights. Cyrus the most renowned King of Persia from them descended, and took
therein great glory; Agathocles King of Sicilia thereof vaunted; The good
Roman Consul Marcus Curious thereby held himself honored; and the worthy
Knight Serran thereof made his brauados: the rich King Hugon laboring in his
golden chariot, thereby kept amagnificall estate, to show that he was extract
of so high and generous a race, as that of the noble Lord Kamat and the
virtuous Lady Sophroisne; whose successors were called Macrobians, men
engendered of good lawful and shamefast blood, under good consteflation, well
and temperately nourished with the first and best fruits of their most
wholesome and fertile Region, situate in the high Aethiopia, between the East
and the South, under the most temperate Climate of Meroe, abounding in all
goodness, in sweet and wholesome waters, and in a most pure and beautiful
aier, like a continual Spring; people of a most fair form of body, of
members strong and boisterous, of good and liberal spirit, loving and
exercising justice, equity and liberality: reverently honoring age, their
fathers, mothers, parents, and betters, their auncitors, and God above al, who
is auncienter than all things, and elder than time it self. Such were the
Macrobians, to whom by fortune or rather by providence, happened the first,
best, and most durable cierges, which they carrying, keeping and governing
wisely, lived two, three, and four times so long as other men. And to me which
am of their race, befell one, delivered me by Cleronome, long, straight, well
waxed and tempered, durable, and of clear light.

Where is it then (quoth the Archier) have thou offered it up already? or has
it failed or gone out by the way. No no quoth Franc-Gall, for if it were our I
should then be dead. Show it me then quoth the Archier, that I might see the
fashion thereof. Then Franc-Gall smiling said unto him thus, show me also thine
that Cleronome gave thee in the beginning of thy Pilgrimage. Mine (quoth he) I
have none that I know of, for I am no Pilgrim, neither have I any
remembrance that ever any cierge was given me. Neither have thou remembrance
(quoth Franc-Gal) of thy first shirt, which nevertheless has been delivered
to thee; so likewise has thy vital light been given to thee, as mine has
been to me; but they are unvisible to our corporal eyes, for every oue
carries them not upon him, but within himself. Of whose flame we feel the
natural heat; which fails when they be extinguished: by their light we see
outwardly and understand inwardly how we ought to guide them in our
peregrination, wherein we be Pilgrims from our youth, and by diverse ways,
adventures, and dangers do bend our course toward the sovereign Temple, where
we are promised rest, as if it were to the return of our proper and
paternall house. How (quoth the Archier) I had thought we had not had other
light than the daily Sun, the Moon, and nightly stars, and the burning
fire to conduct us. Thou art not sufficiently advised for so good an Archier
(quoth Franc-Gal) for when this light (which in the beginning is given us by
Cleronome for our conduct) comes once to be put out, then we see and know
nothing, albeit we have our eyes open, and that the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars and the clear light of candles and torches shine upon us. Wherefore
thou may well understand, that neither our light which we use in our
pilgrimage, nor the cierge of our sight, life, and way, which was given unto us
by the first Fatal Sister Cleronome, consists of those external lights.

I understand well now (quoth the Archier) oh how thou have lightened the eyes
of my understanding, and illuminated my light with the clearness of thine!
Well, at this instant begin I to know my self, and thy mystirall and secret
talk, which is very profitable and delectable unto me: wherefore I pray thee
(if it shall not be over tedious unto thee) to go forward unto the end
thereof. Mark well then quoth Franc-Gall.

After that I had received of Cleronome, this fair cierge great, straight,
full of good matter, well made, and garnished with many sweet and flagrant
savors, and that the second fatal Sister named Zodore had lightened it with a
clear and lively fire: I carried it high and straight without doing it force
or injury, in such sort that it has already lasted and conducted me 900.
years and more, continually flaming, and in most illustrious manner shining
as well before as behind me, round about me, below me, and above me, yea even
unto the heavens. By the clear light whereof I have walked, and by the benefit
of the long days, years, and worlds, wherein I have lived, I have seen a
far off the governance of things both before and behind me: although I see
not the one so well as the other, because I must turn my head a tene side to
behold them. Likewise I have beholden the circumstances as well on the right
side as on the left: together with the things which have fallen under my feet,
and the imminent perils which have hong over my head, from the high point of my
Saturnian Planet whereunder I was borne. And all this by length of the time
have I seen through the resplendaunt brightness of my cierge, by the which I
have viewde the causes of things, and the consequences and progress of of the
same: and as I was not ignorant of the antecedents, so compared I the
similitudes, adjoining to the present the things to come, so that thereby I
have foreseen the whole course of my Peregrination, which hethertoo has been
long, durable, and diverse, through strange countries and regions of the East,
West, North and South; not without suffering of many labors, travels,
fortunes and strange adventures.

Of the preuision of the Cataclysme, of Durat Hippopotame the sea horse,
whereon Franc-Gal surmounted the waters, whereby he was surnamed Cock, and of
his encountrie with Priscaraxe a my-serpentlike woman. CAP. 14.
FOr one day eleuating my cierge toward Heaven, I perceived an exorbitation of
the eight Sphere, from the West unto the East, and contrariwise from the East
unto the West, approaching and drawing together above the center of Aries and
Libra, not in stretching wise, of the right course in length, but of exorbitant
moueing in height and breadth, by equation approaching and drawing together,
making two small circles of exorbitance: whereby after long progression of time,
this exorbitant moving was come to the point of the small circle: the Zenith
being regarded by the Sign of Pisces and Aquarius, of the Planets, of Orion
and Hyades: then knew I well by proof, that the Cataclysme of inundation
should be shortly. Wherefore for the avoiding of all perils that might happen,
I took in the great river of Nylus in Egypt a young Hippopotame, that is a
watrie horse, having head and body like a horse, but without comparison far
exceeding in greatness, strength and belly other terrestrial horses, having legs
accordingly, saving that the feet finished in large and flat cartilages in the
fashion of a goose foot, for swimming the better: neither had he only four
feet like a terrestrial horse, but many and a great number, wherewithal he
cleaued the floods, and swomme like a Dolphin: as for his tail, it was great,
long and full of scales like a great fish, flat in his hinder latitude,
wherewith he beat the waters, and turned himself most readely to what side he
would by the moving thereof: his head he had elevated great and puissant,
carrying in his throat four great, crooked, and cutting teeth. This horse
Hippopotame such as I have described to thee, and which thou may yet behold
at the next Port, where I have left him with my men: (for he is so great and
mighty, that he is able to carry easily many persons, and other living
creatures, albeit he be a most wicked and dangerous beast, specially when he
has drunk too much. Nevertheless I handle and tame him so well, that I make
him rideable thorough all waters, yea and main seas, after that I have armed
him with convenient harness on all sides. Besides this, by a certain art
whereof I have the knowledge and experience, I open his sides, and plant in him
great wings, by the aid whereof wheu he has spread them in the wind, he goes
faster upon the waters than the foul in the aier). This great horse
Hippopotame being thus prepared to serve me when need should require, one day
eleuating my light, I perceived already the cataracts of heaven open, the
water pot of Aquarius turned up side down, the sign of Pisces in exaltation,
Orion with his sword cutting the clouds, and the most stinking hogs and the
goose behind me, to noyce the open depths, and unbounded seas. At this great
brute lifting up my head, I beheld a great and marvelous brook of waters
impetuously coming to fall upon the Region and way wherein I walked, and to
ouerwhelme with waves all the pilgrims passengers in the way, in putting out
their cierges and lives; wherefore the soonest that it was possible for me, I
took provision of victuals sufficient for certain days for me and mine who
were most able to mount with me upon my Hippopotame, by the foreknowledge
that I gave them of this brook which I saw coming, whereby some believed me
and fled to the mountains, others would not, and so were enclosed with the
floods. I was no sooner mounted, but my Hippopotame was elevated upon the
waters, which covered all the face of the earth, and stiffled all the creatures
therein. Then began my marinall horse to swim with his flat seete and to spread
his wings, which having once taken the air and wind, transported us into
diverse Countries and Regions at the pleasure of the winds, waves, and horse,
to the great marvel of the people, who having gamed the uppermost top of the
barraine mountains, saw us ride upon the waves, a thing of them never before
soene: wherefore through great marvel which they took thereat, they cried to
us of all sides with loud voices, Gal, Gal, Gal, which in their Armenian
language signifies, Surmounting the waters: by admiration thereof, that they
saw me great and puissantly mounted on horsbacke upon the profound waters, as
it were on firm land; whom I went and visited, because I found that the
greater part of them were unprovided of victuals, and hunger starued upon the
barraine tops of those high mountains, and distributed unto them part of those
things whereof I had made provision, especially of wine, whereof I had great
plenty, I succored those which wanted to comfort their heart, for there is
nothing that so soon slaketh extreme hunger as the liquour of wine. And
because that I gave them it liberally (be it spoken without vaunt or reproach)
they gave me the title of Frank, which in the Celtique language signifies
liberal and hardy, so that afterward the name of Franc-Gal remained to me.
Had thou then (quoth the Archier) any other name before than Franc-Gal?
Yea (quoth he) my proper name was Dysir, but afterward I was always called
Franc-Gal, which name displeases me not at all.

Now tell me Franc-Gal (quoth the Archier) how could thine Hippopotame carry
thee so many days with out being weary, or plunging himself in the waters,
and drowning of thee and thine? Because (quoth Franc-Gal) his nature is such,
that so long as he has aier and wind, according to his wings and his feet in
the water, he mainteineth himself in his vigor, and gets more and more
force, and new legeritie, fearing nothing but fire and stones: and is never
perilous or dangerous, but when he drinks overmuch. Wherefore my
sovereign care has always been to keep him from his contrary element,
fire, stones, and overmuch drinking: for the rest he is of the nature of the
Camelion, living of the air and of his watrie element: and so quiet, that when
we have landed, and he retired his feet, and abased his wings, he remains
still, without either kicking or biting, and of as peaceable rest, as he is of
terrible legeritie and dangerous passage when his feet are in the water, and
his wings in the air, and his crooked teeth out of his throat. Behold what my
horse Hippopotame called Durat is, upon whom I surmounted the waters, whereby
the name of Gal was imposed upon me.

After that the inundation of this great River was come down, and the
Cataclysine had taken end: being weary of riding amongst the fishes, I came
one day and landed in the Region of Scythia called East Tartaria: where having
recreated my spirits with the sinell of the new earth lately discovered, and
having refreshed my body with meat and wine, feeling my self weary of
travel, and beaten with continual showers, I laid me down upon the ground on
six Lions skins sowed together, which for that time served me against the
storms, and there I fell in a profound sleep.

During the which, this vision came to me: It seemed to me, that before me grew
a fair plant of a flower called double Solsie, otherwise named the friend of
the Sun, which altogether seemed to incline toward me, till that it had
covered my legs. Wherefore seeing this fair double flower bending toward me,
desire forced me to gather it both branch and root, and therefore with my
dagger I dug it up: but under the root thereof I found a serpents egg,
which being broken, there issued out the thickin of a Basilisque, otherwise
called a Cockatrice; which incoutinentlie becoming feathered and waxing great,
flewe away, carrying my heart with him which he had taken out of my body:
wherewithal afright, I waked, and found my self embraced and clasped body
and legs, by some body casting it self upon me; which all at once I perceived
to be a young maiden all naked, and of a great height, whose shape of body
surmounted the common sort, and of an excellent beautiful face, with bright
golden hairs, and glimmering like Phoebus beams, her face white, and colored
with red like to Aurora, hereies gray and comely suruaulted with little brown
eye lids, hernecke straight and well proportioned, her breast large and highly
elevated with two round and incarnate dugs, her rains broad, her belly round
white and fair. But her lower parts, in steed of thighs, legs and feet,
finished in a long serpentlike tail, of diverse colors like shining mayle,
wherewith she linked her self between my legs, and with her fair naked
arms, embraced me so about the neck and body, that I could scarce be rid from
her without violence to so fair a creature (as she seemed by her superior
parts) so lovingly kissing me: which withdrewe me from giving her any
outrageous repulse. But on the contrary part this Serpentlike tail
wherewithal I felt my self interlaced, gave me hideous fear, and
abomination of a creature so monstrous: wherefore tenderly I rid me of her
embracements and linkings, and taking her by the hand, asked her what she was,
and what she would with me.

I am (quoth the Maid right graciously) daughter of Phoebus and Rhea, created
lately in this present place by virtue of the Sun heating the earth, as yet
sumie with the late inundation, and animated with a good ayrie spirit, who by
the first information rendered my Essence perfect: except, that for so much as the
Sun and man do engender man in their proper and humane form, and that I
(being not engendered of the seed of man, but only of the Sun and of the
terrestrial humor heated by the Sun) could have but only the superior part
after the human form, and the inferior part such as the earth could fashion
in the form of a Serpent, nevertheless not venymous, (although they say, that
venym lies in the tail) but of good nature and not hurtful, as thou shall
well know: furthermore my name is written on my right arm, which I neither
know, nor shall know but only by thee: for, for thee, and of thee to
conceive fruit, I am newly sent into the world. I understanding this talk,
looked upon her right arm, wherein I perceived her skin in certain places
gylded like the thigh of Pithagoras, in form of Persian letters, declaring this
name Priscaraxe. Of which name well understanding the good signification, and
considering this so fair and gracious creature (albeit monstrous, but for good
cause) I spoke unto her in this sort; My sweet heart Priscaraxe (for so is your
name written, which I pray remember well) I know now that in a luckie hour I
have met with you, and for that good fortune I will not refuse you: and
for so much as I have found such singular beauty and good grace in your upper
parts, without disdain of your low, terrestrial, and serpentlike vnvenimous
parts, I accept you for mine, and will be wholly yours. In saying thus, I
embraced and kissed her, and for the pleasure and kindness which I found in
her, I remained in her company 32. days: at what time she felt her self to
have conceived, and to be with child, which was her chief and sovereign
desire.

Of the leave taken by Franc-Gal of Priscaraxe, elected and constituted Queen
in high Tartarie, of the homages and fealties taken of the people assembled,
and of the creation of the order of her Knights. CAP. 15.
THe time being come that Priscaraxe felt herself to be with child, I
determined to leave her, albeit that departure from pleasure be grievous: and
notwithstanding her couersation and company was most agreeable and delectable
to me; yet nevertheless, the earnest desire of accomplishing a universal
peregrination, which of long time I had enterprised, moved me the more,
specially being so well accommodated with my good horse Durat Hippopotame,
very proper to pass the seas and hugie streams, being sure to find enough
of others to pass on firm land and trauerse the regions. For esteeming the
whole earth (given to the sons of men for habitation by the sovereign Lord,
who for himself has reserved the Heaven of Heavens) to be but a house and
domicile of humane creatures: I accounted my self unworthy of the name of a
man, and of the household of mankind, if I should not have seen and known all
the parts of this universal house: and for that cause had I enterprised the
circuit and passing about the whole terrestrial world. For the performance
whereof, it was unnecessary for me to arrest my self at pleasures, but rather
the most sweetly I could, to depart from my well-beloved Priscaraxe: wherefore one
day being alone with her, after accustomed solace, I began this talk with her.

My most dear Priscaraxe, there is no company how fair and good soever it
be, but it must in the end finally depart, either by death or otherwise; but
mortal departure is more grievous than any other, because it is without any
hope of return: but voluntary departure is always consolatorie amongst us
that live, in hope they shall once again see and be united together. Wherefore
the separation of us twain being once necessary, will we, or nill we, it
seems to me, that it be better voluntarily made between us, being now
living, in good health and in perfect amity; than to abide till we be
constrained to depart by death in grief and sadness. And for that cause I have
thought good to signify thus much unto you, that within these few days I must
depart from your most loving company.

At this word Priscaraxe touched to the heart like a savage beast wounded to
the quick, cried out: O God! who would have thought it? wherewith, she
inclined her self upon my breast, her voice and spirit through anguish half
cleaving a sunder, and after a long preclusion and gathering together of her
spirits (which of sudden dolor were vanished away) she thus pursued her
talk: who would have believed (alas) that from so noble nature, could have
issued such inhumanitie that after these pleasures by thee received thou woldst
have left her, who begins but now to feel them? O Franc-Gal! is this the
franchise whereof thou bear the name? For pleasure to render me grief, for
honor dispraise, for graciousnesse ingratitude, and for love death? Alas my
dear Lord and friend (if thou will permit me to use this name) consider and
believe for certain, that by thee I am with child, yea and that of a
merueilous Son, as the destinies of my original have pronounced. Consider then
that a better part of thee, remains enclosed and co^ioyned with my body:
which being not able to live without thee, must of force die; so shall thou be
a murderer both of me and partly of thy self. But I believe not (most dear
Lord and friend) that thou have so hard a heart: wherefore telme (I beseech
thee) in truth whether these be thy words, or but dreamed by my fearful
imagination, which would the Gods it were? And in saying this, she cast her
arms about my neck in embracing, familiar kissing, and bedeawing my face with
the tears which she shed. Then albeit I was greatly compassioned, yet
permanent and constant in mine intention, I said thus unto her; Priscaraxe my
most dear friend, although my departure from thee be as sorrowful, as my
conversation with thee pleasant; yet is it so that there is nothing more
certain, than that within four days I shall depart from thee: for so it is
necessary as well for me, as for the rest of the world, to circuit which, and
the things therein contained, I have an immutable desire, as also to accomplish
a certain vow of pilgrimage that I have made to the soueraign temple, which I
never saw, neither know where to find: but I have vowed, and it behooves me
to do it; neither will I cease traveling till I have found it. Why then
(quoth she) lead me with you, and leave me not here desolate in danger of
beasts, and men almost wild, more dangerous than savage beasts: who seeing me
(imperfect of humane nature, finishing in form of a Serpent, enemy to humane
kind) will kill or burn me as a monster, and with me the fruit which is
come of your seed, in my womb, even your Son, as yet imperfectly formed: of
whom the vaticinations have promised so great things, that only might move me
to accept perpetual company with you in your far voyages. My great friend
Priscaraxe (quoth I) if I should condescend to your request, made by simplicity
and ignorance of things, and that I should accord to your demand in leading
you with me: truly, under color of friendship and humanity, I should be a
most cruel and unnatural enemy to you, and put you, your child and mine, to
the hazard of cruel death. For how long the ways be, how intolerable the
trauells, how fearful the dangers, truly your tender age and weak kind can
hardly guess: besides that, according to the form which you have, you are not
able to travel without legs on the land, nor ride on my horse Hippopotame on
the waters. For above all, his nature is that he carries no female kind, but
he casts and drowneth it and all the charge therewith: and so should you give
annoyance to your self, to me, and mine, and put us all in mortal peril.
Wherefore it is necessary that you remain here in peace and sure rest, where
before my departure I will cause you to have not only assurance of your honor
and life, but also authority and reverence to your person. And esteem not
your self abandoned of me, seeing that of my proper blood (as you assure me) I
leave you another Me, that is the child engendered by me in you; who shall
(unless my augurie deceive me) be valiant, hardy, and liverall; and therefore
so soon as he is borne (if percase I be absent) cause him to be named Alector.
For he is engendered under my Planet, and shall be borne of the daughter of
Phoebus in his plain flower, extract out of the serpents egg, which is your
body having the form of a Basilisq, that is to say Royal. And so shall be
accomplished the dream which I phantasied when I found my self first embraced
of you. Wherefore, leaving you a child of my body, you ought not to think me
wholly separated from you. Besides that, be you assured, that so soon as I
have achieved an end of my Peregrination, which shall be so soon as
possibly I may) I will return again to you with great joy: and so I promise
you by the faith of an honest man and of a true friend. And in sign of this
faith promised, I give and leave you this ring of gold, empaled with a most
fine flaming Carbuncle giving light in darkness: whose nature by composition
and casting in work under this Syderation is such, that if I be prisoner or
locked in any straight, it will become pale like the light of a raynie Sun;
if I be sick, it will be heavy like lead; if I be dead, it will wholly lose the
splendour, and become black like a dead coal: but if I be in liberty and in
health, it will hold his viue color shining as presently you see it. Of al
which effects, the signification is written in these words, Tant, que viuray.
Wherefore my most dearly beloved, I leave you, and give you this ring for
assurance and gage of my faith, (as the Ring is a proper Symbol of love and
faith) praying you in this confidence and sure hope of my return, for the love
of me to keep, and often to behold it with curious inspection of my behavior.
And this said, I put the ring upon her finger, and kissed her, which she
received both graciously and amiably, but with abundance of unfeigned and
hearty tears: nevertheless somewhat consolated upon hope of my faithful
promised return, she appeased and comforted her self.

Now during the while that I tarried with her, I passed away my time
principally in two things; the one was to get from the mountains, rocks, and
caves, such dispersed and wandering men, women, and children, as for fear of
the Cataclysme were fled for sauegard unto the high places: where they were
become barbarous, and almost savage. Whom nevertheless by sweet language and
some good deeds I drew unto me in the plain field, and caused them to taste
the fruits of the earth, chiefly of grapes, which at that time were ripe (for
it was about the time of Autumn) and ensigned him how to plant and dress the
vineyards, to mollify them, and to draw the sweet liquor of wine from them,
and thereof gave them to taste, which they found merueilous good and delicate:
the like did I of other fruits of the earth, as of wheat and other seeds. For
before they lived with acornes and flesh, like wild bores, wolves, and
ravening beasts; yea some lived with man's flesh, and drank nothing but simple
water, or else the milk of beasts, which already they knew well to feed in
the pastures of the mountains. Likewise I taught them to cut and felwood, to
square stones, to temper fat earth, and therewithal to build houses and
villages along the water side for their dwellings, and sure defense of their
persons and cattle, against the injury of rain, wind, and storms, and
against the violence of savage beasts, and to assemble themselves by nombers in
redoubtable defense against those fierce and savage creatures: exhorting them
to civil and honest company, to mutual aid, and not one to outrage and harm
another, to chastize and punish those who hurt one another by common accord,
and for the executing of Justice to constitute a wise Governor over them, to
whom, al with one consent shall bear reverence as already they had done to
me. All which things they willingly took and learned like men who are
fellowlike creatures, and easy to be disciplined, and thus they assembled in
great numbers round about my lodging along the fair River of Tanais, bearing
honor and obedience to me.

The other part of my pleasure and daily pastime was to tame many wild horses
(which in that Region are excellent) and to exercise my self in hunting and
shooting: whereby I slew great numbers of Bears, Bulls, Buffles, wild Bores,
Hearts, Lions, Panthers, ravening Wolves, Pardalides, Mustells, Powle catts and
other beasts of most fair and soft skin, whereof there was great numbers, and
caused them to be fleaed, dressed and perfumed by two of my men, who could both
do it very well, and ensign others. Of these fair skins I caused brave
apparel to be made for my Lady Priscaraxe (who before was clothed only in
linen) of so proper a fashion, that they set forth the fairest of her
humanity outwardly, as the neck, the breast, and wrists: The first invention
of trained gowns, and causes why.
but beneath her girdle they covered all the rest of her lower parts, with an
ample stole hanging down to the ground before, and with a long train trayling
on the ground behind, and covering her serpenticall tail: in such sort that
those rude and simple people apperceiued nothing, being given to understand
that this long train behind the garment was a mark and token of feminine
nobleness, which was measured according to the length of the tail; which
opinion remained yet unto this day. These brave garments thus made of so fair
and variable skins, and joined and laced together with rich buttons, costly
chains, claspes of gold, and precious stones, gave to Prriscaraxe an
admirable ornament of beauty, with increase of authority and opinion of
nobility, covering her lower serpenticall parts so honestly, whereon she b^re
and turned her self so cunningly and so easily, that she seemed to tread
little inferior to a young and want on wench; and thereon would incline her
self at pleasure in low reverence and humility to whom and where it
appertained: and likewise to raise her self right of stature more high than
the common sort, as it did become her, which got her great majesty and
dignity, yea opinion of divinity. Having thus adorned her with habits and
honor, I assembled all the people in a large meadow round about me (who degan
already to be somewhat civil) and at the sound of certain musical
instruments which my men had, many others descended from the mountains as yet
half wild, and joined themselves to the troop: and there being ^ounted upon
a platform made of boords, and being set upon a bench with the fair and well
orned Priscaraxe, after I had with my hand and mouth given them sign of
^ilence, with a high and clear voice, I began this short O^ation.

You have known by experience (my friends) how much your former savage life is
amended and bettred in all goods and commodities, by the society and humane
agreement amongst your selves in amity, peace, and justice: assuring you (that
by how much the more you do use and exercise it) by so much shall you be from
day to day increased with goods and felicity: and shall be are rule over
savage beasts and cruel monsters, which heretofore have infested you,
surmounting you in hardines, force and legeritie, and were to you very
redoubtable. On the contrary side, if you pluck up, contrary, and outrage
one another, you shall be made a proy to them, and your bodies their pasture,
and meat for the black and ravening birds of the Heavens. For by accord
little things become great, and through discord the great do lessen, perish
and fall to naught. Wherefore above all things I admonish you to civil
society, concord, faith truly holden, mutual amity, euiting of outrage,
punishing of the offenders by equitable justice, the conseruatrix of your
common wealth. Which cannot be better administered nor distributed than by one
sole head and Prin^e to be obeyed and authorized of all. And therefore it is
expedient to choose amongst you one of your Nation, a man of good understanding
and natural judgment, well orned with corporal sense and members, good,
sage, just, temperate, knowing all, and known of all: to whom you shall owe
all honor, reverence, sovereign right and puissance, by homage and faith to
him given. And therefore choose amongst you him whom you like best, and after
he be informed of the office and duty of his principality, I will crow^ him
for your King. At this word, al began to cry with one voice, Franc-Gal soit
nostre Roy, aultre Roy ne voulons con Franc-Gal: Let Franc-Gal be our King, we
will have n^ other King but Franc-Gall. The cry with the beckening of my hand
appeased, I answered them thus; That cannot be (my friends) for Franc-Gal is
not of your Nation, but a stranger come hither by adventure: and know ye that
strange Kings have seldom been good to the people of wh^ they took not their
original: besides, Franc-Gal can not resist the immutable ordinances of the
ancient Lady Anange of the universal Tower, who has destined him to visit
other people and nations of the world: for he can be with you no longer than
the day and hour present. Choose therefore among you the best, wisest, and the
most upright which you think to be in the multitude, and present him to me
mounted; whom after I have informed of his office, I will (with your consent)
establish and crown him King.

At this answer, the poor Tartarians remained sad and sorrowful: nevertheless
they assembled themselves in 24. bands, and out of every band (after
consultation) was sent one man to speak for all: so were there found 24.
excellent men above all others, in person, speech, and spirit; who meeting
together to communicate the will of the people, they were found all (a great
marvel and sign of accord) of one advice, that is to say, to refer to me
the election of their King, whom they would hold firm, stable, and inviolable:
affirming and swearing thereto by the wind, and by their Acinac, which after
their usage is as much to say, as By life and death. Having thus heard the
relation and delation of these 24. I thanked them and the whole multitude for
the good opinion they had of my judgment. Then rising on my feet with the
fair Priscaraxe whom I held by the right hand to the sight of all the people,
with a loud voice I began as follows.

Ye men of Scythia, seeing you refer to me the honor of this election, and
have so instantly desired me being a stranger for your King; for both which I
thank you: know that I will give you a King in seed extract from my blood,
whom as yet never mortal man has seen; together with a Queen of your
country and generation: that is, this present young Lady Priscaraxe, of such
form and beauty as you see. (At these words Priscaraxe inclined her self
low bending her tail in sign of humble thanks, with right agreeable
modesty: then with a sudden turn of her tail, she raised up her self in
most high form, surmounting even the Giantlie height of Franc-Gal himself,
which gave her great appearance of royal majesty). And to the end (quoth I)
you esteem not her original nobility small: know that she is extract and
borne of your land and country (which is not small, unless you esteem your
native soil small) and she is engendered of Phoebus, whom you so much honor
and worship: she has likewise an illustrat spirit of understanding, and she is
illuminated with a most clear prudence, and shall justly and wisely rule and
govern you: her name is Priscaraxe, the signification whereof you may well
understand what it imports. And if you desire a man king, know ye that in
her and within her body you have one engendered by me (whom you have so
required) extract from the most ancient and illustrate blood of the
Macrobians: who, in my judgment will not foreligne his father. And therefore
so soon as he shall be borne, (if peradventure I be not returned hither
again, as I hope I shall) I pray you and ordain that you call him Alector:
and that you take and crown him with this Helmet to him destined. And
therewithal I showed them a very little crest of a Helmet, decked with fair
Rubies which was ordained for Alector: and forthwith I brought out a rich
Crown of gold, wrought with flowers, and enriched with gemmes of all
illustrate colors, in saying unto them; behold the royal Crown prepared by
my will, and with good judgment for my Lady Priscaraxe here present, a most
fair, wise, and noble woman, daughter to Phoebus, extract out of your land and
country, and being now great with a man child engendered by Franc-Gall
Macrobius: advise your selves whether you will take her for your Queen or not?
We accept her (answered all the multitude with one cry) we accept her and
take Priscaraxe for our Queen and Sovereign Lady. Then lifted I up the
Crown on high in the sight of them all, and so easily set it upon the comely
head of the fair Priscaraxe, whose hairs were according to the Crown, saving
that more naturally they were browned, cresped, and chaungeable: which being
by her graciously received, she humbly abased her self by turning her tail,
and after that arose up straight and higher than of custom in heroycall
restance with visage full of maiestic; nevertheless amiable and gracious: over
and above her natural beauty, she was attaint with a comely red
shamefastness elevated by the fire of modesty, intermingled with joy, and
and lightened above with the glittering splendour of gold, and the gemmes of
the rich crown set upon her head: whereby her form appeared to the Assistants
so fair, Empirelike, and almost divine, that every one as it were moved with
one self spirit cried out, Viue la Royne, vine la Royne Priscaraxe: etc. God
save the Queen, let Queen Priscaraxe live, and welcome be the fruit of her
body, the future King Alector. Thus cried the whole multitude at the crowning
of Priscaraxe so high, that the aier, mountains, hills, dales, valleys, and
floods ringed again with the resonant reclaim of Echo. The noise ceased, I
addressed my speech again to them saying: Ye people of Tartarie, seeing you
have chosen and consented to the election of my Lady Priscaraxe, to be from
henceforth your Queen, Princess, and sovereign Lady, and thereby have
irreuocably transported in royal right, the supreme puissance of your persons
and substance: come therefore now and do her faith and homage. Whereto all
incontinently obayed, and first of all the 24. chief men presented themselves
on their knees, and gave their faith of homage and obedience in the white hand
of the Queen Priscaraxe, giving others example to do the like; who refused it
not, but willingly and with a good heart came to do homage to their new
Queen: bringing with them in sign of honor, some boughs from the trees, some
garlands of savage flowers, some branches of the vineyard, others wheaten
ears, and bunches of green grass: which they strowed round about their
fair Queen: insomuch that the whole platform was strowed, and the Queen all
covered with wild saffron and other flowers of the meadow, which very
graciously she received, and after the homages done, she arose in excellent
straightness, and made them this oration no less short than sweet.

Scythian Tartarians, sithence at your request the most noble Prince Franc-Gal
has constituted and crowned us Queen of this Region, of you the Inhabitants
therein, and of all that which is in your substance, bodies and goods: like as
you have called and taken us for your Queen, so do we receive you for
faithful men and good subjects, promising you Justice amongst your selves, and
defense against all your enemies, by the grace and wisdom given us from the
Sovereign, by the commandment and counsel of my Lord Franc-Gal, and by the
forces and aides of our members, that is of all of you in general,
conditionally that you keep your plighted faith to us, which being the
foundation of Justice, entertaineth and increases the society and fellowship
of men. At this conclusion every one bent their knees and heads in sign of
reverence and obedience, and being risen, lift up up their heads and hands in
sign of good will and readiness to do the commandment of their Queen, and
sovereign Lady. Hereupon I caused to come before me and the Queen, the 24.
chief men who were the fairest, strougest, most burliest, the best and assented
and speached in the whole multitude, and who had the gifts and grace most
abundantly: and demanded of them if they would not willingly employ their
lives for the defense of their Country, Common wealth, royal Justice, and of
the faith and homage which they had promised to their Queen? whereunto all
with one consent answered, that willingly they would. Then caused I them to
give their faith bare headed, and kneeling in the hand of the Queen: which
being received with oath of obedience, to sustain and defend her toward and
against al: she gave to each of them a ring of gold in sign of the honor of
Knighthood, which they received anon after, and about their necks I put a
collar of gold, whereat a Sun of gold hung; saying unto them I do ennoble
you, be ye noble men, you and your posterities for ever: conditionally that you
commit no treason or fellonie against your Sovereign. Wherefrom they all
answered that they would keep themselves, and thanked me humbly for their
enoblishing, and of the honorable presents received of me and the Queen,
vowing their bodies and lives for her and me. And all this was done upon the
Pretoire of Gazons in open sight and regard of all the people, who from far
beheld this mystery knowing not what it was, nor to what end, and meruailed
all thereat, finding it notwithstanding very fair, and hoped as much to be
done and given to them: but the common and ancient Proverb says, Not all, nor
by all, nor to all; and therefore I commanded them to separate themselves in
small companies by 9. and 9. and to place them in the medowe, and the 24, round
about the Pretoire: which willingly they did, and disposed themselves by 9. and
9. in a company. Being thus ordeiued, I sent to every fellowship a quarter of
roasted venison, 3. loaves of bread, and a great wooden tankard full of wine,
made with grapes, honnie, and water: declaring to them, that it was the first
liberality of the Queen toward them at her coronation, and inuiting them to
be merry and make good cheer: which they did, as also the 24. noble men which
were about the Pretoire, to whom we likewise sent such meat as we were served
withal. At the end of the banquet, I took my cup of gold full of wine, and
after I had presented it unto the Queen, (who tasted first of it) I lift it up
and gave sign and token that I drank to all in joy of my speedy departure:
and they likewise on the other side by showing a sign of great joy, pledged me
with gladsome acclamation. The cry ended, and the multitude appeased, I
descended with the Queen, and caused 24. of the savage horses which I had
tamed to be brought in, together with 24. morrions of iron, and as many
corslets, made of the skins of wild bores and bulls, which I had taken in
hunting, and caused to be dressed in an herb called Aarons Ox, being an herb
very strong, sharp, cutting, hardening and binding leather in a little season:
likewise 24. shields made of Tillac, strengthened with the sinews of hearts and
bulls; and 24. lances garnished at the end with leopards teeth in stead of
iron: together with 24. swords whereof I always carried a good number with me,
the which I put into the hands of the Queen Priscaraxe. These things made
ready, I caused mine own men to ride the horses, to make them bend, turn, to
give the carreere, to caper, to mount, to leap, and to fling, thereby giving
example of discipline to the 24. strong men so to govern and handle them. Then
caused I them there to be harnessed with the corslets, and the morrions upon
their heads, and then to all and every of them I gave the Accolade, and made
them Knights. The Queen girded their 24. swords about them and their shields,
and I presented to either of them a lance and a horse, whereon easily they
mounted without putting foot in the stirrup: for they were ridden naked, and
handled easelie enough for their first riding, together for that they were well
tamed and accommodated. After that, for their first exercise and pastime, I
caused them to just and turney with my men: where, after they had encountered
with their lances, they laid hands on their swords, which they never before
had handled, and found them marvelous fair in their glistering splendour;
being joyful to handle such weapons flaming like the Sun. Whereby they
skirmished so courageously, that in the end the sport had turned into quarrel,
had I not caused them to cease, and every one to take his arms again:
exhorting them oftentimes to like exercises without strife, and to all the
duties of knighthood, but specially to sustain and defend their Queen
Priscaraxe: of whom (with a last kiss and straight embracement without power
of speaking of one word to her, nor she to me, by means of the great sorrow
of heart) I took my leave, and of the 24. knights, and of all the people. All
which followed and accompanied me unto the port and haven, where my people
(having trussed up all my baggage) were already gone to prepare my good and
great horse Durat Hippopotame: whereupon being mounted with my company, he
stretched out his long flat feet, and raised his wings in the high aier: where
having once received wind, presently he carried us from the land into the high
seas beholding nevertheless the shore, where the Scythian men, and the 24. new
knights, followed us with their sight so far as they could see us, together
with the Queen Priscaraxe; whom I had left with a transpierced heart, whom I
never since have seen, and am in doubt never to see more.

The apparition and foresaying of Proteus, the return of the Queen
Priscaraxe, her childbearing, and the double birth of Alector, his crowning,
nourishing, and manners. CAP. XVI.
HOw so (quoth the Archier) did thy Queen Priscaraxe die then? No, no, (quoth
Franc-Gal) but (as I have since understood by a messenger and letters which
she afterward sent me) after she had followed me with her eye, until she had
lost the sight of me, she remained with sorrow and auguish, cold, stiff,
and as it were past her self, planted upon the sea side like a statue of
stone, till they might see the sea move and boil, and from the bottom rise
out on the foming water a great troop of Phocques or sea calves: and after
them launched from the deapth a great Seaman, old and ancient to look on,
with long gray hairs, white beard, and monstaches; dropping with salt water,
his skin yellow, rough and full of scales, his arms sinned with the finnes of
fishes, his body naked in human form unto the navel, the residue finishing
in a gross and great tail of a fish, wherewithal he beat the water, and
made it bound up in sprinckling, and bedewing all his Phocques which he chased
before him with a great wand made of a Whales bone which he carried in his
hand: who beholding Priscaraxe with his green and ougly eyes, foretold her
these prophetical verses which I have here written in the bark of a tree. And
therewithal Franc-Gal pulled out of his bosom, a roll of a white Phylire,
wherein were written certain verses, which he read, and pronounced to the
Archier in this sort. Like as the time, onee being past, cannot return again;
Even so the man which now departs (though it be to his pain)
Unto this place, no more shall come. For why in countries strange
The destinies appointed have, that he long time shall range.
Wherefore thou Queen Priscaraxe now, no longer him attend:
For once within eight turns of Moon; there shall of thee descend,
A fair and noble bird; the which shall be of double birth:
And at the last (as King) he shall be crowned with joy and mirth.
Yea he a worthy Knight shall be, and of such valurerare,
That even his looks shall cause the proud, and stronger sort to fear:
By virtue of an inward spirit, that shall be him assinde
Or rather (to discrie the truth) descend to him by kind.
Yet nathles thou shall (of him) have little cause to joy:
Yea short the time shall be, that thou with him shall play or toy:
For scarsely fledgd, with wings yspread, his soaring flight shall take
By cutting of the Air, and shall his proper nest forsake
A loftier seat for to obtain. Wherefore when time shall come
That he will needs from thee depart, do notwithstand his dome:
For if thou would, thou can not strive, against the will and mind
Of the superiall powers, who have this lot to him assinde.
But now (O Priscaraxe) henceforth (it shall with thee proceed:
Leaving three Faons in Gal his nest, extract of Peacocks seed)
Thou shall depart out of this soil, to seek with moestfull cheer
The flagrant flower of withered tree, whom thou do love so dear.
And then not finding that thou seek by long and lingering pain,
The perfect shape of humane kind, and new name shall obtain:
And with a worldly King (as Queen) thou shall a while remain
In blis full joy, upon the coast of fruit full Aquitaine.
And of thy seed shall come the first of all those worthy wights
Which after to the house of Lux, shall give their shining lights.
By twelve fair signs, so shall thou live in perfect rest and peace
Till at the length through curious care who will not seem to cease
(Because thereof thou take name) to cast her eye aside
And that disclose, which thou have sought, with all thy care to hide.
And when those secrets thine shall be disclosd, in mornefull wise
Thou shall depart that sappie soil, pearcing the heavens with cries.
Still loosing more and more the form and figure of thy Sire
And shall unto thy Mothers shape thy self at once retire.
Now therefore get thee to thy house, and see thou look not back,
With careful eye keep thou thy child, that naught he seem to lack,
And if thou would learn his name, that does these things discrie:
Know that it is old Proteus, which never yet made lie.
These divine verses pronounced (quoth Franc-Gal, continuing his purpose) the
old man plunged himself to the bottom of the Sea with his troop of Sea
calves, so that nothing remained to be seen but the troubled superficialitie
of the water, and this paper of the bark of a white Phylire tree, swimming to
the shore, which was taken up and kept, and afterward sent to me written in
such verses as thou have heard.

After then that this prophecy was pronounced and understood, the knights who
were about the Queen, and had seen, heard, understood, and kept the
prognostication of Proteus, ^ame toward her to comfort her, and lead her in,
with all the people consolating her, and so two or those knights took her by
the arms to comfort and lead her away. So they returned back, the Queen
Priscaraxe sliding so easily upon her serpenticall tail (being hidden and
covered under her long trained gown) that her going seemed divine, yea like
the Gods (who go without moving feet or knees): the rather because she was so
well apparailed, richly decked, and crowned with this illustrate crown, that
it made her to shine like the daughter of Phoebus. And when they were come to
the Pallaice which I had caused to be begun, and well advanced, the Queen
Priscaraxe (having sent away the multitude populare, who had followed her in
admiration and reverence, and thanking them of their pains) retired into her
lodging, and all the people into their houses and cabins. But the 24. knights
made their habitation the honestest that they could, round about the Palaice
royal, to be always ready at the commandment of the Queen: who (for honor
and for pledge of their fidelities toward her) took 12. young boys, and 12.
young maids of the children of the 24. knights, of either of them one to her
service, whom she caused to be clothed and decked with fair skins and precious
jewels, which I had left her: governing and maintaining her self in such sort,
that she was beloved and honored of all. And the popular people of all their
fruits, milch cattle, venisons, foul, fish, and to be brief of all that they
got by proy or conquest, would give her the first presents, likewise did the
Gentlemen knights, who above all things honored and served her, and made her to
be feared of her subjects, by their ordinary exercises of arms and cheualrie,
which they used every day before her Pallaice, continuing and increasing
better and better. The Queen in the mean season became greater and greater,
insomuch that at the end of eight months being one night a bed in her secret
chamber all alone (as one who for her lower parts kept her self the most covert
that might be, so as therwas none but two damsels only, the one called Piste,
and the other Siope, that were privy to her serpents form) the anguishes and
pains of childbirth came upon her: where after long fluxions of great dolor,
she brought forth a great lump in the figure of a long round egg, far
exceeding in bigness the egg of an Ostrich; of substance, skinnie, white,
clear, and shining like a transpiercing crystal, so as with in she might
behold a most fair child swimming in clear water: whereof this massy lump
was full, and the child wound and wrapped up, in the midde thereof. Which the
mother seeing knew not what to do, either to break this lump to take out
the naked child which she long desired, and whereunto motherly love solicited
her, or else to leave it whole for fear of hurting the fruit within it, which
mortal fear forbad her. Wherefore at length she concluded to let nature
work: and for that cause she kept it always in natural heat near to her
body and naked flesh, and in the most hot and covert places; in the night she
put it in her bed, and in the day under her furs, until the end of nine
days, that in holding it between the palms of her hands (which are of most
temperate heat) and warming it with her breath, beholding still the enclosed:
suddenly it began to unfold the members, stretching out the body, arms, and
legs, and to turn round, in such sort that it brake the shell wherein it was
enclosed, and so came forth into the hands of ye mother, who received with
great joy this child twice borne, crying in the infants voice for the new sent
of the air, at the voice whereof the two familiar damsels Piste and Siope
came in, who took it and washed it with water and wine luke warm: and being
once washed, it appeared so fair as it was merueilous to behold, and so white
as snow, with frizled hairs as yellow as gold, the body great and strong as
it were of the age of three years, strayning it self, and incontinently going
alone: and which is more, it began to laugh and play with the damsels, and so
soon as it saw the Sun it lift up the head and eyes, in knowledge of his
mothers Sire, and saluted it by and by with loud voice: but somewhat lisping in
singing these words, I salute thee. Whereat the Queen and damsels began to
laugh heartily, although they were very much abashed thereat: the rather for
that he was borne booted with buskins of siluered skales and spurred with
gilded spurs, in token that he should be a magnanimious knight. And it is very
like, that for so much as he was borne with such arms, that nature (for not
hurting the body of his mother) had provided this shelly vessel to emlose him
withal. Who after he was cleansed, he was brought and rendered to his mother,
who received him with great joy, and remembering the name which his father had
ordained, called him after this manner; Alector fair child, the Sovereign
increase in thee virtue, honor, liberality, hardines, and prowess, for of
beauty thou have not failed: and therewithal she kissed him right tenderly.
The Child as it were understanding her voice, began right graciously to smile,
and by a sweet laughter began to acknowledge his mother, who caused to call
and assemble the 24. knights, with a sufficient number of the common people, to
whom she showed the fair child, declaring to them that it was conceived by
Franc-Gal, whereof they were all glad; and accepted him for their King to come,
and for that cause in their presence, put upon his head ye vermilio^ crown
which Franc-Gal had left for him, which becommed him the most properest that
might be, and he planted it so naturally on his head, that it never after from
thence departed. After this the Queen presented him her vermillion nib of her
white dug, that he might suck, but he obstinately refused it; and when she
would instantly have applied the end thereof to his mouth, he turned away his
face, and began to cry aloude this Phrigian word Beco, beco, which is as much
to say as bread, bread: then did they present him bread, which he eat together
with roasted flesh, with a good appetite, and likewise both cheese and fruit;
and dranck without difficulty both milk, and wine of honey. Wherefore from
that day forwards, he was norished with whole meats. wherewith he grew and
fortified so great, membrous, and strong, that he grew three time so much as
other children, in such sort that at sieve years end he was as corpulent,
puissant and right of his members, and as prudent and advised in his spirit, as
though he had been fifteen years fully complete. And from that time, he
began to tame horses, to run the heart, to hunt the wild boar, to break
lances against the ground, to skirmish, wrestle, vault, leap, throw the bar and
stone, to run the stade, swim in the water, to assault and clime high trees
and walls; in such sort that of all the young squires of 20. years age there
was not his match, although he had not full six; chiefly in hardines of
enterprise: nor more virtuous in franchise and liberality, especially toward
the damsels of the Queen, and all other young and fair maids and women:
toward whom he began already to be so inclined and given, that he could not
be withdrawn their company; so addicted was he to present the humble service
of his gentle person to young and fair damsels and other maids and women:
yea and by reason of the entier familiarity which he had with his mother
(being one of the fairest exeatures in the world) he assayd to return to the
place, from whence he was issued. Which thing the Queen perceiving, and
fearing least his over hardy youth through ignorant simplicity should do some
outrage to honor and nature, like a most wise woman, determined to rear him
out of his nest, and to send him into some place where he might find me.

Of the perigrination of Franc-Gal, through the world: of the news received
from Priscaraxe, his letters and presents sent back to her, to Alector, and to
the four and twenty Knights, and what issued thereof. CAP. XVII.
NOw was I entered into the fifth year of my perigrinatio^: where, leaving
Tartary situated in the great land of Jmans, I mounted on the Sea upon my
great horse Durat Hippopotame in the harborles goulph of Pont Euxin, and having
passed the large Propon tide thereof, and entered into the Mediterran Seas by the
straights of Hellespont and the arm of S. George, I visited (toward the East
and South upon the coast of Asia Minor) Natholica, Phrygia, Pamphilia,
Cilicia, Caramania, Suria, Egypt, and the seven mouths of Nilus, Lybia, and
Barbary even to the Mount Atlas. And toward the North and West, I discovered
La Maree de Peloponnesse, and after that passing the hill of Isthma I boorded
the famous ports of ye noble towns of renowned Greece, as well in the seas of
Negropont, as of Archipel: without leaving one Isle, neither Rhodes, Candy,
Lango, Methelyn, nor Malto, nor the disperced Isles, where my Hippopotame
aboorded not, and brought me where I might descend. Likewise in the firm
lands of Macedonia, of the gulf of Larthe of Epidaure or Albany, and of the
foot of the smoking Mountains. In which place my cierge of sight, life, and
way, had like to have been extinguished, and I and all my people in peril and
danger. For from these Acroceraunes and lightning mountains, arose a multituds
of wicked spirits as well ayrie as watrie, deing envious (as is credible) of the
good advancement of human kind, or rather of my over hardy experience in
daring to attempt and prove their elements of water and air being unaccustomed
to man; and beyond the course of his condition: which damageable devils with
the wicked winds of Cecias and of Turbin, heaped together over me and round
about me, gross clouds like great mountains, one linked in another, black,
leuid, heavy, sulphurian, hot colds, and cool heats, beating and striking the
one against the other in fearful breakings, whereby and whereout abundant
and often fire flashes, and coruscations proceeded, horrible thunders abounded,
redoubtable lightnings issued, and most hard and penetrable stones fell,
together with wrestling winds and sounding tempests. By and through al which
perilous moliments these wicked Cacodemones envious of the prosperity of man,
so sturred and unquieted the waves of the seas, that sometimes they were
elevated above the clouds, and of a soddaine again into the very bottomes,
fighting and breaking their waves, and seeking above al to thrust my horse
Durat Hippopotame against ye craggie rocks and stony cliffs, or else to burn
him with their hot and ardent lightnings which 2. things were the chiefest and
greatest to be feared. But he help himself so well, with his flat feet and
with his strong and puissant tail, ruling the torment of the waves that he
saved both himself and us, who were trembling with fear of the present death
hanging over our heads. And albeit these tempestuous sprites did so charge him
with all their force that they made him to abate and strike his wings, and so
tormented, heated, and altered him, that he was constrained to drink, whereby
he became (according to his nature as has been said) more dangerous, furious,
intractable, and perilous, insomuch yt what with force of sudden leapings, rude
flingings, prompt windings, and often risings, he had almost drouned us in the
Ambracian gulf. But I kept him so uarrowly, hild his bridle so closely, and
his cruper so highly, that I made him rise up and spring out into the plain
seas. And then came to my memory the ancient lady Anange who by viue
imagination advised me to bear up the cierge given me by Cleronome, and
lightened by zodore. The which having reared on high, and ventiled to make it
burn more high and clear I might behold two celestial lights, proceeding from
the highest, to come and join with my light: by virtue of that which together
with mine endeavor, knowledge, and strength all this wicked and wandering sprits,
ayry and watery, al adverse and trauerse winds, flotes, waves, hoystings,
sinkings, thunders, lightnings tempests and al other torments departed at an
instant, and returned to the tops of those Acrocerean mountains, whereas yet
they rage, and diuelishly lighte^: whereby they are called of nauigators the
hills of devils. These wicked spirits retired into their Acroceranicall castles,
the Sea in the space of two hours being settled, became so tranquil, calm,
quiet and equal, that it seemed nothing but a field of glass; saving yt on
the top thereof floated the neasts of some Sea birds, builded cloased, and
enterlaced with vigne twigs and ears of corn, by such natural architecture,
that with pain could a man break them with the blows of a hatchet, and of
such fair and artificial building that no basketmaker or topiarie workman
could fashion the like. And this was in the time of the Brume about the 14. of
December and wintrie Solstice when the Sun enters the Tropic of Capricorn;
whereby I knew that ye birds swimming in those fair nests were called
Halcyones, who in this time do build, cover, and hatch their young: to which
birds, nature has granted thus much grace and privilege, that for the space
of 14. days, the waters and winds seem to obey them, and in this time (which
is the sorest part of winter) to appease their rigor, and to moderate
themselves, in such peaceable tranquillity, that the air and Seas are in rest,
and perigrinations sure, which I think to be done by a secret favor of nature
to this little bird; whereat I was much ameruailed, and could not find the
cause for what utility either of the world, or of this creature: the most wise
Lady dame Nature was so favorable to these little birds, as in this perverse
time to give them ye tranquillity, which she refuses to afford unto me^;
which to my thinking is unworthily done. Wherefore eleuating my cierge higher
to consider the cause more metaphysicallie, I supposed the cause of this
tranquillity, to be the return of the Son (who is the most illustrate Lord,
and ruler of the inferior things) into the Tropic of Capricorn. But as I was
resolving on this point, behold a voice which seemed to issue out of the mouth
of my horse, saying: It Is not as thou do think, Franc-Gal, this calm and
quiet space
Of wind and seas, ordained is in figure, sign and grace
Of one, I mean the child of peace, the high and Sovereigns son
Who in the time of quiet rest into this world must come.
To bring to them the eternal peace, that will receive the same
With joy; or else refuse it to their own confused shame:
Ne yet is this tranquillity in favor or respect
Of this small bird, who by foresight this calm does not neglect
To close and hatch her tender young, when stormy winds do cease,
To show that wealth does most abound in time of rest and peace,
Inquire therefore no higher cause, ne make no more a do:
But keep thy course, and take the time while time does serve theretoo.
And hereupon the voice ceased, which seemed to proceed out of the throat of my
horse: whereat I was sore abashed and astonished, and for that cause I demanded
and said, how comes it to pass Durat, and when and where have thou learned
to speak and prophecy? But he answering me not one word, turned his head
toward the West, and took his direct course with enlarged feet, and wings
hoysted up, so that within a while I arrived at the ports of Dalmace and
Sclauonia in Illyrica, and so passing through the insatiable throtes of Scilla
and Charibdis along the coast of Messina and Rliegium, I discovered the Isles
of Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, and all the coast of Apulia, Calabria, Naples,
Italy, and entered into the arm of furious Adriatieum; where at that time the
rich town without land was vnfounded: Venice.
and so passed by the coast of Lygorne, and ouertooke the ports de la Luna,
passed by the happy Gaul Narbonnoys, and from them coasted the occide^t sea
Hispaignia unto the pillars of the high mountain Calipe and Abyle, where the
great Oeean Sea makes way to pass into the Mediterrane Sea, and seperateth it
self into the great Asia, the rich Aphricque and the populous Europa. And in
all the places where my Hyppopotame took land, there let I him repose certain
days: and in the mean while, upon other terrestiall horses, or on foot (as
thou see me now, if the way were not long) I trauersed the countries and
Mediterrane Regions, visited the towns and people to learn and know their
languages, laws, manners, and fashions of living commending them if they had
wealth, and helping them if they had less, according to the wisdom which the
sovereign had given unto me. In recompense whereof I returned from them laden
with honors, graces, riches, presents, substance, and victuals; wherewith I
charged my good horse Durat for the provision of my voyage.

Now as I was reposing my self, one day arrived a messenger come toward me on
the behalf of the Queen Priscaraxe, who had followed, and sought me by sea
and land continually and all places, demanding Franc-Gal the great old knight
upon the flying and swimming horse, of whom he had heard news in all places by
evident tokens, yet nevertheless he had erred and wandered by sea two whole
years before he could meet me: vatil such time as I arresting at Cales he had
means to find me, where he presented me letters of credit sent by the Queen
Priscaraxe containing partly yt which before I have reckoned to thee, without
forgeting ye fair child Alector who was twice borne, the manner how, and his
sudden grouth: but above all things she sent me word, how that ordinarily
beholding every day and hour, the ring which I had left with her, wherein was
set the changeable Carbuncle, oftentimes she had found it somewhat changed, one
while being pale, another while dark, another while clear and shining: but
that in the 4. year of my departure the 14. of the Month of December (which
was the day wherein I was tormented in the gulf of the Diabolical mountains)
in beholding my ring, she perceived it very pale, ashy, and almost extinct of
all ye light. And thereupon she had dispatched this messenger to go seek me
through all seas and lands, and to enquire of my health, well doing, and
fortunes; and to reckon to me hers, such as had happened to her since my
departure, requiring me right affectuously to return shortly. And for that she
willed me to give faith and credit to the words of the bearer, very curiously I
asked him of such things, as had happened since my departure: whereto he answered
me very assuredly, beginning at the apparitio^ of Proteus the old man of the
sea, of his prophecy written in the bark of a tree, which he delivered me,
and is that which thou have seen, (O Archier) understood and read. Then
rehearsed he me the exercises of the knights, the honors, duties and presents
done to ye Queen: her childbirth, ye doubble nativity of Alector, his
coronatio^, nurture, manners and exercises, and his soddaine advancement and
growing. Whereof I had such joy at ye heart, yt I could conceive no greater.
Finally he recounted to me from point to point all things in manner and form,
as I have made the narration: thus having heard al, I caused him to rest
himself, and made him good chere for certain days. And the whiles I writ an
answer to my most well-beloved Priscaraxe, willing her to maintain her self
always in royal authority and maiestic, with sure and joyful hope of my
return, if death, sickness or prison did not let me: mary it was first
requisite for me (by force of my destinies) to circuit and compass the roundnes
of land and sea, until such time as by continual going forwards, I was
returned to the place where from I departed, which could not be done so
shortly, praying her the whiles to entertain her self with her knights and
people, in peace and Justice, in virtue and honor, norishing and bringing up
her son Alector well and nodly, causing him diligently do exercise all honest
and virtuous actions meet and worthy for a young prince, which should be the
greatest pleasure that I could of her either look for or receive. The letter
after this tenor closed and sealed, I writ another shorter to the 24. Knights
in general, willing and commanding them inuiolately to keep their faith and
obedience promised and sworn to their Queen Priscaraxe, to aid and assist her
in the maintenance of Peace and Justice, and honorably to keep the noble estate
of Cheuasry and exercise of arms. And for the better maintenance thereof, I
sent the^ in a little bark for that cause expresty made and apparresled; 24.
steeled and acomplet armors of double metal, and so many triangled and gilded
shields azured and painted with diverse coulors and figures of armory with proper
^uises, and as many strong lances of Sapin headded with iron: and therewithal
24. pair of spurs, the usage whereof they had not as yet experimented albeit
they had seen a certain form of spurs borne with Alector. As for the
Queen Priscaraxe I sent her a double collar of gross round pearls, and so
Alector a right fair sword of fine Chalybian azure (forged by the Chalybes,
people in Hispania being singular workmen in iron and steel) damasked: the
guard and hilts being of hard steel wrought with wreathed serpents by a most
subtle linking amelled and gilded upon the skale, their eyes being of little
clear Saphirs the poygne being of of Lycorne and the pommell of massy gold
wrought with the head of a lion, the two eyes being two rubies, and hears of
the fringe of fine gold wreathed and hanging down: and the top of the pommell
was fastened with a gross diamond: the scabard was covered with the skin of an
Adder, the fairest and best remarked that a man might possibly fee; all traced
naturally with lines of gold, or at least seeming to be guilt, so blew as
Azure, so red as blood, green like the emerald, violet in flower, and white
like the color of Iuorie: and between the lines in the black spot, it was
mayled with lesser skales like silver: whereby it appeared by-day so fair and
rich, that no work of silver and gold might compare to this natural orfauorie:
and that which is more, by night it was so clear as a lamp rendering light and
splendour sufficient to see seven paces round about it: for such was the
natural propriety of the Adder as I perceived one night, when to take my rest
I was gone aland on the coast of Barbary, where by the proper cleerenes and
nightlie splendour thereof, I discovered this kind of serpent. Wherewithal
being after my first sleep awakened, and merueiling to see in the sand such a
strange remoouing lightning, I drew near it, and beholding it to be a kind of
serpent; I set my foot on her head and slew it: neneuerthesesse for all it was
slain, yet did not the skin thereof lose the splendour, but remained shining,
albeit not altogether so lively and far off shining, as it did being alive:
yet was it of natural substance so clear and shining that all the
circumstances of the place by two great faddomes were lightened and easy to be
seen. Wherefore having reposed there all the night, in the morning I beheld the
Adder so shining by night, and seeing the skin thereof so fair, so variable,
speckled, barred, and mailed with gold, silver, azure, purple, sindal, and all
other fair colors, I caused it to be fleane, cleansed and tanned in the bark
of Cassia and Cinamom, and afterward made thereof a scabard for the good and
rich sword which I sent to my Son Alector, with the other presents: which
being laid in chests of Sapin, I caused the^ to be put in a little bark well
victualed and furnished with Mariners, and other things thereto necessary. So
giving to the messenger a rich Cassock of crimson velvet buttoned with gold, a
doublet of yellowe waterie silk chamblet, and a hat of Albany covered with
clear blew silk velvet, brodred and barred with circles in snares of love,
and knit strings of thread of gold, with a fair bow of Bubalins horn, and a
quiver of a Tayzo^s skin full of arrows, fethered with ravens feathers, I
licensed him to depart, and sent the letters and verbal answer by him, with
commandment to declare that which he had seen of mine estate. So departed he
and went his way, and sailed without any hard encountry, torment, or ill
adventure, till he arrined in Scythia; where he having taken land, mounted up
into the palace of the Queen Priscaraxe: to whom (as I have understood since
by my Son Alectors arrival with me) he presented my letters, presents, and
gifts sent to her, to Alector, and to the 24. Knights, who were assembled in
the Queens chamber to hear news of Franc-Gal (which is I my self) whom they
hold for their Sovereign. The letters understood, they accorded very gladly
thereunto, and received the presents most agreeably: specially Alector who
could not fill himself with pulling out, beholding and shaking his excellent
fair sword. The messenger being in the order that I had apparrelled him in,
and ready in the audience of all the assistance, recited all that he had seen
and understood of me, with the great honors and praises of my virtues,
prowess, worthy reuengances, meritorious liberalities, Justice, and good
ensignements, which he heard reported of me through all the places where I had
passed, and where he had followed me: whereof they were all most glad,
specially my Lady Priscaraxe, who, with a sweet remembrance mixed with sorrow
and joy, could not abstain from weeper;ing incessantly before all the knights;
who after the message declared, comforted and consolated her: and she the more
to increase her joy, put the rich double collar of Margarites (which I had sent
her) about her neck, and invited the 24. Knights to supper, who departing from
thence, went to arm themselves in the new harnesses which I had sent them, and
to put on their spurs which they never before had used, and mounting on
horsuark went to Just and prove their new armours, which merueillously pleased
them, as well for the brightness of the burnished iron flaming like the son, as
also for the sound and clattering of the harness, and for the beauty of the
helmets and shields painted and gilded. But if there were no man to whom
these habillements of such hard and impenetrable iron, and of such refulgent
splendour, seemed brave: yet was Alector clean ravished with admiration, in
such sort that forgetting all wantonness and love, he desired nothing more, than
to be made Knight, to the end he might wear such warlike habits, and see
himself once armed and mounted on horseback, garnished with shield and
spear, as for a sword he could have no fairer nor better, than that which I
had sent him. In these thoughts and desires Alector beheld the Knights, being
al armed in white, and to prove their spurs began to prick their horses, who
(being not long before savage, never accustomed to be tickled in that order)
began to run with the bridle between their teeth, to fling, and leap so
rudely that a man could see nothing in the Meadowe but Knights abated to the
earth and unbridled horses running through the field. Notwithstanding they
mounted agame, and pricking their horses more moderatly, accustomed them by
little and little to the spur and bridle. So Iusted they certain hours, and
fought with swords, hatchers of arms and clubs, bauing most great pleasure to
hear their hard armor so to sound, and to give one another such great blows
without burt. Thus Iusting and fighting a space for their exercises, every one
went to disarrue himself, and afterward came all to supper into the palate
where the Queen made them right good and joyful cheer. And after much talk
at supper held of me, of my liveralitie toward them, and of the beauty and
bounty of the arms wherewithal I had garnished them, in whose brighenes they
beheld their valor, as Ladies do their beauties in Crystal glasses: upon
sure confidence therein, they enterprised and expedition to go make War
upon the monsterous and fearce beasts keeping their Caves in the Mount Imaus,
who from day to day issuing out of their hollow rocks spoiled their cattle,
and destroyed their flocks: and from thence to pass the foresaid mount of
Imaus to fight with the Giants of India: who oftentimes accustomed to enter
upon their marshes, and to ravish their fair wives and children. And upon this
concluded deliberation (which afterward was accomplished) every one retired
himself to rest. But Alector who had gotten the flea in his ear, with the
desire which he had to be made Knight, and to bear fair white harness, could
not sleep: for, the gneying of horses, the bruit of armor, the clattering and
brusing of lances, and the blows and strokes of swords, which he thought
always to hear, awakened him incessantly; neither did he ought but study
whether he might depart before day without taking leave of his mother to go
seek out Franc-Gal his Father, whose renown pricked him forward more than any
other thing: but consioering on the other side that it should be villainy and
dishonor to himself, and grief to the Queen his careful Mother: Motherlie
pity and natural honesty willed him to demand license of her, which he
hoped (his intent considered) should not be deuied him: and upon this
resolution he slept till the morning; which being come he speedily arose and
appareled himself, and so came against the rising of the Queen to give her
the Boniour, and in humble reverence presenting himself to her on his knees,
he began his pretended suite in this manner.

" Madam, the birds of Heaven holding of the elementarie pureness of the air,
and resenting in part somewhat of the celestial divinity; following nature
the surest guide (as by experience I have seen) do cover and nourish in their
nests their young ones during the time that they be small, naked, vnfethered,
and not able fly: but when they be great, puissant and able to defend and save
themselves from other birds of pray, and that they be once fledge and fethered
sufficiently to bear and eleuate their bodies in the air then do they
disnest them; and after they have taught them to slye about their nest, they
lead them every day further and further, and finally at length let them fly
without way or trace, through the empty seeming field of the air at their
voluntary pleasure, and freely abandon them with as little thought by assurance
of their greatness, as before they had care and affection of their smalnes by
reason of their infirmity: and so send them at adventure, albeit they see the
immensall space in the air of a 1000. ways, unmarked, and without sign or
token as the earth is, and never hope either their return, reuision, or
reknowledge. Yea and when as yet they would not leave their nests, but live
idly therein like Cokoes, their parents beat them with their wings, gripe them
with their claws, and nib them with their bills until such time as they have
chased them by force out of their nests; wherein no bird of good fught ought or
will remain after it be flegde, and sufficiciently fethered to rise in the
air: this I have spoken Madam; and to advance my self further to speak in
your honorable presence, youthful shame, motherly reverence, and childish
fear do defend me: but I know your wisdom to be so great, that you
understand well enought whereto my speeches do tend." Then the Queen
Priscaraxe, who by an occult and ingenious prudence given her by Phoebus her
Sire, knew what he would have said, by the only opening of his mouth: and who
was not ignorant, that by this gentle figure of the bird, her dear Son
Alector demanded of her privy leave to go search strange adventures, and
Franc-Gal his Father: could not abstain from shedding forth gross ceares in
harkening too, and beholding her Son speaking on his knees before her, under
such humble and figuratrue speech of the bird, not daring openly to discover
the request of his desire, which sufficiently he declared under the image of
the birds: which brought the Queen in memory of a dream which she had the
night before, wherein it seemed to her, that her little sparrow which in
delices she had nourished so tame that it would fly round about the house
reasonable far off, but so soon as she called it, it would at her call
return and come to her fist: and in her sleep she had seen it soddainely to
become a right fair and great bird of brave and diverse plumage, with a face of
horn, a bearde of flesh, neck and legs like to a Griphon, breasted like a
Lion, and sighted like to an Eagle, which departed from her further and
further, and would not return, for all the calling she could make: but flew
so far and so high that she lost altogether the sight thereof. Moreover
there appeared to her in vision, that she lost three other in a cage to go
seek this: and through great desire to follow it, two great and large wings
were given her, wherewithal being carried into diverse places to seek her
sparrowe, she could not find it: but in the end she rested and reposed
herself upon the high tower of a strong castle, where her wings fell of, and
her serpents tail turned into human legs and feet: and thereupon waking the
vision vanished away: whereof well understanding the signification and fore
thinking of that which would follow, nevertheless knowing that the assign of
the celestial ordinances must be fulfilled, together fearing lest the
unbridled wantonness of Alectors youth, and the over familiar conversation of
the great Son with the young mother without husband, might breed either
criminal incest or defamed suspicion, she resolved her self (as before she
had determined) not to hinder his departure, but rather honestly to license him
to go, under good occasion of sending him toward his father. Wherefore taking
him by the hand and making him arise, she said thus unto him: " Alector my
fair Son, my dear Son Alector: if I shed tears be thou not abashed: for
having passed short time with joy in the company of my Lord Franc-Gal thy
father, I somewhat consolated my self to have such a pawn of him and his
promised return, as is thy person engendered of his blood. But now seeing thou
art inclined to abandon me and follow him, and that by celestial destiny it
must needs be so, feeling my self at this instant as it were bereaved both of
husband and Son the two dearest persons to me in this world, no marvel it
is though I be sad, for the anguishes of perpetual want do already enuiron my
soul; my heart tells me, and my dreams presage me that I shall never see
either of you both again. Notwithstanding since I am not ignorant that
childishnes and puerilitie being over past, and youth entering it is neither
honest nor expedient for a young man which is extract and come of a noble race
to remain vnglorious specially under his mothers wing, but rather follow the
virtuous steps of the father, if so he be (as is Franc-Gal thy Lord and Sire)
and with hardines of the execution of his enterprises to search the immortal
honor by happy pursuits of great fortunes and strange adventures, whereto the
supernall powers do call and conduct him: whereto then being eternally
ordained, as I cannot so will I not resist it. Wherefore my fair Son
Alector, my dear Son Alector from henceforth I give thee license (albeit to
my great sorrow and heart grief) and liberty to depart to morrow morning
without letting me know or understand thereof, for mine eyes and heart will not
serve to feel and see it. On this condition that (having found by seeking
through the world, thy Father Franc-Gal whose renown will ensign thee where
to find him) thou take the order of Knighthood of him, for of a more wise,
valiant and virtuous man thou can not receive it. And the soonest that is
possible for thee, to lead and bring him toward me and thy self with him,
for so shall thou promise me:" In this speaking she put forth her hand, and
Alector kissing it (with his own first) covered it with great reverence,
promising and swearing by his faith, to do the Queens commandment to the
uttermost of his power. This done, said, promised, and permitted Priscaraxe
gave to her dear Son two fair shirts as white as snow, as sweet as balm,
a fair vermillion hat of purple lether checkered, a fair coat to ride in
(made with the needle) of diverse colored silks, wrought with embrothered
feathers naturally painted like the Oriental birds, with great large and
hanging sleeves, and a fair Iacket above that, wrought and friaged with golden
thread waued, all which was made and wouen with her own proper hands; and
taking from her neck a most precious and rich chain of gold, put it about the
neck of her Son Alector to show that he was come of noble blood, and so most
tenderly and pitiously kissing him she bad him, adieu; for she had no more power
to speak to him, but retired into her secret chamber that she might weep her
fill, and by force of tears let out the anguishes and sorrows which oppressed
her heart. Alector on the other side moved and naturally compassioned with the
dollor of his Mother, yet nevertheless right glad for having obtained leave,
returned to his chamber which was within the Queens Palace, and preparing al
his trinkets, caused the fairest and strongest horse that he could choose to
be made ready, trussed up a little male, and after he had rested and slept
certain hours in the night he arose before day, and apparrelled him in all
that which the Queen had given him, and so mounted on horseback, and departed
all alone, without speaking or bidding farewell to any person, taking his way by
land (for the Sea was as yet to him unknown) upon his left hand toward the
East, leaving Europa on his right hand, choosing Asia and entered into Suria,
passed the river of Euphrates to go into Persia and the Indes, where he
encountered with such adventures as he afterward told me, and as thou shall
hereafter understand.

The process of the peregrination of Franc-Gal through the World, with the
discovery of the Seas, Isles and land. CAP. XVIII.
WHiles these things were this a doing in the interior Scithia, after I had
sent back the messenger which found me in Calis, I mounted on my good horse
Durat Hippopotame, upon whom (leuing Hispania and Mauritania which I had
suffciently visiired) I entered and passed boldly the straight of Iuberaltar or
of Hisphal and came into the great Ocean Sea which does contain in his
compass the whole earth. Then taking my way on the right hand toward the
North, riding over the great fishes and Britanicall whales, I coasted the
riuages of the exterior Spain, of Portugal, of the Ocean Gauls, of the great
Isle of Albion, called great Britain of England, Scotland, Iuuerne, Ireland,
the Islands of Orcades, and the vtermost Thule. From thence returning on the
right hand toward the West, I went to see the lands of Corterar, of Terra
Florida, the country of Chamaho Temistitan, Beraigne and Peru, abounding in
gold and precious stones; Cuba, the lands of the black Moors where the birds
be green, the trees red: the Isles of the Giants, and the country of the
cruel Canibals deuourers of men, without forgetting the Isles lying in that
Occidentiall Sea, as the fortunate Isles; the Isles of Canary and Madera:
Zipangre and the 7448. Isles of the Occidentall Archipelagus. Then takin my
return by the Meridionall, and passing under the Tropic of Cancer through the
Hesperian goulfe, I coasted all the interior Libya, and entered into the sarre
of Magatian, and into the peaceable Seas without torment, and so went to view
the happy land of Calensuan. From thence I returned by the coast of Afric
toward the South, and passing under the Equinoctial, I came to coast the high
and low Aethiopia, the Nigrites, the Realm of Gambre and Senegue unto Capa de
bona esperanza, and so to the Troglodites habiting under the earth. From thence
coasting Arabia and the lands nigh the red sea I passed along the Realms of
Goa, Canouer, and Calecut, and so visited the great noble and rich Isle of
Taprobane, Perne, the Isles of Malucques, and the two Iaues: and having
compassed the black Realms of Quiola, Melinde, Scilam, and Habest, I vizited
Zaphal the Isle of the golden mines, and came to the Realm of Quinsag, and so
entered into the Barbarian Sea, and from thence into the Indian seas. I passed
the Realm of Cathay, and entered into the high India, and took land at Tangut
to repose my self a while, hoping anon after to trauerse the region of Bator
and to come into Tartary, and so having made the whole Tonrne of the lands,
seas, and Isles, to render my self again to my most well-beloved Priscaraxe.
And know (O Archier) that over and about all these marinall iournies, in
every country and Region where I landed, I trauersed the firm lands most
commonly on other earthly horses, to know the diversity of the towns,
countries, and manners of men: reforming them if they were barbarous, and
bringing them to civility if they were savage and cruel, ensigning them
Religion of honor to their Soucraigne, Virtue, Faith, Justice, Temperance and
Marriage. Likewise teaching them to know the good fruits, plants, trees,
roots, herbs, grains, and metcalls which they had in their regions and knew
not: ensigning them also hushandry, and to till their grounds, vinyards, and
gardens, with the workinanship and making of garments and houses: and by force
of arms chastening the wicked and obstinate, doing violence and outrage to
other men: likewise purging the country of monsters, of evil and dangerous
beasts: and doing infinite other acts of virtues which should be over long to
reckon, and loathsome to thee to hear, and to my self less honorable to
declare my praises by mine own mouth. But thus it fell out, that by these my
merits and good deeds, I got the favor, love, and good will of all the Princes
and people of the world: receiving of them innumerable riches, presents, and
precious gifts, of all the best and excellentest things which were in their
countries and Region, but above all I got to my self an eternal good renown:
whereby being known, reclaimed, and beloved through the world, my Son
Alector serching me, could not fail to understand news of me every where:
enquiring always for the great old Knight upon the swimming and flying horse:
who finally came and found me at Tangut, having trauersed other terrestrial,
ways, than I had passed, before I came into the Scythian Region where I
engendered him upon Priscaraxe, as I have recited to thee before.

The Voyage of Alector seeking his Father, the news which he had of him after
he had been ravished at the River of Tygre, where he slew the ravening
Woolues. Of the taking of the shield at the Trophie, of his fall, and of the
invisible laugher. CAP. XIX.
WHiles I was in my far travels, Alector was on the other side traversing the
regions of Asia Minor, the great Mountain of Tor, the floods of Tygre and
Euphrates: but in passing the Tygre being a rauishing flood, and impetuous like
an arrow (whereof it bears the name) his horse, for all his strength and
force he had, was nevertheless ravished by the running stream of the water,
which he could not withstand, and was carried into Armenia to the foot of a
mountain, where he took land: and after he had shaken his ears, maine,
tail, and whole body to cast of the water, he began to neigh aloud. At this
neighing two ravening Wolves deseended from the mountains seeking their pray
upon the neighing beast, and with wide and open throat, threatened nothing but
to devour him, howling most horribly. The horse naturally knowing his
enemies, began to snort and fling furiously, in such sort that he stroke one of
the wolves which would have fastened on him behind and have lopen upon his
croup, whiles the other assailed him before. But the gentle horse, seeing the
one, and feeling the other, gave such a fling with his two heels against his
breast, so rudely, that he sent him stre foot back to the earth, amassed, with
his sides broosed. And with that rude fling it behooved Alector to fall to the
ground: who fearing more his horse than his own person, arose speedilis with
his good sword naked in his hand, and presented himself before the great
ravening wolf, who perceiving him, left the horse, and flew upon Alector,
throwing one of his paws upon his head, thinking to have stroke him down, and
after to have strangled him with fair teeth: but he found the green hat of
lether hard and strong, which defended him from hurting his head, and yet for
all that he plucked it of and left him bare head. Alector in the mean while
slept not, but with his good sword gave such a stroke upon the care of the
beast, that he stroke it off with part of the head, and the stroke falling upon
his shoulder, cut off his foot and right leg. Where with all the beast being
enraged, began hideously to howl, and so as Alector (thinking that he had
slain the beast) slooped down to take up his hat to cover his head, the
ravening Wolf through mortal rage caught him by the arm which he had naked,
with his sharp teeth, so straightly, that with the pain he felt, almost his
heart had failed him: but his noble hardines caused him to take courage,
whereby he gave such a thrust with his sword into the body and heart of the
beast, that with the issuing of the blood his life departed, and force failed:
his teeth notwithstanding remaining in Alectors arm, through mortal
conunision so faslned, that he could not recover it from the dead beast,
having but one hand wherewith to help himself. His horse on the other part had
so trampled the other Wolf with his forefeete, so beaten him with his hinder
heels, and so pressed his neck with fair teeth, that he had made an end of
killing him, the Wolf lying dead stretched out upon the earth, and the horse
afterward snorting and neighing. At the noise whereof issued a fisherman out
of his house which was thereby; because he got his living with catching of fish
upon the river, with nets, hooks, and a little boat. This good fisherman
seeing these two ravening Wolves dead, was merueilously astonished at the
valor which he saw to be in so young a person, and sore compassioned of the
evil which he saw him suffer. Wherefore he approached nere him with
salutation and gentle speech, and by force of his hands, and strokes of a betle
upon the jaws of the Wolf, and with a knife which he had abouthin, het opeaed
the teeth of the Wolf, and delivered the arm of Alector, who seeing his
victory at the first combat with his sword which he had ever made, through
great joy he began to sing aloud and clear in the Scythicq language,
Cokolostis, which is to say, Victorious. And thereupon the Fisherman led him to
his cottage and washed his wounds in warm wine and Miske with sage: applying
thereto leaves of the herb Peoesne, with the skin cut from the Wolfes foot,
which he flead off whiles it was hot, wherewith he covered his arm so just,
as though it had been a sleeue made expressy for it. In the mean while an old
wife which he had, put some fish into the pot to boil, and other some upon
the gridion to roast: then spread she on the ground a large Hearts skin cut
round, and set thereon Barlie Bread reasonable white, baked upon a tyle, with
dried Raysins and Apples, with Wine made of Honey and water, enuiting simply
their Guest to eat and drink; whereto he accorded most willingly as one that
had need thereof. Whereupon they sat down with their legs a cross about
this fair table cloth without seame, where the old wift served them with
boiled and roasted fish, and with store of fruit. So they eat and drank at
their ease, devising of the adueuture, and how the impetuous flood had carried
him, unknowing in what country he was. The Fisherman told him that he was at
the foot of the mountains of Armenia. Then Alector demanded of him, if he
knew no news of me, giving him tokens of my swimming and flying horse. The
Fisherman told him, that above two years passed he had seen mounting
against the river such a great and huge horse, carrying diverse persons and
other things, but amongst the rest, a strong, great, and fair personage armed
with the skins of Lions upon a white harness, carrying a great shield with a
Sun of gold in a fleld of Azure: and afterward that he had understood, how
this great man had discomfetted and overthrown a great company of thieves
which robbed and spoiled the whole Region: for which cause the country had
done him great honor. As touching the fact, he spoke troth, for in my voyage
by Sea, coasting the riuages: all the mouths of the Rivers which I found, I
was accustomed to enter them, to see and know the Towns and Countries lying
there about in the continent: whereby it happened that passing the Persian
gulf alongest Arabia, and viewing the mouths of this fair River Tygre
falling into the Sea, I entered into the same, and so mounted against the
streams. And by fortune apperceiuing a Carauanne of Arabian thieves and
robbers, who under the conduct of a puissant and valtant (but a wicked) Knight,
enfested the whole Country. In so much that having understood the popular
complaints, I landed with my men (whereto those thieves had likewise fainedly
enuited us, to rob and spoil us) and so set upon this Cauaille and evil
harnessed company with such hardines and exployt, that of a great number of
them, there remained but five, who saved themselves by flight, and we pursued
them to Mount Caucasus, where we overthrew them all, together with the great
Knight, who bearing a shield with a Cock of gold, defended himself so long as
he could, and yet nevertheless would never render himself. Wherefore with a
great stroke of my sword, I cloue his head in twain, and then hong I up their
arms and the shield above them all, upon an old tree which was in that place
in the form of a Trophie: and caused the valiant Knight to be buried at the
foot thereof, who through obstination to my great grief had caused himself to
he slain. And so for that time we purged the country. This done, one night I
returned into the Persian sea by the other mouth of Tygre (for it emptied it
self into the sea by two mouths, the one notwithstanding, not far distant from
the other) and took my way toward Madagascar Zanzibar, and the Isles of the
Grifons. Alector hearing this news of me, was wonderful glad, wherefore rising
from the table he thanked his host and hostis for their gentleness. And for that
he had found the sleeves which was made of the skin of the Wolfes leg to be
very fair, and well beseeming him (for he had his arms naked, for so much as
the sleeves of his coat did not cover him, but were open and hanging by like a
coat of arms) he required the fisherman to flea the other leg for his right
arm, and to flea and give him both the skins of the Wolfes, which the good man
most willingly performed: and Alector more willingly arcepted them and thereof
made fair bardes for his horse, saying that he had well merited to have part
of the spoil, for that he had been participate of the danger, and done his
duty in the fight. Wherein this young youth well declared that he was come of a
frank and noble nature and birth: having thus harnessed and barded his horse
with these fair skins of the ravening Wolf, he mounted upon him and took
leave of his host; having understood that I had gained the height he
determined to follow me, and to mount up against the impetuous river of Tygre,
not by the rauishing way which had so carried him away, but by the surest way
of the land. And rode so long by many iournies, that one day at Son going
down he found himself at the foot of one side of the mount Caucasus in a
plain divided into three high ways: where was a place of reasonable space and
ample enough, and in the mids a Trophie erected upon the body and branches of a
great old and dead tree, charged with all sorts of harneys, Lances, swords,
and shields. In contemplation whereof, Alector who had a singular pleasure in
arms, alighted, letting his horse feed on the fair grass which was about
the tree, and with great contemplation began to behold these sorts of arms
hanging upon the Trophie of the tree. But above all the rest, his eyes
following his affection, were most fixed upon one fair and great shield made
in form of an egg and covered with a plate of brass whereon was elevated a
Cock of gold, armed and spurred with Gules in a damasked field of green
synople, the Cock being raised on his tiptoes, beating his wings, and looking
up a loft. This shield so pleased this young Alector (as youth is delighted
with such pleasant pictures) that he concluded to take it off and carry it
away for the couerture and ornament of his body, as also he would have done the
other arms, but that he fame them over great for the corpulence of his age:
as also for that he had been advertised, that to put on harness before he was
knighted, appertained not unto him. Wherefore considering that he was but an
Esquire to whom it is lawful to carry a shield, as arms of defense and not
of offense; and ignorant that the Trophies are inviolable like to Sepulchers,
through simple affection and desire, mounted upright on his horse, and reaching
as high as he could with the point of his sword took down the shield which
hong on the highest of the shield, his horse apperceiuing a fair fountain
running at the foot of the mountain amongst a sort of trees, and being a
thirst of his daily travel, stole away from under his master to go drink,
wherewithal Alector fell down with his naked sword in his hand and the shteld
after him. And at the same instant he might hear a great laughter of one who
mocked him with open throat. Whereby thinking that there had been some body
hid there about, who with laughing had mocked him at his fall, he suddenly
arose, put the shield about his neck and the sword in his hand (as he was of
nature cholerik enough and proud, and as glorious of sudden rising as
shameful of his fall) with a fierce and long voice, said: what art thou that
laughest, and mockest me in secret, as though it were at a lubber, for being
fallen not of feeblenes or ill attempt, but by the stealing away of my horse who
hild me up. Laugh not, nor mock not, but only come and show thy self in
place, and thou shall be very highly mounted if I lay thee not a long more
rudely than I my self am fallen. At these words the other began to laugh more
louder than before: wherewithal Alector being more moved; how comes it to
pass (quoth he) that there is such mockers, in this country? Ah villainous
mockers, coward and over hardy, thou laughest, and dare not show thy self,
but I will find thee well enough, and guard thee well from laughing. And so
(full of impatient indignation) he went searching from one part to another this
fair laugher, who so much more continued: and when Alector was in one place,
he might hear him laugh in another right against him: and when he went the
other, it seemed that he laughed on the other side, so as this invisible
laughter, caused him with hot fury to run here and there from one side to
another, dispising, threatening, provoking, and beating the bushes and brakes
with great strokes of his sword laid on in vain through dispitefull wrath,
until such time as the night ouertooke him being very black and obscure.
Wherefore Alector being wearied and traveled with running and turning, with
casting and flinging of his strokes in vain, as also with hunger and thirst
which he had suffered a great while, apperceiuing the obscure night to
approach, and fearing to lose his horse, bethought him to leave his laughter,
doing him no other harm, nevertheless threatening and assuring him that the next
day he would find him and make him change his laugbing into weeping; whereat
this ridiculous spirit (as he was) began yet more louder to laugh and in good
earnest: for Alector was well guarded that night from finding his laughter the
next day. Seeing therefore that he profited nothing in tormenting himself to
seek after him, he took a Hare which he had stricken and flaine in a bush,
thinking that it was his mocker, and by the cleerenes of the scabbard of his
sword made of the Adders skin (as I have declared before) he followed the trace
of his horse toward the mountains, while he came to the tuft of trees where
he found his horse laid in the grass up to the belly, eating and reposing
himself by a fair and clear fountain, issuing from the foot of the
mountain. Then his choler being passed, he said, that his horse after his
kind was wiser than himself, who after his labor took rest and food, whereas
he travailed in vain and hunger. Wherefore his sword put up into his scabbard,
and the shield (which so much pleased him) put about his neck, and the thongs
very straight knit and locked for fear of loosing it: he took his Hare, flead,
and panched her, and then washed his hands in the spring, and drank (for with
chafing himself with choler and travel, he was very thirsty) and so having
pulled his Hare in pieces, eat the flesh raw (which was no nouels to him)
so much as he pleased, and til he was satiscted: then went he again to drink,
to wash his mouth hands and face with the clear water of the fountain, and
being thus refreshed he laid him down upon his shield by his horse, where
being weary with daily travail, he fell into a profound sleep.

The apparition by night of the great black Knight challenging his shield of
Alector, what the Knight was, and of the talk passed between them: and how
this black Knight carried Alector away in the air toward his Father at
Tangut, and let him fall laughing. CAP. XX.
Toward midnight as Alector was in his most prosound sleep, him thought he
heard a fearful voice, which in frightful wise said unto him: Alector thou
thief, these Alector and sacrileger, restore me my shield which thou have
taken and strooken down from the violated Trophie against all right, and after
for recompense have sought to beat me with the strokes of the sword: restore
it me I bid thee. At these words Alector wakened with fright, and arose in
haste: and so he might apperceiue before him, a great black and fierce Knight
with a pale visage like one who had been dead long time before: yet
nevertheless one foot and armed in all parts with some of those arms which he
had seen the day before upon the Trophie, save only that he wanted a shield.
Which great black Knight, said to him again thus: Alector, thief, sacrileger,
and perjured, thou have robbed me of my shield, polluted and violated the
sacred Trophie: and thou being none other than an Esquire against the vow of
nobility have taken arms against me, who am or have been a Knight, seeking
with all thy power to kill me: yea thou have flaine and (which is worse) eaten
one of my companions of housh old: and now do thou think to escape thus with
thy rape and sacrilegious theft? Restore me my shield. Alector understanding
himself thus injured not in his beard (for beard as yet had he none saving
that of flesh and blood) but in his face and visage, was merueilously chafed in
his skin: yet nevertheless waighing the reasons of the black Knight (which
soemed to him not unreasonable) like a youth well taught (as he was) answered
him thus: I have not stolen the shield, but have taken it openly as a thing
publicly abandoned of all men, and in the open sight of all men which would
have beholden me, yea of the laugher who mocked at my fall, and after hid
himself. I know not whether it were thine own or not: for if I knew? But
well, I am no sacrileger, at the least wittingly, for I never knew til now,
what a Trophie was: neither whether it were sacred or profane, truth it is I
have taken the shield, because it seemed to me fair, and necessary for me
and my body, and hanging there unprofitably upon an old tree, the which
notwithstanding I am ready to render to him, to whom it shall be shown me justly
to appertain; otherwise not, for it fitteth me well. And to say that I have
falsified the oath of a noble Esquire, and committed felony toward the order
of Knighthood; I have not done it, neither would do it. Truth it is. I sought
with my sword a foolish laugher, and scoffer, who (as it seemed to me) mocked
at the fault which my horse made me: which laugher I well heard, but I could
never see nor find him: saving yt in a bush (where me thought I heard him
laugh) with a strokeof my sword cast at adventure I killed a fat Hare, which
there was set. I knew not whether that Hares laugh in this country or no, but
this I am sure of, that I was laughed and mocked at, and that I have eaten her
with a good appetite. As for thy companions which thou say I have slain and
eaten: I know not who they be, for I never saw them, unless they be Hares,
and that thou thy self art some Devil of a Hare, for thou seem to me not
much more hardy: and the common saying is, that Devils do wittingly transform
themselves by the fields into hares. Wherefore show me thine ears, and tell me
what thou art: whether thou be a Hare or a knight, which are very contrary.
For a knight rides on horsback and is armed, hardy and valiant, or at
leastwise ought to be: and the Hare goes on foot, is very searefull, and by
nature unarmed of al defense, both of horns, teeth, claws, poison, hardness,
and all, saving of a certain fearful legerity: which is the cause that he is
ye most fearefullest beast amongst all other creatures, and a pray to the
Eagles of the air, and dogs of the earth, and Chamarins of the water: yet
should he not find it, especially in the dog days and eleuatio^ of the Eagle;
wherefore telme if thou be a knight, or a Hare, or a devil, or the laugher and
mocker of whom I would willingly revenge my self if I could meste with him. I am
no Hare (quod the great black knight) but the hare which thou have slain and
eaten was my companion; for he kept company with me in my sepulcher: I am not
fearful (for no man can do me more harm) neither was I ever, but have been
in my time a worthy knight, hardy, and enterprising great things, of nature
franck and liberal, extract out of the noble lineage of ye Macrobians, and
called Gallehault, as witnesses my shield which thou bear, wherein is a
Cock regarding high toward heaven, whereby I would signify my high
enterprises and hardines: and of such virtue is the shield that whosoever
carries it, shall never have fear or doubt: and it is that which makes thee
now so assured against me. Now it happened me thus, that for my great
frankenesse and excessive liberality (which is called prodigality) I became
very poor, and yet nevertheless I would always maintain my greatness and
magnificence, for the atchiuing whereof, I was constrained for want of mine own
to take of other men's. Wherefore having assembled to me a great company and
carrauanne of Arabinas, wicked people, and apt to do evil, I destroyedal this
country with robberies, assaults, rauishments spoylings and thefts, keeping with
my men all the ways, corners, and passasses, with the ports of rivers and seas,
taking away the arms, horses, rings, iuels, stuf, apparel, gold, silver, and
merchandise of such as we took, selling their bodies for slaves, or abusing
the^ luxuriously if they pleased us. Nevertheless this life (whereto proud
poverty had brought me) pleased me not, but I had it in abomination: and for
that cause I determined, that after I should be gotten up again insubstance,
to have killed all my companion thieves to the end they should do no more
evil, and to retire my self, and return to my former honorable, liberal,
and less prodigal life. But of this pain, one of my great uncles of the
Macrobians called Franc-Gal which is thy Father, delivered me: whom I know
thou go to seek, and whom I will cause thee to see to morrow, in recompense
of the pleasure which he did in delivering me from the wicked life which I
led. For being mounted upon an Hypoppotame, which is a great flying and
swimming horse in the River of Tygre with some company of valiant men; for so
much as we were many mo in number, wherein we trusted, we invited them by
feigned courtesy to take land and come and rest with us, which they did, being
advertised before what people we were, and for that cause they searched us.
Whereupon incontinently as they were descended well armed and weaponed, they
flong upon us with such fury and valor, that notwithstanding the great
resistance which I made, all my Arabians were slain and discomfetted by the
great prowess of Franc-Gal, being half a Giant, who stroke not a blow
without laying two or three on the ground. So were the takers taken, and the
spoylers spoiled, except four who through their legeritie fled, and I after
them. But that saved us not: for Franc-Gal who by sovereign force and natural
agilitie ran faster than any horse or heart followed us not running but flying
(as it seemed) unto the place, where not able in have to gain the mountain,
and seeing him alone, we returned five against him, and I my self more than
any other resisted him: as for my companions, he had sone cut them in pieces;
but I hild him tack reasonable long and hardy enough in the virtue and
couerture of my shield desending my self with great courage: whereupon he
seeing my hardines and noble heart, he sommoned me often times to render: but I
being envious of my wicked life answered him, that as then I had never bowed,
and that it was deerer for me to dye, than either to require mercy or receive
it. Wherefore he perceiving my obstination; ah (quoth he) there is none lost
but such as are obstinate, and in saying so, he gave me such a stroke with
his sword, that he cloue my head in twain. At these words the great black
Knight plucked off his helmet and showed to Alector his cloven head, in such
sort that one might perceive the brains consumed with worms, then putting on
his helmet again, he continued his tale, saying: with this great stroke I
fell down dead: and Franc-Gal unarmed me and my fellows also, whose carcases
he left as food for the beasts of the earth and fowls of the air: but my body
he caused to be buried at the foot of the great withered tree in the meddowes
her about, and laid a stone upon a grave. Then hung he up our arms in the
Trophie of the great tree and my shield above all, which thou have taken off,
therefore restore it me. Alector then answered him; Gallehalt, since that my
Lord and Father (as thou thy self have confessed) has conquered by force of
arms the shield of thee, thou have no more title in it, but by right of heir,
it appertains to me who am his son, and for that cause willingly I will not
for go it, unless it be by greater force than mine, but will keep it so long
as I can for thy sake who art my kinsman, and have not any more need thereof:
as also for the honor of my Father who has valiantly conquered it, and for the
beauty and virtue which I see and feel to be in it: and therefore go rest
thy self in thy sepulcher, and let me sleep in peace. The Gallehault in a
terrible and fearful voice said unto him horribly; Restore me my shield. And
in so saying ye great black knight (which was a spright in the form of
Gallehault) took the shield with both his hands, which Alector had surely
fastened and buckled about his shoulders, and which the more he hild and
embraced. Wherefore this vmbragious black Knight lifted up the shield in the
air by a certain force and spiritual puissance, and carried up Alector also
who was fastened to the shield, and at an instant caused him to loose ground,
and raised him up so high in the air, that his horse, (which he might
perceive by the light of the clear mome, and whom he bewailed to loose, seemed
to him but a little Hare lying upon the grass, by reason of the far distance
and height that the fantastical Knight had elevated him, carrying him through
the lesser region of the air by the field, whereat this Esquire was fastened
and hanging (for it was not lawful for the knight to touch his person) causing
him to trauerse the air and winds, striving the one against the other so
rudely, that with great pain could he fetch his wind, for that the sudden
moving took away the faculty of taking breath: in so much that in three or
four hours he had carried him more then twelve hundred miles from the place
where he had found him: and a little before day he abased himself the height
of a lance from the ground over a fair green and soft meddow, where the black
Knight shook the shield to shake off Alector, but he had so well buckled it,
and held it so fast embraced, as though it had been borne and vuited with his
body and arms. And yet nevertheless for all the shaking, Alector was not a
whit astonished, but remained assured as though he had been on firm ground,
through virtue of the shield which he would not leave, saying thus. Or ere I
shall it leave, I will be slain:
Else with, or on thy back return again.
He had not so soon spoken the word, but he felt the shield loosed by the
black Knight, and he fell down upon the grass all astonished, as well for
the change of the air, as for the fall which was reasonable high. Wherewithal
this Spirit of the black Knight who had brought him thither for his good, and
who took pleasure to chafe the hot blood of his hardy youth, began to laugh
far greater and louder then ever he did, in the same voice which he had heard
him laugh the day before. Wherewithal Alector being irrited, arose on his
feet in great anger, saying: Hay my Lord Devil the laugher: it is then thou
gentle Gallhea, that mockest and laughest at me when by misaduenture I fell to
the earth like a lubber: but if I could catch thee: Is this evil done to laugh
without doing other harm (quoth the spright) thou threatnest me vainelie and
with injury, for having done thee a good turn, for if I would, it is not yet
one hour passed, but that I might have let thee fallen from above the clouds
upon the hard rocks: where contrariwise, I have let thee fall down easily
upon the grass and soft ground, for not hurting thee. And if I have a little
plaide the Frog with thee, to laugh at the fire of thy pleasant youth, it has
not been for thine evil, but for thy good. For I am thy Kinsman, and I love
thee, and take delight to help thee, as hereafter thou shall understand, at
such time as thou shall have need of me. And know that it was I which chased
thy horse to the fountain, to make him steal from under thee, and to make
thee fall with the shield. For which the poor innocent beast is now well
punished, for the savage beasts of mount Caucas are descended in great number
at the sent of his fresh flesh, and have devoured and eaten him: as likewise
they would have done thee, (being not able to save thy self with all thy force
and hardines) if I had not transported thee from that place, where I have dwelt
two years and more, conuersing about the tree and Trophie, always in watch to
hearken and attend thy coming, and to save thee my shield, which belonged to
none but thee. And all those that have assayed to take it before thy coming, I
have cast them down headlong, and ruinated them after diverse ways, and after
another order then thou art fallen: in so much that they returned no more to take
it down. For I kept it for thee, and I give it thee, carry it with thee, and
keep it well, so it shall stand thee in great stead many times. Now is my
wrath and guard atchiued, I will return to my repose, where I shall always be
ready to aid thee in thy extreme necessities. Salute in my behalf thy
father Franc-Gal whom through my means thou shall fee this day; for if I had
not this night brought thee more then 1200. miles, thou had never seen him,
reccon unto him the things which thou have seen, and show him this shield.
Tell him that Gallehault Macrobe whom he knows, sends him word, that very
shortly he will visit him, to revenge the mortal wound which he received of
him: to God I commend thee. And thus as Alector would have thanked him, and
demanded an interpretation of his sayings, he saw him soddainely changed into
a long and clear flame of fire like a tayled commet, flying through the air
more swifter than the shot of a Cross bow, mounting still toward the higher
Region through the which he had been brought, and followed him still with the
eye until he had lost the sight thereof. Whereupon knowing not what other
thing to do, he laid him down with his shield upon the grass, and
remembering in himself the calke which he had had with Gallehault the great
black Knight with the cloven head, he fell a sleep in the fresh of the
morning, a little before the break of the day, at such time as all living
creatures take sleep, by reason of the moystnes of the night falling.

The sad Augure that happened to Franc-Gal, his encounterie with his Son
sleeping: the mutual knowledge and talk held between them. The killing of
Troluat the Sea monster. Their departure from Tangut, and the loss of Alector
carried away by the wind, and the lamentacion of his Father: and thereupon the
arrival of the two old men at Orb. CAP. XXI.
THis night I had not well slept by reason of an evil Augure which was
happened to me the day before: for as I was at a window in the palace of
Tangut where I was lodged, there came flying toward me a young Dove carrying
in her bill a branch of bay leaves which she presented to my hands and rested
upon my sist: and as I did contemplate and behold how iollie she was decked
with feathers violet, changeable, and gilded round about her neck like an
enameled chain, I saw coming toward me two great birds of pray: the one a
Raven croking, who rested upon my head, the other a red Vultur who ravished
away the Dove with his claws very far off, and high, insomuch that I lost the
sight thereof, and auon after he came flying by me again carrying always the
Dove with him, which me thought was become a storke, carrying in her bill a
turning and wreathing serpent. And thereupon came an Eagle who took the Dove
letting the serpent fall to the earth stark dead, and the Vultur flying away
in the air, the Eagle carried away the Dove (resembling a stork) so long that
I saw him no more. But the Raven who was upon my head, beat mine eyes with
her wings and would not depart, until forceably I chased her away with the
blows of mine arms and hands: so that at length she was forced to arise
crying and croking in mortal threatening wise. This Augurie (which of a truth
was very sinister and of an evil presage to me) did so trouble me, and
represented unto me so many cursed significations, that I could not sleep in
all the night: wherefore being weary of my unquietness, I arose before day, and
having deliberated to depart very shortly, I went toward the Sea to see how my
Hippopotame fared: whereupon it happened that in passing through the meddow
(being yet somewhat dark) I perceived a far off a certain long light stretched
out nere the ground, yelding such a brightness that one might well see that
there was one laid thereby, and still me thought I had seen this light before
that time. Wherefore approaching more nere, and Aurora already having chased
away the darkness of the night, I saw a most fair young man sleeping full
sweetly: at the first sight of whom, mine entrails moved within me, and I
might perceive that he was laid upon the green shield of brass with the Cock
of gold, which partly I knew to be that which I had before time hanged upon
the Trophie, meruailing much how he should come by it. For after I had hong it
upon the tree, and seeing it so fair, I had great desire my self to have
carried it away, and did my endeavor to have plucked it down again, but it was
in vain: for I might as well have plucked up the tree by the root, but a gray
Crow iugging over me, cried: Labor no more to gain the shield,
For it is ordained for a twice borne Child.
Which when I understood I left off, esteeming that it should never happen to
any; for as a man dies but once, so is he borne but once. And thereupon I
remembered my self of the double birth of Alector which the messenger had
accounted to me, and therefore I imagined that the fair Esquire might be my
Son Alector: considering also the sword which he wore, which incontinently
I knew to be the same that I had sent him with the shining scabberd, which was
that which I saw first glister, beholding likewise his rich apparel, and the
chain of gold about his neck, which were tokens of nobleness. Besides this I
saw the streaks of his face resembling the form and beauty of the Queen
Priscaraxe, yea more fair and more admirable, and remembering with my self
moreover, of the fodaine and great growth, that I was informed of his advanced
youth. All which things conferred together, I assured my self for certain,
that this young Esquire was my Son Alector, which made my heart to throb and
mine ryes to shed tears through pity and Fatherly love. And thus as I beheld
him through amorous affection, he began to stretch out his arms and to open
his eyes so clear as fine cristall, and seeing me before him, suddenly he
arose on his feet, and after an honest reverence he began his speech with the
first word of truth saying to me thus: good Father what would you, that thus
peaceably have overtaken me sleeping, and thus atteutiuely beholden me. Fair
Son (quoth I) for that me thinks I should know thee, and yet have I never
seen thee before this present hour for the which I render thanks to the
Sovereign. And the first word which thou have uttered in reverence of mine age
(as I think) in calling me by the name of Father, is issued out of thy mouth
by natural instinction, for I am thy Father, and thou my Son borne of the
Queen Priscaraxe.

You are then Franc-Gal (quoth Alector) the great old Knight with the swimming
and flying horse? For other Father will I not acknowledge under the Heavens:
Franc-Gal am I for certain (quoth I) and to put thee in more assurance come
with me, and I will show thee my swimming and flying horse. To this he most
willingly agreed, so went we deuifing together unto the sea side, where I
showed him my great horse Durat Hippopotame, ye which he seeing so great, so
puissant and merueilous, that a hundred terrestrial horses were not comparable
unto him, he was astonished, desiring greatly to be mounted upon him, in
lamenting his own which the savage beasts had eaten. Then knowing for certain
that I was his Father Franc-Gal, he prostrated himself on his knees in humble
reverence before me, acknowledging me and saying: my Lord and my Father, behold
here your humble Son Alector which my Lady and Mother the Queen Priscaraxe,
has sent your O how truly has Gallehault the great black knight spoken and
kept promise, who told me that this day he would set me in such a place where
I should see my Lord and Father Franc-Gal: without the aid of which good
spirit, it had been impossible for me ever to have found you through so many
long and diverse errors. Hereupon I enquired of him, who was that Gallehault
Knight, and that good spirit who had adressed him to me? and in our returning
and going toward Tangut he accounted to me all his adueutures, and the
conquest of the fair shield in such sort as I have recited it: whereby I
understood that it was the great and valiant Knight, the thief which I has
overthrown and slain against my will through his own obstinate courage, and
buried at the foot of the Trophie, and then I knew that the shield was
destinated to Alector, but that ye black Knight threatened to see me shortly,
yea and to revenge his death; that gave me a sad signification, with the evil
auguries which I had the day before. But the great joy I had to see my Son
Alector so fair, so well borne, brought up, and taught, and of so happy a
beginning, made me forget all ill conjectures, and to set a side all doubts
and fears of infortunes which hong before mine eyes, and which as yet are not
ended. And so devising, we returned to the palace where my men attended me,
unknowing but that I was yet in bed, because in the morning at my departure, I
had firmed my chamber door, and was issued without the knowledge of any one,
for every man slept soundly. Being thus returned to the Palace, after I had
declared to my men who and what Alector was, all of them received him with
great joy, with admiration of his beauty and good grace, doing to him most
great honor and reverence, yea more than to my self (as many do rather
worship the Sun rising, than going down) for the which I was neither sorry
nor enuions; for his great beauty, virtue and honesty, did well merit it:
hereupon the tables were covered, and we went to dinner most gorgiously. And
amongst other communications which were held at the table, Alector declared to
me the great grief that Priscaraxe had of my long tarrying, and of the earnest
desire which she had of my return, for the accomplishing whereof she most
affectuously required me by him, which he also on his part most earnestly
desired, saying that he had promised and sworn to the Queen his Mother,
never to return again to her, unless he brought me with him: beseeching me
with humble reverence to do him the favor to satisfy his promises. Wherefore,
I who was no less affectionated toward the Mother and Son, than they
toward me, deliberated, and made him promise assuredly to depart the next day:
and for that cause I commanded my men to trusse up harness and baggage, to
appoint and make ready my good horse Durat: which they did with great and good
diligence. The whiles I and Alector went to take leave of the King of Tangut,
rendering him thanks for his hospitality: who on the contrary, thanked us of
the good succor which I and my people had done him with our great Hippopotame
against a horrible monster of the Sea called Trolual, so great as a little Isle
in the Sea, or a great mountain on the earth: who, at every full moon would
cast himself into the havens, ports and creekes, devouring and destroying all
that he met, and swallowing up men women and children alive, yea horses, kine,
and other beasts. This monster Trolual seeing our great Hippopotame going upon
the Sea, and we mounted upon him, thrusting and breaking the waves before him,
lanched himself with terrible impetuositie against us and our great horse,
where he thought to have had abundant pray: but he found mauchat maurat, or
maurat mauchat: A Proverb in France when one meets with his match.
for our Hippopotame (who is the most hurtful creature and greatest dooer of
harm in all the world, when he is puised thereto with violence) as the Trolual
opened his mouth so large as the arch of a gate to have swallowed him up and us
therewith: he caught him with his two great teeth before by the lip, in
raising him out of the water so high as we were, whereby presently I thrust my
lance into his throat, with the point sticking and fastening in his roof, and
the great end planted in his iawe below; so as the monster found himself fast
in the teeth of mine Hippopotame, gagged with the lance, and not able to shut
his mouth for the pain of the iron piercing his sensible parts: the which one
of my men called Cetophon apperceiuing, with a merueilous hardines and
readiness, with his naked sword in his hand leaped into the deapth of the
monsters throat so far, that he found out his very entrails and heart, which
he hurt and wounded with so many blows of his sword, that he might feel the
monster weakened: wherefore suddenly he retired himself out of this
monsterous body, and rendered himself to us again. The horse Durat in the
mean while flinging with his feet, and training with his teeth this monster
unto the shore: who through anguish of death, beating the water with his tail
had (like a tempest) moved and disquieted all the Sea, boiling and dyed with
the abundance of blood which he shed: so as three stades round about, it
seemed to be the red sea between Arabia and Aethiopia: when we were arrived
at the shore, Durat, let go the monster Trolual upon the sands, whom by
reason of his weight he could no longer draw, because his life was failed and
through dead, to the great Joy of all the people dwelling about the Sea coasts.
And this was the cause why the King of Tangut and all his people rendered us so
many thanks with most rich and houourable presents.

This self same evening Alector stirred up with a most ardent desire and
impatience of longer tarrying, with most earnest expostulation, humbly prayed
me for the first request of the Son to his Father, that if I loved him, at the
self same hour I should make him Knight, which I as one that could not refuse
to do any thing for him, easily yielded to his request, for the accomplishment
whereof, going about to speak the solemn words and to lift up mine arm to
give him the accolade, all humaiue puissance failed me, as though I had had the
paisie, of tongue, arm, and all the parts of my body: and when Aleft off, my
puissance and force came again to me, and as I would have proved to reiterate
the same twice or thrice, so often this paisey came upon me; whereby I
coniectured that either the time served not thereunto, or ets that I was not he
ordained of the heavens that should give Alector the order of Knighthood. And
therefore for that time I left off to make any more proof, deferring it till
another time and place to my great shame, and no less sorrow of Alector: in
this fearful confusion all of us went to rest, and the next day we mounted
upon the great horse Hippopotame betaking our selves to the high
Teptentrionall Seas: where Durat stretched out his large stoating feet, and
reared his wings, carrying us away so lightly yt he rather seemed to fly that
go. Whereof Alector (who never had ridden over the fishes) was so much (...)
and glad as could be: wherefore through great desire of discovering the
furthest part of the immensall space of the Seas, like a young, greedy, and
nimble youth as he was, he mounted (now go I (...) my mortal griefs) he
mounted (alas) he mounted to the top of one of the wings of my horse Dura^,
armed always with his sword and shield which he would never abandone. And as
he was perched in the highest, beholding on the one side the mountains of the
region of Bator, and the hills Anubies, which seemed to fly from us: and on the
other side the great Seas without bottom or shore: and I fea^ing least he
should fall, called on him to descend. But behold (alas) behold, a strong
wind arose from the Hyperborian parts, or rather a strong Steay and wicked
trouble some spirit who taking him by the shield, elevated into the air my
deer Soune Alector crying from the ayrie Region so loud as he could help
(...) my Lord Franc-Gal, help me my most dear Father otherwise you shall love
me, and I you, for Gallehault carries me away. In saying these words, in my
presence and view he was suddenly transported toward the land over the high
Mountains, Towns and Regions, so as at an instant I lost the sight of him.
And as though he had carried away my heart and my soul with him, I remained of
extreme dollor cold and pale, ready to cast my self from the top of my horse
into the Sea, had not my men kept me who by all means possible comforted me,
showing ^ee, that (...) he was carried to the land, there was less danger, and
greater hope of recovering him again, in seeking toward that part whereto I
saw him carried. At their words having recovered my sprites, and come again to
my self, I cried out saying: O how true ye^ how too true of signification was
the fantastical vision which happened to me at my my first arrival in
Scithia at my return from the Indies beyond the Ganges in the golden Regions,
whereof I ensigned the ignorant people the valeur and usage: and where I lay
sleeping upon the Lions skins in the place where my Lady Priscaraxe came and
found me first dreaming, how the Marygold inclined toward me: which was thou
O Priscaraxe daughter of Phoebus, and the Basilisq covered in the root, who
after ^lew away, carrying my heart with him: which is thou O Alector Basilisq,
little King, and royal child, it is thou that being elevated by some Spirit
amorous of thee and envious of me, has ravished thee through the air into a
strange land, carrying away my heart, which is my soul, my thought, and my
life. O heavens! O Gods! Wherefore do you not content your selves to permit
misfortunes to happen, without sending of us other prodigions and
significations to our double torment? first with the fear, and after with the
evil. For what other thing threatened the rauishing Vultur, the speckled Dove
coming toward me with the green branch of bay leaves, but only the
rauishing of my fair Alector carrying in sign of noblenes a chain of gold,
and come toward me with good news? But of this that I saw him become a storke
discomfiting the serpent, I cannot conjecture what it should signify, (but
only his pity and childly love, which is natural to this bird:) and the
wars against those which are wicked. And that once again (in spite of the
sinister Raven resting on my head, which threatens me of my nere death) I
shall see thee, though but a while. Wherefore I swear and make a bow that I
shall never cease traveling and searching the world, and never return toward
thee (O Queen Priscaraxe) till I have found thy Son and mine; that with both
of us thou may receive joy of our presence, as I think thou have had great
sorrow in our absence. Then turned I my Hippopotame toward the land, whereto
I had seen Alector carried, which was upon the coasts of Issedon, of the
Gangeticq Indies, of Siues, of the silken lands, and regions of gold. To
trauerse the which I entered one of the mouths of the great river Oechardes,
coasting the Nubian lake in searching all those countries, until I came to the
next port, where I took land at the singing of a bird which said thus: Get
thee to Orb and thou shall find in deed,
The sturdie stroke ywith the Serpent vile:
Where if thine eye tuke not full chary beede
It may perchance his sight from thee exile.
The which having well observed, and enquiring the way to Orb, I have found
thee (O Archier) in a good hour, who have solaced me with thy good and
pleasant talk, and with thy sweet patience in hearing my sad and
discomfortable discourses: but a sorrowful and passionated heart, finds it
self very much alleged, if it may get some Sympathicthi person to whom it
may declare his dolors, as I have done to thee (O good old man) who have
patiently given ear to the rehearsal of my diverse and finister adventures,
with compassion and condoliance, as thy tears themselves do witness: (and
thereupon the Archier, wept pitifully) and in this patience and communication
of thy good talk and company, (for the which I thank thee) thou have
conducted me hither to this place, which as I think is the town of Orb: (and
at that instant they entered into the gate of Orb.)

It is truly the City of Orb (quoth the Archier) where is the fair Theater,
and the magnifical temple of God Jove, whereof (for not dissembling with thee) I
am the Archpriest and great sacrificer, having near to the temple a most
ample and fair lodging where I dwell ordinarily, well garnished (thanks be to
GOD) with all things necessary to the life of man: where I beseech thee in
honor of Jove Xenios to take thy lodging and right of hospitality with me,
for the night draws on, and it is time to draw toward rest, where we may
after at our ease atchieue the residue of our talk. This offer presented by
the good old Archier with his entier heart. Franc-Gal refused not, but
willingly accepted of it, thanking him for his gentle hospitality, and went
with him: his Squire Oplophor following him, who of such and so long sermons
willingly fed not himself, thinking it long that they were not already housed.
So entered they into the town at the east gate called port Physe (for the City
of Orb was great and excellent fair, such as hereafter shall be described) so
went they forwards through a great, long, large, and straight street (where
every one in passing by did reverence to the Archier) until they came into a
most large place where the four great streets of the four principal gates
met together, and in the mids of the place was the great Dome or temple builded
round, the fairest and most magnisteal which possibly was to be seen, and so
high, that the top thereof seemed to exceed the clouds. At the instance of the
Archier they entered therein, and before the altar which was in the mids they
kneeled down with adoration and thanks giving, lifting up their eyes and
looking up toward heaven through a round lantern which was right over the
altar in the top and midst of the pinnacle, where infinite lamps were hanging
burning and shining night and day, which set forth the place most worshipful
and princelike. Their prayers done they arose, and by a little door in the
temple whereof the Archier had the key, they entered into a fair house which
was the Archiers dwelling, very sumptuous and magnificall, where they entered
into a fair and great hall hong with rich tapistrie, with large and high
windows glassed with imagerie, and houing prospect into fair gardens and
orchards. In which hall briefly the tables were covered, and water brought in,
and they two fitting down alone, were served with delicate and exquisit
meats. Franc-Gal seeing none set but them twain, asked where the Mistress of
the house was? The mistress of the house (quoth the Archier) is none other
then Reason and Sapience, sent by the Sovereign, by whom all this house is
ruled and governed: for being from my nativity vowed to sacred things (which
ought purely to be handled) neither my body nor heart consenting, have ever
been polluted with woman, nor other fleshelie attouchings, nor shall not be I
hope. For having by divine grace kept the virginicall purity wherein I was
borne, until this present age, which is four hundred and fifteen years,
till white snowes and cold frosts which lie on the tops of the mountains,
sufficiently declare that there shall not be much more heat below in the
valleys. And for so much as by revelation made in the assembly of the people, I
was constituted Archier, that is to say Prince or chief of the sacreds, and
not an Archer shooter, although for the avoiding of idleness the Mother of all
vices, commonly I exercise my self to shoot in a Bow at the beasts and birds
estranged from men, in which act thou foundest me, and sauedst me from the
beast enemy to man, of whom I took no heed. And so I was and am yet
Archpriest and principal sacrificer of the temple of Jove. By whose
revelation and admonition. I knew of thy coming into this country before I
saw thee, and to encounter and receive thee I was sent by him to the place
where thou did stude me: the rest, I will communicate unto thee to morrow:
for now the hour of nightly prayer calls me to mine office, get thee to rest
in peace. This spoken the Archier went to the temple, wherein he entered all
alone, about the first Vigile of the night making fast the door after him. On
the other side two Ministers with two candlesticks of silver and two cierges of
pure and sweet wax conducted Franc-Gal into a fair chamber al wanscotted
with Cypres, and said him in a bed of Ebonie garnished with clothes of red
veluer with fringes of sattain, the curtains of taffatie changeable white and
black, and the teasterne of green and broune, sowed with tears of silver. At
all which things Franc-Gal (who was one of the wisest men in all the nine ages)
took great heed, with observation of the evil presage which all these things
showed in signification of his death nere at hand for he knew us well that the
Cypres was a funeral and sepulchear tree, and that the cerges belonged to
burial that the Ebonie was a good sinking to the bottom of the waters: the
red fringed with sky color, to be the vermillion life turning into leadie and
mortal heaviness: and the changeable curtains of white and black to be a sign
of change from light to darkness, and from life to death. Wherefore Franc-Gal
who was of singular and almost divine wisdom, remembering his oracles, visions,
threatenings sent him by the spirit of the black Knight, the Augurie of the
Raven, and rauishment of his Son Alector, knew by foresight that his death was
ordained, and which he concluded to be near at hand without any fear or
sorrow, saying only that he had not seen his well-beloved Priscaraxe and his
dear Son Alector once before his death. For the human condition of mortal
men is such, that never man (how unfortunate soever he be) dies without
sorrow of some thing left imperfect. Notwithstanding Franc-Gal after many and
diverse thoughts tormenting his heart, finally concluded to that which was
necessary, and humbly to submit himself to the divine immouable ordinances:
and with this resolution after long waking he fell into a doubtful sleep
about the second crow of the Cock, a little before the break of day at such
time as the moisture of the night falling either into dew or hoarie frost,
brings drousie sleep upon all creatures.

The mornings Adoration of the Orbitans, the description of the temple, and the
manner of prayer and sacrifice. The Sermon of the Archier and chief Priest,
and the common prayer of all in Music. CAP. XXII.
THe next day after the Sun was up, the Archier led Franc-Gal to the the
temple, whose gates were already open, and the people come thither in great
multitudes to the morning adoration: Franc-Gal went on one side of the altar
kneeling down to prayer, and the Archier remained before the altar prostrate
in long and silent prayer with the heart and not with the mouth. Likewise all
those who came into the temple presently adored him whom they saw not, in
prayers of only thought without moving of tongues or lips, but with their eyes
elevated on high in most deep and admirable silence, for the imperial
reverence of the place, which was in perfect roundnes mounted upon thirteen
pillars only, but so great and massiue by reason of their height (which seemed
to reach up to heaven) that the thirteen arches were most large and spacious:
with the top and round pinnacle over the mids by agreat round hoale of three
fadom in the diameter, giving open view and prospect to the heavens: and the
curtains of the walls composed on thirteen porches with galleries erected one
above another, whereto they mounted by four vices of stayres, found out at the
third, seaueuth, tenth and thirteenth pillar; and in these galleries whose
windows were of clear glass open behind and carved before, were builded
seats of marble to sit in, and desks before to kneel and lean upon. The lower
part also was round about garnished with seats and vaults of Cedar, Ebanie,
Cypres, white Arabie, brown nut tree, and all other wood meet for
workmanship; which bancks and seats were assigned for the women to sit in. As
for the beauty and magnificence internal of the temple, it was not like to a
grange or desolate house void of ornament, but it was in all parts filled and
repaired with many diverse and fair figures, images, statues, and paintings of
stone, wood, iuorie and other things, gilded, siluered, azured, and coulored
with all fair and illustrate pigments and mettalls: which images and statues
naturally and lively represented, not only the beroycall persons of men and
women of virtue: but also all beasts, birds, and fishes, which fly, go, or
swim in the earth, air, or waters. Neither were the living creatures only
pictured, but also the insensible creatures which are in the two inferior
elements: each one having his several devise in short writing appointed,
according to their natural property, in attestation of the greatness
puissance, glory and grace of the Sovereign God whom they named Ioua. As for
example. Upon the statue of the man was written.
Of straightnes God has given thee a gift,
That thou to heaven thine eyes should lift.
Upon the statue of the woman.
Thou art endewd with beauty and grace,
That virtue in thee might have a place.
Upon the statue of the Elephant.
Of bounty and great puissance,
Is our great God his essence.
And below.
God to the good does not denay,
Both prudence, force, and life for ay.
Upon the figure of the Serpent.
He that is borne to do evil,
Shall be condemned to the Devil.
Upon the bird Phoenix.
One only of himself has been,
Whom never man as yet has seen.
Upon the Dolphin carrying Arion on the Seas.
The friend of man, is God: whose grace
Does him defend in every place.
Upon the figure of the Nightingale.
Each spirit in earth and heaven above,
Sings to Jove praises of love.
Upon the Palm tree.
The lower fortune does thee abace:
The higher to heaven lift up thy face.
Upon the flower de Lis.
Whom virtue has endued,
With honor is renewed.
Upon the Rose.
A pure soul as I suppose,
To God is like a fragrant Rose.
Upon the Marygold.
Toward the Son divine,
Turn thou both spirit and eyne.
Thus with such images, statues and simulachres, of men, birds, beasts,
serpents, fishes, trees, plants, and other things naturally and lively
portrayed, graven, erected, cut, and diuersely figured, with painting,
coloring, guilding, siluering, and gemining, the interior part of the temple
was so illustrately decorated and enriched and seemed so light some, fair,
delectable, and honorable to behold and so instructiue in the inscriptions,
with the contemplation of these fair things (outwardly showing and declaring
the glory of God and by the windows of the eyes, entering into the
understanding to illuminate the same) that they ravished the interior spirits
with an ineffable admiration of the bounty, greatness, and puissance of God,
yelding the temple so devout, religious, reverent, adorable and Imperial, that
those who entered therein found themselves transumed, and divinely ravished as
it had been in a trance. Such was the interior ornament of the Temple, in the
midst whereof was the place of Sacristee elevated upon thirteen stayres of
Marble and porphirie of all coulors, and above that was the Altar erected,
builded and wrought after the rusticall fashion with all kind of rude stones
in the property and natural fashion, without cut, work, or pollishing of
man's hand. And upon that was laid even and level a fair, great and large
table of artificial emerauld in form four square, having thirteen foot in
every square, and set just right under the clear window or lauterne of the
temple whereon nevertheless miraculously never rain fell, never wind perceived,
nor never any tempest touched. About the altar were set nine chaires gilded,
conered and garnished with silk velvet, which were the seats of the Ministers
serving at the altar, and on the East side right opposite to the great door
(which was Westward) there was three pillars of Jasper nine foot high set
triangle wise, in such sort that one was before toward the altar, and two
behind; upon which pillars was set a tabernacle of sweet wood, wrought, carved
and gilded with fine beaten Gold, and open behind, and within the same a
very fair chair of Iuorie. This tabernacle was the pulpet, whereas the
prophetical word was shown unto the people by the Archier; such was the Dome
and Temple of Jove in the City of Orb, which hereafter we will describe. After
then that the Archier being chief Priest, his nine Ministers, together with
Franc-Gal and the people were entered into the Temple, they prostrated
themselves on their faces and from time to time held up their eyes and hands to
heaven, and so continued their adorations and mental prayers about one hour in
great silence, the Archier and chief Priest arose, and after he had turned to
the people, and universally saluted and blessed them, he was by three of his
ministers mounted into the pulpit upon the foresaid three Jasper pillars:
where after he had a while lifted up his eyes to Heaven in high conception of
thought, he addressed himself to the people with a clear and intelligible
voice, after this manner.

"You people of Orb who are here gathered together to hear of me (who am but
a voice crying in the temple) the great magnificences of God: that you may
understand them and comprehend them in your souls, that you may praise them,
hear them, and thank him for them; his infused grace for the accomplishing
hereof forthwith be given you, with his benediction."

"The Sovereign God Ioua, which Was, Is and Shall Be, a name which is above all
names, and which appertains to none other but him: first has made you of
nothing, which is an especial gift of his marvelous puissance, that you above
all other things know that of him you hold your being and first essence. And
after that he has created you, not ignoble bodies, as stones and metals; not
insensible plants, as herbs or trees; not brutal, deformed, cruel or
monsterous beasts; as if it had pleased him, he might have formed you but
Asses, ill shapen pottage pots, villainous Todes, cruel rauishing wolves, or
monsterous imaginations: but he has created you men, fair and right, loking
up to heaven, whereby you hold the root of reason which he has given you: by
who^ you are made like to himself, and by him formed to his own image. Besides
this, he has made al other creatures, the elements, yea the celestial bodies
themselves, and heavens for you, and for your use and service: the earth, to
sustain and nourish you quick, and receive you when you be dead: the air, to
keep your soul in life: the waters, for your usage, cleansing, and
navigations: the fire, to revive your heat, and for your light: the Stars,
for tokens and influences: and the heavens, to receive your souls which he
has given you immortal, through spiritual privilege above all other
creatures, who being once dead, nothing remain more of them. All beasts he
has condemned with their heads enclining toward the earth, in sign that they
be subject and serviceable to you who are directly elevated: some for your
help, as horses, oxen, asses, and cammels, yea the great and strong Elephant
does serve and obey you: the others for meat and nourishment, who by their
deaths conserve your lives. See you not the good fishes both of river and Sea,
swimming in your porrages, brothes, sauces, and iuce? Do you not see the
flesh, fat, and entrails of beasts as well savage as tame, to enter into your
kitchins; and the fowls of the air to fall into your dishes; and all trees,
herbs, plants, corns, seeds, fruits and roots to be given you for
nourishment and medicine? And all this of the grace of God, and to his glory,
as the workmanship, figures, and statues of this temple do show you for
visible examples: whose architecture and building is made to the pattern and
imitation of the universal world, which is the true temple of sovereign Jove,
whose bounty and glory all these things do witness and set forth. Consider then
ye Orbitans, and acknowledge how many and how large benefits, the most great
and most good blessing of God has enlarged you with, to whom you can restore
nothing: for what thing can you offer him, that is none of his, whose throane
is heaven, and earth his footestoole? what then would this most great and good
Lord ask you which is your own, and in your power to give him, for such
infinite goodness whereof he has been your author and giver: with certain
promises and infallible premonstrance of more greater and more durable
hereafter, yea everlasting, such as he bestows upon the superior and blessed
spirits, which ordinarely assist him in endless praise and glorification of his
bounty and puissance, before the throan of his divine majesty? What requires
he of you? Or what can you give him of your own? He desires no other thing of
you (my friends) but a very small retribution and acknowledge, nevertheless he
will that it proceed from you and from your hearts. He will nothing of you
for so many and infinite benefits, but only a simple and little gramertie, one
only thanks giving and one collaudation and glorification to the benefactor:
the which we would gladly do to any mortal man, for any small pleasure that
he should have done us. But he will that this recognisance, this thanks giving
and retribution of glory be given him of your own proper, pure, and best of
the heart, without fayning or dissimulation, which cannot be hidden from him.
For without comparison he sees more cleerelie into our thoughts than we do
see into these exterior things, wherein our corporal senses may be deceived,
but he not, because he is a most pure and simple Spirit. Wherefore (my
friends) in humble and hearty thanks giving for so many benefits which he
has already best owed upon us, which he daily does, and promises to do in
time to come: chiefly for that he has this day revealed by me that this
City and common wealth shall be presently delivered of a great evil
wherewith it is troubled: for these infinite of benefits let us render unto him
all together with one heart and true zeal, with one faith thought, and will,
and with one speech and voice, thanks, honor, glory, and praise for ever and
ever world without end."



This Sermon finished, the pontifical Archier and his nine Ministers with
diverse voices musicallie according, in quauering Trebles, deep Basses, sweet
Tenors and sharp Contratenors, together with Organes, Lutes, Harpes, Violes,
Psalterions, Recorders and all sorts of Musical instruments no less
harmonious than religious, the hands and tunes according with their voices,
song these words and sentences following. O Sovereign God of great insinitie,
Blessed be thou for our humanity:
Do not refuse to hear the harmony
Of this unite accorded company:
Crying to be heard from thy sublimitie.
The gentleness of thy divinity
Our adverse fate with fortune does supply.
Honor and praise to thee O Lord on hie:
Who art the giver of our wealth and store
Grace, praise, and thanks, we yield to thee therefore.
The pontifical Archier and his Ministers having sung this Psalm of thanks
giving in example: all the people answering, sung with great devotion the same
words in like tune, accords, and sounds of instruments. And after this fair
song in devout prayer, magnificall praise, and reverent thanks giving to the
Sovereign God Jove, was song universally by all the assistants in the Temple
in harmonious accord not only of voice and words, but also of one faith and
intelligence in heart: every one of them came with great reverence and
presented himself at the Altar, humbly offering in sign of recognizance of
the divine benefits, that which they thought best: some ornaments and vessels
of silner and gold, of crystal, stone, and precious wood, and other matter
of value; some empty, and others full of sweet liquors, balmes, myrrh,
incense, perfumes and odorements, of the savor whereof all the people breathed:
others offered clothes of silk, wool and flax, of all sorts and coulors:
others brought white bread, hot cakes, and smoking pasties: other vessels and
flaggons of the best wine they had, but above all things they offered willingly
their first fruits and their first borne, whom they presented to God, and the
Archier, gave them back again in exchange and redemption of some fowls or
little innocent beasts: as of a pair of Piggions or Turtle Doves, or of a
Lamb or white Rid. Likewise offered they the first fruits of their Wheats,
grains, trees, vines, plants, and gardens, in acknowledge of the benignity of
GOD which every year gave them increase. And if they were of handie crafts,
they presented the first of their works and most excelletest pieces of their
labors, in attestation that they held their invention of the Spirit of GOD.
All which gifts being placed and set upon the Altar, the Archier blessed; in
praying Jove to extend his hand over them in benediction, and yearly
multiplication. Then the ministers gathered them together, taking for the
Archier and themselves that which seemed to them best (for he which serves at
the Altar must live of the Altar) and distributing the rest to the poor, aged,
sick, lame of body, deprived of sense, and to the poor widows and orphelins,
as well of the town, as of the country, being received, lodged and nourished,
in a great common lodging called Vaniah: but the fairest and best was reserved
for the nourishing and honest entertainment of such persons as had well
merited of the common wealth of Orb in what thing soever. For such persons as
by virtue, prowess, counsel, devotion, or other meritorious act, had done
any great good to the common wealth: were honorably remunerated, by estate,
nourishment and public entertainment in a palace called Prytan as hereafter
shall be declared. Behold how ordinarely the goods of the temple were
distributed by the order of the chief Priest: who, having done his office and
the people retired home, or where they thought best, returned into his lodging,
leading with him his guest Franc-Gal; for whom he took great care, by reason
of a vision and revelation which appeared to him the evening before, and was
such as follows.

The vision of the Archier in the Temple, signifying the death of Franc-Gal.
The assembly of the Magistrates and people in the Pretorian Basilique. The
oracle of the Charites found written in their hands: with the judgment and
preparation of Alector against the serpent. CAP. XXIII.
THe first night that Franc-Gal was received into the house of the Archier,
after they had supped, and talked, and that he was conducted into his resting
chamber, which seemed so mest full unto him, as has been shown: the Archier
according to his custom went to the temple to his evening prayers, where as he
was praying, generally for all, but especially for his guest Franc-Gal that he
might hear good news of that which he sought for: it seemed to him of a
sudaine to hear the deadly hissing of an Adder, and the intempestiue crow of
a Cock, for as yet it was not the second Vigile of the night. And hereuppon
through the lantern in the top of the the temple, he might perceive a light,
resembling a most clear Star to fall upon the Altar, which no sooner had
touched the table of emerauld, but it kindled and arose in a high and right
flame, which nevertheless mounted decreasing: and incontinently after this
Star followed a Swan as white as snow, who rested her self hard by this
celestial fire, and with the sweet blast of Zephyrus began her deadly song,
which she is accustomed by nature to sing upon the banks of the crooked river
of Mcander when she is reposed upon the wet grass, and perceives her death
at hand: and in singing distilled from her eyes abundance of tears which fell
upon the Starrie fire, and quenched it by little and little: the swanne
likewise affeebling both in voice and life, according as the fire deminished:
in such sort that at the last tear which the swanne shed, she died, and the
fire vanished flaming up into heaven from whence it was descended. By this
vision, the Archier incontinently understood, that the latter end of Franc-Gal
was nere at hand, and that he should shortly dye through some dolorous or
joyful cause. Wherefore in the morning before his entry into the Temple, he
went to visit him, but he found him not in his chamber; whereon looking out at
the window he perceived him walking in the garden very pensive, whereinto he
went and saluted him: Franc-Gal saluted him again in a voice very low and
hidden. Then the Archier asked him wherefore he was risen before day, and had
not taken his rest at his ease? My rest (quoth Franc-Gal) is very nere, so far
as I understand by many presages, but chiefly this night through the fantasy
of mine unquietness, which have not suffered me to repose: to the end they might
prepare a durable sleep for me, without waking until the revolution of the
world. And therefore let us go to the Temple to pray and give thanks to him,
who has permitted our being till this present: so went these two good wise men
right to the temple to accomplish the sacrifice, such as has already been
reested. Which being done the greatest part of the people assembled themselves
at the great Basilique Dicaste, where Diocles bore rule as Potentate of Orb,
with all the Benchers, Magistrates, Lords, and notable Citizens. Before whom
was brought this young Squire Alector who (by the Gratians) had been accused of
so many crimes, whereby the death of their fair sister Noemia was happened:
the which Alector but three days before had been adjudged by sentence of the
divine Justice, to prove his innocence, by fighting with the great serpent of
the Sands. This young Squire coming before the face of the magistrates, of the
whole justice, and of the Potentate, showed himself so assured and brave, as
they seemed to be severe and grave, demanding at that instant Justice against
the murdering Archer of his fair and well-beloved Noemia, whom he bewailed
without ceassing: for the rest, neither having nor showing any thought or care
either of his proper person, life, or death, saving only that he might
revenge his fair Noemia. Then Diocles the Potentate showed to all the benchers
of the counsel, the little bill which the day before he had found between
the hands of the statues of Alablaster of the three Graces, wherein these
verses were written. The Arrowe being in the hand
Of vanquisher, revenger of
His Ladies death, the vengeance shall,
From Heaven above descend upon
The murderer of Noemia fair.
And shortly after that shall end,
The Pilgrims life and voyage long,
Through fearful fright and sudaine joy.
This bill, being first declared from whence it came and in whose hands it was
found; was taken for a divine token, and allowed of all with common sentence
that the arrowe wherewith Noemia was stain, should be put into the hands of
Alector to see what would happen. Who being called into the Judgment place was
demanded of Diocles, if he remembered not the condemnation of combat with the
serpent, whereto he had been adjudged? and whether he disposed not of himself
to obey the sentence. Yes (quoth he most hardly and assuredly) and I thank you
too for the honor which you do me: neither wish I any better, but that the
traitorous murderer of Noemia were also joined with the serpent, that of them
both I might make a sacrifice of revenge unto the Spirit of my deceased
Noemia. May it therefore please the heads of Justice to garnish me with mine
arms, which are my good sword, with the lyberian scabbard shining, and my
shield with the hardy Cock, which I brought from the Trophie of Gallehault.
Showing thereby that all beasts by nature are muniated with their own proper
arms as well for defense as offense. "The Lions (quoth he) have their griping
paws, the Elephants their trunkes, the Hearts and Bulls their horns and
forefeete: the horses have their biting before and yerking behind; the Bores
their tusks, the Tortoyes and shell fishes their hardness, the Bees their sling,
the Scorpions their tails, the Serpents their venym, tongue, and deadly teeth;
only man is borne without arms, as a creature of peace, unless with their own
handie work and labor they obtain, or conquer them: as I have gotten this
sword of my Fathers gift, and therefore proper to me; and my shield by mine
own conquest: which arms only (for others appertain not to me being but a
simple Squire) I require to be restored and put into my hands, that I may not
be found a naked man and unarmed of all weapons as well offensive as defensive
against this terrestiall enemy of man, armed with malice, subtlety, force,
nimble lightness, piercing teeth, dangerous tail and mortal poison: besides
that, with hard shayles on his lubrick skin: whereas I being naked and
ungarnished of all defense against such and so well armed an enemy: if I be
overcome, it shall be mine own evil and damage in particular; but in general
it shall be the shame, reproach, and coniusion of those men who hereafter
shall be stain and devoured by the most wicked of all beasts: whom Sovereign
God (which you call Ioua) has condemned to be trodden under the feet of man,
unto whom power is given to tread upon the Aspic and Basilisque, and to foil
with his feet the Lion and Dragon: which you shall see come to pass, (GOD
giving me the force) if you restore me mine arms, which have bin unjustly
taken from me, and the which I here demand before your Justice."

The Potentate and all the Magistrates were amerueiled, not only at the brave
hardines of Alector (which naturally might come of the fire of his age) but
much more of his liberal eloquence and reasonable wisdom before age, albeit
he were far younger than they took him to be. Wherefore presently they
caused his arms to be brought forth, delivering to him his good sword with ye
scabberd of the shining serpents skin, and his green shield with the Cock of
Gold; which he recetued with so great joy, as they bad been taken from him
with great sorro we and lamentation. And besides that, the Potentate Diocles
following the advertisement of the Archier, and the Oracle written by the
Charites, put into his hand an arrow being bloody half way to the feathers:
which he took, and after he had beheld it a long time (as one which he had
somewhat known to have pulled out of the body of Noemia) demanded what arrowe
it was? And what he should do with it? To whom it was answered, that it was
the same arrowe wherewith Noemia was stain, and that he should do with it as
the fencer does in the Sands. Then cried he with a loud voice to all the
assistance, if there were any that would challenge it against him? But no man
answered word. Wherefore he fastened it under his girdle, and said: Now my
Lords let us go when it pleases you, seeing I have mine arms, I am ready to
fight against this dragon and public enemy, and to revenge the private
injury of murder if the traitor may be found. Then the Potentate sent four
trumpets through all the streats of the town to cry and publish to the people
that at noone, a hardy and valiant champion should fight with the Dragon of
the sands in hazard and peril of his lift, for the public wealth, and
expition of certain manslaughter by him perpetrated, and by his cause
happened; and for that cause who soever would, should come and see it.

At this cry all the Citizens prepared themselves to go see this dilectable
and profitable spectacle: where were found a greater number of people than
ever were at the sands for out assembly. To which place Alector was conducted
by 400. Soldiers, deputed to guarde and esose the steld: at this tumult
Franc-Gal and the Archier who after dinner sat at the windows of the great
hall looking into the streat were moved to demand what it was, and having
understood the cause, determined to go thither (albeit the Archier was not
after times found at such sports) nevertheless he was enuites to go, in hope
to see the revelation come to pass which was showed to him of the public
health. As for Franc-Gal he was come thither for none other cause, but only to
find his Son at the Sands of the Theater according as the black Auguring
bird had foretold him. So went these two wisemen together to this new spectacle.

A description of the City of Orb, of the Basilique, Hyppodrome, Prytan
Theater, Sands and other places. CAP. XXIIII.
THe City of Orb was so called for the round form and fashion of the same:
situated upon a little high mountain, yet nevertheless very large, in half
roundnes like to a demie Globe in such sort as the mids was the highest and
most prospectiue castilie descouering round abouts, and descending not headlong
but by little and litttle pleasantly going downward in such sort as neither
mounting nor descending one could scarce apperceiue the elevation of the mids
nor vneuenes of the sids, so easily descended it unto the outwardmost walls
wherewith it was enclosed in perfect circularitie, founded and builded of the
hard stones of the Rock, of the hight of 30. fadomes and of the thicknes of
three: ramped with 19. gross bulwarks with their knights and false loope
holes, and garnished with towers and places of sentinells, and environed in
stead of ditches with a great riner called Cloterre, carrying great vessels
charged and laden with all sorts of merchandise, coming from all the parts of
the world. For they entered and went out of the City of Orb by four
principal ports, the one oriental called Port Physe, another occidentall
called Port Thane the third meridionall called Port Valentine, and the last
Septentrionall called Port Passante, and look how many gates it had, so many
bridges it had, that is to say: the little bridge, the bridge without guarde,
the bruting bridge; and the trembling bridge: through and over which ports and
bridge they entered and issued into the city or stelds there abouts, (for they
had no suburbs) the territory of which fields contained a great country in
compass, divided into four regions according to the particion and ports of
the City, but of far different quality and temperature. For in the territory
appertaining to Port Physe ye air was sweet by reason of Zephyrus coming from
the west, and tendering his last breath in this east wardly region, the herbs,
plants, and trees were always in flower and greennes: the people were gracious
and loving, contented with a little, not doing much other thing but dance,
leap, gamball, run, sing, pipe and play upon instruments, court, contract
marriages, or to advance them or borrowe for the time to come to compose
ballads, songs, sonnets, rounds, to search novelties, to chase beasts and
sowles, to fish and to cloth themselves in colors and to mainetaine themselves
without care or thought: for they were all of them either infants, boys, or
young folk of the one and the other seye. and when they had passed their youth;
they made their transmigration into ye territory of Port Valentine which was
meridionall, of a hot air, inspired with the southern or Etesian winds. And
in the region of this gate grew abundance of fruits of the tree, as also
grass and pasturing, with wheat and other corn of all sorts. In such sort
that on that side the port one could see nothing but mowers, haymakers,
reapers, harvest folk, fruicterers, merchants, travelers, trafficquers, men of
arms running at tilt, Philosophers disputing, and usurers lending upon reuenew
of the fruits to come; there might one behold store of cattle in the stelds,
abundance of bees, butter flies and emmits: and albeit the region was very hot
and dry, yet the people so much the more refreshed themselves with the fair
flaggons cooled in the clear and niueall fountains.

From thence they passed to the Septentrionall Port Passant, where the air was
diverse, unconstant, cloudie, cold, moist, and troubled with contrary winds:
for the rest, a good country and very cultine yelding peaches, grapes, nuts,
and filberds, where one could see nothing but gathering of grapes, pressing of
wines, tunning them and laying the^ into the carts: nevertheless the people
of this country were almost al gray. The other region of Port Thane subject to
the cutting western winds was very sterile and barraine, saving that there was
great store of fat cattaile, wildfoule, and venison, and this was the
territory where the greatest there was kept, nevertheless commonly in close
houses where they kept their banquets, marriages and mummeries. There killed
they continually store of hogs and shotes, making thereof sauciges, chitterlings
and puddings: whereof as also of other things they sent presents and newyeares
gifts one to another, for their entertainment in mutual love and friendship:
and in this soils ordinarily dwelt the old men, who after they had served God
in the morning, passed the rest of the day in drinking, warming, talking,
playing at cards, at glit, primero and flux, or else with the tables at checker,
dames, lourch, and tictat. Such were the four ports and four finages of the
City of Orb, where the inhabitants by the ordinance of the Magistrates of the
town passed all the year, and made their transmigration from one port and
region to another: for if they were weary of the heats of Port Valentine, they
went and refreshed themselves in the Ice of Port Thane, and pass the time
there in sedentarie plays. And if they were cloyed with the mists and cold of
Port Passaul, they would go dance amongst the flowers of Port Physe: for such
power had the Citizens of the town, wherein notwithstanding it was continually
temperat, by reason of the concordant discord of the winds, temperatures, and
qualities of every port, and of his adjacent territory, the which made an
equal concurrence at the closing of the town: which (as has been
beforesaide) was in perfect roundnes mounting by little and little unto the
nauel or mids, where was edificated the temple of Jove (before discribed) in
the great place, where the four great streats of the town met, being builded
very ample and large with singular fair and magnificat edifices, and
trauersed with a hundred small streats turning round and always descending in
level with the four great streats, the buildings were of such straight
level, that from the temple one might view plainly to the four ports of the
City, and from the four ports to the Temple. Before the which was a most
fair and great fountain: of lively, siluered, clear, and wholesome water, the
spring thereof never defailing, but yielding forth abundance of water through
12. figures in manner and fashion to the 12. signs of the Zodiac: which made a
brook always increasing and turning about the lanes and streats of the whole
town, as well for the watring and common use of men and beasts, as also for the
purging and clensing of the streats and houses; which spring and winding brook
being come down unto the latter and lowest circular streat along the
inwardmost wall, by how many springing heads it increased by so many pipes it
emptied it self into the great river of Cloterre, wherein was made bounds and
sluices to open and shut as occasion should serve: which sluices being shut, all
the streats would stand full of water, wherewithal they being washed by
opening again of the sluices all the filthiness and scauage of the town was sent
through the foresaid sluices into Cloterre, and by that means the City on all
sides was kept cleanly and fair. At the four corners of the great and large
market place were four stately and public edifices, that is to say: the
great Basilique Dicast, the Palace Prytan, the Hippodrome, and the Theater:
the Basilique Dicaste, was the judicial Palace, or hall of justice wherein
were decided all causes and controversies as well civil as criminal. In the
same was a long, large and ample hall whose mounting was of marble stayres, and
whose entrance was by two gates on either side. This great hall was lofted and
paued with suitable artifice all of white and black marble: the loft being duble
was sustained by 40. pillars of gray stone, viz. 12. on either side and 12. in
the mids parting the two lofts, and two in the upper end of the hall and two
below. At every pillar was fastened and set a rich and brave statue of a
Legislator of some noble Justice passed with the inscription of his name and
title of honor, and upon the middle pillars were fastened twain, on either
side one. Between the pillars on either curtain of the wall, on the highest
toward the arch of the loft were fair glass windows, decorated, painted and
illustrated with ancient Histories, memorable examples, excellent and singular
sentences and executions of Justice: and beneath were fixed great brazen tables
wherein with gross letters legible a far off, were engraued, all their laws:
according to which (being once received in the common wealth of Orb) the
Citizens governed themselves. And for this reason were these laws engraued in
tables of brass that none might pretend ignorance of the laws: at one end of
the foresaid hall was a Parquet or place of audience closed with iron bars
wrought and siluered, with two rows of seats with their desks and
footestooles: the one on high wherein were placed the Orators and aduocats and
the other below wherein the pledors sat, the complainants on the one side and
the defendants on the other. Above and over against the end of this Parquet was
elevated a high Tribunal, all made of Ebonie wrought and reeled very
artificially, on both sides of which Tribunal were 24. seats somewhat lower,
that is to say: 12. on the right hand and 12. on the left: whereon the 24.
Assesors and principal counselors sat in cloth of velvet; and in the
Tribunal, sat the Potentate and chief Justice: which Tribunal in stead of
crimson velvet or cloth of gold, was hong and covered with the hideous skin of
a dead man, which was sometime a Potentate and wicked Judge, and who for his
tranuersing of justice and abusing of his Sovereign office had been flean
quick, and his skin in stead of tapisterie put upon the Justice seat to give
example to those who afterward should sit therein, not to do any injustice
worthy of so sharp a punishment. On the two sides of the foresaid Tribunal
was placed reasonable high, two statues, the one of gold which was the image
of Justice cut and sigured with a virginicall visage, nevertheless of a
vehement and redoubtable regard, the light of her eyes sharp and pricking,
neither humble nor fierce, but representing a certame dignity of reverend
sadness: this statue was of Gold to signify that as the Gold is incorruptible,
so Justice ought to be: and as it is soft and pliable, so ought Justice to be
more soft and merciful than rigorous and more bending to equity. The statue
was figured a Virgin, because that Justice ought to be entier, inviolated and
uncorrupted, she was of face severe sad and constant, in sign that Justice
ought not to give care to sweet words, prayers, flatteries nor praises: her
regard was fierce and vehement, to give terror to the evil, and confidence
and assurance to the just and good. On the other side was a statue of fine
Cristall clear and white, portracted all naked, which was the statue of
Verity: in sign that Justice is or ought to be accompanied with Verity, who
of her selfeis clear and cuident, pure and without spot, and for that cause she
was portraicted of white and most glistering Crystal, and in form of an
naked body, for Verity will have no covering of fraud or dissimulation but
shows her self as she is. Thus you may perceive what their great hall of
this Basilicq Dicaste with the Parquit and judicial seat were: adjoining to
the upper end whereof on the right and left hand were two bodies of a house,
membred with many chambers, and amongst the rest in either house was a right
fair chamber in fashion of a four squared hall, garnished round about with
settles below, and with rich capistrie above: For the rest clean empty of
other things saving with tables and chayres about them: and both these chambers
had entrance into the Parquit of the great Balican hall, the chamber on the
right hand being called the counsel chamber: because thither the Potentate and
Assesors retired themselves when any doubtful judgment was remitted to the
counsel. In the mids thereof, was a large table of marble round and
Polygonal. For this table held 25. entrangulared spaces, every one of a foot
and a half broad, and about the same so many chaires made bravely of common
wood. But one amongst the rest being more large was made of Cedar, wrought and
guided with fair figures, with a footestoole that he which set upon it might
sit somewhat higher than the rest, and a cloth of estate and a pillowe of
velvet whereon on the Potentate and President did sit in the mids of this
Marble table, was a little pillar of Crystal, and on the same a statue of
like matter Diaphane which represented the Image of Prudence in a feminine
form, not naked but covered with a long Cristallin stole, embrodered with
damasquines of Gold, and seemed with Golden Stars. Nevertheless she had
three heads that she might be better brayned and more sage, the one was old
regarning the things past, another of mean age considering things present, and
the third young, foreseeing things to come. In her right hand she hild a
Lydian stone which some call a touch stone, and with her left hand she
presented a little table of Gold wheren weere written these words in Greek.
(...) Which is as much to say. Prudence is always a great Treasure.

And upon the table of white marble was engraven in black this sentence in
lattin letters. Primum consulto opus est, deinde mature opus est facto. That is
to say: Take counsel first, and then perform it speedily.

In this chamber was the counsel held, and for that cause called the
counsel chamber; the other chamber on the left hand was called the chamber
Sphragide, because that in it was signed and sealed all acts, instruments and
exploites of Justice, written by faithful personages thereunto deputed, and by
solemn oath sworn: this chamber was like the oother, saving that it had two
long tables of the length of the hall along the wall, with glass windows
above, and long benches beneath with seats separated and distinct by little
spaces like to the seats of the quire in acanonicall Church, and therein were
set the Pragmaticall writers in two ranks on the one side and the other of the
two walls, nevertheless but only on one side of the tables which was in the
hench side next to the walls: the other side of the tables being empty saving
that they had two mounting steps, whereby those who had there to do might the
easier come to the two tables. At the head of this hall was another table of
black marble and against the wall a settle with seats, wherein sat two sealers
which had the view and application of the writings, and the keeper of the
seals who cancelled or sealed them according as he judged them lawful or
not, the mark of the seal was a hand open and in the palm thereof an eye
regardant. In the mids of this chamber there was likewise (as in the other) a
pillar made in the fashion of a rock of Lazurine stone, and upon the same a
statue of burnished iron in a feminine figure having one hand against her breast
about her heart, and the other stretched forth presenting it with her open
palm, and this was the Image of Faith or fidelity firm and infringeable like
iron and constant like a rock, holding and performing that which is promised
with heart and deed: in the rock was engraven in greek letters. (...) Which
is to say. Believe nothing unless it appear. And in latin letters was written.
Fides fundamentum Iusticiae. Which signifies that Faith is the foundation of
Justice. At the two corners of the other end of the great Basilican hall, were
conjoined two gross towers of hard stone, builded after the rusticall fashion
strong and thick, not windowed, but loope holed like the holes made for a
cannon straight barred with iron and barbicanes, with small light. Whereinto
was no entrance but through a little wicket with two doors of iron, barred and
boulted coming out of the great hall: and these two towers were with three
rooms, the one in the ground very deep, without window or light, and that was
called the Barathre: the middle out of the ground, receiving a little
shimmering light through the hoales before named, and this was called Latumie:
the third was above, having barred window and lettices, whereby those who were
put therein might both see and be seen, and for that cause it was called the
Cage. Within these two towers were locked all malefactors either in the deepest
middlemost or highest, according to the weight of their offenses: beneath the
great Basilican hall was a vault closed with strong walls on all sides, saving
it had a small door with bares of iron, and a window grated with iron to giu
light, within which vault (which was called Criptoportique, and no less wider
nor larger than the great hall, and for cause builded with many small chambers)
were put the civil prisoners or captives, under the charge of a keeper being
a sufficient honest man: as on the contrary, for keeping the Towers, two rude
and barbarous gaolers were appointed. And also the keeping of the two Chambers
both Council and Sphragide was committed to two Consiergs men right ancient
and wise, both for the custody of them, and apparrelling of the hall and
Parquet when necessity required. And at the two gates of the great hall were
ordained two porters to open and shut them at sun rising and going down,
according to the Equinoctial time. Such was the Basilican Dicast of the
justice of Orb, wherein Diocles the Potentate sat as president, right over
against the which was the Hippodrome a great egall and vniformed place being in
length 187. paces and a half, and in breadth 62. paces and a half, in fashion
sour squared, not equilaterall but far more longer than large, all environed
with triple galleries erected one above another with arches sustained with
little carved pillars; and this was the place, where men on horseback ran for
the best game for the ring, and there was the place of Justice and trial of
arms on horseback with lance, sword, hatchet, and club. At one of the ends of
the Hippodrome was the barrers wherein the horses were enclosed, beating the
ground with their feet, and forcibly staying till the sign of running were
given by the trumpetors at the commandment of the Judges: at the other end was
a scaffold of marble stone flue degrees of height and feats thereon for the
sayrest damsels of the town to sit, assigned thereunto by ordinary exthange
to give and deliver the prize of honor and valor to the best doers, according
to the sentence of the Judges who had their places in a lower porch in the mids
of the Hippodrome, between the rancks of the galleries: and on the other side
right over against them were mounted the trumpets, who at the commandment of
the Judges sounded to give sign. And so soon as the barriers were open, the
gallant light horse issued out to the course, and the Knights to the lifts to
just: every one assaying to carry away the prize and honor, being no les
pricked forward by the sharp regard of the fair maidens, then their horses
were moved with the sound of trumpets and prick of the spurs: and thus you may
perceive what the Hippodrome was. The third building was the Prytan or public
house of the city: in theforefrunt whereof was a large lower court, and from
thence one mounted by 10. stayres of ston into a right great and large hall
garnished all along the walls with benches, and at either end a great chimney
above the benches, the walls were covered with books and rastles, whereon were
hanged al sorts of arms, swords, lances, corselets, morraines, and other
harnis in abundance. In this hal the people assembled in the last week of
December to change the magistrates of the year before, and to choose new for the
years following, and to take advise what was to be done for the utility of
the common wealth. Over and beside this great hall there was a walking place
squared, and clear on all sides with many windows. Through this was a way
into another less hall both close and secret with a treble port, and three
vshers to guard them. Where the politic governors of the town (who were 12.
in number) consulted and concluded the weighty affairs concerning the common
wealth of Orb. Nere to this part of the building was another great court, and
in the mids thereof a fountain with two cesternes whose top being of
alablaster cast out water, through three pipes in great abundance: beyond this
court on the back side of this public house, was another great and large
part, brave, sumpruous and magnifical, comprehending two great hals, the one
below elevated; notwithstanding eight stayres high on the one side, and on the
other side in the fashion and form of a ladder: the other above of like
greatness having their kitchins and offices on the one side, the other opening
with treble windows into the court; which two halls were garnished with tables
of Cedar, and with stools and chayres suitable round about them, and two green
beds of repose; the residue being hanger with rich and fair capistries:
wherein those who dwelt there came to cate, drink, walk and devise one with
another, that is to say, such as by any good work, or profitable invention,
either by wisdom, valor, liberality or other virtuous act, both honorable
and profitable to the City had well merited of the common wealth. For whom in
prize of honor and favor, this fair lodging was appropriated, where they were
at the common expense, nourished and entertained gorgiously with daily banquets
in the foresaid halls, served with officers and servants (at the common
expense) withal, meats and dishes, in rich vessel of gold silver and
crystal, and with prerious lyunen: besides this, they were accompanied every
day with the most apparent and noble Lords and Ladies of the town, recounting
unto them often times their meritorious good deeds with praise and thanks.
Moreover they received every morning every of them a fair flower (according
to the season) with humble reverence and a sweet kiss of the most fairest
maidens of the city. And to retire themselves privately apart, was ordained a
great gallerie transuersing the foresaid halls and parted into 24. chambers,
all garnished a like with rich beds of imbrodery with tables and tressels
wrought and furnished with tapistrie and delicious linen, every chamber having
adjoining unto it a wardrop and cabin, with a page proper and ready to serve
them: the prospect of which chambers was partly easterly and partly southerly,
into the most ample gardens, bowers, and meadows, where the birds continually
delighted them with their sweet and melodious songs: all which was done at the
expense public of the Citizens. Besides this every year was made in the
great hall below a Panegyricall oration in the honor and praise of the well
deseruers of the common wealth, all which things were done and maintained in
the Prytan house, to move and give courage to al virtuous young men to do such
acts, whereby they might get such favor and meritorious praises as that they
might be nourished and nobly entertained at the expense of the common wealth,
in reward of their desert and good deeds which they esteemed a most great honor
proceeding of just cause, as in truth it was: and thus you may perceive what
the Pritan was. Now rests the Theater and the Sands whose proportion was in
fashion, like to an egg, containing 2000. paces about, the walls whereof being of
diverse coulored marble, were divided in three ra^ks of admirable arches below,
in the midst and above, elevated of an incredible height, every rank
containing 72. arches: among those above, were placed so many fair statues as
there were pillars to uphold the arches: beside, over and above the ranks of
arches, was another rank with 72. large and ample windows giving light to the
halls about the Theater whereby the people might look in and out of the same:
the entrance whereof was through 12. gates into the place, where for the
ascending up, were elevated 45. seats of stone, the highest whereof had
compass 1098. foot, and the twentieth seat after in descending which was the
middle degree had 726. foot in compass, and the lowest and last of all had
300. foot in compass: whereby a man may conjecture what the other 42. seats
did contain in compass, wherein 25000. people might sit at their ease to
behold the pastimes, every one of them having one foot and a half for his
place, without reckoning the largenes of the 12. gates. At the foot of these
degrees was the Orchestre, wherein sat the Lords and Magistrates, and before
them a little below was the place and platform where for the solace of the
common people and to win their favor, the richest and notablest Citizens
oftentimes did use and exercise all manner of plays and pastimes. In the same
proportion right before and in the sight of the Theater was a great long large
and ample place empty and discovered: which was called the Arenes because the
ground was strawed all over with sand, to the end that both beasts and men
might have furer footing which came thither to the chase, to fight for the best
game, or for the exercise of their body, for wrestling, running, leaping,
casting the bar, or for fighting with cudgells or sharp swords, naked or
armed, or to chase and fight with all sorts of fierce and cruel beasts. At
the end of which place was the sepulcher of the ancient Archier Caliste, before
the mouth of a cloaque or gut where the great Serpent abode, against whom
Alector the same day should fight. Such was the Theater and Sands of Orb: and
of such magnificence was these four noble buildings at the four corners of
the market place, where the four great streates met in the highest of the
City: and where the most Imperial Temple of Jove was placed, the exuberant
fountain, and the fair and holy lodging of the Archier, and his Ministers,
together with the house called Vaniah which is as much to say as the
nourishment of our Lord: for therein were nourished the poor, old, sick,
lame, impotent, and frail pedple, together with the poor Widows and
Orphans, with the goods offered to God in his temple. Besides all this, there
was diverse other public places, as porches and walking places as well in
raynie weather as in fair: the four markets, viz. the wheat market, the wine
market, the flesh market, and the fish market; and the fifth market of fruits,
eggs and white meats. Moreover there was yet another great and large porch full
of seats and desks, entermingled with walking places and galleries, and a high
pulpet of whole stone cut and carved, which was the place of reading and
disputation of all sorts of arts and sciences, and all at the public charge
of the City. Furthermore at the four gates were four fair keys upon the
river side of Cloterre which went round about the Town, at which keys
ordinarily arrived great boats charged with all forts of Merchandise, coming
from all parts, and not only by river, but by land with Wagons, Mules.
Cammells, and other horses. For the receite and bestowing of the which, were
appointed round about the keys great ware houses, and at every keye a great
porch, wherein the Merchants of all Countries and Nations assembled together,
and kept general exchange of Gold Silver and Money with writings, letters,
answers, bills of exchange and recariage, and all sorts of negotiation. Thus
you see and behold the description of the renowned City of Orb; which has
been set down here by way of digression: after which extrauagance we must
return again to our matter, which was of the combat between Alector and the
serpent of the Sands.

Of the Combat and Victory of Alector against the Serpent. Of the arrowe
thrown up into the air with imprecation, of the fall thereof in flaming wise
upon Coracton, and of his horrible death. CAP. XXV.
THe people of Orb the same day assembled themselves in greater numbers than
ever had been seen before, not only for the marvel of the Combat, but also
to expect the hope of the public weal according to the revelation with the
Archier had shown them in the moruing: whereby there was so great a multitude
of people, as well Citizens as strangers, that all the degrees were full, all
the windows arches and galleries, yea all the pinacles and tops of the walls
were charged with people. Amongst the rest came also the two wise men Franc-Gal
and the Archier Croniel, for whom (by reason of his Bishoplike dignity) was
reserved the most honorable seat in the Orches tree, from whence he might best
behold and most openly discover all the sauds and Theater. He who knew his
place went to sit down, leading and joining with him Macrobius Franc-Gal, upon
whom universally all the Theater cast their eyes, and all those before whom he
passed arose and inclined their heads in sign of reverence to him: brought
singular admiration of the reverend dignity of his face, full of probable
majesty which they saw him in his visage: and in the more than royal
comlines, form, fashion, streightnes, height, greatness and giantly ioynture of
this so fair and soheroical an old man that their worshipful Arch Priest
Croniel with so great honor led with him: specially so armed (for he carried
his armor with him) and clothed with so rich a cloak of purple and with his
precious and illustrate shield of azure with the Son of Gold. To be brief
the whole assistance of the Theater through great admiracion of him had their
ententife regard upon Franc-Gal.

Hereupon the trmupets sounded and Alector was set into the Sands clothed only
with his purple hat on his head, and his iagged Gallican coat of arms, with
his Iasseran fringed with Gold, and armed with his good sword with the Lyberian
scabbard, and with his green shield with the Cock of Gold, together with the
slaughterous arrowe: for the rest so fair, that he seemed to be made and
formed to be beholden of all; young, vigorous, membrous, well set, great, tall,
and of a hardy and assured countenance, in such sort as there was none
(specially of the young Ladies and Maidens) but pitifully beholding him,
lamented that so fair a young gentleman should be set into so mortal a
danger, whereout (as they thought) it was impossible that he should escape:
nevertheless he walked bravely attending his enemy. Now was it the day and
hour that the dragon was accustomed to receive his ordinary food, whereupon
smelling presently he fresh human flesh be issued out of his Cloaque behind
the Sepulcher of Caliste lifting up his dragonlie head with flaming and
piercing eyes, with his great and open throat, full of venemus teeth set in
triple order, and casting out a horrible hissing with three viberant tongues,
which gave a mortal fear unto all the assistants of the Theater, saving unto
the hardy Alector, against whom the serpent with great turnings and windings
came to devour, thinking verily at the first mouch full to have swallowed him
up, which all the beholders thought likewise. Amongst whom Franc-Gal beholding
this fair young youth so clothed, armed, and put into so mortal a peril,
incontinently knew that it was his son, and therewithal through hideous
fear he became so white and pale as an image of plaster, stiff like a
statue of stone, and cold like unto a pillar of brass: for the which he had
presently Aqua Vitae cast into his visage and into his mouth: whereby
recovering again his spirits he cast forth a most high and dolorous cry,
saying: ah fair Son Alector, Alector my dear child! Who is he that has
unjustly condemned thee being an innocent child unto so horrible and peereles a
combat? Is this the fore sage of the funestriall bird, which showed me that at
the Sands I should find thee? Alas! In deed I have found thee, but by and by
I shall see the lost: whereby I shall find the foresaying ouertrue and cursed,
which told me that I should find thee, but never after see thee, as in truth
I shall, for the Oraconicall belly shall be thy Sepulcher: yea so shall it be
mine, for with thee will I dye or else save thee from so strange a death. This
saying he cast off his Cloak, drew out his great and large sword, embraced his
fair Celestial shield with the Sun of Gold, and would with all his force
have descended into the Sands to succor his son: but the 400. men of arms
who enclosed the field, with slood him: through whom nevertheless he had by
his valor passed, had not the Archier been, who with instant prayers and
tokens hild him: declaring unto him that by no means he ought to strive
against the judgment of the Potentate of Orb, which also by any humame force
he could not, praying him to have patience and good hope in the bounty and
revelation of the Sovereign God Ioua, by faith in whom he assured him that
Alector shoud depart conqueror: who in the mean while fought valiently with
his monstrous enemy: and having understood the cry of Franc-Gal and
apperceiuing the shield with the sun, knew that his father was there present;
who with all his force would have helped him: whereby his courage increased and
his forces redoubled by the presence of his genitor, to whom he cried: "My
Lord my Father trouble not your self, neither have doubt of me, but assure
your self that within a while I will come to salute and embrace you, being
once victorious of this wicked beast, in the mean while your only presence
and sight shall be my sufficient aid."

This hardy and confident speech hild Franc-Gal, above other things;
nevertheless trembling like a leaf at every assault the serpent made, who was
above threescore foot in length and a yard in greatness about, with a profound
throat and gaping. Who seeing himself frustrate of his purpose, and that his
invasions were employed in vain, by reason of the legeritie and swift turning
of the vigorous Alector, was chafed in his cold nature, and so provoked that
his throat was all swollen with horrible venyin, which he had gathered
together through spightful anger that he found resistance in one only man.
Wherefore he wound himself into a great roll, and soddainely by plunging out
himself he would assail Alector, who readily leaping aside lent him great
blows overthwart the body: and giving him many wounds; but not deep enough
by reason of the hardness of his seals: wherewithal he raised the Sand.
Nevertheless once he rouled up his long tail so impetuously wherewithal he
whipped Alector (who took not good heed of it) with a blow so violent, that
he stroke him to the ground, and soddainely turned his head and great throat
to have devoured him. Then Franc-Gal was out of countenance, his spirit was
troubled, and his knees failed him: likewise all the people became sad,
esteeming Alector for overcome and lost; but the courageous Champion seeing the
deadly throat of his enemy open over him, with his right hand gave him such a
prick, that he made a deep wound in his throat whereout did spring black
blood and thick red venym in great abundance: and with his left hand covered
himself with his shield. The furious serpent perceiving in the shield the
figure of a goloe^ Cock highly elevated (which naturally he fears) and
smelling withal the savor of the scabberd which was made of the skin of a
kind of Serpent, what with sudden fear, and with the pain he felt of the
wound in his throat, he quickly retired himself, in such sort that the gentle
champion had leisure to rise and pursue his enemy, who fearing the shield, the
Liberian scabbard, and the point of the sword which he had felt to the quick,
would not cast himself unadvisedly upon Alector, but began to play again with
his tail to strike him to the ground. But Alector who once had bin stung
therewith before; took better heed, and every time that the serpent stroke at
him with his tail, he would nimbly spring up into the air, in such sort that
his strokes were employed in vain upon the sands: which caused this dragonlike
monster to chafe in his fury, and with great ire turned his head toward
Alector, who still put before him the shield which he knew to be a fear unto
him: and for that he saw that the blows of his sword would but little
prevail upon his hard skin, he thrust the steely point of his good sword so
firmly into his scales, that it ran so deep in and pierced so rudely, as
Alector could not pluck it out again: and the serpent being a beast of
merueilous force, in turning himself with a strong pluck snatched it out of
his hand. Then new fear assailed Franc-Gal and all the beholders, losing the
short joy which they had received of the two wounds made in the throat and
back of the serpent where at blood and venym issued most abundantly: and for
that they knew not whether they were deadly or not, they remained doubtful
betwixt fear and hope. In the mean while the serpent being impatie^t of his
dolorous grief which he felt, turned his head toward his back, and biting
with his toeth the hilts of the sword whose point sticking fast grieved him,
so much plucked at it, and with force of anger so wrong it, always widening
and tearing the wound, that at the length he plucked it out and cast it on the
sands, not without great loss of the most part of his teeth. And then
perceiving his enemy unarmed, he cast himself furiously upon him: Alector not
having any thing wherewith to defend him, presented him his shield: and
remembering the arrow which he had stuck at his girdle, pulled it out readily
and placed it so between the jaws, of this wicked beast; that he could not
shut his teeth to gripe the arm of Alector, for the more he strove with it,
the faster it stuck: moreover he found himself grievously offended with the
body of the arrow which made of Ass, being an Alexit herian wood, and
naturally contrary to the serpents kind. Whereupon this monstrous dragon
retired in wreathing himself horribly through the great dolor and anguish
which he felt: not only of the wounds, and arrow; but also of the wood thereof
being wholly against his nature and kind, for ye plucking out whereof he had
neither feet nor hands: wherefore he thrust into his mouth, the end of his
tail, which auailed him nothing being over feeble and having lost his force by
reason the seal of his back was broken. Whereupon this monster finding
himself thus wounded, ouercharged with the wood and head of the shaft contrary
to his kind, affeabled of his force, and his adversary nere at hand carrying
the Cock and scabbard where were so fearful unto him, and who again had
recoueted his sword, would no more assail him, but retyring himself by turning
and wreathing as fast as it was possible for him, sought to enter again into
his Cloaque, which he could not speedily do because the breaking of his back
hindered his former legeritie whereby he thought to have entered his hoale: the
which Alector seeing, and knowing his great advantage by the cry and brute of
the beholders joyfully clapping their hands, got before, and cut off the way to
this flying monster, by turnning his head with great strokes of his sword upon
his jaws and on his tail when he began to resist him with it, so strongly and
so often that by little and little the Serpent began to ware so feeble, and his
fiercenes so to diminish, that not able longer to hurt, he sought wholly to
slye. In such sort that the gentle Squire came before him, and without fear
thrust his arm with the sword so far into his throat that it pierced his
heart. The serpent feeling thereby his deadly wound, began through extreme
pain and anguish to turn and wind in cruel wise. Alector then being joyful,
and seeing his white belly uncovered which was without seals, thrust in his
sword a foot below his throat, and so cut it down to his navel: in such
sort, that with the blood, venym, fat and intestines there issued out of the
belly of this devouring serpent the body of a man all consumed, whom he had
but two days before swallowed down, the bones only remaining like an
Anotomy, wrapped in some paeces of bloody and filthy clouts. And the serpent a
little before being the terror to a whole town, who had made so many trooked
turns and windings, and given so many blows with his venymous tail, and that
had eaten so many people, being then vanquished, slain, ripped and constramed
to void that which he had devoured, and all by a young man: did that (being
dead) which never in his life time he would do: that is, he stretched himself
out right like a falue pillar, and occupying in his so lying a great part of
the Sands. Alector beholding him in this wise began to say: "O wicked beast
when thou can no longer harm, thou do that which is right and good. If
thou in thy life time had mainteyned thy self so right, as thou have
conformed thy self at thy death, so many people had not by thee been devoured,
nor thou slain." And in saying so, he mounted upon him with his feet, and
trod upon the head of the dead serpent, in singing for joy with a high and
clear voice and face lifted up to Heaven an Epinic song of victory which he
had learned in the Polonian language passing through that country, when as the
spirit of Gallehault carried him away: to the great consolation of the people,
and incredible joy of Franc-Gal his good father. This done he put up his sword:
and then pulled the arrow out of the serpents throat: the which he holding in
his hand, and viewing it red with the fresh blood of the serpent, and as yet
stained with the old blood of his Lady Noemia slain, could not but cast out
with a profound sigh three great tears without weeping, and these words. "O
murdering Archer that with this arrowe have traitorously slain the innocent
Noemia Gratian the fourth of the Graces before their worthy statues, and
between mine arms, and who through an evil conscience of thy wicked deed
dare not manifest thy self, thinking by occult dissimulation to escape the
just vengeance: I beseech the Sovereign God Ioua, who in this temple before us
is worshipped, that the blood of the innocent which I see yet on this arrow,
may fall with cruel vengeance upon thee, that thine iniquity may descend upon
thy head, to the terrible example of al envious traitors and spoylers of the
innocent." This spoken he darted up the arrowe into the air with such
impetuositie, and accompanied (as it is credible) with the virtue of some
superior power, that it mounted with an unspeakable legeritie so high, that
all the assistants who had their view still toward heaven lost the sight
thereof, attending when it should fall, longer than an hour with great
merueiling. And seeing it not to fall, they descended into the Arenes to behold
the horrible body of the serpent lying upon the sands, so enormious, hideous
and fearful (albeit he was dead) that the greater part of the multitude
durst not approach him, but behild him a far of: saving only the vanquisher
Alector which contemplated him in his length, greatness and terrible form,
armed with impenttrable hardness, with the deadly venym of sharp teeth, with
catching without letting go, with a devouring throat, and consuming belly, and
with the miserable remainders of his deuorations. And hereupon considered the
grace of force and hardines which the Sovereign had bestowed upon him to
overcome such a monster who hild so notable a town in so miserable a
subjection: nevertheless having some doubt of his death and whiles he sought
very curiously on all sides, behold a voice issuing out of the carren corpse of
this monster, sounding so high and great, that it was heard through the whole
Theater in these words: Son of Franc-Gal which now have overthrown,
The revenger of Calistus lately slain:
To thee full heavy news, by me is shown
That thou shall be transformde for this thy pain.
These speeches being cried high and deep like the thick sound of a thunder
bolt was heard of all, who ran to see what it was, but nothing appeared; for
the serpent was stark dead, and this voice proceeded not from the beast but
from some spirit, to give advertisement or terror to Alector of that which was
to come: whereto he took then no great heed for admiration of this monster
and great joy of his victory. And thus as the whole multitude were about him
and the Serpent in contemplation, astonished at the enormitie of the one and
virtue of the other: behold the arrow an hour before darted by him toward
Heaven, with a great bruit fell down from thence again in a flaming fire,
cutting the high region with a sharp sound and lightning, with such
impetuositie amids the fearful multitude, that it fell upon the head of a
young man named Coracton borne in Orb of better house than name, who being
stricken therewith, and attaint with this Celestial fire unquenchable fell
down to the ground, where through the intolerable pains and heat wherewith
he felt himself burned, he lay tumbling and groueling in the sands horribly
crying: " Mercy, mercy Noemia, Mercy Franck Alector, for I am the cursed
Coracton that through malicious envy and enraged iealosie have traitorously
slain the fair Noemia with the proper arrow that now pierces and burns my
brains and entrails. Mercy, (O Soul of Noemia) content thy self with more
lighter revenge: what can thou do more to me, if the death be too little for
me? O Alector, for the love of Noemia (which was so dear unto thee) I require
of thee this last gift, that with thy sword (the revenger of evil) thou will
vouchsafe to abridge my life, and rid me out of the torment wherein I burn.
Now truly (quoth Alector, who would have bin sorry that the death of his Noemia
should have bin revenged with any other hand, than his own) this graciousnes
shall not be denied thee, but it shall not be with my good sword, because it is
unworthy to be stained with so wicked a blood," and therewithal he took a
halberd out of the hand of one of the 400. men which kept the field, and
therewith gave him such a blow upon the head that he cloue it in twain, the
brains all sprinckling about the sands burnt and smokie. Nevertheless for all
this the Celestial fire and the arrowe which had entered into his body ceased
not to follow and burn him until the head, corpse, entrails, flesh bones and
sinews were clean consumed into stinking ashes, together with the murdering
arrow. Such was the divine vengeance that fell upon the traitor and envious
paricide Coracton, wherewithal the people were astonished in fear and terror
of the great virtue and more than human puissance supernaturally given to
this young Esquire, who forthwith was taken by the Potentate Diocles
accompanied with all the Assessours, Magistrates, and Lords of the town, and
led into the chiefest place of the Theater: where (with Croniel the pontifical
Archier) was Franc-Gal, so ravished with joy for the health and victory of his
son Alector, that he was beyond himself not knowing whether he were man or
spirit, quick or dead, sensible or insensible. And nevertheless his son Alector
came before all the multitude and saluted him with humble reverence and childly
cherefulnes saying unto him: "My most honorable Lord and father, thanks be unto
the sovereign, that beyond al my hope and in spite of the rauishing tra^sport
of the wicked spirits, we are again assembled, and united together, and so
shall continue if God please, who has vouchsafed to grant me a sight of you
after so long a depart, and you to find me after so long and uncertain a
search: which I verily believe you have made. Franc-Gal understanding his son
answered him thus: Alector my most dear child, the soueraigae God Ioua increase
thee with virtue, hardines and honor." Then beholding his shield, and eleuating
his eyes to heaven, began again his speech, saying: "Thanks be unto the
Sovereign and to thee most high son, for that before my departure out of
this mortal life (which shall be very soon) wherein I have lived nine ages and
more, I see before me my most dear Son Alector borne of my Lady Priscaraxe
Queen of Tartary, and have seen his first prowess, promises of far greater
in tune to come, with his first honors done unto him in a strange country, yea
and that amongst his enemies such as had vowed his mortal destruction: my
child I pray the soueraign Jove that the order of knighthood may be given thee
by some valiant and magnificall man: for of me thou have failed the receining
thereof: and when as thou shalthaue received it, persevere to honor Sovereign
Jove, and to give him praises every hour both day and night. Lift up thy
spirit and eyes toward heaven from whence thou have taken original, and thy
courage to high enterprises; hardines, prowess and honor always accompany
thee; virtue, freedom, and liberality never abandon thee; be friend to the
good, an enemy and revenger to the wicked. My Son, the hand of the most
puissant, most great and most good God bless thee, and my fatherly blessing
take thou in a good hour." Saying this he put his hand upon the head of his
son: and then adressing his speech to the Croniell Archier, he said thus: "I
likewise thank thee (most virtuous Archier, for thy faithful conduct, honest
company, and of thy good and veritable foretellings, which have consolated me,
and given me to understand that the end of my perigrination is at hand, and
that shortly the vaticination of Proteus shall be accomplished: I have lived
and perfected the course which nature has given me. To be brief my great
Image shall go under the earth, and the flame of my Cierge remount up to
Heaven from whence it came, cause my departure to be signified to my faith full
companions who are at the next port with my Hippopotame but above al send word
into Tartary to the Queen Priscaraxe to let her understand of my departure, to
the end she stay no longer for me." Croniell promised him to accomplish his
request, if the mortal thing should chance to happen, which seemed to him
neither to be ready nor nere at hand, considering at that present he was both
in perfect health and bigor. In the mean while the Magistrates, lords and
multitude with great silence beheld these two persons strangers, the father and
the son, in great admiration of their heroycal comelines, and equal and like
beauty according to the difference of their ages: together with their
excellent magnanimities, valiant facts and aduenturous deeds, and of their
fortunate encountrie, and mutual knowledge the one of the other in that place
of the Theater: in such sort that either without speech or moving, universally
they held their immutable eyes upon Franc-Gal and Alector. Then Croniel the
Archier said: "Ye men of Orb, who upon these 2. strange men do cast your
view in great admiration, know ye, that our Sovereign God Ioua has sent them
into these regions from far Septentrional countries for the public health of
our city, and destruction of our domestical and internal enemy, whom you
your selves and in your presence have seen slain and discomfited by the son
of this wise man: who likewise before has delivered the woods and fields round
about us from the danger of the terrible Centaure whom he slew, and delivered
the fair Noemia from his hands: which afterward was the occasion of the
scandale that now has turned to our great common good, for therewith we are
bound to him, and owe the greatest and chiefest honor and praise next unto God.
To whom: first of all let us go and render thanks in his temple, where we will
devise further with what prise of honor we shall acknowledge the merit of this
young man. All the people general answered hereto. So be it."

Of the thanks giving in the Temple, the public praise, the prize of honor
assigned; with the civil crown given to Alector. Of the death of Franc-Gal,
the lamentation for him, his elenation and translation, of the loss of
Hippopotame; and of the bird sent away as a messenger. CAP. Vlt.
AT these words the Archier between the Father and the Son went right to the
temple; whereto he was followed of the Potentate, Magistrates, Lords, and the
greater part of the people. And being come thither there were set on the
highest degree before the altar, three chayres. In the middlemost the Archier
took his place, in the two others Franc-Gal and Alector were placed, and the
Potentate with the other Lords, counselors, and other Magistrates, betook
them to their accustomed seats. This done, all of them following the example of
their Bishop bowed their knees and inclined their heads in silent prayer and
thanks giving: and afterward rising up, at the suite and imitation of their
Priest Croniell and his ministers, with the founds of all forts of instruments
according with the voice, in harmenious Music they sung this song following.
Thanks be to Jove our great and Sovereign Lord,
Who has us brought out of these mortal dangers:
Honor and praise we people him afford,
That has us saved by the hands of strangers.
O blessed spirits, and sacred Angels bright
Vouchsafe now to present before his throne
Our grateful psalm and song of sweet delight
Acknowledging that through his grace alone
The worthy child and Son of virtuous sire
Has slain our foe, that did our death conspire.
After this psalm sung with great joy and iubilation, the Bishop Croniell
spoke unto all the assistance in this manner: "This day have you soene (my
Lords and friends) that thing accomplished which not long since I have showed
unto you by divine revelation which is vnfaylable: that is, the public
health, with our deliverance from the common terror and vniuersell danger, by
the overthrow of the serpent; which this young and valiant Esquire Alector
son of the sage Franc-Gal, has slain, to the extreme hazard and perrill of
his life. So as by this most virtuous act he has restored your whole city to
the wonted security: for the which all in general owe him thanks and honor,
and not only to him with vouchsased to accomplish the meritorious act of so
great a praise: but also, to his father, who for us and the common wealth of
this city has brought into the World a Son of such virtue. Now have we an
ancient order and a most laudable custom, not to be ungrateful to the well
meritors of our common wealth, but over and above our verbal regratiation, to
reward and honor them with some notable public deed, and some gift of
honorable prize: wherefore prepare your selves to yield this favorable grace
toward these two strangers, who to my thinking have well desetued the same."
At these words all the multitude cried with one voice: we yield thanks to
Alector our persevere, who has exposed his life for us against our internal
mortal enemy, and that has delivered us from his dangers: moreover we give
thanks unto his bertuous father Franc-Gal who has sent us such a worthy
Son: and we likewise declare both of them worthy of the rights of our city
of Orb, to be set amongst the estates of the Prytan, and particularly the
civil crown to be set upon the head of Alector as a deliverer of the city;
then quoth the Bishop: are you all of this mind, will and consent? Who
answered with one voice, yea: then the Archier caused to be brought by his
ministers, a most fair crown of gold, fashioned like to the leaves of an Oak
enamiled with green, and the bays of weighty rubies, and the acornes of sine
emeraulds, which when he had taken it in his hand, he turned toward Franc-Gal
and Alector, saying unto them in this wise: My Lord Franc-Gal a man most
virtuous, and thou Alector Esquire most valerous, the city of Orb universally
thanketh you for their wholesome deliverance out of the danger and public
evil: in acknowledging whereof the Lords Magistrates and all the people do
grant unto you being strangers all the rights and privileges of this city, and
from hensforth receine you for citizens and Patrices of this town of Orb, in
assigning to you the estate of Prytan, so great and honorable, that it is only
ordained for the excellent benefactors, who have well deserved of the common
wealth. Over and above the which, for especial honor of thy virtue (Alector) of
thy magnanimity, and valiant victory over the monstrous serpent of ye sands the
internal enemy of the city, for thy worthy revenging of Noemias death, and
slaughter of the savage Centaure our external enemy, for the excellent prize of
honor for these thy valiant acts, they present thee with this rich crown,
acknowledging thee for the liberator of their city. In this saying he lifted
up the fair and rich crown and set it upon the head of Alector, who receiving
it graciously with a shamefast rednes, resembled to one of Phoebus morning
beams: his Father Franc-Gal beholding him so affectionatly and fatherly with
an extreme interior joy at the honor wherein he saw his Son, (a little
before as an offender condemned) took such a sudden joy after the extreme
dolors and deadly fears which he had not long before conceived as well by his
dreams, oracles, visions, augures, and proper prognostications, as also of the
peril wherein he had seen his son unhoped for in combat with the serpent,
that his soul was almost out of himself through the violence of the
unspeakable adventures, diverse encountries, sudden chances unlooked for, and
strange mutations from sorrow into hope, from hope into travail and dolor,
from travel into doubt, from doubt into fear, from fear into unhoped joy, and
from joy into incredible admiration: by which diverse contratie, and striving
passions being perturbated he resembled a living body in a ravished soul (as
in truth he was,) nevertheless such a new joy shined in his merry vermilion
face full of gracious cheerefulnes: that it witnessed the pleasure which he
received of the happy hour, and honor of his crowned son, as already from
his infancy he had an evident sign. Alector then seeing him thus repleat with
joy, demanded if the crown were properly appertaining to him: and it was
answered yea. Then he lifting it from his own head, set it upon the head of
his Father Franc-Gal: who, through sudden mutation (which is perilous and
oftentimes deadly) from fear into assurance, and from sorrow into unhoped
joy, being already half beyond himself, and feeling this sonnelie pity to
crown him, through excessive joy and love, could no longer keep his ravished
spirit from flying away through vehement exultation: and at the same instant
was seen a long, straight and a most pure and clear flame issuing out of his
eyes, and mounting toward heaven through the top of the temple, which in
truth was the light of his cierge put out the last day of his peregrination in
the temple of the Sovereign God: according to the ordinance of the ancient
Lady Anange, and of her three daughters Cleronome, Zodore, and Termaine, who as
then ended the cierge of his life, sight and way: in such sort that he remained
stif, and departed in the same habitude of joyful and pleasant face which he
had, when (with the extremity of love and joy) the crown was set upon his
head by his dear son Alector: in such sort that none thought he had given up
the Ghost but only the good Croniell who before had revelation of his
departure: and who by conferring the visions and oracles together and
understanding privately his speeches doubted the worst. Wherefore having
signified so much to the people, in the presence of them all he lifted up his
head by the chin calling him three times by his name; but it auailed not, for
there remained neither life, soul, nor spirit in him, his Son Alector more
sorrowful of his fathers death, than before he had been joyful of his new
glory, embraced, accolled, kissed, called and cried to him, but he might
easily perceive him to be nothing but a statue of flesh separated from the
soul: whereupon through great heaviness and sorrow which stroke him at the
heart he swounded in the chair, in such sort as it was thought that both
Father and Son had been dead, the whole multitude being astonished of so
sudden a mutation from joy into sorrow, and from life into death.
Nevertheless with the help of those who stood by, Alector came again to
himself beginning with hauty cries to lament his Father, to the great
commiseration of the whole multitude, who thus dolorously heard him cry: Alas
Franc-Gal my Lord and Father, have you brought me into this World, to have no
more acquaintance with you, but only three days at Tangut and one only day at
Orb? Alas must it chance thus, that having traveled so many lands and Seas to
seek me who was carried away by the wind, you must find me here in mort all
perrill to your grief, sudden and short joy, and unlooked for death? O my
most dear father, well have I attended to be made knight of your haud, for of a
more worthy a man I can never be made. Well I see now that if I would be a
son any longer, I must go seek another Father: this saying he fell down
again, nevertheless he was by the Ministers speedily taken up, and by the
Archier consolated, who showed unto him the good and long life of Franc-Gal his
Father, tegether with his happy death in extreme joy and felicity, without
feel of pain or sorrow, his glory of immortal renown gotten through the
whole world, which should redound perpetually to his successors. For the better
manifesting whereof (tending only to the end to consolation) he turned his
speech to the people, and by manner of an oration funebrall, he declared what
Franc-Gal was, his noble race, his virtuous acts and deeds, his benefactions to
all universally (in ripping up his whole life) and his strange adventures as he
had understood them of Franc-Gal himself and as they have been before declared
and shown. This oration being well understood, all the people universally
merueiled at such a virtuous and heroycal personage, making for him a public
and common mourning from the highest Magistrate to the lowest of the poor
people: who bore such reverence to this most virtuous deceased Fran-Gal that
they would not willingly loose the sight and presence of him, nor hide so noble
a body under the earthly darkenesses. And therefore by the advice of all the
wise men and consent of all the people, and at the common expense and charges
was made a great Tabernacle of most fine crystal in fashion of a tower,
wherein was enclosed the body of Franc-Gal, situated in a chair, the crown
on his head, in the same form, habitude, and countenance of joy, that he
deceased in. In this estate they elevated him upon four pillars of guilt
brass on the north side of the Altar, whereby they might always have him in
their sight as a very Image of virtue: where he remained whole in his former
beauty for the space of 400. years after, until such time as the world began
to commit Idolatry to him, wherewithal the Sovereign Jove being ^rited, one
day he caused it to be lift up by four angelical spirits, and transported
into such a place, that afterward it was no more seen. These funebrall things
being accomplished, the next day the Archier conducted Alector toward the
Haven, where they found Franc-Gal his company attending their Master, to whom
Alector (who by them incontinently was known and cherished) commanded to
discharge all the goods being upon the Hippopotame, that they might be
conveyed to the town of Orb. Which when they had done, he showed unto them
this sorrowful news, willing them no longer to attend their prince, for that
he was dead, where at all of them being astonished demanded of him saying: Is
Franc-Gal dead't And he answered them absolutely: Franc-Gal is dead. At these
words Franc-Gal is dead, the horse Durat Hippopotame began to move (as one
having understanding and intelligence of the death of his Master) and shaked
his wings, feet, tail, head and body with such a violence, that the Sea arose
round about: and in this torment there issued out of the deep Sea the old man
Proteus, who cried aloud, never man hensforth shall ride upon thee. In this
saying he led the horse into the lofty Stas, where, in the sight and to the
great sorrow of all the beholders, he sonke him in the deapth, in such sort
that never after he was seen. The people of Franc-Gal seeing what had
happened, and that they were both without conduct and means to ride on the
Seas, followed Alector as their Master till that they came to Orb, carrying
with them the goods and riches of their late Master, that they might present
them to his entire body, and see him in his tabernacle: and as they were thus
ready to return, behold a bird passing by, came and rested on the shoulders of
Croniell, who knowing this bird to be sent him by divine ordinance, took her
in his hands, and having written in a white leaf these verses: Priscaraxe
Queen of Tartary, no longer dooattend
The coming of Franc-Gal: for why, his life with joy has end.
The onelysecing of his child Alector full of grace
With honor crowned in virtue mild, has wrought this doleful case.
He bound it to her neck, commanding her in the name of Ioua the name of ye
sovereign God, to be a faithful messenger, and to carry this letter to
Priscaraxe Queen of Tartary and so let her fly with his benediction: and the
bird as one having understood his commandments incontinently took her flight
over the Seas and septentrionall parts in such sort that within a while the
companions of Franc-Gal, Alector and Croniell, lost the sight of her, and
returned to Orb, where, what they did shall be declared in the Second part.
And how Alector was transformed by fantasy into a bird, and afterward
restored to his former shape, made Knight, with his facts and heroycall deeds.
Likewise the message done by the bird to Priscaraxe, of her dolors,
decliningand trasmigration into Aquitaine, and all that happened to her there:
moreover of the passage of Alector into France unto the obscure valley
afterward called by him Vau ieur, and of his notable and worthy doings.
Finally his posterity until the coming of the pensive Pilgrim. All this
shall be shown in the Second part and thus shall end the First.

Though long at length.
FINIS.

