WITS PILGRIMAGE, ( by Poetical Essaies) Through a World of amorous
Sonnets, Soule-passions, and other Passages, Divine, Philosophical, Moral,
Poetical, and Political. By JOHN DAVIES.

Tucunda vicissitudo rerum.

AT LONDON, Printed for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstones Churchyard in Fleetstreete,

To the Right noble, and Highly honored Lord Phillip Herbert. Earl of
Mountgomery and Baron of Shurland. etc.
Not for thou had a Prince unto thy Sire,
Nor, for thou have a Monarch to thy friend,
Nor for thou do to Honors height aspire,
Nor, for thou should my Book, or me defend,
Do I appropriate the same to Thee:
But, to this end, that while it lives, it may
Divulge how dear thou were to worthless me,
That tasted to thee this lov'd-lothd Essay.
Yet, if therein be ought that stirrs thy blood
To boil with h^at for thy wished health unfit,
I have it mixed I hope with so much good
As thou shall have no hurt by tasting it:
For, I would taste a great part of my Bane
Ere thou should taste what should thee least deprave:
Since thou helpst all (thy nature's so humane)
That (sick in mind) seek what they ought to have.
And where some Spirits, that rise from Holes obscure,
To Glories height, as proud, as scornful prove,
(Till hate of all (Prides hire) their falls procure)
Thou GREATNESS bearst as thee it could not move.
Showing the difference ^ixt the highly bor^e
(As nobly bredd) and those, in either, base:
For, HONORS Children do hi^ gracc adorn:
But, Baseness Brattes Her glory quite disgrace.
Well knew that King* and great Philosopher
(Whose Arms of Love, and Power uphold thee will)
That He, on Thee did Honor well confer,
Since, with his grace, thou do him honor still*
Long may (much hono'rd Earl) that grace to Thee
Attain increase, till the extremity
With unremoved fauou^e stayed be*
The surest Stay of Earthes felicity:
That after Ages may report, and see,
King James made One, that God made great to be.
The Book to his Patron.
If I thy Blood do kindly war^e, (...),
Warm my Sires Blood with comfort of thy love.
The most free, bounden, and unalterable humble lover of your Honor, Name, and
Family. John Dauies of Hereford.
Again, To the same truelie-noble Earl, and his most honorable other half
Sir James Haies knight, etc.
Since God and King, He is truly liberal^ and maguanimous which delights more
in good renown the money. Seneca.
and your minds sympathy
Have made you Two, an undivided One,
(One, as of two love makes an Unity,)
I cannot give a Gift to one alone:
For (will I, nill I) if to one I send
A token of my love, or loves desire,
That sending to the other must extend,
Since lou^ does make your Union so entire!
Your Sovereign (that with Judgments Sharpest Eye
Transpearceth all that is opposed to it)
Saw ye were made for Jove of Majesty, That bounty and beneficence that stands
in travail and dilig^^^ is both m^rehones^ and also spreades further, and is
able to profit more Cicero.

Since careless ye were of more* benefit.
O they are worthy to be Minions
To God, and King that love but for their love:
Who, to them both, and their dominions,
Yield fruits of sweet. Affects for bothes behoue.
No Sun ere saw two Faurites of a King
(For, for the most part, such hurt Great, and small)
More dear to al, for the^^ Place mannaging,
Then your (dear Pair) pressed to do good to all!
In love contending who, for Virtues sake,
(O blessed Strife excelling Unity!)
Shall do most good, and most*men bounden make
To you, to whom the World it self would tie:
Hold on rare Spirits; As the touch^ sto^ tries gold so gold tr^eth men.
Plato.
this emulation
Is such-as, with fine force, your fames advance
Beyond the compass of Confusion,
And reach of Envy, Sclander, and Mischance.
O strive you still to show the World ye scorn
To turn such public grace to private* game: He is a vicious pers^ says S.
A^^gustine. that atten ^deth only his own profit.

(As if you were for your * selves only borne)
Since all, but Virtue, is as vile as vain:
And if I live, you, living thus, I may
Legend your lives in Lives that scorn decay:
And, Skill shall fail me but I Will place ye near
Cestor, and Pollux in the Heavenly Sphere.
The since are lover of your heroical virtues John Dauies,
The Book to Gravity.
THou that do knitte the Brow to austere looks,
At what but seems; or else is lewd or light;
And lookst for wisdom often in witless books,
(Stern Gravity) auert from me thy sight*
I am the Issue of a labring brain,
(...) all kind of Fancies, breeding be:
Goo^* bad, indifferent, all, of either Strain
Some as unfit, as some are fit for thee.
I probably presume thou can not love,
Since Saturn fits above fair Venus swaie
Then I am not for thee, for I do move
But in her Sphere that bears the world away.
Yet if (unlike thy self) thou long'st to see
What, who, and whence I am, then smooth thy fr^t
And look on That which I have good in me
And for that good hold me in good account:
For, if (but like a flesh-flie) thou will light
On naught but Sores, and shun the soundest parts
Then naught sublunarie can thee delight:
For all (...) faults though some have perfect parts
I (...) my Lines reach not to those Respects
(...) ^ouch Religion: State, or Policy.
(...) not with Causes of Effects
(...) greater then Loves large capacity:
But in round rimes (with Reason Biac'd) I
Do run those Points that ponit at loves delight:
And if some Rubbes do make me run awry
Yet may I, on this Ground well run aright:
But, howsorre I run, stop not my Race,
That tends but to the Mistress full of grace.
The Author to his Muse.
Why makst (fond Muse) a mixture so unmeet
Of good, and bad in this thou have composd
Since good and bad, do mar all where they meet,
If they, in one by arms of Art be closed?
Is it because thou so woulest Simbolize
The nature of the All, in nature bred,
Whose good does bad, and bad does good comprize
So as they scarce can be distinguished?
Or istsith thou would please the good and bad,
And so (like Sin) a people-pleaser be?
Elce is it because that vice and Virtues trade
Is measurd by the rule of Vanity?
What ere it be it is far out of Square,
If it be tried by true Decorums Squire;
Yet skils it not: since out so all things are
That made are of Earth, Water, Air, and Fire!
Then these, of Wits fire made, for Air of Fame,
(Yet some are Earthly, or with folly flow)
The fire is faulty, and the Air too blame:
Yet heat and moisture maks young things to grow
But yet if these grow great, and swell with praise
more then with numbers, or invention,
Then good and badd, conioynd' in these Essaies,
Does please the World, best pleased with both in one.
Yet what is got by pleasing one so base
But highest displeasure of the Highest of all,
Abuse of Nature, Art, Wit, Time, and Grace,
Abuse to please ABUSES General:
Then take this for a vantage, World, for I
Will please thee so no more, but live, and die
Thy fained friend, or open Enemy.
Of my self.
What mean I miscreant my Brains to beat
To forge these Fancies light as Leuity,
To set the World on fire which amorous heat,
That now lies drowned in such vanity?
I know I should not do it, and I know
This knowledge much exaggerates my blame:
Why do I then my science herein show,
Where greatest skill does merit greater shame?
And who does love this vain of fancy vain
But vainest mea? then, o how vain am I
That thus the powers of my wit do strain,
To please vain Skums with skumme of vanity?
H^re Wit it self (though wit it self I had)
Wants skill to coin excuse the faults so foul:
Then, Reason run right, whether do; thou gad?
VVilt thou misleade the blind, thy Queen, my Soul?
To please base Earth, will thou the, Heavens displease,
That know so well the Earth yeeldes naught but dust?
Seekst thou for fame with my whole man's disease,
That wotst all fame, but virtues is unjust?
Or yet (by Faith instructed) know thou not
(For, Faith, in Truth, knows more the^ thou can know)
That names of famous men away shall rot,
If from such graceless Grounds their fames do grow?
Art thou my guide, and yet do me direct
To laby^inthes of love, where we are lost?
Do thou (most wise) cause this most fond effect?
Or'^rossest me, since thee I often have crossed?
Ah Reason will thou now to Passion turn,
That wast the Prince predominating it?
Shall thy Slave (frail Affection) thee oreturne?
And, mad to make me, will thou strain thy wit?
VVilt thou instruct me so to please the sense
That none but sensual men shall like my Lines?
And misinforme the best Intelligence,
That paies belief to thee, and thine assigns?
O Reason weigh thy self in thine own Scales,
Ponder thy power which is as good, as strong:
Be thou thy self, though thou art wronged by Fools,
And right that wrong with Justice, not with wrong.
I see thou hearst me, for thou teach me,
To teach thee what we both should learn and do:
Thou prompst me now, wherein I erd through thee;
And bidst me those light Lines again undo;
And tie them to the lasting Lord of love,
With such a knot as nere shall be undone:
Those Lines will draw, and hold, and stay, and move.
Since they are by the hand of Virtue spunne.
Then Reason I acquit thee from disgrace,
Since thus thou promptst me what I ought to write:
Let Tyrant shame with blood still fill my face.
For so abusing thy right ruling might.
My frinds (though frail as I am) pres me still
To press these lines (more frail) to public view:
If I should say it is against my will
I should speak truly, and yet most untrue:
For my wills fixed my fast friends still to please:
But yet still wauers thus, to publish these,
Yet since, in wavering wise, thus fixed, it stands
Fames wind, Wits weather-cocke, my will, commands.
Wits Pilgrimage.
(I)
ORE those fair Alps, thy Breasts, (that naked lie
Toward the blushing heaven of thy bright face)
When as I travel with my wandering Eye
The Snowes twixt Them, and That, do let her pace:
For, passing through the Valley of thy Neck
Mine Eye there sticks, as drowned in those snowes,
Yet, thy kind heat the same does countercheck:
So, to thy Chins fair Cliff^; on Milk, she flows!
Where, being come, she breathes, and looks back,
Dazzled to see those passed- Beauties Deepes!
So, there she rests, as on the rock of Wrack:
With sense whereof twixt Fear, and Hope she weeps:
And, dares not higher look, since thine Eyes Beams
Draw clouds thereto, and turn those clouds to Streams.
(2)
VVEearie of Rest, thus resting in the Clift
Of this fair Cliffe (thine Alablaster chinne.)
She now begins her self aloft to lift,
But ends her course, soon as she does begin:
For, having scaled, the neighboring hill, thy Lipp,
There soundly sleeps she, drunk with Cherry-wine;
From it (being moist, and slippie) she does slipp,
To thy fair Teeth, which whitest white refine.
From whence (awakt by thy words silver sound)
She steals through the sweet Rose-banks of thy face;
Where she is caught, and at their pleasure bound,
Til thine Eye-beames the Bond break through their grace:
To which clear Suns (thus drawn,) therein she spies
Loves heaven: and still there, drowned in bliss, she lies!
(3)
Yet, by the accidental rising-fall
Of one Hairs glittering Sunne-beame, on thine Eyes,
Mine Eye looked over that Heavens Crystal wall
To see from whence that bright Beam should arise:
And, as she looked beyond the milky Way
That leads to loves high Court, she might discrie
Ten thowzand Sunne-beames, ranged in fair array,
With Love, and Wonder to surprise the Eye:
To which, being drawn by those pure Threddes of Gold,
She, (as the Fly is by the Spider wrapped)
Stirring to go, the more They her infold;
So, there she restes, with Love, and Wonder rapt:
Where, being blinded with those radiant Rai^s,
I could not see the Rest, the rest to praise.
(4)
GRace of that Goodness which it self does grace:
Virtues ^are beauty, in thick Darkness bright,
Life of those Lines that meat the loueliest Face.
And perfect Period of true Loves delight:
The Terms that bound thy'vnualuable price
Are Words of Wonder, wondering at thy Worth!
Ar^htype of of Beauty! Antitype of Vice!
LOVES Holy Land, that brings His Manna forth!
Whose Mouth breathes forth such Vapor, in such Clouds,
As strait dissolues to Nectar fluentlie!
Whose Breast the Treasure of hidd VVisdome shrouds:
Which makes Thee most resemble the most Hie!
Then, highest Love bounding to the Highest of all
In the rebound, on Thee, his F^rme must fall!
(5)
DRead Majesty! that shin'st through Beauties Skies
Regard me, cold Glass, burning with thy Beams;
Which lighting on the Crystal of mine Eyes,
Do burn my Heart, through Them, with Heates extremes!
To whose amazing Light when I draw near
I freeze, with Fear, and flame in Loves desire:
Then, let thy Favors glaunces thawe this Fear:
And, quench, with dearest Dropps of Grace, this fire.
Yet in these sacred Flames I Will sacrifize
The heart of my poor Heart, to grace thy power;
So thou, with Love, wilt grace that exercize,
And, give me heart, when flames my Heart devour:
I gave thee mine, o then give thine to me
That Mine, and Thine, be One twixt Me, and Thee!
(6)
Even as the Persians aunciently were v'sd
With reu'rence to salute the rising Sun,
And as his Beams were more in it them infused
The more Devotion did their Souls orerunne:
So, when Thou risest in Loves Hemispheare
Desire saluts Thee with a mild aspect:
But, to His Zenuh, when Thou drawest near,
Thou Him enragest with Beams more direct!
I do desire Thou should look right on me,
Although those Looks do but enrage Desire:
Yet if that rage may rest it self in Thee,
Let all thy Beams set all mine All on sire:
Where, if I burn to Sinders, yet I shall
Burn in thy love, more dear then all that At.
(7)
Within thine eyes (the Mirrors of my mind)
Mine eyes behold themselves, wherein they see
(As through a Glass) what in my Soul I find;
And so my Souls right shape I see in thee.
This makes me love thee, (for our like we love)
Which makes me love in thine Eyes still to pry;
Because I see, in Thine, how mine do move,
And, mine do move (as thine do) lovingly.
Then, look in mine, and thou shall see thine Eyes
Attest, for thee, what mine for me protest:
Then, let thie tongue no longer subtilize,
But, say thou love me (as I love thee) best:
For, if we see the Hart-Roote in the eyne
Thy eyes are false or It is truly mine.
(8)
SOme say they wonder how so well I write,
(Although my lines to no great wonders stretch)
Since Art, my skill, of Theft cannot indite;
Yet, I endite with skill above my reach!
Love learnes me Art, which Art inspires my Muse:
For Grammar, Logic, Retorick: and the rest:
( Music especially) Loves art does use:
For, love, untuned, in Tune, is best expressed!
Love, most divine, makes men do miracles:
And, most humane love, Woonders does produce:
But, Beauties love, in virtues Spectacles,
Makes men do woonders most miraculous!
Then, they a wonder do not understand
That wonder, since an Angel guides my hand.
(9)
When first I learnd the A, B, C of love,
I was unapt to learn; and since, a Cross
Crossed my way to them, I was loath to prove
That learning that might tend but to my loss.
The Vowels (Looks) that speld mute Consonants
I hardly could distinguish what they were;
And, since the rest to them were Disonantes
To make them join with Vowels, cost me dear!
The Mutes, and Consonants, being Deeds, and Words,
Were harsh without sweet vowels, (sweetest Looks)
My youth was spent (for age such skill affoords)
Ere them I knew with, and without, my books:
But (Tears) the Liquides, still being in my Eyes,
I saw, through them at last, Loves mysteries.
(10)
THe Parts of all Loves speech, are eighty eight,
(A fatal number, but more fatal speech)
And, long it is ere we men learn the slight;
But Women strait do learn, and we men teach.
If eight, to eighty eight be multiplide,
Loves language does more Ve^bes then Nownes embrace:
Then, full of Aduerbes is the same beside,
Of Swearing, Flattring, Choosing Time, and Place.
Why eighty eight Parts just: no more, nor less?
This speech is figurative, A few, for more:
For, all the parts, Speech never can express,
Since ever they increase in strength, and Store!
Then, if Time raise his arms above his bounds,
Loves speech will Tower, til Error it confounds.
(11)
FO^bidden Hopes o why were ye forbid,
Since ye direct your aim at Bliss of Blisses;
Which is most evident, yet most is hid
Apparent on her lips hid in her kisses?
Can labor of the lips deserve such meede?
Or, bodies travel earne such recompense?
That, with but scarce a view, each sense does seed
And with a touch reuiues the buried sense?
Is Sense made capable of such high grace?
And yet forbid to hope the same to have?
Is Heaven most conspicuous in her Face?
Yet must not Sense there hope it self to save?
Ah what is this, but sense to Sense to gliue
To make it feel in death, what it is to live?
(12)
FOrbidden hopes? (the comforts of my Care,
Yet Care that kills all comforts cheering me)
I am no more my self the whiles you are:
And, yet much more then so, the whiles you be.
If ye stay with me, from my self I run:
If you part from me, past my self I fly;
Stay, or part from me, death I cannot shun:
With, or without your help, I needs must die.
I needs must die, for life-inspiring you:
And die, if die you do by whom I live:
I do decay when I do ye renew;
I grieve with you, but more without you grieve:
O then what choice remains to wretched me
But to be naught, or not at all to Be.
(13)
FOrbidden-Hopes, the Heavens of my Hell,
O cease your Heau'nly-Hellish Regiment:
My Heart (the Hellish Heaven wherein you dwell)
You rule at once with joy, and Dryryment!
Since Contradictions ye do then maintain
And that they Reas'n resist that such defend,
Then o part not my single Heart in twain,
To make it double, for this double end.
The joys you yield, are forged but by Conciete;
The griefs you give have ever real been:
Your pleasures are accomplished by De^^ile;
Which, with their ending, endless Woes begin:
Since endless Woes your ending pleasures give,
Die, die (damned Hopes) and let me die to live.
(14)
FOrbidden-Hopes, why flutter ye in Air,
Above the Compass of your Sphere assigned?
More Fit (how ere unfit) were deep despair,
Then Hopes forbidden to the mounting Mind.
Forbidden-Hopes why gaze ye on the Sun,
(Like Bastard Egletts) that quite blinds your Eyes?
For Justice Son such Hopes has often orerune,
And molt those Hopes forbidden in their rise.
Forbidden-Hopes, why do ye impe your Wings
With Feathers culled from the Birds of Love?
Since Doves are harmless withont Gall, or Stings:
But both at once you make your Subject prove:
Then, ofrom whence have such strange Hopes their being,
That see by blindness, and are blind by seeing!
(15)
IF those translucent Lamps thine heavenly eyes
Shall stretche their beams of comfort to my passion
I still will gaze on thy Cheeks ( Beauties Skies)
With, eyes of Wonder, Love, and Adoration!
For, if the Gods their Heavens have made in Stars
Thine Eyes, bright Stars, contain right Deities;
Who are the Presidents of Peace, or wars,
And either cause, as either fall, or rise
Then may I (with no Godless Nations) take
Those Stars for Deities, and them adore,
They having power or Peace or War to make
To make my peace, since war has made me poor:
For, loves hott wars Life's Store have wasted quite
Then grace the Foil, thus soild to grace thy might.
(16)
When well I weigh thy Fassions, and thy Form,
(Both being of Celestial temp'rature,
Which no Change can endammage, or deforme)
My love becomes, like Them, as firm, as pure!
Thy Soul upon so sweet an Organ plays
As makes the Parts, she plays, as sound, as sweet;
Which sounds the heavenly Setters, and thy praise;
The Close whereof with groundless bliss does meet!
This makes desire, in me, (unlike Desire)
Like Crystal, cold, and clear, through heat, and cold;
This makes me flame, like Sol, with heavenly fire,
Which fructifies mine Earth, as virtue would:
Then, what I am, at best, I am of Thee,
Virtues best Instrument to fashion me.
(17)
THy nere too much prized Person (dearest Deer)
The, past most precious, sacred Temple is,
Wherein pure Chastity, and Beauty clear,
Espoused are to Love, and Lovers bliss:
Thy mildness makes Pride poor, and Meekness rich:
Thy looks raise Hope, yet staidly keep it down
Within the compass of a modest pitch:
Wherein thy highest grace, with grace, is shown.
Thou art a Pearl which nothing can relent
But Viniger made of Devotions Tears:
If it be counterfeit, or evil bent,
For it thou have, nor Heart, nor Eyes, nor Ears:
But, Heart, and Eyes, and Ears thou have for mine,
Whose Heart, and Eyes and Ears, are ruld by Thine.
(18)
TO touch on Sylla, yet to escape the same,
And yet be drowned in the Havens mouth,
Is of all griefs the great'st, and greatest blame
To Fortune, or Discretion, Pains, or Sloth.
But I, that escaped the Gulphe and Rock of Wrack,
(Which in the Ocean of my boundless love
I found to draw me on, and put me back)
Am like, in my Hopes Haun, the like to prove;
For when I hopt I had Thee as mine own
(O too too credulous!) am like to those
That love, by which for mine, thou long wast known,
Through winds of misreport, which Envy bloes:
But, if these bitter blasts thee from me bear,
My Hopes sink, causeless, where there was no fear.
(19)
THe Stoics, in their strange Philosophy,
Make All, and Nothing, nothing but all one:
Who say that this World Is: but yet deny
That it has any Essence of the own.
But, in our loves (dear Love) the same is true:
For, Thou, b^^ng All, art mine, that Nothing am?
I Nothing am that is not All thy due,
So, All and Nothing's nothing but the same!
Then, since my Nothing and thy All all is one,
Thou, All, I, Nothing, make an Unity:
For, All to Nothing has conversion*
And, Nothing, unto All, by sympathy:
Then, need I (Nothing) Thee (All) nothing fear
But All, and Nothing still shall One appear.
(20)
Who cannot love without to lust it run
Or else to Passions that as wild appear,
Are like ill Eyes, that cannot brook the Suune:
Or most weak Brains, that strong wine cannot bear.
But, in high Love (whose ^ase on virtue rests)
There Is no distemprature of Flesh, or Spritie:
The Mouth of true Love sucks true Pleasures Breasts:
Which it augments with pure (not gross) delight.
Hence flow all Nectard Sweets into the Soul
That Heaven, or Earth, (in highest height) can yield;
As sweet and fair, as Lust is sour, and soul,
And does (at pleasure) Pleasures Passions weld:
But, he that is impatient in desire,
(As Clogd with flesh) cannot this Heaun aspire.
(21)
O That I could (as willingly I would
By breathing on thy lips my Soul infuse
Into thy beanteous Body; then, it should
Make Thee (as still it does) on It still muse?
For muse I do, and nonght but muse alone,
Because it makes my Muse to make my Love
Unto such only Beauty only known
(By weight and measure) so, thy Soul to move:
Move Soul (sweet Soul!) Soul of my sweetest Sweet!)
With equal motion move, as moves my Soul:
Which moves to Thine, then let Thine with It meet
It to embrace, in love, not It control:
But yet if so thou move, thou shall (Dear Sweet)
Control it still when it moves ought unmeet.
(22)
SO looks an Angel on Heauns Crystal Wall
As looks my Saint, or Angel in her Glass:
Each see in each, they are Celestial;
Her flesh then, being Heaunly, is not Grass:
Grass no: o no, though Grass does glad the Eye
With Ey-delighting Greenness, its too dark
To be like her di^^ne Serenity
That, of highst GLORY, is a flaming Spark!
Which sets the World on fire, and al therein,
Like Phaetons Pride (the Proud should I now that Story)
No Eye sees it but would lose sight to win
That Light, by which Eyes see, Sight dimd with glory!
O might mine Eyes be dimd still, with that Light
I would be naught but Eyes, yet blinded quite!
(23)
STir'st thou me up to love? yet me restrain'st
From that thy strong perfections stir me to?
Frown'st thou in ernest? or else frowning fain'st,
Since thee, in ernest, ernestly I woo?
If thou can be thine own true Antitype,
(That Is most deformed, since most well formed Thou art!)
If thou can rotten be, now, thou art ripe,
Then, can I cease to sue, but not to smart:
For, smart I should no less for thy disgrace
Then I do smart for love of (graceful) Thee:
Then, let me love thee, in thy better case,
That in thy worst, so much should grieved be:
But, if thou will not have me woo, nor love,
Then, either cease to Be, or cease to move.
(24)
SO, art thou (Cruel!) like a Ballance-Scale
For, when I sinck with Bale, thou mount'st with Bliss;
And when I rise with Bliss, thou sink'st with Bale:
So, still thou art mine Opposite by This
And why all this? (O froward Fair!) o why
In mine annoy do thou so much delight?
Can I not live, but thou fourthwith must die?
Or does my death give thy life, life, and spright?
There Is no necessity herein at all,
Unless Thou be the same: Who, (Parchas-like)
Do never rise, but by another fall:
That is, their Threede of life quite off to strike:
For while I waighe them wonnded by thy Beams
Their uumber, rising, falls into Extremes!
(25)
Love, like a Center, in a Circle stands
As near to Beggars as He does to Kings:
And like a King them both, alike, Commands,
As He commands, likewise all other Things!
What Heart is of such st'eely temprament
(Or much more hard:) for, Steel the Magnes loves)
But gently bows, when it by Love is bent?
Only thy Heart (hard Heart!) He nothing moves!
Nature nere made what has no grace in it;
Then, thee she made not, that art so unkind:
So, thou art nothing, since all Beeings fit
The Ends, to which, as Means, they were assigned:
Women, are Means that Men Be, be not then
As Nothing, but with Something, bring some Men.
(26)
THe sweetness ( Sweet) which in thy love I feel,
Sweetens the sorrow which, through it, I taste:
It me vpholds, as It does make me reele;
And, does enlarge my Heart, which It does wast.
LOVE, though Thou kill me, yet, I must confess
Thou have disbur'sd my Love where it is due:
And though it boundless be, yet is it less
Then to my Loves worth does, 'of right, accrue!
And though thou be a Spectacle, through which
Each grace seems greater then, in deed, it is:
Yet, settled Judgment mounts her prices Pitch:
For, Heaven and Earth do offer fair for This!
Then, since Thou art more Fair then Eyes can see,
I Will offer Thee as fair (my Soul) for Thee,
(26)
BY Nature, when we are most cold without
(As in the Winter) we are hott'st within:
And, hott'st without, when cold'st the Heart about:
Thus, in, and out this Hott, and cold do ryn:
The truth here of I know, too well, you know
To question it; Then, why do you suppose
My Love is cold within, since so in show,
When that Show shows you how within it glowes?
Will thou distrust Affections Miracle
(I per se I) so ravished with thy Love:
As now I am Loves Forces Spectacle,
Which Cold, and Heat (yet clear in both) do prove?
Then o look through my cold-cleere Eyes and see,
My Heart still sacrificed in flames to Thee.
(27)
LEt not (dear Sweet) the wheeling of the Spheres
(That spite thy Christaline translucencie)
Wind up thy lifes-Threed on the Spowle of Years
Ere thou do as thy Mother did for Thee:
Least that thy Glass thy beauie do accuse
Before the soueraign'st Sense, for being deflowered
By Time; which Thee, as thou did, Him, abuse:
Which by thy Beauty will be ill endured.
Why make an Idol of Divinity
(Thy Beauiie!) and with It the Pagan play,
By offering up thy self, to It, and die
In Flames, but of Self-love, condempn'd each way?
Then, better thou had nere bin borne, since birth
Thy diuiue Beauty so condempnes to Earth.
(28)
IF (as the Pithagoreans do believe)
The Sea be naught but one of Saturnes Tears
Its not unlike since still I, weeping grieve
That mine Eyes, Seas should shed, in many years.
This is the seaunth Sun has seen my love
As firm, as flaming toward thy Beauties Heaun,
Yet ouerthwartly that Heauns Suns do move
Through evil Signs that to no grace are giun,
Nere did they shine on me but to exhale
A Sea of Tears from my stil-springing Eyes
Or else to parche my Blood, and make me pale:
So, fall my Tears, that still do falling rise:
And, if those Suns thou Cloud still with disdain^,
Mine eyes shall end the World with endless Rain!
(29)
SOme say the Weezel-masculine does gender
With the Shee-Weezel only at the Ear
And she her Burden at her Mouth does render;
The like (sweet Love) does in our love appear:
For I (as Masculine) beget in Thee
Love, at the Ear, which thou bearst at the Mouth
And though It came from Heart, and Reins of me
From the Teeth outward It in thee has growth.
My Mouth, thine Ears, does ever chastely use
With putting in hot Seed of active Love;
Which, straight thine Ear conueyeth (like a Sluice)
Into thy Mouth; and, there but Air does prove:
Yet Air is active; but, not like the fire
Then o how should the Son be like the Sire?
(30)
IF Fire has often Barbarian Honors done it
By reason it resembles so the Sun
Yet scarce is seen when his Rays overrun it)
What would Barbarians to thine Hair have done?
Which (o fair- Sweet!) oreshines Fire, Sun, and all;
Whose rare resplendance no Eyes can behold
That are not (like it) most Angellicall,
And being so, will them, in wonder hold.
Then since that Nature Crowned Thee with such Light
As makes all Eyes, adoreing, wonder at,
Be not, o be not then, in love, so light
As makes thee dark by being This, to That:
My speech is dark; yet what by light I mean
Is more unconstant, then it is unclean.
(31)
IT is as true, as strange (else Trial faines)
That whosoever in the Moone-shine sleeps
Are hardly wak't, the Moon so rules the Brains;
For She is Sovereign of the Brains, and Deepes:
So thou (fair Cynthia) with thy borrowed Beams,
(Borrowed of Glories Sun, great Lord of Light!)
Makst me still sleep, in Love, Whose golden Dreams
Give Love right Current, since well-Coyn'd, Delight.
I cannot wake, while thou, on me, do shine,
Thy shyning so, makes me so sweetly Dream:
For, still me thinks I kiss those lips of thine:
And, -- nothing else, for, I will not blaspheame:
But thought is free, and Dreams, are Dreams, and so
I dream, and dream, and dream, but let That go.
(32)
Lust is a Tyrant, Love a Servant Is:
This is the Sentence of Proofs evidence:
For, I nere see you ( Sweet!) but feel by This
Both Cold and H^ate, through Love, and reverence,
What Eye can look, through clear Loves Spectacle,
On Virtues Majesty, that shines in Beauty,
But (as to Natures diuin'st Miracle!)
Performs not to It all subiectiue duty?
BEAVTIES Divinity none dare profane
That are of Humane, or of Brutish Kind
But when Its full, where Virtue's in the wane:
Where a fair Body hids a filthy Mind?
But were thy Mind and Bodies beauty one,
Twere Natures Majesty's diuinest Throne!
(33)
Enough (fell Fair!) for, thou have done the Deed
That thou have long bin doing, which does make
Thy mercy less, for that, to kill with speed
Shows more remorce then they that leisure take.
How? and how long have thou bin mart'ring me
To make my Death beyond my death to stand?
Who have bin so Anatomized by Thee
That every Nerve has felt thy Rigors hand!
Out of my Heart, and Brains that Hand has squiz'd
The Spirits that either Life, or Sense maintain:
For, I am all as dead, as vnaduiz'd:
Only, for Thee, I Life, in show, retain:
And if thou will have That, since That Is for Thee
Then take Thou All, and leave the rest for me.
(34)
OMemorie (the Relicke of my Sense)
Why yet remainst, to make me yet remain
A Relike of my Fancies soul offense,
That loved for hate, and wooed, but for disdain?
Carowse of Loethe, make thie Cup, my Scull,
Until thou be dead-drunke; then, like the Blessed,
I shall be full of rest, as thou art full
Of that forgetfulness which minds but rest.
And thou relentlesse Diamond, too dear,
(Too dear for me, that offered me, for thee)
Shall, to the World, in worth the less appear
Since thou proust nothing worth to, wronged me:
Then, since thou art naught worth, but in the Exchange,
I will not me, for thee, now, interchange.
(35)
NOw plays my Mind upon her Instrument,
(Thought-wasted Body, Organ of my Mind)
No Parts but such as wholly discontent,
My Parts are so untuned, by Thee, Unkind!
My Longues (the B^llowes) draw in naught but Air,
That (...) my Wind-pipes but with harshe Complaints
Tending to Diapassons of D^spaire,
Which often die, for, that Wind often faints.
My Heart, and Brains (the Stoppes, that cause the Mood)
Do often stopp: since often such Moodes they cause
As by the Pangs of Death are often with-stood,
Through which the Organs Voice does, sinking, pause:
But if thou (SWEET) wilt have It sweetly rise
Then, breathe sweet Air into It as It dies.
(36)
IN the' Abstract Nature is immutable;
But, in the Subject it does vary still:
My Love, each way, is to It suitable;
In the Abstract firm, the Subject vary will.
Why will thou vary (Subject of my Love,
More sweet then Sweetness!) why wilt alter Sweet?
Is it because thou will a Tyrant prove?
Or scornst Subjection? or, thy Match to meet?
If so it be (o fairest Fair!) then, know
I am thy Subject, though thou subject be
To my high Love, that makes me subject so:
Then, thy Subjection gives thee Sou'raigntie:
Since so it is: then, firm to me remain,
Whose Love does make thee Subject: so, to Reign!
(37)
IF two Suns should, at once, adorn the Skies
All, in Combustion, would be soon beneath:
Then, it is no wonder though thy Sunne-bright Eyes
(O most fair- Fair!) make all to burn that breath!
For, in thy Faces midd-heau'n so they shine
As comforts Nature in her works of grace:
Yet makes It flame, with fury (often) Divine,
While it as Heanu'ly does adorn thy Face:
Then, since I am great Mother Natures Son,
Let thine Eyes comfort me, with grace, to move,
(As if I were all flaming, in the Sun)
Unto the endless Orb of thy bright love:
Wherein, if quite thou melt me, I shall be
That which I wish: that is, A parle of Thee.
(38)
AS great pains are not durable, at most:
So, long Griefs are supportable, at least:
For, naught is violent but ends in post:
And that which dureth Nature may digest.
This is most true, else lies Philosophy;
And I would say she lies, in mine own proof,
Were she not Hand-maide to Divinity:
Which makes the Ly to keep the more aloof.
But ah, the smart I have endurd through love
Has (like that Love) bin long, and extreme great
And all for thee (too Sweet) which sour I prove,
Which woundst me while thou do me well entreat:
If Ioab o had played that part alone
Thou should in Deed and Show, have bin mine own.
(39)
When I assaie to blaze my lovely Love
And to express Her alin Colors quaint
I rob Earth, Sea, Air, Fire, and all above
Of their best Parts, but her worst parts to paint:
Staidness from Earth, from Sea the cleerest part,
From Air her subtilty, from Fire her light
From Son, Moon, Stars the glory they impart
So, rob and wrong I All to do her right.
But if the beauty of her Mind I touch
(Since That before touched, touch but parts externe)
I ransack Heaun a thousand times as much
Since in that mind we may that Mind discern
That's all in All that are or fair, or good;
And so she is most divine in Flesh, and blood.
(40)
NOw Taper-pointed Night began to pierce
The bending forehead of our Horizon,
When as I took my Pen in blackest verse,
To shadow forth my blacker Passion.
I told thee then, in Words as dark as Hell,
The Torments (Sweet) I for thy Love abide;
And gave thee light to see their Substance well
By Lines that were al flame thy Sense to guide.
Yet can thou not or rather wilt not see
The White whereat, in this dark-light I drive:
Then know (deer Sweet) directly it is thee:
Lo, know thou now? no no thou still wilt strive
Against thy knowledge not to know the same,
Yet know thy Fashion puts me out of Frame.
(41)
THere was a Time when the most sacred Saint
That ever wedded was his Wife did woo,
And with loue-passions did her Ears acquaint,
To move her mind to Love and marriage too:
When he would not have thought it mortal sin,
(If so he could) to have lynd out his love
In moving measures so her love to win.
For, all that measure well of force must move.
He did, or would have told her his desires
And measurd them in Numbers) were alone
Those, Edens outcasts left unto their Heirs
By marriage Rights for Generation:
Then since that Church, and Common weal increase
By This, should Lines that lead to this, surcease?
(42)
IF Speech, the noblest action of the will,
Be turned to Silence (Loves best speech) in me,
I^ wit be quickened, or made good, of ill
By that good will which I do bear to thee:
Then what auailes good wit if it be mute
More then good will, that want good words to show it?
Suitors speed not, that cannot show their suit:
So, sue I to Thee but thou will not know it.
Yet Dumb-men do, and may, wed lawfully;
But, wed they do not without first they woo:
Then, let me (dumb through Love, that speaks thereby)
Do as, by Laws of Heaun and Earth they do:
They woo, then Wiue, I woo, then let me Wed;
For, Words in Deed, best fit the marriage bed.
(43)
MY Mind to me a mighty Kingdom is;
Which I possess, but not enjoy in peace;
For if I did, I were a King of This,
But Love, my right, does force me to release,
If thou (great Love) usurp another Right
Thou art a Tyrant; and thou must resolve
By fight to keep, what Thou have got by fight;
If so of force, Thou must thy force dissolve:
For with Thy force thou can not win from me
My Mind, unless Her force Thou quite defeat;
Which, it Thou do, it is the worse for thee:
For, tho^ defeatest That, that makes thee Great:
Then, o be not too sell, but let that She
For, and by whom I live, reign there with Thee.
(44)
Cannot that fire that burns me warm thy Heart?
Art thou turned Salamander in desire
To live in my Hearts flames and feel no fire?
But rather takst thou pleasure in my smart?
My heart is little, and the flames are great:
Its lit^e made by thy great cruelty:
The Fuel spent (as now the same is ny)
The fire needs must lose both hold, and heat.
My Heart (the fuel) is not Adamant,
That can endure the fury of this flame:
But it is Flesh, and soon melts in the same,
VVherof I wot, thou art not ignorant:
Then if thy knowledge will not help my Heart
I will condemn thy VVil, and curse thine Art.
(45)
SOme say they love, because their Loves are fair;
And other some, since they are wise and kind:
The first, love but the hue of Flesh, or Hair:
But the last, love the beauty of the Mind.
But, my love kindled is at both those fires:
For, Wit and Beauty in my Love does flame
Without al noisome Smoke of dark Desires:
So, bright she is in Beauty, Wit, and Fame.
If all these do concur to cause my Love,
That Love, so caused, should bring forth rare effects:
And so it does, for me it so does move
As I do rest in restless rare Affects.
Then, since (deer Sweet) thy Graces and my Love
Are like, alike, let our Affections move.
(46)
THey write, and speak well, that can well express,
(In either kind) what Fancy does suggest:
But I the more I fancy, speak the less:
So, in my Heart, my hartlesse Tongue does rest.
But, o deer Heart, since thou art Lord of life,
On pain of death, command my Pen to make
Ynk of thy blood, to Chronicle the strife
Which thou endurest for thy true loves sake.
And, thou my Fancy so thy self bestir
(Who stir'st about the Center of my Love)
That future Times, in love, may pity her,
Since graces such, vnpittiful should prove:
And, make my Pen (in lasting Colors) paint
The Picture of my Love, and sullen Saint.
(47)
THe fatal beams thou dartest from thine Eyes
(Like Basilisks work on me, in effect:
Yet from them does my remedy arise
By glassing mine, in thine, them to reflect:
For, in mine Eyes, should thou thy self but see
Thy Beams would make thee in self-loue to burn:
Then, harm me not and I will not hurt thee:
Else on thy self thy Beauties Beams i will turn.
Think not because thy Heart is Adamant
That thy bright Rays will but thereon rebound
No, to thy self theil make thee mercy grant,
And love that grace that hurts and heals the wound:
Then let thine Eye-beames grace infuse in mine
Or, for thy plague, i will riuet mine in Thine.
(48)
PArdon me Love, since what for Thee I do
(Although it breaks thy Precepts (often too strict)
Is to attain what to attain unto
Thou sholdst no Course, how ere cross, co^tradict:
For, she I love is too too like a Saint,
But that she is most unlike, in her disdain;
Who loves: but loves to cause my just complaint,
As if her pride took pleasure in my pain:
Then though my prostrate old Devotion
I do forbear, forbear to blame my Course:
For some do climb to highest promotion
By scorning Scorn, and offering Fury force:
She Is stiff, and I am strange, but yet I see
My strangeness makes her seem less strange to me.
(49)
A Time there was when Love alone did live
Within the Breast of Heavens eternal Light:
But since that light did light to Planets give
Light Venus, in light Hearts usurps his Right:
So, She Is an Idol made and daily served
With that Devotion which to him belongs:
Whose Motions are much more then his observed
So, He the Author seems of his own wrongs!
He made her first but to incline the Sense:
But since, She seems much more then to constrain,
Since Mad She makes Men with her influence,
If ought from her, their Senses do restrain:
But why o Lightness, love thou so this Star
Whenas the Sun of Glory's brighter far!
(50)
Love, leave thy Lodge (my Heart) and enter Hirs
Who placed thee there; that she may know what pain:
Thou have in pleasures, and what rest in Stirs,
Which being done, return to mine again:
For, though, at once, thou glad, and grieve the same,
Thou griu'st It so, as still It would be griu'd,
So Hirs might still be melted with His flame:
And so made One till they be life-depriu'd.
Or, if not so made one, that Odds should cease,
Yet Odds might light be made, by mutual Love:
Then, in that War we might enjoy sweet peace:
So, we should think War sweet, and so It prove:
But if she love not too, o Love thou art
Heart to my grief, and gri^fe unto my Heart.
(51)
OF Love, why write I, since such hate I prove
As is of force to make Love Love to hate*
How, how (poor Man) should ^ have lust to Love
Whose Love, and Life are so unfortunate?
My scornful fortunes my Love scornful make:
Who Looks on me as on Disgraces Glass:
While I such hate* and wrongs bear for her sake,
As able were to make a Man an Ass
And yet such bearing she forbe^res to style
With virtuous Title, yet if force (...)
She says it is brutishe: Thus (...)
My same, though yet, herein, I her excu^e*
Since, she hates one that loves his own Disgrace
That is, He loves her that does him debase.
(52)
FOrtune, and Love (each other to disgrace)
Strive who should make me Slave to eithers might;
And, being blind, fight without shifting place:
So, I am made the Bar ore whom they fight.
The Blows of either often fall on me;
And, much more often since they both are blind:
But, Fortune strikes me sure, as she could see;
And, Love does wound me sore, with Blows more kind!
Fortune, does chippe me out, and takes away
All outward Things: but Loves impetuous Blows
Nere cease to sinck till in my Heart they stay,
Thus, is my Spoil the Triumph of these Foes:
But, more I yield to Love, then Fortunes might,
Since I can Live, in Love, in Fortunes spite.
(53)
Favors, are so far sweet as there remains
Place for requital; but, if past that Place
They grow, to great Hearts, but to be great pains;
Which loathe such Love, and grudge at so much grace.
This happily (dear Sweet) you think upon
When your dear graces on me dropping be:
Who make them fall with small effusion,
Lest they should cause the like effect in me.
But, you (o me!) do quite my Heart mistake:
For, you have made it poor, and hardly lives:
Which loves you more, the more of It you make:
For, Favors excess hardly it reuiues:
Then o, wise- Fair, my poor Heart favor still,
Since still it lives, by hope, that so you will.
(54)
She comes, She comes, mount, mount my Soul
Unto the height of Admiration!
See how the Sun him self begins to scoule
To see a fairer Sun the Earth upon!
O glorious Light (which makes our Hemispheare
Like Jupiters Star Chamber with thy Rays!)
How do thou me confound with Love, and fear?
What praise but Wonder, can thy Wonders praise!
Stand, stand a loose, come not to near mine Eyes:
For, thou will make them lightlesse with thy Light!
O me! my Heart, how with thy Beams, it Fryes!
What mean (o Miracle!) to melt me quite?
Hold, hold; no more: thy Beams from me auert,
Unless, from them, Thou hide me in thy Heart.
(55)
IF Sunne-Beames spring, by kind, from Heaun'ly Ground,
If Voice, divining Ears, from Angels comes,
If breath that yields as sweet a Sent, as Sound
Celestial be, and Sense, with joy, ore'comes:
Then, Face, and Voice, and Breath of my sweet Saint
Are most Celestial: and, if so they be,
The Spirit of Science did this Picture paint
By Copy of his own Divinity!
If so, she is most merciful, and just:
Since He, in both is most, most infinite;
Which makes us fear, and yet, in Him, to trust;
And so she does, in Wisdom exquisite:
Which often, in Justice, humbles daring Men
And then, in Mercy, liftes them up again.
(56)
IF Favor comes by suffering, not by force,
And wilde-fire quenched be with Milk, or Mire;
If yielding Woll resists the Bullets course,
And gentle Oil does quench Lime set on fire:
If that the higher we desire to build,
The lower we our groundwork ought to lay:
If all these Truethes so natural are held
That their clear evidence does question stay:
Then questionless you are unnatural
(Sow're Sweet) who though I, at your feet, am thrown
Yea, make my self your very Pedestall,
Yet, you insult the more, and keep me down:
If then my lowliness your scorn increase
You are Perfections unkind Masterpiece.
(57)
ITs easy to blaspheame the name of Love,
And say its but the work of Idleness:
The Slipps of Fancy, which often mortal prove,
The Mothe of Strength, and strength of Foolishness:
These, and such like, or else far worse then these,
Might Hate disgorge against Loves Divinity:
And with such Yells Despair her Soul might ease,
Whose sweetest ease is bitt'erst Blasphemy:
But I, that know the power of Love too well,
To well do word him to be used so ill:
For, he has damned me to his lowest Hell
Where He torments my Reason, Wit, and Will:
But, Reason, Wit, and Will in humble wise
Do pray for him, and wish he had his Eyes.
(58)
YOur Favors filling my torn Heart with Hope,
Hope, raising lustlesse Love, and Love, Desire,
Desire rests not but in, Deer you, his Scope;
Whose flames still mount to you, his Sphere of Fire.
Then, if to my desire you will give rest,
It must be in your staid Loves purer flames:
Then, with his Element, Desire inuest,
Since his fire compound is, and him vnframes.
Feeling mounts not to Pleasures firmament,
But through this subtle Sphere of simple fire:
Nor Love attain the Heaven of true content,
But by this sweet Repose of his Desire:
Then, if you love me, as it seems you do,
Rest my Desire, and I will rest yours too.
(59)
HA! there She goes, that goes away with me;
And here stand I, that have her in my Heart:
She flees from me, and yet I with her flee:
For no Division can us wholly part.
Fair fall thee buxome Air that yet do hold
The sent of her late presence, for thy grace:
Thou do sweet Air, but what the Heavens would,
If they so happy were it to embrace.
Who breaths this Air, their breath most sweet must be,
Though it, before the Air made most unsweet:
On It I Will live, till She return to me,
To take the air which from her first did fleet:
And then in Words she shall receive the same
That shall be sweetened with her praise, and Name.
(60)
Parhaps I do, though you think otherwise,
Love in the tenderst Bowels of my Soul;
But what? Can I not love; unless there lies
Love in my Front, while yours, in hate, does scoule?
If no faith in the Front does lie; no love
Lies where no faith is; for, love lives thereby:
Then, the Fronts Arguments do nothing prove
But show of truth inuolu'd in Falacie.
And if the Front say true, and true it be
That Women's Naies are ever double Yeas;
Then, your Front ever giving Naies to me,
Do give me twice as many yeas, by These:
But, in true love, I hold that Skill unfit,
That discontents the Will to please the Wit.
(61)
Will you (your Will be done) have me love so,
That by my Looks the same you best may see?
And will you love in Deed, and hate in show?
Do as you will, your will is law to me.
Yet Show has much deceit, but Substance none;
Then, most substantial is the truest love:
The foreheads falsehood is more seen then known,
Yet known of most, that least thereof approve.
Then, since the Front's so full of Falacy,
I cannot trust yours, more then you can mine:
But if you would our Hearts should open lie
Change Hearts with me, or let us them combine:
Then, feelingly, our hearts we so shall kno,
To This (Sour Sweet) say double yea, or No.
(62)
MY Tongue, is turned to Eyes, mine Eyes, to Ears
In the dread presence of my deeerest Love:
Who, while she speaks, my very seeing hears;
Her Tongue, and Body do so sprightly move!
My Tongue, and Ears are deaff, and dumb the whiles,
Orewhelm'd with Love, and Joy, and Hope in each;
Only my Looks applaude her Words with smiles,
As if they only heard, and saw Their reach.
And since with her I cannot interpleade
But m^erely by the m^ane of speaking-Lookes,
Since Looks alone must stand me then in stead
My Looks shall be Love, and Wits record Books,
Wherein she still may read what I conceive
Of her sweet words, and what replies I give.
(63)
Say you (dear Sweet^) my Lines are labored sore?
My Lines, I know, will tell you no such thing:
Though every Line does labor more, and ^ore,
Till they my Grief, concealed, to light do bring.
But, for my Lines themselves, they labored are
With no more pain then pain in pleasure takes:
Since they my Heart unburden of much care,
That yet, for want of better issue aches.
A Labored Line's too busy for my Brain,
That is well (...) distracted, with muh Thought:
Let those Lines labor, that by Lines do gain;
^or, I have labored Lines, too loage, for naught:
Since my best labou^'d Lines you still reward
With saying, tushe this pains might well be spared.
(64)
While Words I weigh, in Scales of my Conceit,
To know their weight that merit most respect,
And, while I use some Art (without Deceit)
To place them where they may have most effect,
I find the weightiest Words are far too light
To weigh the Will resolved not to be waid;
And, though their plac^ make infinite their might,
Yet stir they not a Mind peruersly staid:
Then, why seek I to move you by my Words?
I know not I, because I know so much:
Yet this lost labor my Love you affords,
Which, ^ It draw not, shall your hardness touch:
For, were you Steel, the Magnes of my Love
Would draw you to it; but harder you I prove.
(67)
YOur Souls rough Calmes, that neither hate, nor ^oue,
Your Mind unmoved with praises, or reproof,
The less they moved are, the more they move
My froward love, to stand the more aloof.
Yet looks it back, when it is well-ny gone,
Supposing It should not so give you over:
Then tries some other kind Conclusion,
Which speeds no better then those tried before.
You hate me not; for, well you use me still:
You love me not; since you feel not my pain:
This (like your mortal hate) offends my Will;
Yet, this is all the love my Love does gain:
What Mettell are you off? sure, flesh, and Blood
Are not so staid, that naught can move their mood!
(66)
Where shall I hide me from Loves Power? o where?
If to the Antipodes from him I fly
He Pricks his Flights at me, and hitts me there:
If near at hand, his Torche my Flesh does fry.
In Earth, his Shafts have all fubdu'd to Him;
The Sea's his Mothers Contrie; and beside
He naked is, and so can faster swymme:
And, through the Air, he on his Wings does glide.
If to the Fire I fly, its to himself:
Then, Heaven, and Hell, (if Poetts fable not)
Have felt the great force of the little El^e:
Thus, all, in all, are subject to his Shot:
Then since no where I can be safe from these,
I Will hide me no where: That is, in mine ease.
(67)
But This, and then my Pen shall make aboade
In endless Rest: For, even now the same
Goes, stradling, underneath a heavy Load:
For, Heaviness his form does quite vnframe.
Who sheddeth sable Tears, well mixed with Bryne,
To rue his owners sorrows bitter state:
And makes happlesse Blotts in every Line
To Simbolize his Love unfortunate.
The sincking Paper makes them, spreading, run,
As ^r^efe runs, spreading, in his sincking Heart:
Pen, Y^ke, and Paper, then, are quite undone,
(As is their Master) with sad Sorrows smart:
And all that smart I feel through your disdain,
Who wounds my Heart, with love, yet scorns my pain.
(68)
Work on my Heart, stern Grief, and do thy worst:
Draw it together till his Strings do crack:
My Mind will nere be whole till they be burst:
Then, break, break Heart, ere broken be my Back*
Which undergoes a World of heavy Harms,
That well might break It, and an Heart of Oak:
Then, Grief extend the vigor of thine Arms
To crush his substance into Sighings smoke.
Hope, thou do hurt It with thy helping Hand:
Who ( Ape-like) kilst it with a kind embrace:
Thy Charge, wan Hope, yield to pale Deaths Command,
That He my vital Spirits may have in Chase:
For, since good Luck proves lucklesse in my Love,
Go hang thee Hope, yet stay, lest I it prove.
(69)
Give me (fair- Sweet) the Mapp, well co^lored,
Of that same little World, your self, to see
Whether those Zones of hott Love, and cold Dread
Be so extreme in you, as they are in me.
If on the Hatt (that small Worlds Center great)
Such Heat, and Cold their vtt'most Powers employ,
No Thoughts could dwell therein for Cold, and Hea^e;
Which my distem'pred-dismall Thoughts annoy.
But, if I find the Climes more temperate
In your World then in mine, I Will thither send
My Thoughts by Colonies,, in wretched State,
Since there, for'thwith, they cannot choose but mend:
And by your temperance, when they betterd be
If you will transplant Them, Them re^plant in me.
(70)
NO, I deny it; and my negative
Salbe made good with two affirmatiues
Yea, I affirm it: which Affirmative
Shall be avouched with two Negatiues:
I do deny I feign, yea, yea I do,
As you accuse me, and withal affirm
I love you for your self, for whom I woo:
And cannot love no love that is too Firm.
I cannot love no love, nor love that love
That Is like Privation, drawing near to naught:
That love is nothing, and can Nothing move,
But such a som-thing as should not be sought:
What That is, guess (if it be not your hate)
It is that I would fly as evil fate.
(71)
What boots Complaint (if it be made alone)
To him whose help without himself does lie?
But to cause Moan effect more cause of moan,
Or make Despair wan hopes best remedy:
Since now, o Tirant Grief; thou long have had
The sack of my subdued hearty Cheer,
Rest, rest awhile let no new fires be made
Unto thy Spoils that are consumed near.
O Reason what clear Eyes have thou to see
Our Evils! and how blind in shunning them!
My Reason sees my Griefs extremity
Yet sees not how to make it less extreme:
For, since I love you (Sweet) I can but grieve,
To see you raze the hopes which me relieve.
(72)
DEer Sweet (who in a bright face Definite
(Being a Spark inflaming Worlds of love*)
Contains an Heaven of Beauty infinite:
To which my Thoughts, on Wings of Hope, do move)
Since that the Sun (Heavens most maiestick Eye)
Disdaines not to behold the basest Worm,
To glad his Soul and grace his vility,
Let your Heavens Suns the like on me perform.
Grace is a Spark of that immortal Flame
Which, being from Heaven desc^nded knew not where
(In Earth) to enter in a mo^tall Frame,
But in your Corpse, wherethroug^ It shines clear:
Then, since Grace glori^ies you Form, and Face,
Grace me with looks, that glori^ie your grace.
(73)
THy Beauties blush, like fairest Morn in May,
(Faire^Honied Sweet) does so intrance mine Eyes
That while thou do those Roses rich display
They see Heavens hue through thy skins Crystal skies,
And did my fault nor thine enforce the same
I still could wish to see that Heavenly Blush:
Yea, I would see that glory to my shame,
So that my faces shame would cause that flush*
Then blame me not if (when thy Cheeks I see
Died in a Tincture that is so divine)
My Cheeks in ^elfsame Color Dyed be
To make thine spread their Die, by dying mine:
Then, blush thou not, for blushing in this wise
Since that Hue from, and for thy grace does rise.
(74)
SOme, blaze the precious beauties of their Loves
By precious Stones; and, other some by flowrs;
Some, by (...), and Celestial Powers;
Or, by wh^^els their Fancy best approoues.
Yet, ^* by none of these, will blazon mine;
But, only say her self, her self is like:
For, those Similitudes I much mislike
That are much used, though they be divine.
In saying she is like her self, I say
She has no like; for, she is past compare,
Then, who, aright commends this creature rare,
Must say She is: and there, of force, must stay,
Because, by words, She cannot be expressed;
So, say she is; and, wondering, owe the rest.
(75)
We read that Gelon and Pisistratus
Usurped tyrannical dominion
By means as violent as vicious:
Yet ruled with love, and admiration:
But, love (that rules the Kingdom of my mind)
Coming in Peace, aright, to that Command
Does rage therein, and either burn, or bind
The Powers thereof, that none escapes his Hand:
Then would he Gelon were, for government,
Though he had got the same with sword, and fire:
Then, should I be Loves Kingdom of Content,
That am the flaming Forge of his Desire:
But, rule more mildly, Love, lest my Minds Powers
Conspire to quench that Flame with thy bloods Showers.
(76)
BOdies, be neither Light, nor Heavy ^ound
So long as they are in their proper place;
But being out, they shift to It apace,
Be it above, or else beneath the Ground:
Then, Love, it seems, is not in his right Sphere,
That in my Heart does rest in such unrest;
Who shifteth still to you, he loves best;
Then, must he rest in you, or else no where.
Receive my Love (Dear Love) then, to that rest,
Since Divine Nature made you for the same;
Prove not disloyal to that royal Dame,
But let us each of other be possessed:
And, if your virtue simple were before
Thus, being purely mixed, it will be more.
(77)
THe Polipp Fish sitts all the Winter long
Stock-still, through Slouthe, and on him self does feed*
So, through the cold of fear I do, in deed,
Whereby the Liberty of Love I wrong.
But they do perish, pitiless, that wear
(Through slouthe) away, that might be fatt, and Fair
By honest Labor; hie Promotios Staire:
So, do I perish, pitiless, through Fear.
Yet, can I not but fear your scorn, dread Dame,
If I should labor to disclose my Love,
Since your high fortunes mine are far above,
This maks me, through my slouthe, to work my blame:
But, lest I should my self so quite consume
To say I love you, let my love presume.
(78)
SO shootes a Star as does my Mistries glide
At Midd-night through my Chamber; which she makes
Bright as the Sky, when Moon, and Stars are spide;
Wherewith my sleeping Eyes (amazed) wake.
Which open no sooner then her self she shutts*
Out of my sight, away so fast she flies;
Which me in mind of my slack service putts;
For which all night I wake, to plague mine Eyes:
Shoot Star once more, and if I be thy Mark
Thou shall hit me, for thee I Will meet withal:
Let mine Eyes once more see thee in the dark,
Else they, with ceasslesse waking, out will fall:
And if again such time, and place I lose
(To close with thee) let mine Eyes never close.
(79)
DE^re, if thou will that I shall call thee Dear,
(Who are most dear how ever thou-art called!
Endeere me to thy Love, past price, and peer,
By loving me that to thy love am thrall'd.
Yet fear I Freedom, as I fear thy hate:
For, naught but thie, fixed hate can make me ^ree:
And, though relict, I Will be no Reprobate
To gentle Love, nor yet to cruel Thee!
I Will be thy Vassal, though freeborn I am,
S^th they are highe-borne whom thy love sustaines:
Then let me live to bear thy Vassalls name,
Yet live to make thee labor for my pains:
That by that pains, and labor, thou, and I
may get our Like, to live in when we die.
(80)
THe Romans, in their Temples, placed, of old,
Near to the Graces, well-Tongu'd Mercury;
To note that Speech in vtt'ring will catch cold,
That lights not on a gracious Ear, and Eye:
So, though my Tongue were most Angelical,
And, could make Ears to hear of Stone, or Wood,
Yet, if your Ears turn Honey into Gall,
As good no Speech, as speaking for no good.
Be not (dear Sweet) o be not so perverse,
Your Ears are flesh, and so your Heart should be:
Then, stone them not, to Cool my charming Verse,
That seeks to turn your Ears, and Heart to me:
But, by that Turn, if you do fear a fall,
I Will hold you up, or break my Neck withal.
(81)
IF the Egyptian, and the Troglodite
Over whose Heads the Sun directly stands
But one mere Moment, daily, in his height,
Do hardly escape quite burning by his Brands,
How then should I (bright- Fair!) not quite be brent
With those bright Beams, shot from, those Suns, thine Eyes,
Since still they are to me directly sent
As from my Zenith, i^ thy Beauties Skies?
O! with those Rays exhale from Mercies Seas
Some Dropps of Grace, and shower the^ down on me,
To cool the fiery heat of my Disease,
That so my Sore, and Salve may come from Thee:
If not, yet shall those Cloude-dissoluing Beams,
Melt my Care-Clouded Eyes to cooling Streams.
(82)
VVHiles that this Air I breath to cool my Heart,
My Hart's inflamed so with loves desire
That Air to Fire it does thereby convert:
So lives my Heart in Hell, or quenchlesse fire!
Then, can thou Goddess full of outward grace,
(In whom I hope, since thee I love and serve)
Still feed these flames with Beams sent from thy face
And martyr him thou should from pains preserve:
Then may I say, by Kind the art glorious made,
But by unkindness thou thy self do mar:
Thou mar'st thy self* That is, thou make me vade,
Who, then thy self does love thee better far:
And yet thou love thy self too well for me
Since so thou love, because I so love thee.
(83)
NO more but so? Why then false Hopes farewell
Why, why so long have you deluded me?
Say you (false Fair!) you hate to love too well?
Although too well, true love can never be?
Then, too well have I loved you for such love
That thinks true love too well loves what it likes:
Which speech does you as fond as fickle prove;
And through your tender reputation strikes.
Hate you to love too well that lothed Hate:
But hate not true love kindly to embrace:
Your grace to love, my Mind did animate
And can you love, too well such love of Grace?
I^ so you can, Grace, too well, loves your Frame
Who makes it famous, while you It defame.
(84)
LAmia the witch (as Poets featlie feign)
Still in a box, at home puts up her Eyes:
But going abroad she put them in again
Their propper holes, wherewith each Mo^e she spies:
So, thou at home, (that is, thy self within
O hellish Cerces that bewitchest me)
Pul'st out thine Eyes: that is, see not thy Sin;
But yet abroad thou mine too well do see.
Thou say I have deceau'd thee in thy love
By other Loves; and so, thou me do hate
Upon a mere surmise: but I can prove
Where thou thy Chastity did vulnerate:
O no, I lie, thou still did keep it ^ound
But others gave, and it received the wound.
(85)
lT may be as you say* but yet say I
lt should be otherwise then still you do:
You say you Love, I will not say you lie,
Because you Love, and Love to linger to:
For, if you loved me could I love so long,
For mere Delays disguizd in Loves Araie
Could I, for so much right reap so much Wrong,
If you loved ^ot alone to show delay?
Delaie, in Love, is dangerous you know:
Then It you love since mine that danger is:
Who seeing love wears me in Deed, and Show,
You love Delaie, to wast me quite, by This:
But, if you love to wast me so, by That,
Hate me, another while, to make me Fat.
(86)
Be not, o be not carelessly unkind
To him (sower-Sweet) whose care is all for thee:
Look in my Heart, through windows of my mind,
And naught but thine own Image thou shall see.
Sack not the Temple then, where thon art shrinde
A glorius Monumente of Excellence!
The Shrine's immortal, since so is my Mind,
Yet may thou it deface, by plaging Sense.
Thou plaugst my feeling, since through thee I feel
The hatefulst plagues that Loves Fire can inflict:
My Heart (where thou do dwell, with Heart of Steel;)
Sill flaming, burns, yet thee it not afflicts:
But were thou not lessesensible then Steel*
Thou coulst not choose but feel the pains I feel!
(87)
It Is said and known, (and, so, it is held for true)
That Arethusa, and Alph^us are
Two Rivers that, each other so pursue
As naught can let their Course, or water mar:
For sweet Alpheus does throug Thetis glide,
Free from her saltness, (though, Lais-like she steer)
Until he meet upon the other side,
With his love Arethusa, fresh and clear.
Then, if that senseless Rivers (which by kind
Are most unstaid) in love so constant be,
Let me not you (Fair Nimphe) unconstant find,
Since through all wrongs, I run, arighte, to Thee;
Then, since to thee I run through Sorrows Seas,
Let me in thy clear Heart, and Arms have eafe.
(88)
DOwn, down proud Heart, to Loves Lures, stoop* o stoop
She Lures, that loves, she loves, that can alure;
Then, down, o down, yet not so low as droupe;
Since she, being gracious, is as kind, as sure!
Her glancing Eye, through Love, in, State is staid,
Which stands with constant grace, and Majesty:
Both which, in, love deserve to be obaide
By hateful hearts, that are as hard as hie:
Then melt, melt Heart, in hott affections flames,
If thou be not mroe hard then hardest Stones:
For, Hearts, but of that temper, she vnframes
In fire of Love, and makes them tender ones:
Then (Sweet) since now mine melts for love of you*
Let it run into yours, to Mould it new.
(89)
THere was a time (to speak, whereof I faint
Since That that was, nere loved the ducking Frir'e)
When I might pray to you, as to my Saint,
And you would grant, or further my desire.
But, you reject (as superstitious)
The prayers which I now do make to you
And (tearming them as vain, as vicious)
You bend from me, when I to you do bow.
If I with you commit Idolatry
It is an easy error* since you be
An Image but too like the Deity
For Fleshy Eyes the difference to see:
But, if you would have me my Conscienc^ kill
Bid me not love you, that will do your will.
(90)
IN Nature are two supreme Principles:
As namely, Unity, and Binarie:
The first does form all Beauties Miracles:
The last's the Fount of all Deformity.
The Form of Number is this Unity:
( Number, the Matter: Unity, the Form)
Confusion, springs from Duality:
Which does the frame of Nature quite deforme:
Then since that Unity has so great grace,
And that Duality be so deformed:
Lett^s not be two (fair Sweet) but fast embrace
The Mean whereby we may be still conformed:
Or, if we shall be Two (o fairest Fair!)
Let you, and I make but one perfect Pair.
(91)
HA, ha, ha, ha, you mak^ me laugh, I swear:
And yet I laugh as some, in joy, do weep
To see you double, like a Hare, for fear,
Lest I should smell where now, in love, you creep.
Well, Wanton, well: I see your Harebraind Course,
Though, with the Catt, I wincke at what I see:
You now turn Tail to me, no force, no force,
You show your beastly manners as they be.
Double no more, no more I Will hunt for you:
Unless I open, since you now I wind:
I Will freely spend, your fame still to pursue,
Since it is blind before, and lame behind:
Yet though some wide mouths call a Jade, a Jade,
I Will speak more spuce, yet call a Spade, a Spade.
(92)
Look from the Turret of thy high disdain
(Wherein I see thee, though thou sees me not)
On me ( fell Fair.) flat lyeng on the Plain
Of Lowliness, like the least little Mote!
Yet if thy heaunly faces Suns do shine
(In grace,) on my great Smallness I, poor I,
Shall, shining, mount, as if I were Divine,
Like Motes in Sun, who, shyning, mount thereby.
But if thou Cloud thy faces Heaven with ought
That may those Sunne-beames let to shine on me,
I Will steep my self in Tears till I be naught,
That I thus brought to naught by cruel Thee,
May charge thee with my fall, when I shall rise
To meet thee, to have justice, in the Skies.
(93)
O proudly^chast, and Louely-coy, dear Sweet,
Why takst thou pleasure to impeach thy fame
With name of Cruel, for thy Sex unmeet?
To keep good name, will thou lose thy good name?
Its mercy to thy self to be most fell
To those (I grant) that seek thine Honors foil;
But, unto him that makes thy praise excel
It is no praise to triumph in his spoil.
The pure respect thou bear thy Chastity
First made me love thee with all pure respect:
Then, since pure love, is perfect Piety,
And chaste Desire is sacred, in effect,
Requi^e my pure Love, and my chaste desire
With like, to like, till we become entire.
(94)
FInding my self (before I would be found)
Near lost in Laborinths of hapless love,
I got me to a melancholy grove
To des^ant on Loues-griefs to heavy Ground:
Where whilft I coucht me to perform the same,
The Flies, and Gnats, without still vexed me;
And Grief, within, as busy as a Be*
Unto my treble grief, made double game:
So, while I sought to descant on my Harms,
My Harms did descant on That which I sought:
For, while I thought on it I was vexed in thought;
And, in my Flesh afflicted with thief Swarms:
Then thought I Lovers were like idle Drones*
Whom Stingers follow, to augment their mones.
(95)
GOds me! what will you? soft, what do I dream?
Do I hear real words? or think I do?
Or can it be that beauty so extreme
Should be so fowly false, and brag ont to?
Sure, I had rather lay my Senses lie,
Then think you can, be so unlike to you:
Since in the sam's no possibility,
How are you seem to you, and me untrue.
Say what you wll, I will not wrong you so
To think (much less to say) that you fair, Sweet,
Will plight me faith; then, me and It for go:
And vaunt (o past belief!) how you did (...):
But, this I swear, if yon rest so unsound,
That such cracked Ware is better lost then found.
(96)
HE that would feign reduce an high-borne Wise
Unto the Compass of his mean estate,
Must not at first, stick for a little Strife,
To make his peace to have the longer Date:
For, as some Curtall ouer-lusty Mares,
Then Water them, wherein they seeing it,
Let fall their Crest, since their Tail so ill fares,
That Fools, and Asses ride them without Bit*
So, from the Colon to the Period
Of this Similitude, what should ensue
Is easily gest: But ah, I am forbod
By high-borne Wives, low matchd, to tell it you:
But, by their leaves this must I needs affirm,
A Ring, too wide, well bowed does sit more firm.
(97)
Fool that I am, to seem so passionate
In that which Wives, and Woes, and Years have cal'md
Why, now should Venus know my Bodies State?
Or, with her Balsamum my Wounds be Balm'd?
No more, no more: it is enough that I
Have won Repentance, with the loss of Time,
In running over these Rules of Vanity:
And not repeat them, erst in Rules of Rhyme.
Now, many Winters have Frost-bit my Hairs,
Congealed my Blood, and cooled my vital Hear,
I, Youthful-follies should ore'flow with Tears:
And, make a Rod of Rue my self to beat:
But, trust me Love, how ere I write of Thee,
I am in hate with thee, and thou with me.
(98)
IF I dare call Love Rogue, and Runnagate,
Its like I am resolved to loath his love:
But, so I call Him and the cause of Hate;
Which to my grief, in mine own Soul I prove.
I hate as hell, His mere rememberance
Much more the Favors he has done to me:
And hold his loathsome love the fowl'st mischance
That can befall Men that most hapless be.
It is the Scurge of God to plague Mankind:
The Conflagration of a World of Lust:
The Match whereat Hel-fire it self does tynd:
The Heat that soonest turns our Blood to dust:
And (so I might not seem of bloody Mind)
VVould's Brains were beaten out, as he is blind.
(99)
THe Tyrant love, that martyrs still the Mind,
We make a God, to which our Pens and Tongu^
Do sacri^ice their Labors, il assigned;
And so ore-right the Author of our Wrongs:
Then, this Affections ^loud we ought to turn
Into the Channel of Celestial Love;
Since Ang^ls swim still in that blessed Boorn
( Lea^der-like) to Grace by whom they move!
Where Light of truth (the Landmark) nere goes out,
And still the Current runs as calm, as clear:
Where no misfortunes Flawes, Fear needs to doubt:
Since holy Loves smooth Flood, excludes Fear:
This Love alone, (did our Muse rightly sing)
Should be the Plaine-song of her descanting.
(100)
Why sing I then in this too loving Strain
When Love, and I do so unkindly iar?
This Vain in me, may seem as light as vain;
Who still turns Coward in Loves hottest War.
Besides, my state of Fortune, Body, Mind,
Are all adverse to light Loves amity:
How is it then I am to love so kind
As to seem subject to his Empery?
The Canse is weak, though strong in strange Effects,
Which Men, how staid so ere, by Wind does move:
Some call it Fame, that naught but Air respects,
And, sooth to say, for It I sing of Love:
And though they write best, that write what they feel
Yet, edgd by Fame, I fetch Fire out of Steel.
(101)
THus far may Speculation help a Wit
Unapt for love, to write of Loves estate:
Thus far can Art extend her Benefit
Past Natures Bounds, in show of Love, or Hate.
These Loue-tricks are not mine, though mine they be
As they are thus drawn out in loving Lines:
These Passions are too weak to passion me,
Although my strength from ought to naught declines.
But whist my Muse, Hypocrisy is sin;
Make me not seem more holy then I am:
My Marrow-bones lie Flesh and (...) within,
All which, by nature, ^urnes in Beauties Flame;
But, say I am, since Grace to me is good,
Free from unkind desires of Flesh and Blood.
Inventions Life, Death, and Funeral.
(102)
Busy Invention, why art thou so dull
And yet still doing?
Are no Conceits ensconst within thy Scull
To help my woing?
Can not, with Judgments aid, once ^ally out
with Words of power
My Ladies dreaded Forces to disrout
and make way to her?
Or, can thou use no Stratagem of Wit
That may entrappe her?
To yield unto Conditions fair, as fit
else love enwrappe her?
Fie, fie, thou lin'st my hedd-peece to no end
Since by thy Lyninge
I cannot, in Loves wars, my Wit defend
from foul declyning.
Does Love con^ound thee, that thy Founder is,
(Bewitched Invention?)
Can she which can but make thee pregnant, miss
of her in^ention?
The powers of Wit cannot defend thee then
from Shames confusion;
But thou must die, with shame, and live again
By Hopes infusion.
Hope, hold my Heart, and Head; for, they are sick
Invention dies:
Loue-sicke they are and need an Emperick
which Love denies.
Invention, now does draw his latest breath
for comfort crying,
He dies, and yet, in dying, strives with Death
To live still dying!
Ring out his Knell, for now he quite is dead
Ding, dong, bell, well ronge!
Sing out a Dirge for now he is buried
Farewell He, well song!
This Epitath fix on his senseless Head,
Here lies Invention
That stood his loving* Master in no stead
In Loves contention.
Yet, for his Soul (lest it should quite be damned)
Some Dole bestow ye;
Give my poor Wits (which he has ^owly shamed)
what he does owe me.
So, Mortus, et sepultus now* he is,
Heaven grant his rising,
Be not to utter darkness, but to Bliss
of high Devising.
(103)
DIe, d^e Forbidden Hopes, o die;
For, while you live, in Death live I:
Since from Forbidden Hope
Death first had life; and scope,
(Ambitious hope, forbidden:)
Then, if thou live, needs die I must;
For, Death does live in hope unjust:
Or at the least Despair,
Whereof Death is the Hair;
Then die, or still live hidden.
(104)
NOw, to this Sea of Cittie-Common-wealth
(Lymit^lesse London) am I come obscu'rd;
Where twofold Plagues endanger may the health
Of Soul, and Body of the most securd:
The Bodies Plague's an Ill which God can do
For, is Ill in the Cirtie he does not?
But Sin (the Plague which does the Soul undo)
He cannot do, though how he well does wott.
Then, now my Soul stand stiffly on thy g^ard
Since many mortal Dangers thee surrou^d
Let Grace, thy guide, thy House still watch, and ward
To keep thy Habitation clean, as sound:
And, if thou can, with Lo^t, live chastely here
Angels will fetch thee hence when Plagues are near.
Other Sonnets upon other Subjects.
The Trinity illustrated by a three-square perspectiue Glass.
(1)
IF in a three-square Glass, as thick, as clear,
(Be'ing but dark Earth, though made Diaphanall)
Beauties divine, that ravish Sense, appear,
Making the Soul, with joy, in Trance to fall,
What then, my Soul, shall thou in Heaven behold,
In that clear Mirror of the TRINITY?
What? o It were not THAT, could it be told:
For, it is a glorious, yet dark Mystery!
It is THAT which is furthest from description;
Whose beaming-beauty's more then infinite.*
It Is Glories Monument, whose Superscription
Is, Here lies LIGHT, alone indefinite!
Then, o Light, limitlesse, let me (poor me)
Still live obscure, so I ^ay still see Thee.
(2)
I Love the life that Love does most mislike:
That is the life which is most like to Death:
On Life's Ha^r-strings when Death at last, shall strike
Souls Organs then do sound with sweetest breath!
The Discords of this Life annoy their Ears
Where but Faithes Concords only sweetly sound:
From Discords, Dangers rise: from Dangers, Fears:
Which Three, these Three, the Soul, Mind, Body, wound!
I would therefore, live dead to such a life*
Within the Grave of most obscure estate:
So, dead, to live as far from State, as S^ri^^,
To check those Lusts that would give Love the Mate:
But o this Faith (frail faith, and Love (Self-love)
Be dead, since they but live for selfe-behoue.
(3)
TIme, faster then my Thought away does have;
Who thought not to have lost It, but for gain:
But, as that thought was present, Time was past;
So, left me but to think that Thought was vain.
While I am musing how my Time to spend,
Time spends It self, and me: but how, I muse!
So, still I muse, while Time draws on mine end:
Thus* Time does me, and I do it abuse.
I think, and while I think, I io'ly, act:
(Yet Thought's no idle action of the Mind)
So, idle actions Time, and me have wrackt
Yet, in these Ruins, I my making find:
For, I am made, by musing, what I am
That Is one that lines the Ornaments of Fame.
(4)
Since Rest, and Labor wears this Life away:
(For, Rest does toil, as Toil does fatigate)
Since Pain, in Labor stirs, and rests in Play:
(For, Labor pains That, Rest does satiate)
What marvel though the Host of Animalls
Do (groaning) long to be Life dispossessed:
Since their whole Power by Natures forces falls
Into the life of Labor, Death of Rest.
Then how should Man but long to leave that Stage
Where Pain does play in Rest, and Rest in Pain:
Since Rest's his Home, and Payne's his Pilgrimage,
Who cannot rest, where he cannot remain?
It then remains that we this Life detest
Since it does rest in* Toil, and toil in Rest!
(5)
Since glorious Princes like to Mirrours are,
(As clear, as brittle) how dare they contend:
Since when they meet, and light upon the bare,
They may see their beginnings, in their end?
And, since base Vp-starts like to Bladders be
(Pu^t up with wind which maks them stiff, as stout)
Me thinks each bound they should rise heavily:
Since That which makes them mount, may let It out.
Lastly, since Men to Bubbles are compared
(Then which no Being's nearer kin to Naught)
Why from ill Thoughts do they their Wills not ward
Since they may be extinguished with a thought?
It is since Bubbles do but weak appear:
So, in their Weakness, Men to Naught are near!
(6)
Work on, my Soul, while Sleeps Soul takes her rest,
And, Sense held idle by her heavy hand;
Act in Dumbe-Showes, which idle Spirits detest,
That Wit, thy Will, thereby, may understand.
Let Fancy offer to I^telligence
The Shade of Shapes, whose Substance thou do love;
So, Sense shall s^e, without the Seeing Sense,
(When Reason is rest) how thou do move.
Mount thee upon thy Wings of Wit, and Will,
Unto the height of thy Wills true desires:
There work thy pleasure, be it good, or ill,
That (wakeing) Will may work what Wit requires:
For, it is VVitts work in sleep, Wills work to spy,
That wakfull Wit may right what is awry.
(7)
THe Match is double made, where Man, and Wife,
Of diuese Bodies, make one perfect Mind;
Striving to be as far from Hate as Strife:
In kindness constant of a diverse kind.
He, gladd of her, She of his self, more gladd;
Since as her better half, she Him does hold!
Each gives, to each, yet have more then they hadd!
For, love, and wealth so grows more manifold!
Doubling one life, since they of Two, make One,
Where Loves Desires rest pleased, in unrest:
For true Joy rests, vntir'd, in motion,
And by their motions that is still expressed:
He rules since She obaies, or rather She
Obaying, rules: Thus, Souls may married be!
(8)
Were Man's Thoughts to be measured by Days
Tenn thouza^d Thoughts te^ thousand Days should have:
Which in a Day, the Mind does, daily, raise:
For, still the Mind's in motion like a Wave!
Or, should his Days be measured by Thought
Then Times shortst Moment they would faster flee:
Yet, Thought does make his life both long, and naught*
That Is naught, if long, and long, if naught it be.
If long it be, for being naught, (though short)
The shortest thought of long life is too long:
Which thinks it long in labor, short in sport,
So, Thought makes Life, to be still old, or young:
But since its full of thought, since full of Sins
Think it may end, as thought of it begins.
(9)
SEarch all the Sonnets set Love wealth to win,
And you shall see (how ever darkly done)
That lightly with the Eye they do begin
As if Loves heat, and Wits, came from that Sun.
And I, as if the Eye bewitched me,
Often set my Sonetts Seane just in the Eye
Of beaming Beauty, that it, so, may see
Wherein consists Loves Comick-Tragedie.
Thus is the Senses So^'raignes Subject, made
Loves Sonetts Subject, in fair Paper- Reames;
Since with Loves fire it does the Heart invade:
For, that cold Crystal burns with Beauties Beams.
Then o the Eye, the Eye! I, I, that is it
Wherein men see their want of Grace, and Wit.
(10)
Wisdom, and Virtue cannot (if they would)
Misguide the Soul to whom they still are Guides:
They guide to Glory going b^t on Gold:
And all that Earth does precious hold besides.
Or, if ill Times should (with injurious hand)
Oppress Them in their Course, or Cross their way,
Yet must He needs about Times Compass stand
That, with such firm Vp-lifters, falls away.
The aim of Wisdom, yea and Fortunes too,
Is at one White, to make bright whom they love:
Ne can Cross Fortune Wisedoms Friends undo,
Since their vndoings do their makinges prove*
The Stars rule Fools, both ru'ld by Wisemen are:
So, each Man's Manners do his Fortunes square.
(11)
WHen, with my Minds right Eye, I do behold
(From naught, made nothing less) great Tamburaline,
(Like Phaeton) drawn, encoach in burnisht Gold,
Reigning his drawers, who of late did Reign
I deem me blessed in the Womb to be
B^rne as I am, among indiffrent Things:
No King, nor Slave but of the mean degree
Where I see Kings made Slaves; and Slaves made Kings.
When, if my Meannesse but one Thought conceive
That minds but Mounting, this Thought keeps it down:
And so I live, in Case, to take or give,
For Love, or Meed, no S^epter ^ut a Crown:
Yet Flowers of Crowns, for Roesies expense,
Poets might take, and give no recompense.
In praise of Poesy.
THou that, by force of All commanding words,
Makst all Affections follow thy Commands,
To whom the Highest such height of power affords
As fully with his grace, and glory stands,
To thee sweet Poesy offer I this Mite
Of Forcelesse words derived from lesser might.
Thou that do scorn Comers with muddy Brains
Or with ought less then Spirits Angelical,
Who chaunt inchaunting Soul bewitching strains
Where of but some includes the Sum of All
To thee I sacrifice these Lauds to lea^e
In flames of zeal that far surmount the Mean:
For o Tho^ scornst so base as Mean to bear
Since that the Mean, in Thee, is held but base,
Though other Arts the Mean do highly rear
Thou holdst the Mean to be an high disgrace
Then ^ with what high Raptures should my Brains
Entraunced be to open thy virtues Veins?
Which, while I strive to do my Brains do beat
As if they would work out their Freedom so
Who do attempt to leave their narrow Seat,
As if they scorned to be the Crown below
But would be compast in an Angels Crown
To make thee Angell-bright in de^re renown!
Sweet Helicon, my Brains quite overflow:
So shall thy Nectar them intoxicate
And with a fiery Wreathe bind thou my Brow,
That make the Muse in Flames to fulminate:
While She, with voice, like Thunder, rattles forth,
The Peales of Praises due to Poesies worth!
From this Foundation might my Muse transcend
The ten-^old Orbs of Heaven; even to his Throne
That Is all in All, there should these praises end,
That higher praises might be His alone:
But, such Transcendents are too high to climb.
For my tired Muses Wings, that Lets do lime.
Yet in my Sconce ^ make your Rendeuous
All words that may wing Praise with Angels Plumes
And Judgment join them fast with Arts Mouth-g^ue
That they may hold past Time that all con^umes:
But ^ my Will all Words h^th ouersho^
Then, let my silence praise what Words cannot.
(13)
WHiles in my Soul, I feel the soft warm Hand
Of Grace, to shaw the Frozen dregs of Sin
She, Angel (armed,) on Edens Walls does stand
To keep out outward Joys that would come in:
But, when that holy Hand is ^ane away
And that my Soul congealeth (as before)
She outward Comforts seeks (with Care) each way
And, runs to meet them at each Senses Door.
Yet they, but at the first sight, only please;
Then shrink, or breed abhorred Satiety:
But, divine Comforts (far unlike to These)
Do please the more, the more they stay, and Be:
Then, outward Joys I inwardly detest,
Since they stay not, or stay but in unrest.
(^4)
It Is not Cocytus, River of sad tears:
Nor ought besides that may sense most torment
Does cause the fear of death, or life indeeres,
In Epicures, that sensually are bent:
But it is the relaps into Nullity,
Which of all griefs and miseries is chief
To those that scoff at immortality,
Since in Not-being's Beings greatest grief:
For, what joy is so great but the conceit
Of falling to his Infinition
(Of black Non-essence) will confound it straight
In those that think this life their Portion?
Since then their Heaven on their frail life depends,
Their Heaven must melt when they do mind their ends.
(15)
MEn, (Worlds of Mould, that fill the great Worlds Mold)
Creep (like vile Worms, in whom is naught but Slime)
To find some Hole, wherein to make* their Hold;
Which found, they fill; then (restless) strait they climb:
Til having raised themselves about the Ground
They open lie to be to dust dissolved:
As little, by great Clods, to Dust, are ground:
So, Clods resolved to climb, are soon resolved:
For, little Worlds, that would devour the great,
Break, since they cannot that huge Mass contain;
For, they that Eat the Earth, the Earth will eat:
So, Earth to quick, is quickly dead again.
Then, in the Earth, if Men will be secure,
They must like Worms, strait Holes or death endure.
(16)
When Will does long to effect his own desires
She makes the Wit (as Vassal to the Will)
To do what she (how ere unright) requires,
Which Wit does (though repiningly) fulfill.
Yet, as well pleased (o temporizing Wit!)
He seems t'eff^ct her pleasure willingly;
And all his Reasons to her Reach does fit;
So, like the World, gets love by flattery.
That this is true, a Thousand VVitnesses
(Impartial Conscience) will directly prove;
Then* if we would not willingly transgress
Our Will should swayed be by Rule of Love:
Which hides the Multitude of Sins because,
Her Sire, thereby, to him his Servants draws.
(17)
IT is no easy skill to rule aright;
The Helm of State one Hand can hardly sway:
They must needs use the left, as well as right,
That in a right Course, will a Kingdom stay:
For, like as Hercules (as Poets feign)
Was gotten in a Night as long as two,
Because that Phoebus did his horses reign
Till Jupiter that Deed, did thoroughly Do:
So, a right Sta^seman must of force be bred
In along Night of Silence, and sad thought;
And in deep skill should hide his subtle Head.
Til his skill be Herculean as it ought;
And then, though Atlas on him Heu'n impose,
He that huge Burden, staidly under-goes!
(18)
When Verity and Virtue be at one
with Peoples-loue (called Popularity)
They (like a forewind in the Poop) drive on
The Owner to sway Kingdoms easilye:
But, if this tripple Union be at ods
The lack of one may cause the wrack of al,
Although the lackers were terrestrial gods
Yet will they ruling reel, or reeling fall.
I grant, a time vice may have good success,
And rule at will, by rules of Policy;
But in Conclusion ^will have nothing less,
If true the Rules be of Divinity:
For, who does rule by Rules that virtue lack,
In Vices spite his Rule shall be his wrack.
(6)
MEn ouertoild in Commonwealth affairs
Get much Tantalia^ wealth by wealthy pains;
Which they enjoy not through incessant Cares:
So, all their Comfort is in Care, and Gains.
Good reason then, that they should care to get,
Who get great Cares, by getting great Commands:
That will not let them sleep, since sleep they let:
For, who sleeps well in Bands, though golden Ba^ds?
Well fare they then with glittering Miseries,
Though they ^are costly, yet they coldly sare:
That feed on naught, but what does feed the Eyes,
And cloy their Stomachs with consuming Care.
Care for such Gaudies who so list for me,
Since Commons much more Common better be.
(20)
Damned Avarice (like a sly greedy Whore)
Stirrs up Desire, and pleasure does ^ordidd:
And makes his Lovers starve amiddst their Store,
As Midas with his golden Viands did.
All other Lusts them selves help every way:
For, who is a Glutton that will spare to feed?
Or who are carnal that forbear the play
Upon an appetite to act the Deed?
But wealthy Misers have not what they hold:
And, money use not, through desire of it:
As, we should Clothes forbear for being cold:
And, for we hungry are, eat not a Bi^t*
This is an Ill that Good does most abuse,
Because it loves the good, it hates to use.
(8)
A Time there was when as thee Moon desird
The Sun to make his a fit Peticote;
Who did refuse to do what she requir'^,
Since he in her such often change did note:
So, can no wisdom well proportion out
To these Phantasticks (^arious, as vain)
A rate of Wealth to bring the year about,
Since now they love, what straight they loathe again*
These, of all light Things, burden most the Earth;
Of whom there is no help, no hope, no use;
Whose Mothers labored idly in their birthe,
To bear such idle Things, for Things abuse:
Each Slave to vice may used be in his Kind,
But there is no use of the unconstant Mind.
(22)
THe ignorance of the Omnipotent,
Into two Branches does it self divide,
Atheism, and Superstition, either bent
From Truth, and in their backward bent abide.
The first, incountring Natures stiff, and hard,
Begetts in them scorn of Religion:
The last, with supple Natures, more afeard,
In them ingenders Superstition.
These, to Religion, are the two Extremes;
Twixt whom the rests, a Virtue most Divine!
Crowned with three in One rare Diadems,
By Heavens great Three in One, or single-Trine!
These Two bewitche the World; for, at this day
Most pray amiss, or else they miss to pray.
(23)
PLe^sure with Profitt is the Pynn whereto
(...) Penns direct their best directed aim;
Which if they splitt, they do as they should do;
And justly for it Glories prize they claim.
Now from my Will (well-bent as I supposed)
(With Shafts of the endeavors of my Wit)
I have roud at this Point, and them disposd
As the Wind sat abroad, the Pynn to splitt.
If I have shot too much on the left hand,
I (as not weather-wise) the Wind mistook:
Yet I considered both the Air, and Land;
But, though my Shafts can neither of them brook,
I loost them right, though light mine Arrows were
Yet some being weighty, I must needs be near.
(24)
PLato putts difference these Terms between
A Man Is not, and is that has no Being:
For, in the first a Nullity is seen,
Which with nor Sense, nor Substance has agreeing.
The other shows but the difference
Between the Cause, and Matter; or, more plain,
Between the Power, and Passion; wherein Sense
Perceaues that Odds does really remain:
For, This distinguishes twixt that which Is
(Yea, of It self Is, evermore the same)
And That which of another's That, or This,
Yet holds nor This nor That, but alters Frame:
So, Man, compared with his constant Cause,
No Being has at all, by Natures Laws!
(25)
SInce first I came to years my self to know,
To know my self, I have done what I can:
Who am not as I am in outward show,
And yet I seek to show my self a man:
For, since of Soul, and Body I consist,
And that my Body for my Soul was made,
I ought, in searching of that Soul, insist;
Since that is my self, that Is, and cannot fade:
She Is: that is, (Like her Original)
immortal, and invisible: that is
Past comprehention of Wit natural,
So, still I search, to know, to know I miss:
Then, if my knowledge be but this to kno
That I know nothing, I am humbled so.
(26)
THe Accademicks held it better far
Quite to distrust the Imagination,
Then to believe all which it does auerre,
Which breeds more false, then true opinion:
Then, since the case so stands with this Souls Power,
We should suspend our Judgment, since Things seem,
Not as they be (though Sense the same assure)
But, be (but in Conceit) as them we deem:
For, through the Senses Chanells that does run,
That is conuaid to the I^telligence:
Then, Sense (as in the greatness of the Sun)
Being deceau'd, dec^aues each inward Sense:
O then, for Men, who seek but good to show,
How long ought we suspect they are not so?
(27)
SO long as Unity retains her might
She is but only One: the Number Two
Breeding but diffrence: so indefinite
Does still divide, that so it may undo;
Even so a Word, or Speech whil they abide
But in the Thought, It Is called a Secret right:
But if put forth, forthwith abroad it glydes:
For, words have wings as swift as Thought in flight.
A Ship, upon her wings (the Sails) may be
In roughest winds stayed by her Anchor hold
When she would into wel-known dangers flee
And so the same from utter wrack withhould:
But speak a word, and naught shall let it hie
Often to the wrack of him that let it fly.
(28)
THen, if we show (what vnshown have we would)
To any other, we bewray thereby
We ween theil keep that closer then we could:
So, show our Secrets for more secrecy.
But, do the Geese, that into Cicily
Over the mountain Taurus fly by night,
Gag them with Stones, for Gaggling as they fly,
Lest Eagles breeding there should stop their flight?
And shall men have less Wit then witless Geese
To make that known that Wit would close conceal
And put no Gag into their glib Mouth-peece,
But (like tame Guls) by gagling it reveal?
Then, if my Tongue were of this twatling kind,
It should more taste my meat, then feel my mind.
(29)
They that have skill to keep, and nourish Bees
Do hold that Hiues wherein most noise they make
To be the best, or with them best agrees
Who, to the same, most honied Riches rake:
But they that have the Charge of humane Swarms:
Do hold them happiest when they quietst be:
And furthest off from vproares, and Alarms,
As having honied Sufficiency!
Sufficiency, the Nurse of Rest, and Peace:
For excess breeds excess of Sin, and Shame:
And Sin, and Shame do wars, and Woes increase:
Where Wasps make honed Riches spoil, their game:
Then, in our treble Hiues of treble Realms,
We want no peace, because we want Extremes.
(30)
THe Frosty Beard, inclining al to white,
The Snowy Head: or Head more white then Snow,
The Crow-foot near the Eyes, Brows, Furrowed quite,
With Trenches in the Cheeks, Experience show.
These are the Emblems of Authority;
Which joined to those do much augment her might:
These are the Signs of Reasons Sovereignty,
And Hy^rogliphicks spelling Judgment right.
These are the Trophies reared by Times left hand.
Upon the spoil of Passion, and her Powers:
We, by these Symbols, Wisdom understand:
That us directs, and protecteth ours:
All these in me begin to come in sight,
Yet can I hardly rule my self aright.
(31)
ALl Dignities that suddenly begin,
And gloriously increase, in have, post have,
So orerunne Envy that she cannot sin,
Nor sin before; for, straight her power they past.
If Flax on fire be put, it makes no smoke,
Because it, in a Moment, falls to flame:
No more can Envy, Pomp to fume provoke,
That on the soddaine blazeth on the same.
But Greatness gotten slowly by degrees
Lies most exposed to Enuies cruelty;
Those Beams are faint, and, used thereto, she sees
Them at the brightest, with a banefull Eye:
Then, blessed They that are from State exempt
That lies exposed to Envy, and Contempt.
(32)
THe more unlike to God, the worse the Man;
Things most like Gods unlike, are most vile things:
God Brightness is, with Him it first began;
The Devil is darkness, and from him it springs.
Who Is bright, or loves brightness, is like God:
Who Is dark, or Darkness loves, is like the Devil:
Who then in Darked ^sse lives, or makes abode,
Does live like Gods unlike, ^he Fount of Evil.
To live, or die alone, it is all one;
Sa^ that, of both extremes, to die is best;
The Beasts most brute, delight to li^e alone:
And whosoe lives ^oe, lives like a Beast:
I cannot think that Men such Beasts will be:
For, Men, and Beasts live with their like we see.
5. Sonnets in ppaise of Emin^acy or a public Life.
(33)
Wealth of Heavens Heaven, and want of Hell of Hells:
Angels renown, and Men's euangeliz'd:
The Sum, of all their All imparadiz'd;
Glorious Elier, that it self excells!
Blackness, Antipodes: Fowlenesse, Opposite:
Minds joy, Joys bliss, and Blisses blandishment:
Lauds Crown, Crowns pomp, and Pompes best ornament:
Kynnet of Darknessr, lightly turning it.
Deaths death, Life's life, and life of Life's, lives Life
Eyes eye Wits eye, Souls eye Eye of all Eyes:
Fames pride, Prides foil, yet Foiles does scandalize:
Gods glory, Glories God, and stay of strife!
This is obscure, and yet it is extreme Light,
Manns Summum bonum, and Gods Souls delight!
(34)
TO Live alone, alone is not to live,
To die alone, alone is not to die:
For, Death is Life to such a liuelesse one
That lives alone, and lothes all Company.
Who lives alone, alone does living Die,
Who dies alone, alone does dying live:
For, Life gave life for sweet Society,
And Death, for Life, and Life, for Death did give.
Earth's not alone, for, Earthling, creep upon it;
And Water's not alone, for Fish live in it:
Ayre's not alone, for Sprights live in, not on it:
And, Cricketts Live with Fire, as all have seen it:
Since these are all, from whence all Creatures spring,
Who Lives alone, lives not like any Thing!
(^)
THen least alone, when I am most alone,
Quoth one that least, loud most Men's Company:
But what was he? a Ruler; such a one
Often lives alone to keep Society:
For, Kings (whose cares are how from cares to keep
Their Subjects lives: in Life's Communion.)
Often live alone, and wake when sound they sleep,
That he with them may sleep when theirs is gone.
But private Men, if they too private are,
Are most injurious to men's public good;
And who are such, live past all kind of Care;
So lived not He, that for Men spent his blood:
If he (Kind Lord) had loved to live alone
He had not died, and we had lived unknown.
(36)
MArtha, and Mary (two of his beloved
That was the Son of Mary, mother Maid)
Chose diffrent lives (by grace, and Nature moved)
Contemplative, and Active (as its said)
Mary, the first, the last, did Martha choose:
The first, preferred was before the last*
By Him, for whom she did the last refuse,
Through whom she was, therefore, with glory graced
If glorified she were, then not obscure:
And if with Him she were, then not alone:
Alone she was with Him, upon whose power
All Creatures rest, yet still he rests all one:
B^t such a one, as every One attends
Who lives alone then, lives not like his Friends.
(37)
I cannot say but Beauty is a Guist:
But, to few given that have other grace:
For, it the Mind above it self does lift
Although the Mind and Body be but base.
Beauty is bright, then, then it is light lightly
And if too bright, too light, too often, it is:
Yet it is the Sign where Grace does use to lie.
But, if thrust out, the Inn is most amiss.
And most amiss, to miss what most adornes,
And has but merely stained-painted Walls:
Which Vice does honor much: but Virtue scorns:
Since It, to Vice, from grace, and Virtue falls:
Then Beauty if thou be not Graces Inn,
Grace, suing to thee, sueth but to Sin.
(38)
YEt what a precious Pearl, in Worlds account,
( Pearl in the Worlds Eyes, that does blind those Eyes)
Frail Beauty is, appears by Beauties wont,
That Coulors now her faults with Forgeries.
Did ever Sun (bright Eye of Heaven!) yet see
Complections in our Streets set (Cried) to sale
Before these Times made them so vtter'd be,
Which makes chaste though^s good cheap, as being stale?
If ever, never was there such a Sun
Unless the Deluge (springing) saw the same:
If then they coulord, it was by it ore'runne,
To better it, because it was too blame:
Those Waters varnisht it, and made it clean,
So wish I varnisht every painted (.)
(39)
But mad, or desprate Muse what meanst thou thus
To touch this Couloring with this hard Touch,
Since that thou know some, somewhat virtuous,
Do use to Color somewhat more then much?
Some, good, as great (but neither great, nor good:
For, Greatness scorns her goodness so to blot)
Do make their blood dissemble with their blood:
Which (for a Color) seems what it is not.
Still worse, worse, cease, cease foole-hardy Mue,
Thou art too biter so such Sweets to grieve:
Think thou that those, which thou do so abuse,
Will ever grace thee, much less thee relieve?
But, o did all as thou do, they should rest
Rewards unto themselves, and please the best.
(40)
LAte in a Lodging, where I used to lie,
A Picture, pincht hung therein, in my walk:
Which, one way, had a faire-Maides Phisnomy:
The other way, an Apes, which seemd to talk:
So, that Face had two Faces, in one Hood:
A fair Maids, and an Apes: which seemed to me
The Painter was not mad, in mirry mood:
That, under mirth, hid grave morrahty:
For, to my Thoughts (that may with his agree)
He seemed to touch our Apish painted Dames,
Who counterfeit the Beauty, which they see,
And make the Boords, their faces: to their shames:
But, Wainscot Faces cannot blush, a whit,
But when they lay on Red, which feemeth It.
(41)
SWeet Beauty bear this bitterest abuse:
If thou abuse thy self, why should not he?
Of whom thou have, in this Tract, made good use
(In gaudiest Colors) by out-painting Thee.
Thou can not hurt me more then by thy Looks
Then thy good Looks I need not much to weigh:
My fight thy Back, then Forepart better brooks:
Then, when thou see me turn some other way:
Unto mine Eyes thou art a Cockatrice,
Who do infuse, through them, into my Heart,
The virtue of thy power, which does (like Vice)
Wholly confound my single-double Part:
Then, if thou will damnme for mine offense
Look well on me, to plague my Soul, and Sense.
(42)
Since Good thou love (o God, Goods only Drift!
Why give thou me a Mind which Ills deprave?
If Grace I cannot have, without thy gift,
Why plagu'st thou me for that I cannot have?
Can my power make thy Power obedient be,
(Mine being so frail, and Thine so infinite)
That, maugre thine, I might wrest Grace from Thee,
And, with strong hand, to rend from Thee thy Sprite?
O no! it cannot: but, its in my power
To Sin, and so, to thrust thy Spirit from mine:
Then, o thou Fonnt of goodness, on me power
(What Is f^rre above my reach) that Spirit of Thine:
If not, I can but fear, that can but fall:
So, can despair, but cannot do withal*
(43)
SOrrow, the Salve, and Sore of deadly Sin,
Sister of mercy, Mother of Remorce,
Who by thy being lost, do Being win:
And, through thy strengthes decay, augmentst thy force.
Who, while thou hurt'st, thou healst (together both)
So, takst away thy Being, with thy Being,
Who loath'st to love, because thou love to loath,
That which does give thee sight, or blinds thy seeing:
O thou sweet-Sowr-sowr sweet, (each way too true!)
Sweeten, that Sour that sowrest death does seek:
Make sweet, sour Sin, by making Death (her due)
Die, since I live, by Sin, made truly meek:
For, when as Ill, by Grace, makes good our Mood,
Grace lets Ill Be, that so, it may be good!
(44)
TRue love is Charity be gun to Be,
Which Is, when Love begins to be true:
But, to the highest grows louing-Charity
When she the Highest alone does love to view.
O Charity! that evermore do flame
In that dread Majesty's eternal Breast.
When, by thy heat, shall my Love lose her name,
And made to flame, like Thee, in restless rest?
Well featut'd Flesh too base a Subject is
For Sou'raign Loves divine, ay-blest, embrace:
The Love of Flesh loves naught but flesh, but this
Loves naught that sauors of a thing so base:
Then, be the Priest, and as an Host, I Will die
Offered to Heaven in flames of Charity.
(45)
Since Truth it self calls this life sour, as vain,
What is less sensible then Sense, that deemes
It Sweet, since so to sensual Sense it seems,
Which not a thought in one state does remain.
I see it such, with Observations Eyes
That ey the inside of all outward Shows;
Which clearly shows, Life ebs the more it flows,
And when it longst has lived soonest dies.
A King this Moment, that Kings adorate,
The next, a Corse, Slaves loath to look upon:
Then, was he King but in opinion,
Which alters with the altring of his state;
O then since Life is but a dream of breath,
In this life's Dream I Will naught but dream of death.
(46)
THe Seas unfit to sail on, it too calm:
As it is when it is too turbulent:
Then, the mean motion sets it so a walme
As does the Sailors Ear, and Eye content:
So, neither too calm, nor too rough a Mind
Gives Virtue Way whose ways are in the Mean:
In Love, if Passion do not Reason bind
Their Action to the Clouds commends the scean
Hatred, and Ire makes way, (and Lets putback)
For Justice, and for Prowess t'act their Parts:
Courage is cold, and Justice is but flack
If Ire and Hatred did not stir their Hearts,
Then, since Loves pass^^^, may with Reason hold
Good reason we should love as Reason would.
(47)
IF Nature cannot make Desire to cease
In Compass of the Mean, let Grace thy Guest
Give head, where Excess is the mean to peace,
And the Extreme the midst of endless rest.
For, Grace has Passion given for Natures aid
While they in Virtues Compass walk the Round:
And move to Goodness when themselves are staid:
But otherwise, they do their Stay confound:
For, as excess of Virtue is but Vice,
And, too much of the best, becomes the worst:
So, extreme Passion does much prejudice
And make them who have most, the most accursed:
Then if thou would ^ be passionate, and blessed
Passion must stir thee, but in peace, to rest.
(48)
TO draw such Lines as will not hold the strain
(If they be stretched upon the Rack of Wit)
Is labor no less vilifide, then vain:
And, for Times graced by finding fault, unfit:
But, such to twist upon the Wheel of Thought,
As may hold stretching though all Racks them strain,
Do grace their Worker since they are well wrought,
And ^^^wne of matter that draws out the Brain.
Such Lines will reach if to the utmost streind,
Above Delight, short of Saciety:
And are so strong that En^y is constraynd
To s^y (...) hold beyond her power to try:
(...) when the Sun does in our Zenith light
He makes no Shade his Beams descend so right.
An amorous Colloqui twixt Dorus, and Pamela.
IN a Garden rich of Flowers
Walld with Baies, and Hawthorn Towers,
In a Tower the rest forsaking,
Woe kept Philomela waking.
Here heard Dorus and his Saint
This Birds musical Complaint:
While they harkned to her singing
Their hands were each other wringing.
When their Ears were cloid to hear
Notes that never cloie the Ear?
Since Hands, Hearts did so discover,
Dorus thus did Woo his Lover.
Sweet you see, and feeling so,
How our Hands, and Hearts agree
And since Hands, and Hart^ conspier,
Let us likewise in Desire.
Time, and Place us both do woo,
To do that we needs must do,
If we will be linkt for ever
With the Knot that none can sever.
Time, once past, returns not:
Place, once lost, is hardly got.
Then since both attend our Pleasure,
Let us wait upon their leisure.
Think not Lust corrupts my love,
Though effects of both I prove
Since that Lust, aloue, seems acting
Where Love, only, is Compacting.
This Conjunction I desire
Not to quench unhallowed sire,
But since I would only owe thee,
I, in love alone, would ^now thee.
Of himself Love jealous is,
Lest he should in duty miss,
Since it is his bounden duty
To do service still to Beauty.
Bound, nay treble bound I am,
By thy Beauty, Grace, and Fame,
That no Right should be neglected
Due to one so much affected!
Since Love can no better do,
Then to make still One, of Two:
That Love, Love is best acquiting
That comes nearest to uniting.
My Soul from my Lips would fly,
And, of Thine to Thine would hie,
That their Powers they might be mixing
In desire of faster fixing.
Since our Souls (through Loves desire)
Labor thus to be intite,
O^then let our Bodies being
Make one E^lence, through agreeing.
So to be, is to be One:
Which is by Con^unction:
One in Spirit, and Flesh, and either
Made by Coupli^g fast together.
This I long for, but not long
That this should thy Virtue wrong:
Since its virtue in affection,
That desires to make Connection.
When desire has had his will
Thou shall be what thou art still:
Mine own life whose fame I tender,
More then what my life can render.
My Love's Love, whose Object is
Virtues beauty, Beauties bliss;
Nere made poor for Fleshes pleasure,
Since her Means are without measure!
Love it self it self does hate
Till it be incorporate
With his dear beloved Object,
Reigning in It, to It subject.
O then, Dear (more dear to me
Then my life's felicity)
Yield, oyeeld, without gainesaying
Since that Danger's in delaying,
This he said, and saying straue
To enjoy what he would have
Warrd with Fire, and Sword of Lovers
While her Forces he discouers.
Forces put in Beauties hand,
Which rare Virtues did command:
Wherewith She him so restrained
As the fight grew more unfeigned.
Loath she was to put him back,
But more lothd her Houorr wrack*
Thus while Resolution houerd,
Resolution He discouerd
Spare, o spare my dearest Dear
(Quoth she to him (Victor near)
Let me die ere live deposed
Of my Trust in Thee reposed.
Thee my Love does so obey
That it hates to say thee nay,
Did not Virtue, bid mine Honor
Charge my love to wait upon her.
It Is no seruple love does make
That thou should such Tribute take;
Since thou art my loves true owner,
But I fear the foilc of Honor.
Sweet, dear Sweet, let be let be:
VVrong not Right thou have in me*
O! forbear vnc^^ill action,
Which procures civil faction.
If the best blood of my Heart
Would but ^ase thy easiest smart,
I protest ^ would eff^se it,
That thou might, at pleasure, use it.
Can my Dorus feel annoy
And Pamela ease enjoy?
No, the smarte of thy least ^inger
Galls my Soul lik Conscien^e Stinger
Art thou Rackt? thy Rack constraines
The convulsion of my veins:
Wherein flovves the Sanguine Humor
That fr^ thee should vvash foul Rumor.
Love me (Sweet) but love me so
That me, faultlesse, thou may kno
So to know me, is to know me
Worth the love which thou do ow me.
My Heart shrines thy louiug Heart,
Still in me thou bideing a^t:
Do not th^n polute thy Temple
With the ^^lth of ^owle Example.
Thou shall have me how thou will
When such Having Has no guilt:
But if now I should yield to thee,
I should fear I should vnd^ me.
Since I should seem most o^scene
In thy Souls Eye pure, and clean:
If not, I should ban my Folly
To love such a soul unholy.
Do what ere thou will with me,
So thou make me meet for Thee:
Thou art good, none can mistake Thee
(Being Noble) good, then, make me.
I Will be Thine while good I am,
Never Thine with evil name:
Let me glory but in glory
Bright^ing our Affections Story.
Yet (dear Sweet) these Lips of mine
Shall still Labor more then thine
With sweet Words and sweeter Kisses
To miss no joy but Amisses.
I will melt with feruor free,
And infuse my self in thee,
That thou shall possess me wholly,
So thou will poss esse me holy.
I, perhaps do wish that done
Which in Love, we have begun:
(Blameless) so to bless thy Fortune
With what, now, thou do importunc.
But, till then (as Reason would)
Hold thou all that I do hold,
Thou shall have all (said she weeping)
But what is in Honors keeping.
O then, Sweet, persuaded be
Witness be my Tears with me
How lioath I am to displease thee,
If with honor, I could please Thee,
Hereupon in Dorus Eyes
T^a^^s of joy, and g^iefe did rise,
And (...) words were islue seeking,
^ands, hard wrong, expr^st their speking.
Yet at last, when Passion had
(...), in being VVoe, and glad,
(...) Dorus his Tongue tried
To unsold what it denied.
While (quoth he) Pamela dear
I thy charming Reasons hear
I am so enchanted by them
As I want will to deny them.
But let me, o let me take
The dear offer thou did make
Which was, harmless kindest kissing
Since it is my greatest blissing.
Herewith he her Body clips
Sucking Sucket from her Lips,
Twixt whose sucking all his Speeches
Were as sweet, as full of breaches.
Though quoth he (and then he kissed)
Sweet, I should (and then he mist
Of what he was then in speaking
Kisses still his Speeches breaking)
Though, I say (said he) yet then
Lips fore Tongue, and Wit did ren)
My Lips nere should cease to kiss thee
My Lips nereshold too much bliss thee.
Should I life, and breath consnme
In thy blisfull Breaths perfume
I could n^uer too much love Thee
Since, as good as kind I prove thee.
For, as in a Glass, I see
What I ought to be, in thee:
Since thou do my faults Discover
Making me ^ perfect Lover.
I will love thee ^s I should
That is, so as Reason would:
Reason would such divine Graces
Should be loud with chaste Embraces.
Come, the Rector of my Soul,
Which Commands by thy Control
Who have giun her Reason power
O^e sweet Sin, and Passion sower.
Come then (Sweet) let us from hence
Walk in Loves Circumference:
Till we may (within the Center)
Do these Rights without aduenter.
The picture of Formosity.
WHo would my LOVES divine Idea see
(So to divine his humane fantasy)
Look in these Lines which her delineate
And see an heauuly Form in earthly state! Hair.

Her Hair, Golds Qninteslence, ten times refind, Head.

(In substance far more subtle then the Wind)
Does Glo^ifie that Heauns Diuexity
(Hi^ Head) where Wit does reign inuincibly. Forehead.

Her Front's the Field wherein, in love, contends
True Grace and Gravity for graceful Ends;
Whose doubtful Conflict gives undoubted grace
To Loves extreamst Horizon, Face.
her sweet face.
On the declyning of this upper Plain
(Where Modesty in Majesty does reign)
An heaunly Hemispheare ore Canopies
Two Suns, Eybrovve.
the Lights of earthly Paradise:
Who, Eyes.
with the force of their fair influence,
Delight Men's inward, light their outward sense.
In which fair Mirrors all Eyes love to pry,
Since there themselves they glad and glorify. Cheek^.

Her Cheeks! Lyllies, and Roses are too foul
For Similies, t'xpresse true Beauties Soul:
For, there that Soul imparadized lies
Like Grace, alone, that made it joy of Eyes!
Two Dimples, like two Whirlepits, there appear,
More beauty to devour then Fle^h can bear!
Her No'e, Nose.
the Gnomon of Loves Dial bright,
Does, by those Suns, still shadow out that light
That makes Times longest hours, but Moments seem:
For Months but Minutes Senses, ioyd, esteem.
Her Lips! Lips.
blush Cherries, Currall, Rubies blush:
For your Prim's far inferior to their Flush:
(...) gain the Prize if you, with Them, contend,
Whose Beauty's more then Hues can comprehend!
Her Teeth. A Row of rarest Margarites,
Impale a Tongue that give all Tongues their Rights;
From whom their Dialect deriues such grace, Teeth.

As Ears it draws with it from place to place: Tongue.

Who, when she lifts (with Balme-breaths Ambrosie)
She it enaires in Prose, or Poesy;
That flow so boldly from her fluent Tongue
As if they could not, though they would, go wrong*
But o her Voice! o fie I wrong the same,
To call much more, no more but by that name;
But, briefly thus; Voice.
It is That of those Quires
That wonder rap divine, and humanes Ears!
Which when she tunes to Siluer-sounding strings,
Her voice much more then Siluer-sounding rings;
So that though she thereto her Voice does fit
Yet sweetest Strings she makes but foiles to it.
Her Chin (where GRACE her glory brings about)
Is like a Promontory iutting out
Into a Sea of Sweets, Chin.
her Neck, Neck and Breast.
and Breast, Paps.

Where Beauties Neck.
Billows rest still in unrest?
Whose seemly Swellings beating on this Point
Does Beauties Deluge seem to disappoint:
So, BEAVTY sits in Dimple of this Chin
To ouersee the Sweets this Sea within:
Who can but touch this Cape (Cape of good Hope)
The way from thence, to Pleasure lies open,
Which lies on her Lips, which if Lips touch
Pleasure her self will at that pleasure gruche.
Fall from these Eaues of BEVTYES heaunly house
(Where Grace, and Natute are miraculous)
Along the Crystal Bozome.
Column that it stays,
Then Mount my Muse and fly ore Pleasures Belly.
Seas
Into Desires delicious Continent,
Where Loves Desire lives, covertly, content*
Her Belly bounds the life of Loves desire,
With all the Comforts, that it can require:
There is the Milky way that does direct
To loves hid Court, the Court of LOVES Elect,
Is is the Olimpus where Sense-pleasing sweetes
In active games to strive for glory meets:
Upon the Top whereof Jove's Alter lies, Nauel.

Where zealous Thoughts their Children sacrifize
In slames of lawful Lust, to Lawless LOVE,
Where they, with joy, sweet Martirdomes do prove!
Just at the foot of this my Muses Mount,
There lies, but what! that does my Muse surmount,
To Express It as It is, without offense,
Such is this Secrets unknown Excellence!
But, at Olimpus Foot runns Helicon;
Then think what makes good my Comparison
(With purest Thought) and so perhapps ye shall
Near guess from whence Loves Helicon does fall.
Her Thigh^s* Thighs,
be snowy Standards, gracefully great,
Which are (strange Paradox) congealed with Heat!
Whose Bases, lifted upwards, hold on hic
That Mount, and Fount of Earthes felicity;
And, growing downwardes, small, or Taper-wise,
Two Pirameds, reuersed, make her Thighs:
Whose Points, depending on a Bony Bowl,
With motion meet them to, Apple of the k^ee* Knees*
and fro does roll.
The Biace of which Boowles does make the Knees
From whence Lo^es lightest Muses take their veeze
To leap into those Seas, which Cares destroy,
Where to be drowned is to be drunk with joy,
Those well compacted Knees (unknown to all
Save known by measures* Geometrical)
Are Beauties Hinges: which each Leg, and Thighe
With nimble-welmade ^oynts togeathertye:
So, that fair Frame which on these Hinges plays
Does, by a Consequent, implie their praise
Then, from her Knees slide down her Legs alonge
(Dull muse, that do her Parts perfection wrong, (...)

And right them in Description of this Part
Which, in a word, surmounts Discriptions Art!)
Unto her Foot, Perfections Pedestall,
No more, nor less then keeps her Corpse from fall:
Which, ^oote.
for the quaint propo^tion, does persuade
It rather is imagined, then made!
Now, from her He ele, to Head, climb back my Muse
Alonge her Back Parts and those Parts peruse,
With forward^ backwardness, because they are
More Common to her Kind though no less rare:
Her Butt, but o! Buttocks.
quick Wit lend me a Word
That fairly may that Part a name afforde
Fit for the fairness of her fowlest Part,
But think what it is to spare new words of Art:
To call them Hanches were but to profane
Their names that are for Globes-Celestiall taken:
For, they are so composd by Natures Skill
That Agent, mixed with Azure, them do fill!
But, leave these Parts (lest partly some perceive
That I am loathe these pleasant Parts to leave)
And scale Beauties * Meridian which does lie ^ir back.

Upon these Crystal Heauns plurality. Ribbs.

There Lock the * Side-railes of this total Frame Rigebone.

Within a * Propp, that upright holds the same:
And, for that Propp of many Joints consists
It seemly stands or bows which way she lists.
She bows to all, yet none can make her bow:
For, with the high, She Is high, and low, with low*
Whose Back bears witness that her Breast is such
That stiffly stands, or bows, still more then much! The holous of the back bone

A Trench, wise Nature, in the same has Cut
Where all the hottest Shot of Love are shutt,
That can overcome what ere their force withstand
And, though by Love commanded, Love Command.
Upon the Marg^ns of this Trench do ^e
(That slow lie, by degrees, mount meanly high)
Beauties fair Walks, or Daizie couerd Downs
Whereto She flies, The on^ward hollounes of the back.
for solace, when She frowns:
And all alonge down to the Posterne Gate
Where Nature thrusts out that which she does hate.
Beauties do run neat Bace, and kindly take
Each other Prisners for sweet Beau^ies sake!
Her Shoulders broad; whereto her Arms are knitt,
Within whole Circuit Joy does sadly sit: Shonlders

Because, that Joy she will impa^t to none
But unto Fames Superlatiues alone!
Along those Arms (like Arms of Seas, and Brooks]
Ru^ne the blew Veins, Arms.
with many branching Crooks; Veins.

Which, in a Soil, with Milk clean overflowed,
Do darkly make those Rivers Channells known.
But o her Hand! (which my Muse Captive holds
And drownes her in drie^moisture in the Folds)
Is a m^ere Laborinth of Faries, far sought,
That yields no coming out (...) wandering Thought.
that Hand, in fair Hands, can so show her mind
That in that show Wit may Wits Substance find:
And handles so each praised Instrument
As She of them had supreme government.
What should I speak of other Qualities
Done bly that Hand (the Hand of Sciences)
Since no Skill that does Greatness glorify
But her Hand can, their rareness, ^arifie!
The Tables of those Hands LOVES Tables are; Table of the had ^ingers,

Her fingers are the Points, both whitest Ware:
Whose Sides are edged with the sweetest Air,
So to distinguish them, more sweet, pure, fair!
Here LOVE at Tick-tack plays, or at Queens^game;
But, Irishe hates, for having Tricks too blame:
Here He casts Doublets, Double Points to take,
(The Heart, and Hand) both which an end do make
Of all LOVES Games, save ^hen the Vies are paid
He plays with the Prize, for which he plaide*
But to paint out her Part these Parts within
I might much more then Zeuxis glory winn:
But, as he drew a Veil upon that Part
He could not show by Coulors, nor by Art:
So must I do, and say, nay swear, it is
Virtue Contracted, to abstracted Bliss!
For, all her Parts are the true Properties
Of divine Grace, and Princlie Qualities!
O Dull Invention how do thou abuse
This Quee^e of Beauty Subject of my Muse?
For that too base is each Comparison
Arre yields too blaz on Natures Paragon.
Then, o Invention make my Muse confess
She Is more then Art, and Nature can express.
So, not as I began, my Song I end,
My LOVES Idea none can comprehend.
In Love is no Lothsomnes.
IF but no more then base Bum-fiddling
Respected were in Loves delicious Scene,
Then, at the Close, such irksome piddling
Would make the Act as odious, as obscene:
For, might my Muse, with modesty, demand
VVha^ pleasure takes frail Sense in? In's enough,
To point at That which all do understand
A sport, if sport it be, as rude, as rough.
And what feels Flesh, but Flesh? and what is that
(Though made in height of Natures Art, and pride)
But Dunge, and Dust^ (be it or lean, or fatt)
And who to fall to such Filth can abide? To stire up thoroughly the stinking
puddle of the filthy manners of vv^^tons* it would turn up the stomachs of
the ^onest and chaste bearers through the hateful and villainous sound the^of.
Pit^a.

But say that Mother Nature does procure
(For procrertions sake) her fleshly Brood
To join together in this Act impure,
Yet is it far less graceful, then its good:
For, did not Adams Aples juice infect
Our perfectst blood in being ming'd with it,
We should not this affect, nor s^^rse effect,
As being, for pure Saints Edenizd, unfit*
Then should no ioy-pain'd tickling of the Sense
(Like that of Arme-pitts, payning us with pleasure)
Have drowned our Feeling with the Confluence
Of lustful pleasures floods, sunck in Displeasure.
We should not then lie soaking in Shames *Soil,
And melting inlaciuious Exta^ie;
Nor should, with heat of Lust, our Livers boil
Till our life-bloud be quite d^^d up thereby.
Nor should the Marrow^Malady, consume
That Oil of life that makes us strong, and fresh;
Nor should we need our Garments to par^ume
To cloak the stinck of our still-rotting Flesh.
No, Love has in it virtue more Divine,
And the Beloud more Cause of dear d^light!
Where Virtue sits enthrond in Beauties Shine
To make each others splendour double bright.
There Modesty to Ma^^sty is knit,
And Venus Dian Claspes, with chaste embrace
There stayed Wisedom's matched to nimble Wit
And Nature ^hequers up all gifts o^ Grace!
Now, in such Confluence of Divine graces
(That do beheaun the Heart, entrance the Mind!)
How can base slesh, once mind fleshly embraces
When sleshly Motions these stayed Virtues bynd.
Were Flesh p^rswaded that an Angel were
In Woman's Form within her Couerture
Could she desire to know a Thing so clear
With other knowledge then divine, and pure?
No no, she could not though she were inflamd
With Fire that kindled Zodoms hellish fire;
She could not, no, though she sought to be damd
(Through her desires) so damd a deed desire!
No more can Love have mind of hateful Lust,
When as her Object is Angelical;
But then it does embrace (as needs it must)
That Object with Arms supernatu^all:
This is the highest Heaun of humane Love,
Which none but divine Creatures seek to pro^e!
Essaies upon certain S^ntences.
Amans quid cupiat scit, (...) sapiat non videt.
Would thou (wise Hus^and) have thy marriage Bed Solon the excellent
Lavv-giuer would have m^n kee^e copa^^^ vith their (...) in b^d but thrice ^
month* that li^e as Cities and States use after a certain time between to
renew their leagues, and confederacies one with another: So he would have
love to procure the man to be a continual vvoer to the wife to keep away
the Monster Sacie^y.

(Without Saciety, to giut (...)?
Then Thou, and It ^ust often be ^undered,
With Love (...) ^eaue to ^ake Love more entire:
For, no joy vn^^ (...) but sa^i^tes;
The more it is, the (...) while it endures:
And, the less (...), the more it consolates;
The truth whereof* too wel-knowne proof a^lures.
Too much of what so ere, produ^d by Nature,
Makes Nature too too much (...) ordered:
Too much of Venus (...) (...) and stature,
In the Ingendrers and (...).
And Fire, and Flax must ^lame, it they do touch,
And Men, and Women join that (bare) embrace:
Who then do seldom part before too much
Their deerst Embracements does too much debase.
To wed a wife, and not to Bed her too
Were too unkind a part for Grooms to play:
To woo, and not use that for which we woo
Were Faith, and Hope, through strange Love, to betray
But yet to Bed her, and to Lie still by her
Is more unkindly done then not to Bed her:
And better were it, for Thee, quite to fly her
Then not to use her well, when thou have wed her.
And well thou do not use her, she may deem,
If well thou do not then thy self approve:
And though of Action she may careless seem,
Yet may she fear thy sloth is sin in love.
Then must Temptation on thy weakness work
If still thou Bed, or rarely Bed thy Wife:
In each of which, Temptation still does lurk;
And all Temptation tends but to Strife.
Then they, from strife, are free, that can, and will
In marriage Duties use the Golden Mean:
For so their Love is without Measure still,
And Souls, and Bodies are as strong, as clean!
But, all that married are have not the Gui^t
So to Divide themselves, since Bedds some have
But for them selves (poor Souls) wherewith they shift)
Who, being One, have Two, but on's their Grave.
In reason these should be together thrust,
Since they are only rich in cold Desire,
Who lie together more for hea^e, then Lust,
Heat, that comes only from Afflictions fire.
Flesh these do touch, as o^t as F^eshe they taste,
That Is seld [God wott] so Flesh, and they are Two:
A blessed odds that makes the Striuers chaste,
And makes them live well, though it them undo.
Now, if this Lore dislikes some youthful Bloods
That still do boil with heat of Love, or Lust,
[Which must be coold (still) in Lusts running Floudds,]
Then must they do, perforce, what needs they must.
Yet let them know, to know each other so
Both Grace, and Nature thereby takes offense,
A man may make his Wife, well, let that go,
The name of Whore fitts not Obedience.
But Marriage is by Heaven, aucthorized,
Since, by the Heau'n-wright, wrought in Paradise:
Then, who de^iles Her vnde^iled Bed,
Makes her not vertueus, but a Veil for Vice.
And Overmuch, does over much Defile
That blessed Bed, which Grace does purify:
Then let not Sin oremuch it self beguile
To think that Bed, so much does sanctify.
And if that any man a wife has got
That looks but for so much, accursed is He:
And Wives that have, like Husbands, to their Lot,
(...) like vccu^st, so, both accursed be.
The one, by (...), accursed, by Happ, the other;
So, both are cu^st, though in a (...) Kind
But, blessed Father, and a blessed Mother
Those (...), by Happ, may make, if blessed in mind.
Then, if we ought, before a Friend we choose,
To ear much Salt with him, him all to taste
We need to eat ten times as much (...) those
Whose All we make our All until our last:
For in that Match our selves we make or mar;
Then had we need to leave, before we take:
That Is leave our Choice, by choosing better far:
Then, leave our life, ere faith, or Choice forsake.
Now, you that yet are free, must needs be bound,
To him that has thus freed you (ere this Tie)
From casting Anchor where you may be drowned
In Seas of Lust, and waves of Misery.
Be sure of Sea^roome ere these Surges swell,
That may lie hidd in deep'st profunditi^s
Keep well that Compass that may guide you well,
In mists of Love to clear Felicity.
The fairest Face has not still fairest grace;
Nor yet the Black, in show, still black in Deed:
Who often are bright in Mind, though black in Face.
And often the fair^st Flowers bear blackest Seed.
Then lest fair Coulor, coulor fowlest Vice
Judge thou of Co^lors by clecre Judgments Eye:
If Coulor should to death thy life entice,
Die, without Coulor, ere for Coulor die:
So shall thou live (and never coulor dying
Which show of life) thy life still glorifying!
Be not ielou* over the wife of thy bozome, neither teach her by thy means an
evil Lesson Ecclus. 9. 1.
You that do choose your Wives as sometimes I
Have chosen (...): That is, for Beauties sake,
And in your Choice mind but Carnalitie
You make a Match to mar, and mar, to make,
Ye mar your selves by making such a Match:
Yet mar your selves, to make your selves but Beasts:
Then, in your turning Beasts, often Horns ye catch,
Which the Head bears, how ere the Heart disgests*
For, if you needs will VViue for Wantonness
Then needs you must have Wantons to your VViues:
And it your (...) so well love Lusts excess
(...) ^^tt They love what you love as their lives.
But were they good by Kind, their Kind you change,
And make them oue^kinde so, ouernought.
You learn them st^ange Tricks, and they teach as strange
To others, that do learn but what you taught.
Therein (like good Wi^es) they divulge your Skill
because you should be known to be good Dooers:
Then blame them not since they, for mere good^will,
Do show their Husbands Conning to their Wooers.
Nor, will they take to teach, but give, to learn
Some other Tricks of others, skild therein:
Wherewith to please their Husbands, and to earne
Their Living if need be, for Slouch is sin.
These Good-ones are made so, by teachers ill
(Too good a^ all things that are good for naught)
If their means ^ail; yet can thee live by Skill;
Which being Light shall lightly well be wrought.
But o frail Fleshlings, Husbands, Hard-heads, Bawdes,
Note but the end of your laciuious Match:
Yo^^ Wives get, Emralds, Rubies, and such Gawdes,
Which you, of them, and they, of others, catch.
Shame, and Confusion (with a Pox) Disioynes
Your damned Conjunction, which does quite divide
From Heaven, your Souls, from Health, your loathsome Loins,
To teach each Groom to choose a better Bride:
^or, who so ever drownes his Spirit in Flesh
When he does handle Flesh, to fit his gripe;
Shallser^ed be with Tricks still fresh, and fresh
Until he stinck, as stale, or rotten-ripe*
And in thy Choice, thy Choice to handle so
Thou (...) so well b^ ^eru'd; and ^erued well
Th(...), by her, which thou did Love, to kno,
N(...) now, to love, or love, as known well*
I speak not of the Bralls, and Discontents
^^hat (...), which still does Lust belott,
^oth breed, twixt them, through their misgouerments)
Though they Want not; That is, they want them not.
Then (...) Mis^^is be what likes her best
[Though Lust loves not to serve best Mistrises]
But let thy Wife (in whom thou would be blessed)
Be far from Tricks, and Toys, and Fantazies*
And look not in her Eyes for Looks t^alure
(Except thine Eyes b'alurd with modest Looks)
But look to see, through them, her Spirit pure;
So may thou conjure Spirits up by those Books,
That may thy Heart to pure affection move,
And in Loves Compass, Compass endless Love!
Non est eiusdem and multa and opportuna dicere* Erasmus Chiliad:
Since all my Thoughts are but my Minds Conceits
And my Conceits but motions of my Mind,
How is it that my Mind in her Receipts
Takes not, for Current, Thoughts well Coynd, by Kind?
Is it because their Metal is but mean
Since they are forgd but by frail Fantasy?
Or, e^s because their temper is unclean?
Or, all, in one, their value vilisie?
What ere it be it makes my Thoughts to muse
That (being stamped by Art, and forgd by Kind)
My Mind should yet (as base) the same refuse;
Or, nail them up, where they no passage find.
The cause, I think [which Thought may Current runne]
Is, [sith ^hee is a Queen of Flesh, and Bloud]
She will have naught [lest all should be vndone]
Alow'd by her that is not great, and good!
Then how escape these counterset Conceits
[Base for there Stuff, and rugged for their Stampe]
Out of her Mynt, [alow'd by Judgments Weightes?]
They escape through Passions Mist, and Errors Dampe.
But can a fault excus^d be by a fault
The lesser by the greater fa^re? o no
Then this excuse, since downright it does halt,
For Current, with the Upright cannot go.
But is it a fault to Love, as it is to hate?
Nor, Love nor Hate are faulty, being just:
^ut, ^is a fault to lo^es if too too late)
^^cause such love looks too like hateful Lust;
^hen, i^ I ^oue* as Love is understood*
My Understanding much misguides my Will:
Which o^ her (...) blind] (...) goes to good,
(...)
Then ^is the b^ame of blind Inte^ligence,
And what^ the cause In^elligence is blind?
It blind^d is by misreport of Since:
^or, that does blind the Soul, and lame the Mind.
But must I sensual (...), to seem excused,
^hen, wo^se and worse falls ou^ mine ill excuse:
^were better say, by Love I am abusd,
(...) I, to love, have off^ed much abus^,
Abusd by Love, without my Lust^ consent!
That is too strange a strength for Love, or Lust:
And eithers power in me, is impotent:
^o^, how boile^ Blood, that long since is addust?
Well, be it as it may, it seems my might
Gives way to what it would, not what it should:
Which on the bent of my Minds Motions light
Puts these right Lines of Love which long will hold.
But i^ they break when my Mind is unbent
Now shall they break, for I even now repent.
Qualis vir talis oration.
FAces do not more varrie in their Forms
Then Wits in shapes, though most be shapelesse Wits:
For, breeding base, often well-shapt Wit deformes;
So, (...) comes off comely, but by fits*
And (...) o^t part are better fed, then bred;
(But, they that feeding want, want Wit, and Wealth:)
Then, most Men's Wits are most il-fauoured,
And what they show, by Wit, they show by stealth.
Yet many Members o^ that Block^head Body
(The Multitude) write idly, without stint;
And he that is not in P^int they hold a Noddy
Because themselves are Noddies still in Print.
Some Ryme, in rage; which rage puts Reason down;
Yet puts not Reason down in their Rymes rage:
These Arrs run rough, but their Rimes (if their own)
With reason rnnne like a thwart Marriage..
Yet if too smooth be this smart Simily
(Although it be as rough as Rage, or VVrack)
Their Rymes and Reason then, run like a Cry
Of brayning Beasts, that Rhyme, and Reason lack,
Yet; will they force Minerua, not by Art,
But for^e, or fear, of their wits strength, or stature
(For, so these Asses ween) to take their part;
So (like the Giants) ^ight against God and Nature.
Some make, in Prose, great Tomes their wit^s t'intomb,
To be as Monuments of Wit, for ever:
Yet (since those Monuments no Wit enwombe,
(Being quite consumed) they continue never,
The mo^'s the pity that such stately Tombs
(That of have* gold without, gilt (...)
though dross within]
Should be gazd on by Lea^^ings drugging Gromes
And, by their Engine, razd; o d^^dly sin!
Minerua ble^^e my Book, Wits Mon^ment,
( A little Monument for lesser Witt]
From such vsurpi^g Ben^clarkes violent,
Lest ^hey pull out Wits eres their turns to fit.
Yet will I leave it them, while fearelesse, I
To ^ury go in expedition,
To try their truth, or taste their Tyranny;
The wo^st is Eylesse deposition:
And if it happ, I hope I Will Sion gain,
Since I the Cause of Sion will maintain.
When the rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue and what he says is
praised unto the Clouds. etc Ecclus. 13. 24.
THe Tongue of truth has said [hen true it is)
Though Indigence could speak like Solomon,
The World is mute, or says he speaks amis^e
Since but the golden Ass speaks well alone.
Thus, golden Asses clawd by Claw-backs are
Where they do ytch, (and but for clawing, itch)
Yet (like lades) pinch each other, being ba^e,
And so the Ri^ch are praisd by poor and rich*
(...) Wings of Sun^b^ight Seraphins
(...) Pe^s, and make them Nectar flow
(...) not gult* like Cherubins
(...), in deed, but sink in show.
(...) World is wise herein.
(Though wise ^^^ein more then most wickedly)
(...) Detraction is esteemd no sin
So that the great be greatly praisd thereby.
(...) greatly praisd when all but Theirs
(...) is (how lawdable soere)
Their (...) (though Crabs) are sweet with Apple squires
(...) for Love, and Love for meed, or fear.
They may be bold they wo^ well with the poor;
(...) pack-hors^s, bear when Asses bray:
They (...) may wince, but they can do no more,
And for their wincing They on them may lay.
^ut heers the comfort, upright after ^imes
(Upright, since that which Is not, no way bends)
Will Lawrell-Crowne them for their royal Rimes:
^or Enuies self Desert, if dead, commends.
Then, Rimes, how ere vnroial, run you on
You may, in time, perhaps come near that Crown
Mean while look for no Coronation
^ut such as Envy gives high-borne Renown:
Yet with your Wit, those after times persuade
That some were mard perhaps e^e al were made.
Upon Apparitions in the Night.
YE g^izly Ghosts that walk in shades of Night
Like Shades whose Substance (though quite Matterlesse)
The daily foul Offender does aftright
Why make ye Darkness Paper for your Press?
Do you imprint in Blackness, blacker forms
Of matters worse? or in our Fantazi^
^mpresse ye Figures raising Horrors storms
Or how in darkness come you to the Eye?
Do you but show? or show in Substances?
Thicken you Air (and so a Shape assume?)
Or creep you in some Corprall Ef^ences?
Or else the Sight deceive with less then Fume?
And why o Hell hounds range you in the Night
Out of Earthes Center, (your infernal Hold?)
Loathe ye the Sun? a or is the day too light,
To do your deeds of Darkness as ye would?
Can ye dead Bodies truly actuate?
And so such Bodies borrow of the Saints?
Or can ye Wicked Bodies animate:
So, take from God the cause of his Complaints?
For if you Souls infuse into the i^l
You are the Father of their Spi^ites, and God
Complains without cause that ^hey cros^e his Will,
Nor are they under naturally his R^dd.
But He it is, alone, that Soul^^ cr^ates,
Without whom naught was made that made has bin:
And Bodies good, and Badd he animates,
Only he made not Death, first made by Sin.
And what is Sin, but only mere Defect?
So Sin is naught: then naught has Death begott;
And Nothing should, in sense, have no effect:
So, Sin, and Death Naught made, and Naught Is not.
I would it were not, but, too true, it is,
But is as Canker does to Silver cleave:
So, you; foul ^iends, that love such Filth as this
Do leave no Sinners, that no sin do leave*
The purest Places you do hold an Hell;
And Places most impure you Heaven esteem:
The one do plague, the other please you well;
And so of deeds, of either Kind, you deem.
To be among the the deads Graves you are gladd;
Wherein you^seeke their sensles^e Bones to griue:
And love to rattle them in sign you had
The Conquest of Mankind through Adams E^ue.
So by a Woman (your familier.)
You Are now familier with Men night, and Day:
And which of both Familiers worse do war
With Men, and Reason, it is hard to say.
These femine Familiars, but too often
Torment us men as if you (friends) they were:
Whose hard hearts placed in their fair Bodies soft
Plague whom that Beauty does to them indeere.
Yet some so filthy are that they are best
When they are worst; that is, when foul defame
With use of trading ill, their Trade, has ceast,
Then (with a Pox) they live Chaste to their shame.
Thus have we got double Familiars,
Women and Devils by a VVomans pride:
Both which familiarly, wage secret wars
With Men, poor Men, that still the Brunt abide.
But yet o Passion tax not All, for Some:
Some are so far from being Fiends, that they
Are Saints and Angels, yet such so become
Through Grace (not Nature) which their Natures sway.
Many a virtues Virgin Grace has made;
The chief whereof was that wife full of grace:
Who was a Mother-maide, which may persuade
All women's foes their friendship to embrace:
Yet many Mary's full of Fiends there be,
But no such Mary's as this Saint we see.
Suum cuique pulchrum.
WHy Self conc^it can thou not brook to see
Or hear, or read, or scarce once think upon
The Parts which in another praised be?
Would like God, only wise, be praisd alone?
And why so praisd would be? for being blind
Seeing not thy self on whom alone thou lookst?
Or else for clawing thine own^itching Mind?
Or, which is worse, since thou thy self mistookst?
If these (besides which, I know naught thou ha^t)
Be them for which thou would be lawded so
Thy Wits are gone, and thou thy self, art past
For these, do fleet, where stayed Wit does flo.
Thou art but blind, yet scornst thou other guide:
But leadst thy self in VVays most hard to hit:
So, thou thy self still leadst thy self aside
Where Error robs thee of Grace, Art, and Wit.
Yet can the witty hardly shake thee of^
So hardly to their Headpeece thou do cleave:
That though thou blindst, thou makst them see to scoff,
Yet hardly take, what they so freele give.
Thou love the Learned, since they love thee well
Yea, makst them often to dote for love of thee
Thou makst them ween their Art does Art excel
When they see not they deep Art cannot see:
For, thou and enny (ay Consociates)
Will not admit that Art her self should show
By others fingers; but the mind inflates,
Which scorns to look for highest Art so low.
Well, take thy pleasure, so thon me displease
Displease me, as tho loust me, since thou art
A mental pleasant ticling damnd Disease
And I Will love that thou hatst this loving part
Hang not about me, tempt me not too much:
For I, though frail do hold up hangers on
While I can stand, if me in love theie touch,
Though some such often seek my subversion;
And rest assured if me thou will not leave
I Will muse on naught bnt thy hopes to deceive.
Stultus Stulta loquitur.
THoughts well conceived and words as fair, as fit
Al souldred with substancial semitry
Best shows the life of judgment, Art and Wit,
Which best Pens have worst labor to discrye.
This is a grace that glorifies the Pen:
That imps Fames wings to make her further flee,
This is (like god) but seldom seen with men:
Though in men by his power, and grace he be.
Yet al suppose (thot can but draw a Line
That they can draw the picture of this Power
And that their workmanship is so divine
That like that Grace, it ever should endure.
And through that self-conceit That is conceaud
Which they do daily labor (in great pain)
To bring to light, which by the World recean'd,
Makes her Arms weary long it to sustain.
It often proves such spritelesse heavy Stuff
(As much mishapt as black, or Mistical:
Yet ween they, They give Rudeness such a Cuff
As turns him round, and breaks his neck withal:
For Self-conceit will not persuaded be
But that her Bird is fairst, though black and foul;
Chiefly if she in night of Mystery
See best abroad to wander like an Owl.
Pens, whither will you? whither will ye flee
Above the Compass of your native power?
O senseless Things! will you still Doing be
The Muses, to their shame, thus to deflowr?
Cease, or take Nectar out of Helicon,
And let it flow from you as from that Fount;
Such, only such, do Fames Wings pynion,
But others make but gaggling Geese to mount.
Yet, if you ween you were for Motion made,
And were in motion while in Wings you were
Fall to a Notary, or Scriuners Trade,
Then may you move right being in your Sphere.
But o! to register the Acts of Wit
Forbear, deer Pens, that make your selves so cheap;
Since for that Office you are far unfit,
And for your Labor sown, but Laughter reap:
But if you will needs be Lyning, yet take breath
Least all the World do laugh your Lines to death.
Candidae musarum ianuae:
AMong the faults we fell to by our fall
No one diuides us more from Piety
Then does self-Loue, which is the sum of all
The fowl Deformities we caught thereby:
Hence flow our Follies, and crimes^capitall;
This Fount (wherein, [Narcissus-like] we look)
Drownes us in Blame, which Heaun, nor Earth can brook.
Hence is it that we others glorious Gifts
Do hold as base; and ours [though mere Defects]
We do adore: and use all cnnning shifts
To have them held for glorious Effects!
To this tend all our [Wit-purloyning] Drifts,
Which we in others, held nor Wit, nor Sense:
But, being Ours (Stolen) both have excellence.
Hence is it that we can no more eudure
Another praises, then our own dispraise:
Hence, seek we others blemish to procure,
That, on their foil, we may our glory raise:
We cannot shine* directly being obscure:
Then, indirectly do we send some Beams
Of glory-vaine, on Self-loues vainer Streams.
Hence, Men of Art deprave each others Skill,
Since it they view with Luciferian Eyes:
Hence, Poets do each others praises kill
With keen Inuectiues that from hence arise:
Hence, spare they none whom they have power to spill:
And they have power to spill themselves, and all
[If they be great] that stand but near their fall.
That Poets should be made to vomit words]
(As being so raw Wits Mawe could not disgest]
Has to Wits praise, bin as so many Swords
To kill it quite in earnest, and in Jest:
Then, to untruss him [before Knights, and Lords]
Whose Muse has power to vn^russe what not?
Was a vain cast, though cast to hitt a Blott.
O Imps of Phoebus, why, o why do ye
employ the Power of your Divinity
(Which should but foil Vice from which we should flee*)
Upon impeaching your own Quality?
O grace the graceless, you that glorious be:
Who cannot grace your selves more then to give*
A large allowance poor wits to relieve.
Written to my dear Friend Master Nicholas Deeble.
I Am about it, good Will give me leave;
Stir me not faster then my Wit ca^ move:
What though He be my self, my self must give
My self, some time, to show my self my love.
Show? ah how Show? with Worthless Pen, an^
Alas poor Show! No, Nic, it shall not be:
And, yet it must, my Pen must drink, or shrink
Since it does thirst so sore to write to Thee!
Then, Ynckpott by your leave, a Draught, or tw^
Of gaully Liquor you must yield my Pen,
Which (like ^ Potion drunk) will make him do
His busnesse kindly: A Hall Gentlemen.
Now on, spruse Pen, fall now into your Measures,
But stay, let (...) first number them in Mind:
You are too hasty: soft, be* ruled, take leisure:
Now, Single, well sedd, now, thy Motion's Kind.
Beware thou double not, a single friend
Cannot endure such Tricks: but, let thy Feet
Be plac^d ^o please, yet please not to offend,
And in their motion Rhyme, and Reason meet.
I love Thee for thy Love, lo, there is my Reason:
Nay, did thou hate me (as thou may in time)
Yet should I love VVitts Salt, which Thee does season,
And, thy rare other Guif^s, lo, here is my Rhyme.
Thus far, in measure, has my prancing Pe^
To Thee approcht: Pen, homage now, why so:
So should it be, for, still the worser men
Must pay the better, reurence which they owe.
Now Sir, if my rude Pen may fetch yours in
After the manner of a Cooshin-dance
Leave when you will; and, as you li^t begin,
Your Discords to mine breed no variance:
But, how so ere your Feet be placd, they shall
In Love, iumpe with my Feet, Hand, Heart, and all.
Be thou my Damon then, and I will be,
At least a Pit^ias (if not more) to Thee!
An Epitaph, or what you will, on the death of Master M^ece an harmless
professed Fool who shall decease, when it shall please God, and him, made at
his ernest request.
HEre low he lies that sat still with the Hie,
For foolish Wit, and honest Knauerie.
Never poore-Foole him self more wisely bare:
For, he got love of All, and took no care!
Then, neue^ Fool, on this World reeling Stage,
Played his Part better, till forescore of age*
Then, Time, and Death on him their force did prove,
And took him from this Life, but not our love.
Now, make Worme^ mirry, Meece, as Thou made Men,
V^till in endless Mirth We mere again:
For, to that Mirth if now thou be not gone
God knows what is become of Solomon!
Who, though He knew much Good, and did it to,
Yet knew much Ill, which he (much worse) did do.
But Thou, (like Adam (Meece) in innocence
Knewst not so much as how to give offense*
Or, if thou knewst, thou did conceal the same;
So, like a wise-Foole liud^st thou without blame!
Then, Meece since Death does play the Fool with Thee
Showing his Teeth, laughi^g ill fauour'dly,
Put on his Pate, thy Capp; and on his Back
Thy pide^Coate put, with every foolish ^nack:
And say (^ith he sittes quite be fide the Stool)
Look on she Fool that cannot kill a Fool! The outvvard g^^^ment of b^s
Fles^ suppressing the Souls vnder^standin^

For I poor Meece; that was a Fool, to Death,
Have made Death now my Fool, even with a Breath:
Since I have Cou^nd him with only That
That made me to be mocks, and laughed at:
Namely, but with mine only outward* Weed
Whereof poor naked Snake, he stood in need^
And, I, being weary of it, gave it, then,
When I was like to live with God, and Men.
For what has the wiseman more then the Fool Eccles* 6. 8.
(...) serious and sacred Subjects.
Mortal Life compared to Post, and Pare.
WHen well I weigh the state of mortal Life,
Me seems it seems but too like Post, and Pare:
Where each Man seeks to winn, by civil strife;
While most make show of more then what they are.
One, vies it, being but a Knave, perchance,
Against a King, or Queen, or Paires of both,
Our-brauing Cowardice, and Ignorance:
And, others part Stakes, that to lose are loath.
Some, Nothing seem, to get Some-thinge by it,
These some, pass all, to go beyond the rest:
These, better their Goods-fortunes by good Wit,
Who crouch, as being worst, till they are best.
Some, somewhat give, to fetch some others in,
That so, at last, they may be furthest out:
These, little give, by small gifts, much to win,
Yet often so loose they all, to win a Flout.
Some, being Pa^riall, dare to do, what not?
Vy, and re^uy and ween they all shall winn:
When some One other better Cards has got,
That they are furthest out, when furthest in*
Some Elders, for re-uies, pass Pare, and Post,
When lo, the Younger shares, or Doubles it:
Then fretts the VVinner, for his wynning, lost,
Since foolish Fortune Conny-catched Wit*
Some, vy, and reuy faceing, so, to foil;
That have no Games, but game some seem, with grief:
The while the rest have game to see their spoil,
Who yet, out brau'd, do blush, since they were chief.
Some, being Cock, like Crauens give it ore
To them that have the worst Cards in the Stock:
For, if the one be rich, the other poor
The Cock proves Crauen, and the Crauen, Cock*
Some, on in direct ^elp^s
having lost the double Pare and Post,
Make their advantage on the Purrs they have:
Whereby the Winners winnings all are Lo^t,
Although at best, the other's but a Knave.
Pur Ceit deceaues the expectation
Of him, perhaps, that took the Stakes away;
Then, to pur Tanthee's in subjection:
For, Winners on the Losers often do play.
Flush is ore^boren often by a better Flush:
And Kings do conquer Kings but by the hand:
As Stronger do the weaker ever crush:
And still win of them Glory Goods, and Land.
Some, look awry to see it they can spy
Another Cards, thereby to make their game,
Then on a Nine ten times, perhaps they vy
Knowing the other's blind, though they are lame.
Some Pack, and others Cut, to break the Pack:
Some, shuffle cunningly, and shift thereby:
Some, take a Card, and some a Card put back
More then they should, to back their vice, and Vie.
Some, have Confedrates of the Lookers on:
Whole ook as friends they were to all alike:
Then with a sign of least suspicion
They note the Conny which they mean to strike.
And if the Gamsters do play ouer-long,
All, drawn, by all, the Butlers Box does draw:
As Lawiers get all be it right, or wrong
That Is won, and lost, it Men be long in Law*
Thus properly we may this Life compare,
Unto the bragging game of Post, and Pare.
My Corollarie.
WEalth, like a Pegasus, does run, or Flee,
(As swift as Thought) especially from those
That nere are gladd, but when at game they be,
Though all their Wealth thereby, in Post, they loose:
And so when Wealth away is posted quite
They run away, or else play least in sight.
Written to the Right Noble, and well- accomplished Lady the Countess Dowager
of Pembroke.
I Grace inuoke, which had would make me pray,
To Thee (great Lady, great, and glorious to:)
I pray to Thee, (...) to a Comforts Stay,
Then, let my comfort still, be tide thereto.
To Thee my whole Man is dyaphanall;
The Rays of whose Wits Eyes pierce through me quite;
Who (like a Goddess) sees all in All
Which in me is, or Foul, Fair, Wrong, or Right.
If ought be Faire^ or Right in me, it is
Not mine, but Thine, whose Worth possesses me:
But if ought foul be in me, or amiss,
I hate for That, for, that its not for Thee:
If I be All amiss, I All assign
To Shame, and Sorrow since no part is Thine,
Your Honors, while he is worthy of that Honor* I. D.
Again to Her.
Feign would I write that Wi^t nere yet concea'ud,
But abject Wit withstands my high Desire:
So diverse write, and ween, yet are d^c^aud*
For, Follies Flawes make light Wit so aspire*
Then, cease to write. Then, is Desire displeas^d.
Better Displease Desire, then Wit disgrace.
Disgrace on Wit has at this Instant seisd.
Wherefore? for halting. Then Wit post apace
Unto the Point: now, now, thy quickness show:
For, Fowrteene Lines thy Lymitts are, and They
Are at a Point. What if they be? I know
The more's my meede if now I Wit bewray.
The last Line next ensues: your praise, and VVitt's behind,
For, may all raise your Price except Men being rude of kind.
MARY: PEMBROK.
Written to the right Honorable, and most iuditious Lord William Earl of
Pembrooke that now is.
Look Lord with those sharp Eyes of thine, with which (though lar^ly open)
In seeing thou see the least ore sigh^s old, new, or done, or spoken:
Look on this Seal of simple Zeal, which though but courslie Car^d,
Contains the Impresse of thy praise thy virtues have deserved.
Truths Hands, VVeal^hs Arms, Wits Eyes, Arts Tongue, and wisedo^s listening
Eare^
Prevent Times Course, young years, conceiving, bring forth many years!
Fair featurd soul I well-shapen Spright! in which subsisting be,
Grace, Goodness, Glory: Three in one, and One including Three!
Grace, goodness gives, to Glory guides, such Gui^^, such Guide, such Glory
God gave, you have, yet having hold unsure, to shun Vainglory.
So, so (sweet Lord) so should it be; so was true Sapience Sourse,
More wise then all, most wise in this, knew Things had but their Course.
Who goes to Glory, Glori^ shunes so shunes, so goes,, that yet
Vainglory shund, true glory gaind, may him in glory set.
Read, Note, Search, Try, Know, Show, Muse, Mount, aspird, again descend;
The lower Souls sinck in themselves, the higher they ascend!
Tell mounting, Wits that's too too light that Wisdom makes not weighty;
Tell motion it is worse then madd whose Motors not Almighty.
Tell World its but the wayward Maze where Man is mazd and lost;
Tell State it stands on Airy Propps, by Storms still turned and tossed.
Tell Wisdom she is base if She mounts not above the Moon,
Tell Humors, and tell Humoristes, their H^mors change top soon.
Tell Learning it is dark as Hell not mixed with light of Grace,
Tell Council, (...) Law.
and tell *Counselors they often mistake the Case.
Tell Books, though euer^blest some be, yet are they but Informers,
Tell them they should more bl^ssed be if they were still Reformers.
Tell Arts they ask too much for Artelin asking all our time,
Tell Arms they do but work their Harms, by Arms, and Harms that climb,
Tell Earthli^ Hopes they make us seek for that we cannot find,
Tell tell Worlds-Blisse it wants force to breed true Bliss in Mind.
Tell Sport it spoileth precious Time, tell Time he is falsely true,
True in his Course, ins Custom false, away steals, yet pursues!
Tell Keasa^^ (though they Caesar's are) their Nostrils Bound their breath;
Tell Li^e (though during like the Sun) it subject is to death.
Tell Wealth it wastes with earthly Pomp, tell Pomp its but a Puff,
Tell Glory she must bide the girde of Enuies Counterbuff.
Tell, tell Fair-wordes, from foul Mouths sent, they feed, but fatten Fools
Tell Friends true Frindshipps no where learnd but in true Virtues Schools,
Tell, Love that He an ^ doll is; found, forgd adord by Fancy,
Tell Flesh enraging Lust she is a Soule-confounding Frenzy:
Tell Favors they are Copper-gilt, uncertain true, if true:
Tell Fools when Shadows come before, their Substance nill eusue.
Tell Looks, where Love in Triumph Til^s against unfenced Eyes,
They Look^s alure, by Looks like Lures, which seem true, yet are lies*
Tell All that al is (al in All] beneath the Hea^^^ly Coape,
A Dream, a Shade, a toil of Spirit, a base betraying hope.
And lastly ^el thy Thoughts [sweet Lord] they in an Harr must rest
That Honor holds for Life, and lives to die ere disposs^st,
Here Sus Mineruam may thou say, its true; yet say not so,
Because it comes from him that lives to die upon ^hy Foe.
I. D.
Deus, ad quae nos tempora reseruasti? Policarpus.
Meet not an Harlot, least thou fall into her Snares. E^clus. 9. 3.
WHO so will keep his Soul, and Body chaste
From Woman's haunt, he must him self retire;
Yea, though they seem religious, and shamefaste:
For, blushing Women most inflame Desire.
Stand not upon thy strength (though it surpass)
Nor thy fore^proued Chastnesse stand thou on.
Thou, art not Holier then David was?
Nor wiser then was most wise Solomon?
And ask the Prince of Earthly Paradise,
(Who, in perfection, was made most complete)
What power a Woman had him to entice
To make him his own bane, and ours to eat!
If we stand near a Fall, we stand unsure,
If near the Fire we^ warm, though Ye we were:
We cannot strive with Death and long endure;
Nor Live with Weakness, but must weak appear,
To be with Women still, yet know them not
Is no less strange then to stand falling still:
We cannot handle Pitch without a Spott,
Although we handle it with Care and skill.
Then, if thou would be safe, in saftie, fear;
Since fear does make thy saftie more secure:
^or, too much trust is too much danger neer^;
And in the midst of Dangers none are sure.
In greenest Grass a Snake does often lie
And Love begun in Spirit, o^t ends in flesh:
Flesh talls in smoothest Opportunity;
And when she (drunken) reels, Sin rises fresh.
The Fiend, her fo^-like friend, does never sleep^
But wakes to tempt her still with Time, and Plac^:
In sweetest Honey he does Poison ^^eep,
Which makes Nature work in show ofgrace:
Then, if thou would not slide, from Women slip:
For, Ill often reigns in such good fellowship:
Gracious is the end that ends all our pains.
WHen, when, o when shall I bid life farewell
Wherein my Soul, and Body so ill fares?
My Soul within my Body, Loathes to dwell
^ith it does dwell in such a World of Cares.
Wherein the best are Briers, that scratching, hold
What ere they catch unto another harm:
Whose Tenter-hookt Arms do, in Love, infold
No one but whom they spoil, and quite disarme:
Where Men love Men, not for that Men they are
But simply for themselves; all whose respect
Is swallowed up with self-respecting Care,
And commonly the Common good neglect,
Where Fashions are, then Eormes, more various:
(Though scarce among a Million two are like)
Where ^he most just are lest injurious
Though lustice their injustice does dislike,
Where Faces want no graces to allure
The Mind to love, so to betray the Mind:
An holy kiss, in show, shows to assure
The rather to fail Hope that seeks to find,
Where often Religion palliates Policy,
And Saints are made a Sacrifice for State:
Yea, heaunly Powers for Earthly Majesty,
Away goes all that lets Ambitions gate.
Where holy Fathers do unholy Deeds
While yet they bless their Sons that cloak their shame:
And so the Ha^t of Piety still bleeds
Because Hypocrisy still wounds the same.
Where all is seeming, and Naught real is:
For all do covet only but to seeme^
Illseemeth good, and sorrow seems Bliss,
And Men, but by their show do men esteem.
Where the whole frame of Natur's out of frame,
And at the point to be dis^olued quite:
Where Wit and Learning are both blind, and lame,
Yet scorn, through pride, a Guide to lead them right.
Where no man has an Ear to hear, since Ears
Are now turned all to Tongues, or Teeth, to gnaw:
If one have Ears none but himself he hears,
As bound ^hereto by self-loues lawless law.
Where Love, and Lordship can no Riualls bear,
That yet should bear with all that Grace does brook,
Where every thing amiss is every where
And naught found good unless it be in look.
Where virtue is despised though bright she be,
If she be bare; Yet Venus, bare, is loved:
Where naught has taste else, that is bare to see
Yea, Truth it self if bare, is not approud.
Where all and some make but the sum of al
Vainst Vanities; for so at best they be:
Where each one rises by another fall,
Yet mounts in vain, for quickly fall must he.
So on this Sorrows Sea, [this World of VVoc]
Al falls to Earth, that rises from the same:
And so all Earthly Things do ebb and flo,
And ebb in nature, as they slow in name.
Then o have I not reason to desire
My Natures dissolution, since it is
With these ^lls conuer^ant, which do conspire
To make it [like them] more then most amiss?
Then, Death (the end of Il unto the good)
Enshore my Soul near drowned in flesh, and blood.
Quotidie est deterior posterior dies.
HOw many piercing Pens have launct the Veins
Of this vain World, to let her humors out?
How many Satyrs beat their tried Btaines
How, from this Ioynt^sick Age to bite the Gowt?
And yet like those anoyd with that disease,
These Times have rather rest then help thereby:
For they displease them that do them displease;
So rest renengd, but toild in malady.
And often those Surgeans are as humorous
As are the Aches which they seek to heal;
Who having Teeth, as sharp as mumerous,
Through others, bite themselves, which seld they feel.
Because themselves are senseless of their Ills
Which this observing World perceiving well
Measures their Medicines by their wicked Wills
So loths their Corsiues, and themselves does quell.
But he that looks with well^discerning Eyes
Into the worlds inevitable woes
Shall see it sick of mortal maladies;
And will (as from the plague] fly far from those.
I see them well (though well I cannot see
Since I am Hood^winckt still with dark desires]
And I confess the World's the worse for me
Though to the best my Spirit* at worst aspires.
Feign wo^ld I leave this fardle of my Flesh
In Fastings Charge; the lighter so to fly
From these still^following plagues which are most fresh
When we are weariest of their company.
But, ^o the World still rounds me in the ear
With Wind that sweetly in that Organ sounds,
Which me alures to love mirth, joy and Cheer:
So down it beats my will when it rebounds.
Thus the Worlds heavy and unholy hand
My Sprit suppre^^eth that would feign aspire;
And with my Flesh, conspires it to withstand
With whom the D^uel ioynes in that desire.
Thus do I rest in that Church militant,
Which still with^stands these three still fighting F^^s
Still warring with them til that strength I want
To guard, with grace, their most ungracious Blows.
Then through my weakness am I forcd to yield
Who then, like Tyrants, triumph in my spoil
And wrack my Hopes best harvest in the Field
Which they have got, so, fearful make my foil:
And thus twixt good, and evil, Sin, and grace,
I still do, striving, run a tedious Racel
Envy is blind and can do nothing but dispraise Virtue.
THe best conceit that ever Brain did breed
(Though better borne then bred, or first conceau'd,
May in good birth, yet have such evil speed,
That scarce the spirit of life may be perceaud:
For, Emulation has no patience
(No more then Ignorance) to stand upon
The narrow search of strict intelligence
But dooms it dead, since it lives so alone.
That lives alone that singularly lives
Which is the life of Singularity:
To live that life still Emulation strives
Or to observe his skill that lives thereby.
Envy seems poisned with another praise,
Which as those praises swell, swells more, and more;
Who, worn to naught, her self* (yet) only waighes,
And weighes no others woorths, vulesse too^poore.
But that she seeks to enrich alone,
Not of Devotion, but of damd desire
To make the greater worth the lesser known:
For she does most eclipse what is most cleir,
Why toil we^then? or lose our golden Sleeps
To gain (with golden Time) more glorious praise?
Since basest Envy, highest Honor keeps,
By whose dispight her glory often decays.
It is because the longer after Death
Our Fames do flee, the longer breathe they shall:
For, Enuies wind does vanish with our breath;
And when our hearts break, broken is her Gall:
Then this does comfort all that merit fame
Virtue lives when Envy dies with shame.
Vincit qui pati^^^.
TO seek for ease where we are borne to toil
Is but to rest in toil, and toil in rest:
To toil for ease where Sloth may work our spoil,
Is but, by ease, to be cafe dispo^^est:
They fish, and catch a Frogg, which so do fish
That, ^aue the Souls repose, catch all they wish,
Its better far to give our Souls to rest
In Patience, then in Pleasures, since they do
Sweetly (like rubbings of an Ytch) molest,-
^ut, Patience gladds us while Pains us undo;
Then, give me Patience, and let Pleasure go,
As that which works, in sport, our ouerthro,
That comfort I detest that takes from me
Incessant sorrow, for incessant sin:
Nor, love I that sharp sight that all does see
Save only That which is my self within^
That Knowledge is as coorse as counterfett,
That makes Men utterly them selves forget.
Give me an Hell of pain, so I may have
The Heaven which a Conscience sound does gives:
Since he is but vncessaunt Sorrows Slave,
That, sick in Soul, in plea^ures Heaven does live:
If Patience Hiue the Soul in Sorrows Swar^es,
She Heaven enjoys in an Hell of Harms.
Who rightly knows him self, him self contemns:
And though men clappe their hands in his applause,
Yet he their praises, with him self, condempnes
By evidence of Conscience, and her Laws:
The cause why others flatter us, with ease,
Is, we our selves our selves too well do please.
How much the more our knowledge al sur^ount^
So much the lower we in in Hell shall fall,
If, when we come to make our last accounts,
Our virtue be not found much more then al:
And simply better it were from Sin to flee,
Then cunningly Define what Sin should be.
With brightest Knowledge to live most obscure
Is to find Hea'n, which in that Light does lie:
Yet like the Sun, through thick Clouds couert^re,
To light the World that Men may walk thereby:
So, does the Highst obscure him self from sight
While all that see, do see but by his Light,
What need we seek quaint words, and Phrases fin^
Since by one Word all Truth is known alone;
Which Word made al things by his power Divine:
So, all things by that Word are only known:
Then, they that learn this only World to know
Know more then World, or Wit it self, can show.
All other Knowledge does but vex the Sp'rite,
Though her it makes much more intelligent:
In it, alone, is Knowledge; with Delight;
Since it the Wit, does clear, the Will, content;
Then they that know this single^simple Word
Do know much more then Knowledge can afforde.
No State so holy, nor no Place so Sole
(Much more no Science) but is full of Doubt:
Cares, creeping, fill each solitary Hole;
And many more vexations swarm without:
And till we leave the World, or wayward Will,
We bear with us a World of trouble still.
Then, it is not shunned by flight, unless we could
Fly from our selves, (our adversaries chief:)
For, while our selves our selves have fast in hold,
We hold our selves to Sin, and so to Grief:
For, they that griue not when they do transgress,
Short pleasures feel, not extreme wretchedne^se
The lack of Will in faith still fixed to be
Is the sole cause we want our true repose:
For, who so blind as they that will not see,
And, who more subject to hard ou^rthrowes:
In^uitable Sorrows still attend
On none but on the wilful, past their end!
To shun the Tempter we must shut the Ga^^
Of our Intelligence against his Charms;
Or, lest he should our Will predominate,
Repulse him from our Wit, by force of Arms:
If yet he stands, upon him straight Discharge
Truths double *Cannon, The ^ld, and new Testament.
with a double Charge.
Then will he fly, or if he stands, h^ falls;
For, nothing can resist his Ordinance
Who makes the meekest Minds his Generall^
That, yielding, fight, and foil by sufferance:
O it is a wondrous Conquest when a Foe
By ouercomming has the ouerthro!
The longer we forbear him to withstand
The weaker are we when we do resist,
And much the stronger is he to comma^n^*
For, Thoughts are active when they do persist:
Because Thoughts travel, with Delight, in pain,
Till He be borne, and they conceive again.
Great Troubles well are borne, by bea^ing small
As Milo bare a Calfe, turned Bull at last;
They in the roughest Tempests needs must fall
That are orethrowne with eury little Blast:
In Sum, the Sum of all our earthly joy
Is in our patient bearing all annoy.
Again.
IF Hope and Patience did not hold the Heart
From being squiz'd to naught with gripes of grief
It could not be, by Nature, nor by Art,
But Death would hold that Seat of Life, in chief:
For, in this Life Deaths do so multiply
(Or Dolors, at the best, far worse then Deaths)
That we do live no longer then we die.
Who living die, and breathing spend our breathes.
So that in patience, only we possess
The Souls we have, which have the Lives we hold;
And Hope Sustaines the Soul in heaviness:
So patient hope is frail Life's strongest Hold.
If both those virtues then in one must join
To make our Souls, and Bodies join in one
(Else Death, and Dolor, will frail Life purloyne
Who join to vnioyne that Conjunction.)
We must inuoke the Heaun's to give us Hope
Well armed with Patience, fith we live thereby
Secured in Dolors, which to Death lie open,
And makes us live, when Death and Dolors die.
Then, patient Hope, the Soul of our Life's Soul,
Arm thou my Soul thereby to guard her life,
And Passions fury with thy power control,
So shall I strive in rest, and rest in strife:
For no way look I, but my sights annoyd
With Troops of Sorrows, menacing my wrack;
And, in my spacious Mind, no place is void
For Camps of Cares that seek my Soul to Sack:
For if I live, I can but live in sin:
And if I sin ( I joy) I can but grieve,
So when fin ends, my griefs and Cares begin
And cease not til I cease to sin, or live.
Yet, what I would He knows that knows my will*
Which [though peruerse] is pre^t his grace to serve:
Which Grace ingenders Hope on my Good will
And makes me patient, since I ill deserve.
Thus patient Hope, by Grace got on my Will,
Does make me well to live, in spite of Ill.
In vindicando criminosa est celerit^^.
WHat gain gets witless Courage but the loss
Of Life, or Limb, Lands, Contry, Goods, or fame,
Or to the Gallows goes by weeping Cross,
And, desprate, dies to his Souls death, and shame.
Would any that had Courage, Wit, and Grace
(As point to part this life) Man's life bereave
To make a crying Sin his Soul to chase,
And never, till she dies, the Chase to leave?
None would that would be wise and valiant:
Then so we ought to live, as dying still,
Since of our death our life is ignorant
Then who (but Fiends) would live in Hell, to kill?
Admit in private Quarrels (fist to fist)
Thou have slain all that durst thy power oppose:
Nay say that no man durst the same resist
Since like a God, thou could of life dispose,
Were it hnmane? much less were it divine
To glory but in bathing but in blood?
Were it not savage, and too Leonyne
For any that would feign be great, and good?
O Then what Quarrel but the public one
Can make a wise, and valiant man to fight?
What stain takes honest-reputation
By taking wrong, to make it self more right?
Can but the Lie (one silly Syllable)
(By Time made much more heinous then by Truth)
Make great men make their Humors suitable,
To Ho^^leaches, that have, by blood, their growth?
Or can the Love but of an hateful Queen
[For such no better be, though Queens they are]
Broche precious blood, as if that were the mean
To measure out sound Love for such cracked Ware?
Can but an od Look, or a simple Smile
(Which may be taken well as well as ill)
Make men their Hearts and Hands with blood defile:
So, blood (like water) for but Looks to spil?
Then Men are Monsters, Monsters! al too good
Is every name that is too monstrous
For such as live, alone, but to suck blood,
Which al do hate, that are magnanimous:
For all great Minds desire such things to do
That are as good, as great; else, scorn the same
For Valor theyl be praised, and Virtue too,
Else Valor they esteem the price of Shame.
And no where can the same so well be shown
As with offensive Arms in Contries right:
And with defensive, guard the overthrown
From the Oppressors merciless despite.
Else Fights uncivil, savage, and too bad
For Beasts, much more for Men, whom Angels serve,
All Quarrels else, are monstrous, moody, mad,
And mortal hate of God and man deserve.
Yet by such sucking blood we see some swel
Unto that Greatness that they scarce can hold;
On Gore they ground great Howses where they dwell
Which often sink, in blood, as Reason, would.
Many that have naught else but daring Hearts
And leaf their Lives, for Nothing to Despair
On this Worlds Stage, do often play Princes parts,
To which they climb by Blood, a slppry Staire*
And desprate Resolution so is held
Up by the Chin, while it does bath in blood
(By Greatness, of small worth) that it does weld,
The world at will, and s^ld, if ere, withstood.
Yea, often it makes Authority to shake
Since they owe others lives that loath their own;
And so it does his own Conditions make
As if it could at will put up and down.
This Ladies love; for, this does Ladies win,
(Faint Heart they say, (I Will ow the rest for shame)
This is a VVorld-commanding graceful sin
In the Conceit of each conceited Dame!
He that dares ioule together highest Heads
(Though he may fail in that too high attempt)
The High his haughty Resolution dreads,
While he, as Crauens, holds them in Contempt.
^o thus may Reason reason against a Wrong
That Passion does approve, and use, as right:
I used [the more my vice] this virtue long
If it be Ve^tue vitiously to fight.
What now! vaunts Wit, and vailes the same with skill?
Would it be known it was to Courage Knit?
Do I condemn, yet glory in mine ill?
So, crack of Courage with, and without Wit?
Here lie I open to Wits privy Nips,
Or open Thumps, lay on, Wit spare me not:
And I Will oreturne as thou shall offer Trips
Since through my weakness thou the best have got.
Yet stay thy Wisdom, wit, and hold thy hand,
Use thou the Conquest like a Conqueror:
That is, foil thou the ill which thee withstand;
But, let the faultlesse never feel thy power*
For it is not simply ill a truth to tell,
(Though it perhaps be told for scarce good end)
And doubtful words, with Letters Love does spel
That always only, does the best intend.
But since al those that know me, knew me such
As once I was, my Line sare of less force
(Unless my hate, of what I was, I touch)
To dravv Sword-dravvers to a quiet Course.
For stealst thou Thief, and yet exhorst to Truth?
Or Kilst thou Butcher, yet dehortst from Blood?
Shall he persuade us who revenge pursuth
That mercy is the best revenging mood?
I am turned Crauen, and am held-therein
By Love, which holds for true divinity,
That Faiths Devotion is but deadly sin
If it be not devout in Charity.
Then he that makes his life a lasting Brall
And seems to feed on naught but Woun^s, and Gore
May pray for grace, to change his life withal,
But, other prayers make his sins the more.
And they that love their sins to mul^iply
Still let them pray in Hate, and thirst of Blood:
So shall they live (while they make others die)
To die the death of Dogs, in damned mood.
Now, if this Charm of Words want violence
To make these brauing Spirits less bloudy-bold
And bring them into Loves Circumference,
Suffices me I Coniur'd as I could:
But, if thereby they wax more turbulent
I can but rue, but they shall more repent!
Blessed is the Man that does meditate honest things by Wisdom. Ecclus. 14.
21.
DId Wisdom write, or speak the world to please
She were not wisdom in a pleasing Sense:
Then who does please with any one of these
Does please unwisely, but the World, or Sense.
Then are they worldly wise, or sensual
That do so write or speak; but none of those
Can be in them whose words can sweeten Gall
Which Sweets do rest where sweetest Souls repose.
And they repose but in the Sweet of Sweets
[God only wise] or Bodies of the Blessed:
In whom true Wisdom, Grace and Nature meets,
Whose graceful Words are naturally expressed.
If Words inchaunt the Sense, and not the Soul
That Charm of Words coniures no holy Spright:
For, Such, such Words (not Such, such Words) controules
Soule-pleasing Words must, then, be rare, and right.
Yet though a Sonnet be as right, as rare
For Number, Measure, Weight, or Noucl^^^*
Yet, if it sounds so, but to Senses Ear,
The Soul, as harshe, does hold that Hermonie.
Then all our Strains that relishe double Love,
(Sweet double-Relishe, worthy treble praise)
To Soul, and Body) Soul and Body move.
(With joy) to listen, as to Angels L^ies!
These be the Aires that get the Air of Fame,
[Of Fame whose Air, divinely is refinde]
That feeds, with purest praise imm^rt all Name;
Fitting the nature, of each mighty Mind.
And, they are only mighty that disdain,
All that, that disagrees with Mightiness:
As is light Love, frail Fancies, Shadows vain,
VVeake Wit, base Bliss, Worlds weal, or VVretchednes.
Then [as to Nature cursed, but kind to Grace]
I herehaue made a Rodd my self to beat,
Whose highest reach in Strains of Love, is base,
Since Lightness incasures them with heavy Feet.
Yet if this Lightness heavy make the Light
In Summing up my Numbers total Sum,
I hope the weight thereof* will be of weight
Their Lightness [if it rise] to overcome:
For, they are too Light that in Those but weigh
What Lusters* not what Lovers ought to say.
Sic transit gloria Mundi.
LIfe, stay; or if thou will not, let my Soul
Move with thee to the Rest, Thou mouest to:
The Twyne, by which thou hangst, Time up does roll
On Heavens round reeling Spheres, which thee vnd^os
Theno my Soul let Truth thy Virtues woo.
To join their Force to enforce th'infirmitie
Of this Life's excess in Deficiency.
For, truth to say, we Be, and Be not both;
We Be, in show,, but Be not as we ought:
If then we Be not but in show, in sooth*
We Are as if we Were not; Ought, and Naught,
Dying as soon as we to Life are brought:
Twixt Generation, and Corruption.
The Mean inclines but to destruction.
And, if we strain the Circle of our Though^
To comprehend some Essence of the same,
It is as if to catch a Shade we sought,
Or closed our Fist to hold the blast of Fame:
Yet, that is Air, but Man is but in Name^
Then, look how much a Name has being found,
So much has Man, which is a Sound, unsound.
Unsound it is: for, were it sound it were
That which frail Man is nothing less then like:
For, Sounds have Being: yea, they plain appear,
And, on the Organs of our Hearing strike:
Of which those Organs are, with us, to seek:
For, while the Sound resounde^h we are gonne:
So, are we Sou^ds that have not Time, nor Tone^
Then, Reason seeking for a real Thing
Of Humane-nature, fowly is deceau'd:
Because the same has no continuing,
But runs her Race ere really perceau'd:
Whose Life, of Life, is instantly bereau'd^
A Dream? a Shade? o no: its not so much,
A shadow of a Dream, at most, is such.
That Is the Similitude the Lord of Life
Does use to show our Lives vnbeeing* Being:
What! in the World, where all things are so ^ife,
Is naught but Nothing to the same agreeing?
Which not appears, nor scarce supposed by Seeing!
And, being scarce supposed: then it is
To Nothing next, or Nothing's like to This*
And, as we cannot bathe twice in one Brook
Since still it runs the same and not the same^
So, twice on our Estats we cannot look
And see it One, so soon it alters Frame:
We are and are not strait, like Lightenings Flame':
At once we go* and come* ye, go, ere come,
Which is the Sum of all of all, and Some*
And, if we live long Lifs extremity
We die as many Deaths as Ages live:
The Life of Youth, is Death of Infan^le.
The Death of Youth, does Life to Manhood give;
So, of the rest Death rests in Life's Deprive:
To Day dies Yesterday, to Morrow shall
This Day be dead, and Night^s their funeral*
We change each Day as Days do rise, and fall:
And, what is changed continues not the same:
If not the same, the same Is not at all:
For, Change transsormes the Nature, and the Name,
Our Passions are as sickle, as too blame:
Now This, then That, then next to This, and That,
Still changing, well I wott, to I wott not what.
Thus, is our Sense deceaud, mistaking that
Which but appears, for that which (...), in deed,
And so our Sense, our Sense, does Captiuate
To mis-conceit, Corrupting Fancies Creed,
Which taks Not-beeing in ttue Beeings steed:
For, that is truly-false what ere it is,
That is but true in Show, and so is This.
To BE, in deed, aeternall is to Be,
To Be aeternall, is to Be alone:
To Be alone, excluds the Pronowne, We,
Yet We do stand by that Trin-Vnion,
Though we therewith hold no Comparison:
And yet we look most like that Trini^y
In Understanding, Will, and Memory!
Tim's like a Leaking Vessel which contames
Both Generations, and Corruptions:
The Fates (like Danaus daughters) take the pains
To fill the same, as often as out it runs;
From whence do flow Times daughters, Slaves, and Sons*
And these are Terms that to Times Turns agree
Before, and After; Has been, and shall Be.
Which show that no Time (but Aeternitie)
Has Being; for, we cannot say that Is
Which yet, is not; and, Now, does cease to Be*
Or if we say Time Is, Time shrinks at This;
Which cannot stand to prove that Term for His:
For, NOW (the Notion, which Denotes Time)
Is Past, while Present, and is Last, while Prime!
Then, if Time Be, it is Past, or Future;
The Past, Is not; the Future, Being wants:
Because it is to come, and most unsure,
For, Time still houers where no Being haunts,
Since Time, and Being still are Diserepants:
Then, That (as erst was said) Eternal is
Which Is, in Deed, and only ONE is This!
Of whom it cannot properly be said
He Has Been, or Shall Be: These Turns of Time
Can never stand with That that is ever staid,
Yet far above Times highest Turns does climb,
And, is the First, and Last, and lasts in Prime:
Who by this NOW, spreads his Aeternitie
Unto the boundless Bounds of Deity!
For, he is ONE, and One Is, and no more!
For, as what ^s, ought to be only ONE:
So, only ONE ought to Be evermore,
Which Is, still Is, Is, only, and alone
The Cause of All, And caused is of None!
To Him, alone, that Is, and only Is
Be only Praise, since Praise is only His!
Non est mortale quod opt^.
Respice finem.
Hen as I hear Times sober Tongue (the Clock)
Call on me every how^e to mind nune end.
It strikes ny heart with fear at every stroke
Because so ill Time, Life, and Breath I spend.
Then straight resolve I, to bestow them all
Upon that Lord of all, that gave them nice
When lo, the World upon me straight does call
And bids me look to it, lest poor I be.
Twixt these two Calls I patted am intwaine:
The first my Spirit, the last my Flesh attends:
So twixt them two my pleasure is but pain:
For each the other evermore offends.
Sin tenders me al Joys, that ravish Sense,
And Sense does pine if from Them It be held:
Grace offers Joys of much more excellence,
And feign my spirit would with Them befild.
But in frail Flesh Sense such a Caesar is
That It Commands it to withstand the Sprit,
While it does feed the Flesh with Earthly Bliss:
And so, my Sprite is vexed with that delight.
Thus, while I am distracted in desire
Time (in his Language, after some Howrs pawse)
Tells me he flies, and bids me to retire
Before Confusion catch me in his jaws.
O Time (that thus endeerst me to thy love)
I constantly adore thy sicklnesse,
That never mou'st, but do my Senses move
To mind thy flight, and this life's trickelnesse.
O that I could make thee Aeternity!
And honor thee, for this, with state divine
That with the God of Glory, thou and I
Might, like the Sun and Moon, for euershine!
Teach me, o learned long-experienc'd Time
To glorify thee with some heaunly Art,
Whose humble Muse would to thy Temples climb
To Lawrel-Crowne them, ere from Thee I part.
O let me be the Triton of thy praise:
Teach me to Trumpet forth thine Excellence:
Let me [though most vnworthy] grace thy Days
Wi^h all that may delight Intelligence.
Let me by thee [deer Time] be brought to Death
Ere I abuse thee in the least degrees.
For, he wins Bliss that does but lose his Breath
To be still found, from Times Abuses free.
Then now, o now, (since now my Days decline)
Let me this Moment enter in the Way
Of V^rtue, Grace, and holy Discipline,
And being in, thence, let me never st^aie
Pro^^^stination does but Plagues protract,
Due to protraction of Conversion:
Then, Time with Plagues my way ward Will Coact
To turn to Grace, ere my subversion.
Let it sufflce that I have thee abusd
Since I was borne, in Wrongs not to be borne:
Then be thou, by me, hence forth rightly vsd,
Or let me, by Thee, die, or live forlorn:
For, I am weary, now of wronging Thee,
Then let me flee from Vice as thou do Flee.
A blind man cannot see the default of his Eyes.
WEll, what of this? this restless toil for State,
What is the end of that which Care begins?
And, without Worlds of Gifts, gets Worlds of Hate,
Is this the All Pride (at All casting) wins?
Must Truths Disciples, Graces Officers,
Sacred Apostles (Saints by calling) strive
For Headship by vnciuill-ciuil Wars
Though they believe they meanly ought to live?
Nay, but for this, if those resplendant Spirits
That do surround the highst Celestial Throne
Advance themselves above their place, and Merits
For which they worthily were overthrown,
Then, Judgment where do thou enthrone thy State
That should be in the Kingdom of the Brain?
Do thou that Seat (since Pride usurps it) hate?
And only in the Humble do thou reign?
Then, where are they? true Judgment tell me where?
If neither with the Angels, Saints, nor Men
They may be found, (as it does well appear)
Where shall we seek for these so humble then?
Or is the total Sum of All, but One
Who was made truly humble for us all?
And do thou rest in him (meek Lamb) alone
Leuing us to our selves to rise, or fall?
Then, woe to us that mad are for thie want,
And do we wot not what in what we do:
Who seek, for naught, each other to supplant:
For, Lordships have their Lodes made fast thereto.
We strive for That which brings us but strife
With grief and care among, often wrack vvithall:
We venture life, to win a weary life;
And rise, by all means, by all means to fall.
So we be up but for a day, we deem
Our Neck well broken; ^ its vvorth a Neck
But for an how^e a King to Be, or seem
Unto his Mates before to give the Check.
If we can catch a place above our Peers
(Although we come thereby by peerlesse ^in)
We vveen us no small fools (as it appears)
When we [alas the vvhile] stark mad have bin*
Such is our judgment, snch our temperance,
And such the state of those that State affect;
Whose State, and Stay has such continuance
As they that seek it; no time in effect!
Then, o my Soul since thou can thus discourse
(As many can whose Courses are stark naught)
Be better staid, or run a better Course
Far from the rise of any mounting thought.
Look in the Inwards of these outward Things;
And note the Lyning of the roialst Robe;
Its powdered Ermyne, pepperd to with Stings
That, like a Nettle, makes the vvearer rub.
If thou affect a Kingdom, let it be
Heaun, or the happy Kingdom of CONTENT:
Which blessed Kingdoms are ordaind for Thee
If thou affect but thine own government.
Be Queen but of thy self and thou shall be
In Heaun Crowned with Immortality,
Where Saints, and Angels shall still honor thee,
For swaying well thy little Signiory.
And since thy Pilgrimage is almost past
Thou needst the less Vi^ticum for it:
For, being tird to lode thy self at last,
With needless *Trashe, would show nor grace, nor wit.
Care for no more then thou may bear, with speed,
To bear thy Charges through this Vale of woe.
Superfluous things give others that have need,
The less thy Lode the better thou shall go.
Little serves soone-suffized Necessity
[Whose Stomach, small and cold disiests not much)
But nothing can Opinion satisfy,
Which being more then full for more does grutche.
The greedy-ritch do* want the wealth they hold
Who pine with Tantalus amidst their Store; Instructa inopia est in diuitijs
eupiditas.

And (Midas-like) even famish with their Gold,
The more they have, their misery the more.
The next degree to Nothing Nature serves
Since she with less then Little is content,
The Hedge-rowes meat, the River drink reserues
To keep her in good plight, and better bent.
The Birds find meat for seeking every where,
The Highest hand still strowes it in their way;
And so may temprate men still find it there
Where ere the Birds do find their stomach Stay.
For Cresses, Roots, Hippes Havves, Sloes, and such Cates,
Are Common, (as the Air) to take, and eat,
This meat serves Nature though it serve not States,
And longest-liuers had no other meat.
Let Gluttons glutt their Gutts until they crack
With all the Kickshawes Cookrie can devise;
And let them lay on lode upon their Back
Of gaudy Gear; thou need none; then be wise.
Puft-panch does soon'st the Kite a pudding yield;
Full Gorges belk, if not much rather spue,
Most fulsomely: for being ouerfilled,
It self with hate does then it self pursue*
At Best; these full Ones can themselves but stretche
Upon their Iuory Bedds, or feed their lust:
For, they must still be feeding til they catch
That which wilfeede on them til they be dust,
And what is a costly Cote but comberous
Unto the Maker and the Wearer too;
To keep off cold and heat we Clothes should use,
Which Howse-wiues cloth does Without more a do.
And so the same be sound, and sweet, we may
In Clothing of that kind best stir, or stand;
When as these Garments rich, and over gaie
Do rather us, then we do them, command.
If Garments m^st distinguish needs, Degrees
[Though Virtue makes the plainest Coat to shine]
Yet more then needs with no Degree agrees:
So says King James, so says the Word divine.
No more of this; enough, if not too much
(But nere too much against too much is sed)
Is sed hereof, and Great ones will but grutch
Since with their Business I am busied:
They hird me not: then, profferd service stinks,
No more my Muse; thy Lady on thee winks.
There is no greater plague then Boldness and Power, when they are accompanied
with Ignorance.
WHen Heaun and Earth, and al their Furniture,
Were made, their maker made Man last of al;
As being his Masterpiece, chief Creature,
For whom the rest were made: He, General.
To whom such perfect Wisdom was assignd
That without Learning He knew all that was:
And namd each Thing according to their kind
Which Names, to us (as we) from Him, do pass.
Who being thus made (made, I may double say,
Since He was double made, made Man, and Great:
Great, like his God, Gods Creatures all to ^way)
And, in an Earthly^ Heaun, held his Seat:
VVheras He would, He liud: so (...) his Will
Rested His life, or death, His Weal, or VVoe
And, while His VVil his Makers did fulfill
So long he knew but what he ioyd to know,
He knew all that was made was perfect good.
But knew, save God, naught unmade, perfect Evil)
And so He knew not, or misunderstood,
The name and nature of the crafty Devil.
He lived as free from Want, as Wickedness
As long as in his Good-wil was no want:
Then Earth bare fruit, vntill'd, in blessed excess:
For God himself the same did sow, and plant.
Rivers of Nectar ran an golden Sand
(With siluer-cleerenesse) through that Pardice;
That, had he thirsted, Drink was strait at hand,
And all that might him free from prejudice.
The Tree of Life (to keep off Age, and Death,)
There still did flourish, in eternal spring:
So, like to Gods, immortal was His Breath:
For, all he Fedd on Health to Him, did bring*
So, his Flesh, health: His Spirit, tranquillity
Enjoyed, in height of highest excellence,
Which height came near the highest Felicity:
For, with Him God still made his residence.
He naked was, and yet He knew it not:
For, Cold, or Heat could tell Him no such thing;
Much less could Shame: for, Shame of Ill's begott;
And Ill he knew not, nor whence It did spring.
The Spring of joy (the Highest) did ever feed
His passing pleasures Streams, with fresh supply:
So, still he was as far (in show, as Deed)
From want of Joy, as joys sacietie.
The Cause whereof, in Him wrought rare Effects,
Who, without Labor, his Lords Heasts could keep:
Whose Heart burnd, like a Beacon, with Affects
that showed, in Danger, he did never sleep.
Who if he stirred; and exercised his Limbs,
It Was not for need, but them to recreate:
Which stirred not till in Pleasures Seas he swimms*
For, still he bathd therein, in restfull state!
And yet the more those boundless Seas to make
With new Spring-Tides of Joy, [as yet unfelt)
God, of his Ribb, a sleep, makes him a Make,
On whom, (awake) for joy, his Heart does melt.
And seeing Her [for all he saw ^e knew]
Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh^said he)
This Creature is: for, in my self the grew,
And as my self I Will love, her while we Be.
This! nay (alas) This naught is to the Good
That He enjoyed in that earthly Heau^t,
Which by Man's Thought cannot be understood.
Whereof [alas] we through him are bereaun:
For, He was w^rn'd but one Tree not to touch,
The Tree of Knowledge, by which well he knew
He naked was, and shamed to know so much:
For Shame does Evil evermore ensue.
Then evil was it that he knew, and did,
When through his serpentine seduced wife
He tasted of The Tree which was forbidd:
So, Lost we, with Him, Paradise, and life,
None otherwise then by our Laws we see
The Sons plagued for the Sires successively;
For, if the Sire a proved Traitor be
He Is plagued him self, and his Posterity.
Which with highst Justice, just proportion holds;
So wills the Highst, whose Will gives Justice form^
Whose Grace true Justice evermore infolds
Then neither can or will he It deforme.
Hence comes it that from Love we fall to Lust
(Foul Lust that's but the Excrement of Love)
And hence it is we prove in both unjust
When Lust another Way our Mind does move.
Thus was a Woman made the Instrument
Wherewith the Devil did man's Ear allure
To hear the Siren Sins first Strains consent,
Which drue him on to Death, which we endure.
And what but Wo-men cause our Sonnetting
Wherein we show what languishnes we have
Within our Souls for them, which often bring
Our Minds to naught, and Bodies to the Grave?
Whose Tongues drue virtue from the Tongue of Eve
(If it be Virtue which to Vice does draw)
To make us love, then, What they List, believe:
For, Lou's as free from Reason, as from Law.
O VVo-men (that were made, but for Mens^ake
To help, and comfort them in weal, and woe)
Why do your selves your selves their plaguers make,
And Cross the Cause of your creation so?
Do not, o do not so degenerate:
From what ye should be, by creation:
You give us life, and life abbreuiate
So make and mar our Generation:
But if you will be like your Mother Eve.
When you have us undone, help us to live.
In iudicando criminosa est celeritas.
TO cut off life by Law of such whose Crimes
Fall out as evil, from an hopeful good
May prove, though just, injurious to the Times
Wherein they live, in deed, or likelihood:
For, Justice though she equal be to all
Yet, by advice of Prudence she does spare
Hopeful Delinquents though they fowly fall
Only because they often most hopeful are:
For had Miltiades at first bin slain
When he in Chersonesus tyranizd,
Where had the Battle bin got on the Plain
Of Marrathon, that is so immortalizd?
Or else had Cimon, or Themistocles
Bin done to death for their lascivious life
(For which proscribd was Al^ibiades)
How had the Athenians conquest been so rise?
The Battles near the flood Eurimedon
Had not bin gaind to their past, gaineful good;
Nor from the Mountain Artemision
Had they sent streaming down their Foe-mens Blood:
For, royal Mynds, great Hearts, and active Hands
(With nimble Wit among) can naught effect
But what with wonder (if not glory) stands
Since mean Attempts they do (as base) reject.
Nor can their Natures motion idle be
That is so restless quick, and violent,
(Still working like a Billow of the Sea)
Til it be staid in some mood premanent.
But as unskillful Husbandmen reject,
The fattest Grounds since they bear Weeds, or wo^se:
When expert'st Husbands those in chief ellect
Since well they wott, fatt Grounds make fatt their Purse.
So do, at first, great Wits, and haughty Sprights
Produce strange fruits that feed but^leane Decay
Which we detesting ween they had their rights
To be cut off, and ridd out of the way:
Which does proceed from judgment most deprau'd,
Though in desire that Justice might take place,
Since if those Men had bin in mercy saud
They for that mercy might their Country grace:
For when with Judgments best-discerning Eye
We see good matter in an evil Man,
As Courage, Wit, and great actiuitie
We long must hope, he will do well, that can:
For, Age with Virtue is Cooperatiue.
Youths prone to Vice, since Vice does cocker it:
So they, in time, great matters may achiue
That may their King, and Kingdom benefit:
Then each wise Judges judgment has this scope
To spare the hopeless Felon full of hope.
Fortuna vitrea est, quae cum splendet, frangitur. Publi.
GREATNESS what great Good do thou contain,
^allure the Will to be in love with thee?
^st souraigne-Good to be a Sovereign
When highest degree of Ills threats that Degree?
Who buys a Crown with neuer-ending Care
Buys Gold too dear by all that Life is worth:
For, Care does naught but Life to Death prepare,
Yet, vnprepard to meet Death flies forth:
For, Kingdoms Cares so many are, and great,
That they constrain the Thought but them to mind;
That though untimely Death they do beget,
Yet Thought [though free] from thought thereof they bind!
Then, o my Soul, poor Soul! rich in Conceit,
(Which do conceive Kings glittering misery
To be (as it is) false pomp, true perils Bait)
Suffice thee still with mere Sufficiency.
Make me as well content to be the least.
As others are well pleased the Greatst to be;
Since Man in honor lives, and dies a Beast:
For, Men prove often base Beasts in high degree.
Let mine ambition reach but to Content,
And that Content reach but the Mean to touch:
That's All; since its omni-sufficient
More meet for richest Mynds then more then Much
There may I fi^t by Virtues surest side,
(For in the Mean sheedoth her self install)
Secure from wrack, while those that Scepters guide
Do find no mean between their Rise, and Fall*
Where I may, all unseen, see all the rest
Of this Worlds Reuolutions; and make use
Of Best, and VVorst discreetly for my best
And store my Mind with Matter for my Muse:
Like a Spectator that does fit at ease
Secure upon the Shore, and thence does see,
How others are near sincking on the Seas
In ceaseless Storms that full of danger be:
Or like a looker on a Tragedy
Within the Middle Room, among the Mean,
I see the fall of State and Majesty
While among the Presse^a Pillar sure I lean:
So see I others sorrows with delight
Though others sorrows do but make me sadd:
But plagues to see, which on our selves might light,
Free from their fall, makes Nature, grieuing, gladd.
Where while I see some Phaeton strive to guide
The Sun of Souraigntie, I see him set
All, in Combustion; so dissolues, through pride,
All Mouers causing his Ambitions heat.
Where I may see but late-Court-Minions
Live like to Sponge [hard squizd] alive, and dead
Through change of Kings, or Kings opinions:
For, when their Heads fail off! off falls their Head.
Or if they find more grace in Fortunes Frowns
To live (as in an Hell) a Living Death
They well may Chronicle what holds in Crowns
Which turn about (like Fanes) eun with a Breath.
There may I Nobles see vnnobly strive
Who shall be greatst in grace, for want of grace,
Who by the damage of each other thrive
And grace themselves b'each others great disgrace.
While (vnperceaud) I laugh to see how they
(Like Fiends) each other restlestly torment,
And, bless my state that on their Plagues may play
In my Minds mirry Kingdom of CONTENT.
In few, there may I see how all Estates
That lifted are above the myrry Mean
Do, falling stand twixt Dangers and Debates,
Whiles of their Falls I make a swelling Scene.
So that this World, the Sea of misery,
Becomes my Helicon, and Streams affords,
To make my Muse to flow, still swellinghie,
In matter far above the reach of Words.
Then, you that, shouldring, buckle for the best
Holding the Mean [the best of all] the worst]
Rest you, or else my Muse shall never rest
To make your States, and Strifs lothd as accursed.
And you, o you vnpassiond peaceful Hearts
That with me live secure in mean estate,
Be joyful though you play but simple Parts
Ye simply play the best, bl^^hst, freest from hate.
And though these great Ones scorn our Case, and Core,
Let us laugh at them since we know they dote*
A Dump upon the death of the most noble Henry late Earl of Pembrooke.
DEath, has depriud (...) of my dearest friend;
My Dearest friend is dead, and laid in Grave:
(...) Grave He rests until the World shall end:
The World shall end, and end shall all I hings have:
All Things have end, on Earth, that Nature wrought;
That Nature wrought shall unto Dust be brought:
To Dust be brought the worthiest Wights on Ground;
On Ground who lives, in Ground consume he must:
Consume he must whom ^rorow does confound:
Sorrow does confound the Mind that Care does rust:
That Care does rust, full soon Care will devour*
Care will devour where Care has greatest power:
Where Care has greatest power it frets the Heart:
It frets the Heart, and does perplex the Spirit:
The Spirit perplexed ptocures the Bodies ^mart:
The Bodies smart does quite expel delight:
Expel delight, then Life is like to Death:
To Death I yield* yet cannot lose my Breath:
My Breath, why did it not forsake me than:
Me than, eun then, when that my friend deceast:
My friend deceast, eun as my Joys began:
My Joys began, eun as my Joys surceast:
My Joys surceast eun as my friend did die.
My friend did die, and so would God might I.
I (aid unto Laughter, what art thou mad? And to Mixth what do thou* Eccles.
2. 2.
AMong the (...) Sin (...) for heedles Flesh
(Though Lust be more attractiue in her powr]
None takes so soon [sith (...) does it refresh]
As Mirth; For, Mirth does joy, and health procure.
The Grave, and Light will, lightly, mirry be
Mirth so does tickle Spl^ene^ of either kind
For recreation, o^e; the other, glees
And both, because therein they pleasure find.
It is Earths Heaven, yet It does hale to Hell:
But so does hale, as, with bewitching (...).
It makes them willing whom it does compel
To joy in Pleasure: which procures Smart.
When Fortune smiles who then laughs not outright?
And often (mad mirry] plays not with each straw?
Makes Pleasure, all their pain; their care, Delight?
These, Mirth, with Ropes of Vanity, does draw.
These, in the Night, think how to spend the Day
[If thinking-sad Ambition let them not]
In pas-time, so, Time passes with ill play
Til they lose All, and He the same has got.
In Weal, we flote on Pleasures Streams, with ease,
In sugared satisfaction of our Sense:
And often seek to sound those sensual Seas
With the decep'st reach of our Intelligence.
Then we embozom all that Mirth can yield:
Musutions, Plaiers: Buffons, Birds-and Beasts
Do* at their pleasure, us (most wanton) weeld:
And, decrer then our Wisdoms deem their lests.
A Zane (farther off from Wit, then Grace
(And yet as far from Grace, as Grace, from Sin)
That can at Feasts, prate with a brazen face)
(When sober Witt's kept out) must needs come in.
Our Dainties will not down with out some such,
A Shamelesse-gracelesse, wittlesse Thing we get
To make us Fatt, as fools, with Laughing much
And on his folly feed, to make us eat.
My Lady she will laugh as madd she were
(Lord! why should Mirth make sober Ladies madd?)
If she but see Him, like an Ass, to fleere;
So she (kind Mule) to see an Ass is gladd.
And when such Buffons ball, and Cornetts sound
(The Ghests loud-Laughing) Who can then be heard
That speaks like Phi^^pps Page, as shrill, as sound,
That Voice has then no grace and les^e regard?
And, if one sober Soul, among the rest,
Do mind the rest of their Excess, in This
Some seeming wiseman makes him straight a lest,
While all, as at a Goose, like Geese do (...).
Then one Goose (that seems reason most t'affect)
Yields him a reason for their hissing so:
And says that Wisdom does her self reject,
When she comes out of season ought to do.
This Diu'l with reason, dammnes Divinity;
And, with his Wisdom, stopps self Wisdoms Mouth:
Which says, all Seasons we should mortify
Our Ears, to hear the lively Word of TRVTH!
Paul, hold thy peace; thou blessed Saint be still:
(Though if thou preach not, thou say, woe to Thee)
Lest they do hiss thee too, for thy good will;
Who hold all Geese that not madd-mirry be.
Tell them they ought in season, and without
To hear the Word of Life; they, dead in sin,
Will, for thy zeal, requite thee with a floute;
For so to quite such zeal they used have bin^
The most voluptuous ouer-wanton Rigge
Proud Plenty, scorns meek Pieties VVoman-hood:
And, swelling Supra-aboundance looks so bigg
That naught it sees so Low as Sober^moode.
Variety of Crowns, Robes, Mirth, and Meat
And all that ravish, Sense, with sweet'st delight
These are the Heau'ns^ desired of the GREAT
Who ween no Heaven nor Hell is out of sight.
Frolic great^great Ones, while these Heauns you hold
Since you will not attend true VVisedoms Words,
Laugh and be fatt, since al you touch is Gold,
Though that food your Souls famishment affordes.
Soul? tush, what Soul? how idly do thou chatt,
Madd Muse, that now [they thinke] do Poetize.
There is no Soul, nor no such Thing as that;
These are but Fictions, Law-confirming Lies.
What resurrection? Pish, who ever came
From Death, to Life? Who can Cadaueres raise?
Some say a Nazarite once did the same,
But Tacitus nor Machiauel to says.
These were wise Men, in deed, and known for such,
If such had said it, we might trust their Word:
But, fow'r poor Fellows poorly it does touch,
That often with themselves do scarce accord.
Who had no action in the Common weal
No Office, no Command, nor no great Brain,
Yet we [for sooth] for vain Souls only Heal
Must credit them in all their prattle vain.
These are the damnd discourses of these Devils;
Thus, their blasphemous Tongues ^erlde the Truth;
Whose greatest gooddesse is in greatest Evils:
And growing Great, through Mischief, have their growth*
Great Wit should have great Grace the same to guide;
Or Wits own greatness will it self oppress*
Or make it run to rage, it self beside*
And sinck the Owner in the deep'st distress.
If Wit, and Wealth concur, to Hell they run,
If Grace, in mighty measure, stay them not:
Who are undone, if they be not undone
Before they do receive their later Lot:
For, Frolic Fate is most unfortunate
If sanctified Discretion hold not in
Unruly Nature, then, in sober gate:
For, from Abundance, springs abundant Sin.
In Wealths excess to be most continent
Is most miraculous, and seldom seen:
For, Appetite is then most violent,
And Passion, with high-hand, grows Reasons Queen.
Then Pleasur's Active, and most Passive, Sense:
Madd-Mirhes rude-hand the Soul a sunder tears:
Which is distracted by Joys violence,
As Well as by Griefs Gripes, or sudden Fears.
If he that does the happiest State possess
Look well within him, and without him too
He lightly shall see cause of heaviness,
Seeing All to threaten him quite to undo.
But hardly shall he sinde a cause of mirth
(Though he sought all the World the same to find)
Since Sorrow only is our ^ight of Birth,
With Labor of our Body, Soul, and Mind.
O Mirth (strong Strumpett!) Whore to Worldly-Weale,
O Laughter (Light Thing!) Baude to both those Beasts,
Why do you not your Luxury conceal
But that bewray which Modesty detests?
It is because ye are madd; as are those
That willingly still rest at your dispose.
Omnium rerum vicissitudo est. Terence.
AS I me sat upon a River side
And marked the Water how it past away,
And how that past, with like, was straight supplide,
That still is past, and still held at a stay,
Me thought t^was like this (...)
Sea of Sorrows Tide,
Wherein the Race of Mankind runs so:
For, down the Stream of Days, to Death we glide,
And still Some come, as fast as Others go.
And as the Stream with many Reaches runs:
So runs our Course, with many way-ward Reaches:
This, Ill it runs to, and that Good it shunnes;
And, to ruune out of Course, makes many Breaches.
Then, with my self I thus discourst, at last,
I, with the rest, am running down this Stream:
Here now, there then, then, presently am past,
Like Streams swift Course, if not much more extreme:
For, ah, I cannot think how swift I flee
But I flee swifter then that Thought, to Death:
For, Times least Parts, then Thoughts much breefer be,
Which Thought, with thought, my (...) me shorteneth!
I am orewheldm'd in Thoughts, as deep as Hell
And high as Heaven; when thus my state I weigh:
And twixt those Thoughts I (as intraunc't) do dwell,
While Time draws me to Death the nearest way:
For, Thought breeds Melancholy, which does breed
The Enemies of Health; and, they do sow
(In Fleshes Earth) our Dissolutions Seed,
That us dissolues when it begins to grow.
If from my self I do my self divide
(The longer, so, to keep my self entire)
And give my Sense delight, my Thoughts to guide
To Mirth, abroad for health: they strait re^ire:
And, sooner can long married Men forgett
They married are, then I forgett the Thought
To which I owe my self, as duest Debt,
Since I was matched to Ill and knew it Naught:
For, if I let my easi-moouing Mind
(With lightest shock turn from his weighty Point)
It rests no where, but in this Point, by Kind;
So, Lightest Purposes does disappoint.
The Elements, though still at War in me,
Do yet, in firm accord, mine end conspire:
For, It they hasten, since they disagree;
Which well agrees to make m^ vnintire.
Then, o why should I add sadd care, to Care
When one's of power, the Pow'res of Life, to foil?
Why should I care to spend, and care to spare,
To spare a Life which sparing does but spoil?
Why should I care to live, since die I should
If I would live quite free from Thought* and Care?
For, Thought's the Deed by which this life we hold,
Which yet determines Life, ere Thought beware,
Suppose with cark, past Care, I could obtain
A golden Crown (but better t'wrere of Baies)
And with Hell-paines a tripple One attain,
What got I but more Care to end my Days?
And were Time staid, and Life most steadfast too
Such endless Kings, had got but endless Cares:
And so the longer Life, the more adoo:
The more adoo, the Dooer worser fares.
While thus my Thoughts are temp'ring, lo, with Time,
Time has stoll'n on me, to steal me away:
Away, with Time, I go: hark, hark, the Chime
Says Musicks charming Notes Time cannot stay:
And, if not Music. no Mirth under Sun
Has power to stay Him; but, Mirth Pas-time is:
By It, the sooner, Time away does run:
Then* Life is wretched both in Bale, and Bliss!
If it be wretched, loathsome is it then*
If so, then so we are, to love it so:
Men-Beasts we be, that reason want of Men,
To Love our Prison, peril, pain, and woe.
Thus while, with healthfulbreath, I breathe out This
I can contempne this Life, and those condemn
That are in Love with it, as with their bliss,
But, were Death near, I might be one of Them.
Yet, let me not my dying Heart belly
(Which dies as it lives, in thought of Death)
It naught (but Hean'n) desires more then to die;
And, yield, to endlest rest, my weary breath.
Weery, I well may term it, that still toiles,
To keep a toilesome Life from endless rest:
So, wrongeth Life the more, the more it moiles:
Which is at worst, when it is at the best!
O Breath, frail Breath! (base-Daughter of the Air)
Fly to thy Mother, me no longer griue:
Nor, would I die, because I do despair
But die, because I hope, in rest, ^o live.
Here is but Toil, and thou holdst me to It;
Which I abide, since Thou abidst in me:
So, but loss wynn I, by thy benefitt,
The loss of Rest, that restless am through thee:
Yet, till thy Giver take thee, make no have:
For, I was borne to toil* for rest, at last.
Difficilia quae^pulchra.
THE Coaeternall, (...) WORD,
Self WISDOMS wised^ me, Image of the HIGHST,
Sole KING of Kings, of Lords the only LORD
And, heaunly HEAD of CHRISTIANS, ^ESVS CHRIST,
In complete Time, took FLESH, by MIRACLE,
Of a pure VIRGIN, through HIS Work that was
The Prompter of each sacred ORACLE,
That did fore-show how THIS should come to pass:
With his unvalued Wonder working BLOOD,
To manumis^vile Man* a Slave to Sin,
Was borne in Beth'lem without, (...)
And, without all that State does glory in.
His THRONE, a Manger, and, a Crach* his Cradle:
His ROBES, course Rags, poor Relics of mean Lynnen.
His WAITERS Beasts, his COURT, (...) Stable:
That worse no Begget ever borne had been in:
Where, yet, foorth-with, by Angels glorifiyng*
Sheepherds agnition, worship of the WISE,
The guiding STAR Old Symeons Prophesying,
And Doctors wondering, ALL, HIM GREAT Agnize,
Who, in his youth, grew quickly old in grace
With GOD, and Man; for GOD, and Man was HE:
Baptized by him which made and gave Him place,
That HE to all might Pieties Pattern be:
Conquering his FLESH with fasting, unco^strain'd,
The World with meekness, and the Fiend, with (...)*
And when the WEEKS of DANIELL end attain^d
He^ ^^light and sought RIGHTS Ruins to repair:
Sometimes, with Words, that wonder-mazed men,
Sometimes, with Deeds, that Angels did admire:
With mercy, still, with Justice, seldom when)
He made (as HE was) God and man entire.
He tought EARTH, Truth: and HELL, to know her error:
He showed the MEEDE ordain^d for Good, and Bad:
Then to confirm All [to Alls joy, and terror)
He calm^d the Elements: reformed the madd:
Heald all Diseases: brought, to life the Dead:
The quickt' obedience: secret thoughts, to light;
To Sins restraint, or to be banished,
And lastly to the Devil, fear and flight!
These [Notwithstanding) and much more then these,
(For, all the World the Books would not comprise
That of his Acts should hold the working-Seas,
Which to a boundless Magnitude do risel
He was, (alas, when he had vnder-gon
All Pains and Passions (Sin all only saud)
Proper to Man [yet had his Godhead shown)
By his own People scorned and depraud!
Yea, by his own (his own chief Officer
Judas, betraying Him) He was accusd,
Arraignd, condemnd, bound, seurgd, hald here, and there,
With Thorns, Crowned, crucified, and worse abusd!
So He, (All being fulfild: the Sun obsurd,
The Earth, all, quaking, Graves self-opening,
And, NATVRES Frame dissoluing] Death, endurd:
Life, thereby, to his Enemies, to bring!
Then, being interd, loost Hell: and, rose again
In triumph, having conquered Death, and Sin:
And forty Days, (with HIS) on Earth did reign
A Man-GOD glorifid, without, and in!
And, of his age, the three and thirtith Year,
He, in the sight of his Saints, did assend
To Heaun, with glory, triumph, joy and cheer,
And sits on his right Hand that Him did send!
From whence [being now our Spokes-man] He shall come
(When all this All shall melt in funeral fire)
On Quick, and Dead to give his final Doom:
When, as their Works shall be, shall be their Hire.
Then, Good, and Bad divided, endlesly,
The Worle refind, and all things put in frame,
To this great Judge, the total EMPERY
Shall Be given up, of this Great-double FRAME!
To whom Celestial, and Terrestrial Knees,
And Knees infernal, shall for ever bow:
And, every Tongue confess, and Eye that sees,
That HE is All, in All, in High, and Low,
Unto His glory that Was, is, and shall
(In all Aeternity) be ALL, in All!
I long for Life, unlike to Death.
SO runs the Tenor of the Treble Ills
Existing by the Mean of three fell Foes,
The Flesh, the World the Devil ever spills
Us miserable miserable Men with mortal Bloes.
Yet, like Fiends, taking pleasure but in pain,
[In pain that to noe perfect profit tends]
We seek to rule, and if we can to reign;
And rule, and reign but for unruly Ends*
O Rest [the Image of that Saboth sweet
Wherein sweet Saints do from their Labors rest!
O rich repose of Spirit, for Angels meet!]
How do I toil to be of Thee possessed?
Then Sloth it is not that delights my Will,
Nor, would mine Understanding idle be;
But, both desire to be in Action still,
Yet rest in action like the Trinity!
The Date of my life's Lease is near expird,
Yet labor I for life, since still I swim
In Sorrows Seas, as one as nearly tried
As he is near the Bottom, or the Brym.
I scarce can keep me Head above the Waves
With all my Labors, my Stars are so cross!
Yea, under Water often my Science saues
From Death, my Life, which Storms of Troubles toss.
But as the Deluge, swelling more, and more*
Made th'Arke thereby to Heau'n-warde mount a pace:
So, when Afflictions Waves increase their Store
They lift me up thereby the more to Grace.
Yet, as they multiply, their struggle so
That they turmoile my Body, toil my Mind:
For, both in anguishe flote when Sorrows flo;
And, sorrows flow from Fortunes Ebb, by kind*
So, that I cannot yet that Rest attain
Which my poor Soul, and Spirit so requires;
I, longing, labor for it, yet in vain:
For, base Defect withstands my high Desires.
And by how much the more for it I long
So much the more I do Worlds weal neglect;
Wherein my self and my Desires I wrong:
That are the more suppressed by that Defect.
I was not molded, sure in earthly Mould,
(Though of the Filth thereof my Flesh was framed)
For, if I were, then sure it fit me should;
But, nothing less, whereof I am ashamed.
I see some Men (who when we weigh their Wit,
We, as miraculous, their wealth admire]
To this Worlds Mould do make them selves as fit
As if their Wit, and Metal were all Fire!
Yea some mere Blocks, that are as bluut, as base,
Rise from still lying but in Du^t, and Dung,
To high estate [which stands with therir Case]
Though Fate, through too much right, them too much wrong!
Yet I [whose Brains are placed in bette^ Cells
And have the influence of clearer light)
Can compass nothing by Wits magick-Spells
[These charming Numbers] but mine own delight.
I stolen am from my self, by nine svveet Queens
[Who do predominate my Wit, and Will)
While Time steals from me both my Life, and Means;
And leaves me naught to live with, but my Skill.
Yet from Times Wings I steal his blackest Plumes
(The Night) to rest in motion of my Muse;
And til my Wit by ^tealth of Time consumes,
In spite of Want, this wealth of Wit I Will use.
And with Aurora [raiser of the Muse]
I Will wake if Rests friend [Sleepe] should rest mine Eyes:
To steal from Time, what I may iustl^e use,
So to supply Times want with his own Supplies!
And for the Stuff whereof I Will draw my Lines
It shall be such as from his Throne shall come,
Whose Muse-immortalizing Spirit them twines,
And (Silkeworme like) I Will work me in my Tomb.
Where, though I, poor Worm, from my Labors rest
My Works well wou'n by some more dextrous Wit
May line perhapps the Note-bookes of the best;
Yea, for Apparel of the Mind be fit.
And though the Viperous Iron Teeth of Time
May gnaw away, to wrack, through my Works Womb,
Yet if my Spirit, thereby above Him climb
Let my Lines ruynd be, to give Him Room:
For, though content, I could be, dead, to live
In Fames strongst Fort (though Paper be the Wall,
And Sense of Fame my life cannot survive)
Yet if I rise thereby let my Fame fall:
For, what feels Naso that a Work composed
That lives, and shall, till Time be Toothlesse quite,
Since hee^s disposd, where now he is indisposd
To feel a VVinde that is so vain, and light?
Yet heer^s the VVinde that bears the World away
Though it be weaker then the lightest Mind:
Then, weak is That so weak a Wind does swaie;
And ^ie they ough^ that live but for such Wind.
But, Virtue for her self (and not for Fame
That as an Hand-maide her attends still)
I chiefly do desire, and let my name
Die in her life, so she may make my Will,
And, with her leave, to give (and make no waste)
My Time to draw Divine Lines to the last.
An Ode in commendation of Music.
O Sacred Music, Nurse of Raptures high,
Which feedst the Soul with divine Symphony,
What Words can praise Thee?
Whose Virtue tunes the discord of the Spheres,
And ties thereto Divine: and Humane Ears;
Then can Wind raise Thee?
Whose sweetest Aires do breathe forth Wonders Wind,
Which mounts, above itself, the heauiest Mind
In spite of Nature:
Whose holy Accents are so full of force
As can the Soul from Body quite deuorce
Of sullen st Creature!
What is so dull of Sprite that has but life
That loves thee not? Or who so full of strife
To hate thy Concords?
Since thou art She, who, with Soule-pleasing Strains,
All petuerse Passions of the Mind constraines
To cease their Discords!
Our Souls (whom some supposed but Music were,
Because they moned are as It does steer)
Do glorify Thee!
The sacred Quires that ring about the Throne
Of that more ^acred ESSENCE, Three, in One,
Do sanctify Thee!
That Holy, Holy, Holy which They cry
That are Sub-chaunters of Heavens Hermony
Records, thy glory;
What shall I say? both Heaven, and Earth conspires
To raise the same past reach of what aspires
If transitory!
And, in a Word, if I mightcensure Thee
That, next my Nearest, art beloud of me)
Thou art that Pleasure,
Who, in thy sweetest Notes, (as well I note)
Have [like that Bliss that by sweet Concord's got]
Nor Mean, nor Measure!
Nihil tam been dictum, quod non fuit dictum prius.
WEre all the Wits that mortal Brains immure
(By supposition, or in Deed) made one,
Yea though they were most subtle made, and pure,
By all the Helps that Wit can think upon,
They could not [though they did themselves distract
With strayning hard] a new Invention frame;
For, each new Deed does turn into some Act
[In some years compasse] past, before the same.
Our Actions, and Inventions are fast fixed.
Unto the Sphere of Uniformity:
Though often the same, with Diffrences, be mixed,
Yet they, with Like, past, hold conformity:
For, as the heaunly Orbs, in vvheeling, cause
The Stars to meet in often conjunction,
For, from the like, the like Time often draws
That rightest were in opposition:
So, do our Words, and Deeds, with Turns of Time,
Turn in it themselves: then, out, then in again;
And, as a Wheel does roundly fall, and climb:
So, Fashions, out of use, come in amain.
We cannot think of that has not bin thought:
For, our more studious Ancients straind their Brains
Beyond ours reach, though we in vain, have sought
To strain our Wits beyond their VVisedoms Strains.
To instance would but breed satiety;
But, breefly, Let us cite some fevv, For All*
Who has past Plato, in Philosophy?
Who Homer for the Art Poetical?
In Oratory Craft, who has out-stript
The Facher of the Romaine-eloquence*
Whose Tongue, and Pen were so in Honey dipped
That now we lick him, to make sweet our Sense.
Then, for the Mathematics, who compares
With Archimedes (Wonder of all Times)
And who, for Music, with Amphion dares
Play for the Prize, whose fame past Wonder climbs!
What Painter will not blush a Line to draw
With Zeuxis; whose bright name, bright Fame does dim?
What Imager would not seem rude, and raw
Before Pigmalion, if he wrought with him?
By this small Touch, we well may taste the Whole
Huge Body-politick of Arts-men past:
Which is a like through out; which Bodies Soul
Holds all that All are learning, to the last.
We may suppose w'haue lighted on a Vain
Without this Body, when out Muse does flo
In some Invention, past the modern Strain;
But, Self-conceit makes us imagine so:
For, read All extant, and if some, or all
Of thy Conceit were not comprizd in some
Thou art a Spirit, and no Man Natural
Who speaks as he is taught, or else is dumb.
This, idle-painfull-foolish-witty Work
Pardon me Patience to call it so]
I may conceive in no Conceit did lurk
Before, from mine, it (thus made run) did flo:
But, God does know on whose Vain I have lighted,
I know not, since, I know, I know non such:
Yet, For indi^ing, I may be indicted
For taking That which I ought not to touch.
If so I have, it was through ignorance
Of what right Others had, to what I have;
And if Theirs be my Wits poor maintenance
Prove it; and I am theirs, to spi^l, or save.
But, some there are that take most greedily
From the old Store, since they know Naught is new:
If then they write both well, and speedily
They but engrosse the Deeds that others drew.
Yet, sooth to say, how ever some may vaunt
They scorn to steal, yet They, yea, and their Heirs
Take [by their leaues] and yet the World inchant
With coni^^ing Words, to think it only Theirs!
Old Pictures well refresht, do seem as new:
And none but Artists know them to be old:
Then, they earne praise, as those that first them drew,
Who make them, newly, their old beauty hold.
The^s nothing new: no, not so much as Sin:
For, what sin now is done, but has bin done
When the Worlds Face was vvasht for soil therein
Which from most foul, to Filthier far did run.
And though the World does wax still worse and worse,
Its since that Deluge, which then scowrd her Scums:
And so it must grow worse and worse, perforce,
Until her second, and last clensing comes,
Which, being by Fires (as erst vveake Waters) Mean,
It, ever after, shal^^ new, and clean!
Inough's as good as a feast.
WE Bows unbend: and flack the Viols Strings?
That used so, we them may longer use:
Then, if our Muse be ever on her VVings
She will the lesser while fly like our Muse.
The body by repletion, compotent,
And by Euacuation, fit for it
Successively, does Nature most Content:
So, must we use the Mind, the Muse, the Wit:
Then, here, an end of that which we began
On no Foundation that had any end
But such as makes our Muse an Artizan,
That can, in every Kind her self transcend:
But, o, light Rimes* be dark to all but those
That can your Rhyme, and Reason well dispose.
Iucundum nihil est nisi quod refict varietas.
FINIS.

