A DISCOVRSE OF THE CONFERENCE HOLDEN before the French King at Fontain-bleau,
between the L. Bishop of Eureux, and Munsieur du Plessis L. of Mornay, the 4.
of May 1600. Concerning certain pretended corruptions of Authors, cyted by the
said Munsieur du Plessis in his book against the Mass.

Faithfully translated out of the French.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Matthew Selman and William Ferbrand, and are to be
sold in Fleete-streete, next the Inner Temple gate. 1600.

A true discourse of the conference held at Fontaine-Bleau the 4. of May. 1600.
SInce that the Lord Bishop of Eureux persuades himself, that the dishonor and
overthrow of the Doctrine Preached in the reformed Churches, of the Realms of
France, Almaine, England, Scotand, Denmark, Swethen and Poand, etc. Depends
on the confutation of the Lord Plessis book, written upon the Sacrament of the
Eucharist (which doctrine is maintained by this book, as it may be gathered
from his private letters to the L. Ples^is.) As if the Ministers of all the
Kingdoms in this last endeavor, had put all their heads into one body, to be
cut off by this new Hercules returned from hell. And since for having only
deflowred certain places of the said book, he boasts of the victory, and
causes Te Deum to be sung in every place: Let no man blame us if by this our
writing, we oppose the truth against those falsehoods which have been
published, since we are thereunto bound by the duty which we owe unto God, and
for the instruction of his people.

Truth it is, that since L. Plessis book of the institution of the Sacrament
was published, some have found out no other means to trauerse the course
thereof, then by publishing both in word and writing, that the places by him
alleged, as well of holy Scripture as the Fathers, were falcified; yielding
sufficient testimony by this their sinister subtilty, that his allegations
auerred and justified, the doctrine he professed should be both clear,
certain and inpugnable.

Nevertheless he patiently endured this slander, partly endeavoring himself
to ouer-throw it by his answers, partly trusting that of it self at last it
would give place to verity: Until he had intelligence that the brute thereof
had come to the Kings ears, yea and got so great creadit as he verily believed
it. Whereupon agreeued (yea and that justly) he desired that he might come to
his justification. And for that there were some that labored to divert
certain Gentlemen of the religion under this pretext; he took occasion to
request the L. Bishop of Eureux by a private letter, that both of them might
join together in a most humble petition to his Majesty, that it might please
him to appoint Commissaries, before whom the book might be thereby examined,
to whom in especially he addressed himself, because the said Bishop was the
principal author of the said evil report, and wrote ordinarily to his friends
in disgrace of the said L. of Plessis; and by certain his suffragans published
the same from house to house, and as it were from door to door. By this
means the L. of Plessis promised himself, that the said L. Bishop upon this
private letter sent unto him, by the hands of his brother, would without any
further trouble, repair to Paris; whereas by accord of both parties, his
Majesty might ordain such a one of his Privy counsel as he thought most fit
to deliver him a true report of their conference. In which case the matter
being manadged with this silence and discreation, his Majesty might have no
other interest then the knowledge of the truth: (A care worthy of so a great
King and the title which he bears) to know as well the good as the evil faith
of a seruitour, accused of falsehood before him: a crime always heinous, but
more heinous in respect of the subject, being matter of Conscience and Divinity.

Contrariwise the said Lord Bishop took a quite opposite course, rattling out
upon this private and modest letter, a public and insolent book which he
caused to be Imprinted in his own house, and published at Paris: by which, of
this particular controversy, he made a public quarrel, and of two persons,
two factions; calling all the Catholic Roman Church to warrant:
interressing the King in all that he might in this cause, and principally to
diswade the examining of the book proposed by the Lord of Plessis, whose
justification he knew too well that he could not ouer-throw. For which cause
he articled falsely against the said book, to draw unto himself the title
and quallity of a Plaintiff, and undertook to approve in presence of his
Majesty, five hundred heinous and gross errors, manifest and without
Hiperbole: yea such says he as they may be judged by the only looking on,
upon the opening of the book, without entering into the judgment of the sense.
And notwithstanding he offered himself further, besides that to make it
appear, that there was not in that book one only place but was either
falsely, impertinently, or unprofitably alleged. These were the very words
(which the reader may note) upon what ground he generally taxed the whole
book.

To this book notwithstanding the L. of Plessis in respect of the King, and
according to his own nature, answered with great modesty, revealing the matter
as much as in him lay from a public to a particular trial twixt the Bishop
and himself, from parties by him pretended, to their several persons. So that
by some, this same simplicity of his answer was scarce well interpreted. But
for that he knew that the said L. Bishop had sent a Copy of that which he had
published, and written with advantage enough upon the same subject to his
Majesty, he was counseled likewise to write unto him, beseeching him most
humbly to vouchsafe to enter into the approbation of his said book, by the
grant of certain Commissaries of sufficient knowledge, that might have the
charge to examine the same, from the one end to the other: in publishing
whereof he protested that he aimed at no other end, but to prepare his subjects
hearts, and make them capable of the seed of so holy a reformation in his
time.

The Doctors of Sorbonne likewise were suddenly incensed against this
proposition, apprehending a serious examination of this book, and perceiving
well in their consciences, that it could not take effect, but to their damage
and indignity: They appointed certain Deligates amongst them to make relation
hereof to the popes Nuncio: who foreseeing too well to what inconvenience it
might tend, sought out the King, to certify him hereof; Beseeching his Majesty
that it might pass no further: and laying before his eyes the issue thereof:
Annexing always to all that he had urged, most instant complaints against the
Author and the book. But hereupon there were some that assured him, that the
matter should be carried with such Art, and with such advantage for the Church
of Rome, as the Pope could not but content himself therewith, and namely in
these words: that the disgrace should light upon the Heretics, and
hence-forward the Nuncio remained satissied, who before had been in great
perplexty, which is to that end reckoned up, that the sequel of the history
may be better be comprehended.

Some few days after the Bishop of Eureux came to the Court, where he was
entertained of his Majesty with an extraordinary applause; every hour
whispering in his ear, suggesting him with all those subtilties, wc either he
could invent or devise, to bring his enterprise to a good end. On the other
side the Lord of Plessis, in what place soever he presented himself, either
his Majesty spoke not unto him, or if he did, it was so coldely, that he might
manifestly perceive, that he took small pleasure to talk with him; yet
notwithstanding the means of this pretended conference, was concluded upon
twixt him and his opposite, and the King thought it good to appoint the
conference to be held at Fontaine-Bleau, during the adiourniment of his
Parliament.

The Lord of Eureux arrived at Fontaine-Bleau the 27. of April, and the L. of
Plessis the 28. at noone, uncommanded, or uncalled: yet notwithstanding the L.
of Eureux would already demand an Act of his compatitiue against him, for
defaulting in his appearance but one day; and yet the Commissaries above named,
were sent, the day appointed for conference; and all this without either giving
him in word or deed notice thereof, yea at the presenting himself before the
King, he never spoke unto him of it, nor any one in the behalse of his Majesty.

These proceedings together with the precedent, being so extraordinary, made
him bethink himself; so that he humbly besought the King to grant him
audience; which he did the last Sunday in April, after some delays.

His purposes were, that nothing had more pierced his heart, then when he was
given to understand, that his Majesty did believe that he had used corruption,
especially in a thing so Sacred. That this his just grief made him desire the
means whereby his Majesty might conceive the truth, which was very easy for
him to do, if so be he had no other intention to know the same: that if the
affairs had been continued in their first terms, he should not be in any sort
grieved; for that if they had been managed with silence and discreation, his
Majesty should have had no other interest, but to have judged between his
vpryghtnes and the others slanders. But since that in truth, by the cunning of
the Bishop of Eureux it had been publyshed through the whole Realm, and
prevailed so far as both the Pope and his Nuncio were pryuy thereto, he saw
well that his Majesty should be made believe that it highly concerned him, to
sort this action to such an end whatsoever it cost him, that the Pope might be
contented, and the Roman Church aduantaged: Consequently that he had this
ill hap to have his judge interessed in this cause, to have his King and his
Master for a party opposite. That if the question were but of his life and
honor; he would cost them at his feet, and Sacrifice them to his service: But
in that he was bound to the defense of truth, wherein Gods honor was in
question, he humbly besought his Majesty to pardon him, if he sought just and
reasonable means to warrant and defend himself: and that thereof his Majesty
had sufficiently informed him, by the aunsweres which he made him from time to
time, that he was truly tried by the nature of his affairs, to oppose
himself against him. The motives which the L. of Plessis proposed to his
Majesty at that time, were these.

The 1. correspondent to the first proposition by him propounded to the L. of
Eur. that it might please his Majesty to give charge to the Commissaries to
examine and in order to verify, all the places of his book, as well for the
ope^ing of the truth, as the manifestation of his faith and honor, and the
rather because the L. Bish. had generally condemned his whole book. This offer
his Majesty was counseled to reject, in that he was certified by those that
directed this affayre, that it appertained to the L. of Eu. who accused him to
impugn such places as him list, whereas if the matter had bin handled
uprightly, the public interest was to know the truth of the book, and to
proceed likewise in terms of justice, that it ought not to be judged as a
contract, by some clause; but rather to be examined as an inquest, by the
deposition of witnesses, that is to say of the Places of ye Fathers; amongst
which if there were some one less answerable, it might not ^o^ all that weake^
the solid proof and perfection of the rest. But the truth was, that the
perpetual luster of the truth in the aprobatio^ of the places, had made cauil
and reproach for shame to hide their heads.

The 2. was, that because some one pretended that the first was too long, that
the Commiss. should examine only the places of the book which should be
impugned as false by the L. Bish and that those wc he excepted not against,
should be held for justifiable as touching the letter; the entire authority
remaining in the L. of Eur. to examine the sense.

A necessary means if it were sought, to attain unto the knowledge of the
truth, since that it was the question as ever to examine ye faith of the L. of
Plessis, in the allegations of his book: yet always without prejudice of the
doctrine of the Roman church, since that the L. of Eureux was always in a
readiness to dispute upon the sense. Yet was this rejected no less then the
former, and for the same cause; because the places not impugnable, would have
bin so many, as they would have ouershadowed the rest; and so strong and eminent
yt in presence of their light, some places sought out here and there, either
indifferent, or of small importance could not have appeared.

The 3. that if these two were refused, it might please his Majesty to appoint
the L. Bish. to deliver to the L. of Ples. such exceptions as he had against
his book, but at least the 500. heinous, evident and litteral untruths by him
prete^ted, and without ouer-vrging them, to the end that the said L. of Plessis
might prepare himself to give satisfaction: the which he offered to perform
in ten days, and to the end that no time might be lost, to begin from the next
morning, and continue every day after, in explaining (in his Majesty's
presence) so many of his errors as the hours and times would afford him
leisure.

A matter practiced ordinarily in all justice, grounded upon the offers made
unto him, and the express written words of the L. of Eureux, by reason he
says that he has coated them already: yet contrariwise calumnious, if he had
so said, yea that assuredly in that he has them not. And yet notwithstanding
all this rejected, under some frivolous aspectes alleged by the said L. of
Eureux, which some held for sound reasons; that for having named 5. hundred, he
was not bound to particulate them. That he kept his word if he nominated but
ten, or less; and further that it were too much trouble for him to write them,
and such like.

But truly by a former resolution between those that managed this affayre, it
was concluded, to give the Lord of Eureux whatsoever advantage he might desire:
and to deny the said Lord of Plessis of whatsoever Justice he could require; so
that he might scratch either by right or wrong, some number of places chosen
out of five thousand and more, to infer an appearaunce of prejudice against
the whole book.

Thus this three means were in all humility proposed unto the King, by the
Lord of Plessis, not only by word of mouth, but by a most humble petition
also, the which his Majesty commanded him to give to the Lord Chauncellor. But
after he had preferred the equitye of his cause to his Majesty by all these
reasons, which to him seemed most requisite, his answer was that he would
send for the said Lord Chancellor, and give him commission to bring the Lords
of Plessis and Eureux to agree upon the form: And presently his Majesty sent
for them.

The same day toward evening, the L. Chancellor sent for the L. of Plessis, and
began to discourse unto him, that the King had told him that he had committed
to him the charge to warn the said L. of Plessis to be ready for the said
conserence: and therefore that it must needs be that either his Majesty had
forgotten to command him, or himself, to speak to the said Lord of Plessis.
Whereunto the Lord of Plessis answered, that it sufficed, in case he would
remember (as he did) that he had not spoken unto him.

Thus after some speeches, he delivered him the petition that he had presented
to his Majesty; and because there was some difference about the form, he
desired him to vouchsafe to consider upon the three aforesaid offers. But the
two foremost were absolutelye rejected under pretense that the chalenger of
falsehood might set upon his party where he list: without respect that the
question concerned the quotation of a book, which (to speak uprightly) held
of the nature, not of a contract, but of an inquest: the disputation was wholly
settled upon the last. The said L. of Plessis pretending that since this matter
was spoken of as to be handled in terms of Law, he being the Defendant, was
not to be denied his Adversaries action of falsehood, that he might answer
thereunto. since that under pretense of form of law, he had been denied the
examination of the whole book, thereby to minister opportunitye to the L. of
Eureux to impugn him in what place he list. And that in this matter he looked
for Justice at the said L. Chauncelors hands, which he assured himself he very
well perceived in this his petition: otherwise, that besides that he should have
cause to protest against the said Lord of Eureux upon slander, he should
upon refusal of so lawful conditions have no less argument to doubt of too
manifest partiallity.

The end was this, that the said Lord Chauncellor sent for the said L. of
Eureux, with whom he spent some 3. quarters of an hour; then coming into his
Gallery, where the L. of Plessis waited his answer, he told him that the said
L. of Eur. would not hear of the delivery of his action of falsehood, much
less of his five hundred places. That he did not think himself bound thereto
by his writing; that the writing of them would ask a month and a half, or
more: that in terms of law to require a condition impossible, and not to
yield to do any thing, was all one, and matter alike.

The L. of Ples. replied, that in his opinion he craved but right before all
Judges whatsoever; that the Lord of Eureux in shrinking from his proposition,
for the examination of the whole book, had bound himself to his own offer,
that in truth he believed that he could not possibly perform the five
hundred untruths by him promised: well might he peradventure deliver in five
hundred pretended, since he had them ready told; since also that having answered
his book, he had no more to do but to draw them out: Otherwise, how could he
purge himself of slander? Finally the L. Plessis concluding that he might not
depart from this last course, and that the said L. Chauncellor (the next
morning) would make report thereof to the King.

Monday the first of May the L. of Plessis heard of nothing, but that the L. of
Eureux still stood upon his denial to deliver his five hundred places, and
still was at the Kings elbow to make him comprehend that this was not the way
to come to his pretended purpose: and the same day there arrived the President
of Thou, M. Pithou, M. Cas^ubon, and the Physician. Martin whom his Majesty had
most earnestly sent for; The last man of these being brought in by the L. of
Eureux, could not conceal his passion in this matter, but bare himself as a
party. To them did his Majesty declare, that he called them not to be Judges,
but only interpreters, in case there should grow any controversy about the
speeches, but reserved to himself the judgment. And here is to be noted,
that only Casaubon was of the religion: whereof notwithstanding the L. of
Plessis made no instance.

Tewsday the second of May, about eight of the clock at night, the L.
Chauncellor sent for the L. of Ples. to intimate unto him the Kings pleasure.
The sum was this, that the King had ordained that the L. Bishop of Eureux
should in his Majesty's presence open the book, and show unto him one after
another, those places wherein he pretended falsehood, to the number of 50. if
time would so permit: whereto he must presently answer in order as they
should be propounded: for said he, it was to be supposed that the said Lord of
Plessis having produced them, should at all times be ready to answer. (Here
let the reader judge what memory could be capable of so many reasons,
presently to answer so many objections; for must he not by that account be
always provided for all, albeit he were assaulted but with some?) Moreover
that if he could not fit himself to this condition, his Majesty was resolved
in his own presence to have the falsehoods by the L. of Eur. pretended, to be
verified in his absence, to the end to determine thereof according as reason
required: as also by his standing upon his words, he gave him to understand
that he concealed more rigor the^ he yet showed; still urging sundry times yt
he had that night to resolve himself.

Neither did the said L. of Ples. fail to lay open unto him the extremity of
this condition, which could not be so precisely imposed upon him, but with a
manifest resolution to oppress the truth in his person. That if he did not
plainly perceive a match made, he could well enough brook any condition: but
that he must needs be blind, if he could not perceive the same throughout
the whole progress of this matter. Likewise that that was the only cause that
he stood so steadfast upon his demand. As for the examining of his book
behind his back, so as it might be duly performed in his absence, the more
should be his honor: if unduly, the less reproach; as also such as should
have charge, should bear the greater burden, as well in honor as conscience.

Nevertheless, that all the world might see that he proceeded beyond all
reason, only upon a desire that his Majesty might be the more plainly
informed of his sincerity and justice, he delivered a fourth proposition,
which in writing he delivered to the L. Chauncelor, to this effect; That he
would be content that the L of Eureux should consigne into the hands of the
Presidents, of Thou and Calignos, either of the President Thou only (because
Calignos was sick) his 5. hundred pretended untruths, to the end that daily
he might in his Majesty's presence answer unto fifty of them, according to
the order of the book, that so much the more easily he might prepare himself
for those that follow: with condition likewise that upon the breaking off of
this conference, the same might be returned into the hands of the Lord Plessis.
The which proposition the said L. Chauncelor received, to report thereof to his
Majesty, and thereof to give him answer.

This matter thus reported to the King upon Wednesday morning the 3. of May,
and consunation holden with the Lord of Eureux, they procured the King to be
incensed upon this; that the said Lord of Pless^s required that the five
hundred pretended untruths should be committed into the hands of my L. the
President of Thou; That it might content him to have them committed into his
Majesty's hands, who had trusted him with greater matters; that his enemies had
taken no surer gadge then his own word: much rather therefore should a
Servant, yea even a household servant: thus overthrowing the substance of his
reasons with their great words.

Hereupon the L. of Plessis being sent for into the Gallery at Fontaine-bleau,
received this second decree at the mouth of the L. Chauncellor; That he should
in the Kings presence answer to the places propounded by the Lord of Eureux,
upon the opening of his books, as is aforesaid: otherwise that if he would not
accept of this condition, his Majesty would cause the book to be ouer-looked
and examined in his absence, and thereof to determine as he should think good.

And indeed so soon as the L. of Plessis had declared that (in regard of his
reasons so often propounded) he could not depart from his last proposition, all
the Court was warned to assemble in the great Hall, at three of the clock in
the after noone, to be present at this examination; (but it was again put off
until the next morning at eight of the clock) neither was there all that day
any other speech in Court, but that they would upon contumacy, proceed with
all rygour against both the Author and the book.

Many circumstances might here be added, as tokens of the stomachs of those
men, that had in this matter undertaken to satisfy the Pope: who also made
show of great commodity to his Majesty. But it may suffice that the same were
noted, even by the most passionate, who by the proceedinges, have in their
minds weakened the pretended success, throughout the whole course thereof.

Lastly about ten of the clock at night, the Lords of Castelnau and of
Chambaret came to visit the L. of Plessis; and in the Kings name, propounded
unto him that the L. of Eureux was resolved to quote unto him 60. places in his
book, whereunto he should in his Majesty's presence answer in the morning
at eight of the clock. The time was short, the hour unfit, and the match
manifestly made: Yet notwithstanding (such was Gods will) the Lord of Plessis
shut his eyes against all these foreseen inconveniences, and contrary to his
former resolutions, accepted of the condition; and to the end that hereafter
the force of the truth may appear, as no doubt it will, in that there was
nothing omitted that might darken the same; and yet in it self it will find
brightness enough to pierce through all darkness.

About one of the clock after midnight the Lord of Castelnau brought the 60.
places: this was but a wasting of his time. About two of the clock he had the
books of the Lord Eureux brought him: (For ye must note that he had none
there) the places were quoted simply, Carolus Magnus p. 816. Scotus p. 869.
Durandus p. 870. etc. without note of falsehood, and without any explanation.
The Lord of Plessis nevertheless together with the difficulty of his sight,
does in have peruse them to the number of nineteen. About six of the clock
in the morning the Lord of Eureux redemaundeth his books: at eight of the
clock he is commanded to appear.

Now again grows another difficulty; the Lord of Ples. tells the King that
he had no leisure to peruse any more then nineteen, even such as came first
to hand, as he light upon the books: his Majesty doubts whether the Lord of
Eureux will proceed; he has reason to the contrary, because the Lord of Ples.
has chosen to his advantage. Heerto the Lo. of Ples. answers that he had the
books but 4. hours, and that in the night; That out of five thousand places
the Lord of Eur. had chosen threescore such as liked him, and that it was very
likely that he had produced ye most sufficient: so that he besought his Majesty
to pardon him, albeit he were forced to say that this was more then
extraordinary rygour: Heerupon held they a consultation with the Lord of Eureux
for the space of one hour, who in the end accepted of the nineteen places:
also to afford him the more leisure, the conference was deferred until after
dinner.

This was upon Thursday the 4. of May in the Bath Hall, in presence of the
King, with the assistaunce of the whole Court. To begin, his Majesty declared
that he had no meaning that they should dispute of the Doctrine, only he would
they should examine the allegations of the places. Then did the Lord
Chauncellor proceed, who briefly did expound his Majesty's meaning. Next the
Lord of Eureux, who for his argument undertook to commend him, in that he
would not intrude into matter appertayning to the Church. And consequently the
Lord of Ples. who briefly did declare that in as much as it was his Majesty's
pleasure, he was there ready to answer for his book; that he never writ it
upon any ambitious intent, but rather dyuerted him therefro, in regard of the
preserving of his Majesty's most gracious favor: And also the zeal for to
prevail during his Raygne, for a holy reformation in the Church, for the which
many good men had long grieved. If to that purpose it might do any service,
he should think himself most happy, with whatsoever loss: otherwise, that
himself could be the first man to wish it burnt, yea even with his own hand.

Howbeit that he did hope that upon upright examination, all the world should
find that he had used all sincerity and great diligence: albeit it was not
greatly to be maruailed, that among 5000. places or more, there might pass
some few, wherein his eye, his memory, or even his judgment might waner: which
yet were such as could be of no importance, to hurt the truth that he therein
handled. For (savd he) were all the books of the Doctors of the Romish Church,
that have bin written within these hundred years, as rigorously examined!
where should we find one that could abide the proof? Besides (with his
Majesty's leave) he protested, that this was a particular action, and
consequently could not prejudice the Doctrine of the reformed Churches of the
Realm, which was before him, and should be after him, and so continue for
ever. And then did they enter into the matter.

The first place out of Scotus.
THe first place that the Lord of Eureux did set upon, The 4. book of the
Eucharist. c. 9 p. 869. l. 26. of the first edi. P. 936. line 2. of the 2.
edition P. 7^^. l. 25. of the 3 edition.
was taken out of the 869 Page, line 26. of the Lord Plessis book of the
institution of the Eucharist, namely within eight leaves of the end (here let
the reader judge what method this is to examme a book) according to the first
edition in quarto, which here we will follow, (saving that we will also in the
margent quote the pages of the second or third editio^) where we read these
words. John Duns, called Scot, near a hundred years after the counsel of
Latran durst bring into question whether Christ's body be really contained
under the forms; and disputes that he is not. Against wc place he pretends
two matters: the one that Scot makes it not a controversy, whether the body
of Christ be really contained under the forms, except in like manner as ye
Schooleme^ use to dispute of matters most resolved; as Whether there be a God?
Whether there be but one god, etc. The other, that the L of Ples. had taken the
opposition for the resolution; and in both these matters he pretended heinous
untruths. To the 1. the L. of Ples. aswered, that whereas he said that Scot had
brought into question. Whether the body of christ be really contained under the
forms, he understood it by the way of transubstantiation, and his meaning did
sufficiently appear, first in that in the Chap, which is the ninth of the
fourth book, he entreats of the absurdities and contradictions proceeding of
the transubstantiation. Secondly, because in the same it is said, A hundred
years after the Council of Latran, that is to say; after the Article of
transubstantiation was established. To the second; that albeit the Schoolmen
do dispute their questions, in vtramque partem, yet do they withal show
their own inclination, yea sometimes their particular resolution, saving that
they make it to stoop to the Church of Rome. And this did the Lord of Plessis
uphold to appear in Scot in the de duction of this matter, namely where he
handles the second member of this question; Qualiter illud est possibile quod
creditur; How the realty that is believed is possible. For after many
disputations, growing to the resolution, he uses these words, which were
showed to the Lord of Eureux; Scorus printed at Paris, by Io. Granion, Spon the
4 of the Se^. did. 10. quest. 1 pa. 63. b. lit. E.
Concerning this article, it seems unnecessary to have recourse to the
conversion of the bread into the body of Christ, especially considering that
even from the beginning, that this matter of the Sacrament was believed, it was
continually believed that the body of Christ alters not out of his place in
heaven to be here, and yet was it not thus manifestly believed at the
beginning of this conversion, as it shall be said did. xi. And let the reader
note that over against this Article that begins, Quantum ad istum artien'^,
nonvidetur necessarium, sugiendum esse ad conuersione^ pan^s in corpus Christi,
precipu^ cu^ a pri^cipio exquo res imius sacrame^^ fuit credita, fuit sempercre
ditum, quod corpus Christi ^^n mutatur de loco suo in c^elo vt sit hic, and
tamen non fuit in principio ita manifest creditu^ de ista conuersione vt
dicetar did. 11.
Quantum; it is quoted in the Margent, Resolutio-Scoti, Scots resolusion. So
that by Scots resolution the Church did not always believe the conuertion; the
conversion is not necessary in the Sacrament: Therefore did not the Lord of
Plessis in this place take Scots opposition instead of his resolution. And this
was gathered very brief by such as writ for either side, namely the Lords of
Grigny, Pasquier and Vassaut, as likewise was all the rest that ensued. Howbeit
in that which the Lord of Plessis consequently did allege concerning the xi.
Did. of the 4. book q. 3. Scots opinion did yet more clearly appear: For
after he has cited Jnnocent the 3. de offic. Missae, par. 3. cap. 26. to
prove three opinions upon this argument. The first, S^ctus in 4. sentent. D.
11. qu. 3. fol. 31. lit. B. Circa hoc erant tres opiniones, Vna, quod panis
manet, and tamencu^ ipso vere est corpus Christi: Alia, quod panis non manet,
and tamen non co^uertitur, sed decinit esse, vel per annichilatione^, vel per
resolutione^ in materiam, vel per corruptione^ in aliud: Tertia, quod panis
transubstantiatur in corpus, and vinum in sangumem.
That the bread remains, and yet the body of Christ is with the bread. The
second, That the bread remains not, and yet is not converted, but cease to
be, whether by being made nothing, whether by being resolved into the first
matter, or corrupted into any other thing. The third, That the bread is
transubstantiated into the body, the wine into the blood; He consequently
comes to ground the first opinion very substantially; in that he says,
(...) potest (...) ista Transubstantiatione.
That the truth of the Eucharist may be kept without transubstantiation:
Secondly, Et pancis inter^ctis. Substantia pants cum suis accidentil (...) a
que potest esse signum si ^ut sola accidentia; imo magis, quia substantia panis
subspeciebus magis est nutrimentum, quam accidentia. Ergo magis repraesentat
corpus Christi in ratione nutrimenti spiritualis.
That the bread with the accidents thereof does rather represent the body of
Christ by an anologie of the bodily sust^na^^nce with the spiritual, then they
^^oe by the only accidents. Thirdly, Et paulo post, Ponendo panem manner cum
suis accidentibus, and corpus Christi ibi esse vere, pauci^ra ponuntur
miracula, qua^ ponendo panem ibi esse.
That of the transubstantiation there ensue more inconveniences then of any
other opinions. Fourthly, Rursus aliquarto post. Mirum videtur quare in vno
articulo, qui non est principalis articulus fidei, debeat talis intellectus
asseri, propter quem fides pateat contemptui se quentium ratione^.
That it is marvel (says he) that (...) an article, which is no principal
article of says, they should affirm a sense or understanding, by the which
the faith is thrust forth for a scorn to all those that ensue reason. Lastly,
Sequitur immed^ate. Nihil est tenendu^ tanqua^ de substa^tia fidei, nisi quod
potest extpresse haberi de Scriptura, vel express declaratu^ est per
Ecclesia^, vel euidenter sequitur ex aliquo plane contento in Scriptura, vel
plane de terminato ab Ecclesia, etc.
That as nothing is to be holden, as of the substance of faith, that cannot
expressly be gathered out of the Scriptures, or that is not expressly
declared by the Church, or that is not evidently gathered out of matter at full
contained in the Scriptures, or plainly determined by the Church: Mox. non
caute^ non videtur express haberi no^ esse ibi substantia^ panis. Na^ Ioa^nis
6. vbi multu^ probatur veritas Eucharistiae, planum est vbi Christus di^it Ego
sum panis viuus, qui manducauerit ex hoc pane, etc. Et 1. ad Cor. 11. Pau lus,
Panis quem frangimus, nonne communicatio corporis Christi est? nec inuenitur
vbi Ecclesia istam veritatem determinet solenniter; nec etiam qualiter istud
possit ab al^quo manifest credito euidenter inferri.
Yet it does not seem expressly set down, that the substance of bread is
not in the Sacrament: but contrariwise S. Paul 1. Corrin. Cap 11. says, The
bread that we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? Neythere
do we find where the Church has solemnly determined of this truth, neither
how it may be inferred of any thing manifestly believed. Then does he
proceed and ground the second opinion upon the like reasons: yea and does
earnestly refell the reasons of Thomas as well against the^, as for
transubstantiation, which is the third. Lastly, coming to resolve, he wotteth
not almost what else to say, but that; Item so. 82. b lit. E. Co^muniter
tenetur quod nec panis manet, co^tra primam opinionem, nec annihilatur, nec
resoluitur in materiam primam, sed conuertitur in corpus Christi, etc.
It is commonly holden that the bread remains not, contrary to the first
opinion: And is not likewise taken away, or resolved into the first matter
(namely according to the second:) But is converted into the body of Christ. And
by what reason or authority? Surely (says he) this does Mox. Principaliter
videtur me mouere, quod de Sacramentis tenendum est, sicutsancta Romana
Ecclesia, sicut habetur Extra, de haeretic. Ad obolenda^. Nunc aute^ ipsa tenet
pane^ transubstantiari in corpus, and vinum in sanguinem, sicut manifest
habetur Extra. de Summa Tri nit. and side Cathol. Firmitercredimus, vna vero,
etc.
especially seem to move me, that we must hold of the Sacraments, as the
holy Church of Rome holds, as it is set down Extra. de haereticis. Ad
abolendam etc. But she now holds that the bread is transubstantiated into the
body, and the wine into the blood, as we have it manifestly set down Extra. de
Summa Trinit. and fide Cath. Firmiter credimus, etc. vna vero; that is to say,
in the decree of Latran. But what an answer here is to that which was so well
grounded? That we must held nothing to be of the substance of faith. but
that which is expressly in the Scriptures, or that is taken out of some what
plainly, plane, contained in the Scriptures, or that has been expressly
declared by the Church? Truly to this argument, wherein (says he) consists
the force, he has no more to say, but Ibid. lit. G. Ad tertiu^, vbi star vis,
docendum quod Ecclesia declarauit istu^ intellectum esse de veritate fidei in
ille. Simbolo edito sub Innocentio 3, in Co^cilio Laterane^si, Firmiter
credimus, etc.
the Church of God has declared this understanding, or this sense to be the
truth of the faith, in that Creed that was formed under Innocent the third in
the counsel of Latran, etc. The same we have in Reportat. did. 10. q. 1. and
did. 11. q. 3. for having argued upon the 3. opinions, and with the before
named reasons fought with transubstantiation, he particularly says. Idem
Repor, in 4. sentent. d. 11. q. 3. p. 20. imprime a Venize apud (...) Bapt. and
Joan. Bernardu^ Sessam. 1597. Dico quod licet substantia panis maneret, no^
auserret venerationem neque esset occasio Idolatriae, etc.
I say that albeit the substance of bread should remain, yet could it not
abolish the worship of the Sacrament, neither be any cause of Idolatry, etc.
Again, Ibid. Dico quod magis substantia panis cum accide^tibus repraesentat
corpus Christi, quam accidentia tantum eum mayor sit conuenientia substantiae
ad substantiam, quam ad accident.
I say that the substance of bread, with the accidents does better represent
the body of Christ then the accidents only, etc. Here note that these words
are his own, and so he proceeds to conclude simply in these words. Ibidan
opinione auctoris. Teneo conclusionem, quia Ecclesia tenet, Quia sides Petri
no^ desiciet. Et iam sub Innocentio 3. ordinatum fuit tene^dum, etc.
I hold the conclusion, because the Church holds it: For the faith of S.
Peter shall not fail, and now under Innocent the 3. it was decreed to be thus
holden, etc. A most euidentargument, yt the reason, that the nature of the
Sacrament, that the faith proceeding from the Church, yea that the holy
Scriptures would have carried it away otherwise, had it not been stayed by the
decision of the counsel of Latran. Dominicus (...) Soto in li. 4. Senten. d 11
Joseph Angels.
Consequently, an argument (as the L. of Ples. did maintain) that that which
he said, tended not simply to argue upon it, but to show what his resolution
had been, had he not been withheld with a strong bridle. And indeed (
Dominicus a Soto (one of their most famous Doctors, does not forbear to impute
unto Scot, that he held but a hard resolution of transubstantiation, as a
matter not to be vpholden by the authority of the Scriptures: And Joseph
Angles in floribus Theologi caru^ quastionum, qu est. 5. de conuersione.
a Spanish divine labors to defend him. Now upon the difficulty that our
Masters ye Commisioners found in the resolution, they referred the judgment
to an other time, as perceiving yt it was no matter of audience. Neither may we
here forget one School trick that the L. of Eur. played the L. of Ples: for in
as much as in Scots book that he had sent him over night, he had noted the
places which he purposed to use to maintain his allegation, he brought in an
other and of an other print to the table, that he might the hardlyer find it
out; which when the said L. told him of, he seemed for the time to make no
account, though afterward he boasted of it, and the like he did upon sundry
instances.

The second place out of Durand.
FOr the second, Li^ 4. de Eu char. c. 9 edi. 1. p. 870. l. 24. edi. 2. pa.
936. l. 31. edi. 3. p. 764. l. 11.
followed a place out of Durand of Porcin page 870 line 24. in these words,
concerning the same matter. Contrar^ wise (says he) admitting that the
substances of Bread and wine do remain, yet does there ensue but one
difficulty, namely, that two bodies be together, neither too great, nor
indissoluble: admitting the contrary, we shall find many; ^^^ely, how these
accidents may be nourished, be corrupted, how some thing may be engendered,
considering that all things are made of the presupposed matter, and therefore
it seems better to hold to the first, etc. In which place the Lord of Eureux
again pretended, that the Lord of Plessis had taken Durands opposition for his
resolution, and at the first blush with some appearaunce, because these words
are set down in the opposition. Heerunto the Lord of Plessis answered, that
Durand, had he not been withheld by the counsel of Lateran, did in the
deduction that he made, sufficiently show what his opinion was in this
disputation of transubstantion; when having propounded this multiplicity of
inconveniences, he plainly pronounces, and can not be weary of it; Durand
in 4 sentent. d 11 q. 1. fo. 274. b^ar. 9. Lugduni apud Gasp. a Porton. triu
1.56. Quamuis iste modus sit de facto, no^ est tamen negandum quin alius modus
sit Deo possibilis, ita videlicet quod Deus posset sacore, quod remanente
subslantia panis and ^ini, corpus and sanguis Christi essent in hoc Sacramento.
We must not deny but there is another means possible unto God, the
substance of bread and wine still remaining, albeit this means be indeed,
etc. Again, Artic. xi. (omitting these words, Albeit this means be indeed)
he repeateth the same. Item. art. 11. p. 75. Non eit tamen negandum quin
alius. ^od^s, etc.
It cannot be denied, etc. Again, Artic. xiiii. Item, art. 14. Satis etiam
durum est, and derogare videtur imme^si^ati diuinae pote^tiae, dicere quod Deus
non possit facere corpus suum esse in sacramento per alium modum, qua^ per
conuersionem substantiae panis in ipsum: maxim cum ponendo conuersione^ fieri,
difficilimu^ est videre, qualiter ipsa faciat aliquid ad hoc quod corpus
Christi sit in sacrame^to, etc.
It is hard and seems to derogate to the infinite power of God, to say that
God cannot make his body to be in the Sacrament by any other means but by the
conversion of the substance of bread and wine thereinto, especially
considering that admitting there be a connersion made, yet it is very hard to
perceive after what manner he does any thing, that the body of Christ may be
in the Sacrament. Finally, Rursus paucis interiectis. Patet ergo quod est
temerarium dicere quod corpus Christi diuina virtute non possit esse in
sacramento, nisi per conuersionem panisin ipsum.
It does therefore appear that it is rashness to say that the body of Christ
cannot by his Divine power be in the Sacrament, but only by the conversion of
the bread thereinto.

All this proceeding, and that still from his own sense and not from any other
bodies, so greatly does this new interpretation set upon the words of the
Sacrament torment his mind! Then coming to shut up his opinion, according
to the which the bread remains in the Sacrament, notwithstanding, the
reality, without laying away transubstantiation; Ite^ non multo posi. art. 15.
Si iste modus esset verus de facto, multae dub^ationes quae occurrunt circa hoc
Sacramentum (tenendo quod substantia, ^nis non ^emaneat) essent solutae.
Dubitatur enim qualiter ex hoc sacramento potest (...) quid nutriri, and
quomodo species possunt corrumpi, and ex else aliquid generari: quae omnia
saluarentur naturaliter eo modo sicut saluarentur, si naturae panis and vini
non assumerentur ad naturam sacramenti: ponuntur enim man ere post
consecrationem, sicut ante.
If this means (says he) were indeed true, many difficultyes remaining in
the Sacrament, by holding that the substance of bread remains not, should
be resolved: for it is doubted after what manner any thing can be nourished
of this Sacrament: also how the forms may be corrupted, and how of the same
any thing may be engendered. All which difficulties might naturally be salued by
this means, even as they might be salued if the natures of bread and wine were
not taken or employed for the nature of the Sacrament: For by this means we
do admit that they do remain after the consecration as before.

Still speaking in his own sense. Wherein we are especially to note, that in his
conclusion, and speaking in his own person, he repeateth the same words
that we read in the opposition formed in the name of a third. Because these
difficultyes, wherein he finds no sufficient solution, do stick in his
stomach. And in the end, how does he satisfy himself? Surely even as
Scot has before done. Et in fine ar. 15. Sed quia hic modus non debet teneri
de facto, cum Ecclesia determinauerit oppositum, qucnon presumitur ertare in
talibus, ideo tenendo de facto aliam partem, respondendum est ad argume^ta quae
sunt in contrarium.
But (says he) in as much as this means must not be holden in deed, because
the Church has determined the contrary: (Namely in the counsel of Latran)
which it is to be presumed does not err in such matter, therefore it is that
indeed holding the other part, we must answer to the arguments that are to the
contrary. And this is the answer that he makes; Ide^ art. 16. In his quae
sunt fidei non semper eligendum est eillud ad quod sequu^tur pauciores
dissicultates, etc. Sed est ponendu^ magis illud quod est co^sonu^ dictis
sanctorum, and tradicioni Eccleasiasticae.
We must not always stand upon the sense that brings fewest inconveniences,
but upon the same that best agreeeth with the sayings of the Saints, and the
Ecclesiastical traditions. He is wise enough for saying with the tenure of the
holy Scriptures, or with the nature of the Sacrament. And indeed the Lord of
Eur. should have learned of his Bellarmin that Durand did not sufficiently
believe transubstantiation, who in his 3. book of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, Chap. xi. has these words. Bellarm. de Sacram. Euchar. lib. 3. c.
11 Durandus docuit parte^ vna^ essentialem, id est forma^ panis conuerti;
partem altera^, id est materia^, non conuerti.
Durand has taught that an essential part of the bread, namely the form, is
converted, and that the other part, namely the substance, is not converted.
Which he does expressly confute in the 13. Chapter of his third book, and
cites Durand upon the 4. book of sentences Did. 11. q. 3. Here would our
Masters and Commissioners have referred the judgment, as they had done with
the former; confessing that the whole question deserved to be read, that it
might be judged by the course thereof. But then the Lord of Eureux found
himself agreeued, saying that it was in vain for them to dispute, if they
would not judge; sundry times speaking to the King to appoint his pleasure to
the said Commissioners. Whereupon his Majesty coming unto them, this Article
was decided and the Lord Chauncellor pronounced That Durands opposition was
alleged for his resolution. Here let the reader judge, albeit it were so, of
the words of the opposition, so plainly repeated in the resolution: and
Durand speaking no longer in a third person, but in his own person, afterward
likewise these clauses, Durum est, Temerarium est: It is hard, It is rash, etc.
Whether in so doubtful, so ticklish, so problematticall matter, the Lord of
Eureux might pretend any heinous untruths, even palpably to be judged at the
very opening of the book, at the bare sight thereof, where a man's judgment,
not his eyes, is in danger of failing.

The third place out of Chrisostom upon the first to the Thessalonians.
FOr the third, they came to a place of Chrisostom upon the first to the
Thessa. Hom. 1. Liu 3 de Euchar. chap. 11. ed. 1. pa. 5. 7. l. 31. edit. 2. p.
538. l. ^. ed. 3, p. 498. l. 22.
alleged by the Lord of Plessis in his book p. 537. li. 31. where he
examineth all the places of Scripture, which the adversaries do boldly apply
to the invocation of Saints, namely this out of Jeremy. 15. Ierem. c. 15. v 1.
Si stererint Moses and Samuel cora^ me, non est anima mea ad populum istum.
Though Samuel and Moses should stand before me, yet should not my affection
be to this people. In which place having proved by S. H^erosme, Theodoret, S.
Gregory, Hugo Cardinal, yea the gloss it self, that this place is meant of,
the intercession of Moses and Samuel when they lived, between the wrath of
God and the sins of the people; But not of any intercession of the dead
Saints unto God for the faithful living here beneath; he withal adds,
that here of Chrisostom gathers a conclusion clean contrary to that of the
adversaries: namely, That we must not stand upon the Prayers of the Saints,
but work our salvation with fear and trembling. Now against this place the
Lord of Eureux pretended two things. The one, that the Lord of Plesses had cut
him off in the substantial words: namely, if we be negligent. The other that
Chrisostom entreated of the intercession of the Saints deceased, which the Lord
of Plessis denied. To the first the Lord of Plesses answered, that he
alleged not the express words of Chrisostom, but only set down the sense,
because the discourse contained two or three whole pages, which he reduced as
it were into a Theses: and that indeed he alleged it, after the phrase of the
Gramarians, Oratione obliqua non recta. in an overthwart and not direct speech,
by this word, That he, etc. Therefore that he was not bound to the course of
the text. To the other, that in this allegation he had no other purpose but to
show that Chrisostom out of this place of Jeremy had not gathered, as the
Church of Rome at this day does, the intercession and invocation of the
deceased Saints: but contrariwise had collected this Doctrine; That we must
not generally stand upon the prayers of the Saints, whether alive or dead, in
sum upon other men's prayers; but that we must watch, pray, and endeavor (as
the Apostle says) to make sure our salvation with fear and trembling. And
indeed that this intent appeared in these words; Chrysostan 1. ad Thessal.
chap. 1. ho^. 1. sub fine^ p. 1414 editionts Groe^. Lat. Hier. Ce^melini 1596.
Et vt id seras. audi Deum dicentem. Si steterint Noe, and Job and Daniel, non
eripient filios suos, and filias, and ruisus. Si steterit Moses and Samuel. Et
vide quomodo hoc dicitur duobus Prophetis: quoniam ambo pro ipsis togarant and
no^ era^t assequuti, etc.
And to the end thou should know (namely that the prayers of the Saints do
not profit, except we do convert and turn unto God.) hear what the Lord says
by the Prophet; If Noe, Job, and Daniel stood before me, yet should they not
save their Sons nor their Daughters. And again, Jf Moses and Samuel, etc.
And mark how this is spoken to two Prophets, because both of them had prayed,
but had not obtained, etc. Thus that this place of Chrisostom was not
curtalled, neither could be, since it was but touched by the way and not
alleged: Much less was it wrested to any contrary sense, because generally he
speaks of the prayers of the Saints, albeit the examples were of those that
are yet conversant with us here beneath.

Now for the better opening of this point, the Lord of Plessis own words did
suffice, That we must not stand upon. For what is it to stand upon, but wholly
to trust, or to rely upon, even to the exclusion of our own duty and of all
other means? He did then express the meaning of Chrisostom, that the prayers
of the Congregation, of the Saints, of the faithful, each for other are good,
are to be wished: But that we should not sleep upon them; but for our own
parts do our duetyes: Also the course of the text will lead us thereunto. Et
pa. 14. c. 2. Nullus dormiat, nullus sit piger ad virtutem. Hoc enim est
somnus. Nescitis quando dormimus, quam nostra non sunt in tuto, quam facile eis
parentur insidiae? Quando aute^ vigilamus non opus est nobis tanta custodia,
Quando dormimus, etiam cu^ multa custodia, sepe perimus. Sunt and ostea, and
vectes, and custodes, and vigiles; and tamen fur ingreditur. Cur haec dico?
Quonia^ si vigilemus non egebimus alioru^ auxilio. Sin autem dormiamus, no^
multum nobis prodest alioru^ auxilium, sed etiam cum illo perimus.
Let no man (says he) lull himself on sleep, let no man be slow to virtue;
for that is a sleeping. Know you not when we sleep, how small assurance we
have, how easy a matter it is to rob us? and contrariwise when we watch,
there need no such guarde: When we sle pe, not withstanding all our guard, we
many times perrish; We baue gates, bars, boulter, watchmen and sentinels,
yet does the thief sometimes get in: Wherefore doe^^ say all this? because if
we watch, we shall not need the help of others; but contrariwise, if we
sleep, the help of others shall stand us in small steed, but we shall perish
therewithal. Of others says he in general: and what means he by others?
Sequiter im mediate. Bonu^ est frui Sa^ctorum precibus, sed eum ipsi quoque
fuerimus intenti operi.
Je is good (says he) to have the prayers of the Saints, but always provided
that our selves be attentive to our own works. And did not the Lord of
Pl^ssis say as much? Not to depend upon the prayers of the Saints, but to make
sure our salvation with fear and trembling. And therefore with what conscience
can it be said that this place is curtalled? as indeed our Masters the
Commissioners did not so judge. Now for the opening of the second, whether this
place of Chrisostom does commend unto us the invocation of the dead Saints, we
must consider what follows. Mox imme diate. Et quid mihi, inquit, opus est
aliorum precibus, cum suero intentus operi? Ne te eo redigas vt opus habeas.
Nec ego quide^ hoc volo sed op^s semper h^be mus, si sapia mus.
And what need I (says he) aliorum precibus, the prayers of others, so long
as my self d^e labor? Now (says he) ^euer bring thy self into that
necessity, neither (...) it my mind ^^ou should: yet if we be wise we do
always stand in need. But of what Saints? of the dead, or of the faithful
that live? surely there is enough spoken of that: neither do we doubt but the
Saints that tryu nph with Christ, do pray for the Church milirant here
beneath. But we are not come to that. For that they pray for the advancement
of Gods kingdom, or for our particular necessityes; that they pray according
to their charity that quayleth not: or that we may in faith pray to them,
haning no foundation therefore, are very contrary questions. Howbeit here we
shall see that Chrisostom speaks or the prayers of the Saints that are
conversant among us, grounded upon the express word of God, of whom (says
he) we stand in need; and yet does he exhort us not to rely upon them.
Sequitur inmediate. Paulus no^ dicebat, Quid mihi opus est precibus, etiamsi
qui precabantur non era^tco digni, imo vero ne pares quide^ Et tu dices; Quid
mihi opus est precibus? Petrus no^ dixit, Quid mihi opus est precibus? Oration
enim, inquit, fiebat sine intermissione ab Ecclesia ad Deu^ pro eo.
S. Paul (says he) said not what need I prayers? albeit they that prayed were
not worthy, neither equal with him: yet thou say what need J prayers?
Neither did S. Peter likewise say, what need I prayers? for (says he) the
church does make prayers for him without intermission; etc. Many other examples
he does also allege. Thus far then for the Saints that pray here beneath
for the faithful, desiring all good men to have care of them in their prayers,
which (says he) are of efficacy with God. But how? joined with our own, with
the duty that we perform in our vocation: according to that which the Apostle
says. Et pa. 1417. ex 1 ad Cor. cap. 1. Adiuua^tibus and vopis in oratione pro
nobis. Vt Ex multis personis eius qu^in nobis est donationis per mult^s gratiae
agantur pro nobis.
That ye labor together in prayers for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us
for many, thanks may begiuen by many persons for us. Neither may we here
forget, that when in this assistance they heard speaking of living Saints, it
was news unto them, as if it were not a common matter, both in the holy
Scriptures and in the Fathers, to term the faithful, Saints, even in this
life: not for that they are canonized by the Pope, but sanctified by faith in
the blood of Jesus Christ. Yer upon this ignorance they made sundry applauses.
Bu^d th he not here speak expressly of the prayers of the Saints deceased
for the living? Does he not exhort the faithful alive to invoke the dead,
to rely upon they suffiages, upon their passions or upon their merits? Et
aliquanto post. ex 4. Re. ca 19. Audi Deu^ qui que dicente^; Protegan^ hanc
ciuita^em prop er me, and propter David seruum meum. Sed quando? Tempore
Ezechiae quierat iustus, etc.
Surely (says he) God said, I will protect this City for my own sake, and
for my servant David's sake. Namely, because of my covenant in free mercy, that
I have made with David and with his seed. But when? Jn the days of Ezechias,
who was righteous. Again, Et in sine eiinsde^ page 1413 Audi Deum dicentem de
amice. Iobi; Et orabit; inquit, pro vobis, and dimittetur vobis peccatum
quoniam peccarunt quide^, sed non magnum admiserant peccatum. Sed hic ipse
iustus qui per preces tunc seruauit suos amicos in tempore Iudaico, non potuit
seruare Iudaeos pereu^ies. Et vt id scias, audi Deum dicentem per Prophetam; Si
steteris Noe, and Job, and Daniel; non eripient filios suos and filias.
And Job (says the Lord) shall pray for you. (Namely, he living for his living
friends) and your sins shall be remitted: But the same righteous (says he)
that saved his friends by his prayers, in the days of the Jews, cannot save
the Jews. And that thou may be the better informed thereof, hear the Lord,
who says: Jf Noah, Job and Daniel stood before me, etc. And out of this place
did the Lord of Eureux argue when he spoke of the Saints deceased. But by that
which follows, it shall most plainly appear that he means, if they had
been either to return in the days of Jeremy, or if they had been in his
place; and so did the Fathers understand it. Chrisostom in the same place,
soon after in express terms says. Ite^ p. 1. 1414. Si steterit Meses, etc.
qui dixit, Si demittas quidem peccatum, dimitte; sin minus, me quoque dele. Si
hic ergo nunc esset, and haec diceret non impetraret. Et si rursus Samuel, etc.
Si isti ergo steterint nihil proficient.
Jf Moses himself (says he) were now here, and should say unto me for the
people as heretofore, If thou will not forgive them, blot me out, he should
not be heard. Also if Samuel likewise: also if these, (Namely Noah, Job and
Daniel) they should not prevail: that is to say, coming here down and making
intercession as thou do: least thou should think my denial unto thee,
were in regard of thy person: Sequitur immediate. Et dicit de Noe, Iustus
perfectus in generatione sua. Et de Job. Irreprehensibilis, iustus, verus, pius.
Noah nevertheless (says he) and Job and Daniel righteous men,
irreprehensible, full of godliness, etc. That is to say, Saints. But if the
Lord of Eureux would reply, but to what purpose is this that he speaks of the
living, against the invocation of the Saints deceased? Surely because with
greater reason he might have spoken that of the prayers of the Saints
deceased, which he spoke of the living: These that are grounded upon
commandment, upon example, and upon promise: those that have no ground at all,
because also the abuse suppressed in these were of the greater force also
against them. In the end Chrisostom concludes his Homely in these words.
Mox. Cum haec ergo scramus, neque preces sanctorum contemnamus, neque totum in
eas coniiciamus, tum ne pigri simus and socordes, temere and insidiis
circumueniamur, tum ne a magnolucro excidamus: sed and horte mur ad orandum,
and ad manus pro nobis porrige^das; and ipsi virtutem sectemur.
And therefore knowing these things, let us not contemn the prayers of the
Saints, neither yet wholly rely upon them: partly least we should be
slothful, and suffer our selves rashly to be entangled in ambushes: partly
also least we should incur some great loss: (namely, the assistaunce of the
prayers of the Saints or faithful) but let us exhort them to pray, and to
lift up their hands for us: where note, let us exhort, which cannot be meant
but of the living, and our selves also ensue virtue. Of the Saints in the
conclusion, as in the promises, of the faithful praying for S. Paul, for S.
Peter, etc. of our selves praying here beneath the one for the other. For
whence should the conclusion grow but from the Premises? And thus, how far is
he from exhorting us to call upon the Saints deceased, or to trust to their
merits? Had our Masters the Commissioners had time to have read over the whole
place at length, as the Lord of Plessis did most earnestly request; would they
have stayed upon that which the Lord of Eureux did urge? In princi. p^^. 1414.
Job in tempore Iudaico non potuit seruare Iudaeos pereuntes, Job in the days
of the Jews, could not save the Jews that perished; Would they not by that
which followed have noted that he aluded to the place of Jeremy; If Noah,
Daniel and Job stood before me, etc. Si steterint Noe, Daniel and Job, etc.
Would they not have perceived that Sisteterint signified, if they were in place
where thou art O Jeremy, when he says; Sisteterit Moses primus legislator,
etc. Again, Sihic ergomure esset, etc. Et sirursus Samuel, etc. If Moses the
first lawgiver, etc. Jf be were now lecre, etc. And if again Samuel, etc.
that is to say, in the place where thou art. And so consequently would they
have judged that Chrisostom in this place, spoke of prayer to the Saints
deceased.

The fourth place out of Chrisostom upon Matthew.
NOw follows another of the like nature, Liu. 3, de Euchar. c. 13. adit. 1.
pa. 574. l. 16. edi. 2 p. 617. l. 1. edi. 3, p. 507. l. 39.
taken out of the page 574. line 16. where the Lord of Plesi^s says as
follows. Chrisostom seems to have tasked himself to beat down this abuse,
so careful is he to undermine the foundations upon every occasion. (Namely,
the invocation of Saints deceased, founded upon the pretended merits of
others.) He perceived (says he) that the people trusted more to the help of
other men's prayers, then to the amendment of their own lives: And therefore
fights against this opinion. (Namely, to depend upon any other whosoever.)
But (says Chrisostom) we have much more assurance through our own prayers,
then through the prayers of others, neither does God so soon grant our
salvation at others entreaty, as at our own: For so took he compassion of
the woman of Chanaan; gave faith to the Adultresse, and Paradise to the Thief;
and thereto never entreated at the intercession of either advocate or mediator.
Against this place the Lord of Eureux propounded falsehood by omission: Namely,
because the Lord of Plessas had omitted these words following; Chrian Mat. hom.
^. page 59 edit. Basi. apud Froben. 1558. Et haec non eo dicimus vt
supplicandum esse sanctis negemus, sed ne torpeamus neue supini ipsi and
dormieates, alus tatum mo do nostra curanda mande^^^.
Neither ^^e we speak this to deny that we should pray to Saints, but that
we should not be negligent or slothful, and so f^lling on sleep, or being
benumbed, we should commit the managing of our affairs to others. Where we
are to note by the way, that the copy which Chemnicius cyteth has these
words; Non quod negemus sanctus orare debere pro peccatoribus; Not that we
deny that the Saints should pray for sinners. Where by the sense should differ
very much; and in this case he would not have made such have to tax him for
omission because he should have gained nothing thereby. But taking law of the
common lesson; either S. Chrisostom in this Homely speaks of praying to the
living Saints, to remember us in their prayers; either else of invocation of
the Saints deceased. If of these, then does the L. of Plessis confess the
omission, and grants that he has done amiss. If of the others, what wrong
has he done, since they both agree, for there is no controversy in the matter?
But surely it is most evident by the whole course of all the Homely, and by the
examples produced, that he there speaks only of the holy men that make
intercession here beneath in their prayers, to God for his people, and of the
faithful praying each for other. In this Homely does S Chrisostom handle this
point, that even our Lords brethren believed not in him. And thereout
gathers this conclusion; That it is in vain to have any familiarity, either
of Country, Family or Parentage with the Lord, unless we labor to conform
our selves unto him. And therefore he says, Ibid. p. 54. Nemo de se desperet,
etc. neevila in re alia spem suam, quam post Dei misericordiam in vertute sua
collocet.
Let no man settle his hope in any thing, but next unto the mercy of God, in
his own virtue. To the same purpose he alleges; Et mox. Nam and propheta id
ipsum significans ait, Frater non redimet homo?
Frater non redimit, redimet homo? The brother redeemeth not, man shall
redeem, etc. Et page 55. Etiamsi inquit, Moses adesset atque Samuel tamen
little pro talibus deprecantium, non reciperem orationem.
Now (says he) albeit Moses and Samuel were present and should pray for that
people, yet would I not receive their prayers. Like wise the more plainly to
show us, that he speaks of those men, returning into the estate of this
life. (...) paulo post; Et si Samuel ^msum pro aliquo indigno deprecetur,
^^ntinuo ad ip^^m diect Deus Ne lugeas propter Saul. Etiamsi pro sorore quupiam
incompete^cur orauerit, audiet quod Moses etc.
And if Samuel (says he) should pray again for any unworthy person, God
would strayghtway say unto him; Mourn not for Saul: Likewise if one should
pray unreasonably for his Sister, behold here what answer was made unto
Moses, etc. Then does he add, Sequitu^; Habent enim vim pro nobis, and
quidem maxima^, orationes supplicationes quae Sanctoru^, sed tune cu^ nos
quoque poenitentiam egerimus, and meliores reddemur.
For the prayers and supplications of the Saints for us are of great force,
but when our selves also do repent and amend. And of what Saints? That shall
indeed appear by that which immediately follows. Sequiter immediate. Nam
etia^ Moses qui sratrem suum, and sexcenta illa milia armatoru^ a tam dira
liberauit ira, sorrem tamen suam nequiuit eripere, non quippe erat aequale
peccatum: Illa enim iniuriosius de Mose fuerat quidda^ locuta, illic vero
impietas erat quod perpetratum erat.
For Moses himself (says he) who delivered his brother and his 600000. armed
men from the fearful wrath of God: could not neuert helesse warrant his
Sister, albeit the sin were not equally alike, for she had spoken injuriously
of Moses: and on the others behalf the sin that had been committed, was
mere impiety: Then was it of the living Saints, and of the faithful that
pray for the sins each of other. There also follow many other examples of
the like nature: Of Samuel praying and being heard for Israel: praying also,
but not heard, for Saul. Of Jeremy heard when he prayed for some: and when he
prayed for the people, not heard: Of Daniel praying for the people, and not
heard: and heard when he prayed for the Heathen, etc. Et in fine eiusd. page
55. Equibus prosecto redolet, quod si negligentes fuerimus ac desides, nec per
alioru^ quidem poterimus merita saluati. Sin vero sobrie agemus, etiam per
nosmetipsos istud valeamus essicere, and multo magis per nos quam per alios.
Nam and Deus gratiam non tam aliis roga^tibus pro nobis. vult donare, quam
nobis: quo and fruamur liberate Deu^ compellandi, and emendemur, dum ipsi
studemus Deum reconciliare.
Whereby (says he) we do learn that if our selves be slothful and
negligent, we cannot be saved, no not by the merds of others: But if we sieve
soberly, we may by our selves, and much rather by our selves then by others:
For God will also show mercy not so much for then sakes that pray for us, as
for our own; that we might use the liberty of speaking with God, and
laboring to recencile our selves to him, might amend our bu^^s, etc. Which
again he proves by the example of the Cananite, of the evil living woman:
of the thief, etc. Sic Chananaeam illa^ aliqua^ do miseratus est: sic etiam
meretrici donauit salutem, sic latro^e^ nullo mediatore intercedente.
I^o whom (says he) God gave salvation, not that any Patron or Mediator made
intercession for them. Where then hitherto, where is any other invocation, or
intercession, other then the living Saints? not one word of the deceased. Now
do immediately follow the words now in question, and let us take them even as
he list. Sequitur immediate. Et haec non eo dicimus, vt supplicandum esse
Sanctis negemus, sed ne torpeamus, nevesupini ipsi and dormietes aliis,
tantu^odo nostra curanda mandemus.
But we speak not these things to deny that we should pray to the Saints,
but that we should beware that we suffer not our selves to be overtaken with
sloth and carelessenes: and so falling on sleep, commit the mannaging of our
matters to others. And then as in all other places, the living Saints, not the
deceased. Here will the Lord of Eureux say again. Why should he allege this
place against the inuccation of Saints deceased, since here is no mention but
of the prayers of the living Saints? Surely because he meant to undermine the
very foundation of that confidence, that men do repose in the holiness and
merits of others: as also, as we said before, that if we may not repose our
selves upon the prayers of those that do converse with us, whose conditions we
do know, and they ours; and to whom in charity we are commended by the Lord,
and they to us: much less upon the prayers of those that rest above (as says
Saint John) from all their labors; who (says S. Angustine unto us) do not
inter meddle with the affairs of this world: the measure of whose knowledge we
know not, as likewise they knew not the particular necessities of our
conditions. Otherwise, should they not be Gods? Whereof moreover we have
neither in the Old Testament, nor in the New, either commandment, example or
promise: Whereas the prayers of the Saints conversant here among us, one for
an other, stand both upon express commandment and ordinary practice. All
which notwithstanding, sentence passed for the omission: that these words, Et
haec non eo dicimus vt supplicandum sanctis esse negemus: Neither do J speak
these things to deny that we should pray unto Saints, etc. ought to have
been added, for the groundwork; that this Homely is to be understood of
Saints deceased. And all for want of reading the Text throughout, as the Lord
of Plessis instantly required: but the common error carried it away, as if
there had never been mention of any other Saints but of the deceased. As if
Caris Dei adgeniculari; Sanctorum vincula deosculari; To kneel to the beloved
of God; To kiss the bonds of the Saints, in Tertullian, and a thousand such
other places in the Fathers, could be understood of others, then those that are
conversant here beneath among us.

The fifth place out of Hieromy.
NOw follows the fifth taken out of S. Hierom upon Ezechiel lib. 4. Ca. 14.
Lib. 3. of the ^uchar. chapter 14. edir. 1. p. (...). l. 8. edit. 2. p. 626. l. 15.
edit. 3. p. 502 l. 16.
alleged by the L. of Plessis. p. 583. li. 8. against prayers to Saints, in
these words. Haerony in Ezechiele lib. 4. c. 14. ex editione Christ. Plantini
1578. Quod si in aliquo fiducia est insolo domino considamus. Maledictus.n.
omnis homo qui spe^ habet in homine, qua^ uis sancti sint, quamuis Prophet,
Legimus Nolite co^sidere in homimbus. Et iterum. Bo number est considere in Domino
quam co^sidere in principibus. No^ in, princip ibus tantu^ scaeculi, sed and in
principibus Eccleasiarum, qui suas ta^ium aoimas si iusti suerint, liberabun^.
Filios autem ac silias quos in Ecclesia genuetint, si fuerint negligentes,
saiuare non poterunt.
If trust (says he) be to be reposed in any, let us repose our trust in one
only God; for cursed is the man that trusts in men, be they Saints, be they
Prophets. We must not trust Principtbus Ecclesiarum, in the Principles of the
Church, who albeit they be righteous, shall deliver but their own souls, not
the souls of their children. Against this place also the L. of Eureux pleaded
omission, because these word. (Sinegligentes fuerint, if they be negligent)
were omitted. Which the L. of Plessis consesseth to be true (as he will always
do, where like matter fails our) not of any bad intent, for what should he get
by it? but because (as it seems) he relied upon the adversaries own
allegation. For in their ordinary gloss, even upon this very place of
Ezechiel, this place is alleged, and these very words omitted; and as we may
well think without fraud. Hier^ny. in Glossa ordinaria ^^^duni 159^. in
illuel Ezec^ielis c. 1^. Non uberabunt fil^ ^^euaefiuas, etc. ^onum es^ce
fidere in Domino, quam confidere in principibus. etc. Non secul^ tantum, sed
(...) iusti ruerint tantu^ animas suas liberabu^^, no^ finos vel fi^as, quos in
Ecclesia genueru^t.
It is good (says he) to trust in the Lord, rather then to trust in Princes,
not of the world only, but even of the Churches: who albeit they be righteous,
shall deliver but their own souls, not their Sons nor their daughters, whom
they have begotten in the Church. Also this place of Ezechul does S. Hierome
vnder-sta^d in like sense, as Chrisostom does the place of Noah, Daniel and
Job, returning into this world. Here again did the L. of Eureux instantly
urge; what makes this place against the invocation of Saints deceased, since
it speaks properly of the living? Whereto he was answered as in the former;
but the rather, because in the L. of Plessis book, entreating upon this place
of S. H^^rame upon Ezechiel, ensued these words that answered him. (...)
Obseurch^^, docentur (...) have sente^^^^lam nou (...) quod lautat. Deum in
praesenti saeculo sumus, sieve orationibus, sieve consiliis inui^e^ posse nos
coadiunari. Cu^ autem ante tribunal Christi, venerimus, no^ ^ob, non Daeniel,
nec Noe rogare posse proquoquam; sed vnumquemque portare onussuum.
And to the end we should not think that he meant not to speak but of the
living, writing upon the Epistle to the Galathians upon these words; Every man
should bear his burden, mark what he says: By this short sentence we do
learn, albeit darkely, a new Doctrine that is hidden, that so long as we
remain in this world, we may be helped by the prayers and counsels one of
an other; But when we come before the Tribunal seat of Christ, neither Job,
nor Daniel, nor Noah, can pray for any man, but every man shall bear his own
burden. Now the L. of Plessis urged him to way these words; sieve orationibus,
sieve consiliis: Whether with prayer, or with counsel: But he would not hear
him, saying he had not to do but with this place.

The sixth place out of S. Cirill.
THe sixth was a place out of S. Cirill of Alexandria, in his sixth book against
Julian, (...) 2 de Eu^^^. c. 3. ed. 1. p. 233. l 5. edit. 2. p. 239. l. 30. ed.
^. p. 139. l. 25.
taken out of the pa. 223. l. 5. where the L. of Plessis says. That he
answers the Emperor Julian, who objected the honor done to the Cross; That
the christians do yield neither adoration nor reverence to the sign of the
Cross. Over largely peradventure for the words, though surely not for the
sense. And therefore the L of Eur. pretending untruth, grounded upon these
words; He answers, because he answers not precisely in these words.
Heereto the L. of Ples. answered, that by his own text it appeared, that he
never meant to allege the words of Cirill, only he gathered the sense out
of a discourse, of a leaf in quantity: that indeed the oration was not direct,
but by the way, the Character of the text, not of any allegation. Therefore
that they ought to seek the sense and not the words: and the rather because
it has been often said, that the untruth should not be concluded upon the
diversity of words, in case the sense were to be found. And as for the sense,
says he, Julian said unto the Christians. Cirill. Alena. contra Iulianu^ lib.
6. p. 134. to. 3. Basil. apud Joan. Heruagium. 1566. Et o miserihomines, cum
serue^tur arma qure magnus demisit Jupiter, hoc est, pater Martis, pignore dato
non verbo, sed re, quod ciuitatem nostram perpettio protecturussit, cessatis
adorare and colere and interim crucis lignum adoratis, imagines illius in
front and antedomus pingentes.
Ye wretches as ye are, ye worship not Ancilia de coelo lapsa, and our
bucklers fallen from heaven, which Jupiter has given us for the protection of
our City, and yet ye worship the tree of the Cross, and paint the Images
thereof in the forefronts, and before your houses. Heereunto if the Christians
in those days had worshipped the tree of the Cross, what was there to be
said, saving, we worship it because it deserves worship, and not Dulia only,
but also Hiperdulia, a more especial service, even so forre forth as to bend
both the knees, yea to bow with the belly to the earth, even to invoke it as
living, etc. But what answer does S. Cirill make him? Et paucis interiectis.
Absque labor demonstrabimus elusmodi sermones a malis cogitationibus
profectos, extremam sapere imperitiam.
But (says he) we can easily prove that these speeches proceed of bad
thoughts, and rely upon extreme ignorance. And wherein? Saving in that he
did imagine that because they painted the Cross, they did it to worship it?
And therefore even at once he brings him back from the Crucifixe to the
crucified: from the sign to the thing signified: from the pretended oderation
of the wood, to the mystery of our redemption, (...), Nam (...) and do^^^^, qua
(...) omnibus (...) aequalia (...), and indi^unitatis solio considere, non
capinam tame^ arbitratus est se esse aequalem Deo, sed serpsum humiliauit,
formam serui accipiens, contemtaque ignominia crucem sustinuit vt corruptionis
abolueret potentiam: Vnus pro omnibus moriuus, and excitatur vt a mortis
laqueis humanum eriperetgenus. etc Vt spirituales saceret adoratores,
mortuumque faciens in nobis sensum carnis, filios essiceret Dei eos qui in se
crediderunt, etc.
etc. Our Lord and Savior (says he) might do equally with the Father, he
might sit upon the Throne of the (...), and yet never be imputed unto him for
theft, in that he made him elfe equal with him: but he humbled himself; he
took upon him the shape of a Servant; he contemned ignominy that he might
bear the Cross, to take away corruption, and alone for all men to dye and
rise again, to deliver mankind out of the shares of death. etc. To procure to
himself worshippers in Spirit. Note, in Spirit, and not worshippers of flocks
and stones; to the end to make us the children of God, by killing the motions
of the flesh in us, etc. And as concerning this wood, he says. Et paulo post.
Haec omnia recordari nos facit salutare lignum; and suadet vt cogitemus quod
sicut dicit diuinus Paulus vnus pro omnibus mortuus est, vt viuentes non vltra
sibi ipsis viuant, sed ei qui pro ipsis mortuus est, and resurrexit.
This healthful wood puts us in mind of all these things, and exhorts
us to remember the saying of S. Paul. One only dyed for all, to the end that
living they should not hereafter live to themselves, but to him that dyed and
rose again for them. Again, Et pa. seq 135. Vis igitur, vir strenus, vt
lignum quod nos ad recordationem omnis virtutis inducit abiiciamus and
relinquamus puerisque and mulierculis tua proponamus
Would thou (says he) wish us to reject this wood, that puts us in mind
of all goodness? and to set before our wives and children thy paintings. Namely,
as he did a little before discourse, the patrons of all uncleanness and
polution? Of the worshipping therefore, or adoration of this wood (albeit this
was the very fit place) not one word. And indeed says the L. of Ples. why
should it seem more strange in Cirill then in Minutius Felix, who does
expressly say; Minus Felix in Octauto, pa. 20. edi. Heidenberg. Lud. Lucii.
1^6. Cr^cis nec ^^oramus, nec optamus.
We do neither worship nor wish the Cross. Then in S. Ambrose, who speaking
of Helen the mother of Constantine, says. (...) non innum vtique, quia lib.
(...) eti error and (...) impiorum.
Hellen worshipped ^^ the wood for that had been an error and heat burnish
(...). Where the question concerned not the Cross only, but the true Cross.
Heereto the Lord of Eureux replied, that these places were to be understood by
the distinction of Dulium and Latria. The L. of Ples. old uphold that this
distinction was frivolous, unknown in the holy Scriptures, or Fathers; imposed
upon S. Angustive who^euer understood it. But he ere into would the Lord of
Eur. never enter. Lastly, that this great (...) (for he took pleasure in his
(...),) who had been a Christian, and was acquainted with the Christian
mysteries, would never (...) puted it (...) them, (...) it not been live. But
let the L. of Eu. mark, what preiud^^e he has here wrought to the sacrisice
of the M^sse, before he was a^^^e. And even there where Julian obiecteth to the
Christians, that they sacrificed not; saying unto the^; Cyrill Alexand. co^tra
Julian. lib. 9. Vos antem inuento nouo sacrificio non vltra indigentes
Jerusalem, quare non sacrificatis
And you my masters that have no more to do will Jerusalem, why doyou not
sacrifice, in finding out some new sacrifice? He will bear us witness yt the
christians in those days did not sacrifice; that in hew of the Jewish
sacrifices, which the^ they had given over, they had not as yet brought in any
new sacrifice: Even he, let us say with the L. of Eu. who should not have
forgotten the ordinary sacrifice of the Son of God, daily reiterated by the
Priests, had it been at that time in use in the Church. Here the King
himself perceiving that they could pretend no untruth against this place,
pronounced aloude that both sides had reason. And thereupon the L. Chauncellor
pronounced simply; That the words are not to be found in S. Cirill. So leaving
matter sufficient to infer, that the sense was neuerhelesse to be gathered.

The seventh place out of Peter Crinitus.
THen they came to the seventh place out of Peter Crinitus that the L. of Eur.
and his side had made so much ado of, Lib. 2. de Euchar c. 3. edit. 1. p. 223.
l. 10. edit. ^. p. 239. l. 3^. edit. 3. p. 199. l. 29.
taken out of the 223. page lin 10. Where the L. of Ples. alleging this
Crinitus, de honesta disciplina, lib. 9. in the Margent for his author, says;
That the Emperors Theodosius and Valens had made an edict in these words. Fet.
Crinitus. li. ^. de honesta discipl. cap. 9. Lugd. a^u. Sebast. Gryphiu^ 1543.
Cum sit nobis cura dili^^^s in rebus o^nibus superni numinis religionem tue^.
sig number Saluatoris Christi nemini quidem concedimas coloribus, lapide, aliaue
mate ria s^ingere, insculpere, aut pingere. Sed quodeumque reperitur tolli
iubemus; grauissima poena eos multando. qui contrariu^ deceretis nostris and
impetio qu^equain tentarint.
Because our greatest care concerns the service of God, we forbid all persons
that they shall not make the sign of our Lord Jesus Christ, neither in color,
in metal, or in any other matter; that they shall not grave, paint or carue
it: but we will wheresoever it may be found, that it be taken away, under
pain that all offenders to the contrary, shall be most grievously punished.
Here against the L. of Eur. pretended falsehood, because (said he) this law
was otherwise set down in the Code; namely, that it is prohibited to paint or
carue the Cross upon the earth, humt, in which word consists the force of
this law. The L. of Ples. answers; There can be no falsification, because in
Crinitus whom he has alleged it is so set down; that Crinitus says that he
took it (ex libris Augustalibus) out of the Imperial books, others
peradventure then the common sort: and it may be himself has read sundry sorts
of the common sort. That he cited Valens and Theo losius, who rai^ned not
together, and so he might confound their edictes into one: That these words
in Crinitus. Nemini concedemus coloribus, lapide, ali^^e materia singere,
insculpere, aut pingere, can no way be entered into the place of these of the
Code. li. (...). c. nemini lic. sig. salu. etc.
Lib. 1. tit. 7. leg. 1. where we read, Nemins licere vel in solo, vel in
silice, velta marmoribus humi positis insculpere, vel pingere: too far from the
letters or sillables, also from the text, to be either ingengred or corrupted
the one by the other. Contrariwise, that it was more likely that as
superstition increased in the Church in the days of Justinian, that Tribonian
accommodated that law of Valens and Theodosius to his time, by adding humi:
Which the learned Cuiatius, and after him, all other lawyers had noted in
sundry laws, as well of the common wealth as of the Empire. Whereof likewise
we have one testimony in matter of the Cross: for the punishment by the Cross
being by all Christian Emperors forbidden, in every place where the Roman
laws had Crucem, Tribonian put in Furcam. Infinite other like examples might
we allege. Besides there was no cause that this law should seem more
strange then the 36. Canon of the Elibertin counsel. Council Eliber. c. 36.
Placuir picturas in Ecclesiis esse non debere, ne quod adoratur in parietibus
depingatur.
It has pleased, or it has been thought good, that there should be no
painting in the Churches, to the end that which is worshipped, should not be
painted on the walls. For (says the L. of Ples.) if the Cross or Crucifixe
were worshipped, they were not then painted in the churches: if they were
painted, they were not then worshipped. To this latter reason the L. of Eureux
did reply, that this Canon was otherwise to be understood; namely, that they
should not be painted upon the walls, but upon loose tables that might be
fastened to the walls. Also that that was their manner still in the Diocese of
Eliberis in Spain. But hereof let the reader judge by these words, Picturas
in Ecclesiis esse non debere, for the question is, that there should be no
paintinges in the Church, either painted or fastened. And so did the Elders
understand it. As also our Agobard Bishop of Lions, who writ since the year
800. Agobardus Episc. Lugdunensis contra eorum superstitionem qui picturis and
imaginibus sanctoru^ adorationis obsequium deferendum putant. Qui liber
manuscr. extat in Biblioth. S. Victoris. Si viderimus pennatos Angelos pictos,
praedica^tes Apostolos. martyrs tormenta patientes, nullum ab imaginibus, quas
aspicimus, auxiliu^ sperate debemus, quia nec been, nec male possu^t facere.
Recte nimiru^ adeiusmodi euacuanda^ superstitione^ ab Orthodoxis Patribus
definitu^ est, Picturas in Ecclesia fieri non debere, ne quod colitur and
adoratur in parietibus depingatur.
Albeit we see the Angels painted with their wings, the Apostles preaching,
the Martirs suffering their torments, yet are we not to hop, for any succor
from the Jmages that we see, for they can do neither good nor evil. And
therefore to root out this superstition, the Orthodorall Fathers have very
well decreed, that there should be no paintings in the Church: that that which
is served and worshipped should not be printed upon the (...). Alleging the
words of this Counsel. All which notwithstanding the L. of Eur. grew out of
patience, that this place that he had made so great account of, was not
condemned of falsehoode: And therefore most importunately both with hand and
voice vrgod the Commissioners. Whereupon the L. Chauncellor procounced, That
indeed the L. of Plessis had truly quoted the place of Crinitus, but that
Criritus was deceived.

The eight place out of S. Bernard.
THen follows a place of S. Bernard, Lib. 3. de Euchar. chapter 15. edit. 1. p.
60 p. l. 9. (...). 2. p. 648. l. (...). edit. 3. p. (...). 12.
taken out of his 174. Epistle to the Canons of Lions, alleged by the L. of
Ples. pa. 604. li. 9. (for thus they leapt from one to another) where he
entreeteth of the conception of the Virgin Mary. Out of this Epistle against
the false honors attributed to the holy Virgin, be took these words. She need
no false honors, being as she is, at the fith^^s thereof: It is no honor, but
a taking away of her honor. The feast of her conception was never well
instituted. Which propositions the L. of Ples. gathered out of sundry places of
this Epistle. And the L. of Eur. pretend. falsehood against this place:
because (said he) the Lord of Ples. had omitted that which came between the
two clauses. Magnifica gratiae inuentricem, mediatricem salutis, restauratricem
saeculorum. Magnify the inuentrix of grace, the mediatrixe of salvation, the
restoratrixe of the world, etc. The Lord of Plessis vpholdeth that in this
allegation, he uses neither mayming nor fraud: No fraud, for he does not
dissemble the commendations that S. Bernard attributes to the Virgin Mary,
where. soon after he says; That in other places S. Bernard helps to
advance the same abuse, where he says. O man, thou have a sure access to
God, where the Mother is before the Son, the Son before the Father, the
Mother showing her Son her bosom and breasts; the Son showing the Father
his side and his wounds. What could be spoken more sincerely? and does not
this import more advantage, then the words that the Lord of Eureux took hold
of? Mediavicem salutis, the mediatrixe of salvation, which cannot be borne, but
so sarre forth as the Virgin was the instrument of salvation; Neither truly
any mayming, for the clauses are distinguished by great letters; and which is
more the same that concerns the feast of the conception is repented in sundry
places, both before and after the same, whereby the allegation does begin.
She need no false honors, etc. Neither has the Lord of Plessis herein hurt
any but himself, in that labouring^ after breuity he said not enough. baint
Bernard says to the Chanons of Lions. Bernard. epist 174. edit. Parisions.
a^nd Gu^^. (...). 1566. Miramur saris quid visum sucrit hoc te^ pore quibu^^a^
vestrum voluisse mutare colore^ optimum, nonam inducendo celebritatem, quam
ritus Ecclesiae neseit, non probat rario, non commendarantiqua traditio.
Numquid Patribus doctiores aut deuotiores sumus? Periculose praesumimus
quicquid ipsorum in talibus prudentia praeteriuet. Nec ver^^d tale est quod
nisi praetereundum sucrit, Partum quiuerit omnino diligentia^ praeteriisic. At
valde honoranda es, inquis, matter Domini. Been admones, sed honor Reginae
iudicium deligit. Virgo regia falso non eget honor, veris cumulata honorum
titulis, etc.
We do surely maruatle what toy has taken some of you in the heads to alter
your good color, by bringing in (note for the conception) a new feast which
the Coremonies of the Church know not, which reason allows not, which
ancient tradition does not recommend. Are we either better learned, or more
devout then the Fathers? Shall we presume or dare to undertake with perrill,
all that in such matters their discretion has omitted? Neither is this matter
of so small importance, that their diligence would in any wise have omitted
it, if it had not been to be omitted: But thou will say, the Mother of our Lord
must be honored. Thou give us good warning, but the honor of the Queen
must be done unto her with judgment. The royal Virgin (note for unmeet
honors) needed no false honors, being as she is, laden with the true tytles
of honor. Wherein we are then to note the true periods cyted by the Lord of
Plessis, even that which concerns the conception, and the other that touches
the false honors attributed to the holy Virgin, immediately and in one
sequence, whereby he was not bound to add that which followed far enough
off, Magnifica gratiae inuentricem, etc. For had he undertaken to set down
the whole Epistle, he prosecuteth the reasons, in regard whereof the feast of
the conception has no reason, in a long discourse, and toward the conclusion
redoubleth the same sentences, that he had set at the beginning in his
preface; Ibidem, sub sinem page Dico gloriosam de Spiritu S. concepisse, non
autem and conceptam fuisse: dico peperisse virginem, non tamen and partam a
virgin. Alioquin vbi erit praerogatiua matris Domini etc. No^ est hoc virginem
honorare, sed honori detrahere etc.
I say (says he) that the glorious Virgin conceived of the holy Ghost, but not
that she was conceived: That she a Virgin brought forth a child, not that
she was childed of a Virgin. Otherwise what prerogative were it to the Mother
of the Lord? etc. This is no honoring of the Virgin, but rather an abasement
of her honor, etc. And therefore says he: Et paulo post. Cum haec ita se
habeant, quaenam iam erit festiuae ratio conceptionis? quo pacto, inquam aut
sanctus asseretur conceptus, qui de Spiritu S. no^ est, ne dicam de peccato
est: aut festus habebitur qui minime sanctus est? Libentur gloriosa hoc honor
carebit, quo vel peccatum honorari, vel falsa induci videtur sanctitas.
Alioquin, nulla ei ratione placebit contra Ecclesiae ritu^ praesumata nouitas
matter temeritatis soror superstitionis, filia leuitatis.
Things being at this pass, what reason can there be to celebrate the
conception? J say, how can we affirm the conception to be holy, which is not
of the holy Ghost, J will not say which is of sin? Or how shall we sanctify
this conception which cannot be holy? Surely the holy Virgin can be content to
forbear this honor, whereby her sin shall be honored, or a false holiness
brought in. In another place; No novelty presumed without reason, contrary to
the custom of the Church, can she like of, Mother of rashness, Sister of
superstition, Daughter of inconstancy or lightness. Then does he afterward
refer himself to the decision of the Church of Rome, which belonged not to
our purpose. Now let any upright mind judge, whether there were any hold to
be taken against this place, whereupon notwithstanding for the satisfying of
his importunity it was pronounced; That it had been good to distinguish the
two places of S. Bernard in one self book (namely of this self Epistle) by
one, etc. Which nevertheless albeit repeated in two several places, do
immediately follow each other.

The ninth place out of Theodoret.
THe ninth was taken out of Theodoret upon the 113 Psalm, alleged by the Lord
of Plessis page 218. lyn. 9. in these words. Lib. 2. de Euchar. chapter 2. edit.
1. p. 218. l. 9. edit. 2. p. 234. l. 21. edit. 3. p. 195 l. 13
God (says he) does what he pleases, but Images are made as it pleases men:
they have the habitation of the senses, but senses they have none: being
herein inferior to the flies, flease, and all vermin: and it is meet that
they that worship them should loose both reason and sense. And the Lord of
Plessis had taken the most substantial clauses of this Psalm. But the Lord of
Eur. pretended falsehood in two respects: In the translation, because he
expressed Simulacra (...) by Images: for he would have it Ido^^^ In omission,
because he had not set down a Gentibus cul^a, worshipped or s^^ued by the
Gen^^^s: to distinguish them (said he) from the Images of the Christians. To
the first the Lord of Plis^is answered that these words (...), Simulach^a,
Imagines did usually pass for one. And this did the Lord of Plis^is offer him
to prove; but he would not enter thereinto. And indeed in the 40. of Esaias
where the old interpreter says, Simulacrum the Septuaginte say (...), Image.
And in the 4. of Deutronomy, the old interpreter tr^nslateth the word (...)
Imaginem, the Septuaginte (...). That the same old interpreter translateth in
the 33 of the C^^onicles Simulacrum that which the Septuaginte (...). And the
first of the Romans where S. ^a^^ says (...); Lombard, Caietan, Stapuiensis,
Osor^us, etc. ^^ue translated Simulacrum. In the Scriptures they are therefore
indifferent. For the Fathers, Just. Martyr in Tryphone. page 251 edit. Hierca.
Commel. Grae. Lat. Qut per Mose ^^sanxit (...), ne qua omnino sieret vel imago,
vel simditudo, neque coru^ quae in coelo sunt. etc.
Iustm Martyr layth, That God forbad Moses to make any Image or similitude:
where the Septuaginte say (...), he says (...). Tertullianus de Idolelatria
chapter 3. Ex edit. Pa^^chi. Ad hoc necessaria est vocabusi in^^ pret^tio; (...)
Graece f^rm^m sonat; ab eo per diminutionem (...) deductum, aeque apud nos
formu (...). Igitur omnis forma vel sormulo, Idolu se dici expos^it, inde
Idololatria omnis circa omne Idolum samulatus and seruius.
Tertullian; E^^^s, in Greek, signifies form or figure; whereof comes the
diminutiue (...), which we do interpret a small form or figure; therefore
every form or small sor^ne must be called Idolum. And thereof Idolatry, all
honor and service that is done, circa omne Idolum, to any form or figure.
Again, F^ cap. 4. Qui seruitis lapid^bus, and qui i^^agines sacitis ^^^cas and
arge^^eas, and ligneas and lapideas.
You that serve the stones, and that make Jmages of gold, and of silver, and
of wood, and of stone, etc. And again, speaking of the Gentiles; Item Eo^um
ima^^^^ (...), imagia^^^ c^^sc^ratio Idololatria.
Their Images are Jdols, the conse^ratioon of Images is Jdolatry. Minu^ius
Fel^x upon the reproach of the Heathen Celsus, cast in his dish, that the
Christians had no Images. Min^^. ^elix page ^5. edit. Heidelberg Quis dubitat
hotum imagines cons^^ratas vulgus orare and public colere.
Who doubts (says he) but the Heathen direct their prayers to the Images,
that these men have consecrated, as also that they honor them publicly with
religious service? and within three lines after, he calls them
notwithstanding Simulachra; Mox. Quod si in animum quis inducat tormentis
quibus, and quibu^ machinis simulacru^ omne formetur, erubescet etc.
If a man should imagine with what tools every Image is framed, etc. Wherefore
also it comes that Jsidore means no other subtilty; Isider. Originu^ li. 8.
ca. 8.
Simulacra (says he) a similitudine nuncupata, eo quod manu artificis ex
lapide, aliaue materia eorum vultus imitantur, in quorum honorem firguntur;
Jmages so called in regard of the similitude, because by the workemans hand,
whether of stene or other substance, they imitate the countenaunces of those to
whose honor they are feigned. Even among the Schoolmen, Thomas calls that
Thomas in 1. ad Corinth. cap. 8. lect. 1 Simulacrum quod ad similitudine
alicuius rei natrualis fit.
Jmage, that is made to the resemblaunce of any natural thing. Also Durand,
Durand. lib. 1. c. 3. in summario, art. 4. Idolorum immodicus vsus reprobatur,
modicus probatur.
The immoderate use of Jdols is reproved, the moderate approved, 1 of Images.
And in the same Chap. Nonsacies Idolum, thou shall not make thee any Idol.
Also, Simulachra Gentium Argentum and Aurum, the Jmages of the Gentiles are
silver and gold, etc. By such authorities (says he) the excessive and
immoderate use of Images is condemned, etc. Holcor likewise expounded a place
of the book of Wise^ome, Chap. 3. against the Idolaters;l In this part does
the holy Ghost begin to condemn Jdolaters, and those that do honor and
serve Images and artificial figures. Again, Ibid Exodi 2 dicitur. No^ facies
tibi Imaginem, neque vllam similitudinem.
Thou shall not make thee any Image, etc. translating (...), for Image. So new
a matter is this distinction between Idol and Image among the Christians;
Ide^ lib. 1. c: 3 Ex his and similibus auctoritatibus reprobatur nimius
imaginum vsus. Holcot in lib. Sapien. lect. 157. in verse. 10. cap. 13. In hac
part Spiritus S. consequenter aggreditur reprobare Idololatras qui colunt
Imagines and artificiales figuras.
yea even so far forth that Pope Pius the fifth, expounding the ten
commandments, confounds them in these words; Pius Quintus in Exp^^ca.
de^^l^gi ^^ae^^pto 2. In ^cripturis iussu D^i simula^ra and imagines e^^ictas
le^^^us, Cheru^^^, serp^ntis ^^ei.
Jn the Scriptures we d^eread that by Gods commandment they made Images and
likenesses, as of the Cherubins. of the serpent etc. Now against these
authorityes, which the Lord of Plessis would have alleged to the Lord of Eur.
he appealed for help to Henry Stephens Thesaurus (he should have joined with it
the Card. of Sens, his Calepine) where against they might with more reason have
opposed the old Glosser: S^mula^rum, (...), Lakenes, Jmage, Jdoll, Picture,
where all these words are confounded together. Thus much for the falsehood
committed in the translation. Now for the second, in the omission of these
words, a Gentibus culta, worshipped or served by the Gentiles; The L. of Pl^.
answered that of themselves they did sufficiently supply, in that the Psalm
spoke directly against the Images or Idols of the Gentiles; considering also
that in those days the Christians had no Images, as is already sufficiently
proved: which notwithstanding was no let, but that that Psalm and text might
at these days be applyable against the Images of the Christians, even as well
as they were or might have been in the old Testament against Images of the
Jews, when after the imitation of the Heathen, they diuerted to Idolatry. As
indeed the arguments did equally concur each with other; that they were made,
but not made; that they received honor of their color and metal, and shape
from the hand and pleasure of the painter; that they had the seats of the
senses, but were insencible, etc. Hereto the L. of Eu. replied that the devils
or demons inhabited in the Idols of the Heathen; which was granted him in
regard of some, but few, and denied in the most part and ordinary. The L. of
Eur. again replied, that in those days, and before the Christians had Images:
witness (says he) Theodoret (...) vestibu^is and porticibus ei paruas
posuerint imagines, hine sibi praesi^ium and tutela^ parents. Cum ergo
venirent innumerabiles; conabantur aute^ omnes co^trectare, and expelliceis
illis vestibus aliquam precipere benedictionem; primu^ quidem absurdum and
alienu existimans ta^ insignem sibi haberie honorem, deinde^tiam rem aegre
ferens vt nimis laboriosam, machinatus est illa^ in columna stationem: primu^
quide^ iubens aedificari sex cubitorum, deinde duodecim postea autem:
vigin^iduorum, etc.
who in the history of Saints, tells us that Simon surnamed Stilites, was so
famous in Rome, that in the porches of all their shops they had set him vpsmal
Images, hoping for suc^oura^ their hands; And this did the assistants receive
with great applause. Here let the reader note that the Author says (...), ^en
say: Also, in the porches of their shops, not in the Churches. Again,
Posuerunt, they planted the common people, ^ot the Church: But which is more,
that these honors thus done unto him did so grieve him, that he det^rmined to
cause the pillar to be built, upon the top whereof he purposed to end his
life, that so he might sequester himself from the world. Finally the L.
Chauncellor pronounced, That this place could not be understood but of the
Jdols of the Gentiles, and not of the Jmages of the Christians, as appeared in
these words; a Gentibus culta; and quae in Gentibus adorantur, that had bin
omitted. But in conscience of a Divine, is this any let why by Anology the same
may not be alleged against y^ Images of ye christians?

Thus were these nine places examined, and no more, because it grew late: where
may be easily discerned that the L. of Ples. who had strained him in the
arguing of the foremost, finding that he was disgraced by thy Kings presence,
whose religion, albeit not directly, he did impugn; and grieved with the
applause that seconded all his his adversaries sayings, withal seeing that
they permitted not the Commissioners time enough to read and consider of the
places; and evidently perceiving by all the countenaunces and circumstances,
that this action was prepared (notwithstanding whatsoever he could do) to his
disadvantage, did toward the end seem to sertle to yield more force to this
contestation; Unprofitably indeed employed, in that it had been in vain more
earnestly to defend the truth, already condemned upon the file. Yet was he
prepared for it, and had watched very late oue: night (albeit he had lost the
night before) to continue the next morning, had not God in the night time sent
him a great weakness of the stomach, with extraordinary vomits, not without
a Fever.

Upon which accident, the Lord of Riuier, the Kings chief Physician
counseled him to have speedy recourse to some remedies. And therefore the L.
of Ples. most humbly besought his Majesty to hold him excused during this
sickness^. Whereupon the next day the Presidents of Thou, Pythou, Casaubon, and
Ma^tin, were lycensed to depart.

Here let all such as have seen the Lord of Eureux writing, or heard him
speak in company, remember whether he has produced any thing answerable
either to their conceit, or to his own speeches, to their hope, or to his
promises. For where are these heinous, litterall, occulary falsehoods and
untruths, which might be discerned at the first opening of the books, and
found at the first sight?

Contrariwise, which one place is there amongst them all, where they were not
driven to enter very far into the sense of the text; and right, before they
could assesse judgment? Yet in the mean time upon these great words who was
not purposed to see the Authors falsely alleged, the supposed places, set
down upon pleasure to deceive the people? Yet who can doubt but that these
sixty places by him presented, whose force was to be perceived in these nine,
are the chiefest, wherein he expected greatest ad^auntage, ^ith be placed them
in the fore front of his battle, and in them chosen from among 5000. or more,
with so great leisure and labor both of himself and others, he had reposed
his pretended victory?

Now to come without passion to the very matter, what has he gotten, or rather
what has he not lost with all sound judgments in the examination of these
places? For what one falsehood is there either judged, or to be judged among
these nine? Or may in some one of them, the omission of some word, for the most
part indifferent with men of judgment, be of any force against the Author,
the book, or any part of the book? Yet let us yield them what they can ask
in these places, (whereof notwithstanding our selves without contradiction do
retain the best and chief part;) these places picked out here and there, and
in every place, can they relieve Transubstantiation, the invocation of Saints,
the worshipping of Images, overthrown throughout the course of the whole book
by the authority of the Scriptures, the practice of the Primative Church, and
the consent of the most notable Fathers? Scot, Durand and such like, who are
not alleged, according to the phrase of the Palace, but cumulatiue, as it
were to make up measure: which crossed out, would be no weakening to the
book: or kept, make it not the stronger: these are they from whom they hoped,
for the raising again of their Mass, for the proof of Transubstantiation in
the Mass, notwithstanding argued, beaten and overthrown by themselves, if
they durst have stood to it. And the like let us say of the most part of the
rest. Who therefore cannot see that where he seeks to make most best of his
force, he has made most demonstration of his weakness? where he looked to
have bleamished the sinceritye of his aduersaty, he has caused it to break
forth and to shine more clear and bright. Surely (for we may say it truly)
there was never Book either in our age or in the formerages (no not the quoyne
in the general essays) examined so severely or putto so rygorous trial. And
yet when they that have been made drunk with this smoke shall grow sober
again, when they shall be disposed earnestly to consider what they have
seen, what they have done, that the deep wounds which this pretended Goliab
promised, are less then small scratches: his blows with his club less then
phillips; what shall they catch, unless by the affected reprehension of
frivolous matters, they took st^edfast assurance of the infallible truth of
the principals, of the most firm, of the strongest? To speak Lawyer-like;
what can they judge but that these slight exceptions have strengthened the rule?
as a great man of our age said very well. It is no good proof of a matter,
that there is nothing to be repugned: but rather an argument to the contrary,
that it has been but superficially looked into: but that is well tried wherein
they reprove what they may, and find but little to be reproved. Were we to
examine with like authority and rigor, not the books of their particular
Doctors, but even their Cannon law, their decree it self confirmed, Canonized
and verified by the Popes; what one distinction shall escape notable
falsehoods, both in number and without number? wherein we shall not find the
places both of the Fathers and counsels, curtalled of their most essential
words; falsified, supposed, composed upon pleasure, to fit them to the profit,
authority or doctrine of the Popes? For to set down some example, leaving the
Donation of Constantine: the oath Ego Ludouicus with many others disavowed by
the learned. In the 3. famous Counsel at Carthage where S. Augustine was in
person^ the 31. Canon, speaks directly against the vsurpings and enterprises
of the Church of Rome. Council. Car^^ag. 3 c. 31. ^imiliter pla^^ut vt
presbi^eri and diaconi and reliqui infetiores clerici, in it is, quas habent,
causis, si de propriorum Episcoporum iudiciis quera^tur, vicini Epis^opi cos
audi^n^, etc. Ne appellent ad iudiciu^ quod est extra mare, sed ad primares
suaru^ pro^inciarum, quemadmodu^ and de Episcopi^^^^e de sinit^ e^^. Qui autem
ad trans marina iudi^ia prouocant, a nullo in Af^i^an ad communionem
re^^p^^nt^r.
That the Priests shall not appeal to any judgment beyond the Seas, but to
the Primates of their own province, as the Bishops have often defined:
likewise that such as should appeal to any judgment boyond the Sea^, should
not by any be received into the Communion in Affricke. This Cannon employed in
the (...)
Decretall 2. q. 6. Placuit vt presby^eri, with what conscience could they add
these words. Nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint, unless per^duenture they
appeal to the S^^ of Rome, which viterly overthrows the meaning of the
Counsel? In the 73. Canon it was said; Council. ciu^dem. c. 73. Placuit vt
Presbyteri, Episeopi and Diaconi propriis terminis etiam a suis abs^niant
^xoribus: quod nisi fecerint Ecclesiastico ordine moueantur.
It has seemed good that the Priests, Bishops and Deacons in their proper
turns should abstain even from their wives. Wherein it appears that they
were married, and notwithstanding their orders, kept their wives, but as their
course came about to serve, they did abstain, according likewise to the Canon
of the sixth Counsel: With what credit have they inserted it into the
decrees? C. Pla^^^^t. did. 32.
d. 32. Cha. Placuit, cutting of these words, Propriis terminis, in their
proper turns, in the course of their service, which make the whole sense to
bring in single li^e instead of marriage. S. Augustine likewise declaring which
were Canonical Scriptures, whereupon every Christians faith should depend:
said, August. de. doctr. Christ. lib. 2. c. 8. In Canonicis aut^n: Scripturis,
Eccles^arum Catholicatum quamplurium sequatur auctorita^em, inter quas san^.
illae sunt, quae Apostolica ^ ^edes h^bere and Epistolas accipere merue^unt.
Tenebitigitur hune modu^ in Scripturis Canonicis, vt eas quae ab omnibus
accipiantur Ecclesiis Catholicis, praeponat eis quas quaedam non accipiunt, etc.
In the Canon^cal Scriptures of the Churches, let them follow the authority of
the most part, among the which (namely Churches) those indeed are, which have
deserved either to be the Seas of the Apostles, or to receive Epistles, (as
Rome, Ephesus, Corinthus, Thessolonica, etc.) to pres^r those that all the
Catholic Churches do receive, before such as some do not receuie, etc. With
what shamelessenes could they cite this place in these words. In Canonicis.
did. 19 Inter quas fane ^llae sint quas Aposlolica seeds habere and ab ea alii
meruerunt accip^re Epistolas, etc.
Among which indeed let those be which the Apostolic Sea has deserved to
receive, and which the other Churches have deserved or had the favor to
receive from her: So to make S. Augustine, who never thought of it, to Canonize
the Decretals of all the Popes: and that, even by quoting this Cannon by name
out of S. Augustine 2. book de Doctrina Christiana. To be short, In summario
supradicti Canonis ciusd. did. 19. Inter Canonicas Scripturas Decretales
Epistolae connumerantur.
The Decretall Epistles are accounted among the Canonic^ll Scriptures,
falsehoodes indeed, truly litteral, and indeed destroyers of the sense, such
indeed as the L. of Eur. did promise, not such as he did produce. And of this
quote only in the decree we may show them whole hundreds, whole Chiliade^^ and
(to stand upon the very terms of the Lord of Eureux) of persect tale without
amplification. The like may we say of the Master of the sentences, whom the
Schoolmen have taken for their text of all their commentaries, for the
argument of all their studies; at every fields length corrupting the places of
the Fathers, to accommodate them to the doctrine of his time. And in three
leaves that the L. of Eu. has put to printing in all his life (how may it then
be in these great volumes?) he cannot escape free from the like crime.

Thus have you heard ye true proceedings and history of this Conference, which
I was forced to set down because the people were brought into a wrong
immagination, under color of the copy of a certain letter that was printed
and published all about, read in the Pulpits, and distributed through all the
parrishes in the Realm: even so far forth that the L. of Ples. coming to
Saumur, found there above 100. Coppies, part printed at Teurs, part coppyed by
the commandment of some of the bench, by all the notaryes in the town,
whereby the inhabitants began to murmr one against another. It is therefore
but a sinall matter to let the L. of Eur. fly pass for an Elephant, and an
illusion that shall go: Truth will overcome in a short time. But let his
Majesty in discretion, take order that this spark, cast out at adventure, and
husbanded contrary to his meaning, by the enemies of quietness, proceed not to a
fire of sedition among his people. And God of his grace, grant him long to
Reign, in all felicity and peace to his glory, and the quiet of the kingdom.
Amen.

FINIS.

