AN ORATION MADE ON THE PART OF THE LORDS SPIRITVALL,

In the Chamber of the Third Estate (or Communalty) of France, upon the Oath
(pretended Of Allegiance) exhibited in the late General Assembly of the three
Estates of that Kingdom:

By the Lord Cardinal of PERON, Archbishop of Sens, Primate of Gaul and
Germany, Great Almenour of France etc.

Translated into English, according to the French Copy, lately printed at
Paris, by Antoine Estiene.

Whereunto is adjoined a Preface, by the Translatour.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XVI.

THE PREFACE OF THE Translatour, to the Reader.
THOUGH worldly men, whose souls are swallowed up in sense, be content to make
their purse of gold their God, by occasion whereof S. Paul thought good to say,
that covetousness was no beter the^ a kind of sacrifice to Idols: yet such as
are not wholly deaf to the voice of reason, may hear it protest, that as man
is compou^ded of flesh and spirit, so his spiritual goods are inco^parably
superior to the corporal, and that riches are to be held of the meanest and
lowest rank, among all such benefits as God Almighty has vouchsafed to
mankind. For as those things which men have any color to account their own,
are either plenty of fortune, health of body, glory of reputation, or lastly
the soul it self; so, who is he that will not empty his purse to recover his
health, or save his life? What man of worth will not despise his life to
preserve his honor? And who doubts but that the respect of honor should
yield unto the care which a man ought to have of his soul? Hereupon may be
grounded, amongst others, two apparent truths; The one, that for the soul a
man is to despise all other things; the other, that except the soul, there is
nothing so dear as reputation. Now, if reputation be so precious, for as much
as concerns the moral man, what account ought Christians to have it in, since
scandals are often given and taken, upon the abundance or defect thereof; and
sometimes upon the credit of a few, depends the salvation of very many. The
enemy of mankind who knows how true this is, has continually labored to rob
Gods servants of so great a Jewel; yea and has presumed to infame God
himself, being made man for us; sometimes tempting men to traduce him as a
Coniurer, sometimes as a Samaritane, which did import a Schismatike, and
sometimes as a traiterous and seditious person. The same style he held with the
Christians of the Primitive Church, and we English Catholics of this age,
whose cause is the same with theirs, have lain groaning long under the same
burden, and felt with unspeakable grief, though with undaunted courage, the
poisoned arrows of this kind, which he has been daily shooting into our
sides.

Those Adversaries of our cause who believe in God but for fashion-sake, at
least conceive that it importes not after what fashion he be served, think they
do us a favor, when they call us fools, for exposing our selves to
persecution upon the differences of Catholic and protestant Religion. Such
Protestants as in good earnest believe that Religion, which they profess, are
wont to traduce us for superstitious and Idolatrous persons, under the pretense
of our doctrines which concern the Real presence, and the reverent use which
we make of Images: But they who use their Religion no more then for a servant,
or rather slave to their absurd reason of state, and know well enough that if
they should persecute us under the only title of Heretics, they must be feign
both to disclayme from the Society of al ancient Christians, and should be
forced to deserve the censure of savage cruelty, for presuming to condemn that
faith, to which their ancestors and ours were converted from Paganism: they,
I say, are the men who give out, that we are not unjustly persecuted for our
religion, but justly punished for our faction, disobedience, and treason.

For the painting over of which discourse, how many industries have been used;
how many Jewels and Cupbordes of plate to foreign Princes and Ambassadors
have been presented; how many crafty and cruel laws have been at several
times procured and enacted; and lastly what a couple of dangerous and
detestable. Oaths, under the authority of the aforesaid laws, have with
extreme rigor, and without distinction of sex or age, been propounded and
exacted?

The first of these Oaths, is that of the Kings Supremacy, devised heretofore
by our Adversaries for the making of all Catholics express Traitors, and
executed for a while with great severity, though afterward they grew half
ashamed thereof. And the use which it affoardes at this day, is chiefly to
distinguish such persons, as adore the present state of things, from others
who are more indifferent: and so we see it is ordinarily ministered, but to
such, as either pretend to make Laws by voice in Parliament, or else to carry
Office in the Common wealth or Church. Always that Oath served rather to other
ends, then to make division, or procure mutual scandalls among English
Catholics, since we all agree in the clear detestation thereof; and for this
later purpose, the other Oath, which is called of Allegiance, was set on foot,
by the instigation of some Ministers, immediately after the powder treason, as
if every one that did refuse to take it, were guilty of that prodigious plot.
Withal, it was couched in such cunning and mysty terms, as some Priests (yea
even since the Pope condemned it) have not been ashamed to take it, and more
lay Catholics have been led on by their bad example. This action of theirs,
has implied a kind, of disloyalty in them that refused the same; and the State
has not been a little careful to publish the brute thereof, both within and
without the Realm, to the extreme disadvantage, and discomfort of all sincere
and solid Catholics.

There has not been a greater means toward the strengthening of foul
aspersions upon us, then the confidence which our Adversaries, the Ministers,
have used in protesting, that we English Catholics who refuse the Oath, are
controlled by many great parts of Christendom, even Catholic, where men
would undoubtedly (say they) have taken such an Oath as this, if they were
required thereunto by their several Princes. In particular the example of
France has been every day obtruded to us, as if the Catholic part of that
Kingdom were wholly of the English Protestant faith in this particuler^ And
although this undertaking of theirs, were known to be impudent and most
untrue, by the industry of some English Catholics, who informed themselves of
the Sorbon, which is the Divinity, School of Paris, and found that it abhorred
the Oath; yet partly by the confident asseuerations of our adversaries, partly
by the corrupt belief in that point, which some one of the Ambassadors of
that Country, residing heretofore in England, was fallen to, and the flattering
discourse which for hope of reward he was wont to hold; so it is that the
ordinary sort of Protestants conceived all this while, that French Catholics
were in this point agreeing rather with the Parliament in England, then the
Church of Rome.

But, God be praised, the curtain is drawn at length, which heretofore has
parted the stage from the attyring house, and now the spectatours (who are as
many of our Country, as can write and read) may se^ that such as plead the
parts of civil, rich, and religious persons, are many of them no better then
insolent, beggarly, and lewd companions. This work is perform^d in this
Oration following (wherewith I have thought good to present the courteous
Reader) composed and pr^noun^ed by that ornament of our age, the Cardinal of
Peron; a man so well known to the world, for the great childs portion which
the father of all good things has allotted out unto him, of incomparable
learning, prudence, and zeal toward the Catholic Faith. It pleased God by
his means long since to convert the last King of France from his erroneous
belief; to make the said Cardinal, amongst others, an Instrument of
compounding that business of the Venetians, whereupon the peace of the Church
did in some sort depend; and now this honor was only wanting to him, that he
should be the means to restore one of the noblest members of the Church (for
so we may without any vanity, to the glory of God, esteem the English
Catholics, who with so admirable grace, and strength are still swimming through
the bitter waves of persecution) to the honor of only suffering for that
faith, which other Catholic Countries do profess, whereof our Adversaries have
studied so earnestly to deprive us, whilst they say, the doctrine contained in
the Oath of Allegiance is impugned by us, out of singularity, or seditious
humor, and that our next neighboring Churches, of the same Communion, would
acknowledge and confess the same.

But I must not reflect so particulerly upon the dignity of the Cardinals
person, and the extreme obligation which al good English Catholics have to
him, as thereby to neglect the setting forth of the aduanta^e which our cause
has got by his Oration. For although it were not a matter of small importance
if it had been deliuer^d by himself but as a private man: yet it ought to rise
to another manner of accoumpt, when it appears, that, as the style thereof
was ordered by his eloquence, and the sound thereof pronounced by his voice; so
also the substance and strength of it, did spring even from the heart root of
the whole Clergy of France represented by those Archbishops, and Bishops, and
other Prelates there assembled, and was both joyfully received, and clearly
auowed by the whole Nobility of France, assembled also and represented in lik
manner. Now to the end, good Reader, that thou may^st run through with mo^e
facility, and be able with more syncerity to discern of that which is
contained in the Oration, I will make thee acquainted with the occasion thereof,
and premise also some few other things, whereof perhaps thou art ignoran^, and
which may serve to set thy judgment straight in that which follows.

The Parlaments in France have no resemblance to ours in England, but are
certain sedentary and supreme Courts of Justice, compounded only of Lawyers,
who judge without appeal within their several precinctes of Jurisdiction. Of
these Courts there are eight in France, all independent on of another, though
the Parliament of Paris have a Country under it of greater extent, and by
residing in that City, which is the ordinary habitation of the French Kings,
it has grown to that kind of am^ition and usurpation, which some Patriarchs
of Constantinople, and some Bishops of Rauenna have been subject to in
different causes, but upon like occasions. That which in France does answer
the nature of our English Parliament, is the holding of the three Estates
General, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Communalty (which last is called
the Third Estate;) but it is with this difference, amongst others, that they
sit in three several Chambers, whereas the two former of ours sit in one and
whereas, with us, an Act is not presented to the King, unless the mayor part of
both our Houses or Chambers do find it good; in France if the mayor part of
two Chambers do resolve upon any proposition, it is to go under the name of all
the Three Estates, although one of them should dissent therein.

This supposed, I will proceed to inform thee, courteous Reader, that the
greater number of the deputies of the third Chamber, in this last Assembly of
the Estates in France, did conceive, and frame the form of an Oath, which they
wished might be ministered in that Kingdom, as that which bears the name of
Allegiance is in ours; whereby the same principal Article is ^biured, namely,
that no French King can be deposed, nor his subjects absolved from their
obedience, by any Pope, for any cause whatsoever; and that the contrary opinion
is Heretical, and repugnant to the doctrine of the Scriptures. But this
difference is found between the two Oaths, that whereas the English one, in
one of the clauses, seems to exclude not only the authority of the Church over
Kings, but even of the Common wealth also (yea though it should be accompanied
with that of the Church:) that of France shoo^es only at the abnegation of the
Churches authority. Nor is there a man in that Kingdom who appears to h ld,
that Kings in certain cases are not subject to the censure of the Common
wealth. And as for the Parliament of Paris in particular, who knows not, that
diverse of that body have now helped to animate the Prince of Conde and his
accomplices, to take arm^s against the King and Queen of France, upon the
supposall which they make of the ill Government of that Kingdom. But howsoever
tha^ case stands, this Oath was drawn by the Chamber of the Communalty, which
in France is called the Third Estate, and rejected, as containing false and
wicked doctrine, by both the Chambers of the Clergy, and Nobility, and
consequently for the reason that I gave before, by the Estate General. Some
man perhaps amongst o^r English adversaries may object, that notwithst^nding
the custom and style of France does bear that whatsoever is authorized, or
repr^oued by any two of the Chambers, does take the name of all the thre^, yet
it makes exceeding^y for the credit of our Oath of Allegiance, that they of the
Third Estate in France, which is the greatest member of that body, should c
nspire in opinion with the Authors of our English Oath, though they be of a
contrary Religion to the Protestant in other things, and esteemed the most
devout professors of it in that Kingdom. I answer that this argument may
look fair a far off, but with such as know how things were carried, it will
fall out to be of no force at all.

It is to be understood, that this Chamber of the Third Estate was wholly, in
effect, compounded of Lawyers, (most of them belonging to the Court of
Parliament of Paris) and certain Officers of the Long Robe, belonging to the
King, as Treasurers, Receauers, and such like; who commonly being the chiefest
men of their Parish, are wont with such case to procure themselves to be chosen
deputies, as an English Gentleman of means and credit, can make himself in
like case be made a Burgess. By this means there were very few places in the
Third Chamber, which were filled by Freeholders, or substantial Merchants of
those Cities and Provinces, and therefore no marvel, if under the name of
the Commons of France, who are perhaps of the most pious men of that Kingdom
(and whereof there was in this Assembly of Estates no more in effect but the
name) this wicked proposition of a profane Oath did come to light, being
conceived partly by the Kings Officers (who crept into those places, expressly
against the Laws of France, and who make no scruple to flatter their King with
fair words, upon condition they may the more securely rob him by other,
means;) and partly by certain other Lawyers, as has been said, who use to
be well content to deliver the King from all Tribunalls but their own, and are
generally the greatest Libertines both in understanding and will, that perhaps
the Christian world is acquainted with.

This action therefore of the Third Estate being thus miscompounded, need not
make our Adversaries more insolent then they were before; but much rather ought
they to retract their former actions upon a due consideration of the
proceeding, which was held in this business, by the Clergy and Nobility of
France, of whom it cannot be pretended, but that they would gladly have
granted to their King, whatsoever they could in conscience. The Clergy I say
of France, which depends more upon those Kings by the exemptions of sundry
Popes, then any Catholic Clergy does in Christendom; and the Nobility of
France which enjoys not only more access, and other privileges, but draws
more money in specie by way of pensio^ from their King, without obligation to
any particular residence, or service, then any Nobility does in Christendom,
whether it be Catholic, or other; wherein I will not except Spain, for I know
I need not. And when I should say, that the French King di^burseth yearly not
much less by way of pensio^ to his subjects of the Nobility, then the King of
England receaueth year^y to his purse all manner of ways, I should not be the
Author of a Paaadoxe, for the su^me ariueth in sight (besides that which is
unknown) to upon the point of six hundred thousand pounds per annum.

The Oration it self does follow at the end of this Preface, and therefore I
enter not upon the perticulers thereof; only the Reader, when he has perused
it, may be pleased to remember two things in general contained therein. One,
that the Oath is such, as that they of the French Clergy and Nobility will
rather die then take it; the other, that there was never any French writer,
since the faculty of Divinity has been taught in the Schools of France (not
excepting even such as were the most earnest vpholders of Regal authority, and
were required by the Kings of their times, to defend the same by public
writing) who affirms Kings to be indeposable by Popes in all cases. And
whensoever any of them have debated the point of the Absolution, which
subjects may have from the Oath of Allegiance to their Prince, the cases of
the Princes Heresy and Apostasy are always excepted; that is to say, in such
cases, the subjects of a King, acording to the judgment of all Catholic French
writers, may be absolved from the Oath of their Allegiance.

I tie not my self to the words, but the substance of these two propositions
is clearly delivered by the Cardinal, in the name of the Clergy of France:
which so long as the Reader shall keep in mind, it will make him (if he be a
discreet Protestant) discern with ease, how falsely his Ministers have laid
certain seditious opinions to the charge of us English Catholics, and such
(say they) as are not believed by the Catholic Countries joining to us. If he
chance to be a Precisian, he will have reason to take compassion of us
Catholics, whom he finds to agree in this with himself, and all the
Calumists in the world, that Kings may for some hideous crimes des^rue to fall
from their Royalty; though there be this difference between us, that we hold
the common Father of all true Christians, to be the fittest Judge of such high
quarrels, as fall out between his children (wherein also he is directed by the
Canons and inviolable Customs of the Church, in what sort, and by what degrees
he must proceed) but they hold that Kings are subject to a kind of popular
judgment, which is so much the likelier to be corrupt, as it is usual for the
people whom they make the Judge, to be a party. If he be a faint Catholic who
has brought his conscience to take the Oath of England, and to run dancing
round the may pole of humane respects, it will make him return to the good
company, which in that point he has left, and fetch the blood into his face,
when he considers that he being an English Catholic, who was wont to have the
honor to be so entire in the confession of his faith, has need to be put in
mind of his duty, by an action performed in France, where leuity and liberty
are ordinarily so much in use. If lastly he he a sincere and loyal Catholic,
who does choose rather to starve, then to strain his conscience, and
consequently resolves to be far enough from taking the English Oath, he may
give God humble thanks for his infinite mercy, who besides the promise of
future rewards, for these present sufferinges, and the testimony of a good
conscience, which, even in this life, is so great a Jewel as both the Indies
cannot buy, has vouchsafed to justify him in point of spiritual reputation,
by the testimony of that Nation, whose syncerity was called most in question,
and whose example has been heretofore so impudently, though without control,
alleged against him, and us.

And though if we were sure that our persecution were to continue as long as
the world: yet we should know withal, that there is no proportion between the
longest time and eternity; and that, the sufferings of this life, though never
so grievous, are infinitely unworthy of that glory, which is prepared for such
as keep the Depositum of Catholic Faith, vndiminisht. But we are taught, not
only by the experience of former times, which tells us of the periode of great
persecutions, even then when there seemed to be least humane hope thereof; but
also by that which we may have observed by the passages of the late action of
the Estates in France, how able God Almighty is, to make his greatest enemies
the liueliest instruments of his glory, in despite of their own wicked
hearts, and to make their endeauours, which aim at the dishonoring, and
abusing of his Church, to give the greatest contribution that could be wished,
to the Dignity, and Majesty of the same.

Who knows not, that the holding of these Estates in France, was pursued only,
in effect, by certain irreuerent semi-Catholikes, who love nothing less then
the splendor and vigor of Ecclesiastical discipline, and ^urisdiction? Who
knows not, that as soon as the said Estates were opened, that rotten member
which took the name of the Third Estate, discovered that Canker, which has
been feeding gredily upon it (especially since the introduction of heresy into
that Kingdom) by plodding upon some course, how to make an Id^ll of the
temporal power of Kings, in respect of the reverence due to Popes; and so far
to abuse the authority of the Apostolic Sea, as that they would redoubt it no
more then a mere Scarcrow, or Chymera? And yet we see God has fetched the
Treacle of which I have spoken, from the poison that grew in the festred
bowels of his Enemies; for if that French Oath had not been propounded by
those Lawyers, the contrary doctrine and belief of the Church of France, had
not been protested by those Prelates. Shall the providence therefore of God,
be able to watch so fruitfully over the Catholic Church of France, and shall
the narrow seas be broad enough to keep him from showing his power in England
to our comfort, and the confusion of such, as either know him not, or care not
for him? nay rather let us learn by this, that when our persecuting Ministers
do most conspire our ruin, then shall we be surest of Gods present help; and
when the grave shall be finished wherein they hope to bury us alive, incident in
foueam quam fecerunt, it is then that they are likeliest to die in the same
ditch which they made for us.

Courage therefore is that which we are to beg at the hands of God, who knows
not how to forsake, but such as confide not in him It was said long ago by one
who had no supernatural ^ssistance whereby his crosses were to be assuaged, Si
longus leuis, si magnus breuis; but we have infinitely more reason to assure our
selves then he, that if our persecution linger on, it will be lightened, if it
increase it will be shortened. Nor ought we be without hope, but that it may be
both short and light, when his Maiestyes Excellent Judgment shall have observed
(which in all likelihood he h^th already done, by he ens^ing Oration and other
books) that his Catholi^e subjects ho^d no other opinions in favor of the Sea
Apostolic, but such as are common to those Catho^i^es, that are accounted even
the most remiss i^ Europe; That there is no Protestant Church, which has
declared this proposition to be true, That a King can never be deposed by any
authority under heaven, nor his subjects be absolved from the Oath of
Allegiance, which once they made, for any incorrigible crimes whatsoever. That
on the other side, rebellions of s^biects against their natural Princes, have
grown familia since ^rotestancy brake loose, and have been as it were ha^cht
by that sect in England, Scotland, Holland, Sweueland, Germany, Switzerland,
Geneua, and most often in France, whereof tru^ histories mak^ particu^e mention.
And (...) that should not be able to read or vnderstan^ a book, might see the
matter verified even at this instant in the Kingdom of France, where the
Prince Protestant of them all, is vexing his King by all the power he has,
either of credit, or other means, having drawn to his lure many others of
both Religions: That, since his Majesty has been ill counseled and v^ged by
Ministers (amongst all whom there has n^uer yet been any one good man of
State) he has gotten nothing less, then that they aimed at, which was, That
Regal Authority, now that it is employed in their defense, should be as
superstitiously adored, as in Queen Mary's days, both of England, and
Scotland (when their religion received a check) it was irreligiously decried
and disgraced For now instead of being held a kind of Divinity upon earth
(which notion men's minds were fitter for, before they were opened by such
Oaths) they are grown to looke^ abroad upon that light, which they were wont
to be afraid would dazell their eyes; and at last are come so near unto it, as
that they touch and handle it, by the discourse of reason, and experience,
which tells them, that Kingly Authority cannot come immediately from God to any
man, but by miracle: That all the Kings whom we know, do either rule by force
of conquest, and in that case the authority of the Common wealth if it be
usurped, may be resumed, or by Donation, Election, Marriage, or Succession of
blood, in which cases Kings forfait by not performing the conditions, under
which either they or their first ancestors did enter, whether they were
expressed, or necessarily implied. Necessarily I say implied for supposing,
that a people who was without question the first owner of supreme authority
upon earth should cause a King to govern them without obliging him in
particular to do this, or that, it were a Barbarous conceit to think that it
were in his law full power, to Tyrannize over them at his pleasure, without
having respect either to their defense in time of war, or the administration
of Justice in time of peace, for which only respects they made him King. If
this discourse be true in case of Kings, even by the Law of Nature and of
Nations; how much more shall it be so, amongst Christian Kings, who in their
Baptism do their homage to the Faith of Christ; and at their Coronations do
swear the mayntenance of Religion, and Justice, which are the conditions
expressed, whereupon the progenitors of the most absolute Christian Kings,
were placed in their Royal Throne. These things, I say, are grown into the
consideration of men, and strikes the reasonable part of their souls with such
an evidence and demonstration of truth, as no formulary of an Oath, though
perhaps for fear, or fashion sake they may chance to accept thereof, will ever
be able to wipe out.

Some questions there may be, between men of different Religions (as has
been touched) to whom the judgment over Kings for their offenses may belong;
some holding that this Jurisdiction resides in the Church; some in the Common
Wealth; some in both together; and some others other several opinions, which
are not so much worth the specifying; but all the Christian Congregations of
all Religions in the world do agree in this, that all Kings for hideous crimes
may fall from their dignity, and their subjects may be absolved from their
Oath of fidelity. Nay I have not heard even in England, where our Oath of
Allegiance was enacted, nor in France where the like was offered, that when the
general propositions which were contained in both the formularies were well
deduced into particulers, men would be drawn to subscribe and swear thereto
(otherwise then forced by fear) excepting only a few hypocritical Ministers
amongst us, or profane Lawyers amongst our neighbors. But as God would have
it, neither the Ministers in France are of that opinion (for they profess the
contrary) nor yet the Lawyers of England, if you put the case home to them: for
howsoever it costs them nothing to swear, that the Pope can never come to
depose a King because he is a protestant; it would trouble some of their
consciences, if they have any, to swear that if an Upper and Lower house of
the English Parliament should condemn a King, who might happen to be so great a
Tyrant, as that he would abrogate all the Statutes and Common Laws of the
Realm; bring in by force a summary course of Justice, as is used in
Switzerland; confiscate all the Common Lawyers of England, who are able to
spend above a thousand pounds per annum; and in a word dispose of their wives
and children, as if they were his own; it would trouble them, I say, to
swear, that such a King might not be deposed by the Houses of Parliament, and
that themselves could not be so far discharged from the Oath of Fidelity, which
they made to him when they were sworn Justices of Peace, as to make some
personal resistance in their own defense.

There is nothing more certain, then that many a man reads over the Oath of
Allegiance, and diverse take it, who consider not the importance of those
fearful general clauses, which include and exclude all particular cases of
No Pope, No King, neither by his own, nor by any other Authority, for any
cause whatsoever, can Depose or Absolve subjects etc. And yet, as I said
before, there are so many Protestants, who by occasion of this Oath have
entered so deeply into the consideration of Kingly Authority, as it is evident
(to all such as freely and familiarly live with Protestants, and understand
sincerely from them what they think) that thousands of them are grown to a
less adoring conceit of Royal Dignity, then they were wont to have. And
though his Majesty can hardly come to know the prejudice that he has sustained
by yiedling to them, who have unfitly sought to help him, or rather to help
themselves by propounding this Oath, because he is a King, and cannot equally
converse with his subjects, (nor can he from his servants expect but such
news, as will be pleasing to him) yet it may be hoped for, at the Hands of so
Excellent a Judgment as his Majesty is endued withal, that he will one day
fall upon the true account of these businesses, by other means, and not
continue his Catholic Subtectes in his so ill conceit, for professing of that
belief, which is now, in terminis, auowed by the learned and noble Catholics,
even of France; the contrary whereof is not auowed by any Protestant Church
upon earth (if we change the name of Pope into the name of Common wealth) and
the sequel whereof has done nothing but disseruice to him. I beseech God of
his infinite mercy, give his Majesty such light of mind whereby to discern the
distempered thoughts of his Ministers, who are in such a rage against
Catholics, and to us, that he will vouchsafe so much strength of mind, as that
whatsoever happens, we may rather obey God, then Man.

AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER, translated out of the French.
THE Author of this Discourse understanding that some had put in print two
several Speeches in his name, far different both in sense and words, from
that which he by word of mouth delivered, he was constrained to bring this to
light as an Antidot or Countermaund to those other. Neither did he much wonder
to see such pieces of changeable colors clapped together, some true, some
false, according unto every ones passion, without resemblance to the original:
for he does think that no pen could follow, nor memory retain two Speeches
whereof the shortest lasted three hours, although swiftly pronounced. But he
was much astonished at the liberty of this time, that within Paris (himself
being present) any should publish two Speeches in his name without acquainting
him with it, thereby to understand whither he would acknowledge them for his
own. It is true indeed, that he was not the only man, who had been so dealt
withal: for some other Prelates had lyn handled after the same manner, and
found as little of theirs in those remnantes bestowed on them, as Euphorbus in
Pithagoras.

Now therefore it does suffice him to present thee with that he pronounced in
the Chamber of the Third Estate. For that it was in a manner all one with that
he made in the Chamber of the Nobility, the reasens being the same, and no
difference at all, but in the beginning, conclusion, and ornuments: By reason
whereof the publishing of the one might serve for a general remedy of the
suppositions of the other two.

As soon as he had therefore signified to the Gentlemen of the Third Order,
that being to speak in their presence, he thought himself obliged to make the
same prayer to God, which Pericles was accustomed to do, being to speak to the
Athenians, that nothing might pass from him unbeseeming those that had
employed him, neither of those that were to hear him, Psalm. 50.
he directed his words to God, saying with the Psalmist: Domine labia men
aperies, and then began as follows.

THE ORATION.
IT had been to small purpose (Noble Gentlemen) to honor the dignity of those
that make profession to minister Justice; It had been to little purpose that
which Aristotle taught us, by saying, that Justice is beautiful, and admirable
like to the star Lucifer; and it had been to as little purpose to have taught
us, that in justice all virtues are summarily contained; And the answer of
Agesdaus King of Sparta had been unto as little purpose, which he gave unto the
King of Persia (who took to himself the title of the great King) that he could
not be greater then himself, valesse he could prove he were more just. And
that fable of the Poets had been to as little purpose, faigning Minos the Patron
of just Princes, to have been the son of Jupiter: and that Themis and Dicas
were placed on either side of Jupiter; if the Scripture did not teach us that
by justice Kings do reign; if the Son of God had not chosen him who was to
be his figure, and called him Melchisedech, that is to say King of justice; and
that the same Melchisedech whose name does signify, King of Justice, had not
been also King of Salem, that is, King of peace, to show that of justice
depends peace, which is the mother of all good in heaven and earth. And
seeing the oracles of divine scripture agree in commendation of this virtue
with the testimony of profane authors, it seems in giving her the first place
of honor and dignity amongst humane virtues, is to put in execution the will
both of God and men.

Now (Gentlemen) if ever there were any Nation in which this virtue has shined
and been flourishing; it is this in which we live. I will not speak of the
glory of the Druides, or ancient Sacrificers, in whose hands the Gauls had put
the execution of justice, with intent to make it sacred and venerable to the
people by the quality of the persons that should exercise it; I omit the care
and zeal our Kings did bear to the practice of Justice, themselves becoming
ministers and distributers, not only in their first and second race, but
likewise in the third: To say nothing of the splendor of our Courts of
Parliament, and in particular of this great, and high Parliament of Paris, whereof
the reputation has been such amongst foreign Princes, that they themselves
often made choice of it for their judge and arbitrator in causes of greatest
importance. It shall suffice me to affirm of our Nation, that it has ever
been so famous, and flourished in the exercise of this virtue, that the very
women amongst the Gauls were hertofore esteemed better able to administer
Justice, then the men of al other Provinces. For when Hannibal received and
incorporated the Gauls in his Army (in his passage to the Conqest of Italy) it
was agreed on, that if at any time there should arise any difference between
the two Nations, if the Carthaginians were plaintifs, the verdict should belong
to the Tribunal of the Carthaginians, resident in Spain: and if the Gauls
found themselus agrieued, the decision was referred to the Dames of France. And
therefore (Gentlemen) our Kings having assigned the keeping and disposing of
this precious treasure in the hands and custody of your Order, it is not
without cause that we honor and respect you, not only as ministers and
interpreters of Themis, but as such her interpreters in the chiefest Tribunal
she has upon earth.

And now (Gentlemen) this Themis, this Dicas, this ^lustice it self, which
teaches you to render to every one his due, inspired you likewise from the
first meeting of the States, to render above al other things what you owe to
God, to his Religion, and to his Ministers; making you thereby to imitate the
example of those great Law-giuers and Sages the Romans your Predecessors, who
carried so great respect to Divine things, that although the Religion was
false, yet notwithstanding because in this false Religion they pretended, as S.
Augustine says, to honor the true Deity, it pleased the same God to
recompense their zeal with temporal graces and benedictions, whereby they
raised their Empire above the clouds. For then you gave us testimony by di^ers
Embassages, that you held us for your parents, as the Pastors; and Directours
of your souls, and such as lived in continual watchfulnes to render account
of them to Almighty God: For the which we have of tentimes given you many and
hearty thanks. But that which did most assure us, that you practiced
effectually what you gave testimony of by words, was the last occasion which
presented it self. For upon the news which was sent unto us, of a certain
article, touching the security of Kings, entitled, a Fund a mental Law
proposed and resolved amongst your selves, where there was matter of Religion
mixed with interest of state, you were contented to be persuaded by the learned,
and eloquent informations delivered you in our names by the Archbishop of Aix,
and the Lord Bishop of Mumpelier, to communicate the matter with us, and
jointly to receive our opinion thereof.

For this cause (Gentlemen) the Ecclesiastical assembly has chosen and sent
me unto you: First to give you thanks for the honor you pleased to do them
heerin: then to let you understand their opinion concerning as well the
substance, as circumstances of your Article. And they have especially given me
in charge above all other things to render you infinite thanks, and praise
your zeal, in providing so carefully for the security of the life, and person
of our Kings; withal protesting, that they all conspire together with you in
this thought, and extraordinary feeling of yours, and that from the bottom of
their hearts and souls. For they lament, and shall never cease mourning with
tears of blood, the tragical, and detestable Assassinats, which have wronged
and defiled the memory of this age, with two so horrible parricides; and do
find in themselves so much greater obligation to have their hearts pierced with
this grief, by how much more they must acknowledge themselves tied with
strayter bands, then any other Orders, to maintain and stand affected to the
Sacred Person of our Kings. I mean not to enlarge my self for the present in
telling you, how God has put into their hands the light of his word, to
lighten other orders, and how the Clergy must march foremost and direct others,
by doctrine and example in serving well and faithfully those, whom God has
placed over his people: Only thus much out of mere humane considerations;
There is no profession so straightly bound, in all fidelity and loyalty to our
Princes, as the state Ecclesiastical. For other states come to offices,
honors, and dignities of the realm, some of them, as the Gentelmen and
Nobility, at the dearest rate of all other, with loss of their blood, and
peril of their lives; others; besides their merit, by contribution of some
part of their goods, and commodities. But as for us, we atteyne them by the
only grace and favor of our Kings, without hazard or employment of ought,
either of life, goods, or honors. Neither by any other means (being as we
are naked and unarmed) can we enjoy our quiet or commodities, but under the
shadow of the peaceable and prosperous affairs of the King, being otherwise
exposed as a prey to all sorts of wrongs and outrages. And therefore, what
man of sound judgment can live in doubt, but that we have more interest, then
any other in his conservation, in whose life, as within some fatal brand, all
our lives and fortunes are comprised?

We therefore alike join issue with you in this your zeal and feruency of
passion, and do alike condemn, nay more if possible may be, the perfidious
butchery of those monsters, which dare adventure on Sacred personages of
Kings. But with all desiring you to enter into consideration, that as the only
laws sufficient to restaine those who set at naught their lives, are the
Ecclesiastical which curb those spirits, that contemn death with the
apprehension of those pains after death: So must we carefully take heed, not
to insert any thing into those laws, but that which is held for certain, and
undoubted by the whole Church, for fear of disabling the authority of that
which is certain and infallible, by mixture of that which is doubtful and in
contention. For experience has taught us too well, that humane laws only, and
apprehension of temporal punishment can never serve for sufficient remedy to
such evils, as proceed from a perverse and corrupted imagination of Religion.
We must have therefore laws of conscience such as work on our souls, and keep
them in fear of eternal torments. Those who undertake these detestable
parricides under a false per suasion of Religion, are not kept back with any
fear of corporal punishment; they bath themselves in torments with delight,
they expect triumphs and Crowns of Martyrdom, they flatter themselves with
false application of that sentence of our Savior, do not fear them that can
kill the body, Matt. 10.
but rather fear him that can send both soul and body into hell. So that to
restrain and terrify this kind of people, we must lay before them, not such
laws as are executed in this life, which they care not for, and thereby
deprive other men of theirs: but of such laws, whose rigor and severity are
exacted after death, that is of laws Ecclesiastical and spiritual. The
Milesian Virgins were possessed of so furious and prodigious hatred of their
lives, that they ran voluntarily with great contentment to their deaths, they
strangled, threw themselves down headlong, and cut their own throtes, the
prayers and tears of their parents not being able to hinder them. The
Magistrates of the Island oftentimes consulted, and made many decrees to stop
the public mourning, but none of their designementes took effect. For they
despising and hating life, entered likewise into contempt of whatsoever was
ended with life, until in the end seeing all other means to fail them,
agreed to publish a law, whereby all those which voluntarily made away
themselves, should be drawn openly through the streets, and that stark naked
after their death: Then the frenzy, which all these remedies applied during
life could not cure, the apprehension of shameful punishment after death did
remedy. The like is to be held of this fury, this rage, this madness; there is
nothing but the fear of pains to be imposed after death; nothing but the
apprehension of the pains of hell; nothing but the horror of eternal
torments, which are sufficient to cure their distemper, who think to immolate
and sacrifice their lives to God, when they loose them, by putting in execution
this horrible and abominable enterprises.

Now the spiritual and Ecclesiastical laws, are those only which can imprint
in men's hearts the terror of excommunication, and lively apprehension of
everlasting torments. For to cause this effect, they must proceed from
Ecclesiastical Authority; that is certain, absolute, and infallible, that is
to say universal, and such as contains nothing wherein the whole Church does
not agree. For if they proceed from doubtful and different authority, and
conteyne such things whereof one part of the Church houldes one opinion, the
head and other parts thereof teach another; those, in whose bearts they desire
these things should make impression, instead of houlding them for certain and
infallible, and thereby to be terrified and swayed by their threats, fall to
laughing at them, and hold them in extreme derision. And therefore we must
take great heed, I say once again we must take extraordinary great heed to
mix that which is in no sort to be doubted of in this Article, and that which
the whole Church agrees on (that is to say, that none without putting himself
in danger of the devil, and eternal death, may adventure upon the life of
Kings) with any point in controversy, for fear of weakening that which is
undoubtedly true, by joining it with some other thing which other parts of the
Church do debate, and hold in dispute.

Three points there are in the substance of your Fundamental Law, besides
certain accessory points and circumstances. The first concerns the security
of Kings persons, and in this we all agree, offering to seal it, not with
ink, but with our blood; that is to say, that it is not lawful for any cause
whatsoever to murder Kings: and not only with David, do de^est the Amalecite,
who vaunted to have laid his hands on Saul, 1. Reg. 11.
although rejected and deposed by God by the mouth of Samuel, but moreover cry
out aloud with the Sacred Council of Consta^ce, Council. Constant. sess. 5.
against the murderers of Kings, even such as might be pret^eded to be
Tyrants, Anathema, to such as murder Kings; eternal malediction to the
assassinats of Kings, eternal damnation on al such as murder Kings. The
second point is of the temporal dignity, and sovereignty of the Kings of
Frances, and in this likewise we agree. For we believe our Kings are absolute
in every fort of temporal Sovereignty in their Realm, and that they are
neither feudataries to the Pope (as some others who have either received, or
obliged their Crowns with this condition) nor to any other Prince; but that in
the pure administration of temporal things they depend immediately of God, and
acknowledge no other power over them but his. These two points then we hold
for certain, and undoubted but in different manner of certainty: for the
certainty of the first is divine and theological; the certainty of the second
humane and historical. For that which Pope Innocent III. Cap. per Venerab.
Tit. Qui filij sint legitimi.
affirms, that the King of France acknowledges no superior in temporalities,
is spoken by him in form of historical testimony: and that certain other
Realms (whereof he seems to wright Cap. causam tit. eodem.
the same) have since changed, and bound themselves to some certain kind of
temporal dependence upon the Sea Apostolic; and that France remaynes in her
prime estate, it is history, and not faith that tells us so.

There remaynes the third point, which is this: Whether if Princes having made
an oath to God, and their people, either themselves or their predecessors, to
live and dye in the Christian Catholic faith, and do afterward violate their
oath, rebel against Christ, bidding him open war, that is to say, fall not
only to open profession of heresy, or Apostasy from Christian Religion, but
withal pass to force their su^iectes consciences, and go about to plant
Arianisme, or Mahometisme, or any such like infidelity within their states, and
thereby destroy and root out Christianity; whether, I say, in this case, their
subjects on the other side may not be declared absolved from their oath of
Loyalty and Fidelity: And this coming to pass to whom it apperteynes to
pronounce this absolution.

This then is the point in controversy between us: For your article conteyneth
the negariue; that is to say, that in no case whatsoever the subjects may be
absolved from the Oath of Allegiance made to their Princes. As on the contrary
side, all other parts of the Catholic Church, together with this of France,
since the institution of Schools of Divinity, until the coming of Catuin,
held the affirmative proposition, which is, that when the Prince breaks the
Oath he has made to God and his subjects to live and dye in Catholic
Religion, and does not only become an Arian, or a Mohammedan, but manifestly
wars against Jesus Christ, in compelling his subjects in matters of conscience,
and constrayning them to embrace Arianisme or Mahometisme, or any other
detestable in fidelity: That then this Prince may be declared fallen from his
right, as culpable of felony toward him, to whom he has made the oath of
his Realm, that is to Christ: and his subjects may be absolved in conscience,
both at the spiritual and Ecclesiastical Tribunal, from the oath of
allegiance they have made unto him. And that in this case, it belongs to the
authority of the Church, resident either in her head the Pope, or in her body a
Council, to publish this declaration. And not only all the other parts of the
Catholic Church, but likewise all the Doctors who lived in France from the
first setting up of schools of Divinity amongst them, have held the
affirmative opinion, that in the case of heretical, or infidel Princes, and
such as persecute Christianity, or Catholic Religion, their subjects may be
absolved from their oath of allegiance. By means whereof though the contrary
doctrine were the truest, yet notwithstanding all the other parts of the
Church being against it, you cannot hold it for more then problematical in
matter of faith. I call that doctrine problematicall in matter of faith, which
we are not bound to believe, by necessity of faith, and the contradictory
thereof does not bind them that believe it with excommunication, and disunion
or separation from the community. Otherwise you must acknowledge, that the
communion which you exercise with the other parts of the Church, houlding the
contrary doctrine, yea even that communion which you conserve with the memory
of your predecessors, was unlawful, defiled with heresy and excommunication.

And indeed those who take upon them to defend the doctrine of the English Oath
which is the pattern of yours, VVidring. disput. de Iuram. fidel. cap. 3.
sect. 19.
defend it for no other then problematicall, Our intention (say they) is not to
affirm the other opinion, as repugnant to faith, or salvation, it being
defended and maynteined by so many and so great Deuines, whom God forbid we
should go about to condemn of so great a crime.

And therefore to include this clause under the same obligation of faith, under
that very degree of excommunication, under the which we comprehend the
condemnation of those which attempt the lives of Princes, is to fall into four
manifest Inconveniences, which our Chamber has given me in charge to lay
before your eyes. The first, is to force men's souls, and entangle their
consciences, in bidding them to believe, and swear under pain of
excommunication, as doctrine of faith, and conformable to the word of God, a
point of doctrine, the contrary whereof is held by all the other parts of the
Catholic Church, and has been ever hitherunto, by their own predecessors.
The second inconvenience, is utterly to overthrow the authority of the Church,
and to open the gate to all sorts of heresies, to give scope to lay men,
without direction, or warrant either of general Council, or Ecclesiastical
sentence, to undertake the decision of matters of faith, to determine points
of Controversy, and to pronounce openly what is conformable to the Scripture,
what is impious and detestable. This then we say is to usurp the office of
Priesthood; this is to stretch our hand to the Arc; this is to take the Censar
for Sacrifice. In brief, this is to commit the self same outrages, for which
Gods maledictions have justly fallen long since on the usurpers, as well private
persons as Kings themselves. The third Inconvenience, is to throw us head long
into evident and inevitable schism. For all other Catholic nations houlding
this doctrine, we cannot declare it to be contrary to holy Writ, nor hold it
for wicked and detestable, but therewithal we must renounce the communion both
of the head, and other parts of the Church: and thereby confess, that the
Church for so many ages has not been the Church of God, but the Synagogue of
Satan: not the spouse of Christ, but the Devils strumpet. The fourth
Inconvenience, is not only to make frustrate the remedy, which men seek in
this peril of Princes, in weakening that which is held for certain and
undoubted, by joining it to a thing contradicted; but withal instead of
assuring the life and estate of Princes, to put in great danger both the one
and the other, by means of wars and other mischances and disasters, which
ordinarily schism draws after it.

These are (Gentlemen) the four points our Company have given me in charge to
represent unto you, which I will do my best to dispatch with all possible
cleernes and facility, if you please to hear me with the like patience you
have hitherto continued, which I easily persuade my self you will, if you set
before your eyes the importance of the matter I am hear to treat with you,
which is the greatest at this present in Christendom. And besides; consider
that it is not my self, whom you hear speak in this Controversy. For it is
not I who speak in this cause, but the whole body of the Ecclesiastical
Order, and all that of the Nobility adjoined unto it, and which have deputed
these twelve Noble men, taken from the twelve Gouernementes in the Realm, of
purpose to give authority to my words with their presence: and withal to give
testimony in this present occasion, of the self same devotion their
predecessors have ever borne the Church, which they have planted by their
Arms, and watered with their blood, in the furthest parts of the world. And
therefore I will no more enlarge my self in begging of you, favorable audience
and attention; only let me entreat you, before I enter into the matter, to
give me leave to make these two protestations, thereby to prevent certain
calumniations. The first, that when I say, those who hold the negative part,
cannot hold it for other then Problematicall, I intend not to comprehend by
the word Problematicall, that which concerns the condemnation of those
parricides, who undertake to kill Princes: for this I hold for a point of
faith, and condemn the contrary opinion for heretical, and guilty of all
sorts of excommunication and eternal punishment. The other, that it is
contrary to my disposition, and full sore against my will, that I come to
treat of these questions in such a time, when our Country is newly come out of
many differences, and divisions in State-matters, and is yet full of debates in
matters of Religion; and have refused this charge many times, even with tears,
knowing well how I was to imbarke my self in a sea full of rocks and perils,
and to how many harsh contradictions and calumniations I should expose my
self. But the publishing of Copyes of your Article (the bruit whereof was spread
far and near) has hindered us from keeping it any longer secret; and the
wound once discovered, the discharge of our Office bound us to seek a remedy.

Now then Gentlemen (concerning the first Inconvenience) to lay the foundation
of my discourse, not on pillars of gold, as Pindarus said, but on the firm
pillars of History, and practice of the Church, the method I will observe,
shall be in proving two things. The one, that not only all the other parts of the
Church which are at this day in the world hold the affirmative opinion, that
is to say, in the case of heretical Apostataes, and persecuting Princes, the
subjects may be absolved from their Oath of allegiance made to them or their
predecessors: but also for these eleven hundred years, there has not been
any one age, in which this doctrine has not been believed and practiced in
diverse nations. The other, that it has been continually held in France, where
our Kings, and particulerly those of the last race, have defended it by their
authority and arms; where our Counsels have vpheld and mayntained it; where
our Bishops, and Scholasticall Doctors, since the first institution of
schools of Divinity until our days, have written, preached, and taught it;
and where, to conclude, all our Magistrates, Officers and Lawyers have followed
and fa^oured it; yea often times for crimes in matters of Religion, much more
light then heresy or Apostasy. Wherewith notwithstanding I intend not to help
my self, but where they serve to defend either the general Theses, that is to
say, Whether in some cases the subjects may be absolved from the Oath made by
them to their Princes; or this particular Hypothesis, that in the case of
heretical Apostataes, and persecuting Princes, their Subjects may be dispensed
withal in obeying them. To the end therefore to free you from all obscurity, I
will not oppugn your Article, but by those maxims wherein our Doctors of
France, who have written in defense of Princes temporal authority, do all
agree; containing my self notwithstanding in the simple plain way of fact,
without passing to that of right, the decisio^ whereof appertains not to this
time nor place.

First then to begin with Anastasius who was made Emperor more then eleven
hundred years ago. When this Emperor Anastasius, an Eutichian heretic, took
on him the Empire, Euph^mius Patriarch of Constantinople would never
acknowledge him for Emperor, until he had signed and subscribed with his own
hand to the Creed of the Chalcedon Council. Anastasius (as Victor Tunonensis
Victor. Tunon. in Chron. a Scaligero edito.
an Author of that age has left written) urged by the Bishop of
Constantinople, was constreyned to promise under his hand, to attempt nothing
that was sinister against the Apostolic Faith, and the Council of Chalcedon.
And Euagrius: Euagr. hist. Eccle. lib. 3. ca. 32.
The Empress Ariadne desirous to put the Imperial habiton Anastasius, the
Bishop Euphemius would never give his consent, until he had given up a
profession of his faith, written with his own hand, with grievous and severe
Oaths. And Theodorus Anagnostes says, that Theod. Anagnost. l. 2. collect.
hist. Eccl.
Anastasius being declared Emperor by the Empress Ariadne, Euphemius the
Bishop made resistance, (...).
calling him heretic and unworthy to have command one Christians.
Notwithstanding the Empress and the Senate, trayling Euphemius by force, did
their uttermost to compel him: But he would never consent to anything before
he had drawn from him a profession by writing to embrace the doctrine of the
Chalcedon Council. And when the said. Anastasius fell back contrary to his
Oath unto the Eutichian heresy, and passed further to persecute the Catholics;
Pope Symachus resisted him, and took upon him the defense of the Church in
these words: Sym. in Apologet
It may be thou will say, it is written, We must be subject to all power. It is
true; We acknowledge humane power, according to the degree thereof, yet so
notwithstanding, that it be not erected against God. But for the rest, if all
power come from God, with much more reason, that, which gouernes divine things.
Bear respect to God in us; and we will reverence God in thee. But if thou
honor not God, thou can not claim privilege by him whose laws thou
co^temnest. And imediatly after: Thou say that the Senate co^spiring with me,
I have excommunicated thee: that which I found lawfully done by my
Predecessors, I have without doubt followed. Thou say that the Senate of
Rome does treat thee ill; if we treat thee ill by inciting thee to leave
heretics, can it be thought thou dealest well with us, which would throw
us headlong into the society of heretics? And when he went about to distill
the infection of his heresy into the Churches offices ^^d set his hand to the
banishment of Bishop^; not only the people of Constantinople were in commotion
against him, and demanded another Emperout but moreover Vitalianus one of the
chiefest Generals of that age, having assembled a puissant army, went to
present him battle at the very gates of Constantinople, and would heuer agree
to peace, but with this condition, That he should recall the Bishops whom he
had banished from their seas, and should reunite all the Eastern Churches with
the Roman. The Catholics (says Marcellinus Comes) Marcel. Com. in chron.
demanded Areobuidas for Emperor, and threw to ground the Images and statua's
of Anastasius. And Cedrenus: Cedr. in compend. hist. in Anastas.
Anastasius going about to join these words to the Hymn of the Church, who
was crucified for us, there was made a popular insurrection within
Constantinople, the Citizens calling for another Emperor, whereby the Emperor
being affrighted, put of for a time his heresy. And Victor Tunonensis: Victor
Tunon. in chron.
Count Vitalianus the son of Patriciolus understanding the subversion of the
Catholic faith, the condemnation of the Chalcedon Council, the banishment of
the Catholic Bishops, and the intrusion of heretics into their places; he
assembled a great army revolted from the Emperor Anastasius, and joining
battle which Patricius the Emperors Nephew and Constable of the Empire, he
killed threescore and seven thousand of the Roman soldiers, and took
Patricius prisoner. And a little after: Vitalianus being encamped at the gates
of Constantinople, notwithstanding many demaundes of peace made to him by the
Emperor, he would never ^earken to any but with this condition, that he should
call back the defendours of the Chalcedon Council, who had been cast out from
their seas, and should reunite all the Churches of the East, with the Roman.

And when Clotharius the first of that name King of France, that lived in the
same age with the Emperor Justinian, had slain within the Church of Soisson,
on good Friday in the time of the adoring the Cross, Gautier.
Walter Lord of Yuetot in Normandy; Pope Agapetus whom the Greeks call
Council. Constable. sub Men.
the Beloved of God and men, did threaten him with his censures, if he did not
make amends for the outrage he had committed against Christian Religion. In
satisfaction whereof, the King did erect the territory of Yuetot, with En tiltre
and condition de Roy^ume.
the title and freedom of a Kingdom Whereof besides the possession without
interruption continued, and the perpetual tradition of the Province, there
were writings made that very hour, the date, according to the account of the
year of our Lord, falling to be the same with the year 536. Which I allege
not, as I have before made protestation, therehence to infer any particular
consequence from fact, to right, but to show in general how great reverence
our first kings did bear to the censures of ancient Popes. The Pope, says du
Hailla^ Du Haillan en Phist. de France l. 1.
incensed with this cruel act, sent word to the King, that he should make
amends for this fact, otherwise that his realm should be interdicted. Then
Clotharius feeling remorse of conscience for his crime, did ordeine for amends
thereof, that from that time forward the Lords of Yuetot, and their heirs
should be quit from all homage, service, and obedience due to the King for the
territory of Yuetot etc. And thereupon were the evidences drawn and sealed by
the foresaid Clotharius. And Gaguin: Gaguinus hist. ^ranc. l. 2.
I find as an infallible truth, that this was done the year of our Lord 536.
For the English having long time after dominion in Normandy, there fell out a
suite, between John of Holland Englishman, and the Lord of Yuetot, as if his
territory had been tributary to the King of England; The Lieuetenant of The
word which the translator of Gaguin uses, is Caletz, which signifies as well
the town as the coast of Callis, the people whereof in old time were called
Caletes, and whereof one part is even to this day called le Pais de Caults.
Callis, after he had thoroughly in the year of our Lord 1428. informed himself
of the case by order of justice, did determine that he had found just, as I
have noted before.

And when Queen Brune child, and King Theodorike desirours to have a
confirmation of the privileges of the hospital of Autun, which the said
Queen had founded, and to have the ensuing Kings bound by the authority of
the Sea Apostolic, to conserve them inviolable, without the least tuch of any
sacrilege; the Pope S. Gregory the great, at their instance wrote these words
in an Epistle to Senator, which is the tenth, in the eleauenth book of his
Epistles: An absurd Author has as fondly made answer, that this decree is not
found in S Gregory: as it was absurdly answered that the Excommunication of the
Emperor Theodosius by S. Ambrose, was not to be found in the Ecclesiastical
History.
We grant and confirm, ordeyning that no Kings, Prelates, nor any other of
what degree soever, may in part diminish, or take away any thing bestowed on
the said hospital, by the foresaid most excellent Kings our sons. And a little
after. And if any one of the Kings, Prelates, Judges, or other secular persons,
after information given of this our constitution, do go about to contradict it,
let him be deprived of his power and dignity. For I will not serve my self of
those Bulls of the Abbey of Soisson, for that they were not inserted within the
Register of S. Gregory's Epistles, but were taken out of the Coffers of the
Monks of S. Medard, and put after the work at the end of the Register, as
appears both by ancient impressions of the same Register, and by the citation
of Pope Gregory VII. Gregor. 7. lib. 8. ep. 21.
(who lived more then 500. years since) made of the Epistle to Senator,
without speaking of that of Soisson.

And when the Emperor Justinian the 2. sent his Constable to take Pope
Sergius, and transport him from Rome to Constantinople, for that he would not
approve the Council falsely called the Sixth; the Imperial soldiers of Italy
opposed themselves, drove back the Emperors Constable with injuries and
reproaches. Justinian the 2. (says Beda Bed. de sex aetat. mundi.
an Author of the same age) being offended, for that Sergius of happy memory
Bishop of the Church of Rome, would not sign and favor the erroneous Synod,
which he caused to be held at Constantinople, sent his Constable Zachary,
commanding him to take the Pope, and bring him to Constantinople: But the
Soldiers of Rauenna, with the Provinces adjoining, did resist the impious
commandment of the Prince, and repelled the said Zachary with contumelies,
and reproaches from the City of Rome. It is true indeed, that afterward the
same Justinian did wash away this crime, together with other his impieties,
when as having gotten Pope Constantine into the East, He threw himself
prostrate on the earth Bed. ib.
before him (says Beda) and praying him to make intercession for his sins,
he did renew all the privileges of the Church.

And when the Emperor Philippicus, successor to Justinian 2. came to the
Empire, and according to the custom of the Emperors (presently after their
coming to the state) of sending the profession of their faith to the Pope, had
addressed unto him a profession of an heretical faith; the Pope rejected it in
Synod, and upon the refusal of it, the people of Rome abrogated the Emperor
Philippicus his Imperial titles. Philippicus (says Beda de sex aetat. mundi
Bid and after him Paulus Paulus Diacon. de gestis Longob. lib. 6, cap. 4.
Diaconus) sent unto Pope Constantine letters of perverse doctrine, which the
Pope together with the Council of the Sea Apostolic rejected etc. And the
people of Rome ordained, that neither the name, nor the edictes, nor the money
that had the image of the heretical Emperor upon it, should be admitted, or
received.

And at what time the Emperor Leo Isauricus fell into the heresy of the
Iconclastes, or Image-breakers, and began to persecute the Catholics in the
East; Pope Gregory the second after many dilations assembled a Council of the
Bishops of the West at Rome, by which he deprived the Emperor of all his
rightes, tributes, jurisdiction, and power Imperial that he had in Italy, and
all this with the advice and assistance of the French. And though some Authors
be silent herein, yet Theophanes, Cedrenus, and Zonarus, Greek historians,
affirm it, and none of them deny it. The most holy Gregory, says Theophanes
Theop. in hi^^ miscel lib. 21.
, withdrew Rome and Italy, and all the rights as well of the Republique, as of
the Church into the west parts, from the obedience of Leo, and of his Empire.
Zonaras says Zon. tom. 3 Annal. in Leon. Isaterico.
, Pope Gregory seeing the persecutions of the Emperor Leo against the
Catholics, did cut off from communion with him the Bishop of Constantinople,
and those who embraced the same impiety, and exposed them together with the
Emperor, to an Anathema Synodique, and forbad the tributs which til then had
been paid to the Empire, and adjoined himself with the French; whereupon they
might take an occasion to make themselves masters of Rome.

And when the French were resolved to abandon and forsake Childerike, and to
substitute Pipine in his place, though the cause that moved them to remove and
make away Childerike, was his impertinency and his stupidity: yet in as much as
it touched Religion by occasion, because Childerike his imbecility and weakness
did put France in danger of falling from Christianity, Orat. legate. Pipini apud
Paul. Aemilium in Child. 3.
through the invasion of the Sarazens, who were become possessed of all Affrike
and Spain, and had already many times ouerrun and wasted France, and that
otherwise it rested upon the absolution of an oath in matter of conscience:
They would not in any wise yield to do homage to Pipin, until the Pope had
absolved them in the spiritual Tribunal, from their precedent and former oath
they had made to Childerike. Pipin (says Paulus Aemilius Paul. Aemil. de reb.
gestis Franc. in Child. 3.
after infinite other authors) sent Burchard Bishop of Wirtzburg to Pope
Zachary, for the abrogating and taking away of the obligatio of the oath, by
which the French were bound to Childerike. And again: The Pope absolved the
French from the Oath they had made to Childerike, and they assembling the
States did homage to Pipin, in quality of King. du Tillet en la vie du Child. 3.
And the Lord of Tillet in his Memorialls, says: To take a way the note of
perjury and infidelity, it was thought best to send unto Pope Zachary, Vegard
Bishop of Wirtzburg, and Fulrad chaplayne of the said Pipine, for the obteyning
of absolution unto the said subjects, from the oath made unto the said King
Childerike, and of approbation of the election by them made of the said Pipin
for their King. And this was accorded by the said Pope.

And when as again, after the heresy of the Emperor Constantine Copronymus,
and of Leo his Son, and the persecution that Constantine Son of Leo raised
against the Catholics for his false marriage, Charlemaine became beloved, and
potent in the West, and that it came to be understood, that by the inconstancy
of the Emperors of Greece, there was no more certainty at all for stability of
religion in those prats of the East; Pope Leo the third absolved with effect,
all their subjects of the West from their fidelity, declaring Charlemaine
Emperor of the West in their place. The French, says Zonaras, Zonar tom. 3.
Annal. in Iren, and Constant.
made themselves Lords of Rome, Pope Leo having crowned Charles, and called him
Emperor of the Romans: And Theophanes: In hist. nuscell. 22.
The Pope to requite Charles, crowned him Emperor. And Eginard Chancellor to
Charlemain says: Eginard. in vita Caroli magni.
our Charles in the beginning had such an horror at the title of Augustus, as
he affirmed, if he had understood the Popes intention, he would not that day
have come to the Church, notwithstanding it were a solemn festiuity. And the
Lord of Tillet in his Memorials says thus: du Tillet enla vie de Charlemaine.
Charlemayne was King of all France, by the half wellneere augmented and
increased by him, and after that by Pope Leo crowned the first Emperor of the
West.

And when King Charles the Simple meant to use the help of the Infidells, and
to bring in the Normanes, who were Pagans and Idolaters, into the Christian
Countries of the French, to make wars against his enemies; Fouques Arch.
bishop of Rhemes threatened him, that he would renounce the fidelity he ought
unto him: Frodoard. hist. Eccles. Rhemens.
Who is he, quoth he, who being faithful unto you, as he is bound, has not an
horror, that you desire the amity and friendship of Gods enemies, and have a
will, to the detriment and ruin of the name of Christ, to receive and admit
the arms of the Infidells, and detestable aliances with them? And a little
after: It were better you had never been borne, then to have a will to reign
by the protection of the Devil, and for you to be assistant unto them, whom
you should most eagerly oppugn. Wherefore know you, that if you so do, and
condescend to such counsels, you shall never have me loyal and faithful to
you: and I will further withdraw from your fidelity all that I shall be able:
and I, together with my fellow Bishops will excommunicate you, and your
accomplices, and adherentes, and condemn you with a perpetual curse, in place
of the fidelity I bear unto you.

And when King Philip the first in the beginning of the last race forsook
Bertha his wife, daughter to the Count of Holland, and took in place of her
Bertrude, wife of Fouques Count of Anjou yet living, (matter that concerned the
violating of a Sacrament, and not of the breach of one Sacrament by simple
adultery, which had been a crime of manners, but by the superinduction of
another Sacrament, and by a public profession of making it a matter lawful,
in keeping, even in the sight of his whole realm, the wife of another man
still living, in his Royal bed, and in title of Queen and his Spouse, in
place of his own wife yet also alive, when as the precedent marriages had not
by the Church been declared to be of no validity, which was a crime acompanied
with heresy:) Pope Vrbane notwithstanding he was to contend with an Antipope,
reprehended the King, and after many admonitions, perceauing his pertinacy and
obstinacy, excommunicated him in a Council of almost 300. Berthold. ad ann.
1095.
Bishops, assembled at Clermont in Auuergne, and interdicted his Realm. And
Pope Paschal after him did the same. At the Council of Clermont, says
Malmesbury, Guil. Malmesb. lib. 4. c. 2. in Guil. 2.
the Pope excommunicated Philip King of France, and all them who called him
King and obeyed him, or spoke unto him, if it were not to correct him. And Iuo
Iuo Carnot. ad Urban. Epist. 46.
of Charters, writing unto the same Vrbane, says: They will menace and
threaten you, that the King and his Realm will depart from your obedience
(that is, will pass to the obedience of the Antipope) if you restore not the
Crown to the King, and absolve him from the excommunication. And the Lord of
Tillet says Du Tillet en la vie de Philip. 1.
: In the year 1100. John and Benedict Cardinals, and Legates of Pope Paschal
the second, sent into France, assembled the Prelates at Autun, at Valence, and
at Poictiers, and after having admonished the King to take the said Queen
Bertha again, and to leave Bertrude, excommunicated them, and interdicted the
Realm. Whereupon the said King was moved to iudignation: But in conclusion he
obeyed.

And when the Emperor Henry the fourth who lived at the same time with Philip
the first complained a while before Pope Gregory the seventh, for having
absolved and discharged his subjects from the Oath of fidelity; he reproached
him that he could not do it, for that he had not committed any error in
faith, and that the tradition of the Fathers, (observe the tradition of the
Fathers, to give to understand that it was not then any new invention, or
devise) did warrant, that he could not be deposed, if he erred not in faith:
Epist. Henr. 4. ad Greg. 7. a Protestant. edita, vna cum alijs. Refertur a
Centuriat. Cent. 11. c. 8. de Schismate.
The tradition of the Fathers, says the Emperor, has taught that I ought to
be judged by God alone, and that I could not be deposed for any crime, so I
declined not from the faith, which is not pleasing unto God.

And when Philip Augustus, the little son of Philip the first, was fallen into
the like contempt and dislike of his wife Engeberge sister to the King of
Denmark, that his Grandfather was of his wife Bertha; and had caused his
marriage to be dissolved and disaunlled by Cardinal William his uncle Archbishop
of Rhemes and Legate in France, in prejudice of his former marriage, he took to
wife the daughter of the Duke of Morauia: The Pope thereupon took notice of
the matter, as of the violating and transgressing of a Sacrament under pretense
of religion. And seeing the resista^ce that the King made, he excommunicated
him, and interdicted his Realm: Du Tillet en la vie de Philip. August.
The sentence of Cardinal William was (says the Lord of Tillet) revoked by
Pope Innocent the third, as given without order of justice. And because the
King presently after the sentence given holding himself untied and free,
married Agnes daughter of the Duke of Morauia, the King and the Realm were
interdicted. And hereunto the Cronicle of Foiz, cited by Vignier, has adds,
Viginer liver 3. de Phist. de Prance en Pan 1200 en la Biblioth. hist. page 3.
That during the time of this interdict, they did put in France to the public
contracts, not in the reign of Philip, but in the reign of Jesus Christ.

And when John King of England, who was not yet at that time obliged by any
temporal acknowledgment to the Pope, Act. int. Bonif. 8. and Phil. Pulch. fol.
91. p. 1.
had driven the Bishops out of his Realm, and seized upon their goods, the
same King Philip Augustus held an assembly of his Estates at Soysson, where he
proposed to make war upon the King of England, for that he persecuted the
Church, and for that the Pope had discharged and absolved his subjects from
their oath of Allegiance to him: Du Haillan li. 10. de Phist. de France en la
vie de Phil. Aug. Rigard. lib. de vita Thil. Aug. adan, 1212.
The King says Du Haillan (notwithstanding he be an historia^ very passionate
against the Popes) at the entreaty of the Pope, at Soyssons held an assembly of
the Prelates and Peers of his Realm, to take advise, and consult about the
means, how he might pass ever into England against King John, to make war
upon him, as a persecutor of the Church, whom the Pope had then
excommunicated, acquiting, taking away, and discharging his subjects of the
Oath of allegiance they did owe unto him. And a little after. The greater part
of the Nobility were of opinion, that he had just cause so to do, as well being
thereunto moved, by authority of the Pope, as for the reestablishing of the
Bishops, and other the Prelates in their Churches, from which they had been
thrust and driven out by John's Tyranny, whom the Pope had excommunicated. And
again all the Nobility with one accord promised Augustus to serve him with
their own persons in this enterprise, Ferrard the Count of Flanders only
excepted.

And when the Emperor Otho, nephew of the said John King of England, meant to
take his part, and to make war upon France, the said Philip Augustus sent
unto the Pope to solicit and move him to declare Otho deprived of all the
rightes of his Empire: and for the execution of this censure he bestirred
himself, and used his courage and his Arms so effectually, as under the
conduct and favor of the Popes cause and quarrel, he wan the greatest
battavle that ever King of France had gained against any Emperor, to wit, the
battle du Pont de Bouuines, where the Emperor had above an hundred and fifty
thousand fighting men. The King, says du Haillan, advertised of the threats
of the Emperor Otho, Du Haillan la mesine. Rigard. ibid.
used such expedition in the business, and wrought so effectually with the Pope,
as he declared the said Otho enemy of the Sea of Rome, and deprived him of his
Imperial titles. And the Electors of the Empire, at the solicitation and
incitement of Augustus, who sent to them Ambassadors to make his way, elected
and chose Frederike the King of Sicily Emperor. And a little after he puts
down King Philip his speech to his army in these words. My Friends, says the
King, let us take good courage: Du Haillan ibid. Rigard. ibid.
Let us not be afraid: Let us have honor before our eyes, and the fear of God
in the first place, to whom we must recommend our selves. We have to fight
against an Enemy condemned, censured, and excommunicated by the Church, and for
his impieties and wickedness separated, and cut off from communion with the
faithful.

And when Reymond Count of Toulouse, and the greater part of Gaul Narbonoise,
became to be infected with the heresy of the Albigenses, and began to persecute
the Catholics, there assembled first a Council of French Bishops at
Montpellier, Histoire Albigeoise rapportee par Vignier en son hist. de France
liu. 3. en l'ann. 1214.
and after that, the Council of Laterane, for heresy, deprived both him and
Reymond his son of the County of Toulouse, and adjudged it to Simon Count of
Montfort, who had taken arms against him, (and of this came the union of the
County of Toulouse, and of the adjoining Provinces to the Crown of France:) By
decree of all the Council of Laterane (says du Haillan Du Haillan en la vie
de Philip August. Rigard. ibid.
whom I do often cite because it is every where in the hands of all) Reymond
the Count of Toulouse, and his son also named Reymond were excommunicated
etc. And the County of Toulouse was adjudged to Simon Count of Montfort. And
again: Simon showed unto the Estates of the County of Toulouse, the decree of
the Council, by which he was declared Count of the said County. And there
opposed not any one against it, but all with one accord took the Oath of
fidelity to him. And the Lord of Tillet says in his Memorials these words: En
la vie de Louys 8.
The County of Toulouse came to the King by good right, the said Reymond and
his Father being confiscated, that is to say, having lost it by confiscation
for heresy; and Symen Count of Montfort having procured and gotten it, and
Amaulry his Son having transferred, and made it over to the King: he was so
gracious to the said Reymond by the treaty of peace, as to restore it unto him
conditionally, that it should return to the said King if his said only
daughter had not issue by Alphonse of France the Count of Poittou

And when the same universal Council of Laterane (which may worthily be
called the most Universal Council, for so much as besides the Pope, and the
four Patriarchs of the East, Matthew. Paris. in Joan. ad^ an 1215. Magdeburg.
Cent. ^^. cap. 9. de Synod.
who were there present, some in person, as the Pope, and the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and of Jerusalem, and the other by their legates, as those of
Alexandria and of Antioch, there were seauenty Archbishops, 412. Bishops, and
more then 800. Prelates: and more then this, all the Monarchs and Kings of
Christendom were there assistant, either by themselves, or by their
Ambassadors, and the Emperor of the Fast, the Emperor of the West, the King
of Jerusalem, the King of France, the King of England, the King of Arragon,
the King of Castile and others:) When the Council, I say, intended to provide
for the extirpation and rooting out of the Relics of the Albigenses, it
ordained, that the Princes, who should become contemners of the Council, that
condemned the Albigenses, should be deprived of the obligation of their
subjects fidelity toward them. And this I remember not for an example to
disturb or trouble the public peace and tranquillity, since the Heretics be
in so great a number, as they make a notable part of the body of the Estate:
but to show that we cannot hold that for heretical, which was pronounced and
decreed 400. years since by the mouth of the Universal Church.

For as touching them, who for the frustrating of this decree do allege, and
cite Plat. in vita Innocen. 3.
what Platina, and after him the Suppl. Chron. l. 13. ad an. 1215.
Supplement of the Chronicles affirm, that the Council proposed many things
but resolved nothing, they are more worthy of pity then answer. For who sees
not, that those Authors there speak of the preparatiues of the army for the
war of the holy Land, and not of matters of Doctrine, or Ecclesiastical
discipline? Otherwise a man should impugn as false, that therein was resolved
the Article of Transubstantiation; the Article of the Procession of the holy
Ghost, of the Father, and of the Son; the precept of annual Confession to
all the faithful; the condemnation of the errors of the Abbot Ioachim;
together with all the writings of the School Doctors alleging these things;
the practice of all the Jurisdictions of France, followed in the searching and
finding out of heretics. We should impugn of falsity the Decretals of Gregory
the ninth, Decret. Gregor. l. 5. tit. 7. de haeret. c. 13. Excommunicamus
compiled twelve years after the Council of Laterane, where that decree is
repeated at length, under the title of the Council of Laterane; the writings
of Matthew Paris Math. Parisan^e. ad. ann. 1215.
a Writer of the same age, and a great enemy of the Popes, who says, that the
Council of Laterane made 60. ( you must read 70.) Decrees; the Bull of Pope
Clement the 5. in favor of King Philip the Fair, who returned the readers to
the decrees of the Laterane. Council; and the Centuriators also, Acta inter
Bonif. 8. and Philip. Pulch.
who inserted all the 70. Articles of the Laterane Council into their
Centuries. Finally we should impugn of falsity the conjunction of the County
of Toulouse to the Crown, which was founded upon that Counsels Decree; and
the reasons and declarations of the Court of Parliament to King Lewis the
Eleventh, touching the extinguishing of that pragmaticall Sanction or Decree,
where the Court prays the King to order the Elections according to the
Council of Laterane in these words: In the Council of Later^ne (says the
Court) which Refertur a Biblioth. lib. 4. decret. Eccl. Gall.
was assembled and held at Rome by Pope Innocentius the third, in the year
1215. where were assistant and present 1333. Prelates; there was prescribed a
certain form of Election, and thereunto was annexed, that in case of the
Electors negligence, the right and power of provision for the Church, should
fall to the Superior Prelate, Cap. Cone. Lateran. c. 24.
Quia propter. and Cap. Ibid. (...) 23.
Ne pro defectu. But I have made to far a digression; let us return to our
History.

Wherefore when the General Council of Lateran, which represented all the
Christian Common wealth, both spiritual and temporal, meant to provide for
the extinguishing of the relics of the Albigensian heresy, it conceived,
made, and published this Conc. Later. c. 3.
Canon: If any Prince neglect in his lands and territories to extirpate the
heresy of the Albigenses; let him be excommunicated by the Archbishop of the
Province: And if he continue obstinate; let it within the space of one year be
signified to the Pope, that he may absolve his subjects from their Oath of
fidelity.

And when Pope Innocentius the 4. did at the Council of Lions, absolve the
Subjects of the Emperor Frederike, from the fidelity they owed unto him (I
dispute not now whether justly or unjustly, for so much as my scope, drift, and
intention is not, but to show how the Kings of France have in such occasions
carried themselves) the King S. Lewis, took upon him the protecting of the
Popes cause against the Emperor. The King of France (says Paulus Paul. Aemil.
in vita S. Ludouici.
Aemilius) being come to Lions, by zeal of office and of Religion, for the
assisting of Innocentius, and having made a protestation, that both himself,
and his forces, and the Counsel of his Realm were ready to maynteyne, and
defend the power and authority of his Holiness, added strength and dignity to
Innocentius his cause. And even those, who to make the Pope and the king S.
Lewis odious, write that the Pope offered to cause Robert Count of Artois, the
Kings brother, to be elected and chosen in place of Frederike, but that the
Barons of France refused it; add that the Barons themselves protested, that the
Emperor could not be deposed, if he erred not in faith. You shall hear the
Barons words, be they true, or be they feigned, delivered after many
inuectiues against the Pope, by Matthew Paris an Englishman, Matthew. Paris. in
Hen. 3. ad an. 1239.
who favored the Emperor, and was the Popes heavy enemy, and taken out of
him by Vignier, Vignier en la 3. p. de la Biblioth. hist. Pan. 1239.
who yielded not a whit unto him in that behalf. And thus he says: But to the
end we may not seem to contemn the Popes commandment, though it be evident
that it came from the Church of Rome, more upon hatred to the Emperor, then
for a love to our Nation; we will send men of prudence on our part to the
Emperor, who shall diligently inform themselves what conceit he has of the
Catholic faith, and thereof shall make a report unto us. And in case they find
not any thing but sound, wherefore should we disquiet him? But if otherwise, we
will persecute both him, Cost addition (and the Pope himself) sent (...) style
de l'Anglois. and non comydes Barons de S. Louys.
and the Pope himself, if he believe not in God aright, or whom soever
besides, to the very rooting out of the memory of them.

And when Peter King of Aragon, besides much intelligence, and correspondence
he interteyned with the Insidels, had caused the festiuity of Easter day to be
violated, by the horrible massacre of the Sicilian Euensong; Pope Martin the 4.
says Paul Aemilius, Paul. Aemil. in Philip. 3.
and du Du Haillan l. 12. de Phist. de France.
Haillan after him) acquitted, and absolved the Aragonians of the Oath of
fidelity they had made to the said Peter. And Philip, surnamed the Hardy, Son
of the same S. Lewis, and Father of Philip the Fair, took arms for the
execution of the Popes censure, and died in executing of it. But I insist the
less upon this example, because though there were some crime of religion
intermixed with the motives of the censure: yet there wanted not many temporal
respects and causes: I only allege it to show how far off the Kings of
France were from holding, that it was contrary to the word of God, and impious
and detestable to think, that in certain cases the subjects might be
absolved from their fidelity and allegiance, sworn to their Princes, since they
became themselves the executors, and reputed such acts amongst the chiefest
works of their piety. For the defendors of Act. inter Bonif. and Phil. Pul^h.
fol. 80. page 2.
Philip le belle, have put this example amongst the meritorious works of the
Kings of France. Philip his Father, say they, ended his life, and went to God
prosecuting in Aragon the Churches quarrel.

And when the Pope Urban the fifth had excommunicated Peter the Cruel King of
Castile, For that, says Froissart Proissart vol. 1. cha. 230.
an Author of the same time, he was an Bulgaret en Froissart signify
Albigeois, an heretic.
heretic, a persecutor of the Church, and conspired with the Moors (some add
De Ser^es.
an abnegatour and abiurer of his Christianity) and had discharged his
subjects of the Oath of their fidelity: King Charles the si^th assisted the
Popes censure with his arms, and sent his Constable with an Army to drive
Peter out of Castile, and to put Henry the Bastard of Castile in his place The
King of France, says Froissart, Froiss. en Phist. de Fran. 1. volian c. 230.
was very glad of this ordination and decree, and labored and effected that
Monsieur Bertrard du Guesclin was sent to the Finance. And du Hailla^ says:
Charles Du Haillan e^ la vie de Charle 5.
the fifth King of France relying upon the interdict laid by the Pope upon the
Realm of Castile, and upon the right by him given to the Bastard, sent forces
of the French for his aid and succor, under the conduct and charge of
Bertrard du Gues^lin newly returned from his prison.

And when the Con^cell of Constance (which all the Parlamentes of France
embrace, and receive, as the Palladium of liberties of the Church of France)
was assembled and held, for the taking away of the schism that was between
the three Popes, contestating and standing for the Popedom; and that the
Emperor Sigismund took upon him the charge of going in Embassage in behalf of
the Council to Pope Benedict the 13. into Spain (a journey undertaken for a
reunion, and taking away of the schism of the universal Church, and whereunto
none might cause any impediment or let, without declaring himself an enemy of
Christian religion) the safe conduct that the Council gave him for his
security of passage through the lands of other Princes and Potentates, was
comprised in these words: Council. Constant. fess. 27.
If any King, Cardinal Patriarch, Archbishop, Bishop, Duke, Marquis, Count be
any hinderance, or let unto him; let him be deprived of his dignity, be it
secular or Ecclesiastical. And this, Gerson Chancelour of the university of
Paris, and the Kings Ambassador, and all the Bishops deputed of the Church of
France, being present and consenting.

And when the Council of Basil consisting for the greater part of French
Bishops, and which the Parlamentes hold for another Bulwark of the Church of
France, meant to propose a perpetual example of direction and d^scipline to
posterity, it caused the same Acts of the Council of Constance to be
published anew, and with the very same words. And not only the Council in
general, but also the Doctors in particular, who have lived since the
Divinity which we call Scholasticall, has been instituted, and namely those
who have been Frenchmen, or have written and taught in France, have all held
and auerred this doctrine.

I will not speak of them who have more exalted and extended the Popes power,
as Alexander de Hales Alexand Halen. p. 4. quast. 10.
an English Doctor; but who read and taught in Paris, Hugo de ^ugo de S. Vict.
l 2. de Sacram. p. 2. (...). 41.
S. Victore, an Almaine, yet a Doctor and Abbot of Paris; Durand Bishop of
Mande, Dura^d. M^^^^. in (...).
surnamed the Speculatour; Durand Dura^d. M^ld. l. de orig. ^urisdict. q. 2.
Bishop of Meaux; Peter Paludanus Petr. Palud. tract. de cause. imnad. potest.
art. 4.
Patriark titular of Jerusalem; Heru. tract. de potest. Papae.
Heruey, and others: But I will speak only of them who have specified the case
of heresy, or of Apostasy, and namely of S. Thomas, who for having taken the
degree of Doctor in France, and studied, read, and written so long a time in
France, ought to be reckoned and numbered among the French Doctors; and who,
for having been the chief of them all, and for having had the honor to be
Kinsman to S. Lewis, and to have been highly fanoured by him, and to have
eaten at his table, ought to be the less suspected of Princes.

He then in his Sum, which is the substance of all his other writings, and
as his last will and testament, and which has at all times been publicly
read, and (if I may say it) adored in the School of Paris, says expressly in
these words: Tho. 2.2. q. (...) art. 10. (...) corp. art.
The right of dom^nation or gournement that the Infidells have over the
faithful, may be justly taken away by the sentence or decree of the Church,
having the authority from God. For the Infidells by the des^rt of their
infidelity merit to loose their power over the faithful, who be tra^sferred to
be become the children of God. And sometimes it happens, that the Church does
this, and sometimes it does it not. And again: Ibid. q. 11. art. 2. (...)
corpore art.
So soon as any is deuounced excomunicated by sentence for Apostacy from the
faith, his subjects be absolved from his domination and subjection, and from
the Oath of fidelity, whereby they were bound unto him before. Behold what this
holy and wonderful Doctor, or rather this Eagle of Doctors, whom the
School of Deuines calls the Angelical Doctor says, and this in his Sum
which has been ever publicly read at Paris, and held for the miracle and
oracle of Scholasticall divinity, and who has never been noted nor taxed in
this Article by any, neither French, nor other.

And not only he, but even those also, who among the Doctors of the faculty of
Paris, have purposely and expressly written for the Emperors, and for the Kings
against the Popes, and have taken upon them to demonstrate, that the Popes
could not declare the subjects absolved in conscience from the Oath made to
their Princes, have always excepted the case of heresy, and infidelity; and
especially when the Princes went and proceeded so far, as to have a will to
destroy, and overthrow the Christian, or Catholic Religion, and to enforce,
and constrain their subjects in their consciences, and to persecute them as
they were either Christians, or Catholics.

For William Occam, who favored the Emperor against the Pope, and whom the
French Doctors who have impugned the Popes temporal authority, have taken for
their Patron, having written expressly touching the Power Ecclesiastique and
Laique, spiritual and temporal, where he disputes of set purpose, that the
Pope has not any power at all, to absolve the Subjects of Kings from the Oath
of Allegiance they owe unto them; excepted in general terms the cases of
Heresy or Infidelity: Occam. lib. 8. q. 2. c. 8. ad 3. alleg.
The Pope (says he) cannot ordinarily depose the Emperor, no more then other
Kings, though he be never so worthy to be deposed: nor for any crime or
default, though never so great, if it be not of the number of the spiritual
crimes.

And John of Paris, to whom the more sincere servants and favorers of Kings
send the Readers to learn and understand, what ought to be the limits and
bounds of the authority spiritual and temporal, does there bring the very
same exception: Io. Par, lib. de potest. Regis and Papae c. 14.
If a Prince, says he, were an heretic, and incorrigible, and lib. a
contemner of the Churches censure, the Pope might do something in the behalf of
the people, whereof might ensue that he should be deprived of his secular
dignity, and deposed by the people. And this the Pope may do in the only crime
Ecclesiastique, the understanding and notice whereof, appertains to him that
is to excommunicate all them, who should obey such a Prince as their Lord and
Sovereign.

And James Almaine Doctor of the Faculty of Paris, who at what time King Lewis
the 12. was at difference and variance with Pope Julius, took upon him the
defense of the Kings power against that of the Pope; and for that cause did
publish and put to light what Occam aforesaid had composed, and written against
the Pope, touching the bounds of both powers, and illustrated them with
explications and notes of his own, relates the words of Occam in these
terms: Doctor Occam, Almain l. de potest. Eccles. and Late. c. 8.
says he, writes, that Jesus Christ has not given power to the Pope to
deprive the Laiques of their Dominions, and their possessions, except in case
that a secular Prince should abuse himself therein to the ruin of
Christianisme, or of the faith; so as that abuse should extend to the damage of
eternal felicity. For in this case it is not to be denied, but that the Pope
has power to dispose, though other Doctors deny it: albeit they confess,
that the Pope has only authority, and power to declare, that such a Prince
ought to be deposed. Lo Almaine his words in the first part of his book. And
see again what he says in the second part of it; The Doctor (says he,
speaking Alm. ibidem.
of Occam) has answered, that if the Emperor be worthy of deposition for a
crime of the former kind, that is, for spiritual crimes, he may be deposed by
the Pope: for as much as the Pope has full power to punish spiritual sins.
But if he be worthy of deposition for a crime civil and politic, it then
belongs not to the Pope to depose him. And it is not to be said, that the
condition of the Emperor, and of other Kings, is not parallel, alike, and
equal. For Occam handles them as equal, and manteyneth, that the Emperor
depends not in any sort of the Pope for his temporalities. And a little
after, passing unto the opinion of John Doctor of Paris, he says: Alm. ibidem.
John of Paris holds, that for any crime, either spiritual or politic, it
apperteyneth not unto the Pope to depose the Emperor, but by accident etc.
that is to say, in as much as he may excommunicate him for such a crime, and
all them that take part with him; and consequently by such an excommunication
to constreyne them to depose him. And so he deposes him only by accident, and
indirectly, and not directly.

And yet these be the principal supportes wherewith the Kings and Church of
France, have served themselves, when they meant to withstand and oppose
themselves, against the progress of the Ecclesiastical power, over the
temporal. These be the books which the Kings have caused to be written for
the maynteyning; and upholding of their authority. These be the books which
the Faculty of Divinity, have caused to be published at such time, as the
Kings had any variance with the Popes. These be those writings that were
reprinted and put to light again, and illustrated with explications, when King
Lewis the 12. entered into a difference with Pope Julius, in the time of the
Council of Towers, and of Pisa. These be the books which were caused to be
published for the same subject, under our deceased King of glorious Memory, and
that an eight years since, that is to say, in the year 1606. and whereunto
the Masters of the Kings retinue of the Parliament of Paris, do remit and
refer their Readers, to understand what be the batteries and strongest defenses
of the Jurisdiction spiritual and temporal. And this School of Sorbonne
(says the deceased Monsieur Procuratour, or Attorney General de la Guesle,
Apud Rochell. in Decreto Eccl. Gall. lib. 5. c. 8.
speaking to the School of Sorbone on the behalf of the Court) has excellent
observations in the writings of Gerson, and in the book de potestate Regia,
and Papali, composed by John of Paris Doctor in this faculty, and in a
thousand places besides. And notwithstanding this, what says John of Paris?
That the Pope Supra page 47.
in case of heresy, can depose only indirectly, in as much as he can
excommunicate those who do adhere to an heretical Prince, and consequently
compel them by imposition of some spiritual pain to depose him, though he
cannot depose directly. And what says Gerson? That the power Ecclesiasticque
cannot take upon it power over the secular, but in case of heresy, or of
impugning the faith. The power Ecclesiastique (says Gerson de pot. Eccl.
confiderat. 22. tom. 1.
Gerson) ought not to presume, or usurp over the rightes, dignities, laws,
and judgments of the secular power, but when the abusing of the secular power
redoundeth to the manifest impugnatio^ of the faith, and the blasphemy of the
Creator, and to the manifest injury of the power Ecclesiastique. For then a
remembrance must be had of the last clause of this consideration; that is, that
in such cases, the power Ecclesiastique has a certain dominion and power
regitiue, directive, regulatiue, and ordinatiue.

And not only the Deuines, but the Lawyers also be of the same opinion. For to
say nothing of those who have further extended the Popes power, as John de
Selue Io. de Seiu. eract. de Benef. p. 3. q. 8.
President of the Parliament of Paris, Joan. Fab. in log. 1. nu. 10. c. de sum.
Trinit. and fide Cath.
John Faber Advocate of the same Parliament, Stephen Aufrerius Aufr. de potest.
saecul.
President of the Parliament of Toulouse: But to restreyne my self to those who
have written expressly for the limiting of the Popes power, when Master Raoul
de Presles Counsailour and Master of Requests to King Charles the fifth,
translated by commandment of the same King, the work entitled, Of the Power
Pontifical and Imperial, or Royal, he proposed the 15. objection for the
Popes temporal authority in these words: Item the Pope may abso^ue the
vassalls (or subjects) from the oath of fidelity, which is due to the temporal
Lord, which thing he would not do, if he had not power in temporal matters.
And he made answer for the Princes in these words: Raoul de Presles imprime
en Almaine parles Protestants.
I answer to this argument, and say, that in a case in which the Pope may have
action against a Prince, he may also absolve the vassals from their oath of
fidelity: or which is more, he may declare them absolved as in case of heresy,
of division of the faith, or of contumacy against the Church of Rome.

And when the Chancelour of the same King Charles the fifth composed in favor
of his Lord and Master, a dialogue of the Power Regal and Sacerdotall, Le
song dit Verger, attribue par quelques vns au Chaunceleur des Domans: par les
autres a Philip de M^gi^s Cos^^ller and in^^ne confident du R^y Charles 5.
he made answer by him who mainteyned the part of the Regal power, That the
power spiritual commands not the secular, but when the secular power
intermedled it self in matters spiritual, to the prejudice and hurt of the
eternal good of the soul. Behold his words. Lib. 1. c. 7.8. in res milit.
But there where the secular Prince would meddle in spiritual matters, and do
some thing in regard of his subjects, to the detriment and hurt of their
eternal salvation, the spiritual power is then necessary, which in such a
case commands, and guides the temporal.

And after this when Peter Gregory a lawyer of Toulouse undertook in his
Treatise of the Republique, the defense of the Regal authority against that of
the Pope, he always excepted the cases of faith, and says, that the Pope
could not depose Childerike of his own authority, that is to say, without the
instance of the French; for he adds: Petr. Gregor. Tholof. tract de Repub. l.
6. cap. 5.
Childerike was not an Heretic, nor had committed any Ecclesiastical crime,
whereby he should have been enforced to submit himself to the Jurisdiction of
the spiritual Sea. And again: Cest autheur est cite parles Anglois, par
^auterite temporel des Roys, and imprime ^uecq privilege verify au Parliament.
The example of the Emperors ought not to be drawn for a president for other
realms principalities and gouerments, which depend not upon the Sea of Rome in
temporal matters, and care not much for her commandments in such matters. I
always except, as I have said else where, the cases of faith, in which the
Princes of what power and liberty soever they be, are directly subject to the
Sea of Rome, and may be punished for the crimes they commit in such cases;
Always understood, that as the crimes be personal, and go not further then to
persons deli^que^t, so the pain that is due to them, infringeth not the right
of the success^urs to their Kingdom.

But against this, one obiectes three principal insta^ces. The first is taken
from the resistance made by Philip the Fair, to the attempt of Pope Boniface.
The second is taken from the opposition of King Lewis the tweluth, to the
pretensions of Pope Julius. And the third is drawn from the arrest, and Decree
of the Parliament of Paris against Tanquerell.

To the first of these instances, the defendours of the exception answer is,
that the subject of the controversy was not matter of heresy, or of Apostasy
from Christian Religion. On the contrary the people of France gave testimony to
King Philip the Fair, that he was a great distroyer of the Bulgares, They
anciently called the Asbige^ses, Bulgares, because the Bulgores held their
heresy, and after that al Heretics were by extension so called.
that is to say of Heretics. And as touching them who wrote for the King, so
far were they from houlding, that it is impiety to believe that the Pope can
for cry me of Religion disanull the Oath of fidelity and allegiance, as they
themselves alleged amongst the meritorious works of the Kings predecessors,
that his father died for the execution of the absolution, which the Pope had
given and granted the Aragonians from their fidelity to their Prince. Philip
his Father (say they) Act inter ^^enif. and Thil. ^idch. q^ de po^^st Pap. fol.
80.
passed to God prosecuting in Aragon the Churches cause. But the subject of the
quarrel was, that the Pope pretended, that the temporal sovereignty of France
apperteyned unto him. Against this therefore the King opposed himself and all
his Realm, and appealed not to the Pope, but from the person of Boniface
(whom he maynteyned not to be Pope) to the Council, and to the Sea
Apostolic, when it should be provided of a true Pope. The King, says du
Haillan, Du Hailan in his history of France in the life of Philip the Fair.
answered, that since Boniface was not the lawful Pope, he appealed for this
fact to the Sea apostolic, at that time destitute of Pope and Pastor. And
King Philip the Fair himself in the form of his appellation says: Act. inter
Bonif. and Phil. Pulch.
We appeal to the said General Council, which we most heartily crave may be
assembled, and to the true and lawful supreme Bishop that shall be, and to
others to which, or to whom it shall be meet to appeal. For the King and his
maynteyned, that Boniface was not the true Pope, but was intruded and thrust
into the Popedom by fraud and simony, Ibidem.
Celestine his predecessor the true and lawful Pope still living. And they
further added that he was an Ibidem.
Heretic, and consequently not Pope, for as much as, said they Ibid. in
appell fact. per reg. and regni col. art. 18.
he had revealed a confession: and more then that, he pretended, that he
believed not in the presence of Christ's body in the Holy Sacrament. And for
this the Count of Artois caused his Bulls to be burnt, not as of the true Pope,
but as of a false one, intruded heretical, and symoniacal: and for this cause
the King appealed not from the Pope, but from the person of Boniface to the
Council, and to the Sea Apostolic, when it should have a true Pope; and he
sent two Knights to signify his appeal, the one an Italian named Schiarra, and
the other a Frenchman named Nogaret, who surprised by intelligence the City
of Anagnia wherein Pope Boniface was, whence being delivered up, and sent to
Rome, he dyed within awhile of sorrow.

In place of Boniface was chosen Benedictus, to whom presently after his
creation, the King gave sufficiently to understand, that what he had done
against Boniface, was done but against his person, and not against the Sea
Apostolic. For he wrote unto him with this superscription, Act. inter Bonif.
and Phil Pulch. fol. 94.
To the most holy Father in our Lord, Benedict by the divine providence,
Supreme Bishop of the sacred holy Church, Roman and universal, Philip by the
grace of God King of France, devoutly kisseth his blessed seete. And further
with this co^gratulatio^: Ibid. f. 95.
The Order of the Preachers do glory to see sitting in the supreme throne of
justice, such a father of the Universe, and of the faith; such a successor of
S. Peter, and such a vicar of Christ. And together with this concludes: Ibid.
f. 96.
We recommend confidently the Realm, in the government whereof we do by the
grace of God sit, and withal we recommend the Church of France to the favors
of your Holiness. And to Benedict who continued in the Sea but eight months,
succeeded Clement the fifth, under whom the affairs of reconciliation were in
such sort accorded, and brought to an end, as the temporal rightes of the
Realm continued in their integrity. And Clement himself came to Lions, where
the King to honor in him the spiritual power of Christ, put himself on foot,
together with his brethren, to receive him. Our Chronicles, says du Haillan,
Du Haillan en la vie de Philip le Belle.
do affirm, that the King of France, and his two brethren were on foot by
the Popes side, holding his horses bridle.

To the second instance, which is of the complaint of Lewis the 12. the
defendors of the exception make the very same answer: That the source and
origin of that difference was not matter of religion, but cases merely
temporal, that is, of the league and association that Pope Julius and King
Lewis the 12. at that time Duke of Millane, had made and entered into against
the Venetians. For the Pope seeing how the King grew as great as he could
desire in Italy, fell of from that alliance with him, and reconciled himself
with the Venetians. The King incensed with this separation, and the Popes
deportement, and bad carriage toward him thereon following, caused a Council
to be held at Pisa, and after again at Millan, by the Cardinals and other
Prelates of his side, where the Pope was declared susspe^ded from the
administration of the universal Church. The Pope sore moved at this attaint,
caused another to be held at Rome, where to requite the King, he declared him,
and his adherents deposed from the administration of their temporal Estates.
But the French both Ecclesiastike and Laike, knowing that the first source and
beginning of that discord proceeded from passion of matter of State, and not of
religion, interteyned union in such sort with the King, as nothing could
separate them from him. For as touching the loss that happened unto John de
Albret of the Kingdom of Navarre, the Continuer of Paulus Aemiltus, though he
was a sore enemy of the memory of Pope Julius, confesses not, that the
sentence of the Pope was the true cause: on the contrary, he maynteineth that
the cause for which John de Albret lost the Kingdom of Navarre, was for
breaking of from the alliance he had with Ferdinand King of Aragon, which
alliance Ferdinand affirmed was ratified upon condition, that if the Kings of
Navarre did violate the same, then the Kingdom of Navarre should return to
the Spaniardes: and he did put himself into that alliance of King Lewis the
12. under promise, that he should procure the soueraignity of Berne to be
restored unto him. This then the Continuer of Paulus Aemilius auerreth to be
the true cause of the loss of the Kingdom of Navarre. And the other neither
to have been the true cause, nor true pretext, but only a help of a pretext,
of which Ferdinand not having taken his advantage, did not yet leave to
pretend, that the Kingdom of Navarre appertained unto him, and so to take
possession of it. The King of Navarre, says he Ferro^. Continuat. Pauli Aemil.
in. Lud. 12.
denied in the beginning, that he could refuse to give passage to the King of
Aragon, to pass into France, saying; first that he was hindered to declare
himself enemy to Ferdinand, by the alliance he had with him: and Ferdinand
himself vaunted, that when the Kingdom of Navarre, was by the Spaniardes
rendered up, into the hands of the race of Albret, it was by caution written
and provided, That in case their successors should break their alliance, the
Kingdom should return to the Spaniardes. And a little after: Ibid.
Whereupon Ferdinand having understood that the King of Navarre was entered into
amity with the King of France, turned against him the forces which he had
prepared for his journey into France. And this was the cause for which
Ferdinand did thrust his neighbor, and next bordering King out of his
Kingdom. And more then this, he added the pretext of another matter, namely
that the Pope had declared the King and his adherentes excomunicate, and their
Kingdoms exposed.

To the Third Instance which is taken from the Arrest, or Decree of Parlame^t,
which Mousieur Chancelour of the Hospital caused to be made against
Tanquerell, there needs no other answer then the Answers going before. For
the Arrest touches not in any sort the exception, whereof the French Doctors
speak, who have written in defense of Regal Authority, which is the case of
Heresy, or Apostasy from Christian Religion; but only the fact of temporal
Sovereignty, as it appears by the disauowing of the proposition that was
comprised in these words; Ap^d Boch^^l. Decree. Eccl. Gall. lib. 5. ca. 6.
I am sorry, that I have held, that the Pope was Monarch spiritual and
temporal, and can depose Princes that are rebellious to his commandments.
And therefore to what purpose is it to allege this history, and other the
like, which speak of temporal Sovereignty, alleging them against the
exception of which we treat, which they who make it, extend but to the cases
of Heresy, or of Infidelity alone, that is to say, of abiuration of Catholic,
or Christian Religion? But it may be replied, that the Popes may well impute
unto Kings, either by passion or bad information, that they be Heretics or
Apostata's from Christian Religion, though they be not so indeed. But against
this, the authors of the exception think they have carefully provided. For
first they protest, that they mean to speak of an Heresy notorious, well
known, and condemned by the precedent sentence of the Church. And secondly
they confess not, that the execution temporal of these Ecclesiastical
judgments (that is to say of actual deposition) appertains to the Pope, but
to the body of the Realm. By occasion whereof, if the Pope err in fact, and he
presuppose falsely, that a Prince makes a public profession, to believe, or
establish an Heresy condemned by the Church (a matter that cannot be concealed
or hidden) the Clergy and all the rest of the Realm in place of following the
judgment of the Pope, do join themselves with the King; and make known unto
the Pope, how he was deceived, and mistaken in the fact, demanding that the
matter may be judged in full Council, the Church of France being present.

In so much as it is so far off that this manner of proceeding restrained to the
only case of Heresy or manifest Apostasy from Christian Religion, may cause the
ruin and overthrow of Catholic Kings, as that on the contrary it does assure
and fortify them with a double rampaire. For if the subjects have any bad will,
they are not permitted under pretext of Religion to move any thing against
their Prince, until the authority of the universal Church, residing either in
the head which is the Pope, or in the body which is the Council, has declared
him fallen into heresy, or Apostasy from Christian Religion. And if the Pope
deceived or misinformed in the fact, precipitantly and unjustly declare him
such a one; besides the recourse that the French are wont to have to require of
the Pope, that the matter may be examined in a Council, where the Bishops of
all the Church, and in particular those of the French Church are present; the
declaration of the Pope cannot be followed to the temporal effect, which is
actual deposition, until the Realm consent unto it, and see demonstratiuely
by the conversation of their Prince, whether he makes profession of the
Catholic Religion, or of any other. Now, who understands not, that it much
more profits Kings to have this double rampaire before them, that is, that
nothing can be designed against them, without the preuentio^ of the Churches
universal judgment, nor be effected without the concurrence of the consent of
their people, then to permit and leave to the liberty of every particular
person, to censure of the religion of his Prince, and after he has given his
judgment, to make himself an arbitrer of the remedy that is to be applied?

It further appears, that our Kings have been so far of from thinking
that this bar of the Popes authority, interposed between them and their
subjects, has been prejudicial unto them, as on the contrary they have with
great instance obtained of the Popes (and that by a privilege both very
singular and favorable) that none other but the Popes may excommunicate the
Kings of France, or impose interdiction, be it in general upon the whole
Realm, or in particular upon the Lands under their obedience.

Hence it is, that Peter de Cugneres Petr. C^gner. grauam. 59.
the Kings Advocate among other the complaints that he made to King Philip de
Valois against the Churchmen, brought this article for one: Moreover they have
many times interdicted many of the Kings Cities and Castles, and have caused
the divine service therein to cease, against the privileges that our
Sovereign Kings have from many Popes. For Pope Alexander the Alexand. 4.2.
Calend. April. Pontif. an. 2.
4. yealded th^se words unto the King S. Lewis, by express Bulls; That no
Archbishop, nor other Prelate can publish against your land sentence of
excommunication, without commandment, or special license of the Sea
Apostolic. And Nicolas Nicol. 3.13 Calend. Octobr. Po^tif. an. 1:
the third uses these words in his Bull to Philip his son: That none
generally pronounce the sentence of excommunication, or of interdiction against
all your land, or against the Realm of France, without special commandment
of the Sea Apostolic. And besides Clement Clem. 4.3 Idib. Martij. Pontif-an:
2.
the fourth, Gregory Greg. 10.9. Call. April. Pontif. an. 1.
the tenth, Martin Mart. 4. call. October. Pont ann. 1.
the fourth, Clement Clem. 5.2. call. Aug. Pontif. ann. 2.
the fifth who published the like Bulls, Clement Clem. 6.2. call. lan. Pontif.
ann. 9.
the sixth renewed them afterward again by Bulls sent to King John, and to the
Queen Jane his wife in these terms: Giving consent to your devout petitions,
we yield unto you by Apostolic authority, to you and to your successors Kings
of France, who shall be from time to time, that none can publish sentence of
Interdict against your land or theirs, without special command, or license of
the Sea Apostolic. And again by other Bulls Ide^ 12. call. Maij Pontif. ann. 9.
sent to the same King John and Queen Jane, for their Chappells in particular,
in these words: That it be not lawful for any to put the Chappells of you,
and of your Successors Kings after you, under Ecclesiastical Interdict,
without special license of the Sea Apostolic. And these Bulls were
addressed, and sent to the Court of the Parliament of Paris, by the letters
Patentes Anno 1369.
of Charles the Fifth, to cause them to be registered; And they were registered
14. calend maij.
by Act of the same Parliament, showing their execution and verification.

But here the question of Right is not disputed, namely whether the French
Doctors have had reason to except against the insolubility of the Oath of
alegiance, in cases of Heresy or Apostacy from Christian religion? The matter
which we now speak of, is a question of Fact, that is to say, Whether they
have excepted them? And for this we need no better witnesses then the English
writers, VVidrington Apol. pro Iur. Prine.
who have put their hand to pen for the defense of the Oath, made by the
present King of England against the Pope. For having used all their endeavor to
find some doctors, and in particular French, who had held their opinion before
these last troubles, they could hitherto bring forth never any one, neither
Divine nor Lawyer, who says, that in case of Heresy or Apostacy from
Christian religion the subjects could not be absolved from the Oath of
Allegiance. On the contrary, the French men (whom they have cited, as John of
Paris supra page 47.
, John Mayor Io. Mayor in. 4. sent. did. 24.
, James Almain Io. Alma. supra page 48.
, Peter Gregory Petrus Greg. supra page 52.
, always except the cases of Heresy or of Apostasy from Christian religion.
And as for Strangers and Forrayners, as Occham Occ. supra page 47.
, Antony de Rossellis Ant. de Rossell. Monarch. part. r. c. 56
, and Vulturnus Vultur. lib. de Reg. mundi
, they affirm the same. For as touching Marsile of Padua they were not so
hardy as to allege him, for so much as he is well known for an heretic by
the uniform consent of all Catholics, as having denied, that the Pope was
head of the Church iure diuino, and S. Peter's Successor, which the Council of
Constance Council. Costant. sess. 8. in condem. art. VVicaf.
binds to believe, as an Article of faith, and under pain of Anathema: In so
much as for this very cause the Emperor Charles the Fifth caused his books to
be burned publicly.

Moreover they durst not allege the Epistle of the Chapter of Liege against
Pope Pascalis during the contentions of the Popes and of the Emperor Henry the
4. First, for that the Bishop of Liege under whom it was written, was the
Emperors Chaplain, and one of his faction; V^sperg. in Chron.
and very passionate against the Pope, as having been created Bishop by the
Emperor, and by the Antipope. Secondly, for that at what time it was written,
the Emperor resided actually in Liege Ibid.
: Thirdly, for that the Chapter of Liege has since Ibid.
abrogated it, and razed it out, by the pardon they craved of the Pope, for
having taken part with the Emperor: And fourthly that the same Emperor does
recall it, when he wrote to Pope Gregory the seventh the third Pope after
Paschalis, saying: Inter Epist. Hen. ^ Protest. edit.
That it was the tradition of the Fathers, that he could not be deposed, if he
erred not in faith. Which Cusanus Cusan. l. 3. concord. Cath. c. 7.
the Imperialist writing for the Counsel of Basil against the Pope, has since
auowued and auerred in these words: If the Pope find that he who has been
chosen Emperor, erreth in faith, he may declare him not to be Emperor,

They well allege indeed Sigebert Sigeb. in chro. anno 1088.
who says, that it was a nouelty, not to say heresy, to teach the people, that
they did not owe any subjection to bad Kings. But besides that, this Sigebert
was a man no less passionate for the part of the Emperor, then was the Bishop
of Liege: what he says, does not any way touch the case brought by the
exception, which is of Kings Heretics, or Infidells.

Now, if those who have of set purpose labored in favor of the Oath of
England, VVidring: in Apol. pro iur. Princ.
to find out authors who have affirmed, that in case of Heresy, or of
Infidelity, the subjects could not be absolved from the obligation that they
owe to their Princes, could not find out any one: And if those, who have since
written of the same subject in France, could never find out in all France,
since the time that Schools of Divinity have been instituted, and set open,
til this day, one only Doctor, neither Divine, nor Lawyer, nor Decree, nor
Council, nor determination, nor Act of Parliament, nor Magistrate either
Ecclesiastique or Politic, who has said, that in case of heresy, or of
infidelity the subjects cannot be absolved from the oath of fidelity they owe
to their Princes: On the contrary, if all those who have written for the
defense of the temporal power of Kings against Popes, have ever excepted the
case of heresy, and of apostasy from Christian Religion; how is it, that they
can without enforcing of consciences, not only make men to receive this
doctrine, Artic. of the third Estate.
that in no case the subjects can be absolved from the oath of Allegiance they
owe to their Princes, for a perpetual and universal doctrine of the French
Church: But also to cause all the Bishops, Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical
persons to swear it, as Doctrine of faith, and to condemn the contrary, as
impious; perverse, and detestable? And how can we endure a proposition to pass
for a Fundamental Law of the Estate of France, which came to light and was
borne in France, more then an eleauen hundred years since the State of it was
founded? And when there shall be found as many persons who shall have followed
it in France, as there be found who have followed the contrary, what shall they
be able to infer more (other nations contradicting) then to hold it for
problematique in matter of faith, and not to cause men to take and swear it,
as conform to Gods word, and necessary to salvation, and to abuse the other as
contrary to the word of God, and impious, perverse and detestable? But this is
enough for this point. Let us pass to others, and endeavor to handle them all
in as full and worthy manner, as this Audience does deserve.

THE SECOND INCONVENIENCE, that I have bound my self to show in this
Fundamental Proposition is, that not only it gives unto Lay persons power and
authority to judge of things of Religion, and to decide the doctrine that it
contains, to be conformable to the word of God, and the contrary to be
impious, perverse, and detestable: But also it gives these men authority, to
impose a necessity upon the Ecclesiastical persons, to swear, preach, and
teach the one, and by Sermons and writings to impugn the other. And who sees
not that this is to make the Church like unto that woman, of whom S.
Epiphanius speaks, Epiph. hares. 59. quae est Cathar.
who did put her head-tyre upon her feet, and her shoes upon her head: which
is as much to say, as to commit the command and authority of the Church to the
parties that should obey; and to put obedience upon the parties whose office it
is to command? And what is this but to open a gate to all heresy? What is it,
but to turn vpside down, and to overthrow the Churches authority? What is it
but to tread under foot the respect of Jesus Christ, and of his ministry? To
be short, who sees not, that it is a Sacrilege, that has at all times drawn
the Ire, Wrath, and Vengeance of God as well upon Kings, and Princes, as upon
particular Persons, who have attempted the same?

Every one knows that, Saul 1. Reg. 13 and 15.
was deposed from the right of his Royalty, and died a miserable death, because
he would take upon him the office of a Sacrificer. We know that Oza ^. Reg. 6.
was punished with a sudaine death, for putting his hand to the Arc, that
seemed to sway to the one side. We know that King 2. Paralip. 26.
Ozias was stricken with leprosy, and excluded from the administration and
government of his Kingdom, for taking the Censar into his hand. And holy Writ
says, Malach. 26.
The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the Law they shall require
of his mouth, because he is the Angel of the lord of Hosts. And the Prophet
Esaias Esaias. 54.
says to the Church, Every tongue resisting thee in judgment, thou shall
judge. And again: Idem. 60.
The King shall walk in thy light, and the people in the brightness of thy
rising. And King Iosaphat distinguishes the bounds of the one and the others
Iur^diction in these words: 2. Paral^p. 19.
Amarias (says he) the Priest and your Bishop, shall be chief in these things
that appertain to God: and Zabadias the son of Ismael, who is the Prince in
the house of Judah, shall be over those works which perteyne to the Kings
office. And our Savior Matthew. 19.
says himself, Whosoever shall not hear the Church, let him be unto thee,
as an Ethnic and a Publican. And S. Paul speaking unto Pastors Act. 20.
says: The Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to rule the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. And speaking to the Laytie he
says: Heb. 3.
Obey your Prelates, for they watch, having to render an account of your
souls. And again: Heb. 5.
Neither does any man take the honor to himself, but he that is called of
God, as Aaron.

And therefore we see that the first Christian Emperors, were euerso
respective and Religious, as they would never make themselves Judges, neither
of matters of faith, nor of matters of the Churches discipline, nor of the
Bishops causes among themselves, for fear of violating the rectitude that Gods
Ministers ought to bring to Ecclesiastical Judgments, by the fear of
temporal Jurisdictions. And that if they published any laws in such cases, it
ever was, after the Bishops had passed them, and to further the temporal
execution of the decisions, formerly made by Ecclesiastique authority.

It is not lawful form, says Ruff. l. 10. Eccles. h^st. c. 2.
Constantine the Great, who am placed over temporalities, to censure and judge
the causes of Bishops And the Emperor Valentinian Sozom. l. 6. c. 7.
the first said: It is not lawful for me who am of the Laity, to arrogate to
my self the curiosity of searching into these matters. And the Emperor
Theodosius the second Epist. ad Sinod^ Ephesians.
writing to the Council of Ephesus, says: It is not lawful for him, who is
not of the rank of Bishops to intermeddle himself with the decision of the
affairs of the Church.

And the most glorious and victorious of all our Kings, which was Charlemaine,
confirming the answer that Censtantine made, says: Carol. m^g^. l. 6. cap.
301.
The Emperor Constantine answered upon the accusations of the Bishops, To me
who am placed over temporalities, it is not lawful to judge the Bishops
causes. And confirming that which the Emperor Valentinian had said, he used
these words: Ibid.
Your business is above us, and therefore judge among your selves of your own
causes: For you are above us.

And when on the contrary, the heretical Emperors would take upon them, to
meddle with Ecclesiastical judgments, the holy Fathers resisted them, and
contradicted them with all manner of constancy. We are not permitted (said
Hosius to the Emperor Epist. ad Constable. apud Atha^. in ep. ad solit. vit. agent.
Constance) to hold the Empire on earth, nor to You to lay hand on the Censar,
and to usurp the authority of Religion. And S. Athanasius says: Athan. epist.
ad solit. vitam again.
When was it ever heard in the memory of man, that the judgments of the Church,
took their force from the Emperor? And again: Ibidem
He treats not of matters of the Roman Common wealth, where there may be
credit given to you as to an Emperor: but he speaks of a Bishop. And a
little after: Ibidem
Who is he, who seeing an Emperor, occupying the chiefest place in matters of
the Church, would not judge that it were the abomination of the desolatio^
fortould by Daniel? And Gregory Nazianzen Greg. Naz. orat. adcities ti.
percuis. and Princip. irascent.
says: Will you hear a free word, which is, That the law of Jesus Christ
subiecteth you to my Jurisdiction, and to my tribunal. For we are Emperors
also, namly in an Empire greater and perfecter then yours. And S. Ambrose Ambr.
ep. 32. ad Imper. Valent. innior.
says. Who makes any doubt if we regard the order of the Scripture, or the
antiquity of the Church, but that the Bishops in causes of faith have a custom
to judge of Christian Emperors? And again: Your Father said, It is not for me
to judge between Bishops; And your Clemency says, It apperteineth to me to
judge. And S. Martin the renowned ornament of the Gauls, says: Apud Sever.
Sulpit l. 2. sacrae. hist.
It is an impiety new, and not heard of before, that a secular Judge should
judge of matters of the Church.

And against this it helps not to allege that the Emperor Constantine did
call himself Eusebius. l. 4. de vit. Constant. cap. 24.
a Bishop out of the Church. For Constantine by that meant nothing less, then
to say that he had jurisdiction and superintendency over the external form
and discipline of the Church. Else wherefore should he have desired with so great
instance the authority of the Council of Nice, for the decision of the day of
Easter? But he meant only to say, that what the Bishops did by their preachings
among the Christians within the Church, that did he out of the Church, by his
Edictes against the Infidells. He ordained (says ^usebius) by his Edictes, and
gave order to the Governors of the Pagans, to cause them to keep the Sunday
also, as well as the Christians, and to honor the days of the Martyrs, and the
feasts appointed in the Churches. And thereof it came, that having one day
feasted some. Bishops, he called himself, Bishop in their presence, saying
unto them: God has placed you Bishops within the Church, and me a Bishop out
of the Church.

But me thinks I hear You already say, that the matter of this article is not
a question of Religion, but a simple and mere question of Estate, and Policy.
As if to handle, how far the spiritual use of the keys, and of the power of
binding and loosing, which God has given unto his Church, extends it self,
were not a question of Religion? As if to dispute whether these keys might
pass to the exco^municating of them, that willingly obey their Princes, who
after having done homage of their Crowns to Jesus Christ, come to use manifest
felony against him, to proclay me war against him, and to impugn his faith
and doctrine, were not a question of Religion? As though to dispute whether
those keys could in conscience, and in the Churches tribunal absolve souls of
the Oath of Allegiance, they owe to their Princes, when their Princes violate,
and break the reciprocal Oath they have made to God and to them, to mayntaine
them in Christian and Catholic Religion, were not a question of Religion?

For therein being two obligations and bands, by which the subjects are bound
to obey their Princes, the one politic, which has for his scope, the peace
and felicity of the temporal life, and against the violating whereof there be
temporal pains ordained, which is that whereof the Apostle speaks Romans 13.
when he says, That a man must obey Princes not only for wrath; the other,
religious and Ecclesiastike, which is that of the obedience, that Christians
owe to their Princes, not for the simple respect of laws and pains temporal,
but for respect unto God, and for the consideration of rewards and pains
eternal, which is that, that the same Apostle Ibid.
calls for conscience sake: Who doubts, when there is question of untying,
not of the simple knot politic, for which the politic laws be instituted,
but of the spiritual, and Ecclesiastike knot, and of the obligation contracted
in the tribunal and Court of conscience, and this being the matter which is
now in dispute, whether in case of heresy it may be v^tied or not; who doubts
I say, whether this question be a question of Divinity? And more then this,
whatsoever the matter be in it self, who sees not, that to dispute, if it be
conform, or contrary to Gods word, is a question of Religion?

But some will reply, and say, that this is so clear and so evident by
Scripture, as it admits neither untruth, nor dispute, nor censure. Is it
true? Where then there is a proposition which all the school Doctors, and
namely the two great lights of School Divinity S. Thomas, and S. Bonauenture,
and so many other Bishops and Doctors, have thought conform, or at least not
repugnant to the word of God; shall the contrary proposition be so clear in
Scripture, as it shall need neither to be disputed about, nor censured? And
what article then of faith may not be thrust out of the Churches Tribunal, and
exposed to the prey of Heretical presumption, if it be enough to say, that it
is so clear in Scripture, as that therein, there is neither need of dispute,
nor judgment?

Indeed this might have some appearance, if those who hold the one of the
propositions, should allege Scriptures for themselves, and the others should
not cite any at all. But as well those who hold the affirmative proposition, as
those who hold the negative, argue by Scripture, answer by Scripture, and
reply by Scripture. For example, they who hold the affirmative, that Princes
who overthrow and destroy religion, 1. Reg. 15.
may be excluded and deprived of their right, allege, that Samuel deposed
Saul, or according to others (for I pretend not to treat here by way of
resolution, but only problematically) declared him deposed, for having violated
the laws of the Jewish religion. ^. Reg. 11.
That the Prophet Abia deposed Roboam from his right of regality that he had
over the Ten tribes of the people of Israel, because Solomon his Father had
revolted and fallen from the law of God, and sacrificed to false Gods. That
the Prophet Elias deposed Achab for having embraced 3. ^^g. 19.
the religion of false Gods, and persecuted the servants of the true God.

Those contrariwise who stand for the negative part, answer, that the organs,
instruments, ministers, and oracles of such depositions, were the Prophets, who
were particulerly and infallibly instructed, taught and inspired of Gods will,
and that their actions cannot be drawn into a consequence for the time of the
Evangelical law, wherein there be more Prophets.

Those, who reply forth affirmative part say, that where there were in the
Jewish religion, two sorts of missions, the one ordinary which was
Sacerdotall, and the other extraordinary which was that of the Prophets it; was
to this end, that if the ordinary came to decay, or to decline, it might be
raised up again and supported by the extraordinary: But in the law of the
Gospel there is but one mission, and that Sacerdotall, or of Priests. All
the authority and infallibility which was in the two missions of the old
Testament, is united in the only ordinary and Sacerdotall mission of the new;
which consequently can no more fail, and be deceived in judging of Heresy, or
of Apostasy from Christian Religion (which be the two only causes, for which
the French Doctors, who have written in favor of Kings, think a Prince may
be excluded from the right of reigning over Gods people) then the prophetical
mission of the old Testament.

And others add, that even in the old Testament this prerogative was not
restrained to the Prophets alone, but was extended to the Priest: For the
Priests judged of the leprosy, If thou perceauest (says the Law) that there is
difficulty between leprosy and leprosy, Deuteronomy. 27.
thou shall arise, and go up to the Priests of the Leuiticall stock. And hereof
there were two reasons: the one, for that the leprosy, as all the ancient
Fathers have observed, was a figure of heresy, the judgment whereof by right
apperteyned to the Priests of the new law of the Gospel alone: the other, for
that the leprosy was not then one simple malady or disease, natural amongst
the Jews, as it is now, but it was a punishment extraordinary, Leuit. 14.
miraculous and divine. For this cause it lay one while in a stone of the wall,
Leuit. 13.
which was to be pulled out, to take it away, another while in a linen, or
woollen garment.

By occasion whereof the judgment of this plague, apperteyned to them who were
the ordinary interpreters of the causes of Gods Ire, that is to say, to the
Priests. And in this ease, say they, all were subject unto them, even the
Kings themselves and bound after they had given sentence of the leprosy, and
declared them to be touched with it, to separate themselves from company, and
from the government of the people. And of this they bring for example the story
of King Ozias, 2. Paralip. 26.
who was suddenly stricken with a mark in the forehead for having
(notwithstanding what Azarias the high Priest said unto him) taken the Censar
in hand, to offer incense before the Altar; and the high Priest judging it to
be the leprosy, did thrust him out of the Temple, and from conuersing with the
people, and by that means caused, that the administration and government of
the Kingdom was taken from him, and transferred to his son: though among
other nations the leprosy deprived none of conversation with others; nor of the
government of the Common wealth; witness whereof is Naaman, 4. Reg. 5.
who was General of the warfarre of the King of Syria, and Governor of his
whole Kimgdome.

Finally to pass from things figured, to things literal, 1. Match. 2. and seq.
they allege the story of Matathias high Priest, and the head of the family and
house of the Machabees, who seeing Antiochus who reigned in Jury, to have an
intent to force the Jews in their ancient customs, and to overthrow their
law, and to persecute them by punishments, torments, and death, took arms,
and gathered Gods dispersed servants together who effected and wrought so much
under his conduct and his sons, as they delivered the people from the yoke of
the Seleucides, and took from them the Kingdom of Jury, and by that means
conserved the religion of the Jews, which without such a resolution, favored
by Gods visible assistance, had else been quite exterminated, and abolished out
of the land.

Those who hold the negative part, come down to the new Testament, and cite
for themselves this passage of S. Romans 13.
Paul, where he writes; Let every soul be subject to higher Powers: 1. Petr.
2.
For he that resists the power, resists the order instituted of God. And
this of S. Peter: Be ye subject, whether it be to Kings, as more excelling, or
to Rulers. And by this they infer, that obedience to Kings, is of Right
Divine, and therefore cannot admit dispensation by any authority, neither
spiritual nor temporal.

The maynteyners of the affirmative part, answer to this, that these passages
do not in any sort touch the knot, or difficulty of the controversy. For the
question (say they) is not, whether it be de Iure diuino, to obey Kings
whilst they are Kings, or known for Kings; But the question is, if it be de
Iure diuino, that he who has been once known, and acknowledged for King by
the body of Estate, may cease to be; that is, that he may do some thing, by
which he comes to loose and forgo his rights, and to cease to be acknowledged
for King.

Now, these two questions be far different: For, to take an example even of
him, under whom S. Peter suffered martyrdom, it was de Iure diuino to obey
Nero, whilst he was Emperor: But it was not de Iure Diuino (say they) that he
could not fall from his Imperial rightes, and be deposed, and declared an
enemy of the Common wealth. It was de Iure diuino, so long as Antiochus was by
the Community of the Jews acknowledged for King, that the Jews should obey
him in matters that were not against God; For he was no less temporal
sovereign of the Jews, then was the Emperor Claudius, under whom S. Peter
wrote. But after that Mattathias the high Priest, and the rest of the nation of
the Jews, who lived conform to their own law, had declared him a Tyrant, and
a violatour of the consciences of the people of God, and therefore no more
their lawful Prince; the particular Jews were then no longer bound to yield
him obedience.

And not only the defenders of the affirmative part: but even M. Barcklay
himself, who is the principal propugner of the negative part, uses this
distinction and says: Controuers. Menarch. Match. l. 4. cap. 16.
There is not any case wherein the people can rise against a Prince ruling after
an insolent manner, so long as he continues King. For this commandment of God
is always against it, Honor the King, and he that resists power, resists
God. And therefore the people cannot have by any other means authority over him
unless he do something, by which he by right cease to be King.

And else where they add, 1. Petr. 2.
what S. Peter writes, Romans 13.
Be subject to every creature, whether it be to King, as excelling, or to
Rulers as sent by him. And S. Hebr. 13.
Paul: Let every soul be subject to higher powers. And the same Apostle
writes else where in more express words thus: Obey your Prelates, and be ye
subject unto them: For they watch for your souls, as those who ought to render
account. Hence it arises, that it is as well de iure diuino to yield spiritual
obedience to Prelates, as it is to yield temporal obedience to Princes. And
yet it follows not, that it is de iure diuino, that the Prelates, no not the
Pope himself, cannot fall from their rights of Prelacy; nor that it is de Iure
diuino to continue to obey them, after they have lost their right.

But the defendours of the negative part object, that the Church which lived
under the first Pagan Emperors, never made use of this right of absoluing in
the spiritual Court, the Christians from the Oath they had made unto them: And
contrariwise, that the first Christians preached not any other thing, then
obedience that they yielded to the Emperors.

To this again the maynteyners of the affirmative part answer many things.
For first they say, that the Church not having absolved the Christians of the
Oath of fidelity by the^ made to the Pagan Emperors, all the Christians in
particular were bound, even in conscience, to obey them, and pray to God for
the safety and prosperity of their Empire. And as touching the cause for which
the Church did not take away the spiritual obligation, the Christians had to
obey them, they bring three reasons.

The first is; For that it had been over great imprudency and folly, to
irritate and incense the Pagan Emperors, by such a declaration, in a time when
they were the Lords of the whole world, and for that such an act could have
been not only unprofitable, but also absolutely domageable and pernicious to
the Christians, against whom to incense the Emperor at such time, as they had
all the forces, and the world within their hands, was not to succor or
promote religion, but to precipitate and overthrow it clean. For it is not
sufficient to say, that the Church is bound to do some thing, because she may
lawfully do it, unless she also can do it with prudence and profit.

The second reason is; For that there is great difference between the Pagan
Emperors, under whom the Church began to lay her first foundations, and to
take the first roots, and the Princes who should now fall into Heresy, or into
Apostasy from Christian religion, and should become either Arians, or
Mahometans, or Pagans. For the Pagan Emperors who then were, had not yet at
that time done homage to Christ, nor yielded or bowed their necks to Christ's
yoke, as we read that S. Greg. Turon. in Clodoueo.
Remigius said to our first Christian King: Mitis depone colla Sicamber, they
were not yet by a mutual, and reciprocal oath bound to their subjects to live
and dye in the religion and obedience of him who carries written upon his
thigh, Apocal. 19 Psalm. 105.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And those words of the Psalm: The
Kings and nations shallbe gathered together, to serve our Lord, Esa. 49.
were not yet at that time fullfilled: Nor those of the Prophet Esaias: The
Kings shall adore thee prostrate upon the earth, and shall lick up the dust of
thy feet.

By means whereof, they not having beeue declared vassalls and tributaries of
Christ, nor having made to him any oath of homage and fidelity, nor having
been received by their subjects with that condition they should live under the
Empire and Ensign of Christ, and not being bound to their subjects by
contract and mutual oath; when they began to proclayme war against Christ,
they fell not by their own proper Profession into any manifest crime of
felony; neither declared they themselves by their own judgment unworthy, and
to have lost the Fee which they held of him; they violated not the reciprocal
and mutual oath, that was between them and their people.

But at this day the Christian Princes, who have for so many ages since made
profession, to be vassals and tributaries of Christ's Kingdom, and to subject
their Scepters, their Diadems, and Crowns unto his Empire, who have raised,
seated, and placed his Cross upon their Ensigns, and in their standards,
carried it upon the forefront of their Diadems, have set it upon the top of
their Crowns, have stamped it upon their moneys and coins, that it might
appear whose tribute-coyne it was, have made these Inscriptions, Christus
vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat, have bound themselves after so long
a time, by oath, at their Consecrations, both to God and to their people, to
maynteyne the faith of Christ, and with that condition received the Scepter at
the hands of their Peers, and the reciprocal oath of the people: These I
say, when they come to proclaim war against Christ, and to break the oath
they have made to him, and to their Estates, not by a simple act of
contrariety, nor by a simple declaration and fact of repugna^ce, but by a
profession and protestation of a will always bent to contradict, and to oppose
against him: not by a simple violating and breaking of an oath, but by a vow
and oath of a mind, resolved for ever to violate and break their oath: not by
simple default of faith, but by the yealding of their faith and promise to the
enemy of him, to whom they had by a former promise and faith bound themselves;
that is to say, by abiuring and persecuting the Catholic Religion, and by
public profession of Arianisme, or of Mahometanisme, or of Paganism; Then
they fall into a contumacy of perfidiousnes against God, and make themselves
incapable of the tenures they hold of their Sovereign, and unworthy to be
acknowledged for Lieutenantes of their Subjects, and of those that be under
their charge.

And from this derogateth not that which others object, that Kings cease not
to be Kings before their co^secratio^, and therefore the oaths which they take
at their Consecration are not essential conditions of their Royalty: For they
answer, that Kings before they be consecrated, be presumed to have taken their
Oath, and made it to their people in the person of their predecessors, as the
people are also reputed, and held to have taken their Oaths of Allegiance unto
their Kings, in that which they have made to their predecessors. In so much,
as when there happens any impediment of Consecration, they are always
thought to have made and taken their Oath in desire and will, and implicit, as
the School Deuines say, by a covered relation, that the condition under which
they reign, is pretended to have, to the oaths of their predecessors, and
namely to the first Kings of the races and lines. They who are not only
content to bind their Successors by their example to take the like oath to
their subjects but also to assure unto them the Crown, with the more strong
bands, they would often see them consecrated in their own life time, teaching
them by the oath that they caused them in such a case to take, and make to
their people, with what a law and condition they passed the Crown over unto
them. 4. Cor. ^.


And to this they further add, that where S. Paul says, That it was ashame to
Christians, that they were judged in causes, that they had amongst themselves,
Cedr. in com. hist. in Just. ad lib. 1. tit. 5.6.11.
by the Infidells (a thing which the Emperor Justinian converted into a law,
when he ordained that neither Pagan nor Heretic should be admitted to the
administration or government of the Common wealth) he seemed to insinuate,
that the commandment which the same Apostle gave the Christians who lived
under Pagan Emperors, to obey them, was a commandment made by provision, and
for the time; namely until the Church were so multiplied and increased, by the
universal conversion of the Pagans to Christian Religion, as it were, or
should be within the power of Christians, to be able, without peril and wrack
of state, to hinder the admitting and receiving of any other Princes, but
Christians; and to observe this Law of Deuteronomy: Thou shall make one a King
among the number of thy brethren. Deuteronomy. 17.


The second difference that is between the one and the other Princes, is taken
from the diverse condition of Christian people. For in the time of the ancient
Pagan Emperors, which is the time (says S. Augustine) meant by the first part
of Daniels Prophecy, Aug. epist. 60.
the Christian had not yet attained the temporal Tribunal of Christ, nor as
yet apperteyned they to Christ's temporal Kingdom. For as much, as Christ did
not at that time exercise, or manage any temporal Kingdom on earth, neither
had as yet any temporal Ministers of his Laws, but only exercised a
spiritual Kingdom by his spiritual Ministers, which were the Bishops and
Pastors. But after that the second part of the Prophecy was fulfilled, that is
to say, after the conversion of Kings, and Countries to the Christian Religion,
and that Kings served our Lord in fear, and apprehended discipline, or
according to the Hebrew text, did homage to the Son, Psalm. 2.
he then gained, and added the Christians, not only to his spiritual Kingdom,
which he exercises by his spiritual Ministers, which be the Bishops and
Pastors; but also to his temporal Kingdom, which he exercises by his
temporal Ministers and Substitutes, which be the Kings and Princes, who serve
him (says S. Augustine) not simply, as men in observing his Laws, but as
Princes, in causing them to be observed.

And therefore since the time, the Christian people has, by the conversion of
Emperors and Empires, and by the reduction of Kings and Kingdoms, been
gained and consecrated to Jesus Christ his temporal reign, it cannot any more
be usurped, nor possessed by way of right, by the enemies of Christ's name. And
hence it is, that whatsoever Conquest the Turk makes of the Christians, and
whatsoever possession of long continuance it be, he cannot by any tract of time
gain the least inch of prescription over Christian people, who were formerly
subject to Christ's temporal tribunal, before any such Conquest by him made.

And to say the contrary, were not only to embrace and hod one of Luthers
errors, who has taught that the war, that the Christians made against the
Turks, was unjust and unlawful, and not only to condemn the authority of so
many Counsels, which have decreed the expeditions of the holy Land, for the
ayding of the Christians of the East, for the delivering of them from the yoke
and servitude of the Infidells (which had been a thing unjust (For the
Accessory follows the Principal) and if the Christians of the East had been
lawful subjects to the Mohammedan Princes, they neither could have revolted
from them, nor rebelled against them:) But also even to anathematize, and
accurse the memory of so many Christian Worthies, and to affirm that so many
Knights, Princes and Kings and among them our most glorious S. Lewis, who
dying in that war, as Champious and maynteyners of Christ's cause, pretended
to gain the Crown of Martyrdom, dyed in a cause unjust and worthy of
damnation.

But those who defend the negative part reply, and say, that in time of the
first Arian Emperors Constantius and Valens, before whom the Empire had
already acknowledged Christ Jesus, the Church used not such manner of
proceeding, nor acquitted the Christians of their obedience. On the contrary
that the Bishop Hosius, writing unto the Emperor Constantius, Apud Athana. in
epist, desolit. vit. again.
says unto him in these words: As he who would spoil you in your Empire,
should resist Gods ordenance: So I fear that your usurping the authority of
the Church, will make you culpable of a great crime.

To this then the defendants of the affirmative part answer two things; The
one, that the Custom of obliging Princes to make an express oath unto God,
and to their people, to live and to die in the Christian and Catholic
Religion, had not yet place in the times of the first Heretic, or Apostata
Emperors, and was not brought in but afterward, namely then when they would
stay, and hinder Religion from falling into the same perils, wherein it was
under them. The other, that the Church used not this proceeding, not for
default of Right, but for want of force and strength; not for want of power in
it to ordeyne it, but through want of ability in the Christian people to
execute it. For it is not enough to bind the Church to declare Princes
Infidells, and to have lost their rightes, and to exhort their subjects to
depart from their obedience, that she may lawfully do it, but it is further
necessary, that she be able to do it prudently and profitably.

And therefore S. D. Tho. 2.2. 2. q. 10. art. 10.
Thomas after he had said: Infidells by the desert of their Infidelity be
worthy to loose their power over the faithful, adds; But this the Church
sometimes does, and sometimes does it not. And if we should conclude that
because the ancient Church has not declared the first Arian Emperors excluded
from the right they had from God, of commanding Catholics, that therefore she
had not the authority to do it; we then should conclude the very same, that
because it excommunicated them not, it had no authority to do it. For we find
not, that any either Pope or Council did ever namely and personally
excommunicate the Arian Emperors: Not for that the Church cannot excommunicate
them, as well as other Aria^s, whom it excommunicated from time to time, but
for that it deemed it a matter of imprudency, and pernicious to Religion, to
exasperate them, not having forces to repress and curb them.

And as touching Hosius they a^swere, that he says, not, that the Church
cannot absolve in the spiritual Court, the Catholics from the obedience of
Co^stantius, if she should have thought it profitable, possible, and necessary
for them to attempt the delivery of themselves from his tyranny. Neither, says
he, that if the Emperor Constance being a Catholic Prince had not been
dead, and that he had declared and proclaimed war against his brother
Constantius, as he threatened he would do, if he ceased not to persecute the
Catholics; the Catholics of the East would not have joined and taken part
with him, and would not have believed that the Church could have dispensed with
them about their oath of fidelity they had made to Constantius. Theod. hist.
Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 9. and alibi.
But they say, that Hosius speaks of them, who of their private authority,
and of their own ambition raised themselves against Constantius, to deprive
him of the Empire, and to become Tyrants themselves.

Yet Lucifer Calaritanus makes no difficulty, Lucif. Cola. rit. lib. de non
parcend. in Deum delinq.
to call Constantius himself A Tyrant, and the Antiochus of his age, and
protests, that he is not bound toward him, to observe the modesty of
words, which the Apostle commands to be observed to Princes and
Magistrates; for as much as the Apostle speaks of Princes, who have not yet
believed in Christ, and not of such Princes as have revolted from Christ. I
add (says he) that the Apostle speaks of Princes and Magistrates, which
have not yet believed in the only Son of God, whom we should by our
humility, and meeknes, and long patience in adversity, and most great obedience
in things reasonable, provoke to believe in him.

But those who hold the negative part, Socrat. hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 19.
reply, that the Christians might well have deposed the Emperor Julian the
Apostata. For when the Emperor Iouian who was elected after his death, Theod.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
answered the soldiers of the Army, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 1.
that he would not have a command over men who were not Christians, they
replied that they were Christians.

And to this again, they who maynteyne the affirmative part, want not their
answer. For on the contrary, they auerre that the Church could not do it
prudently, nor profitably: For besides, that the Christians were so divided, as
the faction of the Arians alone, joined with the Heathens, (without speaking of
other Heretics, or of the cold Catholics, who as S. Gregory Nazianzene says,
Greg. Naz. in Iul. orat.
served the time, and had not (as he further adds) other law, then the
Emperors will) held their foot upon the Catholic Churches throat. And
besides when Julian was Emperor, he was so far from persecuting the Catholics
at the first, as that in the beginning of his Empire which continued but there
years, he called the Catholic Bishops home again, who had been banished and
sent into exile, by Constantius his predecessor. And in the end he had by
favors and his other carriage so gained the soldiers of the Roman bands, as
they made almost all profession of Paganism.

Whence it was, that Iouian a Christian soldier being by them chosen after
Julian his death, answered them that he would not command men who were not
Christians. For the answer which they made, We are Christians, was as much to
say, that all they made an outward profession of Paganism to please Julian,
yet in their hearts they continued still Christians. By occasion whereof the
fear of a greater ruin having hindered the Church, from absoluing the
Catholics from the obligation of fidelity, in behalf of Julian the Apostata,
they were still bound to do that which S. Austine says of them, Aug in Psalm.
124.
For the love of the Emperor of Heaven, they obeyed the Emperor of the Earth.

But some will say, the Christians might well have deposed the Emperor
Valentinian, for as much as they were the stronger in Millane, when he would
have one of their Churches, for the exercising of his Heresy therein. It is
true. But to this the defendants of the affirmative part, answer four
things. The first, that the memory of the Emperor Gratian his elder Brother,
and as it were Father and Tutor of the Emperor Valen^^ar, and slain by
Maximus the Tyrant, and the most Catholic Prince, and the greatest friend of
S. Ambrose that ever was, changed all the malice or evil, that the Catholic
people could have had, or carried toward Valentinian, into favor and
compassion, and into a desire of assisting him, for the revenging of that
murder, and making away of his Brother.

The second is, that Valentinian was yet so young, and the son of so Catholic
a Father, as there was not any cause or ground to despair of his conversion,
which also followed within a while after, and that with so great an Edification
of the Church, as S. Ambrose celebrateth him for one of the most Religious
Emperors of his age.

The third, that though in the beginning the people contained themselves within
the simple bounds of petition, and gave Valentinian to understand: We contend
not, O Emperor, but we become Suppliantes unto you: yet when Valentinian had a
meaning to proceed further, the people held their own, resisted the Emperor,
and stood so resolute in the matter, as he fearing a tumult and revolt, was
constreyned to yield unto them. Hence it is, that they thought not, that the
commandment our Savior gave to his disciples, when they persecute in one
City, to fly into another, was an absolute and perpetual precept, but
rather a dispensation and a permission, accommodated to the time; wherein the
Christian people either were still under Pagan Emperors, or had not yet the
means to make resistance, against persecutions by might and force.

The Fourth is, that the Emperor Valentinian his own soldiers, thought not
themselves so bound in way of fidelity unto him, as they believed they could
not be dispensed with; when he should perseoute the Catholics. For when the
tumult began to be hot, they caused it to be signified unto him, that if he
would come upon the Place, he should come thither accompanied, for as much as
they would assist and help him, if they saw him conjoined, and to take part
with the Catholics, else they would put themselves in company with the troops
that held with Ambrose.

But the propugners of the negative, part, recurre to the Analogy of other
practices of the Church, and say, that for Heresy the owners are not deprived
of their goods, and consequently much less Princes should be spoiled of their
estates.

To this again the maynteyners of the affirmative part bring two answers. The
one is, that in this our Realm, Heretics loose not their goods, and the
cause is, for that the execution of the laws made against Heretics, is
suspended for the conservation of the public peace, and tranquillity. But if
there should creep forth some third sect in France, and should begin to grow,
and were not come to be so great, and to make a notable part of the body of
Estate, as Arianisme, or Nestorienisme it is questionles, that the other two
would judge them, who should make such profession, worthy to be deprived, not
only of their goods, but of their lives also. For this is practiced at Geneua,
where Calvin caused Seruetus to be burnt: and it is the practice at this day in
England, where the Most Renowned modern King of Great Britany punishes the
Arians, with loss of goods, and of life.

The other answer is, that there is a great difference between the power that
owners have over their goods, and that which Princes have over their Estates:
For goods are made for their Masters, and Princes contrariwise for their
Estates; neither have goods any soul, nor can be compelled by force, or by
example, or by persuasion of their Masters to loose life everlasting, as
subjects may be by their Princes, by means whereof the prejudice of the one
does not make any consequence for the other.

And if this question be no where found certainly decided, neither by
scripture, nor by the decrees of the ancient Church, nor by the Analogy of
other Ecclesiastical proceedinges, how is it, that lay persons will of their
own authority, and without light and president of any general Council, of
any Oecumenicall Synod, of any universal Assembly of the Church, yea against
the greater part of the rest of the Church, convert this doctrine into an
article of faith, and make the Clergy to swear it is conformable to Gods
word, and cause them to abjure the other, as a doctrine contrary to the word of
God, impious and detestable?

It is five and twenty years since those of your Order, carried away by the
tumult and trouble of the time, labored in the full Assembly of Estates, to
establish one Fundamental Law of Estate, clean contrary to that article of
yours: And now you propose another Fundamental Law, entitled of Estate, and
of Religion, quite contrary to that former. And will you (not you, but those,
by whose inspiration and advise these clauses be crept into your Bill) that the
Laytie cause the Clergy to swear it? That the Laytie exact of the Clergy an
Oath in matter of faith? That the Laytie impose the Laws of Religion upon the
men of the Church?

O reproach, and shame! Oscand all! O gate set open to all sort of Heresies!
And shall our faith then be subject to the varieties, and inconstancy of the
affections of the people, who chaung every five and twenty years? And shall
the flocks then be guides to their shepheardes, Luc. 16. Hebr. 13.
and Pastors? And shall the children teach their Father? And shall that then be
frustrated that our Lord has cried aloud, The scholar is not above the
Master? And shall it be in vain, that the Apostle has said: Obey your
Prelates, Greg. Nazian. orat. de ser. suis ad Iul. trib. exeq.
and be subject unto them: For they watch for your souls? And shall that be
said in vain, that S. Gregory Nazianzene has written, You sheep, feed not
your pastors? And shall it be in vain that Saul was accursed because he would
usurp, and take upon him the authority of Priesthood? And shall it be to no
purpose that Oza was punished with sudden death for having put his hand to
the Arc? And shall it be in vain that Ozias was stricken with the leprosy
because he would take the Censar in his hand? But the time presses me to get
out of this point, and to dispatch the other two remaining, with as much
breuity as possibly I can.

THE THIRD INCONVENIENCE, that I have undertaken to discover and lay open to
the eye, in the examen of your article was, that it did thrust us into a
manifest and inevitable schism. For to say nothing of the declaration, that
his Holiness has already made of the Oath of England, upon the model whereof
this Article has been formed, and not to permit any hold to those who say,
that it should be the Pope, who should be the author of the Schism and not
we: I say that though the Pope intermeddle not himself in our affairs, the
Schism is all made the very hour that we accept and swear this Article or
Bill. And that it is not the Pope, but we that make it.

And to confirm it, how can we swear that the Pope, and all the other parts
of the Catholic Church, hold a doctrine contrary to the word of God, impious
and detestable, without making schism, and schism not only against the Popes
person, but also against the Sea Apostolic, and against all the rest of the
body of the Church? For if the foundation of the Communion Ecclesiastique, be
unity in faith, and in matters appertaining to salvation; how can we believe,
and swear that the Pope, and all the rest of the Church, err in faith, and in
matters belonging to salvation, and hold a doctrine contrary to Gods word and
impious and detestable, and consequently Heretical, without separating our
selves from Communion with them, and subiecting them in as much, as is in us,
to a malediction and an Anathema; and consequently to divide the Church, or
rather separate our selves from the Church?

And how odious a thing, schism is to God, and how much it is detested both of
Angels and men, we need not any more express testimony, then that of holy
Writ, that teaches us, that the earth opened it self under the Schismatikes,
and that they descended all living, Number. 16.
and alive into hell: The ground (says Moses) brake in sunder under their
feet, and opening her mouth, devoured them, with their Tabernacles, and all
their substance, and they went down quick into hell. We need not a more
express witness then Great S. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 45.
Denis of Alexandria who wrote to Nouatian in these words: It were meet in
very deed rather to endure all things, then to consent to the dividing of Gods
Church: the Martyrdomes to which we expose our selves, to hinder the
dismembring of the Church, being no less glorious, then those which we suffer
for the alsteyning from sacrificing unto Idols. We need not more express
testimony, then that which S. Cyprian brings: That the stayne and spot of
Schism, is not washed away by the blood of Martyrdom. De unit. Ecclesiae.
We need not a more manifest testimony then this of S. Chrysostom, who says:
That those who divide the Church of Christ, Ad Ephesians. hom. 11.
merit no less punishment, thent hose who pierced and divided his own body.
We need not a more express testimony then that of S. Augustine, Aug. de bapt.
contra Donat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
who affirms, that the wound of schism is more grievous then that of
Idolatry. Those (says he) whom the Donatists heal of the wound (...)
Idolatry, or of Infidelity, they hurt, and wound more grievously with the wound
of schism.

Neither does this Article only cast us into an ineffable schism; but does
also precipitate us into a manifest heresy, necessarily obliging us to
confess, that the Catholic Church is perished and decayed on earth for many
ages past. For if they, who embrace the opposite Doctrine, hold an opinion
contrary to Gods word, impious and detestable; the Pope has not then for so
many ages past, been Head of the Church and Christ's vicar, but an Heretic
and Antichrist, and all the other parts of the Church, have not been true
parts of the Church, but members of Antichrist.

And this being so, where continued the Catholic Church? In France alone? And
shall then the Part have given a bill of divorce to the whole? Shall then that
which an ancient Father cried out be accomplished: I see that, which cannot be
done; Author li. contra Fulgent. inter ep. Aug. tom. 7.
The Part of the Donatists has overcome the whole body; A corner of Afrike,
has excluded and thrust out the whole world? What then shall become of the
inheritance, to whom God the Father said: Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Gentiles for thine inheritance? Psalm. 2.
what then shall become of the title of Catholic, by which S. Aug. cont. ep.
Fundament.
Augustine professes himself to have been most of all held and kept in the
Church?

But how should it have contiuued in France, if this Article be true, since all
the French Doctors have for so many ages held the contrary in case of Heresy,
and of Apostacy from Christian Religion? we should then also bid adieu to the
Church of France, that has been before our times, and take up the bodies of
so many Doctors, either French, or those who have written and taught in
France, as S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, and others without number, and burn
their bones upon the Altar, as did Josias burn and consume the bones of the
false prophets.

And this done, where should the Church have been? In the desert of the
Apocalypse? And why then should we with so main force oppugn the inuisibilitie
of the Heretics Church? Wherefore should we delay to yeald them the victory,
and our arms, and all? For what greater trophies and signs of victory can we
raise and set up for them, then to auerre and profess, that the visible
Kingdom of Christ, should be perished and clean decayed through the world:
and that for so many hundred years past, there has been neither temple of
God, nor spouse of Christ, nor Church, but that all has been the Kingdom of
Antichrist, the Synagoue of Satan, and the spouse of the Devil? And what
stronger machines and engines, could they desire for the abolishing and
overthrowing of the Article of Transubstantiation, that of Auricular
Confession, and other the like, which were decided against the Albigenses, and
in few words for the ouerturning and ruining of all Catholic Religion, then
to say, that the Church which has decided them, has done it without
authority, and was not at that time any more Christ's Church, but Antichrists
Concubine? See therefore whereunto these men lead us, who compel us to swear,
that it is a doctrine contrary to Gods word, impious and detestable, to hold,
that subjects in some cases may be absolved of their fidelity. And this
proposition they would have us put in the same conclusion of faith, and under
the same decree of Anathema, with that of the murdering of Kings.

THERE remains the last Inconvenience, which I promised to examine, which is,
that this medly does not only make the remedy, that they would bring to the
danger of Kings, to be unprofitable, but more then that to be pernicious and
domageable. And now I beseech you, Gentlemen, before I enter into the matter,
to permit me to tell you, that I give not place in affection to the service of
the King to any of my Countrymen. I am a French man borne, and the son of a
French man, and I have never but respected our Kings. I have never in fact of
State, cast mine eyes upon others, and God lending me my right wits I will
never turn mine eyes away. I have been nourished, brought up, intertayned and
raised up under the wings of my Sovereign King Henry the third, and have
always continued an adherent to his fortunes, whilst he lived.

After his death I followed likewise the fortune of the deceased King Henry the
Great, of glorious memory, and that with a good, and with a sound conscience,
even according to the Maxims, as well of those who defend the affirmative
part, as of those who hold the negative. For to say nothing of the word of
Relapse, that was by bad information imputed unto him, he was never either
persecutour or incorrigible. On the contrary, after the time of his
predecessors death, he promised to procure to inform himself and be
instructed, and in his greatest affairs, he did me the honor to confer with
me in secret about the points of our faith, for the preparing of himself to
his Conversion. I brought him by the grace of God back, or the grace rather by
me to the Catholic religion. I obtained his absolution at Rome of Pope Clement
the 8 and reconciled him with the Sea Apostolic: Actions, by which he effected
and wrought the recovery of his Estate, and the restoring of you all to your
houses, commodities, and fortunes.

I ever served him after that, supporting and upholding the honor, and rightes
of his Majesty, in a more affectionate manner then I tendered mine own life;
not here, where it is an easy matter to extol the Kings soruice, and to
commend, as the saying is, the Athenians at Athens, but out of his own
Kingdom, and there where matters were canuased and disputed upon. And of this
also, I have received for a sign, and testimony of approbation of my service,
all these honors and commodities I am now possessed of; for as much as I never
received neither goods nor dignities, but of him. It is he alone who has
advanced me, and raised me up to a Bishop, Archbishop, and Cardinal. He made
me Great Almenour, and bestowed upon me the means and provisions, necessary
for the helping of me, toward the susteyning and bearing out a part of these
charges.

And from the King his Son, I continue the enioyng and possession of the same
benefits and good turns, without hoping or desire of hope of gratificatio^
from any other. And therefore, Gentlemen, you ought to be believe that I am not
moved in this, for any other interest, then for his service and for the
conservation of the Catholic Religion, in preservation whereof is comprehended
both the spiritual and temporal safety of himself, and of his estate.

For the first branch then of our last opposition, which is, that the mixtion
of contentious matters, makes the remedy which they would bring for the
danger of Kings, unfruitful and unprofitable, we have already said enough
from the beginning. For seeing we will agree both the one and the other that
the te^porall laws, and the pains and penalties imposed upon the body, do not
any ways serve the turn or be enough to prevent, auert, and put by these
wicked attemptes, and that we must make recourse to spiritual laws, and to
the pains that be exercised after death, that is to say, to the laws of
excommunication, and of damnation eternal; and for that reason teaches us,
that the laws of Anathema, and of excommunication, make not any impression in
the souls, if they be not believed to proceed from an infallibleauthority, how
is it, when there shall be intermixed some clause contestated and called into
question, by the rest of the Church, that they will serve for a bridle to
those, who fear nothing but the pains and torments of the souls? And how
shall such laws imprint the terror and fear of Anathema in minds, that
shall believe, that the laws themselves be subjected to Anathema?

On the contrary, how will they not quite overthrow, the good and sufficient
remedies, that the general Counsels, whereof the authority is infallible,
have instituted for the safety of Kings, which they would take from us by the
medly of other things whereunto the universal Church does not agree? I have
said good and sufficient remedies for the safety of Kings, which they would
have taken from us; For who knows not, that if the infernal monsters, who
made the attemptes upon the lives of our two last Kings, had read the
Ecclesiastical laws, they had found their damnation expressed in the decree of
the Council of Constance. And therefore it was not for default of
Ecclesiastical laws, that they committed those two most horrible murders, but
for this, that they had not read them, or rather by occasion of an enraged and
devilish malice, wherewith they were possessed.

But they will reply, that it was not enough for the securing and assuring of
the life of Kings, that the Church has decreed under the pain of
Excommunication, that none may attempt upon their persons, if it decrees not
further, under the same pains, that the subjects cannot be absolved from their
obedience, in whatsoever estate they be, that is to say, even when they should
make profession of heresy, or incorrigible Infidelity, and should become
persecutours and violators of conscience. For though (say they further) the
Church forbids, that no attempt be made upon the life of Princes; yet if the
Princes happen to fall into incorrigible Heresy or Apostasy, and become
persecutours of the faith, and that the Church thereupon declare their
subjects absolved from the oath of Allegiance, and that notwithstanding this
declaration, they will enforce the subjects to continue their obedience unto
them, they become Tyrants. And then (add they) the Politic Laws permit
every particular body to attempt upon the person of Tyrants, and consequently
their life in case of Heresy, or of Apostasy cannot be secured.

To this objection the answer is short and easy. For the Church intermedleth
not her self with the absolution of the subjects, but in the Ecclsiasticall
Court: and therein besides this pain, and that of excommunication, it imposes
not any other. By means whereof it is so far from consenting, that any attempt
be made upon the life of them whom it has excommunicated, as it abhors all
fortes of killinges, and murtheringes, and especially such as be sudaine and
unexpected, in regard of the loss of both body and soul, which commonly go
therein accompanied together.

And if they say, that the Church ordayneth it not, but that it is the cause
that it is done, for as much as the Common wealth conforming it self to the
Churches judgment, and making the same decision in the tribunal politic, if
the Prince keep on his former course, declares him a Tyrant, and an enemy of
the state, and consequently subiecteth him to the power of the Laws politic,
which permit the conspiring against Tyrants, for the making of them away, and
for killing of them: we bring first this exception, that there is great
difference between Tyrants of usurpation, whom the Laws permit to
extirminate by all manner of ways, and Tyrants of administration and
government, who are lawfully called to their Principality, but govern it ill:
and we add that the Heretical Princes who persecute the faith and their
Catholic subjects, be of the number of Tyrants of administration, and not of
the number of Tyrants of usurpation, against whom alone it is permitted to
conspire by clandestine and secret practices.

And if they further urge and say, that the politic Laws permit conspiracies
against the one and the other: we answer, that they are politic, profane,
and heathenish Laws, as those of the ancient Romans, or of the Grecians in
former times, and not Christian politic Laws. For the Christian politic
Laws consider not only in their Princes the respect due unto them, for the good
of temporal policy, and the regard of the Majesty of the Estate which they
represent, but they further consider in them the Image and unction of God, who
has called them to that Dignity, in so much as in them, who have once had the
lawful vocation of Royalty, what Tyrany soever they exercise, the Christian
politic Laws never pass so far, as to permit the use of proscription
against their persons, or that any do attempt by clandestine, or secret
coniuration, or conspiracy against their persons, or lives; but they carry the
same respect to them, that did David to Saul, notwithstanding he knew he were
rejected, 1. Reg. 26.
cast of, and reproved of God, when he said: Who shall extend his hand upon the
anointed of our Lord, and shall be innocent?

In so much, as if the Christians be constrained to defend their religion, and
their life against Heretical and Apostata Princes, from whose allegiance they
were absolved, the Christian politic Laws permit not more then what is
permitted by military Laws, and the right of nations; that is to say, open
war and not clandestine and secret (...) and conspiracies. For there always
remains in them a certain habitude to the dignity Royal, and as it were a
mark of a politic character, that discerns them from simple particulers:
and when the obstacle and impediment is taken away, that is, when they come to
amend themselves, and to give satisfaction, it restores them to the lawful
use and exercise of their regality.

And therefore we see, that in so many controversies that the Popes have had
with te^porall Princes, never any Pope went so far as to counsel, or to assent
to the murdering of Princes. Contrariwise if any calumniators labored to
impute it unto them, they have ever justified themselves, even with the horror
and abomination of such acts, remembering themselves of these words of S.
Gregory, when the Lombards made war upon him: If I would have meddled with the
death of men, Greg. lib. 7. epist. 1.
the Nation of the Lombards should at this day have had neither King non
governors: But because I stand in fear of God, I will not have to moddle, or
deal with the death of any person.

And touching the other point of the last Inconvenience, which is, that this
medly makes the remedies, that they would bring to the danger of the Kings,
to be not only unprofitable, but also pernicious and domageable, there needs
not much eloquence to persuade it. For if those who made the attempts upon the
lives of our Kings, were moved to those horrible parricides by a false
imagination which they conceived, to wit, that our Kings did something in
prejudice of religion, how much more would they have thought they had a greater
and better pretext, if they had believed, that our Kings had abused their
authority by the bringing in of schism, and the overthrowing of Religion, and
that they had seen themselves in schism, and separated from the communion of
the Sea Apostolic, and cut off from the other parts of the Church?

And more then this, who understands not, that there cannot happen any thing
of more and greater danger for the life and authority of Kings, then
intestine and civil wars, which schisms do ordinarily draw after them?

Moreover who knows not, that the contempt and indifferency of Religion,
which must needs follow upon schisms, engenders and occasioneth Impiety and
Atheism, and takes quite away all the respect that men are wont to carry to
Kings for the love of God, and for the reverence of Religion, which is the
strongest corpse or Court of Guard, and the surest rampaire for the defense and
security of their persons? For when Religion is had in contempt, men are not
any longer withholden from attempting upon the persons of Kings, then by
force, and by fear of the temporal pains, and therefore when they think they
may do it, without being punished, or that they contemn and make no reckoning
of the temporal pains, they have no more bridle to conteyne them, or to hold
them in.

Finally, who sees not, that there can be nothing worse for the safety of the
persons, and of the estate of Kings, then to stir up, and draw upon them, by
an ouerture of a new schism, and division from the Church, Psalm. 75.
the wrath of him, who takes away the spirits of Princes from out of the earth?

And here, Gentlemen, I will not with you use more reasons and arguments, but
will pass over to exhortations and entreaties; and will conjure you to remember,
that you are French men, and that you are also Christians and Catholics, and
that in treating touching the securing of Kings, you must not only cast your
eyes upon the earth, but also lift them up to Heaven; and you must not remedy
their temporal safety in causing them to forgo and loose the everlasting, nor
provide for your bodily part which is France, by destroying and ruyning the
spiritual part, which is the Church.

The Pope tolerateth and endures for the good of the Churches peace, that the
Frenchmen, that is to say some of them hold and maynteyne in this point,
Doctrine contrary to his own, and to that of all the rest of the Church, so
they hold it only as problematicall, in matter of faith, that is to say, that
they propose it not as necessary to be held, with that necessity which is of
faith, and declare not the other to be contrary to Gods word, impious and
detestable. And though in the cases before specified, there be ten Countries
against but a part of one, an hundred Doctors against one, ten Counsels
against none: yet whether it be that these Counsels do not therein express
their intention by form of decision of faith, but by form and manner of
supposition, or for some other causes, he is contented to hold the Doctrine
contained in them for true, without binding us to hold it for necessary, as
matter of faith; he is contented to hold the contrary opinion for erroneous,
without binding us to hold it for Heretical, and not to excommunicate them, as
Heretics, that hold it.

And wherefore then should we now go about to break the Churches communion,
and to divide the unity of Christ's body, by turning into matter of faith, a
doctrine, which does not only make the remedies, which they would bring for the
security of Kings, unprofitable, but further, makes them pernicious, both to
their persons, and to their Kingdom?

There is no time wherein schisms be not most domageable, and prejudicial to
religion and to State, but they be most of all ruinous and pernicious to the
one and the other, when the times be already infected with heresy. For as the
Physicians say, that in the time of pestilence all sorts of fevers end in the
plague: so in the time of Heresy all schisms have their ending in Heresy. And
therefore Heresy having now at this day so great part in France, if we proceed
to bring in a schism among Catholics, who doubts but that the fruit of
this division, will be the enfeebling and weakening of the Church, and the
strengthening of Heresy? And if Heresy even when she is weakest has so much ado
to keep herself quick, how will she continue in peace when she shall once come
to an equality? And if we break it, how shall she be able to disturb the
peace of Religion, without troubling therewithal the King, and the State also?

It is certain, Gentlemen, the scope and intention of them that first moved
this stone of scandal, was not to provide for the security of the State, and
the person of our Kings: Their drift and intention was to cast the seeds of
division in the Church of France, and to assay either to separate it from the
other parts of the Church, or to divide it within it self.

I say not this to tax you. I honor you all, as persons of singular wisdom,
and merit, and most affected to the Catholic Religion. But I know you are not
the first authors and inuentors of this Article. I know that it has been
craftily thrust into some of your seats, It is not long time since they have
menaced and threatened us with this apple of discord. These be those that be
already severed from us, and have by this means thought to sow some sparcles
of division amongst us; and for this end they have served themselves of men,
who carry the name of Catholics, and more then that, of Ecclesiastical
persons, and for the undermining and beguiling of the ingenuity, good
disposition, and simplicity of others, under the title of service to the King.

The pretext they have taken, is fair, it is specious, it is over shadowed
with the name of the King, but under this cover, is hiden schism and the
design of making a division in the Church. These be the Vlissesses fighting
under Achilles his buckler,

When Julian the Apostata meant to draw the Christians to the adoration of the
false Gods, he caused the Idols of Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury to be
intermixed, and put in company with his own pictures, to the end, that when
they should present his own Images to the Christians to adore (as it was the
custom then, for the people to adore the Images of their Emperor) the
Christians either refusing to do it, should be accused of high treason, as
having refused to adore the Emperors Image, or in doing it be constreyned
jointly with the Image of the Emperor to adore Idols. These men have here
done the very same, having intermedled in one and the same Article, a decree of
the securing of Kings, together with an introduction of schism, to the end
that those who shall refuse this oath, should put themselves in danger, either
to be esteemed little affectioned to the service of Kings, or to be thought
culpable of schism.

And therefore you must not suffer your selves to be beguiled by this first
bayte. It is of honey, but yet of honey, that has been made by drone bees, that
have gone from one flower of hemlock to another, that is to say, by souls that
have tasted and sucked the venom of schism.

Aristotle writes, that we must behold pleasures not before, but behind, not
when they are coming, but when they are gone and past. In like manner in this
there be specious pretextes, you must regard and behold them, not by the face,
that is to say, by the first sight, but by the back, that is, by the sequel
and success.

This Oath resembles Horace his Mo^ster, which has the head of a fair and
beautiful woman, that is, the pretense of the service and safety of Kings; but
it has a fishes tail, that is the tail of Schism, and of division in
Religion. And indeed it may well be said to have a fishes tail, seeing it is
come swymming by sea from England. For it is the very same Oath of England
(saving that of England is yet more sweet, and more modest and moderate.) I
will not prosecute this point for fear to offend the most Renowned King of
Great Britany. I am (setting aside religion) his most humble and most
affectionate servant. I do in a most high degree, esteem, and honor his
learning, his eminent moral virtues, and his excellent natural conditions,
and I find nothing to be desired by me in him, that might express, not a
feigned Image made at pleasure, as that of Cyrus by Xenophon, but the true and
real image of a perfect, and complete Prince, the title of Catholic only
excepted.

He has bound in general all men of learning unto him, having made the Muses
to sit in his Royal throne, and he has obliged me in particular, for having
pleased to take the pains, to enter with me into the listes of dispute of
Divinity, and not to do as did Alexander, who disdayned to enter into the
Olympian race, if he were not to run his course against Kings.

I therefore touch not this string, for fear of offending. I know that holding
the religion he does, he thinks to do what he ought, when he assayeth to
bring in a Schism, and division in ours. But shall it be said, that what the
King of Great Britany does in England against the Catholics, does serve us for
a law, and an example to do the same in our Catholic Country? Shall it be
said, that France, that has for so many ages been honored with the name of a
most Christian Realm, Hier. contra Vigil.
and in which S. Hierome said, there were no monsters, is brought to this, that
it permits not Catholic religion, but with the same conditions, and
seruitudes that be imposed upon it in England? Shall it be said, that
Ecclesiastical persons be not suffered to live in France, but under the
stipulations, and conditions under which it is permitted them to live in
England? Shall it be said, that the Catholics of France, and especially the
Clergy, enjoying security and freedom, shall be enforced to swear and bind
themselves to believe the same thing, which with groaning and sighs, thereby
to gain some little breath, is done by Catholics in England? And if there be
found in England Catholics constant enough to suffer all sorts of
punishments, rather then to consent unto it; shall there not be found those in
France to do the same, rather then to subscribe, and to swear an article,
that puts the raynes of the faith into the hands of the Laytie, and
brings a division and Schism into the Church? Yes certainly, Gentlemen, such
will be found in France. And all we who are Bishops will rather go to
martyrdom, then give our consentes to the dividing of Christ's body, Apud
Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 6. cap. 37.
remembering this saying of S. Dionysius of Alexandria; That the martyrdomes
that men suffer for the hindering of the Churches division, be no less
glorious, then be those that men endure for absteyning from sacrifising to
Idols.

But we are not, God be thanked, under a King who makes martyrs, he leaves
the souls of his subjects free, and if he does it to those of his Subjects,
that be strayed from the Church, how much more will he do it to those souls of
his Catholic subjects? we live the one and the other, under the shadow of the
Edictes of peace, in liberty of conscience. And wherefore then should we be
constreyned to swear that, which we forbear to make others to swear?

There is not one only Synod of Ministers who would have subscribed to that
article, which they would bind us to swear. There is not one Consistory of
others, but believes that they are discharged of their Oath of fidelity
toward Catholic Princes, when they shall be forced by them in their
consciences. Of this come those modificatio^s that they have so often in their
mouth, Provided, that the King forces us not in our conscience. Of this come
these exceptions in their profession of faith, So the Sovereign Empire of God
abide in his own integrity. Of this came the taking of arms so many times
against the Kings, when they would take from the^ the liberty of religion. Of
this came their insurrections and rebellions, both in Flanders against the King
of Spain, and Sweden against the Catholic King of Polonia, whom they spoiled
of the Realm of Sweden his lawful inheritance, and therein established Duke
Charles a Protestant.

Neither yet do they restrain these exceptions to the only case of religion,
and of conscience, but they further extend them to secular matters. The
writings of Buchanan, Bruise, and infinite others give testimony, who will,
that if the Kings fail in temporal conuentions and accord, which they have
made with their subjects, their subjects be free to revolt from them.

Not considering that there is great difference, as we have already declared,
between faylinge in a simple accord, made by Oath, and destroying the Oath, by
the which the accord was made. For when a Prince does of frayltie, or of humane
passion commit some injustice, he does indeed against the Oath he has made to
his people, to do them justice; yet he does not thereby destroy his Oath.

But if he make a contrary Oath, that is to say, instead of what he has
publicly and solemnly sworn to his people, which was to do them justice (to
wit, as far as human frailty will permit) he should swear and bind himself
by another public and solemn Oath, that he would never render them justice,
but rather swear, that he will minister nothing but injustice; he should then
destroy his Oath, and renounce his own Royalty, in renouncing by a contrary
Oath the clauses and conditions of his former oath, for which, and by means
and occasion whereof his Royalty was instituted.

And therefore Barckley the Achilles of the doctrine of your Article, has had
most just cause to reprehend, and find fault with the aforesaid authors, but
in reprehending them, he has reserved an exception of two cases, which make
much more to the prejudice of Kings, then do the Churches censures from which
he would exempt them. For he affirms expressly, that in two cases the people
may shake off the yoke of Kings, Guil. Barcl. lib. 4. cont. Monarchomach c. 16.
and arm themselves against them. Behold his words. What then? Can there not
occur any cases in which the people may rise, and take arms by their own
authority, and assail a King insolently reigning? None indeed, so long as he
contynueth King: For this commandment of God contradicts it always; Honor
the King etc. who resists power, risisteth God. The people then (adds he)
cannot have by any other means power over him, but when he does some thing, by
which he cease of right to be King. For then, for as much as he spoyleth and
depriueth himself of his principality, and makes himself a private person, the
people remains free, and becomes superior. And these two cases, as he
says, be when a Prince labors, and has intention to exterminate and
overthrow the Kingdom and common wealth, as Nero and Caligula did; or when he
will make his Kingdom feudatary to another. Ibidem.
I find (says he) two cases in which a King by fact makes himself of a King
no King, and depriueth himself of his royal dignity and of power over his
subjects. The one is, if he goes about to exterminate the Realm and Common
wealth, that is to say, if he has a design and intention to destroy the
Realm, as it is recorded of Nero, that he had a deliberation to exterminate
the Senate, and the people of Rome etc. And the other, if the King has a will
to put himself under the clientele and protection of some other.

But who sees not, that this is a thing tooto unworthy for a Christian to
admit these exceptions, in case of the destruction of a Common wealth, and not
in case of the destruction of Religion? and otherwise the judgment which the
people may make of the one is much more perilous to Princes, the^ that which
the universal Church may form of the other. And yet these be at this day the
writers whom they celebrate, extol, and whom they have in their eyes; For so
an author say something against the Pope, and that he put as much as he please
the safety of Kings under the peoples feet, him they embrace, applaude, and
adore.

And of this we need not any better proof, then the edition of Gerson, which
they who have been the first authors of the Article that is now proposed unto
us, have caused to be imprinted eight years since, with inscriptions,
pictures, and elogies, or testifications of his praises, because he seems
unto them to have written against the Pope. For in his sermon made in the
presence of King Charles the 7. in the name of the University of Paris, Gers.
sermon. ad Regem Fran. nomine vniuersit. Paris.
after he had made Sedition to speak, which wills, that use without exception
and indifferently be made of this rule of Seneca: There is not a sacrifice more
pleasing unto God, then the killing of Tyrants, and that it is to be put in ure
against all sorts of persons accused of Tyranny, and upon all manner of
suspicions, and of defamatory libels; and Dissimulation, that wills on the
contrary, that we never use it, but that we endure all Tyrants: he brings in
Discretion that teaches when it is to be used in these words: Gers. ibid.
We conclude further, that if the head, or any other member of the Common
wealth should incur such an inconvenience, as he would swallow up the deadly
poison of Tyrany, every member in his place should oppose himself by all his
possibility by expedient means; and such as should not make the matter worse,
seeing it were to small it purpose when the head aketh, that the hand should
strike it, but rather folly. For nether is it necesary to cut it off by and by,
and to separate it from the rest of the body, but we must cure it sweetly,
as well by good words, as otherwise, like prudent and wise Physicians. There
could not be any thing more against reason, and of greater cruelty, then Tyrany
by a sedition. I call sedition a rebellion of the people, without cause, and
without reason, which is often times worse the^ tyrany etc. There needs great
and singular discretion, prudence, and temperance about the expulsion and
thrusting out of tyranny, and therefore we must hear, and give credit to wise
Philosophers. Lawyers, Deuines, to men of good life, of good and natural
prudence, and of great experience, of whom it is said, In old men is found
experience. For though a Prince and Lord sin in many cases, yet he must not
for that be presently censured a Tyrant. So he there.

And in his work of ten Considerations against the flatterers of Kings, where
he recapitulateth a part of the discourse of his Sermon, Gerson Considerat. 7.
contra adulat.
he says: It is an error to believe, that a terrene Prince is not bound in
any thing, during his reign, to his subjects. For according to divine right
and natural equity, and the end of true government, as the subjects owe
fidelity, aid, succor and service to their Lord: So the Lord owes again
faith and protection to his subjects. And if the Prince manifestly pursue and
persecute them, and with obstinacy in injury, and by fact, then this natural
rule (It is lawful to repel force by force: and this saying of Seneca, There
cannot be a more acceptable Sacrifice immolated and made to God, then by taking
away of a Tyrant) takes place.

And notwithstanding this which is more strange, those who have caused this to
be reprinted, have not vouchsafed to add, either in the beginning of his
works, or in the margent of these words, any observation, or note for the
censuring of them, or for advertisement of the Reader to take heed. But indeed,
how could they have done it without condemning themselves: Themselves (I say)
who during the fury of these last troubles had been Ensigne-bearers, or rather
had carried the burning torches of this pernicious doctrine, and had maynteyned
and published it against King Henry the third, by propositions disputed and
printed? For these be their words: It is most certain, that by right, both
divine and natural, the Estates be above Kings. And again: It was lawful for
all the people of France most justly to take arms against the Tyrant: that is
to say, against King Henry the third. And a little after: They, who consider
matters attentively and diligently, will judge that the eternal enemies of the
Religion, and of the Country ought to be pursued not only by public arms,
but also by the sword, and plotts of particular persons. And that James Clement
the Dominican, was not put forwards by any other desire, then by the love of
the Laws of his Country, and of the zeal of Ecclesiastical discipline, by
which this restorer of our Liberty, has put upon his own head grace, and upon
our neck a collar of gold, and the heavenly collers of the Church. Thus there.

This I say not to scandalize them (for I conceal their names) nor to reproach
them with that, that the bounty, and clemency of the King has buried up and
forgotten; but to show, that they should be content to attend the rest of their
days, to the cancelling and washing away of their offense with their tears,
and not to meddle themselves with the making of lessons, of the service of
Kings, to them, who always well and faithfully served them, even then when
they persecuted them.

But these are violent spirits, who being transported to one extreme, and not
being of power to hold the mean, thought that the best means, for the
justifying of themselves was to pass over to the other extreme, and to put
their hand to pen, to write and fight against the Pope. Wherein as they are
found conform, or at least very like unto the Churches enemies, they have
been so set on, and plied by those our enemies, and by some that dissembled
with them, as they have been induced and thrust on, under a pretense of the
Kings service, to sow the seeds of schism.

But, Syrs, the King desires not to be served after this sort: his will is not
that provision be made for his safety by schism, and by the Churches division:
In the ruins whereof is comprehended the ruin and overthrow of his own
safety, spiritual and temporal: he is a Catholic, and the eldest child of
the Catholic Church; he is the first Catholic of all the Kings, and the
first King of all the Catholics. He fears not to fall into Heresy, and
stands not in doubt of the Popes censures, nor dreadeth the Churches threats
against Heretics. He is the prime and principal protect our of the one and
the other. He is the heir both of the Crown, and of the name, and of the
faith of that glorious S. Lewis, who was the Churches support and pillar, and
the Popes defense, and retrait. He is descended from a mother no less
Catholic, pious, and Religious then his own: he is inseparable and
indivisible from the union and amity of the Sea Apostolic, and does seek by
all manner of reasons, both spiritual and temporal, to manteyne it.

In the person of Elizabeth Queen of England, the interests of Estate fought
against those of conscience, and bound her, to continue severed from the
communion of the Pope. But all the interests as well of State as of Religion,
bind the gratitude of our King, to conserve himself in intelligence,
correspondence, union and amity with the Pope: he is besides the Titles his
predecessors have gained him, a child of the Sea Apostolic in many sorts.
Pope Clement the Eight received the deceased King Henry the Great his Father
into the Churches bosom and lap, he resolved, and established his marriage
with the most Christian Queen Mary de Medices, to whose prudence, virtue, and
bounty, we owe the prosperity of our new reign, and the memory of whose most
happy Regencie, all the ages of posterity will extol and bless. Out of this
Marriage, is come the Sacred bud of our Lillyes, which Solomon did not match
with all his glory: I mean the King who now reigns. Pope Paul who sits at
this day in the Sea of Peter was his good Father, and as his second Father,
has employed himself by all manner of cares and good offices, to procure
before God, and before Men, the conservation of his person, and of his Realm.

And wherefore then should we desturbe or trouble this concord, by Laws not
only of State, but also of Religion, and of conscience, which our Fathers have
not known? Cast your eyes upon the histories of France, and you shall find,
that always when our Kings have been in union, concord and correspondence
with the Sea Apostolic, and that the Spouse (to use the terms of Scripture)
has fed among the lillies; all sorts of graces and benedictions temporal and
spiritual have rayned, and come down upon them, and their people; you shall
find that as when the Arc of Covenant stayed and continued in the house of
Obededom, there was not any kind of felicity wanting even so, as long as the
Communion of the Sea Apostolic has been amongst us, and that we have had
the assistance of the Vicar of him, who is the true Arc of Covenant, we have
had our share in all sorts of prosperities: the name of Frenchmen has
dispersed it self from one end of the world to the other, and our Lillyes have
extended and reached themselves to the furthest remote corners of the earth.

Contrariwise at what time our Kings were severed from the communion of the
Sea Apostolic, the Lillies has been amidst the thorns, and all sorts of
afflictions, and of adversities have besieged us. Renew within your selves the
memory of those things, and therehence draw consequences for the time to
come. Remember how many calamities and miseries we have suffered in time of
Schisms, or apprehensio^ of Schisms; how many Churches ruyned, how many
Altars pulled down, how many Cities saccaged and spoiled. Represent to your
eyes the State of your passed life, the time that our deceased King was
deprived of the Communion of the Apostolic Sea, and with how many vows, and
tears both he and you have desired his restitution. But above all, lay again
before your eyes the state of the life to come, from which the authors and
favorers of Schism be excluded, and whereunto none can possibly come, if he
be not placed, not only in the faith, but also in the unity, and in the
communion of the Catholic Church.

FINIS.

